

Got well loads of homework tonight.
Got any merit marks today?
Er  one yeah in maths  ooh er
for the class work  look at that homework I got two wrong    and in science  steady  should be  finish.
Try doing that.
I can't.
Are you coming to the fair tomorrow?
Yes 
Ah?
Yeah.
Are you going?
Half past ten to half past twelve.
Is Dad?
Could do love cos I've gotta get er  Karen's er  card.
What from the fair?
Yes I might find something there.
There's some good things but th they don't do cards.
What sort of stalls are there?
No I  got the cakes  Does it look alright Paul?
Could of got the  but they're  there  .
So will we got to that other place  Dad?
Yeah  hopefully  ring up her  ring up er  ticket line  see if it's er  they might be 
a day 
about a day  yeah.
day  what is it O eight nine eight one
O eight nine eight  four hundred three three three.
Alright.
In that one  Paul and I are going into work, alright?
Is that alright?
Yeah he's going to do his homework there.
I have a 
Yeah I know   you out  Who takes you tonight then?
Mark  I can't remember  gotta get 
 
cleared up before Sunday  I've gotta go at nine o'clock tomorrow morning to get the cake.
Yeah.
Twenty third.
Where's the calendar gone?
Have you got it?
By the phone  oh no it's this  round the erm  on the table  I might  you change you can't go.
Make a  other meeting.
Yeah  I've done the booking.
Well that's alright we can go w whe y you if you're at Mencap  oh you w 
I only said we're getting a lift  and Richard  to write a letter to join the dance.
Why is tha why is David involved in that all of a sudden, it's not through us is it?
I dunno still right  
Dad it's the tenth of 
It's very odd isn't it!
December.
What?
Tenth of December.
Oh right.
Oh!er look I mean it at all unless David gives me a little 
May  other meeting.
That's a good reason for David to give me a lift isn't it?
He won't mind will he?
You'll have all re you'd know where it is, won't you, by then?
Well I know where it is I just don't know how to get there.
Normal squad for tomorrow .
Do you hear Gary Lineker's got  his son's got 
Yeah.
but it it's not life 
Only fourteen 
life endangering though is it 
only fourteen babies under twelve months old get that every year!
God you know you are lucky  wouldn't you?
The irony of it is this is that he  has done a lot, he gave ten thousand 
Yeah.
pounds, is it, not to the leukaemia was it or w was it?
Think it was cancer  childhood cancer or something.
Yeah it's almost though he knew, it weird!
I mean fourteen babies a year that can  
Get Leukaemia?
And as well as his son?
No ah yeah under twelve months old only fourteen babies a year get it  Oh that's dreadful!
How old's his baby then?
Well it just shows you how famous he now means you are.
mail and it says about what a lovely family they are and how  it's gotta 
Shame!
be good that a such a er erm  show what a perfect family  how they sort of go through it all.
It said a lot of people who're watching how they react?
Yeah   by a family who knew them personally not off .
Will he still be playing for Tottenham, Mum?
Will he still be going to Japan.
Ask at your your Christian Union  about Sunday and bring that up, Sunday lunch   we had a right old  ding dong at work today!
What about 
Trev 
it?
Trevor thinks it's  not stopping you going to church  he said.
True.
Dad can I have your quiz  can I have the quiz.
No we're gonna do it tomorrow morning  no I won't.
How many questions are you gonna have in it?
Dad?
What?
How many questions are you gonna have in your quiz?
Dunno I 
Hello is that John?
I n I like the new quick ones 
It's Ruth  here.
than the ones in the
I don't know how to tell you this   I can't I can't  
lot's of  
make the tenth !
Well I I I could but all  
we'll go through go through some papers and start cutting out things 
and I  a chair for the
only thing if I if you do it 
even in the chair for a meeting
you won't enter the quiz  so what do you wanna do?
about erm  
Would you rather me do it on my own 
I think 
And then you can enter with  cos I thought about sticking everybody into pairs 
cos they've asked me.
Mean I won't be able to enter 
 
the quiz?
Well you'll know the answers won't you!
Oh I want that some  if all the social services just put in with the  thing having 
Please can I a ask the questions?
a series of six meetings  about this  
Now let's have everything tha I want to aim a at doing any oral questions just 
Ah?
like
a lot about it and shan't be, frankly I'm relieved I don't actually know a lot but  when the meeting to discuss what we're supposed to do is on December tenth  yo so I'm a bit torn cos I  in a way that's what I ought to be doing even though the welfare business  in a way that's wh that's what I ought to be doing cos it's  entirely .
Would you like Paul to buy presents  tomorrow?
For me at the fair?
Oh  well he says he's got e he's got enough now hasn't he?
No you want one!
To give to me on Sunday.
Oh I see.
Still put that aside .
Oh Trevor was quite good he di he d he would've got his big pay rise today an didn't  push it too much I don't think  perhaps it's Nick though 
Why's got a big one?
Well he got promoted didn't he  he's stable now that child though hasn't he?
Until they start tre tra  blurgh they start treatment straight away don't they, these days.
Oh he's only twelve and ended up as one of the  smallest birds 
But it said I heard that it said chemotherapy well what's that's erm drugs is it, no that's radiation isn't it?
Makes your 
Oh y 
hair fall out   
well you wouldn't give that to a little baby would they?
Well you'd have to.
I thought they washed the blood out  changed all the blood.
Blood type  and that's what that other woman died  girl died of didn't she they  
I was saying to Trevor  it's it's not very nice but it's rather so much better than than than having a cot death isn't it?
If you see what I mean.
Mm.
I can actually imagine the feeling of going to a cot and then finding no  no the child was dead, that's awful.
Done  there was a  our school dinners today  I went into this  give you four pounds back  I get twenty two pounds sixty  Have you got two tens in change of a twenty?
I haven't got  five pounds  
Have you got two tens you want to change for a twenty Paul?
No sorry.
That's been quite good that cos you know  I had a hundred and ten pounds left
Mm.
I only took out the palace because I knew  I'd given I'd written a cheque for forty 
You'd written out a cheque  
and I've only just started, still got two people outstanding so I've got that forty pound and I put that into the building society and use that forty pounds  for months see  so it kind of like saved it for me, I've managed, had to do without it
Yeah.
and er
When have you got to pay all that.
What mu a a th agent says I only have to pay it off a day   
How much is it?
What just write a cheque?
Yeah  and that way .
Well you won't be there on the day.
Well Dave'll be down there today.
Well not you can't pay on the night, can you?
Well I suppose   I'm sure Adrian won't mind if I paid him  the day after or a week after or something.
You're unemployed I wouldn't have thought you could've stood a hundred and fifty, two hundred pounds withdrawal.
No I don't mind  saying it I I'm not gonna ask any more.
What?
Well so that yo about Adrian  after a few weeks it's  you know
Remind me to wash in these cupboards before Sunday.
Yeah.
Have you seen Jan and Joan dress up to their their Victorian day  Jan came like a an upright stripped  erm working, not working class a sort of governess right she had 
Yeah.
frumpy shoes and a .
Where'd she get the clothes from?
Oh she borrowed it, and a bonnet and a  white flowers an all and Joan turned up like a  a twenty five year old Victorian fashion model  you should have seen her!
Black silk skirt  maroon  blouse  her hair done up in a bun  draped with gold jewellery oh  talk about looking the part!
What's wrong with that?
And John hired this thing like a cape 
Who's idea  is it?
Was it?
Oh it's it's quite common, everybody does it if you have a vic if you study Victorians anyone who a Victorian   and they all they did all done out, chairs er table space at the front, they did drill in the playground  they played with tops and hoops in the playground, all the children  the m parents hired costumes from Fairy Godmothers  Fairy Godmother's done a roaring trade especially  
Ah I should think Fairy Godmothers put the ideas into somebody's head, I would have thought.
That's not  
We might  
It's just a very good way of er teaching chi I mean children will I mean that's the kind of experience 
Yeah.
you never forget, do you?
Some of  but you can't do it for something like a Medieval's day or Roman 
No.
day it'd be grim, but Victorian 
Victorian 
people have got a, yeah 
just close enough to sti still remember a lot of the cloths and stuff.
and they had to they had to sit in rows and they had to do as they were told and they weren't allowed 
Ha!
to speak.
Yes.
Apparently some of the children got quite scared of Jan cos Jan played the part so well  ah Joan  for life.
Frightened the life out of them.
Yeah.
Ah back ah back ah back and bill .
So what did John look like perhaps like a little Billy Bunter didn't he?
Ah no he looked very good he had a gown and a mortar board and cane  and bow tie  and pin striped socks, quite good, yep.
And they wore that all day all of them all day?
All day and then he got  all to do   at lunch time  yeah they kept it up all the day, they had separate play time, they had had to eat their lunch in the class room  all they were allowed was a piece of fruit, a bread and water  and they all had to have, you know, they had a bread roll  supplied by the school  an a an apple I think    And Jan made them write out their names and some of them couldn't write their name!
Boy called Daniel couldn't write Daniel cos all last year he'd been allowed to put Danny  an he'd forgotten how to write Daniel!
Search me!
How old's that child?
Ten  and John 
And he can't 
that's what's so dreadful, Joe was language coordinator and they came from her!
Can't write names.
And another boys name was Thomas   and he couldn't write that cos all last year he'd been Tom  an he'd forgotten how to write his surname  they're not dim children  both of them  
Frightening isn't it?
family  she says  quite an eye opener  an they had write lines if they did anything wrong  one boy just   I reckon she could carried him but
No.
You can't be  three times    Where's tonight gone?
All this stuff in out here shall I?
You think you're exhausted after a days work imagine if you've been doing that all day long, shouting 
Look!
and shrieking, no I mean that  
I shout and shriek all day long!
Ooh I'll lose my voice up there today  we've done some really good things though  try and do see more my hall is very full  if he bothered to come to school he'd have seen them!
Still  find those  what's this that's broken from?
But Mummy you could 
Paul  spikes.
Excuse me!
You took them and I want the batteries for them.
Some people go round  
You asked me for them.
in science books
Excuse me !
What does it say?
Fourteen and a half.
Were they marked?
No  look at this here.
Don't like the smell of your Narcissus.
Well go and  won't they.
Don't like the smell.
Somebody look!
Can you see it?
Let's go  .
Oh well neat!
You know I can't see from that distance  I thought John had a snowman badge on today, when I got close it's an owl and it said I am the vet.
He enters into th the to the fray doesn't he with it er
No he's got a grey jumper with an owl  Beaky  on it  all over the front  and a mortar board on the owl.
Did they have to ask him to do that or did he just volunteer.
Oh probably just did it  Do you know what Terry's   do you know what one of my children did today?do you know what  did  apart from the fact he spent all day crying  then he had to do the corrections, I said go back and do your corrections, said right  on your own  I wrote something that went no homework done, so he wrote no homework done,no homework done, no homework done !
Oh no! er!
I can just scream !
Ah  spent all day weeping today  with one thing and another when he weeps 
Why cos you keep telling him off?
he oh!
They'd write a poem for her about my greatest fear, I said I remember last year there was a boy called Ali and he wrote a story about   a poem about this bird and cos he was really scared of that and so I said I don't suppose any of you will write about being scared of me  except perhaps Adine!
Eh.
All Americans go Eh    Nine o'clock tomorrow I'm going over to  Kate  ten thirty that gives me a bit of lee-way  I've got a  at ten I thought it was ten thirty  I ought to get some money out really  You're not going into Woking tomorrow morning  are you doing your quiz?
Do you want some help with it, not really.
Well I was gonna paper out and start cutting out some faces I think  cos I mean a I may just as well I mean I was quite happy to let Paul  help me out but then
He can't take part.
he can't enter the quiz then 
No you should do it 
but he shan't 
all yourself and then
I don't think I'm gonna do as much as I'm just gonna do
No cos you won't  
a big stream of  pictures  right
Yeah.
and them I'm gonna think I'm gonna do the same  South America
Yeah.
but do South American you know get some big ones 
Yes.
in  that might be fun mighten't it?
Yeah I can't do it with you.
And you could already write up in red pen  you sort it out  instead of arguing about trying to do it.
Yeah  you could u u or split up the  to start.
some proverbs, I can't think  can you complete these proverbs  good book up there  for that  I don't know at all, there's something wrong  Ooh this looks really good  got  look at this book, all the streets  it's got like   The House of Commons  and The House of Lords  
Oh yeah!
Take you  brilliant book that   
Alright.
I'm at school  
 
you can smell it  in the book 
 
it's got all proverbs and what things mean.
What's all this then.
Well they're proverbs aren't they.
All of them or
Yeah.
single ones?
Well all sorts, let  sleeping dogs lie, the ones that underline them as  I've underlined in biro.
Where did you get that  
Sort of big words for little words  that's a big word, you have to think of an addition, I've had it in   nineteen 
 
fifty eight it is or nineteen sixty three  geographical facts
Oh yeah.
peoples of other land, look all the people that come from  
Mum, how do I get  
Are you sure it's up-to-date though?
Well you bu you'll know if it isn't.
Dad?
Sorry.
Spell deceased.
Deceased, D E C E A S E D.
Look, masculine, feminine  Kevin  masculine, feminine some of them are really hard   Zar, Marino distinctive name given to some countries, look  the dairy of Northern Europe, Debonair  cut your nails down!
Urgh!
Look famous  famous founders, pioneers  Africa for east or west  I think it'd be there today  the muses  do you know what that says?
Yes.
Any more famous faces  oh you're gonna do up?
No I was wa er  what  what the other guys did  he's gone through a whole load of newspapers cutting peoples faces out
Yeah.
some a little quite obscure
Yes.
and  just stuck it in little boxes, like little boxes and 
Yeah.
that put it underneath  that's all I'm gonna do is, do I I'll measure the framework 
Yeah.
and stick them on photographs an filling in a the names underneath.
Of who you think it is.
Yes.
seen them really.
Ish so that it
score
The la funny enough they had Gasgcoigne  and the picture was so poor it looked  people put things like  oh you know er  Edna Everage  things like that and he ju , he looked like 
 
a woman and he the really  
You know you're  of pictures now then.
Yeah.
So you're gonna photocopy this or are you just doing one original one?
No I'm gonna photocopy it.
Are they free?
Yeah.
about going 
cos I've got tomorrow as well.
Well you're at football tomorrow.
Yeah not all day.
Virtually   watching Boon  I've got some A two paper I think.
Ah  don't look!
Even if I looked I wouldn't know  gotta be fairly small pictures haven't they?
How do you spell disappearance?
Yeah   aha  go over there 
D I S A double P E A R A N C E 
cos you're far too near whe wha I'm  what I'm doing.
And again.
D I S A double P E A R  A N C E.
Do you want a coffee Ruthy?
Yes please   I'll have a  Maxwell House cappuccino.
have some women in it.
Ooh it's a good one, there's some really obscure ones!
Do some of the things you'd know!
Just because you've got some imbeciles coming!
Who are they?
Well mainly the children .
Dunno them.
Your 
Your cousins.
I'll do a full face on that one  cos that's hard.
What is it?
Knowing Yvonne she'll  hee hee!
Actually it's surprising how many faces you can get  just looking at cheap newspapers you see, incredible!
You think ooh that's well done  quite easy.
Oh did you do      Kettle's boiled  Kettle's boiled  It's only three weeks since the last party this is all for Jim's benefit isn't it .
I thought this has co ro come round quite soon.
Well she goes  June come on, could have had it next Friday I think something must be happening next Friday, she goes to Australia  on the seventh  well maybe that is next Friday  Oh no it's the  isn't it?
So she can't come to the ?
Cos the sixth is next Friday  no.
It's just as well cos she's bound to say something about my quiches!
Ha ha ha!.
.
Gosh how much have you got Paul?
Lots.
You do it all tonight?
No.
Why?
Erm  I can't.
You can't do any tomorrow  can't do any on Sunday  I suggest you do it all tonight.
Can't.
You don't  about this cappuccino is  I don't understand is that here Maxwell cappuccino  is
You can't open the packet.
twice the volume 
Yeah, but twice
that's right much more powder than you use 
We I know you can't open the packets, it's stupid!
Honestly Paul you won't have time to do it tomorrow and Sunday  well you can work 'till nine o'clock tonight.
How much, can I?
You can work 'till nine o'clock tonight.
These Narcissi are really strong.
Sorry?
Cor they're really strong.
Ooh yeah   aren't they.
Mm.
I don't they're going to grow that tall, somehow but  gone up straight as a dye haven't they?
I can't put them down there  to begin with, I think they all  draw up 
Hey 
than lower down.
My hic hyacinths have all come out except  no, they've all come out, one  goron l looks like it's  gone and lot congealed  little bad  and another hyacinth has  two have come up and other ones not come up at all.
You haven't had as many as usual have you?
Well  no not perhaps as many as last year.
I'm gonna have to go in this afternoon again .
What did I do with the scissors?
Took them out to make the tea  did you get any biscuits?
No  except for some .
There's some Kit-Kats up there.
Well you're not having any.
I wouldn't mind one.
No  Pauline 
Just one.
would agree.
I'm nine two this morning on the scales, I'll have you know.
Wanna a Kit-Kat Pauly?
Yes please  How do you spell whereabouts?
W H E R E A B O U T S  seems to be a lack of spelling at your, this place  Ah!
Urgh!
Put plenty of royalty in.
Are you looking?
Oh no, why should I!
Trouble is Paul 
 
I wouldn't cheat.
She's   you Pauly.
I won't cheat!
You'd love to though.
Why?
I gave my top group your algebra homework today  they said  Pau is this Paul's homework, I said yes  that's not fair  I said why isn't it fair?
Well it's too hard, I said how do you know it's too hard?
And they all did it  apart from Chris   who said  urgh she always works us too hard!
Apart from Christopher  most of them managed it Paul  especially Richard  he's really clever  I know who that is, Lady Di.
Shut up Ruthy!
Is this one Lady Di?
Is Mum not entering it then?
Yeah.
Course I am.
Then why are you looking?
I'm not looking Paul  don't tar everybody with the same brush.
What?
Pardon, don't tar everybody with the same brush.
Ooh pardon me!
What's that mean?
That means just cos you're likely to cheat don't assume that everyone else does.
Then why did you say Princess Diana?
I know that's Princess Diana.
Cos I see him cut it out.
So you were looking in the first place!
No you were looking at the  Mal Vicinty 
 Vicinty 
Spell  Vicinty 
I don't  know, about it .
Will I have to pull up any of those caps heads before your Mum comes round?
No.
We were just hanging around talking today and the children done Christmas card competition an wi some really and me and 
Ah!
Moira
!
and and Joanne Joe, say who could judge this, this is for our competition we'll say Heidi  coming, no, is anybody else in it, no  er Sarah'll come in cos she doesn't know, right?
So John came up and we said er we were wondering who could judge th Christmas card competition and he was saying oh I don't know,and then th the P T A chairman came up  erm we said oh perhaps you should judge the Christmas card competition  erm  and she said  well Melissa  is judging it  and we said Pardon!
Then John,, said well didn't you ask her this morning then!
And Joan says oh no I forgot!
Well   and even that didn't jog his memory, that he should have asked her to judge it!
What a dozy !
You know 
Who's judging it then?
Well Mary  going to judge it and, would he let her do it on her own, no  he followed her round, making comments here, making comments there, trying to influence her  fact is, this'll make you laugh, you know the wall displays  you know th erm the books, Where's Wally   Where's Wally  you have this  page, of really tiny little things and you have to find Wally, who's  a person, right?
Yeah.
In minute detail, hidden on the page is something, you remember how Simon had books like that
Yeah.
In where's Lisa, Where's Freddie, anyway it's Where's Wally, for that  he said er  I think I'll get a picture of somebody  and er course he   I said you gonna call it Where's Wally?
He said no I'm wanna call it Where's the Wally!
Milly said  cos we'd been talking about this all day and they, the children had been saying to John  you gonna have a picture of yourself in Where's the Wally thing?
And erm  Milly said ha can't think of a more suitable candidate  and swept off !
If you don't want the car I'll drive to school tomorrow.
What?
I said if you don't want the car I'll drive Paul and myself to school tomorrow.
Just thought Mu Mum's got this newspaper so she might,s know some of them photographs.
Well then it's not fair, use a different newspaper.
Well I haven't got them.
We got our local papers, aren't there any in there?
Doesn't matter.
You get  yes you do you get pictures of pop stars and that in The 
Yeah?
Mail.
Right.
And you can have  my magazines 
That's a hard one.
as well if you want  The Express and The Mail have much the same pictures      Got a  football magazine and a Woman  you can have a football, I can't u look
Still get some wrong it don't matter anyway does it.
Football will be there for children won't it?
Yes that's what I mean, I noticed that the man who did it balanced it rather nicely, he had some  actors  some  politicians, that everyone can contribute  especially in a .
except for me  If you think my general knowledge is abysmal!
Abysmal!
Erm after football's done, then it must be us.
.
Will you tell Paul he's gotta finish his homework tonight, if he can't do any tomorrow  he can't do any on Sunday  Not cutting off their hair?
Yes.
Let's see.
Not allowed to look  Can I read that?
No.
Please?
No.
Why is it illiterate?
Yeah.
Hurry up with the scissors Pauly.
Why the rush?
Got a pen?
Cutting out like mad here.
Have you got a pen?anything that writes Paul?
No, anyway you didn't ask me!
I have.
Then  in there and get it!
How much did you pay for this pen in the market?
It's got a loose nib!
What?
This pen you bought in the market has got a loose nib.
How many you got?
Oh, still waiting for the scissors.
Oh Paul!
What?
What is the matter?
Daddy wants the scissors.
Well I'm sorry!
Not very.
Ha.
Don't throw scissors, ooh it's very dangerous.
Paul!
Well you shouldn't keep taking them!
Tell you what you can have a pair for Christmas instead of a computer.
Oh yes please!
There's a pair there  look  paper's there.
You saw then  you were looking !
I'm not .
You were !
See you can't be trusted.
Ray Wilkins   Is it ?
Oh that is ridiculous!
Sorry   I just .
That's it!
See you can't be trusted, you're a  you get quite upset when you get accused  and Pauly quite rightly accuses you.
 
I caught her looking Paul.
She's always looking!
She'll always look up  Got a Pritt stick?
Yeah.
Where is it.
Usual place.
Where's the usual place?
Where's the usual place?
Can't   it isn't  pardon?
Where in there 
  

Is it in there?
It is .
Was she looking?
She was looking at what, Ray Wilkins.
Well how do you know of Ray Wilkins?
Well cos she  called it out.
pay my attention to it, I look harder.
She.
Stop making silly noises then!
She'll be   Ferrero Roche.
I'm really not   Hey how about getting erm   if I can get there early enough  individual Christmas cakes  they were gonna sell them for
Oh yeah.
two pounds each  individual iced Christmas cakes like this.
Cheap.
Yeah.
I want one of them   might be nice for Natty.
Keep it in the box.
boing!
De er der der der der .
You're on still, look!
Yes you're on, no you're off.
Dad?
Eh?
I  today did you do one bulls eye  no not  cut up the thing and say which sport does this person belong to  might get a picture of Rob Andrews  see if they stick rugby or tennis on.
Yes Paul  that'll be a bit unfair for the other twenty nine people around wouldn't it?
What other twenty nine people round?
Ah!
Then you'd know all the answers.
Can't do one for everything!
I think you should have a music one.
One or two I  I know now  I'm writing them down and .
Ha ha  I'm in at  tomorrow morning I'm hoping when I wake up I wanna  nice and  
So what time do I need to wake up?
From the fair?
Not very early, you can sleep in I've gotta go to Waitrose to pick up the stuff.
Sleep into when?
Well ten o'clock.
Ten o'clock!
Oh hang on I'm leaving at ten cos I want to be there a little early  and start them but I hope to get some perks.
Nine okay?
Wake up at nine?
Yeah I'm going to Waitrose at nine.
So which fair is this  at school is it?
Yeah, what do you think I'm talking about!
Oh I don't know I heard it's a craft fair, that's all I heard.
All this time Daddy thinks it's a like 
No I said it's a  lovely craft fair.
It's called Christmas fair but you and Darren have got a stall so  ah
Why did you know what to do there then?
I already bought a children's  thirty five pee each.
Yeah.
Zoe  said  are they for your little   said which little fun are you talking about Zoe?
Said yes they're both for Paul ha ha!
Little   Look at those brilliant grafts Mum  double grafts they're called   Hobart and Darwin.
Why are they called double grafts?
They're not called double they've sort of got a  about rainfall and temperature.
Oh and they show two things  so y you'll have to see if there's any correlation between the two  is there any correlation between rainfall and temperature, and is there?
When rainfall goes up does temperature up and vice versa?
Dunno just gotta describe them.
Well that's what you have to say, is there any correlation between
What does correlation mean?
They all correlate.
Yeah.
It's connection isn't it Kev?
Mm.
Yeah  and you've gotta see
That's level six, you should be doing that.
What's level six?
Well correlation I've just done that with all my children, you should be level six, no good doing it, you should be it  Want you to do two pieces of work for Monday and  all the same level, so there's an extra  two you've got to do.
And what homework do you, what do they get  what homework do they get over Christmas?
They get  poem, my greatest fear  and they get a project homework from Lynn.
So how many homeworks do they get, two?
Yeah  how many have you got?
Five.
Rubbish!
Clap trap!
That word would go down well.
You know that lady that did the thing so Lary  what did you w and you say the children w meant  knew what it meant, what did they say it meant?
Well   sort of meant all knowing.
No  Lary means something like  it's sort of like  someone  mm
Ah you know that word as well.
Yeah 
Well how do you spell it?
L a r y.
L a r y?
Yes  it it's Lary, it's sort of like  someone insults you like they er  you've only got four toes  and so I'll say  that's well Lary!
And then y but I take that then 
What like an insult?
Lary, yeah  like  hey you when and got too Lary!
Sounds like Aunty Sheila's mardy 
Got it?
she says mardy don't she?
Lary everyone's going oh that's Lary  but 
Well I've never heard of it and they I said  
But and you called James  a moron or something like that 
Yeah but
he goes
moron
but he goes 
we know what moron means.
but he goes oh that's Lary!
You shouldn't take that word, well 
What you unkind?
No
I do 
No Lary.
Rude?
Yeah.
No I'm sure he didn't mean rude.
Not unkind, it's like  you shouldn't take that from him that's  bad  get him out   ding da ding ding ding ding ding  boo boo diddle erm, doo doo doo doo diddle erm  dum dum dum diddle erm   ding ding diddle er er  diddle er  yeah yeah  doo diddle erm  doo doo dee dee  dee   boom boom diddle erm boom  .
Hurry up!
I'm moving, I'm scrooving, I'm dooving  this is hard, got to take all these notes and just put them into all  sort of  a summary.
Spell summary.
S u m m a r y  today is Saturday.
Is there any connection  why have you coloured it in red biro!
And  oh   I don't really know.
That doesn't show anything!
Yet the January, February, March the temperature is  high  which is temperature  I can't tell by looking at that, which one's temperature and which one's rainfall.
That's temperature and that's rainfall.
Yeah but which line refers to which, how can I tell?
You need to put the dotted line there  and square there 
No you can look like that.
How?
Rain, ten millimetres of rain equals one millimetre  ten of rain equals one millimetre and this one  one degrees  celsius  equals
Well I'm sorry  I don't think that is very clever  for you!
there and 
one degrees, how can temperature
What?
one degree celsius equals one millimetre
Yes.
So it's twenty five degrees celsius in January?
No.
Well I thought it wouldn't be a bad idea to put some sort of  clue on it.
We've got twelve people coming, right?
Er yep  what's that gotta do with anything?
Well cos I'm gonna have  pairs  I think here 
And one you!
Oh  singles then?
It's more 
No 
fun in pairs isn't it cos the people can have the scraggle and talk to each other.
You'll have to have pairs and put one three.
Chips.
Well that's not fair then.
Put Michael with
Oh yeah
if you put Michael with two other people, it's completely fair.
But then your implying something aren't you.
Why don't you say if you're a child  you can go in a group of three, if your adults you'll have to be in a group of two, so the children can attach themselves to any group.
Right.
Right.
You've got eleven people you need four groups  you don't have four groups it's not worth doing is it?
Gotta share it all out perfect even  why don't you say, stick it on the wall, give them each a piece of paper and they've gotta do it  I've got an idea, you can compile a quiz
Fine I'm  
and then you could have a treasure hunt for the children
you know
Couldn't I.
Most amusing 
Are you gonna sort of read out the question and they each gonna scribble down their answer.
Nope.
What you gonna do?
No, just leave 
Have a chart.
your father!
What?
Have a chart.
Heart.
You'll let people  overlook each other then  sort of overlooking 
Cheating you mean!
Yes I mean that's the first thing you have to say, you have to think  when you look at   you keep, anybody who does the whispering 
Is Mum.
is giving their answers away  in fact, what we did, the team of four, is they all had a little pad of paper, if you spotted something you knew, you went  and you wrote it down  because people we there.
You did it in silence.
Yeah  tried to do  and they obviously can't.
Why aren't you gonna  for faces.
Well this th this is the the faces and I thought I'd do the maps and the rest were questions I don't know whether y should do some questions.
Well you'll have to think of some.
Yeah  I'll see how I go any 
You got the maps of South America?
Yeah.
I've got one at work  a blank, you should of asked me for it.
What all split up, yeah?
Yeah.
Oh.
I could get it tomorrow morning  in my 
Yeah could you?
Blanked out without the er the countries names 
Yes 
in it?
Oh yeah.
I've got all the countries blanks  might not oh I might not even have the countries on but if you had blanks you could put countries in, that'll be easier than  
No that'll be harder.
No  what the boundaries?
Yes  because if you've got the scale  you just drop, trace it all off  where as you got the you've the you gotta sort out work out  i th the scale of everything, haven't you?
No you just draw the lines.
Yeah but how do you ge 
What scale?
How you going to know exactly where the boundaries go or i in between some land-lock countries  that you got it in the right position 
How many land-lock countries are there in South America?
Well enough anyway, I mean I thought you were giving me something easier to do not  
Well I think  why would you do it tonight if I didn't have it?
Yes 
Say I didn't have it tomorrow you'd 
well 
do it tonight?
probably ni or tomorrow I was gonna do that.
I seem to think you should take the easy bit, cos that's gonna be miles too hard!
No I like to balance it, I ju there's some balance there, there's some easy ones and some hard ones.
I'll tell you what's best for Michael.
I don't feel that's very good  because you're just gonna get children totally pull out of it unless they're 
No.
really really good.
Children are allowed to go  
You find that if if if i in a team, if there's teams  i you find that in a singles, but if there's a team e if everybody feels the everybody feels they can contribute something to it  when you've got 
You can have those  
allowed to be the idea of that, you don't wanna make it 
Yeah I know 
too easy  
No there are no husbands allowed to be with any wife  and children can attach themselves to which group they want.
So work out the groups, you work out the groups.
Well there's going to be  apart from your father there's going to be seven adults.
Listen, a man with a woman  but not wi not  by marriage  cos say like Andy with Nanna 
Well I could go with two children, I expect.
Well write down the names let's have a go at, let's work out, let's work out the teams 
Cos I'm the cleverest person, I can go with two teenies!
lo , write down the names.
Modest!
No and I could be the only adult with two children cos I'm so clever.
Write down the names and th work out some balanced teams then for me please.
Ah, give me a pen!
I'll write it out with her.
Can I, thank you.
Then people don't argue then 
 
do they, if they say look that's the team then th people are h happy.
There's Nanna and Margarite, if I find him another 
Yes, they don't know  cos they're both Daily Mail readers and I'm cutting the majority of these out.
And   and maybe an adult  
Don't put 
No four groups, is all you'll get out of twelve people.
don't put Michelle and Andy together.
I'm not?
Don't put 
Papa a Nanna and
er Adrian
And Kevin with Andrew  yeah  no not Kev and Andrew because
erm Mooty 
Yeah.
Mooty and Michelle 
Hang on  i 
What other adult is there?
There's only me 
Is Karen quite good?
One, two
Yes Karen is 
three, four 
will be as sharp as iron 
Can I be with Papa then?
It'll have to be me with Papa.
Okay  .
That's the eight adults.
Who're you putting Karen with?
Be careful cos Karen is the 
Andy.
Andy.
No that's far tha well 
 

think again isn't that  
Nanna and 
Michelle and Mooty, why you think that's too clever?
Andy an Andy and Karen will  streak through.
What better than Michelle and Mooty?
I bet you.
She  generations though.
I bet I'll give you a bet  Karen will win it.
What about Papa?
Who you gonna put Karen 
Because 
with?
she thinks , she reads papers.
Well I put Karen with Papa and me with Andy then.
It's just her her what?
Put me with Andy then, and Karen with Papa.
No that'll be too easy cos you and Andy'll streak through that.
Mm.
It should be 
No it'll have to be Karen and Andy cos 
Mooty and Andy!
Yeah?
Cos the others are different generations, they're at a disadvantage cos they're the same generation  Andy 
Yeah.
and Karen.
Yeah so 
Karen doesn't read The Mail  and nor does Andrew.
You'd be surprised, Karen's well read, newspaper wise she's not 
Oh of course 
or something.
Right you got that'll do, I think  unless your father wants to  
No.
Now three of those groups can have a child 
should be with Nanna and Adrian.
No.
Why not?
You mean you with Nanna and Adrian  yeah I think you should 
Okay.
be with them  put Michael with Andrew and Karen  tha 
Which one are you gonna have?
Who can have Lisa, me and Papa or Michael an Mi Michelle and Mooty?
See I'm  in so me th th they'll all be able to contribute.
Michelle and Mooty.
That's right 
Cross Michael out then?
Where's does Lisa go?
Cross Michael out.
Why?
Just cross him out.
Why?
You've gotta think of the generations  they would be more likely to lead a pop star  or sort of person that would know all those  those sort of things, put Michael with Michelle and Mooty    and Lisa with Papa and Mum 
Be careful who you put Mooty with  cos Mooty 
I've put her with Michelle!
Oh that's alright, that's fine, yes.
and  Lisa with Papa and  you.
So that left Andrew and Karen on their own?
Yes  that's fair 
Do you think that's fair?
Sorry?
Andrew and Karen, you think 
Yeah.
they're so clever that they're 
Yeah.
going to beat anybody else?
They will win.
Yeah, so listen to this  Nanna, Adrian and me 
Go to Dad.
okay I'll read it out, Nanna, Adrian and me, Dad?
make up on.
Okay?
Sorry?
Nanna, Adrian and me  Papa, Mum and Lisa  Andrew and Karen 
He's not listening  he's not listening 
I am yes 
Michelle , Mooty and Michael.
That's alright.
Is it after lunch, I presume?
Yes.
I knew Michelle and Mooty would need somebody else cos  you know Michelle  Mooty would have a .
Paul you gonna throw me another pencil I seem to have lost
Paul don't belittle the 
lost one.
older generation.
No but s 
Throw me a pencil please?
I'm just saying  would she know about Michael Jackson and all that sort of stuff.
Is Daddy putting Michael Jackson in?
I don't know, he's bound to put  in, I hope.
I'm not giving any clues away  I'm balancing as best I can.
What do you want?
Pencil, I know you couldn't concentrate on three things!
comet  have you used the match box?
Yes  that brown crayon you've got in your hand'll do.
Why, why will it do?
Well  you seem a bit desperate.
What you gonna do with it?
Right so you're going to go work 
Well 
after I've gone to  have you?
Yeah.
You can go to work when the tape stops  Well he's not going to watch you sticking all those on at work  what's he gonna be doing.
He's doing his homework.
I can draw some sides   just like I can put  I could make a  just draw neatly in the teams bi on a big piece of paper  that'll make it look really good,.
And when were you going to do the map of  you can't do that map tomorrow can you?
Yeah.
Well when will you do that at work then?
Before or after football?
I'll slot it in sometime tomorrow.
Right, fine  wish you could slot into washing up mood.
Ooh there's a hard one.
There.
Ooh ooh ooh ooh ooh that'll sort out the  I'd like someone to say, I'd like to have  one or two that nobody gets.
Is there a prize?
What do you mean?
Sorry?
Is there a prize?
I suppose there should be.
Suppose there should be yeah.
What an overall prize or individual prizes?
Er
Little individuals is it?
Well they'll have to be equal prizes wouldn't they?
I've got it!
Whichever team wins  th the cha children can give out the Christmas presents.
What Christmas presents?
Those presents up there.
Big deal!
Can't fool you.
 
Well I've never   prize 
It's only  it's only fun, I mean what are you gonna give them?
The team that wins gets their presents.
He said I used to laugh at my Dad when he used to do these quizzes but when
That's why you'll start getting more and more like your Dad.
Yep.
Wouldn't argue with that one iota.
What does iota mean?
Scrap.
One what?
Scrap.
Scrap?
Scer er ap .
Why?
One little bit, I wouldn't argue with her.
You could do a treasure hunt, Dad  Dad
Mm?
you could do a treasure hunt.
No it's too hard.
It's not.
No this is do this is just a gentle little thing it'll just get people laughing and things cos
You've gotta sort out how you got organised ?
Who?
?
No he no go upstairs th in pairs if they wanna do it, quietly.
upstairs and find .
Getting silly!
You should have  answers up there  and each person has their gro group reading  one in the  breakfast room
But we got go grammatical each person has to speak.
Why don't they go out  Well I can have somewhere else  but they can all have their quiet place to talk.
Is it tonight Casualty on?
Eh?
Fridays?
Done today's paper?
Don't know.
Can I have it then.
Then cut it up, I don't know  you cannot loo go through you cannot go through those!
I only want the television page 
I don't care 
for Friday Kevin 
No don't Mum 
Sorry.
Oh for goodness sake how can I possibly see anything aye aye!
Why don't you look 
Find it over there what about over look!
Look I've found it.
Oh give it !
I thought you wanted a pop star?
Will you do any mathematical sums?
No
Mum can do them.
I might win.
Mum can do mathematical sums.
I've got a lovely mental test for the children  it's a bit hard.
Is it?
Better than 
Two one one   I am so tired, I've got to get up early tomorrow  , right I want that recorded twenty one thirty, shall I  her out?
Yes you better had  
as well.
Oh where are your keys?
Paul can you turn this thing to nought.
Yes.
Or on this one  or you have to have the other one?
The other one  should be a button  I've pressed the button just lift this up  button she set, there you go.
Thank you  so if I press play and record now  twenty one thirty, twenty two thirty it's half past ten   thirty five to half past ten that's alright  so  if I press play and record now  it should come on at  wha one and a half and ten  one forty so it should come on when it says one forty.
Shoe shoes shoe 
I took them upstairs.
Where are you going?
To see Mrs .
I didn't want that lady thinking you were untidy.
That what lady?
When are we leaving?
Dad?
Mm?
When we leaving?
In a minute  oh this is it  oh no  they're not re releasing in that   Cor look at this  he's not doing the one, he's doing all his Christmas ones together .
Who?
Cliff  that's why they did it, cos they put them all together.
Mm?
Clever I think.
Right I got my key then.
Alright, I think I got enough here.
Alright?
Right, yeah.
Well will you be very late?
No.
See you then.
Hello my name's Geoffrey Chaucer  and I'm going now, bye.
Are Paul  are erm Manchester United playing in their blue strip today, will they do you think?
Yeah.
That's their unlucky strip.
Let's hope   
It's a disgusting strip.
That awful white and blue 
Yeah.
strip.
Red as well.
Yeah I suppose they can't have red can they?
Not with a red 
No.
So, we're so much like red aren't we?
Red and blue.
team's  us they can't have red or blue either .
What did they have, what colour did they have before the blue?
Oh it was blue last year wasn't it?
It was a bluey weirdy one before 
Oh yeah.
last year.
Yeah.
Before that they have white don't they?
All white.
Oh yeah.
They played the cup final in white didn't they?
Yeah.
Right.
I looked up the teletext and it said full squad for Manchester United.
Even Paul Parker's  fit.
So they've got the full 
Not the palace full squad?
Man United?
No Man United, yes.
So they can't have any, if we beat them they can't have any excuses.
Yeah.
Have they got Lee Sharp?
Well I don't know.
I don't think 
 
don't think that's, that means that I don't think.
I hope not.
That's all we need.
I've got to try and make sure the petrol lasts till the Texaco garage  
When's that?
Where is the Texaco garage?
That one by  Carshalton ponds I don't think there's any one nearer is there?
No.
Oh yeah that one.
We don't usually go to that one do we?
Been to it before but not for a long time .
Is this the A three or the M twenty five?
A three.
Lovely new road.
Be kind of funny to see the mascots going on knowing what they've done  .
Oh yeah.
Except they'll have had a  four course meal to eat.
Will they?
Well  maybe.
Does that mean they would have if they have it at the ?
On Saturday well I mean it's the option to have it Saturday.
I don't know, at at that price I don't know.
I don't think very many do.
Really don't.
Fast.
Did you see that erm  did you hear that in the Zenith Data
Yes.
er  game?
When the Q P R man  interviewed the ref.
The the  Sky television man interviewed the ,
Oh yeah.
he said what's the coin?
And he says nineteen sixty two when I started reffing  and he said the oth they're not  I'm not giving them this one but these two are for the other mascot scene.
You lost out there didn't you really ?
They were badges.
They gave themselves badges .
Oh  badges.
Oh.
What did you ref say?
No chance  sorry you can't have it?
Dunno.
Geoff Thomas sent for  
He asked on your behalf didn't he?
Yeah.
Well you can't ask any more of Geoff Thomas than that I suppose.
I wonder why that little bit was in the paper about Geoff Thomas being  absolutely priceless?
Was it cos someone's 
What bit?
someone's after him again?
What bit?
There was a little article in the Sun I told you about.
Alan Smith saying  Geoff Thomas is absolutely priceless.
Er  all he's got to do is score more goals.
That's what I couldn't understand.
What a nerve!
.I think he meant for England.
All he had to do to seal his England career was pop in a two, a few goals like he does at Palace
Yeah.
and er  could be on the way to a regular spot.
He is in a regular spot at the moment.
Well I don't know.
Hope, hope that's true.
Yeah but well you look that  that jaguar  four litres!
. Four litre car!
Yeah but what are you gonna do with four litres?
I dunno.
Well quite.
It does about  eighteen miles to the gallon.
How many miles do we do to the gallon?
I hope we do something like thirty six.
Thirty six!
Don't think it's much more than that.
How can his, well  if ours is one point six  there's three times
No it doesn't work that way.
It doesn't work like that?
No.
So what  how long will it take him to get eighty miles filling up every ?
Well I mean do they have huge tanks?
I mean they take  if you, if you filled up you could put I think it's about twenty six gallons in that car.
And how many can we put in?
Nine?
Eleven?
Cor.
Eleven.
It was eight, nine.
I think this might take eleven.
So how much do they spend if they filled it ?
Don't forget if you've got all that weight, you've got that you're gonna lose even more petrol.
So if you filled that up, how much would that cost them?
Well, twenty six  I think it's something like  isn't it something like two pounds a gallon now?
You don't, they do it all by litres now so it's really hard 
About fifty P?
About fifty, fifty pounds?
Fifty pounds to fill up!
Yeah.
Oh yeah fifty, sixty pounds.
And how long would it last them?
About the same time as us?
Yeah.
I suppose you have to be able to afford all that if you can afford the car in the first place.
Right.
Yeah if you have to moan about that you shouldn't be driving it in the first place.
Motto, what?
Motto of the story is er  er don't, don't buy expensive cars if you're gonna want to run the thing though.
You've spent all your money on this car.
All of a sudden you realize  
Well like that new advert for the Rover he says don't, I keep thinking my back  my back tailgate's  flapping or  I keep hearing, you keep hearing creaking don't you?
A creak here and you think what's that, what's this, what's that?
So that new Rover has been built so everything fits perfectly, right?
So nothing rattles.
What do you mean nothing?
No toleran er the tolerance is you know minimal.
Whereas the tolerance here'd be  I dunno eighth of an inch here eighth of an inch there he says  the advert says as soon as you have tolerances like that then thing work loose and start rattling and creaking and
E E.
you can hear it go E E er E.
Yeah.
you imagine cruising in a car, lovely car like that  and it makes no noise.
Just cruising away and it just like glides, and you glide you know  like, like Papa's Citroen type  that kind of suspension.
Yeah.
Is this a new Rover?
Crikey what was that?
A Rover.
Was it that Rover?
Yeah.
Was this a new, is this a new Rover ?
Carving everybody up.
Yes.
That was er  that, yeah well it's not out yet is it?
Looks like a  looks like the front of a B M W to me.
I think that's what they're trying to emulate.
Oh that one.
How much is it?
Supposed to be.
Don't know how much it costs.
Should think it starts at about sixteen, seventeen thousand  .
Yeah .
A three's heavy isn't it?
Look.
Yeah.
So you got any ideas what you're gonna get, what you should get mum for ?
Er.
We could just  fall back on a bit of sweets and chocolate or something in the end but I'd like to get some
What  what sort of thing are you gonna get her?
there's some funny little weird shops down Thornton Heath aren't there?
What sort of thing are we talking about?
Well I dunno.
Something  I'm not  I've no idea until I see it.
Well something like soap or what?
Could get her some, some toiletries or something.
I dunno.
I was hoping for something even more er
a  Moss chemist might be able to get her some  Bromley don't they?
There is a  Moss chemist on the way.
Oh yes she did tell me that she'd like some of that.
Yes there is one isn't there?
By  shops.
Right we, we'll  we'll treat that as a fail safe then.
If we can't see anything more unusual suppose we could always fall back on  the bubble baths or the  anyway I think that's a bit more than  but there you go.
They're off to football aren't they?
Look at that!
I've never seen a Metro  so full.
how many people are there in it?
Five.
Five full adults.
Look  really down on his  haunches.
Oh yeah!
Low!
It's really low innit?
Mm.
See that's the B M W I think the Rover's gonna look like.
That one, that's what they're copying.
Yeah.
It's really like it.
It's only the front though.
Oh I wanted to let him go.
What?
Oh look!
Someone's been right through that wall there, look.
Cor.
Ooh!
You wanted to let who go?
I wanted to let that car go, I was
Why?
Well I like to be polite.
I don't like the people like this who  who straddle across you and just stop you.
Mm.
Specially when they're Indians.
Come on, let him go for goodness sake.
what's that plonker holding that Sony thing for!
Yeah I I held up a traffic jam of about sixty cars doing that .
There's .
Still there.
Do you  Judy then?
Somebody call Judy.
Judy, yeah .
Yes it's Judy.
Ah!
What did the  say up there?
I don't know.
Wah.
 

I think we're gonna have to invite erm  Adrian again.
One of these football evening matches we could couldn't we?
Yeah.
I'm gonna see how many people I can let go  across  here, between here and Palace.
Right four 
Do you wanna count?
oh no I did four at that one and I just did one there.
That's five all together now.
Five.
Five  five times I was polite.
No but they, they just ran out in front of you, those other four.
No, well  no I let them go though.
Well  the third one did.
So we're counting from five?
Five yeah.
Only ones I don't like are the ones in like  oh that doesn't matter cos he's allowed to do that cos it's a keep clear zone there.
I wonder if they're going to our match here, do you think?
They look like  a football crowd don't they?
Not really.
Do they?
Well I dunno  
It's a woman a woman driving it.
Is it?
Yes.
Oh well.
Perhaps not then.
four men 
So if we get there early enough do you feel like a Wimpy?
A Wimpy?
Sony, Sony Sony  Sony me Sony  
I don't know what  That's a tiny little shop for a Sony isn't it?
Yeah.
Oh it's not a Sony shop though look.
It's  audio  Sony advert.
Oh.
I bet they've got one of these tape recorders in it though.
Mm.
Sony me Sony Sony me Sony   .
A Wimpy?
Cheapskates.
They don't put the lights on in this Christmas  thing till  it's slightly dusk.
I know.
Well we can't hardly see them now.
Well you  well you would be able to though wouldn't you?
Would you?
You wouldn't want to put them on, they're not so spectacular are they?
Cuts  cuts down on the electricity bill.
Plus two sports.
It's funny, every time we've sat at our seats  that bloke has come to ask the chap next to me
Yeah.
what he thinks of the match hasn't he?
. There hasn't been one game we've  been there that he hasn't  or both of them haven't .
Suppose they're both season ticket holders.
James was well gutted on  Friday .
James right  like Mr  right he didn't know right and we have this sort of erm  water fountain and he was running towards it and he, and he  filled up his mouth with it and he was spitting it everywhere and we were all sort of getting out the way  and Mr  told him  if you don't want to drink it then leave it alone  and he sort of turned and walked away.
Mr  who's quite strict isn't he?
Yeah.
He looks
He  badminton.
James 
Oh does he?
James was really unlucky.
He sort of just come, just go up there 
James is always into trouble isn't he?
Yeah.
That's rather disgusting though
I know.
putting water in and spitting it out.
He should have remembered because  always walks down there on Fridays to do his badminton class.
Did he give him a de de detention or not?
No, he told him to get away.
Yeah well always mucks around on Fridays don't they?
Sort of like ah no more school for about two days.
More relaxed mood.
James is very excitable 
Yeah.
Now when I, when we went to that open day that  Mr  is very stern isn't he?
Mm yeah.
Didn't think it helped he'd, just before we got there  his biro had exploded in his pocket .
All the ink was all over his shirt, it was coming out all over the place.
I don't think he was in the best of moods when he, we got to him.
But he seemed very very stern.
He doesn't  smile very much.
No.
Terse.
We have his wife er Mrs  for English.
And you say they're nothing to do with Mark
No.
?
It's unbelievable isn't it?
Isn't it Yeah.
Unless it's Smith in Cypriot or something .
Don't know.
Don't think she's Cypriot.
None of them sound Cypriot but
So what's his wife teach then?
English.
We have him for history and her for English.
And her for English?
Yo!
Yeah.
Mm.
She's the one we did our Geoffrey Chaucer project, project with.
I always feel guilty passing Mike's house.
We really should sort of take him to football, don't you?
But
they are.
I don't think he's I don't think he's interested as you is he really?
No, nowhere near.
But  he's probably not there.
He's probably at a party or something like that, or
Yeah.
 
I don't think he's got any lack of things to do, has he?
Really?
No.
He never seems to have any homework to do though.
all those Christmas trees in that lorry, look.
Oh yeah.
Where are they going to?
I don't know, they're loa , looks like they're loading them in, they're putting them in the gar the school.
Has that school closed now?
I think perhaps it has.
I went there for a week.
Yeah, I think it's closed.
Didn't I?
I was in the fourth year, the top year .
Were they nice to you there, the teachers?
I mean there weren't very many teachers anyway were there?
How many were there?
Dunno.
Three or four.
Four?
Three or four?
Don't know.
Can't remember.
on the computer most of the time.
And I took part in some of their tests.
I got better results than some of the actual  fifteen year olds.
That'll be quite good about your maths test won't it?
Cos you'll be, you're doing it again with, like that aren't you?
Your maths 
 
you're taking class nine
Yeah.
you could get better than them.
Yeah.
Virtually every year the eighth, eighth year always does get better than the ninth year.
Look  that house is really old.
Look it's got the plaque on it.
What's a plaque mean?
Is that a fire station thing?
Well yeah it's  yeah.
No no it's not but it's, it's saying how old those houses are.
all, all these
Yeah?
are really old.
They look quite new.
Yeah.
Well no they're kept to look like new  really old.
Were th , were those white boards always there?
It's got a Surrey  Surrey badge on it look.
Building of historical interest.
What's so historic about that?
Don't know  well it's probably near erm three or four hundred years or something.
Yeah.
Everything's old around here isn't it?
Apart from it's sort of like everything's old that side
Yeah.
everything's new the other side.
More modern, yeah.
Talk about that being out of place.
Look at that.
What?
Well 
What  Budgens?
That bloke looks like your Derek doesn't he?
The old Sunday school teacher.
What in the car?
Chap here, yeah.
Does he?
Bet Derek wishes he'd have a car like that.
Nice.
He's only got a beat up old Metro.
Yeah.
Spent four hundred pounds on it.
They, they had a documentary on Metros apparently and the Me they said that Metros of a certain period for about, I think  from his period sort of  A registration, B registration, Y registration  they're absolute rubbish apparently.
Yeah.
You know, all the rusting and everything, they've improved now.
The Me if he had a Metro now he'd, you'd get a better deal but they said that
They're cheap though aren't they?
Well yes but not cheap if you have to keep replacing them and
Think he'll probably buy a new car  probably.
photographic  photo service.
How do you spell sergeant?
I've always wondered that.
Is that how you act is that sergeant?
Erm  yes.
It's not S A R?
Er  I think the American version is and I think that's the English version and that's right.
So his name is actually somebody sergeant?
Yeah.
Ooh I wouldn't mind buying that, look.
For sale, doesn't say a price though, but look, doesn't half look new doesn't it?
Where?
Complete new Opel body I reckon he's got there.
T registration but  Opel Manta.
Nice.
Genesis.
Who's that?
Oh that's Phil Collins isn't it.
This corner here gets worse and worse, traffic lights and yet the traffic 
Yeah.
gets further and further back.
And yet  two or three years ago it used to stop up there.
Now you stop further, now you're almost stopping on the lights.
The lights are getting clogged up .
Yeah.
You know those sporty rollers?
They don't have all that pine in them.
Don't they?
That wood.
No.
No.
Suppose  it's not very  zoopy sport does it, like ?
No, it's not conducive as a  sporty image  the walnut facia.
facia.
Don't think.
How do they make that building curved?
architecture.
They're quite nice actually aren't they?
They, they're a bit run down.
They could have a bit more money spent on them.
Had a new roof I note but
Yeah.
They're always for sale.
There's always a for sale sign out outside one of those or one of those.
I reckon it's one of those flats, you can always get a flat there.
Are they flats?
So many that, er yeah, so many of them that  soon as one's sold somebody else sells another one.
Yeah.
Well how many are there?
Seventeen to twenty
Oh 
twenty one to twenty six.
It's a lot isn't it?
Yeah.
Specially both sides.
Yellow flag coming out of his aerial.
Oh where would you prefer your ae aerial?
Would you like it there  up there or at the back?
Up there's alright.
I like it the way the ones that you can  close each time, now I'm sure my aerial will last longer.
Cos you can 
What do you mean close.
Well it compacts.
Oh yeah.
The ones that stick out all the time, they  I suppose that is good.
If you have one that doesn't compact, you you're best to have one in the middle cos it's less likely to get pranged there isn't it?
Yeah.
Here like walkers by can bend it and  Oh look.
Here's my next one.
Six.
I've let six go now.
You must have let someone go before now.
I didn't, no I haven't.
No.
Haven't had the opportunity to.
What is this lady dressed up like?
What has she got on  ?
What has she got on her hair?
Weird.
Bunch of wool .
She'll be thinking where's that wool?
Oh it's on my head.
Look at those tiny rugby posts.
Yeah, I don't know why they do that, I was gonna ask that, why they chop those off, look like they've been vandalized don't they?
Yeah.
It's only for junior rugby though.
They haven't replaced that garage have they?
It's Volvo's in there.
They've got no-one, no-one's 
Yeah.
Put a new garage in there already.
There's loads of new garages going in all over the place.
Volvo 
Could have let that one go but I was too late.
Yeah.
Volvo seem to be  moving out all over the place.
I think they're trying to set up  er nought, their own things rather than just joining petrol stations.
Where's the  Secombe centre 
Back there.
Have you been to that place, Holiday Inn?
Headphones on the wall again.
Oops a daisy.
Is that the B & Q down there
Yeah.
or the Texas?
B and Q.
martial arts.
So so far I've let six people go.
That's not bad.
Six!
It is bad.
You let five go in a second.
Well I could you could let this one go but I think he's gonna come out isn't he?
I don't know what to do.
Here you are, no, I'll let him go, oh two I let go!
That's eight.
Oh brilliant.
Yes!
Eight!
Wow.
Eight people.
 Wowsers Eight people.
She's gonna sit there all day  she's that far back .
Funny.
Think it's obviously to do with trusting your car's power.
It's also being alert  to watch.
I mean some people just don't expect you to let them out so they're dreaming mostly .
Yeah.
Times you flash people  er?
And you have to flash flash flash flash flash before you know oh, oh, ooh!
let her out.
You know, they're just, they're just waiting you know, sort of  Others are like on the ball almost too much.
They whip across you before you've even thought about it.
Isn't Texaco around there somewhere?
Texaco?
Er  no that's B P.
Texaco is round the corner.
Don't forgot to switch that off when we go in the garage.
Yeah.
Oh look.
Number nine.
Yes!
Number 10?
No I can't cos they're, they won't let her, let them go.
Get stuck there.
I, I'll ask about that.
Yeah?
Yeah.
No I know about it.
You have to send off.
Do you?
Yeah.
But have you got a form or something to get at the garage?
Er  you can ask then.
It's those ones where you just flick it around.
What were they called?
What were they called?
Er
I, I know arm bands but was it, is there a name for it?
Protective arm bands?
Flick them.
Er
Flick arm bands?
Flick on bands, yeah
Flick on bands?
Flick on bands .
You want me to go in a garage and ask for, have you got a flick on band!
You flick off!
You're the one that wants them.
Squire car company.
Why have they got all
Fancy having a car called eggs.
E E G S, dad.
Oh that's the way you spell eggs.
It's not!
How far have we got through this tape?
Flick it off now.
The garage is here.
Yeah.
Sort of past half way.
Can't believe these are only forty five minutes.
Cos we've been talking  at least there.
Mm.
This is a tricky one to get in to isn't it?
This is the one, you know I went wrong in the B P?
This is the one I always think I was thinking about.
Yeah?
And when I went wrong the other time.
What, what other time?
You know, went to the Esso and I went all wrong and I couldn't le , I went down a no en 
Oh yeah.
Woman said no way .
No way chummy.
Oh there you are  children should be   application forms here.
Yeah it's going round.
Why must you check, every time?
Cos I think sometimes it doesn't .
You just sit there thinking you're taping and you're not.
Oh.
Er  how did she get it on there?
Pooh.
Mummy's gonna say that's very strong, Paul.
In fact put it at the back somewhere I think  pong.
No.
Why should we have it in the back?
That's it.
Really strong innit?
Can you put that in the  in the  glovebox then please.
Do you wanna bit of this?
No thank you  Bounty   What's the Egbert fund?
I'm supporting the Egbert fund.
Do you know it?
Looks like er the spastic one.
Oh.
No we've picked the wrong one there.
I don't think we'll pick spice again, do you?
No.
Ooh!
Smells like somebody's lavatory .
Looks like you'll have to sort of like  put it up for a day and then  take it down for a week and put it back in again.
It's too much for one day .
You shou , perhaps you should have kept the  bag on it.
You know it's too strong to .
You take the bag off, off it after a month or something.
Even your Bounty must taste a bit poorly.
Yeah?
Yeah.
Bet the bloke listening to this can hear it  smell it.
I know.
Put it in there.
.
open the glovebox when we get 
Yeah.
Er  hang on though, perhaps that's not so good.
I, it might make the sweets taint.
Mm.
I reckon we'll  when, when we get out we'll put it in the boot and it'll  filter through  through on its own .
Ooh dear!
How about just keeping it in the bag?
It's overcoming me.
Yeah.
Open your window, quick.
Oh  look.
Panic.
Not everybody's window, Paul .
Ah!
Strewth Pauly.
Disgusting.
I'll just keep it down there.
In the bag.
Oh it's disgusting smell.
And why did you hit this car?
Well you see 
my son took his magic  pongo tree out
and I was overcome, thus hitting the car in front.
I see Mr .
Do you expect us to believe that do you?
Yeah .
Yes.
He is an idiot.
Can you leave that alone!
I leant on it.
Lean out a bit cos I'm shutting the windows again.
No I want it.
I  
I hope this traffic jam's not all the way to Croydon.
I do so hope.
Oh can you imagine what that Purley Way's gonna be like?
Forget the s , egg and chips Pauly.
Forget mummy's present.
Oh what are they having here now?
The Christmas fair.
At the moment I'm just trying to forget that awful spice stuff.
innit?
Yeah I think you did wrong.
You should, you shouldn't have er yeah.
You shouldn't have er  opened the packet.
It's funny that shop didn't smell of it did it?
So I mean  the seal must keep it all in until you open it up.
Ugh ugh.
open it ugh .
No it's quite a nice smell if it's like taken out now.
We'll put it in the boot or it'll just be sickening on the way home.
Yeah.
person listening to this tape will probably go ah .
I can smell it when I'm listening to it!
There's our little football group.
Look, it's getting bigger and bigger.
What little football group?
There!
Yeah.
Got a lady teaching, got a team to go there.
Do you remember that lady that ran the team at er St John's?
Yeah.
Quite keen.
Oh yeah, her.
how her little team got on.
Whether it folded or not.
Probably did.
I think a lot of them do.
Yeah.
You imagine what Purley Way's gonna be like ton , today.
Christmas shopping .
Awful 
Oh we're taking  forget two o'clock.
I said two o'clock we'd be parking.
Stopped for petrol I suppose.
Yeah but dad, not for that long.
So when will we park now?
Set an estimate 
Well look there's an  estimation look they're  parking, they're queuing on this brow of the hill instead of the other one.
Everybody's got Christmas fairs on haven't they?
Look, balloons.
This is the day.
Yeah.
No, fifteenth is the day.
Or sixth 
Are we going to ?
Yeah.
It's the toy service tomorrow isn't it?
Is it?
Yeah.
That really is a strong  
No it could, you could overcome, I wonder if there's a warning on the packet.
Do not open this and drive at the same time.
Really heady.
On an empty stomach it's made me feel quite queasy.
Oh look he's done, someone's done that to his, look, look.
Smashed his wing mirror, look  jam a glass in it, er sock in it to stop  the glass falling out .
Oh it's not too bad.
Yes Paul.
Well really you should have read shouldn't you?
Dad!
You  told me to take it all the way out.
Should have got that blue one.
I knew that was your fault.
Stinks!
Yes but you opened it all.
Actually I don't even want it anywhere near me.
Ah.
It's gone all my nose funny now.
nose I've got  my asthma.
Asthma.
Asthma.
By the way, if you can hear a word I say you're better than I am.
Oh get this out.
Phew.
I'll have to lob that  
That car's got smile  just to annoy everybody .
What?
Smile, just to annoy everybody that blue Datsun says on 
What does that, what does that mean?
Ooh, yeah be pleasant and ooh.
There you are, look, look 
You can read that ah.
I thought you meant that  what about the one in front of it then?
Baby on board.
I can't stand those ones.
Can you see?
Well I can see 
I can see the baby.
Well a baby is on board.
Give them their due.
Oh, oh it's made all my throat go all funny.
Pay someone to take it away.
Very long lasting.
Yes, very long lasting.
Hang on, I'm just opening the window again.
Recording commences at three past two.
With   .
Got a Palace  picture on.
Man United!
Oh.
Don't let them out.
They can stay there.
We hate United.
Hello again.
Hello, hello, hello.
Who is that  munching cashews on the tape .
Here we go, you go right close, go  ah!
 

You wicked trickster you.
Would you like a cashew nut?
You can't have a cashew nut.
Oh come on.
I like the big ones.
You would.
That's me!
Mm
Tasted nicer ones.
Can't afford to eat them like that!
Mm  can.
Mm.
Lovely.
Should eat them about a quarter at a time.
Why are the dearest things the nicest?
Don't eat them like that!
Mm.
I can't, look at you eating them like that.
One at a time.
Oh look Pauly hot rod.
Hot rod!
Woo woo, nice.
Mm.
No!
That means give me the packet.
Hurry up, come on.
What?
Quick.
Give me the packet please, they're mine.
What me?
What.
Oh that's where you should go for your computer, look.
P C World.
Yeah.
This bit's not so bad.
Once you get through that  traffic light back there
Yeah.
it's alright.
Mm.
Soon as these lights go we should get here, through here quite quickly.
Mm.
Long lights.
I command thee to become orange.
Orange.
Well it's so long for the .
They make them longer during the evenings and Saturday.
Orange!
And this lot have got to go first haven't they?
Mm.
Yeah   .
Quite ridiculous.
Far too long.
Far too long, yeah.
How do people know it's gonna change?
They just sort of start their engines  still red.
changes.
Regulars down here I should imagine.
Where?
Regulars probably who come down here and know 
Regulars .
They can count.
Yeah.
No they can probably see down the end and they  
Well these lights used to be quite easy, didn't mind being stopped by them.
Now you're petrified of being stopped by any of them cos you know it's
Yeah.
really long wait.
When are they gonna bring those towers down?
Don't know.
Which way would they tumble them?
I don't think they're in any rush to develop now, are they cos this housing business is so poor.
whoever's got the land has decided 
are they boarded off.
You can't go up there any more?
No.
That is so naff isn't it?
Putting your scarf across the car like that.
I know.
What's it say.
Crystal Palace.
Least it says Crystal Palace.
Right.
Who shall we, who shall we get
What?
as a replacement for somebody.
Who is there?
Who would you like?
If we had all the money.
Buy Ian Wright back I suppose.
No.
I'd sell Bright.
No I wouldn't sell Bright.
I'd buy someone first.
Make sure someone was interested in  .
I'd buy Deane  and swap Bright in exchange for Deane.
No matter how bad he doesn't like it  he's well and truly gutted.
Er so him for Deane and 
Yeah but Deane won't be available till the end of the season.
There's no way Sheffield United  
Er I dunno.
just stoking the price up I think.
Cos it's not old Bassett now, this is what it's all about.
to get the odd draw you need the odd goal and er it's not gonna come from any other people than er
Oh yeah, Deane.
Deane.
But Deane didn't score today.
It was Beazley apparently.
Beazley.
Beazley.
Er I might see if I could pick up that  Sheffield United guy Jamie Hoyland.
He's quite good.
As you say the main problem is, as you say is are you going to change your whole  team, game 
Yeah.
I don't know.
I think they'll do it slowly but  not this slowly.
I mean I th I think we should have bought someone along with er Gabbiadini to play with him.
could just bring him and expect  stuff.
Mm could you get 
I think he's gonna have to raid the bottom divisions again, you know.
What sort of bottom divisions?
he's probably got his eye on .
I mean that Coleman was a very good buy wasn't he?
Yeah?
Yeah.
How much did he cost?
Three hundred and fifty.
Three hundred and fifty.
No it wasn't, it was three hundred.
It was two 
Yes it was.
Three hundred and fifty.
Oh anyway, it was still pretty good wasn't it?
Wasn't cheap, I mean
No, but I mean you could see   play really well .
I mean Southgate's all the more pleasing when you think he's somebody that's worked his way up, right?
Yeah.
That's really nice to see.
And he played really well.
Southgate is a harder person to mark isn't he?
Yeah.
I think I'd drop Mortimer  oh look, Palace.
Red car  it's like ours isn't it?
Yeah.
I'd drop, I'd drop Paul Mortimer
Yeah.
and have Collymore in right?
And encourage  that's the trouble, you drop Mortimer you drop somebody who can er flip the ball in but  I think you definitely want to take the heat off Wright.
Now if if all Collymore does is distract   but Mortimer was not playing enough of the game.
We can't afford  people like Mortimer to, I mean he scored a goal  but I mean
Yeah.
Eddie  I think is worth  sheer sort of  opening teams up.
Well he does open, there's no  not many players can play a team better like  than opening up 
So what'd you do, say you had  back next week so our next game against Birmingham.
What would you do then?
Well I mean they've got, they've got, he's gotta do something because you're gonna lose that Birmingham game.
can see that coming now.
But Birmingham must have won today cos they had equal top  must have won I would have thought.
That's good.
Chelsea won one nil.
How do you know?
You'd have thought Forest would have beaten Chelsea wouldn't you?really annoyed after being 
Yeah.
I suppose so.
What are you gonna buy mum?
He's gone the whole hog that guy  hanging down to his
Oh.
So what are you gonna buy her?
Newbury Fruits?
Or something like that, er
They did very well with those little tulip hand out  things didn't they?
There's a lot of people who er don't, who would not have gone to the bother of going into the shop and buying a one pound or two pound or four pound  
But why did they do well out of them if they were free?
Well yeah they're free but they've got their advert on it haven't they?
Tulip 
tulip tulip, I mean  you're like a roving little advert aren't you?
I mean it, it draws your eye those little pictures doesn't it?
You  
Oh he's got, he's got the hanging one at the front hasn't he?
And he's got a badge on the right hand side as well.
Yeah.
So he really is  
You see that guy next to us?
He's got a Palace earring hasn't he?on one of his ears.
Oh my goodness.
On his left ear.
He's nice though isn't he, wasn't he, he did say something
Yeah.
I didn't have to say anything.
I said to him  I don't know, he said  did you enjoy yourself Tuesday?
Oh I said, did you see us?
Oh yeah we saw you.
And his dad's nice.
Yeah.
But that other bloke was there but he wasn't in his normal place.
Yes  
Why wasn't he in his normal place?
Palace played really well.
The first twenty five minutes, when you think we were one nil up right I thought gosh  if we could get that second goal it would have made all the difference and United would have been really would have been in trouble.
Was a good game though.
Oh I enjoyed it, yeah.
Just don't enjoy Palace losing, but   sheer football   and it just shows you that ironically the two games can match each other and there were chances for Palace to wrap that game up.
But er  when they do play that ball to ball  business erm 
Yeah.
we look like we've got huge spaces in our  in our midfield.
I mean  that's what teams are doing now, they're realizing that's where all our weakness is in midfield  so  don't take a er a hefty boot and try and er er  people like Thorn and  I mean Thorn and Young were impeccably  they played beautifully today.
You cannot ask Thorn and Young, I've never seen two players play  they do, they did th , they do the simple thing  but they do it consistently well.
Over and over again, maybe a hundred, hundred and fifty times in one match and they'll make one mistake and usually like Coleman was there to c , I think Coleman backed up well and Gareth  backed up well once or twice.
But defence wise  superb.
Absolutely su , there was a lapse with that guy, don't know who was to blame about that third goal but I mean
It was Young.
Er Young let it plop over 
Oh, didn't see who it was.
It was like, it was like a, like they were waiting for an offside or some there were just couldn't believe, it was 
But it was the same when Palace scored and exactly the same thing happened didn't it?
Why do they lapse?
It's weird.
Yeah, it's  well they do say both sides that it's the most dangerous time straight after a goal.
I mean often, times you see teams equalize immediately.
You know it's like, you sometimes you can go a whole game like seventy minutes of a game and no-one's had a goal scoring chance
Yeah.
and then someone scores and the guy goes in straight calmly and scores straight away.
You know it's people aren't
Yeah.
I don't know, it's psychologically sort of still got their mind on going through what's er
On what happened.
Yeah.
It's like at school when they're thinking oh no, no and they've scored again.
It's like you've scored, you're so elated and you  
Fact you you often sort of watch videos of managers.
Managers are often shrieking you know about what's happening next rather than you know, all their players are jumping with joy all over each other and you think  and they're saying get in your positions.
Do your stuff.
Don't let it slip straight away, I mean  That was annoying thing is that we didn't deserve to lose three one really, I mean
Sneak that  that box of sweets in then for mum .
I bet she knows you've done that for her.
Eh?
I bet she knows you've bought that for her.
Well she knows that we're giving her something, yes.
I mean we could have been worse, could have forgotten completely.
I mean it's easy, cos when mum gets all those things for everybody else, clearly she doesn't get something for herself.
Don't know why not.
What did you get her last year?
It was the same thing wasn't it?
No I didn't get, we didn't do this did we, last year?
Yes we did.
We always have the tree presents.
Do we?
Our sunroof's pretty isn't it?
You what?
Our sunroof's pretty isn't it?
Very stylish.
What's the time?
This  very busy road, isn't it?
I suppose so.
busier.
seems to be very busy 
So does the other way.
Yeah.
Because of mum.
where the heck are we.
hundred percent better 
Yeah you were well fluky then, getting the 
How come that shop had them and the other one didn't?
you wouldn't believe it would you?
No.
nice big posh shop like  and it's got cheap
Yes.
and nasty  in it.
Yes.
Hope you're enjoying it.
follow you up 
It would be real boring just listening to a load of rubbish wouldn't it?
I mean making up conversations all over the place.
Suddenly it clears  this bit.
What you're memory?
No this road.
Oh, this road.
Why?
Dunno some go off that way 
I mean, let, some people go up go off where?
Where is it leading to?
Don't know.
I don't really know.
What's all this, why does  Meltis always have that stand of eighty, eighty years?
Well it's how long they've been going, I suppose.
Surely they've been  for the last four years and they must  or do they just keep it at eighty one then they go to ninety?
I don't know.
I've never noticed that badge before.
Hallo  how many miles have we done?
sixteen thousand one hundred and sixty.
How many did we have when we bought it?
How long ago
Fourteen thousand 
how long ago was it that we bought it?
September.
September?
Ages ago.
Yeah.
twelve thousand miles 
Twelve thousand?
No way, not at eight.
What if we lose at Birmingham Paul.
Will you wanna go to the Chelsea match?
What Chelsea match?
Well the Chelsea match is the following Tuesday.
Is that  yes.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And what Saturd , what's the match on Saturday before squeezed in between that?
What?
I don't really know.
Er  erm  is there a game  on Saturday?
I think there might be.
Oh I've got it, I've got it.
It's come to me.
It's come to me.
It's come to me.
Oh not a big team is it, again?
Tottenham.
Oh no!
Oh no it's not Tottenham.
No, you know when we played our Birmingham replay?
Yeah.
That night we were gonna play Tottenham.
Were we?
Mark  told me that.
It was on his picture list.
Really?
That night we were gonna play Tottenham
Oh well.
in the league.
Oh sorry.
Perhaps we can play Tottenham when they haven't got er Gary Lineker in  their games any more.
Yeah.
You start hitting periods like this and you think  oh no.
You think every team  you start worrying about almost every side don't you?
Yeah.
Oh we always worry about every side cos Crystal Palace  always hate the  bad sides.
Cos usually we do well against the Man United and as soon as we start  losing against them we start getting worried.
They outplayed us last season at  fairground didn't they?
Liverpool 
What do you mean  at Liverpool?
What did Liverpool do to them then?
Well we lost  no we beat them two one 
Yeah.
I remember that.
Most surprising result of that season.
Not really.
Was it?
It is when you see us struggling against Birmingham.
 
What do you think the score's gonna be against Birmingham?
Three one to Palace.
Three one to Palace?
Be great if that is.
We will score first.
They will equalize and we'll score two more.
We have got to get another goalgetter.
I mean old erm   does his bit  crossing and splitting defences and getting goals but not scoring them.
What do you mean, getting goals and then not 
Now, well now  it's just now we've got nobody who, who score actually really scores goals  except Thomas I would say at the moment.
We really do need somebody who regularly pops them in.
What about Gabbiadini?
What about Gabiadini?
Well  he's coming along.
I don't see him  
I think he  he had a really good first half  I think it like, I think that  to be fair, apart from Coleman an Southgate everybody faded in the second half didn't they?
Yo.
Yo  
Yeah.
What's that, Man United fans?
Wallington.
Where's Wallington?
Oh that's boring.
Why are we going this way then?
Are, are Manchester United not the most cockiest fans going aren't they?
They really are cocky .
Yeah.
Leeds, I like Man United, I don't, I don't hate them or anything I just, they get a bit I dunno.
Mind you not that they've had an awful lot of success recently but they are, really are a cocky lot.
Leeds are aggressive so you're always quite glad that you've beaten them but .
Specially with Palace I think they seem to think  but they really .
Should have finished them off in that first 
Yeah   Can I just flick the light on for a second?
Thank you.
Yes, see who  I mean  I can't think of anybody who's in the reserves who could do any better than the lot that are in, in at the moment.
Can you?
Other than perhaps give Colleymore a full blooded  game, right?
Doesn't he get a full blooded game at the moment?
I think perhaps it's, it's worth it now.
The season, I mean we're not gonna come top of the league are we?
Right?
We've gotta make sure we stay in the first division but  
I think we can afford to blood Colimore as a good one now.
He could have this whole of this season to get used to playing, right?
Yeah.
And then who knows what fireworks could happen the season after.
I mean  he's never gonna be a  when he's obviously another Bright.
Who wants another Bright?
We're supposed to  to the better style of play.
No, I don't know.
Well why did we buy Gabiadini?
Why?
What would be the point of buying Gabiadini?
No, well I, I mean you saw the point really.
I mean  to pick I mean who, who  who could replace ?
He's, I, he, the way he plays is virtually unique, isn't he?
So I mean you're not gonna say  well let's go and get another Ian Wright off the peg so fair enough.
But er  in the kind of situation where Ian Wright was very very good was in tight situations.
differently through se sheer speed and  but er I can see Gabiadini  I mean Ian Wright never flicks like some of the flicks that he does.
I mean some of the flicks are fantastic.
But erm there is a nice side to his game but god he doesn't half fade.
Can you afford somebody that fades like that, I don't know it's
The whole team fades at the moment.
I, I, that's what I would do.
I'd drop Mortimer now and er  keep, I wouldn't, I'd  keep McGoldrick up  don't have him as a sweeper.
I mean if you're gonna have McGoldrick as a sweeper then you'd have to bring Mortimer back but
Why not 
I noticed it was quite odd that he didn't use McGoldrick as a sweeper did he?
I mean we, we went out to win that game didn't we, again?
Well, don't you think?
Yeah.
We didn't play a  and yet the defence played well enough.
So I think drop Mortimer and bring Colimore in for a full  ninety minutes and then and and again and again and again.
Get sort of like  half a dozen games.
I think drop Bright  Colimore.
Well.
I mean Bright, I mean
Well yes, you could say, yes
you've got, you've got an excuse to drop Bright.
Bright's tired.
You could say Bright is absolutely tired.
He looks tired at the moment.
Just drop Bright .
There's no need to drop Mortimer.
Not when he's playing well.
Mm yes.
Well he, he didn't play well in the second half though did he?
I don't think.
He sort of 
Give me a player that did, outside
Yes, well, yes.
Coleman and Southgate.
Well it  it was one of the, I mean when you saw
Oh look, that's where Fergie made those funny faces.
Oh and you didn't see that did you?in the paper .
Look Croydon  Caterham valley.
eyes.
Christmas presents.
Er one thing, what's the name of this record you want?
Enya.
It's in the, it's in  I think it's number nine in the hit parade 
What's it called?
What's Enya's record called now Paul?
Eh?
Enya's record?
Shepherd's .
It's number nine wasn't it?
What?
Nine, wasn't it?
Number nine.
I don't remember
What's the cover look like?
It was number three when I 
It's silvery.
Greyish.
It's not silvery it's blue.
Is it?
It was green last time you I asked you.
Enya anyway.
Are you celebrating your birthday tomorrow?
Well Paul was asking this, when  well  I'll have some presents.
Whoever comes, brings me in we'll open those.
Do you want yours opened ?
I'll open one in the morning I think.
Up to you, what do you think?
I don't mind .
So you'll take Paul to church in the morning will you?
Alright.
Well you can drop him off and pick him up.
I could do, yeah.
Now you've found my keys for my  I really need to get those 
What's that he's got?
What's that?
My .
You bought it?
Yeah.
More money than sense.
Wonder what he looks like now?
How old was he there?
Nineteen sixty eight, so that's  twenty three years ago.
He was only twenty three then I should think.
Let us have a bit of the paper.
Listen to this.
Absent minded spinsters Beryl and Doris  lost their car in a repair shop .
Yeah I know!
I read that.
The sisters are eighty and eighty one reported the mini stolen
And bought another one.
got the  er three months later they received thirteen hundred pound pay off from insurance Commercial Union and promptly bought a replacement car.
But when they booked their new car into Tristar Motors for its first service, they found their old model waiting for them .
That is  dreadful garage that didn't phone to find out why they hadn't picked it up though, isn't it?
I'd have thought
Unless they lost their address.
Hee hee hee hee.
I mean the fact that this come  out is that the 
That was in the Mail  That was in the Mail.
Yeah but the fact it's come out is that they've been honest.
Isn't it?
Right?
Yes.
You could have kept that quiet, anyway.
Oh I should think the garage publicized it.
I remember this one.
Who's that?
Kinks isn't it?
Ray Davies?
Yes.
Tears of a Clown.
No it isn't.
No I know but he, that's what he's famous for isn't it?
Tears of a Clown.
  

I bet someone's vid , I bet Alan's videoing all these.
Put them all together.
  

Look at the sets in  in sixty eight .
You could, as the camera goes by you can see where all the sellotape and the gum's stuck to boxes.
I mean look at those boxes.
Just  just  scrappy old blue  looks like something the art college has knocked up.
Who is that?
Moody Blues isn't it?
Is it?
Ha ha you used to look like that.
They all look like  Allied Carpet salesmen now don't they ?
 

 

I mean  they looked old then don't they?
I mean  you didn't have sixteen, seventeen year olds in those days coming through did you?
They were sort of like
Mm.
I mean look at those boxes.
You can see all the sellotape and the bubbles and
Where?
Oh you've got poor eyesight then.
We need a new aerial.
Where's the other bit of paper?
Which other bit of paper?
Croydon Advertiser?
Yeah, well which bit have you got there?
There you are.
Has it got the adverts in it?
Jaws is on telly Paul.
Er?
Jaws is on tonight?
Jaws is on.
Included The Who, The Small Faces, The Move, The Kinks, The Moody Blues and Jimi Hendrix.
Absolute rubbish on television.
That's what Merle said.
Now House of Elliott's finished  she's got nothing to watch.
I bet she's watching Bugsy Malone.
Did you hear that, Winston Churchill's doing Bugsy Malone?
Oh.
And Catherine's in it and that er  I said ooh haven't you seen it Merle, she said no.
I said ooh I've got the video.
She said well what's it like.
I said ooh  you'll either find it really funny or you wouldn't  find it funny at all but erm
How could you not find it funny?
Catherine  well I can see that
Oh!
I can imagine that Tom would find it funny.
I said it's a very good film.
Anyway Catherine's got a very small part in it.
She's a German reporter or something.
Which I couldn't even remember a German reporter .
A German?
I said what do you work for Fat Sam?
I don't think she knows it very well.
She said she's seen the film but none of the other family have seen it.
You know.
Where they, they're having a fight and  they've got all the different people in the news like Chinese people go  and there's fights and then they get, there's custard pies thrown at them.
Oh yeah.
And Germany  going boom boom boom boom 
That's just gonna make an awful mess on stage isn't it if they  ?
Is that all she's got to do?
Yeah.
She said it's a very small part.
They go pow  they've got french people being fired at 
I wonder if they'll have the er custard pie part in it?
Oh yeah?
Splurge guns.
Splurge guns 
?
Yeah.
Splurge guns.
Oh look.
Pete Townshend.
The Who.
I met Liz  in er Woking Paul.
I met Liz  in Woking.
stall made over seventy pounds.
And  Jo  won a major raffle prize.
Liz said  isn't it typical.
She won a huge box of groceries.
Liz said I won a raffle prize.
I said oh what did you win?
She said well  it was down to the last two she said, I had a choice between a red and green cushion  or a fitness test.
Ah!
So she said I took the fitness test.
I said you don't need a fitness test Liz .
She was waiting for her husband.
Her husband's much older than her.
Her husband 
Well she 
could be her father.
Oh no.
Well he's  he's fifty five.
He is fifty five.
That's why she's talking about him retiring isn't it?
Yeah but I mean she  looks about fifty five to me .
Liz!
She's younger than you isn't she mum?
Actu no she probably is forty five but she only looks 
She's not younger than us.
about forty.
The way she carries herself makes her look  
I  I thi feel I look I I feel thirty  so I mean I always think 
And Liz makes herself look   
I thought that was very interesting that
She's so fit though.
Oh look it's all when The Who used to smash their rec , all their, I mean that used to be disgusting.
What are they doing?
 
They used to break up all their things on stage.
Dreadful isn't it?
Why?
Well that's what pop groups used to do.
They went to total excess and  then they had to come back the other way.
Well look at them now.
Well one died.
The guy, the drummer just drove his car into the swimming pool didn't he and drowned.
What the one that drums there.
Yes Paul.
Not the one holding his guitar.
what's he trying to smash it all up for!
Well that's what they did!
They were only old instruments.
They didn't smash up anything valuable.
Why did he drive his car into the swimming pool?
Well that was the point.
I think they did.
Oh.
Why don't you ever pick up the freebie papers?
They've got the property in, I'm always interested in those.
Is he still alive, Pete Townshend?
Yes.
Cor look!
Christmas shopping in Croydon Tuesdays and Thursdays.
And the week before Christmas Monday Tuesday  Thursday Friday.
He's dead though Jimmy Hendrix isn't he?
Yes.
He's dead.
Look here Paulie, you come and have a look at this.
This is Crystal Palace going up in f flames.
 
November the thirtieth nineteen thirty six.
Look, there's the shape of Crystal Palace.
Gutted in one night.
Were you alive then dad?
No I was not.
You said you could see it.
You lying hound.
No that was the that was the furniture repository.
No you said
Yeah that was the furniture repository  nothing about the crystal palace .
No
Thank you ma.
I'd nearly forgotten that.
I thought how on earth did I get myself 
You plonker .
stuck in that one.
No ages ago you said you saw it.
We've been to the site haven't we?
Eh?
site.
The site is where the zoo is.
Oh I'm taking the phone up to phone my sister.
I'll stop the tape and
clock, with the children.
We were Christmas shopping can you imagine  
Six hours!
Awful.
So I said what have you got it all then?she's bought your present but she can't post it.
She said it's heavy 
What is it?
so you might be getting something else.
It's quite a nice book.
So I  
So she's gonna buy Simon either chocolates  dairy miniatures
Yeah.
or  a supply of chocolate miniatures.
Or a supply of caps for his gun.
Can you pull the curtain please Paul.
What a big supply?
Do you reckon that's quite a good idea?
Yeah.
A supply of caps for his gun.
Twelve 
Yeah I told her twelve .
Or roll cap.
Make sure it's  Oh yeah.
It's two new guns.
One takes roll cap and one takes  
Well we've got plenty of roll cap haven't we?
We've got a wadge of roll cap.
That's 
Yeah but, the rate he
you know 
goes through it.
She might as well buy a year's supply.
She doesn't know what to buy, she might as well buy something useful mightn't she?
Yes it's true.
There's no point in wasting six or seven pounds.
No.
As far as I can understand anyway.
I said or a teddy that does something.
So she's bought me this book?
She had already bought it before she phoned dad this morning, so
But she's not gonna buy, give me the book though?
She says it's too heavy to post.
So she's not gonna give me the book?
Well she might, but you might have to wait till after Christmas for it.
But she's gonna send something else?
I'm not sure.
No you might be old enough to be considered you can wait till after Christmas for your present.
Paul I'd like you to do a job.
I've done a job.
I've been round to Merle's.
No.
I'd like you to do a proper job.
I'd like you to take a sponge  and I'd like you to clean the paintwork on the stairs.
Please.
What about touching up?
I'll touch up.
I've done the touching up.
So why does it need ?
You won't help will you.
I don't feel that it's worth doing.
Trophy holders Palace are now just three steps away from another trip to Wembley.
Oh that's good isn't it?
Three steps 
You're not going this time.
We are.
Yes we are.
I don't think we'll get there actually.
Chelsea kicked us out last time.
Chelsea won today.
Yeah I know.
Against the team we lost five one to last week.
Oh you can imagine what it's gonna be like tonight.
 

What I was glad of, we didn't play poorly.
I didn't think we played poorly.
No you didn't.
You played Manchester United.
Ha ha ha ha 
 
report on the telly?
Yeah they showed you that, yeah.
Have you heard it?
No, we'll have a look at it, I think Paulie missed it.
Kanchelskis scored that third goal.
It was a really funny goal wasn't it?
I know.
I didn't see that.
I didn't see who scored.
scored the second?
Hughes I think.
What's on ?
You'll have to listen to it then.
Oh  
Oh hang on you didn't see  no goals you didn't see?
No.
Oh.
Oh I s , it was on telly?
Rewind a bit then.
Right.
I do rewind it.
 reading teletext 
Oh you were right, McClair Paulie.
Kanchelski
Kanchelskis
Sorry?
Kannchelsk ?
Sshh.
Did they tell you how he was?
Did they tell you how he was?
No.
Can we have a look at the, we'll have a look at the results cos I didn't see er  no no not that lot.
Turn all of it off.
Thank you for that bit.
I thought you meant Teletext.
No I thought she caught the film.
Actually there was a little bit, they showed you the four goals on the television so they might show it on the nine o'clock
Where did they, what, when did they show you on the telly?
n news.
No!
Do you know what he was doing in the car?
With the speaker?
I th he thought I didn't, couldn't see.
He was going  ooh ooh ooh.
That poor person 
What do you want?
on the end of that tape.
What do you want ?
I want er
He hasn't got a clue what he wants.
Eh?
.
What do you want?
Let's have one  results weekend league programme.
Let's have a look at  
One  five  one   
Got the gates on there, look.
Twenty nine thousand.
Is that a lot?
Well apparently it's gone up.
It says in this paper that last they could only 
 
they could only hold twenty seven.
But now apparently there's a, this  with this seating or something there's now can hold thirty one.
And it wasn't completely full was it?
Paulie?
No.
So it could just, probably just squeeze th 
So Liverpool's got the biggest capacity has it?
They could just get thirty thousand in there.
I think thirty one's a bit 
So Liverpool's got the biggest capacity has it?
Oh  Manchester United would  no Manchester United have er oh at home yeah.
Liverpool can hold about forty two 
Manchester City twenty two  
That's pretty low 
nearly all those were  with home fans weren't they?
What?
Well Manchester City versus Wimbledon.
Nearly all those will be home fans.
Wouldn't they?
Yes.
Twenty two and a half thousand!
Ooh.
And Manchester City are doing well don't forget.
I knew, good old Wimbledon.
That's how they stay up.
 
That's how Wimbledon stay up.
They go up to those games 
Nil nil.
and they make it nil nil  they've drawn wi , now with Manchester City and Liverpool in two successive weeks, nil nil.
You cannot break them down.
that's why we stay quite near the top.
Wasn't it?
Oh!
Well Villa went above us.
Or Villa are above us.
We're sixth.
Yeah I know.
No they can go above us.
They always was above us.
But they're above us on cos our goal average must look absolutely  diabolical now.
The goal average must 
Paul.
Watch my lips.
It was Wednesday that went ahead of us.
Go and turn the television off in the kitchen please.
Gosh Oldham, good old Oldham.
Did us a favour there then didn't they?
Now!
West Ham did us no favours.
One two ah ee oh ee ah  .
Can I have one five two 
What do you go like this.
Press the red button.
Cor!
Barnsley beat Newcastle three nil Paul.
What's so weird about that?
Well  poor old Newcastle.
What?
Brighton beat Plymouth.
Four nil was the biggest score.
Yeah.
Who won four nil?
Well Tranmere lost four nil at Ipswich.
Oh that was  
Southend won again.
They've gone up  
I mean who would have thought that Tranmere would have lost four nil?
Who would have thought that when you drew Southend in a cup, you think oh great we'll thrash them.
They'll be could be a first division team next season.
How come?
Southend?
They're about fourth or fifth.
Sowfend.
They won again!
Oh Swindon slipped again.
They should have won that, against Grimsby.
That is so unlucky, Ian.
Will they be home by now?
Eight o'clock, they're hoping to get home.
Er yeah I bet
Four nil .
Still.
Poor kids.
Oh I feel sorry for them.
Yeah.
You get used to it if you support Palace but
Shut it!
I was just gonna say, what games have we lost?
We are getting used to it, I mean there was a coup , a sea , last season we had
Five one you lost not long ago!
Yeah but I mean  last season we hardly, Paulie and I hardly ever used to come home having lost.
Now we're starting to get used to it.
Now you  lot.
What have we lost at home, Paulie, this season?
Come on.
A lot.
Arsenal.
Yes.
Man United.
Is that all?
Oh and you lost  
No hang on.
That's the two we've seen.
Have we lost any others?
Oh well we can't complain then, only two.
Are you sure?
Q P R we were preciously close.
Birmingham we were preciously close.
Here you are, programme here.
They hit the crossbar as well.
Oh yeah we lost against West Ham as well.
Yes.
I thought we did.
I was sure, I thou 
West Ham?
I know.
That was  that was annoying.
We should not have wo , lost that.
You'll soon be losing against Birmingham.
Birmingham.
Well they  there's another stupid mistake here!
Birmingham City L C three R.
They've got us down that we won!
One nil.
Yeah their stat statisticians are going mad.
Yeah.
Statisticians.
Would you like  page now?
Yeah, page three.
There were lots of draws.
Thirteen draws.
Oh look.
Birmingham won two nil.
Oh oh.
Look at the gate they get.
Ooh.
I don't really know.
Bury one thousand eight hundred and eighty six people!
Dreadful isn't it?
Who's that with seventeen thousand?
Wow West Brom.
See West Brom, really a first division team.
They shouldn't be in the third division.
the figures is irrelevant isn't it?
Yeah.
The figures are irrelevant.
Tradition that is, West Brom.
Just tradition.
They're getting bigger 
Even if they went out the league they'd get that number.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I've been a West Brom supporter 
They wouldn't be able to afford to keep the ground on would they?
all my life.
What?
They wouldn't be able to afford to keep the ground on if they went out  
Well I mean it shows you what marvellous West Brom were.
When West Brom got lost four nil to Woking  wasn't it Paulie?
The next round they had West Brom supporters supporting, came down from 
Yeah.
Birmingham to support Woking in the next round.
Yeah.
It's pretty good isn't it?
But that's all much of a muchness isn't it?
Nothing over four.
No.
was right.
We er we would have played  Tottenham on the night of the Q P R game.
Oh.
I got mixed up with .
He said Q P R .
Did Woking play?
wasn't.
We only played them away.
Yes.
What Woking did play?
Yes well Paulie said they did.
They played
What did they do?
What did they do?
Oh I've got to see what they did.
Got to see what they did.
Two hundred and seventy five people watching  .
Oh I thought Woking were  
at Gateshead.
I am so desperate to see what they did.
Well that's it.
There aren't any more results.
Hearts won again.
What about one five seven?
There aren't any more results!
They don't have  they don't have amateur  do they?
Yes they do.
Try  can you try number one please.
There's one off for fog.
Fog?
Oh yeah there it is.
Berwick East Ham.
Can you go to number one  one five eight.
one five seven.
What would you like dear?
I would like B B C one please.
This is her.
There's 
But the Linekers had better go home.
They can't stay and look at the, that child all the time can they?
I mean it's gonna be weeks isn't it?
They've arrested it now haven't they?
There's noth there's nothing on number one about it at all.
Oh.
Sport  football 
 
 
Saturday review.
League table.
Non leagues 
Ipswich  
 
Three  eight.
Jemson saves the .
Now we should have picked him up.
Why didn't we pick him up?
He just floated over Sheffield Wednesday, honestly.
That's .
Are you sure Woking ?
Should be the next page
Yeah.
The  premiere.
This is so  I tell you what I'm gonna run out of here and go boogey boogey  
Oh if they've won they've done it.
Five nil!
Oh it just 
Five nil.
Oh yes !
They're just walking away with that division.
It's a waste of time.
The whole  
Do you know what  said to me?
He said 
Are they top of that division?
Yeah.
that Enfield, he was going, he said that Enfield would beat them five nil.
That was his words.
Enfield are the second team.
And they've won five nil.
They're about, that that makes them nineteen points in the lead.
Ludicrous!
So what happens?
They go into the Vauxhall league next year?
Yeah, they'll be definitely in the .
That's in their division five  couple of seasons la we could be  fourth division team.
Couple of seasons!
If Crystal Palace don't succeed you could be playing Woking.
Shut it.
Love it.
That means if they, they'll go up this season  
Shall we pack up supporting Palace and go to Woking Paulie?
Yes.
I'd pay for that.
I'll pay for 
Very funny.
a Woking season ticket  free, for nothing.
I I've done a tu turncoat once already so it's easier  for me .
There's nothing on Lineker there at all.
Yet other times  
I think we should go and watch Woking more often.
What?
You mean like every other week?
Yeah, when we're not watching
Yeah 
 
No I think I think we should take  go to some more Woking evening games dad.
Oh do you?
Yes!
I mean we've never been to it.
Have you ever watched Woking play?
No.
I want to.
Lineker.
The condition of the baby son of England's football  is poorly but stable.
That was yesterday's.
Ah  oh that's exactly what the other one said.
Poorly but stable.
That was on six o'clock this morning that was on.
Two people died  
Oh .
Can I just watch this please?
Ugh it's Jaws.
It's gross.
Guys getting eaten.
it or something?
No.
You don't need to  hear the music.
Ugh that's horrible.
This is a horrible film Jaws.
Look it's got somebody's body in its
It's only a plasticine model.
Gross!
But I I would just like to see how awful the graphic 
He's died.
His mate's died look.
I think he's dead.
Ooh!
Gone under.
Took him under.
Oh no!
Can I see?
I I don't mind watching it without the noise.
Gosh quick.
They're leaking.
Please mum.
Oh 
That's in the studio.
It's all in the studio isn't it?
Oh no it's not.
I mean the  the plasticine sharks  are stupid.
Oh the story of this particular one is that it er er  they tried to make out that the erm  that the the the  the shark has actually got something against  the human beings  on this boat and it keeps chasing them.
Here it comes again.
There's in a studio, that bit.
Look out here it comes.
Look it's gonna knock her right off.
He spots it.
Ugh.
Ugh.
Going through all the previous ones.
These plasticine models are so awful .
Yeah they look gross now don't they?
Oh they are quite lifelike.
Oh god it's broken.
Oh you can see it's a model can't you?
Ugh  it's swallowed it.
My  stones didn't come out very shiny.
I like these bits where there's a shot which goes down .
So can I start wearing my dressing gown before Christmas then?
No.
It's got to be wrapped up.
So has your, you can't have your song book either till after Christmas.
Oh, I don't mind that.
Ugh the towel's dirty.
Ruthus we're taping .
We're not gonna know the person who's going to listen.
Geoffrey Chaucer's here again.
 speaking into microphone 
He keeps going Geoffrey Chaucer's here .
But we saw the best bit Paulie.
The last five minutes .
Have you turned it off?
No, it was the last  you know the dramatic end that everybody  who's been waiting for watching that film from seven o'clock till 
that off?
Er?
You haven't turned that off?
No.
Oh.
It records everything Ruthie.
Why is this dirty again?
All of 
Yeah mum has got a towel dirty.
I'm fed up with you.
I keep putting it in there, clean one.
But the towel's for wiping your hands on.
Don't blame me!
It's not my fault.
I'm just Geoffrey Chaucer.
The famous poet  Canterbury Tales.
Where art thou Jonathon.
Where art thou Jonathon .
Do you want to do any jobs.
I've got to finish my quiz off.
Must do that map.
Disgusting, Jaws the movie.
Too gory for Geoffrey Chaucer even.
Paul I think you should go to bed now.
Yeah.
No way dudes.
Busy day tomorrow, yes?
No way dudes.
You've got to be joking.
We'll wait till the end of the tape and then you can go.
You have gotta be joking man.
Boogey boogey.
Zachramondo dudes .
I think Paulie's invalidating most sides by total and utter gibberish.
Well isn't that what they want to know?
Eh?
What the mental cases  in Woking 
totally illiterate.
mumalissimo
I used some big words on the way down.
We're Italian now.
Mumalissimo where are you bonjourdino.
Oh Paul don't be silly!
Go to bed if you're going to be silly.
Go and learn your words for tomorrow.
bought one of those stinky old er  pine tree things and Paulie ripped the whole wrapper off it
Oh!
Spice.
and we nearly died.
It nearly overcame us.
I bet you did.
It nearly over , we were in danger of going off the road with it.
It was so strong 
Why did you let him?
I put it in the boot.
Why did you let him?
I think it'll have to be put in the garage and then put in the car once a week or something.
Why did you let him do it?
I dunno.
Unsupervised as you would say.
You've got no control over him at all have you?
Oh yeah mum wouldn't have done it would she?
You'd ripped the wrapper before 
We had the wrapper off last time.
No we didn't.
Yes we did!
No, you pull it out a bit at a time, not just
No, but we had it off last time.
Yeah the spice was   was not nice .
The spice wasn't half as nice as  
So it's  it's totally wasted then is it?
Totally wasted.
It would have been disgusting anyway.
Is it totally wasted then?
Yes.
Yes.
No well no it's usable.
Absolutely fantastic wastage.
Wimbledon got  got the right royal rave.
Watch the super dons flatten the .
The white what rave?
The .
How come they use the same box office, I suppose they would wouldn't they?
Seven seven one.
Oh it must be funny working for Palace at the moment.
You think you're doing well and you get hold of another 
Oh I get it.
Royal  royal?
Mm.
Joe Royle?
yeah.
Can I watch it, can I read it?
Eh?
No.
Watch, I'm reading my paper now.
You're always reading it.
Oh look you always get these people  we have just witnessed the top London club suffering a humiliating defeat at the hands of  .
Oh this looks good, let's see.
Is it horror?
Don't know.
Now you'll see the goals on this, now.
Because it was on the other B B C one so it should be on this one as well.
You saw them?
Yeah.
All four goals.
When?
Here's a letter that m mistakenly done today.
It says it says  it now seems painfully obvious that after our performance at Forest we have reached the stage where teams have finally worked us out.
For some time we've been in a false position and our two games against Birmingham have confirmed this .
Dunno why they're saying this bit.
Steve  may explain the game at Saint Andrews was for low to ground players .
Don't  well they.
But surely by now we have a squad to deal with such eventualities.
We have clearly lost our way in both fullback positions .
Well that wasn't true today.
Our two fullbacks played the best  of the Palace players, I thought.
Both were, couldn't been asked any more of.
Both saved instant goals.
Er  both got feet in just as goals were about to be shot and scored.
This is er ob now obvious after it's  aft as it is restricting our attacking options.
What possible reason is there for not playing Bodin?
A proven player of international quality who enjoys going forward.
We are told that we have to pay Swindon another fifty thousand if he plays.
But if we went out of the cup it could cost us more in lost revenue.
Come clean Steve.
Swallow your pride.
Play Bodin in the position you bought him for and show off our defence that otherwise will leak goals like two seasons ago .
It's not true.
Bodin's  I don't reckon's as good a defender as that.
He's a good passer of the ball  have him in the middle.
Well where then?
Dunno.
Well we cou , he might be able to use him if Thomas can't play erm on Tuesday.
I can well believe Thomas won't be fit for Tuesday now.
Not after ricking his ankle like that.
If his ankle's any, half as bad as mine he wouldn't play on Tuesday.
I chose the right Tuesday to go then didn't I?
It wouldn't be very good without Jeff Thomas there would it?
No.
Who do you reckon will be captain then?
He's gonna have steroids for it.
Who'd be captain?
Pardon Ruth .
He's gonna have steroid injections in his 
Ankle.
You mean steroid, do you?
Yeah.
She does.
I do, I think.
Aha.
What they, what they deflate your swelling quicker do they?
Yeah.
Yeah who would er  be the captain?
Humphreys isn't it?
He's not playing.
I suppose Young would be wouldn't he?
Thorn  Thorn's been captain before now as well hasn't he?
Thorn and Young!
Couldn't cr er  complain about that.
It didn't look like, you have a look at this goal.
Didn't look like Young's  problem.
Put a tape in Paulie just in  get a tape quick.
And see if we can tape this th th th last time they showed all four goals.
Clearly B B C 
I see , No.
Is this on I T V separate?
Are you there?
Are ready to record straight away, bumph with the record button?
Just a minute.
He wants to do this rap thing doesn't he?
Oh yeah.
I want to  
Yeah but still 
going all night while you were
Yeah  ha.
out  Will you chew those?
You've been a very good boy  right ha  flowers are floppy
We can record one of the party then can't we?
Yep.
You can get loads out of that could you cos people will just forget it.
Yeah so  except you've got to list everybody's name.
Yeah but then  list the name, then list the 
 
names of the next home tape again  they'll think it's 
Yeah but you're supposed to listen to it all off and see.
Oh no  ridiculous isn't it!
Well no so they can identify  the people, isn't it.
Yeah but then yo er  in a party situation you could probably do that in the first minutes couldn't you, I would have thought  everybody in th room will have spoken  in the first five minutes wouldn't they?
So I've just gotta jot it down quickly then.
Yeah  Oh we've got more  this time 
Yeah well  when I saw Alison's lo the flan recipes, I panicked.
Aha.
Right all those need slicing and buttering and putting on there.
Right, better do that then  so is that  or kilo?
hundred  ha  there's a  tomatoes.
Gosh!
I'll make some sandwiches  can you feel that's soft enough, if you don't like that
This
Well no I  got butter
No I'll put that on it's easier  save that for your Mum  put them on here did you say?
Yeah 
This tray?
Yeah, I'll just put this out.
 
I think these flans will freeze  so what we don't need
What've they got in them though?
Got any little flags for what they've got in them?
This one is prawn  and pepper
Paprika?
Pu no  well  red pepper  with paprika sprinkled on.
Yeah.
And this is  egg and bacon and mushroom  a little piece of cheese  Orville!
Well really, looks like I've only done two each  but I think I'll freeze  I'll only cut two up  lovely!
I might be able to eat that    where's the little 
Want the sharp 
black knife?
What do you want the little one for?
You said the black knife, you said.
I said the sharp one  this one  he's fairly cheap but they use him a lot,.
Alright and don't burn them then.
I think they burn very easy  Do you think everyone will dress up today?
Don't cut them completely in half like that.
Well I have.
Well, oh  best if you cut them almost to the end  like that  then butter them and stick them back together again  Have I got that cream?
I've sort of forgot about the puddings  there's blackcurrant torte up there, can you see?
And I've  two 
Ooh yeah!
black  tiny black forest gateaux, but they're here for tea aren't they so 
Well 
no need 
well yes I do tha you've done this before, that  this buffet thing, it's quite nice, people can sort of like, if they're staying they can just  say y leave it out and you sa eat whenever you want to really innit?
Oh  Nigel!
I haven't got a pie slice    .
So did I hear you say to your Mum that there's gonna be a ra exactly the same rap at a
Well it sounds the same  couldn't believe it!
Is there sugar in my coffee?
No sorry, I only put, well you got one   I suppose if they know that this rap thing won't last long 
It won't last long 
will it, so it's all gotta 
No 
be done this year 
she's  it could've been saying 
well it she could've been done last year but  we've not done this year, be gone.
No  it's funny unle I Mum says is it something that's just been published this year  you know, like if someone just published  
No.
and everyone jumped on the bandwagon, or have they all made up their own?
That is the whole  point of rap  they're completely personal  it's a personal rap.
Well Michael says you haven't been to a decent service for six weeks, till  back.
So we went so and so, that was dreadful!
We went so and so, that was dreadful!
can put your finger on it though,it it's like  it's not  what it used to be.
That's it  well tha there's Peggy says  I said oh well I'm a bit erm  worried about taking them  and I said they have been known to get up and walk out, and  said, surely not!
But Peggy says  well why shouldn't they walk out, if they're that old and they're  don't li why shouldn't they  get up and walk out ?
I thought Peggy, I   ah.
I don't think they, they don't walk out of we of er er er er er Por 
They wouldn't of , no.
Portis Head there it's too in ten tenuous .
But in a way, I i i is it better for them to walk out than  seethe and  you know, I sa are you putting a bit much on there?
Tricia says it's not butter  Are we exchanging Christmas presents today, did you ascertain that off your Mum?
I don't know  not really.
I've got them  
No I think sh 
We've gotta give them to them today have we  Andy and Michelle?
I seem to remember she says she's gonna  do that on the fourteenth.
What Christmas presents, same time as the Golden Wedding?
Mm, think so.
What at her rap?
Suppose so  give them, I mean I don't think they're gonna be opened then.
Right.
As I said, If I remember right, I said well when are you gonna come and see us before?
She said on the fourteenth, you know and give it to you then.
Well who's gonna come and see us  eh?
Mum and  what's it  and presumably, Michelle and Andy 
 
can give out presents that day as well, can't they, cos they'll be there.
Mm.
Where do I put the ready?
Well I'm gonna give Mutty that cake today  , just pile them up  Do you think twenty four's enough to do to begin with?
I think there is.
There is?
Ju oh.
For twelve people.
Pile them up.
Do twelve egg ones, please.
Should never have told Bill.
was coming with clingfilm  but stick the rest in there  What are you eating?
Gotta take box to school  and I can't be bothered, cos you've got the car tomorrow haven't you?
Mhm  a three day week.
You've got the car Friday, and you got the car  Wednesday?
this butter's  
Cos you're going down to  aren't you on Wednesday?
Oh yes.
Or are you not?
Have you sent Val a postcard?
Yes.
Are you going to  or not?
I didn't say I'd come and see him 
No.
on Wednesday
No.
But I did say, I'd come and say on the  the Christmas show so 
Well have you sorted out your  holiday?
yeah I  well I  I did say that I was gonna play badminton then go away and sort out that  when I see Ian  
On the Wednesday?
And have you sorted out your holiday?
How many holidays you got left?
I've only got 
No I haven't 
two days left 
Er yeah I'm sure I have.
So if you go to the Christmas do on nineteenth then you just bring Simon home with you afterwards, I think  don't you?
But you need to tell Zoe.
Right.
Cos he finishes at four o'clock on that day anyway.
Mm.
So you just bring them home at lunchtime or something give him a  
Can you do that, yeah?
Yeah we did it last year cos I broke up the day before last year  all of mine still at school that day.
Right  Got a  roll of film for the camera?
What for?
Well don't you need it to be here?
Oh what on the nineteenth?
She go  yeah.
That's a long time ahead  two weekends to go  You ought to see how badly that  can't you when you   ha ha   three bits on there   suppose you could do that now couldn't you?
Better than what I'm doing  any of it though.
If you allow a bit like .
Yeah.
I don't think I'll pie, you're right  put out mince pies  we didn't win on the pools, I've checked  I'll throw away the coupon or do you wanna see what you got?
Have you checked the aways is it?
Yes, they're all the aways written out on the top  B T shareholders, do you want this?
No thank you.
Next week pools coupon?
Yep.
Crystal Palace  cam Coppell campaigns.
Mm, keep that  where did the C draw  voucher go by the way?
Somewhere.
That one being drawn  twenty six of November  what's that one, that's Park School.
Oh I must see If I can er  Bob and Mum  not Karen and  but  Mum .
Does Mike have some er  Georgian Hotel, look at that  Christmas jokes, Daddy, Eddie's broken my new dog  how did he do that  I hit him on the  head with it   Why is Father Christmas unemployed?
Maybe you know that one, cos he got the sack.
We've both seen that one Ruth, is it alright?
Why?
Oh no  Fred  
With your way you put your foot in it 
 
isn't it, oh yes  perfectly harmless  no malice meant there at all but you try and convince somebody of that.
Fred it's rude to keep reaching over the table for the mince pies, haven't you got a tongue in your head?
Yes, but my arm's longer  Oh it's the Christmas crossword I could photocopy that for the children.
Where do you get that  from?
Oh look how about a Christmas customs, I wonder if the answers are in the back  what kind of fruit sauce is traditionally eaten with turkey?
Cranberry.
A well known Christmas decoration was the sacred plant of the druids  what is an advent calendar?
Was the sending of Christmas cards introduced, one  one eight two, one eight four six, or nineteen O three?
Oh let's do that, I like that one 
What event does  a  celebrate?
There's ten questions  well look up, what's wanted, can you match these nursery rhyme features with suitable Christmas presents  Humpty Dumpty, Old Mother Hubbard, Wee Willy Winky, Jack Spratt, Doctor Foster,
Now that Christmas card one, I'll have that one.
And there's a nativity quiz, quiz  What were swaddling clothes?
Why were the shepherds on a hill side afraid?this is quite a good one  shall I
that'll be the lot.
Erm  yeah  I expect the answers will be at the back.
Well I'll do a I know I'll do a Christmas section then, right?
Mhm mm  there's some answers 
Oh right,
Christmas clothes how you fill in the blanks, I saw something come sailing by, that's quite good  Little Jack Horner sat in the corner eating his
Who'd have put Michelle with this, little bit unfair to put Michelle to put between them.
Mutty.
That should be alright then, shouldn't it?
And she's got a child in that book.
Oh right.
Mu , Michelle, Mutty and Michael  but on the other hand  Michael might have to budge  You can change it all I
Done it whe who's Paul with?
With a  
No, Paul should go with
Michelle and Mutty.
Mrs Michelle and Mutty, balance it up.
Andrew and Carole  you're sure they've got to  
Andrew and Carole yes, Andrew and Carole, fine.
What goes  oh oh oh?
Father Christmas laughing backwards.
You could put that as in as bu bum question couldn't you, see if anybody gets it, right?
Postman, I have a Christmas parcel but the name on it is obliterated  can't be for me then, my  name's Jones .
So what is the best way to do, that where you ask the questions, now  they did  if you could help me out is the when  you do one section  an you hand all your papers in  somebody else marks them 
Well you don't need a lot of room, yeah just pass it around  
Ah but no what they did is somebody else marks them while the the next round was going on for
Well no you it'd have to be you 
and then they announced 
that marked it, you couldn't do that  you'd 
could 
have to pass them round and mark them instantly  then start the next section.
Would you, why?
Well cos what person could then be lying around waiting to mark the answers?
Oh I see yes.
You've only got one quiz master.
Oh I see, yes, that's right  Well let them mark their own  I mean who's gonna cheat?
Alright 
It's a bit confusing innit, swapping the papers round?
Where's the plum in this plum pudding?
Would you expect to find a dog in the plum pudding  Milly, what did you get that ten P for?
Tilly, carol singing, Milly, and what did you fifty P for?
Tilly, stopping  Right I won't look at the answers.
Now I can't go oh no!
What?
I can't give that oh oh oh, can I, cos you're in the blinking quiz!
Come here!
That says staff library, please return on it  I didn't look it, I didn't look at any answers for the questions.
Can't do the oh oh, that was funny  now you'll know it!
You are daft, honestly!
Well you could just leave it out!
What do you me why am I daft  it wasn't one of 
You 
the questions, it was one of the jokes!
You didn't say stop reading out the jokes.
I wouldn't ever stop, cos you  
well how would you have known then, you wouldn't have waded through the whole book looking for it, would you?
There aren't the hours in the day, ten to eleven, your Mum's coming at  half past twelve.
Half past twelve.
Knowing her, quarter past twelve.
So I'll take from whatever you gi can't get caught for that one.
What?
Someone played that accidentally  you can't use that!
Knowing your Mum is a  served you right!
She's been getting quite a lot of  in our jokes  over a couple  ha!
Oh he's forgotten his cool dude glasses.
Oh dear.
Oh, my Mum  rap   he's going to cool dude, cool dude.
I mean if you told her, put a C in front of it and that's what it is.
What?
Rap.
Oh  
She wouldn't understand our line of 
No.
Crap , what's that?
Crap?
You should of let 
think what you have to do Mum, so you ought to say, when they say rap, you can say that it's crap 
 
and she heard it, it's crap.
You think, how can somebody be on the earth, I mean
And not have 
you don't have to appreciate do you, oh yeah 
But there's probably more people who don't know what rap is, in England, than do  think about it.
Yes I suppose so .
I bet there are.
I reckon there's a lot of parents
Load of single people over the age of thirty.
know or at least sh they don't it's called rap  I've this  Yen da da day dan dan dan da day  I mean
We mustn't  he's got really, really   if it's not done well it's a  it's worse than  not doing it all.
Well the bad ones are as when the kid do it themselves  isn't it?
They make up the words themselves, right 
Yeah 
whereas  Paul's 
an the 
been  having some kind of direction there, hasn't he, I mean at 
Yeah.
however nauseating, it does all make sense, doesn't it?
Right, does it?
Actually it not an easy thing to , it sounds easy, but it's not an easy thing to do.
No I don't  did one  it did, you heard the little boy that's not getting on at home  dreadful 
You turned it off?
No  there's one on  the teachers are picking on him
Are they?
surprise, surprise
Ah the kids deserve
come on you   no   course teachers will pick on him, the only secondary school teacher that  John he walked round with him  he might have shot out of there 
That was all about 
backside!
that was only because he was  like transferred there  I thought that 
Well 
he was gonna tone do , he had to tone 
well 
down when he was
he obviously hasn't and I think it's really funny!
Or a  Christmas 
Pompous!
Yes.
Ooh I could of gone 
I mean he should 
he should have gone to private school shouldn't he, really  but then
Well probably the Dad would  but he 
No I don't think they can afford it.
The irony is, I don't think all the time, they are as pompous  they give an air pomposity don't they?
Yes I know, I think Jeremy is quite 
I don't think that Dad is at all, but
No, it's just  how they appear.
And how you were brought up, I suppose.
How I was brought up, but a no one 's ever called me pompous  I mean, the way  walks around as if he owns the place, I think it's really funny!
And I don't suppose he's made,didn't have very many friends, did he, really, at Goldsworth?
I mean Paul was one of his friends  he never had that many  so  that probably means he finds it hard to make friends, you can tell  
It's just as well Paul didn't go with him, cos Paul would've been singled out as well.
Yeah.
Teachers always  think right, he's with him, he's a new
Yep.
you know, identify with it, even if you don't  portray those  feelings.
Well I'll tell you this once  and then
Who told you that then?
Ooh who told me    I think it came from Great Grandma and then  told her.
That's if you were interested.
Well  impeachable source but I  there's no smoke without fire  and everything else I've heard  I've got to set this table .
You can't please them, that Paul managed to get the school team and he can't
Ha  Well he said he'd probably get on alright at Horstell  that's the irony of it  wasn't necessary for him to go to Winston
Do you think Mel would, I would of thought Melanie might have been the type t to sort of li be lenient on that, you know,
What different schools?
Yeah, sort of say well 
Well I mean Phillip wanted to go to  Winston.
Oh.
I am making a mess!
Urgh!
Should of left, Rufus.
Well I did leave the other one  how long do you leave it?
I'd have  should of left it till  .
I think Moira's gone to church  I think she has.
Well I might not   Peter's  entire office  dip switch  Trev.
Well I I thought  oh  go and watch the telly  and I'll send Paul round when he gets back  right, I'll take these two mugs to school, those with the  on  what did you do with the other one?
It's got quite well spiders on, but at least you feel they're being used we don't get 
Yeah.
enough out of Ha  Oh drink  two, four, six, eight, ten, there's enough bowls for ten people to have fruit salad.
That's your lot.
That's your lot   that through  how many seats there in the front room?
One, two, three, four five  six, seven, eight  no one, two  three, four  there's nine so we'll probably have to take some stools in, but I won't take them in till the last minute.
When do I add the drink in?
Well what needs to be cold that's out there?
What we having ?
I haven't got a clue, it's up to you  there's a box of wine that's been in the fridge for about six weeks!
We'll have that, that's quite a good one I think, though.
Yeah.
That's Sainsbury's  Muscadet we'll have that.
Yep.
So there's white wine  I'll put these two in the fridge, so there's sparkling orange  and there's  Sainsbury's Cascade  put a Kiri  er what does Karen have, Appletise 
Appletise.
is it?
Put that in the fridge, there's room in the fridge now  have you put an Appletise in the fridge?
In fact you could bring quite a bit of it in and put it in the fridge.
Are you going to change?
Oh you have changed.
Bloody cheeky moo!
Well those you're gardening trousers.
Oh they're alright, they go nice .
Right, I'll put some make up on  Just read them straight out the book can't you?
No I was gonna re write them down though.
I'll mark them there.
Yeah but you'd  mark the ones you know, Ruthy!
I haven't!
Where's the answers?
In the back of the book    How many sections have you got altogether?
Three so far.
What pictures?
Two pictures  and a map   countries  it's Africa so you're you're gonna do quite well Ruthy.
You're joking, there's about fifty countries in Africa aren't there!
look at it, I find it makes them easier because I think  there's gon so that's gonna be quite hard isn't it, I'll 
Do mix the countries  or 
Eh?
is it just South Africa?
Well what if they  the  Burkina Faso 
Oh no I haven't been that  that bad but I reckon I've 
Well what are they like?
I've done some that i the pe 
I mean you're in the middle of a country
I've given them  er question mark on the shape of the country  it's a map   but the  ha what I think is easy, I dunno  I mean to I mean I look at maps all day long, so
Well I can't place very many, all I've placed are the ones in the middle that I used to live in  I could probably place  Zambia, Malawi  Zimbabwe  whatever the Conga is now called, I don't even know what that's now called  that's about my limit, Ghana  Nigeria, might be able to place  if it's geographical features I could place more  how many countries have you given then  in Africa?
Twelve.
Fwoar!
I won't cheat, go and look it up  oh we're working in pairs though aren't we?
Mm  that's what I mean, I y we found that with four, is even more so, what some people were strong on  others weren't and it it worked round  you know, if you picked your team right  everybody would thought perhaps it was better to have one woman in the team  or, you know, if you had four women 
Yeah.
have one man in the team it i i it's
Have you prizes?
No.
Why not?
What we got, what can we get, what can I get?
Well you've really got have something, in case o 
What you looking at the questions !
I'm no , you know my eyesight, I can't see that.
It's just walk over there and talk to me please.
Pardon?
You need three prizes, three  in case it's a team of three that win  how about buying three Toblerones?
Right.
I'll send Paul to get them  I don't think I've got three of them in the house  Surely you don't have to write them out.
Well I it's easy isn't it?
Hope Adrian's in a good mood  You haven't seen  what work he's doing at the moment then, how does he know?
Quick look at the tape  ooh what's this?
Bet you couldn't cut all those pictures off.
Oh yeah.
That's Michael Caine s oh not it isn't   Pamela Bordes, I thought it was Michael Caine's wife   Oh there's Michael Caine's wife, oh they do look similar  
Strewth!oh that's too easy isn't it?
Eleven eighty two, eighty  oh 
Why?
What the Christmas card one?
Mm.
It was Victorian times wasn't it?
Or make three different dates for it.
Oh yes.
Oh I'm not just a pretty face  I don't remember what dates it has, make up  three appropriate dates  So they're both coming at half past twelve, yeah?
Roughly  will they come in three different cars?
Next week's dress rehearsal.
Alright, we're going next week.
I'm not if I've still got this cold.
You won't have that cold next week.
It's not worth me going, I'll see how I feel, sit there snivelling always.
So it might be alright for Mum and Dad?
What?
What might be alright?
What might be alright?
Well if there's no rap, it might be alright for Mum and Dad.
There will be a rap.
There will be a rap?
Can I have one of these please?
Mum?
Yes.
Thank you .
There will be a rap?
Well what are they gonna cancel then?
Nothing  nothing
Come and watch.
So you gotta go next week for a dress rehearsal an if you want me to.
I don't need them for that.
Well what costume do you need for your dress rehearsal?
And when will they let you know whether it's cancelled or not?
er
What are you eating?
Woh!
Woh!ah  
Win a lot of toys?
No.
So who else is in it, apart from you?
I dunno, don't care, don't want to know!
Oh  take some Anadin, you'll feel better.
No I won't  I've gotta stay away from them.
Well we changed your group, by the way.
What?
Daddy said, you should be with Nanna and Adrian.
I was with Nanna and Adrian.
No Daddy said you should be with Michelle and Mutty.
Why do I  Nan and Adrian?
Well cos  erm some of the questions are sort of, English questions.
So what?
Well Michelle's not English.
Well Mutty is.
Yeah but Mutty's old  won't understand all the rapping.
Paulie looked at one of the questions!
He didn't.
alright I'll si 
Well you should go in the front room cos I've got the test papers to write.
No I'm here!
Where is my cardy?
Where's a pen?
It's ridiculous!
Cos I had a pen here.
There's one
Don't look at y , he's looking!
Oh he isn't!
Dad  I'm not looking.
Well go, you go over you can eat it over there 
 
go on.
I wanna sit on the couch , how can I 
No go on Paulie cos I can't
Why can't you do it in the front room then?
Eh?
Why do 
Cos there's a table here.
Is that, I will move on a table then!
Don't turn round  take something for your si cold.
Then I'd have to turn round wouldn't I?
But keep away from Pucker.
I might as well be like a  
Don't turn round.
Go to bed.
Goodnight.
Goodnight.
You'll enjoy it when they get here  it's cold isn't it?
No it's not .
Why do you pu , Michelle knows loads of things.
Yeah but she might not know English Christmas traditional questions.
Yeah.
If I were you I'd much rather be with Michelle and Mutty  Michelle's very clever.
Well exactly, so why does she need me?
Cos you might win  Ferrero Rocher don't want that one over there.
 

Just give me the  .
won't.
You forgot to put new tapes in the recorder last night.
What new tapes?
New batteries rather.
Did you put them in?
Yes  go and see on Teletext see if Gary Lineker's son's died.
Oh Ruth!
What gonna die?
Well no I mean I want to know.
Not gonna die that quickly.
Oh yes he is.
He's only got leukaemia.
He's only thirty one, Gary Lineker.
That's sick Mum!
You can't think like that  Has he died yet, sounds like you're waiting for him to die!
Paul, that is not what I meant!
Well it was so  said wasn't it.
See how he is, if you prefer   Wogan's been axed.
Oh yeah.
It lost half its ten million since it started  a speculator for BBC wants to buy This is Your Life and Thames  the seven o'clock with Wogan as host  it's a   
On 
 
This is Your Life?
a week   That's alright then, that means he alright, good   The Queen Mother fell over yesterday  got up again .
What what what what's in the house.
Say that again.
Queen Mother fell over 
What what what's in the house.
yesterday, how old is she, ninety  two?
Might be a bit older than that.
Ninety three?
Doesn't say  about time she retired  Mm mm ha  In our report, headed the burden slaves, on October the thirteenth we mistakenly  a picture of Vidalia Oberia in place of Mrs Filamenia Agassi  typical Daily Mail!
Why did it all go wrong?
Why did what go wrong?
Well
Is it hard to cut?
And for your next complaint!
Is it hard to cut?
Yes.
That one looks good  hey ya  pow  hey ya  .
Junior doctor held his  held his finger on a neck wound .
Urgh!
Er what happened?
Why did he have to keep it there for three hours?
Why couldn't they get 
I'm sure someone else could of dealt with it better  as a
No but I mean why did it take three hours to get him to surgery?
An awful 
What happened?
long time doesn't it, before anybody did anything   A junior doctor held his finger in a stabbed policeman's  neck wound
God!
for three hours with a sur as the surgeon battled to save his life   well I'd have thought they could have plugged wounds with something other than a finger!
Oh alright  don't keep talking about it please.
Urgh!
Ha  ooh just with  umbrella  stuck his finger right in.
This three inch wound, look at him, look at his scar!
Ah.
It's a take it away  it's making my eyes water.
Is the front door shut Paul?
Dunno.
There's some Vauxhall advert  the choice  buy a Nova with a good deal  or very little  doesn't make sense does it?
Kevin?
Costs 
What doesn't make sense?
Well it's another Vauxhall ad but it doesn't make sense  buy a Nova with a good deal  or very little.
No but do you know what it means?
A pun.
Well what does it mean?
It's a pun, they always have puns, I don't know what it means  yeah but one of those charts are wonky though  the other one   
In fact they are on all of them, looks silly doesn't it?
Are you giving me your cold?
Mm, hope so  but at least it won't be me  my selection   er er er er er errr  gonna let my  was there any post, Mum?
Paul this is Sunday, do we have post on a Sunday?
No, no, no.
Have you done all your homework, you can go and do half an hour's homework quite usefully couldn't you?
Yes.
Have you done it all?
Oh well done.
Skilful Joe.
Hardly.
Got to have that    Dils doo dee doo doo doo  I'll go and change   I'm gonna let my hair go down  am I not wearing a football shirt?
I hope not.
Can I change into it in the evening?
Oh  yeah  because this looks cool  total  just mod cons Mum  Bang!
So what would you rather me wear, this or that white shirt thing?
That'll do.
What this?
It's better than the red and blue one   Half of primary pupils will not work on their own  traditional teaching is best  ten year study shows  modern class, failing children .
Doo doo doo doo doo doo doo doo doo doo  La la la la la la   ah doo doo doo doo doo doo doo da  boung boung boung boung 
Suppose su some of these questions you'll remember won't you?
da da da da da now now now now now now
Well they've all played  as well so they might remember.
you gotta love my people  now .
taking English Grammar at best, taught to the whole class   thank you  I think I'll cut that out and take that in.
We need some tonic water Kevin, is that in the garage?
Mhm.
Could make some out of Soda Stream if you're desperate.
Oh I think we will make it out of Soda Stream to begin with  do you want to make a bottle Paul?
Sure   Don't na na na  
Get the middle size bottle, make a middle size bottle full of
We haven't got a middle size bottle.
Well look harder.
We haven't.
Well what's happened to them?
Oh hang on  this will be it.
Paul try just s middle
Not eh!
I'm not looking, I'm not looking  oh put it away Dad!
Oh  knowing your Dad, doing on the last minute!
I know  we should be
Well where have the middle sized Soda Stream bottle gone?
I'm not allowed to look anyway.
Well make the little one Paul.
Could at least put something over it!
Ah here it is  hang on a second while I rinse it out.
You're not telling answer  Got the bottles of Coke out yet?
Only one bottle.
Only one bottle of Coke out there.
Yeah.
You got any share money hanging over you still or have you paid everything?
Well it depends if I get these shares I bought yesterday  or not.
What shares you bought yesterday?
British Telecom.
I told you!
I did, I did, I've gotta go and get my British Telecom money !
You said oh yes.
What you said was  I am going to pay in these various cheques and if there's a big queue  I'll come straight out 
No, no, no 
and I said why should there be a big queue and you said because cos it's a B T share offer.
Yes  no I said  I'm getting my B T's in  offer in  haven't got them.
off of B T.
Well when I went past Britannia to see if you were there, there was nobody in it.
Yeah 
Not got Coke.
Halifax was out the window, yes 
Mm  there was nobody in there
there was about 
So if I meet a big queue 
I dunno it was about to shut wasn't it at the same time and it  it was like  well it's worth gonna get them.
I must have missed you, cos if I went  past Britannia, and I thought ooh they'll probably still be in there  
Technically I suppose 
 
if you get inside the shop before the time closes they they're on a bet
They all stand by the door don't they?
Just but, once you as you long as you got in before twelve o'clock
Yeah you'd be alright  I think it might be twelve thirty round about twelve fifteen, Britannia isn't it?
Anyway it's
Twelve o'clock, Britannia.
But he looked across to us and saw us and then he really cheesed off with me we he di he virtually sat  
Well that's why you went to Britannia's innit, isn't it?
Okay?
We had to put our  three hundred and twenty pounds.
We haven't got three hundred and twenty pounds.
I hope you'll save that two hundred for your Mum's golden wedding
Ah.
booze  I am cold.
Mum?
Yeah.
Is it the one of the right or the left or one that's got his finger in.
Paul, the one on the left is Kenneth Baker  the one on the right is a policeman  neither of those is a junior doctor.
Sorry.
Not worthy of a photograph I shouldn't think  There's the Queen Mother again, doesn't say how old she is  There is the picture of the doctor, mind you he doesn't look like a junior doctor, he's Pakistani  and he looks about fifty!
Mr Ujam
Ooh Ujam, Ujam, Ujam  look at this Mum.
What's this?
The florists were alright.
Look at these three.
Nice flowers.
A 
So it is.
He's seen the light.
Sheila's buying an Amiga.
Sheila who?
How many Sheilas do you know?
What this Christmas?
Sheila   Sheila 
Sheila .
When?
Oh no!
This is ridiculous!
Great, no way  unbelievable!
I'm not swapping anything with her   they ended up bringing back my games !
We get one, oh I must get one as well.
When they getting them?
She pro they buying it as a joint family present this year.
Oh.
Then each child's only allowed ten pounds worth of presents apart from that  you look dreadful!
Why don't you go and lie down for half an hour?
Don't believe this!
Take some Anadin.
Why them !
They got 
Paul there's probably a million Amigas in the country.
Is that why you   erm  that's quite   only not .
about that, I think you've got a totally illiterate person, no doubt Actually she said  nine tenths certain going to get an Amiga but they might get an Atari.
Well Atari's no good  they're games 
It's not a computer.
They only want it for games do they?
No  well there's all different Ataris aren't there?
Oh yeah, is that right Paulie?
Yeah.
These are supposed  on the side don't you?
No  three hundred.
Well that's cheaper.
Oh, is it?
What 
Pauly showed me this this thing, the game thing for Atari where you li disk pack  what's it called Paulie?
What?
Ray's getting.
Oh that's not Atari, that's Sega.
Sega.
Sega Megadrive.
Megadrive.
Yeah.
It's got a
They have to   the Atari, right  you load this in a word processing  in a  path  games are  venture and  the sound is much better than Amiga  on the Amiga  er the graphics are better on the Amiga  and but  the Atari ST is slightly easier to program.
What is the point of mouse ?
Makes it  pretty it  improves it's just a mou , you know mouse mat you got them at school.
Yeah but what is the point of it?
How do you know I've got mouse mays at school?
Yes you have, you know what you run your mouses along!
I haven't got one.
You haven't got one  y know, quite cheap just mats that they  they  ah I've got forgotten what the word is for it  they make the mouse  improves the performance of the mouse  see 
Do 
the ball at the bottom, the rolly ball as it picks it up easier  stops them, you don't scratch the bottom of it.
Ah.
How do we know which is for tea and which isn't?
You can eat anything there for lunch and I'm going to put sandwiches and cake out for tea.
Where you doing, where are the sandwiches?
I haven't made them yet, I'll be making them this afternoon, yet more work to do  I can't really make them now.
Why not?
Oh!
With twenty five  we're likely to die falling off a ladder than you are to die from AIDS .
Having been up a ladder, only I could see how easy it is, you could fall off a ladder as simply as anything.
Yep.
Excuse me.
What .
I hope the tape picked that up Dad.
Yes I'm sure it probably did  I just thought Paul, go to the corner of the front room Paul  and take something for that.
I'll take another sausage  wow!
Don't take one with bacon round it.
It's much more warmer in there.
That lounge.
Did you make this?
No.
Oh.
Why do I only I allowed to have your cold?
Erm, you'd better keep away from Papa.
Can't keep away from everybody.
Don't breathe over them and don't make it so obvious.
What else am I supposed to do?
Right, let's try the crossword,fish of carp family,don't know,middle in a cracker,
Portuguese enclave in China , Daddy will know that.
Pardon?
Portuguese enclave in China, begins with M 
Er  oh yes Macau.
How many letters has that carp one got?
Five  Ancient models 
plaice 
of a Spanish Peninsula   the young eel is an alba  plaice, Paul has not got five letters.
Yes it has, no it hasn't.
Begins with T, I expect it's  tench 
trout  trout.
well I think tench and carp are the same family  kind of orange   navel  naval, navel  navel King Tyle who assisted Solomon in the building of the temple 
King  Tyle 
Doubt it.
Religion revealed through Mohammed.
Er Islam.
Oh thank you Paul.
That's not ..
I think it's hair  what's the ancient name for the Spanish Peninsula
The border.
Any letters?
yeah it ends in I A, and it might begin with O  it begins with a vowel  kind a it's a lu the Russian walk out  it's got a Z in it.
Oh that's  Agaza Agat 
No something U something Z something something
Something U  mm
Not bolshoi is it, how do you spell Macau?
M A C A U.
O?
I thought it was M A C A U, Macau.
I thought it M A C A W.
Oh no.
You would .
Yes it might  I've seen it  spelt both ways.
Well maybe no it cos it'd be 
Nothing  
bolshoi if it was O.
It's W 
Yeah bolshoi's right  so which one is it then?
O.
Mm  I've seen it a  U as well I must admit.
I thought it was
Right 
holiday 
you done it.
the something something   meetings of spiritualistic phenomena   seance.
Yo 
Ooh Dad give us a bit.
Exam papers  turn over your papers now  do not look  can't start yet.
Read them out Mum  I can't get them easily.
Bird, female of the  ruff style of architecture prominent during the reign of Louis the f fifteenth .
How, what word has it got?
Nothing   words of songs , lyrics?
Birthplace of Saint Theresa.
Rome
County in Eire .
Cork.
Cle something.
Cle r 
Scrooge's late partner , Marley
I'll go and play that .
one of the gospels , Mark?
Bird, female of the ruff , I think it's a grouse   nest of a bird of prey 
Hawk, falcon
no, nest,one who manages another's business  agent 
Oh I know that er  a ki  kirey isn't it  e earring
so it's not a rouse  what is a bird, female, oh it's a  reath the American buffalo 
Bison  bison.
Very good
What a county in Eire beginning with C L  cl 
Clare 
Clare, County Clare.
Look it up.
style of  architecture 
Done it.
with Cocoa   I've done it.
What that say again?
Style of architecture with cocoa.
Oh.
What is name of it?
of the largest of the continent   must be Africa but it doesn't fit.
Asia.
Oh Asia the largest continent   birthplace of Saint Theresa 
Erm
India
Syria.
doesn't fit  where's Mother There Saint Theresa born?
Not Mo 
Syria.
not Mother Theresa.
No, Saint Theresa.
It is India innit?
Don't fit  gotta be something I something A
Something I something A
Something something I something A
Shakespeare comedy , the  mister of something
Temptress.
Is it?
 Vinchenti Blasgo something writer of the four    Sailor, not an officer  .
Tree with shrub with white or yellow flowers   
Daffodil
No  right I've done all I can, you can finish it off.
I'm still cold!
Okay   
 
Well you can do it.
 
We'll get hot.
 Vincent Blasgo what Dad?
Vi  Vincent Vasco de Gama 
No!
Blasgo!
He wrote the Four 
He wrote the Four Gentlemen and a   
something B something N something 
Ah these are disgusting!
I'm hungry.
those
Take them ou out of circulation then if they're disgusting.
What?
Ah people might like them.
Get away!
Urgh they're the ones that smell like  bad fish!
You've had it before.
You're not wrong  no I've done some before, urgh!
Pu clean them away, people won't like them!
Yeah a lot of people will  your Mum might  Nigel Kennedy, look at the Aston Villa club shots.
Oh yeah.
Football is the unifying part of my life, it is of equal importance to the music 
He'll grow out of that one day.
I love anything, claret and bu blue   he's a Senior Vice President of the club  and he's got Aston Villa boxer shorts and Aston Villa pyjamas  on one visit 
 
to the shop he spent four hundred pounds.
What?
Nigel Kennedy's been known to spend more than an hour in the shop after a game, on one visit he spent four hundred pounds.
The shop sold Aston Villa t-shirts, sweatshirts and slippers to bikes, Nigel has examples of most.
It's got a bit serious he admits, I've got the logo on my   .
My girlfriend's a Villa fan but isn't always happy about it especially when I suggested painting the bedroom  claret and blue .
His violin case which houses the seventeen thirty f 
You're really clo clobbered with that though, it really smells like bad feet  you smell like you haven't washed your feet  I think you better clean your teeth  where are those crisps  take them away.
They're disgusting!
No Dad.
That's two you've eaten now 
They're  
that's the first thing someone's gonna think  is that her feet smell!
 
They won't think that 
Kevin 
you've eaten some cheese crisps.
there's two of those, so throw them both away  there's two of them.
It really smells like I haven't been near a bath for a month.
What's so bad?
Wooh!
They must be the ones that Mum had been eating when you  I came in.
Can I just have a smell?
You I haven't, I just opened them.
I can't smell anything  
Right when you eat them?
When you bite them  it smells like
Put bigger ones 
 
in there.
Parmesan cheese.
Well that's alright  there they are.
They don't they don't smell so bad  compared with the other ones  do you want one Dad?
Nope  oh they're delicious!
No break them  Right you want me to go and get the other drink in now, you say?
Yep.
Where's Paulie's big blow up straw, the copying  was it, was it over here?
Behind the chair.
Which chair?
That one?
Ooh!
Yeah.
Oh wah  yo do do do do do do .
I'm so cold.
Bye Dad, gotta go, see you later.
These Paul I'm supposed to be writing all .
That was   these Twiglets are stale as old Harry.
Twiglets?
Mm.
Take some Anadin Paul  here's a couple of Anadin  feel better, honest  Paul.
Alright  no not Anadin.
Why?
They make me sick.
Oh what?
Oh well, what else you got?
Paracetamol.
Let's have a look  not solubles    you've got some     Hang on   just gonna   there's one.
It's all football  where's that one then?
That's all I got.
Hello 
Hello 
all you got
Mm.
That's good.
Ordinary Anadin won't make you sick.
Tip it in whole   Only one  
They're gonna be late now because we insisted on them all coming.
Like that.
Say half twelve bomb or something.
So when's this Wogan thing packing up then, do you know?
Does say, doesn't it  forgotten where the  was.
somebody snow, I'd really like it.
Boursin.
I can't see them letting Wogan 
Boursin 
go though can you?
They'll do 
It can last for so long people  
do something else.
the mind boggles.
What do you want me to do with this?
Put it on the hall stand please.
Oh is it, is it one of 
  
after two  at tea time.
Put that heater on then would you  that one on for a while just before they come.
besides the fact that I've got a headache.
So will our quiz done  have you a got a pad or something?
Yes your father's got a plan.
Dad put me with 
After lunch.
We'll eat 
After 
fairly soon 
Mm.
We'll eat stra virtually fairly soon  and then let them have a look at them.
After everybody drinks when they first come in  yeah?
Mhm.
No le let them have sort of like a half an hour talk before you announce the quiz straight after that  let all their stomachs go down and then sort of get
If we let we can 
No 
judge that Paul.
wait forty five minutes cos then you wanna catch all their er  speaking don't you on a tape?
Well we'll see.
So   what these these are new aren't they?
Mm  I don't use them every day because they began to fray.
Well where are they?
Don't 
Yeah that guy's chest looks   what he's been through.
Oh what yeah, horrid innit?
Like a rag doll.
If you think another person did that to him.
No  you don't do on purposely do those  beautiful cuts like that across there  they did that 
What?
The doctors did all that  all he had was  in the leg.
No but someone had a crack at him.
The doctor, yeah  yeah.
Don't get people thrashing people     
Isn't that awful about Stoke on Trent's garden thing?
What?
That  that was before and look at it now.
What happened to it?
Been allowed to
don't look very good  before now.
Where were those  taken?
There.
Yeah.
Shall I move these spirits and video star out the way then?
Yep  put it them by the videos  on one of the shelves.
What's this video doing here?
I dunno  probably my husband.
Are you gonna want to record anything tonight?
Erm  dunno  go and look and see what's on telly tonight.
Did you bring your tape in Dad?
Don't record on that  car rally one, that's Trevor's.
Hasn't he taken ?
No.
What is it here for?
Dad?
Daddy's going to watch it.
You put Lombar Lombard R A C rally  on  
Rubbishy magazine.
That's a pretzel glass isn't it?
Mr Pickford
That's what well Kevin gave me that slip .
Kevin why did you give Michelle that glass cos I didn't wash those glasses, I didn't wash those glasses.
Oh dear  ah ah ah ah
was such a
ah ah ah ah and there was a piece of  metal in it !
Piece of metal in it.
Oh that's the one where you put the  when it was being done.
checking that !
Oh yeah  
That's on my feet.
How did you take the ?
Well he gave me the  !
Oh dear !
What made you think that?
Oh maybe he liked the  so much   .
Do you want some more of this,?
No 
No.
thanks.
So you thought yo you ate frogs legs?
Have you tried the
Did you Kev ?
seafood one?
Lovely shrimps in it.
I thought we were leaving Bill at home.
Did you he did you see that 
Does anybody want a drink top up?
programme last night about 
Yes please, yeah 
this er
French firm?
Vodka 
about the French  what did they do 
 
with the other half  of the story !
Want a drink?
Michael 
Can I have a Coke please?
I might have 
Yep 
the fish, I think, do you think?
Yep in a minute 
Yes.
You okay there?
Are you gonna have some?
Yes alright, I'll have some.
Pet don't look so serious.
Sorry?
That would of made a good conversation, why did you give Michelle the  glass?
You're standing on my chair.
I think it's very rude of her 
Move!
given me a dirty glass.
Sorry am I a  
Oh sorry  oh don't sit on it!
Like the shoes Paul.
I think you've caught him out .
Oh yes.
I think that  taking the mickey out of them.
Will it come out   .
No sometimes it sticks to you.
Go round the sitting room with it on your feet!
You know that list of flowers
Accurate 
Has it 
yes.
I've never seen it flower
If it  
I'm not very good at them  Mum gave me that one it's been in quite good condition but 
It has to be watered, water all the time.
I mean look I've killed it  
Where did you get your Christmas cactus?
Mm  from Croydon 
Had a 
Nice one.
a knot she had a  she had one  is it  Papyras you call it don't you.
Umbrella plant we call them.
Oh  Pap  Papyras 
Why?
That's the word.
I think the Egyptian used to use that to write tha to write on.
Oh.
Mum's just telling me about her erm 
 
Like a quill 
Well I erm 
thing?
this 
Michelle have you got another dirty glass you want to replace 
from Beatons, Safeways , no thanks.
Yes  I would no , I'd like another dirty drink  
 
Enjoyed that one so much !
Dad, Dad I'll put all after I've done one side of this we'll do the quiz then.
Sad about er Gary Lineker's baby.
Alright yeah.
Yes 
Cheers.
Fine
It did work.
Same drink Michelle?
 
Only little children  
Then what?
Yes .
Get them in.
That's what I wanted to take the little  
Strange thing is this is why he's never  because that home environment 
It's very nice.
Do you know what my
er 
mother does she was gonna let her 
he regrets 
know her net curtains are all along her window, he had them in the front of the house and oh
because he  
down their  very advanced  
Paul!
One of these ones?
Really huge 
I'm I'm  silver, I'm not very good 
Thank you 
at drawing.
Isn't it a shame Mum about Gary Lineker's baby.
Oh yes.
Yeah very sad.
But if I was you know you're not  
No you can't  
Let me out!
cos he's friendly with Jose Carreras, the Barcelonian
 
And and also with Botham, cos Botham does that with do that walk for the er 
Mm th that w one wonders, you see, because he  he had a lot to do with Jose Carreras when he was ill and you wo 
Mum,
cos there is a school of thought that they can be a virus that starts it 
Mm.
He's going to do another run, Ian Botham for leukaemia 
Mm.
research.
Must have been dreadful that though  
But it only strikes on two babies a year, two babies in England 
He does  you know  
Couldn't it be helped?
Mm.
So sad.
But they say e even if he came out very 
prognosis though 
su successfully it'd be five years 
I would of thought so, hope so.
he's clear.
Yes but the prognosis of a baby at that age isn't good.
They don't?
No.
 
Look at the Mountbatten's little girl.
Yes but she didn't have leukaemia so quickly.
Oh did she?
Oh I thought  
Excuse me  just because the tape's on there's no need for you to use big words like prognosis.
 
Yeah.
Is it on, this?
Yeah.
How do you know it isn't on?
No it's not on at the moment, cos Paul 
No.
turned it off.
I didn't.
Have you turned it on?
Now it's made it all go quiet hasn't it 
Yeah.
eh?
I ain't gone quiet  
 
Oh I  
Let me take those  
washing up this morning  washing up 
Are you sure you're alright, he said I just said oh.
er oh just a little bit.
No I am 
Just talking about the tea room.
Yeah  actually he was supposed to say to Jeff  
Say about that 
there was this  job.
You won't now because they got the hospital to build on.
 
Doesn't really take  
 
Wednesday nights.
They're  I've never seen anything in that bowl.
Do you want another  honey?
That's Appletise 
Oh er anything  what this one here?
  
Yeah but wasn't it 
We've got  their Mum gave us a French dictionary, but my  is the  in French  now they can't get      The number of English words there are in there it's
So  get learning 
amazing 
yeah but  
the thing is actually giving up 
Happy   
They are really English words  they erm  I can't think of something now but I mean
I bet I could 
The only one I can think of is 
Oh yes, did that at the beginning  for for a long time.
For a fortnight.
 
You don't have to play for a fortnight, do you?
Mm I think cousin I do  I will say cousin actually, it's all same.
We'll   two.
There are quite a few cos I did that in my Norman project.
Did you hear about  say 
The English is the same isn't it?
ne next week  on Sunday, the Danish Embassy
Oh?
Pu our own  Putney has been awarded the medal of honour, sixth highest medal of honour  for erm  services to the Danish industry and he's coming over and they're having a  a caviar and champagne reception at the Danish Embassy and now the Queen of Denmark  Queen Margarite is coming over.
Ooh 
I don't read Turkish.
Ooh I say yeah.
They are all invited.
They were going out for a west end  meal in the evening.
That'd be nice  oh lovely.
But Karen thinks 
when was that?
Next, not this Monday, next Monday.
Karen thinks we'll all be three black crows we've all got black.
Yeah we're all wearing black!
very funny !
If in doubt, wear black.
Well Cynthia went somewhere the other day and there were so many pe people in black it was like a doomsday 
It's come back again, hasn't it?
Yes.
Why is that then?
Why?
You've got black on, but this time you wear it I mean it's  
Purple took over for a while, ha.
Mm.
My , it's so weird now, I'm borrowing erm  she's got a a  a blue, no it's not  a blue plaid  it's not really a scarf, it's bigger than that 
Throw over.
yeah,
Like a wrap thing.
which she got from Ireland 
 
Don't know about this.
her Mum bought it for her  er pure wool 
over there 
it's electric blue, so I've got to wear the  with.
Oh I say  
 
Oh and that's gonna be
But when I take, I can't wear that in the embassy because it will be too hot.
Oh yes I know Mark.
yesterday, cos it laid on its fluff on you.
See 
it's not smooth, it's not that  I don't think it does.
The car's ours.
I mean it's
Does Mum  
I quite like actually it does
it's really funny  I just when I wanna be simple   it's just like I'm gonna break down in front of a man  yeah  and they just got, cos they're mean 
Her mother gave it to her when she went over there 
Yes.
a bright blue and er  I bought that 
Really.
on the M forty five.
Mm.
And Adrian bought me for my birthday erm 
earrings the   so I'm going to wear a pearl necklace and pearl earrings on 
We caught all different perch out there  didn't we?
But when you get  er to a certain I think you do tend to find a lot of the dressier clothes are in black.
Mm.
Yeah but you're not at that certain age?
Yes  I agree 
No.
No matter, what I mean why we all seem to wearing black, because they're 
at school 
 
 

But only when you go in the shop, I find the colours this year are rubbish 
empty!
and they  
 
they couldn't really  have something 
 
Brown ale or 
I'll finally accept it,i the thing she is she got a green velvet suit from Ron   and the lady said to her   she said well will you be in Hello,i she said I thought we'll be in Packaging News!
A hundred and fifty people have been invited, but I don't know if all will be coming.
I've just realised that the be every time I have an occasion
Yeah  
I go green don't I?
And if it's green  
One bottle over.
It's the colour of hope.
 
Is it?
It's warm.
Yeah it's the colour of love.
Well my  green oh and in French it's the colour of hope, promise?
My  
Exactly.
Our bridesmaids
And you.
wore green velvet didn't they Mum?
Pardon?
Adrian and I had  bridesmaids in green velvet 
green velvet 
do you remember you said how unlucky it was?
Mm.
In England green is supposed to be an unlucky colour.
Really?
Oh.
Mm.
Oh dear
And then
everything   already 
and then, also we got married in May, and they say marry in May, rue the day, so
Mm, or going to Paris on the honeymoon!
yes.
That's the time I was married in May, too.
Paul.
There we are Mum.
Yeah.
Mm, thank you.
Could I have  
Mum you can't get that round here.
I will, I'm just looking for the
What do you want?
earrings.
Yes I will.
These are so delicious 
 
aren't they?
Oh to go with your dress 
dress yes.
Mm  mm  very nice 
 
 
sit there?
people sit there gambling 
No 
No.
I'm not.
How they put the big plastic things 
Mm 
that hold them.
But I don't know if they will be too heavy for your ear lobes.
I'll have a go anyway see 
The everlasting twenty pound note.
Shame  got it fixed!
You know complete small ear lobe.
No here,do it  these are worth letting go
and erm  I paid for them dearly  for piercing for me
and er I think he was frightened of  a little bit too far on the edge I think.
Mm.
Choose another one  
No I can't do that 
now so I can't certainly
Mm.
Cos that's one lower still 
Well no 
Well they 
they might sometimes  I had mine done to me 
Definitely   close it right up.
when he 
Oh.
They couldn't 
Nancy was telling me that he had  loads of 
Mine  
complaints 
I was playing with the dog a 
Well I didn't have any   
No 
just periodically  
 
I 
So we take her onto the 
We had to pay for the doctor.
It didn't hurt, but then they  don't they?
Don't know how he does 
Yep 
them.
By the time you get an  you know, Michael will be allowed to have his  
Plenty of room, it is a big room  
 
Yeah.
I'm clo that's closing up  it's closed up that one  you know, where we got it.
You know what it is, we disguise all our  don't we?
Mm.
   
 
 
Have you just heard?
No 
Right.
Go and sit over there.
You're all in then  
 

Dad!
stay there love.
Oh.
Is he in middle again 
What does that family look like?
Have a bit of the dirge.
Doo do do do .
Mum is that alright  
 
Mm  Is that because the hose 
Then he'll be walking in with this quiz an 
 
Yes.
What is this quiz we're gonna have then?
Ooh it's a big quiz, one of 
I'll  
 

Following in my Dad's footsteps.
Daddy spent all day  and scribbling.
Yeah everyone's gotta play  
They're getting very popular those square bags aren't they Joy?
any paper.
It's funny you should say 
Very popular they get
we both had the same
Mum!
about it  and you know how we weren't very, cos everybody said oh we'd like one of those, cos they're so easy.
Mm yeah.
And now poor Michael couldn't find  one !
Yeah.
Rat fink!
and imagine we were  
Somebody told us in the market, but we never get to the market, do we?
I don't care 
No.
Yeah in the market, but er  in  Red Parks they're in front of the  exit  
like that, I mean they were so easy .
aren't they?
Oh!
Well can you imagine any more than English ones.
What was the little dog you had?
He's not  any work.
Yes.
I always remember  
After my old one.
we all had the naughties, used to say.
and now when you got this   
 
 
Once you get out of car and I thought it was a dog that she had,bu didn't have, she didn't have a dachshund he had a little 
No  she had, she had corgis.
Woof, woof, woof, woof.
Michael,
No I'll get it.
Whose is that one?
Andrew's possible but that won't  
 
Ah  right 
I don't want him to stop until his party.
You've got your new shoes on Mum, or those  
Yeah 
Yep.
They're nice.
  

Ha ha ha.
Mm.
Good innit  that's outrageous, that is!
There   
Is it slanderous or libel 
Read it outside, the inside first, I think  read 
Yeah.
the outside first.
has written a slanderous poem 
.
I have to be very careful though, seeing that his birthday's the same day  
Yeah, yeah 
Karen why aren't you opening yours?
I've opened mine.
Oh you've opened them all
You didn't tell me what you got.
Shall I 
She didn't show me what you got, why should show you!
Oh.
But she had money from  and I gave her 
 
some money
Oh I see 
and a  for you 
Aha.
too.
Thank you.
Don't you worry about that, Ruthie's the hostess.
 
Oh yeah 
Ooh!
I think I'll be coming 
Right 
from over here.
Let's see that one.
.
Michelle  really!
Ooh dear 
Right we can all throw that in bin.
Blue what?
Course you can't go round, you gotta do double  with my   .
I can't guarantee it works like clockwork.
Ha ha ha
Hopes he finds 
Ruth and I are trying to get these done   especially when that ship went up  you looked like the Keystone Cops, didn't I, we went one back in there!
I'm afraid I  I went one when the li when the allotment caught fire.
Cos cos  you were pale.
I'd of never  never got that hose out without it would I, now?
No  there's some very  in that bag.
I we I think the fire fighters used  the white skirt tied the way it wa on my shoe
Tried to hold it to it.
I was s dirty, mud all up my leg.
Trying to hold the trees together 
All the  splashing over me!
Well you had to hold it together 
I
Do you watch  that er that London's Burning?
Oh yes, he finds her at erm 
Do you watch that, yeah 
Yeah.
Do you get it last week   
Yeah 
Yes 
Bailey
Bailey
saw the cards.
He's  dodgy 
I like him  it's 
Good you can find, ah, he loves her.
a twist  
They didn't think, didn't think he could wait a week,
One  
At least where he 
Didn't watch variety stop?
No.
 
He looked quite good, didn't he?
Yeah.
Yes, well it always is.
good 
Mm.
.
Oh have you seen that face lift job he wants?
No it's over.
It's well out of order!
Twenty to eleven.
I don't know.
Yes it is  Now when he was at school 
No  but I like it back.
Yes well and I didn't like it better either.
You seen that Andy?
What?
This face lift jobby.
Yeah I know.
And
You could  
your one.
all because they have to be read, I  
Yes 
That  
What is yours 
Michael's really tired.
I'm alright.
.
Lovely  aren't they?
Yes 
Oh no.
and I thought that  you wanted that 
Yes 
didn't you?
very good.
Mm.
Shall I hit him!
You won't understand it Paul, it's confidential.
No  not my hands please  Mm.
Boys these days!
I'll tape it up.
No, no, no, no you'll muck up everything.
No.
ha.
It's a do-it-yourself pea shooter here.
Where's it gone?
Eric  in your bag.
I'm chair listener  alright 
Yeah 
Alright Kev?
You can sort out 
Oh yeah, Paul 
What earrings this, is it Nanny's?
What  
I don't know who's that is.
the green earrings are mine,
Dad 
and the then you can borrow or a 
I've found the green earrings.
erm
Do you see that one?
Wendy said I could borrow her dress.
 
Are those your, oh yes of course it is.
And they come back 
She's got a dress a green dress for her for Golden Wedding Anniversary.
The Sunday after  
Just look.
Are you gonna leave the tape on?
Ah  
Put the tape on.
 
Yes 
No don't worry green's,for love.
Paulie put that other tape  
Is it?
 
I'm learning, how to maybe read the stars,.
That's right.
Her longs are what?
Are long and tiddly!
Yes.
Ah  lovely    
yes  so
But it's just uncanny I'd suddenly I keep picking green for occasions.
Well Mutty had a green 
Well so do I, I wear it for 
dress 
school every day.
for her Silver Wedding celebration.
 

I  Paul's for a lot of green and he's a
Yeah.
Paul's now   
 
then she's going to
Maybe get so lucky.
Ooh!
Maybe us all thinking that it's sort of not quite smart and it's  
It's a toilet set innit?
You're cheap!
She has to live like saint.
I'd rather do it myself.
No that bats   Ooh look, I've got my ears caught  
You'll come back next year and it'll still be in the box.
Adrian will have to fix 
No.
fix it up then, cos it, or Andy cos they did a   
Ooh very useful, yeah.
Andy didn't mind.
Hose round corners.
He's got press ups.
Why haven't you taken it all out of the box.
I 
He's gonna make it.
Show it everybody.
He's gonna put it together now.
 
oh.
Yes, yes.
Oh go on.
I'll get it all right now 
He's going to put it on 
you gotta
Now you're a five star  
No what you are supposed to do is , this is one I made earlier!
I'm the one who comes last,looking at the other people.
We noticed that, it's all  
Yeah it's in a  
Oh hurry up, number three!
Can't help that.
Ah this is useless!
If you turn the tape on now you hear all the best murmurs.
I had to get Adrian to do it.
Yes   I'm shoving more 
Course, then there's that bit, alright.
And then  the nose bit.
He's bunging them off.
And there's no , oh yes there is.
In the side.
Right, all those he promised.
 
It's up to you though 
Oh is it?
It is recording.
I know it is but don't play around with that!
You'll stop the sound .
Cream's on the table.
Ladies and Gentleman, it's  
You said that it weren't on anyway.
I know.
So no one thinks it's on.
They know  
anyway.
Oh.
Doesn't use the instructions then anyway.
Put the mike on.
 
 
last word  then after half an hour 
He told us off for not taking him  there 
Then you
You'd of looked even funnier next to the  six year old !
Paul looked funny enough.
That 
Well I wondered if he'd wa he'd gone out on the Nottingham  cos I wondered what would happen to the mascot  was he shot the mascot, after the the game?
Well I i they had the mascot from the  it would have only gone out on their home territory.
 

Quartered yeah  yeah.
Hung, drawn and quartered.
Well I
I I said to the chap  he said did you have a good day, this little  guy sitting next to me he answered yeah, good day   yes did you see us?
I said, yes we saw you.
We saw you but did you have to come  running over 
Green coat.
waving to the crowd!
Apparently some football teams won't let the fathers on the pitch.
What did Nottingham Forest beat you?
If you do it for our side
Five one
they won't let the players .
Mum, can we get on?
Yes  well
Lucky old 
But is it really ?
They try and take photographs of him .
Yes 
We had to take the photographs, he had to go on the pitch, didn't he?
Well I first had to go down and ask.
When you think those days of 
Did you get to wear your football shirt as well?
No I went in  
he did ask, didn't you?
Yeah.
Oh you do meals, gonna have some  don't you?
In the end people said actually it wouldn't be worth entering, yet  
What we do is I'll go in and  video 
Eh?
When they  
 
I bought, in the end  to drive.
Let me get behind furniture  
Well if Liverpool win 
People   who argue that in the league the lower the  that's forty pounds, they must in  
 

What about the league then?
Eh?
Until he comes back from   and that 
Well that's because I hadn't been in there and you can be 
Yeah and you 
Yes  I'd be sitting on it by now.
  

Yep I'm finished, thank you very much.
 

Oh dear!
And the 
Yeah.
Or  motoring .
Wouldn't mind about the , when yo , you know when you hear about being in  it's huge  try and gore him  each player so they  
What's this photographs of it?
I'm not  
 

Which is actually, that's a chemical thing, isn't it, that's the E E C 
Michael.
isn't it  
What's the oldest  
label every chemical .
Has he got that, oh that's quite nice 
Has, has has, has 
has, has, has,
You got any spare batteries ?
I dunno  there might be some  then I can have one.
Okay, is it alright to slow it right down .
 
Oh yes, but the actual, no  
How do you know if they're working, how?
Well yeah, might have.
Yeah it's go still working.
What the tall thin ones?
Open i open thing.
Don't try and take a photograph.
You open the  lens cap.
Now you try and take one  you'll have to get  
Just  
You're posing  natural, natural 
who's camera is it, Paul?
 

Why isn't it working?
Well hasn't it got a tall thin flash?
Yeah.
working 
Well we've got 
flash.
we've got lots of batteries  Paul, though 
And it won't work if you put the battery in there!
They'll have, they'll have  
Well done 
Did you see B and Q
Pardon?
Did you see B and Q have got a  recently now?
Ah?
B and Q.
Have they?
And they Eric   so cheap.
Always so cheap  Always buy your  in B and Q.
Oh yeah.
Oh look.
I said I will wait  
B and Q  
Eric  Eric.
We've tried this one here.
Oh dear, oh dear.
Not such a good idea!
Little tiny ones  we'd stay and we'd replace them.
Yeah but 
I'm talking about the loose ends.
Kevin.
They've lasted all this time.
 
good idea 
Must do that 
 
must do that.
How old is ?
I dunno  Paul  Paulie  Paulie  got any patches like that?
No look look, yeah let's listen.
I will.
 
where is the sharp  ah  to make .
Two of them?
You say I 
He bought  to go out.
Yes.
Sam's own school  really 
Too up to go down and too low to come up.
as well.
Er 
Granddad 
what is it?
says he  so I don't think he was being very practical 
Mm.
Must say 
Mhm mm mm mm mm mm mm .
I think 
You know what to do with these, don't you?
Do I?
Yes, we can hope, can manage that, yeah.
Ha!
I'd laugh if he said yes without !
We'd have a look   You sure you can?
Do you want it on the wall or what?
  
Sit on that.
Do you want it on the wall or free standing?
We're putting them up, yes  I can do that.
On the wall.
Er on the , they're cracking up and I'll be   
Kevin I don't think I'll have it as whirly as that.
It is innit?
And then when we   
That's what you've got, is okay.
erm  yeah.
They're getting me a hose for Christmas.
and put 
Well that is a good idea.
Just as well 
 
a fla a flat one?
   
Yeah, we're gonna have a flat one.
Ha ha  oh go on  
 
Oh no, it's just remembering without the words.
Oh go on he says that cos he knows he's got the card.
Oh.
So I don't know if I can get a .
Is it a  then?
No.
It's their kitchen that  
It looked quite  
 
That's right, you get it on there surely?
cos they were in 
No they put that, put that
a long erm  a  
 
Adrian's is on the wall too.
thin looking  scissors
Well that's a train  
 
anything else you think we might know,upside down?
While they're finishing   aren't you?
I don't know  personally 
Yeah like they got little metal plates 
and they apparently they look very    to the wall.
Ah they won't 
But they can take it off the wall.
Oh I see  oh that me that means it's working okay.
Fine, is it alright now?
Yeah.
How much do I owe you for, how much are they Ruth?
Oh I don't know where it came from it's been a long time .
Don't throw those away.
If they were new they'd be a in a packet.
Yeah.
We've fumigated them.
Ooh mind the beer!
Is it working now?
Yeah.
Don't all look at me, you're supposed to be going on talking!
 
Should be perfectly natural.
I always sound like that.
 
It's very true  
Straight in front of a map and you go urgh!
then do something and urgh!
Ah!
He don't get any better does he Joy?
Yeah.
Don't get any better.
You  ooh ooh!
Well do you think we can have our pudding now?
Yes.
Oh yes.
Yeah 
Ooh I need spoons.
Hurry up, you're too hot.
I don't need a box, oh only so you can break it and then take it back.
 
Who's that ?
 
That's 
Actually puddings  
 
Oh yes,
can you handle that?
Oh yes that's  piece of a handle.
 
The pudding is erm  hot  Jam roly poly or  and I used to say  he's really going down it 
On the axles weren't you
That goes on the axle, I've found that out.
Why's there a bit left over?
Oh that's the   ah?
Oh I'm pleased about that.
It's alright, I remember now, it goes
Well why don't you do it down here?
It's a funny wheel that   funny wheel for it.
Yeah.
yes.
Do it in there somewhere  like that  
That's right, we did actually yo you and your son managed it.
Oh you're  
No, no actually we did 
quite terrible!
Actually be better  
inside.
Cos then it depends which way you want the  host to come in, which side you want the host to come from.
I don't think  you know.
I don't think you got the choice on this one Andy.
No?
Right  that's  he's done it, by gum 
Now take it out  let it join the bird table.
Ah 
Why didn't it flash then?
Why doesn't it flash?
Doesn't matter 
Cos the flash has run out.
You bought it from B and Q.
Look 
You 
Got it from .
strong in that  
You tired?
Well I wonder 
 
how strong they are, yes 
What time 
yeah.
did you go to school?
About one 
I think this is your lime, I'm drinking, Kevin 
Do you want that one wound up?
is there one 
Yeah 
with lime in one?
Yeah.
Or you   I just thought I'd tell you .
I have got lemonade in it.
They're both lime and lemonade in.
Yes.
I'm sorry that doesn't sound right.
 
Cheers.
though 
Maybe   !
You need the flash on cos you've got  innit?
I can't resist you .
serviette the way you've screwed it up, the way you screw it up.
 

Did I?
Yes.
Well that's it, there's only one each 
Ooh ooh ooh ooh ooh!
That's 
No  was always quiet.
I wish somebody else is!
That's it.
On red light like that, I didn't depress the 
Ooh.
button far enough for it to take a picture then.
When i whe when the red light you sh should keep your finger on longer.
That's all I did was it?
Oh to charge up the
flash?
Ooh is this my next lot?
Mm.
Great  well I  
That's the that is the paper that Michelle 
Yeah.
gave me  
We opening them now?
Bit early.
I'm not.
Not putting  
We open them cos it's Christmas 
these?
day.
Dessert  
Do you know how many here for you?
There's some up there.
Well no I'm gonna open  Michelle and Andy's  and they're gonna open ours  I didn't bring everybody else's cos we co we're seeing them Christmas Day.
 

The light goes on   
I'll end up 
Ooh ooh ooh ooh.
Hope you get something  
Got to use this just like my automatic camera?
Yeah.
These from Michelle and  Andy
You can take a picture now.
 
have we?
Mm.
That's good
Kev !
Uncle.
Yeah.
You got a drill?
Yeah  a drill .
We'll borrow to go up the wall myself.
left, right, left, right oh no?
Yeah.
I said we might as well climb up the wall now.
Yeah, go there now?
He's got one Adrian, now ask him if he can find it!
 

Where's your drill, Kev?
I'll walk 
 
round with him.
You'll need
Well have your pudding first, before you  
This flat  erm
Yes  it looked rather 
Very nice.
unusual didn't it?
Erm  we need an extension as well.
Mm.
I we I went on Thursday actually and I  
Don't worry I'll use the battery power.
Is this bit yet?
someone's just had their accessory 
Andy's battery power   downstairs in the prison!
It looks nothing when it is in pieces but as soon as it's  done and together, it looks nice.
with Zoe.
The real McCoy?
Especially what you saw.
  
Why not?
if you don't, I don't care.
Eh?
Everyone's a different .
Do you think that's true?
Mm?
They're very useful around  
It says on here do no dismantle once the , I wonder why not, wonder why that is?
Er Michael 
It must be 
will you  for me?
perhaps the plastic stretches.
and then take it  
No!
These are lovely.
Really?
Yes  by the 
Hey you know they're always 
Yeah it's got this bit left over 
Er Paul what's that 
 
er Paul
What a horrible !
What's that ?
What?
oh.
Even that great big purple thing?
That purple
Yeah that purple thing.
Well what has this got that's attached in here, eh?
The hose goes on there.
on there  yes
The hose comes from your tap and it goes on there
Yeah.
right?
Now the hose for your garden  goes on there
I see
Oh.
Okay, so just  unclip that  by pulling the yellow 
See 
bit backwards like that 
if you stuck a bit on that 
yeah I know, we got that already, yeah
unclip that from that there, put it on the end of your hose
Yeah.
that'll then wind  and it winds the whole up.
Have you picked a  section 
No 
, oh Ruth look  she's waiting  
 
hang on a minute.
If we go there, she'll  the right drill,.
No we won't have the right drill bit!
Pardon?
I know what  
laugh innit?
Mum, if you just 
I bought you all we've got.
Mum, did you have that cup?
Can I get you a drink ?
No thanks .
 
The gateaux.
The  
The  
Dad, Dad is that  
What about Aim  Hemslow No?
drill bits!
Yeah  isn't it .
Well Michael, what did you 
Right, here it is 
say about my  fruit salad ?
listen here 
It's purple!
if you're  
Why can't it be purple !
What happened to it?
It's all this   this thing here.
Blackcurrant.
This your accessories?
Blackcurrant Michael.
Well I think that you clip on here.
Is it with the hose?
Like the garden.
 
Is it blue?
Yeah.
Should be enough left over to push your face  into Michael !
It's lovely.
What did you have?
I didn't want to .
You just said well the fruit  salad .
How can it be fruit salad 
What is erm 
if it was purple?greenish or yellowish,
What was that word, Eric?
Oh Eric!
 
like normal fruit salad.
Yeah.
Is he still doing his crossword?
He was doing that about five minutes ago.
 
Go and get the sweets .
 
I'll  in a minute.
You'll have to eat it then  
I had two lunches.
Oh did you?
Grapes, smelly black banana  
Is that the  then?
Paw paw.
Yeah.
Oh yeah.
Oh.
Paw paw?
black cherries 
So many people do.
So many people get it now.
doesn't it?
Yeah but my  done it  in the morning go rush out to the post box 
Accessories   spray gun 
 
Oh no I think  
Where was  born?
Mhm.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Yugoslavia, but what town?
Sofia.
There you go.
You ain't got that!
Hold on Yugoslavia  
Sofia , is Bul 
Bulgaria.
Bulgaria 
Sofia is in Bulgaria?
Oh thank you, yes.
No A something I something A 
 
A something I something A  Oh, I could've  you that  
 
I don't know   
Oh it'll be part Indian.
No it's not Mother Theresa, it's Saint Theresa.
got any letters there are five of them?
Oh you saying number three's  
No I'm not 
Saint Theresa?
Come on  you work it out.
Saint Theresa we wanted 
Oh I thought you were talking about Mother Theresa.
We started this as well 
What yo you do is using that bracket there
I'll tell you what
on the wall
we'll get  we'll get ours and then we'll sort of mix and match them 
Like so the bracket 
Right.
fits on there  and that bit just rests on the wall, well then 
Right 
what you can do  is  wind it like that and the hose winds up.
Oh good.
You'll be a strong man by the end of it.
It's alright you're off on Wednesday you can do it then.
And you can have it like that if you want.
Yeah I will.
Just leave it like that.
I I think it's better on the wall
Yeah do you think at the moment you could take it all back out again, then?
Yeah.
Where do I put it, inside the garage?
No 
I mean 
on the back wall by the tap!
Yeah.
Yeah that's where you want it, near the taps.
 
Yeah we'll fix it up in a minute.
It's just to see because then the   
Don't worry about it 
 
I'll manage 
Why 
We will
 
What happens   that's it we come and say right .
Adrian have you got a hand drill?
Much better on the wall.
This is how  
Got a hand drill?
No it's not the drill itself, it's more the bit
Yeah.
?
No it won't s it's too big  they're are all wood drills dear.
I've got Eric's  
 
somewhere.
And that's an  
 
drill  the what?
How can you tell?
Do you know that Adrian that in this 
 
house, we don't use 
How can you tell?
an electric drill in this house any more cos the handle's  
You need Michelle to 
Yeah 
 
Dad is making a  
Any of them in there?
Hold on hold on  the  are
Never heard of that, that's just a straightforward drill that  
 
I think we'll go in.
Auntie.
That's erm a ten pounds 
Auntie 
for the  
Oh how old are they, yeah.
You first  
 
what did you do to that, look?
I didn't intend it to be purple.
Yep.
What about wall pliers?
I blame Julie she made it 
You'll need wall pliers?
Yeah I think I've got some.
I'm  
There's half a cabbage 
There's no raw plugs in that packet, is there?
Cabbage  
Uncle has  uncle  why do you put five Ps in here?
go in there?
 
try to sit  
See you just gotta  
that one, that one, that one and that one 
I was certainly out of it.
you got a ?
I was saying to  
 
Do you want any !
Keep an eye on that one!
Did she 
Anyway 
You haven't got that one.
I just  
than they had left.
Yes.
Like 
That's right 
poison
deadly nightshade is 
Yeah.
So that's where you put it is it?
They've never had to survive long
A couple of weeks.
sleeping like that.
Anyway that's the story of 
Right, I'll take this out.
No that'll make a really good 
And if he's not had 
Ooh yeah it'll be good 
the pictures 
Eh?
No we haven't got a  drill bit.
Or have you got the same blanks as I've got.
I think I can manage  
Eric.
We've got twenty seven across which is, birth place of Saint Theresa.
Yeah I got a minu A blank I blank A 
  

It's in Yugoslavia I think.
What makes you think 
 
she's from 
 
Yugoslavia?
I always though  was a  symbol  
Eleven across 
wouldn't you, you buy things in it.
something I V A.
Kevin's hopeless.
 
Cor when that door's open!
Who's gone out there?
Kevin.
Kevin.
when we went  back in the kitchen and it's hot but
but  read the book
I'd  everything.
!
Now we'll start this one.
Did you get that?
When you've read the book, you put it up.
I dare you.
We'll have the book and get the pieces together, yes I 
No it's when we were doing the electricity.
He  goes now 
I'll be a good girl, I won't 
 
 
Yes.
more careful with him.
 
Michael is too.
Yeah.
You'll have to read the book then, won't you  
It's that.
Ho how do you like your new toy?
taking it to pieces you can't get them back together again.
Couldn't of intended to stay 
Yeah.
if I couldn't.
problem.
Oh oh oh oh.
Oh  
That's his problem!
Yeah.
Who's that?
What's the ancient  name for the 
the pieces don't you?
Spanish peninsula?
A  
 
Iberia?
Oh no I don't  but er 
Don't do that.
I daren't do that.
I fixed our washing machine.
Don't do anything  
er  our washing machine  clothes.
You two are  paired up for the quiz, I had a lot of money 
and you couldn't do so be quiet!
too strong.
She knows the master 
 
so go away.
When was that?
depends    
not cos you went 
then I went  don't touch that!
Remember when I  her washing machine?
erm  
Yes, big !
Okay do it.
I was so pleased 
that made me  there 
Where did you do it, where did you do this?
again.
Well there's something wrong with the washing machine I got the  
She likes to go to bed with  
I did the whole washing machine 
and then  
I fixed it.
take away and
Oh aren't I clever!
Aren't you a lucky boy Kev?
Oh aren't I lucky!
Thank you very much.
 
It was about two years ago when I was about  thirteen  and
It would've taken me about four hours to do it.
Da ah ah ah ah ah.
And 
Alright   
Ooh ooh and you've exhausted   
Yes  
I can't be bothered with  
But er Andy was always  you see  
Don't really like to  to  you know I did have a  that made me so close to it.
My Dad was most impressed with that,
But I always remember Ruth make it a desk, you see it only came and in   she was sitting out there and this desk,all the pieces and parts were going everywhere.
Given up now, I buy ready made.
Ooh  .
do 
Alright there, for coffee?
 

yes I did 
Yes.
Ooh ooh.
I might be getting a barbecue  with  
Kev.
Mm.
I can't even get   
I said  anyway this is  
you see  and then later we're coming on.
I  the children.
What?
No.
apart.
Make up  the sand .
Which would it  !
You don't have to  !
Are you having a  dear?
She'd have to put the bags  
Oh yeah come on then.
Or  
Where do you aim from?
What you bossing me for?
Get me down .
Mind your beer, hold it tight!
looking up my brother-in-law's nose real.
have you got a bit of that blackcurrant?
No thank you   no thanks .
Oh  haven't put it on there long!
It's lovely.
We love that album.
Which?
This one?
What tha 
What have I got here  
Was actually very nice, have the blackcurrant er  sweet.
And th th the the 
Yeah  Nan 
And that lovely cake.
Nan!
Yep.
Oh I got this one.
Thank you.
I know an even ruder person than that.
Like who?
Well I know you can but  !
Hurry up!
I am hurrying as fast as I can, don't 
Come on!
 
Mhm.
She's not going to  recover from it !
Is that recording thing on?
Yeah  
They've grown early, haven't they tha those erm
What?
what they called, narcissus.
Yeah.
Yeah.
 
Did you  love?
No she didn't.
No I didn't.
No 
It's actually very nice.
What's with it, sponge?
fruit salad .
No.
It's   
Cream too 
Did you know about yesterday?
The texture of it's really nice  
Dad  Why didn't you know about yesterday 
mousse.
what happened?
Mousse.
Mousse.
Mum.
Blackcurrants on.
Did Lawrence tell you about Kevin  
No?
?
Doesn't agree with me.
He was  everyone.
It's strange and it's only  
About what happened yesterday 
Oh erm  and Mi Mi Michael shakes erm 
I told them about  
the .
Do I?
What does he play?
Gonna play the  
I  he's supposed to be very dangerous .
I told him you mustn't do that again   
Mm.
Joy.
Pardon?
Two third of the meal gone without dropping any down .
You didn't need to do this for a laugh!
Fifty quid note ripped in half, oh no!
Oh you can mend that's alright, ha ha.
That's alright.
No but, what the bloke had one half and you had to have the other half.
Oh yeah .
going.
Alright now with   ?
I'm terrible at going  er since er  October I sort of become really  isn't it?
Is that for the  
Christmas shopping do you think?
Possibly yeah I think 
Five minutes?
and I think now so many people are on holidays and yo you really notice 
Oh yeah.
Oh yeah.
everybody going to work, you know  rather than er   in the summer.
But the office improved, haven't they got all the decorators out now even
Yes, that's sorted out now.
You haven't got the hole there to put your head in at the moment then?
 
No they've done that  they've fixed the roof.
They've done that.
You quite like your office don't you?
Yes.
Well he's all on his own.
Cor er   good is it?
Mm  
I mind though 
Where ?
I think it's round about twelve miles.
Sorry?
 
a bit scared.
 
please  because you  
Ooh coupled lovely.
Coffee's ready, everybody 
And er some
coffee's  
they erm 
Any more coffees?
Pardon?
Did you have some done?
Yeah.
 
Yeah.
Coffee?
Nice isn't it?
Mm yeah.
Coffee Dad?
Mm  Mm.
Coffee?
Did Ruth make this?
Er
Oh yes I did.
I think I'll have, yes please
Coffee  Dad 
Yeah well who's was it?
Can I play ?
?
Usually mine or  church.
What was 
Oy!
the hose for, I .
It's very nice, thanks   
 
the trees.
called.
Ooh.
Ooh yes but she doesn't want to .
Do you want coffee, please?
Yes please.
Do you want coffee, please!
 
Unbelievable !
Don't have to remind me Mum!
Thank you.
Do you want a cup of tea?
Er anybody want tea?
Bet he's not working across the road, he's not coming home 
Thing is, he'll think 
for lunch.
look at that !
You might want seconds, that I want.
Ha ha ha.
So you're going on Monday to
Do you want coffee Paul?
Molly's?
No thanks.
They can't go Tuesday.
I'll have tea later  one two three 
She's got  I don't know what I'm gonna do.
What's ?
How come  you gotta give forty tapes to the lady then?
Well she gave us twenty tapes and she said 
That's what  to know.
we she'd like at least ten
Yeah.
but she le left us twenty.
Why?
Well cos that's how many they want from each person.
Why do they want  it though?
I don't know Michael.
They're building a dictionary.
It's for a dictionary.
For this  for listening to.
A whole dictionary?
To see how many words 
Well 
people use,
well yes 
Oh right 
people like you.
and a lot of words that people 
Their computer.
do use aren't obviously 
yeah so 
in dictionaries.
No.
so you name words 
 
Anybody heard of the word lary?
Yeah.
Yes.
Yes.
That's in no dictionary how do you spell it and what does it mean?
Just lary, yes it is, it's in  a new dictionary   
Well you don't know how you spell it, but it's right.
Is it right?
Lary
No.
I means yucky but
No it doesn't  no 
It's rather yucky.
It's erm
Lary means
Yeah like  
Lary.
 
I think actually , I think actually
No lary means mouthy Dad.
to the teacher.
No  lary means 
 
er  mouthy  it means like you're cheeky.
all of my children  
That's right, that's what I thought that's when it's right.
Well I don't know.
But lary meant in a 
 
in our time lary meant someone's wearing a sort of bright green an 
No lar 
Yeah.
pink 
No I mean  a lot of people would say that this was a  
in time you'd say that was a lar 
Like a lary tie?
Yeah.
No that's  
Don't take any notice of anyone around here, it means mouthy, okay?
What it means is is things like  someone's got a
Cheek?
a cheek, yeah.
No I said to  
Auntie I just s , Mum I just s I just 
find it in the dictionary I'll give you five pounds .
I told hey, I I I told erm 
Wary or lary?
Lary.
I told the lady  what it means  i lary means mouthy, okay?
Just in case you didn't hear the first time.
Well it's not in any dictionary that we can find
and yet everybody knew i , all the children from work go
 
It's a slang word.
don't be so lary,
Lary 
Lary 
Lary,yeah .
Well, you know
One, two, three O'Larey.
It's well in from the sixties.
Oh now that's an Irish song.
Yeah.
Yeah but lary means mouthy now.
word.
No it 
Like gutty.
Lary means mouthy or she'd was lary clothes, loud clothes.
 
yet.
Yeah but lary  lary actually means loud like, but it can mean loud clothes or loud mouth.
Yeah  John's  at work.
Now.
I've been learning that.
Paul  
It's a word.
It is loud, it's loud clothes and loud mouth, but it's the same as what  you said  so
It means 
It's loud, yeah
not really 
Oh I'll be more laid back.
the day they sell  
things like that 
lary  
don't get stressed 
Yeah.
All these
and they do as well.
the things that we used to use as verbs, they use as nouns I think I must 
Stressed, don't get stressed.
nouns are part of your  Michael .
you're the ones who can do, get stressed 
Yeah  erm I 
Thank you fans, I love you all!
Michael.
She senses the teacher in you Ruth.
Yes.
Yeah?
Eh.
Even I can put a  computer in like those 
Look how I put that microphone.
Mhm.
when they, use it 
back properly, but they don't, Michael go er er er!
in a computer like this so that 
Aha ha ha ha .
And this woman had apparently  
Dead cool,.
 
Put it down!
Like Alice 
I have.
Yeah.
er yes where they li 
That's really really common!
Oh no .
Especially  on the tape.
Were you with hi 
 
with him on Saturday,do that?
the kind of conversation  you go up and down.
Yeah so put .
Yeah.
Yeah put it 
I'll put it  
yeah take it but 
Not unless we find out  
Can you imagine the people who'll get paid to sort out that lot  millions, I mean, probably millions of tapes will be made.
Some would be quite funny I should think  some of the comments we're making !
Imagine the poor chap  
They've probably 
!
!
Must be horrible doing that in the restaurant, last night, last night 
I went to pay the books.
we had two weirdest people, we had two
 
for  I was there!
and
Ah!
we were nearly under the table
Ooh 
it was a terrible  and all of a sudden this man said, I'll be jiggered!
Then she went  right
under the table, so Karen's trying not to giggle
and I was probably alright, until she kicked me under the table  Paul!
This man said to her, this wife, we assume 
Yes?
er 
  
we have to get the give and take blend  just right, so it sounded  like a coffee !
And the conversation was really funny.
They're nice Ruth, where did you get those?
Auntie 
Can't remember?
Auntie!
It's gone 
Sainsbury's.
I I can fill a whole tape  
Oh do you want one?
I would always er  
Auntie!
last year but I couldn't  
Auntie!
 
 
Do you like them?
For a  
Auntie 
Auntie.
Course you can   
 
I can tape still some  slow words
Don't you like ?
  
Auntie!
It is nice in coffee.
Auntie!
You have when you have it 
Auntie.
with Tia Maria  
Do you want me to  do a slang words on it?
Yes Michael , no 
I could do a couple of tapes worth of slang words that they've never heard of before.
!
No  Michael's street language.
Auntie  Thanks!
We've got a .
Is it?
It's what?
Have you got two or you got one ?
No, one.
I've got the one,I'm with Mutty .
Don't you dare  
Do you like biscuits?
Yes.
What was that Paul, was it
Oh we're the other way around.
Ooh my  
I 
is open!
Dad's on my erm      thought I was ever so good  no   I usually have baths  I  I usually got erm
I usually  get Oriental but I I'm not sure, I haven't tried this yet.
What's that one?
Erm Marina  Marina 
Marina 
Is that the new one, Marina?
Dunno, ask Paul.
I've I I've got the Oriental shower gel fro got the Oriental shower gel, that means I've the Oriental and Marina.
Well what's that with the  that's the gel and then the what, the shower gel?
Yeah.
I love that deodorant.
Probably 
Yes.
Can I leave that with you then?
Mm.
That's for Michael's birthday.
Can I have a look 
Well 
at the birthday?
Isn't it 
for  Michael's birthday .
Is it your birthday?
Yeah, no  smell my hand!
Yeah, oh 
No, actually that was supposed to be for Christmas, as it goes.
That's the aftershave then  .
Does he like it ?
Yeah  he likes Lynx stuff.
Mm.
No it's that way  I've already put it in my handbag.
Ah can I have it now?
Mm.
Auntie.
I haven't got enough for your birthday.
Auntie, can I have it now?
No.
I wanna open it  it's only a couple of days after Christmas isn't it?
Ladies and Gentlemen  Kevin says would you please move  cos these are all teams for this afternoon.
Oh
The reason why teams have only 
 
two members, Karen and Andrew, is because Kevin says  that you two are so clever
and he said, you would be bound to win   
 
that puts the kiss of death on the  
 

So Andrew, Kevin and  Karen are together so that's alright, then it's  Michelle and Mutty and Paul  and it's Nana and Adrian, my brother's  
Well Nana and Adrian and Michael are sitting in there.
And Nana's sitting there.
Papa, me and Lisa.
There's a star prize for the  
Well we got a good team.
Who ?
And the star prize is the whole of three Ferrero Rocher.
Wow!
 

The ones that she couldn't have  
Cos I'm on a diet anyway.
So I'm gonna  
I'll read out the groups to you.
try and get a packet and half of each.
 

We'll be alright, won't we?
Lisa an 
And the quiz is nothing to do with me.
Who did it??
it's me.
Lisa!
she wins.
We, no Kevin's not actually in this quiz 
cos he's gone.
every single bit
No he's the quiz master.
of newspaper  
No he's the quiz master, he made it up.
Oh.
I mean, really hard!
Adrian.
So who are you with, Magnus Magnuson?
With Andy  just the two of us.
  
won't it.
Because they'd know .
I wasn't aware of this  
And then  
I don't 
we've got the .
She looks thick, but she's wiz , wizard at general knowledge.
know every single person in the picture.
Have you put the tape on Dad?
Oh do we need glasses?
Well I think I do.
Go and get your glasses!
Have the teams gotta sit together?
Yeah  
If you need the break  
All out, everything out.
Right.
Right.
What we'll do now then 
I've got my glasses but I haven't got the   .
We're a team.
Can I do i 
No I've got the  
the firs 
anyway.
the first round is
I was waiting for you, I was waiting for you to say 
 
one team of four, where  
Bamber Gascoigne doesn't have this trouble, look 
Excuse me.
the first  round 
Excuse me.
Out the way.
Excuse me!
Out the way,!
 

The first round is pictures so if you 
Alright 
keep your voice down 
Ooh I don't have to do that.
Shall I move over here?
Is it your birthday this week?
I do like that tie, I've said that before, haven't I  
Yeah.
That was the erm
 
Well Michael's gotta go and sit with his team over there.
It was a good one though wasn't it?
It was 
No Po po Papa   but  I said  
Why don't you a why don't you all sit on a 
Alright 
little bit of that one.
Yeah alright.
  
Michael.
Mike you've gotta
No, no, no, no, we're alright  ar our team's 
Ah.
okay here.
Well we're alright here.
I'll sit on the floor.
There you are.
Right.
Is Dad alright now?
quiz masters can go over there then.
Yes.
No  sit there.
Are you alright there Dad, or ?
Karen, we can .
by Thursday.
Do you see  
I was  sat there shouldn't you?
Shall we sit  What team Michael was on?
Oh right.
Michael Michael's with Adrian and Nana.
Right.
Yeah only so you could   
Alright well sit down there then.
Right there you are  how's that?
It's alright.
me go back?
Yeah.
Who's gonna be there then?
I'll go here.
It's se Ah ah ah Lisa!
And Lisa can sit in the middle on the 
Ooh ooh ooh 
on the .
Lisa you're sitting there.
Are we being recorded?
Why have you got your headphones in it?
Er it's not 
At the same time?
Something else he's got there.
Where's ours, where's our Sony?
Oh up there.
Alright.
Don't walk off with it  will you !
You're not supposed to be  
 
Four 
Only four.
Well you set things up.
You divided them.
You set the papers up.
Ruth   a one one bit of paper each team.
Can we have table ?
Are we gonna have pen?
.
there that one.
grab the table quick.
Pen, I'll get a pen .
Pens are there  by the telephone.
Oh give us then will you.
No I wo I won't have one.
Thank you 
Here are Joy, rest it on the back of 
Everyone got a pen?
your hat.
Mum!
Joy?
I've got it.
You have to  to win a box of chocolates.
Well you work for yourself, I'll work for me.
Just the Ferro 
Ha.
Oh  Is that all?
We'll work really hard.
Michael.
Not really.
Okay, about ten minutes.
Next!
Don't turn over these papers.
Was it you Dad?
God it's like an exam!
Don't turn over your papers.
Well 
Yeah, this is a mock.
Mock  
Do we write the answers straight off the sheet?
Ah?
Yes the answers 
On the  
are in a little box, under each picture put the name what you, who you think it is, underneath, in that part  
Have we got to be quiet?
 
If you shout out  other people will hear 
Other people would pick it up.
starting
Starting  now  turn your sheets over now.
It's up there 
 
goes in the box, Joy.
Right, cos 
  

Do we have to give a name of a  character or  
Well to be quite honest when it's when it's  I'll give one point for the character's name 
 
Uncle!
but if you get the actor who's playing it 
 
have one?
We'll put  anyway.
Yes .
You're supposed to write it on there, Joy.
Oh on these, what did you give me a paper for?
No, no  
No that's my future on, sorry!
That's a  that's for
They won't need that at the moment.
  

Mike, you're supposed to be helping ours.
Are you  taking part?
  

Go away!
  

Dad, do you name the characters then?
You get one mark for a character name and if you name the actor who's playing it, two marks.
You get one mark, one point for the character name
Kev.
Yes.
You got another picture ?
 
one for the character name and a extra  one point or something for, if you can the other one  yeah.
If you get the character name  one point
 

It's a good idea though  If you want a spare one   or are you all happy?
We're alright.
Anybody want a spare one?
Me.
across.
Uncle, Uncle.
A spare one there.
What one point for the name and one point 
Yeah 
Kev?
For a character name,the, if you get the 
 
one mark for the character
Dad, why was that  a singer 
an extra mark  
type singer  ah.
Oh no you couldn't get it for singer.
Ah.
Bu good then.
Right.
That's good though.
Oh he's not a character it only works in 
 
only works in
  

I don't know who the actor is, I know who he is 
It's hard  
I haven't a clue who that is!
Who's that person?
Yes yes I know  
Who's that person?
He was on the variety 
Oh that's what's his name, yeah.
Well as you all know I'm really good on names.
  

Keep your voices down  the ears are  listening.
The walls 
Ah.
have ears.
That's  
Write it down 
Politicians, I haven't a clue, why did you fill it up with politicians, for goodness sake!
  

I didn't know there were any politicians on there anyway,politicians.
I know who number two is.
Yeah,
It's easy.
that's the easiest one on the sheet!
  

Well we've only got two to get.
Have you?
Yeah but we've only got two!
No but we need 
We need , we've only got one more
Yeah, well  Kevin was right then, wasn't he?
  

Got five left.
  

How many you got?
Er all but
only wants one
two.
  

have only got two left .
  

We give up, we haven't got a blinking clue!
No.
We got one   
Two, we've got two we don't know.
Few more minutes  Wouldn't matter if we had  minutes, Kev.
Oh come on.
Can't do any of them.
What!
Oh no.
Hardly done any of them, got about five.
Oh!
I've got five to go.
Hate to tell you, that was the easy page!
Have we got fifteen ?
We have.
Yeah but ten of them are !
They're not.
Oh no they're not.
Ah?
Mum.
You can't ask her!
I wasn't going to, I wanna say something  Mum 
You know what I mean  you know the one who's got Mrs 
always 
She says er  only one Mrs er
  

Yeah but he said, put th what they're concerned with, you ge get an extra point.
Yeah.
if you say what they link.
No it's the character  character name
Yes.
or the actor's name.
  

I've just put down  erm whatever  I know that is
Alright, time's up .
but I don't know his first name.
Why's one of them lying on her back?
I think we've done better with Mother.
Mm?
I should think you'd have easy done better than  
Mum  Did you spot the cheeky one, number twenty?
Oh I knew that one straight away.
Yeah I knew straight away, easy one.
You can tick your own.
Do you get two points for a totally correct answer an 
I'll decide as I go along.
Oh.
Oh listen to that !
Decide as I go!
Right, ready?
Oh Uncle, what's his name first?
Eh?
No wait till we get 
What's that other picture there?
You alright?
Yeah .
Okay, ha.
Right  number one  who any of the answers, give me some answers.
Fagin, Ron Moody.
Dicken's character.
Tha that's right 
 
yeah  I  
It's wrong.
Isn't it, it is .
Fagin I give you one, for Fagin.
We've got Dicken's character.
Anybody got a name, the right name?
I've got  
He was the Fagin?
No  I 
He was a Fagin,
If they get that he was originally Karen, this is a different 
What about Dicken's character?
Do you get one for that?
Took his part.
Alec Guinness.
Yeah.
Alec Guinness!
You get one for Alec Guinness, one for Fagin.
No, do you get  for a Dicken's character?
 
Er  no, no, no, no.
We could of got Fagin as well, couldn't we?
Right 
Yeah we got Fagin  
Next 
I  I don't know his name in  
He's in Coronation Street 
 

I'll give you one for that 
 
Yeah.
What?
Alec Gilroy
I'll give you two for his
It's Alec Gilroy 
right one for that  I'll give you two for his actor's name 
His mos his other real name is Ron something 
real name 
Yeah.
Is it Ron something?
Nearly.
Don, Ron 
Ronald 
According to me, it's Roy Barraclough.
Ah ah ah.
Ah that's it!
Two for Roy Barraclough.
We get one for that.
No we don't.
Why not?
Get two something
 
Alec Gilroy
No you can have the name of the  
That's  
You get one for Coronation Street, you get one if you got the title 
Yeah that's 
of the show.
one for Coronation Street.
Dad
We get one, put a one
Dad
Right, three is 
You've only got one.
Bernard Manning !
Bernard Manning !
Yeah !
We've put a ?
One for that.
A cook!
Is that one?
Who was he?
One for that, yeah.
Who was he?
Bernard Manning.
cook  yeah one.
Next one.
You could of got 
Tom Jones 
four, I cut that down as much as I could  so
Next one.
Tom Jones.
Tom Jones.
Tom Jones, yes 
Yeah 
singers
One for that.
Two!
Do you get 
Two for Tom Jones!
Why?
Because we got the right name!
No, one that's only co couldn't be anything else  
 
Ooh, you rotter!
It's all the same for everybody.
Yes.
Is it singer, do you get one for singer?
No we'll have si , singer, no we're not having that.
Nope.
The next one.
We're not having actor for number 
No.
either.
 

Oh yes !
Who?
Richard Dreyfuss.
Yes.
do I get one?
I didn't know that anyway.
Karen said it's a man in Always.
He is isn't he, Mum?
 
Who?
the film Always,
Yeah  yeah 
Well I dunno, you're the man in the chair!
Yes!
Alright one for that.
Is it one or two for Richard Dreyfuss then, anyone?
Who got six?
He's an American comedian on the  show.
On the Variety show.
Yeah.
Do you think we could have his name !
Do we get one 
It's over 
for comedian?
It was on last night.
Oh Rabbi Mason I've got.
Who?
Rabbi Mason.
Well yeah, he is a rab 
He is a rabbi 
he is Mason  he's Jackie Mason  
Ah.
He is a rabbi.
He was a 
You should get two for that?
Yeah,
Can we   
Joy.
an American comedian on the Variety show?
Well did I  well we did  
American chat show host.
Dad.
Well he was on last night.
Yeah.
He's not a chat show host!
Dad, dad dad!
He's American.
Dad !
Yeah, one for comedian, that's alright.
Then  American .
You and Michael,!
Gonna be something!
When I go through this, I know who's gonna go .
And number five is Saunders  Guinness.
Yes  yes that'll be Saunders.
 
That's not right!
Is that  two or one?
Mum, do you think I could have a pen?
Michael what did you do you can't write it in now,
Mum 
!
Mum 
Yes?
One for you, cos they got Ernest Saunders, two 
Oh.
for them.
Mum, did you get number ten  by the way?
I don't know yet.
Number eight, have you got ?
Yeah.
Tick tack man!
Yeah 
You get one for tick tack  
bookmaker
Wait
Channel four !
Tick tack man we've got.
 
Anybody got his name?
Two for his name.
What is his name?
I can't think.
John  McCrirrick 
Never heard of him!
 
So can we have tick tack man?
Tick tack, one 
Got it I've got that.
bookmakers, one
Yeah.
tick tack's, one  yep.
  
Next one's  
And I heard Dad say straining, that is close.
Jack Nicholson not John Nicholson!
She said John!
I said that.
Jack Nicholson and he was straining 
 
he was pulling up that water  you know the 
Jack Nicholson.
water 
Do you get one for that.
Can we have one, for if he looks as though he's straining?
No.
Have we got one?
Can we have one for Jack 
Where?
Nicholson?
This one  and two we said  
I think we're two for Jack cos Jack and Nicholson 
I didn't know that.
Oh we wouldn't get two for Tom Jones !
Sneaky  !
And you didn't give us two 
Right 
No, one 
for Tom Jones!
one alright, one.
One ha ha    
Cos we had it on one 
And one for 
And he got Jack Nicholson 
Yep.
Oh we knew he was but we !
 
Can I get a word in edgeways here?
What?
Did he play Daryll in the  Witches of Eastwick?
No.
Yeah, he played it in the Witches 
Did he?
of Eastwick, but I don't think  
Yeah, well we got Daryll.
Well you see 
Ha ha ha!
And you say the part?
Yes.
Pardon me.
Alright, one for that 
Half.
No!
One for that and two for you.
See it was who I thought it was.
Paulie knows number ten, he's  
Say that again Mum.
Bart Simpson.
Two points 
Yep.
for Bart Simpson.
I bo yes.
Bart and Simpson.
Excuse me!
Why can't 
Yeah.
we have two for Tom Jones?
No I've decided.
I can't see that!
Why not 
No sorry  I've deci , I said I'd make it up  as I went along !
 
Number eleven 
Two for Bart Simpson 
the next one is  Heron 
again
 Heron 
One for  Heron 
One for Russian?
Russian!
 
Yeah it's a hero 
Russian  isn't it?
name though.
 Heron 
Who is it?
it was a  it was an 
Give us a clue.
 
It is  Heron 
 Heron is a  
 Rohnson something?
Yes.
Yeah.
I should've known this but 
Dad ?
Well I know it's wrong, since I hadn't put it down  but I had  Heron down.
If you knew it was  Rohnson why didn't you put his name down!
I don't know, ha ha ha!
You big wally!
I got the next one.
from the head of the .
I know the next one.
Dad.
Hey!
We got that.
 
to Come Dancing.
I thought I'd put her over there 
Kevin, we've got Lancia down.
Lancia?
Yeah.
Yeah, what for  Heron 
For Mr  Rohnson 
Oh, we got that.
Why?
I don't   I don't see the connection.
Well he owned Lancia 
 
as well as  Heron 
Hard luck if you didn't know that.
Well we've   
Well I think I should get three points for knowing that now.
Not a lot of people know that.
How many points for Angela Rippon?
Ha?
One o w one point off for being cocky!
How many points for Angela Rippon?
One  that's only have one, that's easy.
Cor one!
Who got thirteen ?
Ken Maxwell.
He's first 
Maxwell .
No it's Kevin Maxwell 
Kevin Maxwell  
Who?
Oh I got Ken Maxwell.
Oh I only got one.
You only get one, we got two !
Ken, Ken, Kevin Maxwell.
Why what's he do?
Who is it?
He's the son of, Maxwell's son.
Maxwell  Maxwell, Kevin
Do you ?
Yeah.
Marquis of Blandford!
Dad  dad, dad!
I'm glad you  you know!
You're closer than you think
Like what?
Move back 
 
come on,
 
Chelsea 
 
One point 
You creep  
go on then put it there.
Fifteen was your  
 
 
Who was it?
Who was
 
and I do of course 
How, tell him when he was young.
Now  sixteen, go on.
Who was the 
What?
football.
Jimmy Greaves 
Greaves , I knew, we know
I knew I knew his face.
Jimmy Greaves.
Who wrote, who, what are the  
We got, we got football 
Chelsea football 
She answered football
Chelsea football right
No 
Great Crystal Palace
Good boy 
Minus one, huh.
Don't believe 
One football 
Nothing really
Oh  
No, we didn't get anything 
Who's on the  
One.
Oh there were two pair of ones  
Right,this evening 
 
 

What can we have?
One mark.
That's four.
Two for magic 
So.
Yeah, we got magic  and the 
Have you got 
And, and, that he  acres
Won't give up a point for 
Who didn't, who didn't get number eighteen?
Rupert Bear 
When  person was alive.
Phone call.
What?
No its alright, we've talked him out a minute 
I thought, how many places you get 
Rupert
Two, two's the maximum you can get 
You take three from my last one, why was that?
What you get three for?
magic 
No, if you're not getting 
Oh, come off it 
three  
Oh I  
No.
Why not?
We won't 
Don't be greedy.
gonna hear from Rupert, one
One
What about Rupert Bear?
Good try, but no.
Arnold Schwarzenegger, Terminator 
I could be a  
Arnie Schwarzieger 
Two
Two for that cos they got the film as well 
Oh, and the next one is Kevin Bambers 
And Jack, and Jack the Ripper.
How many did we get with Kevin?
How many points?
One for Kevin 
Can we change teams please?
Twenty one.
They should of been all out in teams .
Can I take the spare one into work?
Twenty one.
Twenty one you stupid
.
Oh right
Clever dicks on the sofa.
I got only wrong answer
Ha, ha, ha, twenty six over there.
That's not fair cos we never 
Right, I got so many wrong answer, I put 
Cruel.
I heard that 
Right come on Ruthie 
Fourteen and a half.
Oh bottoms.
Half, where'd you get a half from?
Ah well we had, you had  we had that, that bloke  Americans, so we got half a point.
Right who's good at geography?
Oh well Ruth should be, she's got a 
It's absolutely got nothing to do with geography 
Well  
You know why he's  they did a quiz at Phillips
Oh you can 
You need your papers, oh there it is.
Yes, you any good at this?
Oh, we've decided not to give it to America so  oh I know what it is Lisa, I've been really honest and 
I haven't got a clue, look 
all numbered, I want the na , names of the 
Oh give it out  you've got to be joking.
Just write them in the boxes Joy on the paper 
No it says it on the paper.
I haven't got a 
I'd like to keep them 
I'd like to keep them wrapped Michael cos I take it to work.
I was gonna screw it up and throw it at you.
Neither have I.
I've done three and I think that's wrong.
I haven't got a clue either.
Michael got any ideas?
Dad, are these maps to scale?
What?
no way is  that big.
Are you a calling me ?
Well are these, are these to scale?
They all, well, that is 
Yeah 
really that big?
Mm, mm.
There's nothing in the middle that big.
Yes there is, but it's got a new name, called 
If we put the old name do we get one mark?
You'll get, yes you'll get one for that
Can we put that this one's near,
No you can't put near
No,isn't it mum?
Yes.
I'd rather have South America I think Andy
I bet you lot, I bet you I know who's going to score the highest this time.
Who?
Who?
Karen, wait and see, I'll tell you if you're right.
What is Joy doing?
What you've got there in your hand?
Oh.
Joyce writing, got it all sussed out.
I wouldn't say that
Paul have most.
I don't think so, no, it's interesting.
Is it switched on  or you listening to something?
Why couldn't you given us well known countries?
I tell you what Kevin if you'd done Europe I think you'd of had, we'd of had just as much trouble.
No, no, I'd of done Europe.
No, cos we haven't got a clue 
We've finished.
Have a guess.
Finished, I know lots of countries in  just don't know where they fit.
It's right 
What, no we haven't done this one 
I know.
Oh yes, I know what, don't know what it's called now.
Right, we've finished.
Give the answer to the 
We don't know any of them, but we've finished, I've got
Oh don't give them any more time
As much as I could do  south of the equator
I've just done  Europe or South America.
Well hopefully there won't be too much argument this time.
Unlike the last 
Who requires more time?
Who wants more time?
Yes we do.
cos we're only just finishing.
Should of just done it though.
No, we didn't do Africa
Didn't we?
Not enough 
Yeah I do.
Well you might but only at that age
Go on then Mike if you do it.
Well why aren't you asking the questions then?
I did it in the first year, I'm in the fifth year now, that was four years ago.
Oh yes, well then it wasn't National Curriculum.
God is it  four years ago?
Can we put in Sahara Desert?
Can we put things that were there aren't any numbers fellows?
I'm gonna put Sahara Desert,.
I know the South Africa 
It's the positioning that's difficult, ten, nine, you, cos what
Can  get some points,
Are you ready?
Ready as we'll ever be.
Uncle we have,
Yeah ready as we'll ever be.
Uncle if we had some other places in do we get more points  cos Sahara Desert is where we  
no, no, no, no not .
O K ready.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Right who's got number one, this
Zambia
Mm.
Botswana.
Nambia.
It's Namibia anyway, but it's not
Botswana.
the one below, it's bad luck
Botswana.
Botswana.
Oh I thought number twelve was 
had a big war for a long time, Angola.
Oh Angola.
Fancy not knowing that 
These are all the easy ones, I picked all the easy ones.
Two.
Right, you better 
Zimbabwe 
get two
Right, two is
I told you.
You wouldn't listen to me.
No, but it's, where's it's erm, it's
you 
it's not very well 
can you imagine, can you imagine  on the top of it
Dad 
Zambia's L-shaped that is.
how do you know why 
sorry?
 
because that's not right up there then 
Oh,.
That's misleading.
This is perfectly good scale so it's accurate, yeah
I've just, I traced it that's 
O K.
I thought it joined up on Mozambique.
Sorry?
I thought the border was on Mozambique.
Border of what?
Mozambique 
 
What about
Mozambique's on the coast  's not on the coast.
Dad 
Yeah, but then you, that impression made me think that all, it's all South Africa, which, which was why
 
And then I thought  was erm
I'd coloured it in for you  
I said, I said, I didn't think there'd be much discussion over this.
Kevin just take hold of this will you and have 
Number three.
Number three.
Syria.
Ethiopia.
Kenya.
What's three
No,next to number four
Three
Three
Dad
Yes, who got Sudan?
We got one.
I thought Ethiopia was Sudan now?
At last.
Sudan, mm.
We put number eleven as Sudan.
Oh we didn't put anything.
Syria.
Right number four someone 
Malawi
Yeah, very good.
Malawi oh
Niapaland I give 
No.
What?
Niapaland.
Number five.
Number five
Nigeria?
Yeah.
Gold Coast 
Nigeria .
Who's got Nigeria?
Er .
Oh 
Oh 
Six,
Libya
Algeria.
Morocco, Morocco
Morocco
Yeah.
You got that one?
had that one.
Seven I had Morocco.
Number seven.
Tunisia.
Alger 
Greece 
Oh.
Very good, you said you didn't get them.
Only got two out of seven 
Tunisia .
What is seven?
Tunisia .
Tunisia .
What did we have?
I can't  
Oh we had Morocco the wrong way round .
Eight, we got Egypt 
Oh.
it's Egypt.
Number eight, Egypt.
Yeah.
You all get that one?
Yeah, we all got that.
But you see doing them in the isolated spot
Makes it harder
yeah you don't join them up, I mean I've got to know the borders
Oh
Yeah, that's the same for us all 
Oh it's so unfair isn't it?
Yeah, but you 
Did anybody get number nine as well?
Nigeria.
Didn't get any one.
Oh, I got  there.
Number ten  then.
Number ten?
Toga.
Close.
Ivory Coast.
Oh.
I did.
Have you written
What did he put?
He put  three times.
Right, who's 
Number eleven?
Mozambique
Ethiopia.
Sudan.
Is that it?
Number eleven
Mozambique 
Kenya .
Oh is it?
Oh got that right 
Kenya's lake, Kenya's got a border with 
Why who thinks  was a country?
I thought Kenya was a  
Yeah.
Botswana, Botswana
Who thought twelve was a 
No I would.
Congo.
It's a Conga.
Yes it is, it's the Belgium Conga with 
Well honestly I get the back of the 
You put Belgium Congo's, no
Good gracious.
I'm ashamed of myself.
Didn't get anything there did you?
Add up your scores, one for every one you got right.
Well I'm totally ashamed.
So am I, cos I, I don't like that map, I don't like that map at all, I mean if you drew a map
Look lady twenty years of  don't you 
Don't  that was traced, a .
The point is
I never had a map you haven't joined up so you know which country 
You couldn't join them wide, join them up and confuse actually.
No.
You should, you should do another one on the counties.
I know, I've got a map of that, it's unbelievable.
Kenya, Kenya was this one.
Oh.
Oh the counties were in English, but
Well what did you do
I don't know  I might not  
What did you get?
Two
The counties I could do that.
Oh yeah.
Yeah, the counties.
I'm very disappointed.
Two out of twelve
Yes, I should be 
between Malawi and
Well I bought cake and .
Right, Paul, you got nineteen, mum's got, mum and Andy 
Hey you say the picture one was separate.
You got nineteen?
You said the scores for the picture one was separate 
Oh you old clever dick 
I made, I made then up
Two
I made 
You got three on that.
Oh, nineteen altogether, that's good, twenty three altogether, that's good, twenty nine
Oh.
They've got  
Nineteen and a half you're catching up, you're catching up, right.
That half might make all the difference.
Were losing 
Yeah, might.
How you've got twenty nine?
 
 
True, true
It's a bit expensive  
The fact you box him round the ears to get the half point, true I think.
are we?
Yeah.
Can we change the more
what was I saying? 
When we gonna ask the question?
Right, Peter's  get ready, questions
One to ten?
One, thirteen 
called Peter and you do
One
One to what?
Thirteen
Ask some questions that 
One to thirteen 
me and Paul will 
Well I have got, at least you'll get some of these, these, these are all Christmas questions.
Oh.
Thirteen.
Ruth's books, so she'll probably know all them 
Say the Father Christmas joke now.
I don't know a Father Christmas, you do, you know 
Who says ho, ho, ho?
Father Christmas.
Father Christmas lying on his back.
Alright, O K, yes, I, I knew it would die so that's what I said, but
That one  right
Right, in which pantomime would you find the following characters?
Is this just number one?
Number one, a character called, don't call out 
Don't call out.
write it down, people here will be giving away your points, a character called Dandeanee  whisper it or write it down so that people can't hear, that's right.
Everybody ready?
Yeah.
Number two
Mm, mm.
right
Yeah.
A character, a cow sold for a bag of beans.
Oh.
Beans, beans.
In what pantomime?
Just one bean.
No it's a sack of them.
No, two. 
No, you're quite right.
Why?
Because you said 
Because you told her 
number one, in what pantomimes are these characters?
Are these characters , yeah.
I got A, B 
We all thought it was all part of number one.
Question two that was.
Yes, number three.
I haven't had what question two is, what is it?
A cow sold for a bag of beans, what pantomime was that in, a cow sold for a bag of beans.
Excuse me, as we're being recorded it is a pantomime 
You're well informed then.
Oh yes.
Pantomime, correction, pantomime
Can't we 
Pantomime
Pantomime
loved to be in a pantomime.
Recorded all this?
Yep.
Oh dear oh dear, right
Any 
a widow who runs a Chinese laundry 
Is that the name of a thing?
I'll give you one mark
Yeah, but is that  
I want one mark for the pantomime and one mark for the character 
I was  
listen 
Of the what, just for number three?
Yes, whenever I say.
Right.
What you 
You have the whole class yelling at you, that ain't fair Mick 
 

Number four.
Can we have the first question again please?
A character called Dandeanee, in what pantomime?
Question number four, a very large white bird  in what pantomime?
Whisper it, very quietly 
Oh yes, well done 
Question five, coming off the pantomimes now
Yeah.
what kind of fruit sauce is traditionally eaten with turkey?
I know you know the answer to that one.
Karen's is the best in the world .
But dad, are we , are we  pantomime
Yes, that was after the, you realize that was after the 
That, that was after  
I did say 
he did say that was after the pantomime.
Off the pantomime.
Number six  was the sending of Christmas cards introduced in the year eighteen forty six, eighteen forty eight or eighteen fifty.
Very 
So who can guess, come on who can guess?
Can you read them out again please?
I have the three 
Eighteen forty six, eighteen forty eight, or eighteen fifty  take a guess can't you or you have one in three chances  this is one I didn't know, who were the Magi?
I hope you do know now.
Yes I do know now.
What do you mean?
Who were the Magi, what, who where they and I'll give you an extra mark for each one of their names, I didn't know they had any names.
Who
How could Magi's
M A G I
I know
Magi
I know two of them
can't spell it  what's the third one called 
One mark if you could tell me who, who, what, who they were.
What, what?
One mark for each one of their names.
I don't know it at all.
I won't blame 
I know two of the names  the third, I do 
Ruth's got it right, I know .
Can we get extra point 
I didn't know 
Yeah I know, but they're brilliant.
in pairs are thought to be clever dicks, sorry.
I did have Michael, but
Oh is he?
Yeah, he's
If I could remember the third one, we'd get another point wouldn't we?
I bet he'd might of known that one.
Can we, do we get points if we put down what they brought?
No, no.
Well that's right, give it away  the first part of the question 
Ah?
Question eight,
Right,
Seven, oh no, eight.
eight,
We missed seven.
Where did Jesus, Mary and Joseph flee to when Herod decreed that all baby boys should be killed?
You repeat that 
Where did Jesus, Mary and Joseph flee to
Oh I know, I think
when Herod decreed that all baby boys should be killed?
Yes that right .
Is it?
Yeah.
I think it's that.
The bible.
Is it Bethlehem?
No,that was where he was born.
We might catch up a bit here.
Yeah, we might.
If I could remember the name of the third wise man.
Ready, question nine, these  the following lot I want you to fill in the blanks
Fill in the blanks.
Every time I say blank there's a word, right?
Yeah.
Kevin.
How many words in a blank?
Somebody just gave it away.
Oh is this nine, ten and eleven 
I saw blank, blank come sailing by  I saw blank, blank 
Which number is that?
Which number is that?
That's number nine, fill in the blanks.
I saw blank, blank come sailing by  question ten  blank, blank but once a year 
What's that?
Blank, blank, but once a year 
  
once a year actually.
I like, it is my favourite 
It's something to do with 
Number eleven.
What was ten then?
What
Blank, blank but once a year 
something, something but once a year.
Blank, blank, but once a year.
Do you get two points if you get both words?
She 
I think it's gonna be split like that cos some people are gonna have one word perhaps , I don't know, I'll have to 
Good job  
I like number eleven , I like number eleven, all I want for Christmas is my blank front blank  think hard.
Mine, that's happened to me, two weeks before .
, hang on say it again.
All I want for Christmas is my blank front blank.
Do  Michelle?
Oh come on Michelle, it's obvious
I know 
The answer is that and that, not that.
Yes, that's the answer.
Now Michael should of been here for this one,
Oh something to do with, about 
God Bless us everyone said blank, blank 
What 
Let him finish 
God Bless us everyone said blank, blank  yeah
Yeah.
God Bless us everyone 
How many years ago was that?
said blank, blank.
Hard one that innit?
Oh somebody who said it?
Yeah, yeah.
God bless us everyone 
Michael said it .
said blank, blank 
I know, you should got that one.
Yes you should get that one 
 
blank, blank, did this.
We went for 
Mutty you went as well, you saw Michael play the part.
Yes I did, he got up and said God bless us everyone
And Michael played it.
Oh yes
on the head wouldn't it?
The only laugh I remember.
Right last one.
wasting his 
Yes.
What was eight again, can you just
Eight?
Eight, question eight.
Where does Mary and Joseph 
Where did Jesus, Mary and Joseph flee to when 
flee 
Oh yeah.
Herod decreed that all baby boys should be killed?
We've had that haven't we?
Yeah I know.
That's all we've got 
 
The last one , the holly and the ivy now they are both blank, blank.
We don't 
Holly and the ivy now they are both blank, blank.
We've got a lot of right ones here.
Ooh.
I can't remember the name of the third wise man.
Just remember what it is  
So if we get two of the wise men 
I'm glad you can't Ruth 
we get two points 
I'm very glad you can't
It disappeared.
I'll be silent as well 
If these answers are right, you did very well.
Right.
Answer to the first one.
Here you are then.
Really want one more wise man and we get full marks 
Are we all ready?
Yes
Yeah.
Question number one, a character called Dandeanee.
Cinderella
Cinderella
Puss In Boots
No it's Cinderella 
Cinderella 
Cinderella.
Well done Joy you've got that one.
Yeah, I knew that was wrong
Yeah
when I got the other.
A cow sold for a bag of beans.
Jack and the Beanstalk
Yes, one mark.
A widow who runs a Chinese laundry 
Widow Twankey 
Widow Twankey with Aladdin 
Aladdin.
Aladdin.
Aladdin
Aladdin
If both you get two.
Oh yes.
Yes.
What's that?
Oh right 
Mark for Aladdin , mark for Widow Twankey.
Yeah.
A very large white bird.
Mother Goose.
Mother Goose
One mark.
Ugly Duckling, that was a good guess Lisa.
Mother Goose.
No party pieces 
What you 
Cranberry sauce 
cranberry sauce
Good try though, hang on, hang on let me say the question first
 
What is the British sauce traditionally  cranberry sauce 
Cranberry sauce.
Right, what, when was the sending of Christmas cards introduced?
Give us, just give us , give us
Forty eight
Eighteen forty eight 
Eighteen fifty 
It was eighteen forty six,eighteen forty six 
Oh 
Nobody got, eighteen forty six.
Who got it 
No one got it 
I  the middle one 
I, can I answer number seven please?
Number seven, who were the Magi?
Wise men.
One mark for three, three wise men
Wise men
King 
Kings 
The three kings
They get one for that, they 
Yeah, but they ain't got their names
Yeah
Melphor Beltravers
Oh shut up.
and  Casper.
You've read that.
I didn't.
We did Casper, we get four for that 
All three yes,
How many did we get four for that, four altogether for that, Ruth 
And if you just have wise men?
One
Read this book didn't you?
I didn't.
She got all that on her own.
Don't forget I'm
Egypt, Egypt 
Where did Jesus 
Ah, you missed one 
No I didn't, Egypt, where did Jesus, Mary and Joseph flee to, Egypt.
Oh we had that till  
No.
Three ships.
Three ships.
Three ships 
Three ships 
Three ships, one mark.
Yeah.
You get two for .
No, no.
Nothing.
Number ten any wants 
Xmas
Christmas comes 
Comes but once a 
Christmas comes
Oh yeah.
but once a year.
So that's two for that is it?
No one.
 

Christmas comes, you have blank, blank,two 
You can give us two 
for 
No, unless someone's got just Christmas.
Two front teeth.
All I er
No, no
The answer is two teeth 
Two teeth 
not two front teeth
Cos I crossed it out.
Not according to the judicator 
That's what we put 
Will somebody sing it.
All I want for Christmas is my
Two front teeth.
Oh
Two teeth, two
Yes, the answer is two teeth, alright, front, yeah O K.
Can I cross that 
I put front in brackets.
Oh 
That was one was it?
One mark for all these yeah
Tiny Tim, yes.
Tiny Tim, yeah.
I put little Tim
No, half, half, half.
No nothing it's wrong.
Number thirteen holly and the ivy now they are
Full grown
Where'd you get that?
One, two, three, four, five
Well
Oh you, won't get the rest of these.
Eighteen.
Twelve.
Fourteen
How do you get fourteen?
Fourteen and nineteen and a half.
Paul, thirty three and a half.
Nineteen and a half.
I'm really not with this you know 
I'm not 
What did you get grandma?
Well 
What did you get?
You get?
Twelve.
Ooh.
Ooh.
fourteen
Funnily enough we've got fourteen 
Fourteen so I can get it in 
Oh yeah you'll get your bonus
Well
Yeah.
Not enough 
Not enough, is it?
What you get mum, mum?
I'll add them up for you.
And there's another 
I think ours is thirty three and a half Ruth I think
What we got now then our , twenty nine isn't it?
She's just adding them up, she'll call them out 
Paul's got twenty eight and a half, mum's got
No, twenty eight and a half's not bad.
thirty five
It's not brilliant either.
Oh  done wrong.
You thirty five mum?
got forty one.
Good god.
We've got 
We're both thirty three and a half I think.
Thirty three and a half?
I think so, we're still lagging behind 
 
We're third
Quite interesting though cos it's quite equal  really
More questions
Number fourteen Christmas 
How many?
Uncle, uncle why then you have some on for like
Thanks Kev
How many?
stroppiness.
How many?
Quite rightly 
Questions please.
What?
Fourteen in this one.
Fourteen.
Ask some good ones 
Good game.
Every time I've asked him to do anything in the last three days, I can't, working out the quiz.
Right.
Shut up, right, number one
Hang on 
What's the logic of 
Yeah.
This is a mixed bag of  
Oh Kevin isn't.
Number one, name Britain's largest wild mammal
Largest
wild mammal.
or sea 
No sea is
I'll give it to you, oh land on land, we don't want you confused.
Britain's largest wild mammal 
Wild mammal.
I haven't got a clue, what do you think about that?
I think I know this one.
Whisper it.
Hang on, er wild
I'll come back on this one
Scotland, there's a clue there.
Could be.
Oh I know what it is then.
Mm.
I think it's a
Yeah who  that?
I don't know if you've heard of them
Scotland, is it that, do they have those in Scotland?
may as well 
Word of warning, I'll give you a word of warning, I'll give you an extra mark for an absolute accuracy.
There's two words in it aren't there?
Yeah 
Yeah  
Two marks for that for accuracy 
Accuracy.
Number two, here's one for mum, the dahlia is popular in Britain, from which country did it originate?
Mutty might know this one as well.
The dahlia, which country did it originate from?
Gonna say anything else Eric?
Are you implying that it's not very long been in this country?
No, been, quite a long dahlia
Dahlias were in my dad's days so
No, but I mean in terms of hundred of years
Oh
Oh yes, hundred of years.
Yeah.
Now then, next one, hurry up 
Why couldn't you ask about tulips I could've told you about.
Come on Bamber
Come on Bamber get a move on.
Oh here's one for mum, she'll get this one.
Lyde is a seaside resort, where?
I know that.
Oh, oh, oh, oh,
Everybody gets them right you 
Even ages 
I knew where was
Yeah 
You didn't get the question right though.
Why I said dad, she said mum, he said mum will know I, said well he managed 
mum will go to the, the one of the
No,
ah, that's why I said it.
Alright two if we're 
Dad wasn't that a bit simple?
Number four.
Alright, what about this one, what is nix, what is nix?
I know.
N I X
What?
She sings with er, in Fleetwood Mac, Stevie Nix
What is what?
Nix.
you're asking for the comprehension of the word.
Yeah what does it mean
Yeah.
when someone says nix?
You're nicked
No that's N I C K S you're nicks, nicks.
I, I thought, I was thinking of  
 
You want N I X
Question five 
Oh I  got it wrong then if 
What  first then
N I X.
This is another word for this dictionary is it?
It means 
Number five, which coin ceased to be legal tender in August the first, nineteen sixty nine?
Sorry about that over there 
Oh.
Sorry about that over there 
I know, I know.
Yeah.
Nineteen sixty nine, August the first, nineteen sixty nine.
Sorry what was the question again?
Ceased to be legal 
Which coin ceased to be legal tender in August the first, nineteen sixty nine?
Sixty nine.
Might of been
Probably, probably leave it, leave that
No, that was before then.
Eighteen.
Yeah, probably about right, twenty two years ago.
Right, next question
That second one 
Come on I'm gonna hurry you.
I'll put that down, cos I don't know.
Right oh, number six, who is the goldies crew?
Oh I know
Who's the goldie crew?
Erm
Who are the goldie crew?
Who are the goldie crew?
Is the goldie crew?
Who are
No, what do they do, I know,
First  
do you have to get it exact?
Yes, yeah.
Do you have to get it exact?
Er, ah.
I can be,be
We had a quiz like this at work and our captain couldn't 
Yeah, but I don't know which team that I'm on?
Who is and who are can make a difference.
Yeah,
Dad, what they do or 
Telling me what they do is, telling me what they do, is telling me what they are.
Who is it?
The golden crew.
I know.
The golden crew
It wasn't Star Trek was it?
Here's number eight.
A yellow jersey is the coveted prize, in which sport?
Yeah.
Oh I know that.
Say that again.
A yellow jer not the yellow jersey a yellow jersey, see a coveted prize in which sport?
Andy will know that 
What number is that?
Number seven is that?
That was seven.
Yeah, Andy knew that.
Oh, yes 
Easy for us.
yes, I know it is dear.
Why?
Oh yes of course 
Number eight 
say which country 
Oh it's a good one, it is good, the Crucible is a venue for snooker contest, which city is it in?
Oh.
Mm.
The Crucible.
Is it?
Snooker.
What you gonna put?
I was gonna put that.
Sshh, mm
You think it's the better one?
I think you're right there 
Alright.
It isn't Eric 
when I  out Eric?
I, I, I should be drummed out of the 
Here's a hard one, hard one coming up.
I think that, I'm not sure.
Number nine  you alright?
Yeah.
You alright brain boxes?
Yeah, they're such brain boxes especially they are  
they come up with so many answers they never know which one to pick.
Right, number nine, which sport world cup was hosted at Willesden in ninety eighty six?
Which sport's
Oh dear
got it's own world cup, and it, this time it was hosted cap Willesden in ninety eighty six?
Ninety eighty six, can't be.
No.
I don't know
No, I
I'm not sure, but that sounds about right.
Yeah.
I'll give a clue, lunch, lunch 
Yes.
Lunch 
That's right isn't it Joy?
Oh well I should know both of what I say 
, well what you say,
I should  
and what I say, it won't
That's for mum to know and you to guess.
Why should you know?
Well we've got to guess why she said that.
Alright, mum 
She's got to rack her brain through er
Only the four I ever associate with  
Right number ten then, number ten 
Perhaps you're right.
 
If it's that hard  I had it before you said that.
Alright
Did you?
That's good, name the two fences 
 
which are only jumped once 
Only  question 
in the Grand National, two fences 
Ooh 
Oh yes
but they only go over once in the Grand National.
It's that really dangerous
That's right.
any help.
Oh dear, I've 
I want two names 
 
I want two names
Oh the other one's a water one.
There's two names for two 
Yeah that one 
separate fences
which are only jumped once 
I can't remember that one.
Put that round the wrong way.
Right, there's only one, there's only one person who's gonna know this, this question,
That's me.
little Paul, I think.
Little Paul.
Number eleven, The Tangerines are the nickname of which football club?
Oh yes, think about it.
What the proper nickname?
No, I want the names
No,no, but is it the proper nickname on the 
Well I think so.
Alright, Eric knows.
Well yes he might, yes, I could see why he would know, yeah.
Why?
Yeah I can't, well I'd give it away.
Is it a proper nickname?
Yes I think it is.
Oh you want the nickname?
No 
No 
Oh.
That's the nickname of the Tangerines 
Will you  
Yeah
Sorry what's 
It's a nickname of a famous football club
That's right, yeah.
Oh the  won't know that over there.
No, maybe not, no.
Andy won't know that.
Write it down, I'm not sure.
Tangerine Paul'll know that.
That's the only one I've got 
It doesn't make any connection with 
I'll give you a clue, it's to do with their stripe.
I know, but 
It might grow 
called eagle.
Right, number twelve
Number twelve.
it's an easy one, what must ladies wear in the Royal Enclosure at Royal Ascot?
Can we have two answers?
It's alright you all know the answer now 
 
Thank you Eric.
I knew it anyway.
Well there's only one in 
But we did know it Eric.
Did you?
Yeah.
Number thirteen, two more to go.
This is a good one as well, which creature may be called 
That  
Bubbly Jocks in Scotland?
Spell it.
Bubbly Jocks
The biggest mammal in the world 
Bubbly Jocks , J O C K S, Bubbly Jocks in Scotland
Yeah.
Creature?
Which creature?
Oh.
It's called a Bubbly Jock
Yeah, yeah.
I've got 
Is it a mammal or what?
What was the question or  please, sorry.
I'll give you a clue, it's a bird Kev.
Oh.
Which creature may be called a Bubbly Jock in Scotland?
May be called.
it's a bird.
It's a bird.
I'll give you a little time for that one.
Eagle.
Kestrel.
Last one 
why we didn't hear, what was thirteen.
Thirteen, with which creature may be called a Bubbly Jock in Scotland?
How do spell that 
Bubbly Jock 
second word?
Cos it's a bird.
It's a bird.
J O C K S
You were right about those two weren't you?
Ha 
You're right about you two, you are good.
They shouldn't have.
You don't guess do you, they 
Last question 
What term describes a group of ducks?
A  of ducks, a  of ducks.
Oh it's a funny one isn't it?
The something of ducks.
No, really strange ducks .
No, but I can't think what it is.
Not the  no 
No, that's geese.
With duck, not geese.
No, a  of ducks.
You said it.
Group name of ducks.
I don't think it is that, but I don't know.
Right, ready for answers?
Yeah.
I think it begins with 
Name Britain's largest known mammal?
Loch Ness Monster 
Moose
Lock Ness Monster 
Red Deer 
Red Deer
Red Deer, two marks 
Hooray we've got it.
Deer one mark.
 
Well my moose is a deer 
It's not  moose  
There aren't any mooses in this country.
Canadian 
I thought a reindeer, but they're
That's what I said
aren't they?
They used to be 
Right two, the dahlia what country?
Japan 
India
India.
Japan.
Russia.
Mexico.
Oh Mexico 
Mexico 
Nowhere near it.
Not a lot of people know that.
No, we do now.
Everybody knows this one.
Right, number three.
Isle of Wight.
Isle of Wight.
You did know Mutty
One point 
you did know.
One point, what
Is that all?
Isle of Wight
Yes.
I though we would of got three, one for 
Good try Andrew.
What is nix?
Nothing.
That's how many points you get 
Nothing.
Nothing.
Nil
Nil, one point for nothing.
Two for nothing.
Oh two for nothing.
Two for nothing.
That's the actual word, nothing to hand down for.
Where did that come from?
Nix, nicta, not is not German isn't it, nix, I don't know. 
Right, which coin ceased to be legal tender
Threepence.
Sixpence.
Threepence.
Fifty P
Earlier.
That sided hexagon.
Half a crown, sixpence.
Er, right, what is it?
Old half penny.
Oh.
What  is it?
Old half penny.
No not half penny
No you've got half a crown, you cheat.
Number six, who got six?
Blackpool
The Italian yacht
The  crew often 
Oh, I'm sorry yes what
it's a crew.
Definitely one for that, it's the second crew, it's the reserved crew of Cambridge 
Crew in the box, I  second crew oh look I got second crew, second crew 
You got second crew which is two 
in 
No, one mark.
Is that all?
You can't put both for that one  
That, it means nobody else  
Seriously, what was the question?
Goldie crew.
Goldie crew.
I'm sorry that is mean 
 
I've got all the words  
All the words 
number seven.
Precisely.
Dad you put
You're so mean.
The yellow jersey coloured  
Don't you dare give them two, one.
One.
it's not the Tour De France anyway 
Never, they never started
Right, which sport's world cup was hosted at Willesden?
number eight.
How about number eight, come on.
Oh yes, so sorry.
Oh yes.
Sheffield.
Bournemouth.
Sheffield.
Bournemouth.
Sheffield.
Sheffield.
Yes, yes 
I thought it was Coventry 
We even had Birmingham at 
Bournemouth.
Right which sport's world cup
Swimming
Bowls, bowls .
tennis 
Tennis.
Tennis.
Ice skating.
Hockey.
Hockey.
Cricket.
I said hockey.
don't you?
Just remember next year, you do not put me in for 
 

I think you'll win anyway.
I had it written down Kev.
Er
Number ten
Right number ten, name the two fences which are only jumped once in the Grand National.
Beechers Brook 
Beechers Brook 
Beechers Brook
the Chair
What I got here, the Chair
Yes,of the Chair
Oh yes.
I got, that it's got, had water jump.
That's Beechers Brook 
Beechers Brook 
It had water jump.
The only reason is, the only reason we got that right is that's the only two names of the fences we knew.
Yeah.
 

Well we're all, all happy.
Right, number twelve, oh no, number eleven.
Blackpool
Blackpool
Blackpool.
Tangerine.
I, I knew it was 
I don't think we're gonna get any more points 
That's gold 
on this.
Right
What
Everybody ready?
Yeah.
That's twenty ahead I think 
Question one  name the first English printer.
I know, I know
Voice down.
just done it in a project.
Got it?
I  
Do we get two points for both names?
christian name 
Thank you.
Christian name and surname.
Just done it.
Yeah 
Two points for this 
I haven't got his christian name 
Ooh, you haven't got his christian name?
Oh dear me.
I don't know both names 
.
We can beat the quiz master.
In which year did the great fire of London occur?
Which year, I want the 
Oh 
exact year 
Are they all history questions?
No.
Oh no 
Yes, something that this, this day and date that's in the  
Right question three.
Hold on.
No one 'll get the answer to this, but I just wanna ask the question to this.
Did you add, did you add one question on the end that I would answer
You can't be that dumb.
Question three, who discovered Uranus in ninety seventy six?
I just wanted to say that question, so, who discovered Uranus in seventeen eighty one?
Er
Well you need to give us a clue or there's no point asking the question.
W, H.
William Holden.
I dunno.
Oh yeah.
Question four, I don't think , question four how many sides has the brass threepence, the old brass threepence?
Oh dear.
Easy 
How many sides has the old brass threepence?
Eight.
I don't know  in my life.
Threepenny bit.
I've got one at home 
Can't remember.
I'll give you one mark for er the right answer and two 
Two for the wrong.
two extra, two extra, no one extra, one extra for the exact
You are enjoying this aren't you Kevin?
 
What was the Silver Ghost?
I know dad
I want, I'll give you two marks 
Hang on.
for the accurate.
I know 
Is it that?
what that is
Eric was it that?
Silver Ghost 
I don't know.
It's that.
Cos Adrian this is true to  
Mum   
Was it that or was it a
Yes, yes you're right
the answer's obvious but there's a little bit to it as well.
Yeah.
Someone can experiment  
You think it's one of those
Yeah.
You don't know any more?
No.
That mean get three points if you get that right?
No, it's two, you get one for the right answer 
Eric 
one more for
do you think it was one of those?
No, but he might of got it wrong you don't know that.
that's right, well love what was the 
Number six. 
no you're not supposed to tell people.
keep picking up your answers
Yeah, it's your 
It always happens though.
Why
losing, she only wants to show off.
Why was Edward the black prince so called?
Why was Edward the black prince 
Oh I know.
so called?
I think I know.
 

Could it of been?
Could of been, yeah.
Thanks Paul,
I hadn't seen the  
How do you tell the age of a horse?
Oh that one
Oh.
Oh I was thinking of a tree
Oh I know.
How do you, yes your 
By the br 
your way 
Cut it half and count the rings.
How do you tell the age of a horse?
Question 
How 
Easy 
know that one.
There's one for Mutty.
What is a Blenheim orange?
What is a Blenheim orange?
Question nine.
What is a coypu?
A coypu.
Oh I know.
A coypu.
Do we have to know exactly?
Well no 
What 
No, no 
What is a coypu?
Yes.
How's it spelt dad?
C O Y 
C O Y P U.
And no marks for the obvious answer here, question ten, what are the willies?
Sshh.
What are the willies?
Yeah, anybody want another ?
up to fourteen and then 
Number eleven.
Number eleven.
Name the famous golf club, and golf course at Virginia Water.
Er 
Yes.
Name the famous golf club and course at the Virginia Water.
Oh dear, oh dear.
Oh yeah.
Thank you everybody.
May I ask one ?
Number twelve, what is measured in Ells?
E L L S.
Why should I know, should I know particularly?
You should know.
Eh.
Is it a volume or, or a 
Unit I suppose.
I think it's a, I think it's a volume, but I don't know what it measures.
What is measured in Ells?
Do you mean the letter Ls, or
No it's E L L S 
E L L S 
Not water then, not, not metres?
Michael you can give your answer 
Oh right. 
 
Right question thirteen , two more to go let's finish, question thirteen 
I think about ells , I haven't 
What was the name given to the tight trousers worn by teddy boys?
It's more like  
 
Oh.
Oh yes, we know that one.
Tight trousers worn by teddy boys.
Erm, can we write our erm  
You're trying to catch me 
You're an old smart you really are.
Yeah.
Oh that's not fair, you're asking qu , no you ask questions
I know 
from outside the quiz.
Last one, easy question.
What is a Friesian?
Yes.
You know, you know.
Right, does Michael want to have a number fifteen then?
The same .
Hang on, say that again.
What is a Friesian?
Friesian.
A Friesian?
Yeah, but you can't do that, cos you're in the team.
No you.
No cos you're
Order.
She was, she's not with us she said.
Go.
Go on then.
Enlighten us.
Enhance us with 
Yeah.
What did Kevin Cosner play, what's his name?
Eh?
Say that again.
What?
What character, the character that Kevin Cosner played in Dances With Wolves, haven't got a clue, this is not fair cos you're making us fall further behind if we don't know the answer 
And then there is B to it, what ?
No, that'll have to be number sixteen.
Oh I  seen the film
No alright, we've just 
Can I just do one more then?
I just 
No.
I just want to do, who invented the toilet?
That, do I know the answer to that, William Crapper.
No it wasn't
I know.
It was Thomas Crapper.
How many was  fourteen or fifteen?
Alright number one.
Right, answers, question one
William Capstan.
William Capstan.
Oh yeah.
Yes,
Well you know William you can have two points
I, I believe you.
favouritism.
In which year did the great fire of London take place?
Seventeen ninety three 
Sixteen sixty six .
Sixteen sixty two.
Yeah.
Very good.
Seventeen ninety three.
Very good.
 
The year after the plague 
Sixteen sixty five was the plague
I didn't know the year of the plague  
Sixteen sixty six was the year of  
No one answer, no one you 
Yeah, Wilhelm Ulasey.
No William Hurschell.
We've put five question marks 
 
Ah?
We've got five question marks.
Number four, how many sides has a brass threepenny bit?
Twelve.
Eight.
Twelve.
Twelve.
Twelve it is.
Twelve.
Oh six one side, six the other.
Oh.
No it isn't, it's twelve all the way round  shape 
All the way round , who's got one?
I got that.
Who's got one?
You got that?
Yeah.
Adrian what
Got a lot more than you think.
what was the Silver Ghost?
Rolls Royce.
Rolls Royce motor car.
It's a figurine of the women.
Rolls Royce one point
And it's the figurine of the women 
Phantom.
Something about the Silver Ghost 
Dad, it's the Silver Shadow 
I, it isn't
No.
Phantom.
You've one mark for Rolls Royce you get two, an extra mark for saying Rolls Royce first model.
 
Oh.
number six.
It was also that figurine of the women
Was 
was based on 
Really?
No you can't have another point.
Cos we went to 
Why was Edward the Black Prince so called?
Cos he wore black armour.
Cos the black death happened in his reign.
He had black armour.
Black armour, colour of his armour is black.
Oh, very good.
You got that one Joy.
Very good.
A little guess 
How much we get for that?
Michelle knew number seven, I saw 
I think we're, I think we're falling behind here.
Falling behind here.
Who's got number eight?
Apple
Apple, one mark.
I remember that.
Number nine, what is a coypu?
A  wolflike animal.
Rodent.
Rodent, yes, we got that.
A rodent, yes 
You said, we didn't have to be exact.
Say that again mum.
Animal, that's not good enough 
Mum , mum
I said how exact do we have to be.
Point two five.
Called again?
Michelle  
I said, you didn't say if that was an animal, I was 
Ha, a six pack of coypu
No, no, don't wash, don't wash.
Right, number ten, what are the willies?
Islands
Depression, depression.
Nerves
The nerves.
We put depression.
Well that  I've got the willies that's what 
I think I'll give that.
losing .
Yes, I'll give that.
You know where that comes from 
you know that women in white, that's written by Willy.
Yeah.
No, Wilky Collins wrote that.
Oh Wilky Collins.
Willy Collins 
It's like you say, someone gives me the willies.
That's right, yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah, I thought of that but I didn't think that could be right.
Right, number eleven who got the famous gold course 
Collindale 
Wentworth.
Yes.
We did 
What is it?
Erm
One mark for that man
What is measured in ells?
Material
Water.
Very good.
 
What did she say?
Lengths of cloth.
Oh lengths of cloth.
 
How did you know that?
I heard it somewhere, I, I 
do it in feet and inches.
You know where I have heard it from, it's from work, because er they do, they do lengths and stuff and
Really, oh.
and  I knew I'd 
Right, who got thirteen then?
Drain pipes
Drain pipes is 
Drain pipes, yeah
Drain pipes.
What?
I didn't say that did I?
I tell you what I guarantee Karen wouldn't have known the answer to the next one if she hadn't known me.
Right.
The mind boggles.
What is a Friesian?
A cow 
A cow 
A  cow.
You can say old Friesian you.
Hey, I won.
Add them all up.
I thought he said Friesian.
Karen, I think you  out on that.
What you get?
Eight.
Eight.
Thirteen.
Oh.
Oh they're cheating.
Eight.
No they won, we came last.
No we equalled them though.
I don't know, probably 
I get one more.
You'd better give the prizes, I'll have the .
I vote that And Andy and Karen don't play together any more.
Kevin said they'll win.
You said that's why they don't need three people in their team.
Dad what about the prizes?
Right, I don't, I mu , I must say I don't think I would of won without Karen, she got most of them, I was writing them down most of the time.
Someone , oh someone's taken the prizes, disappeared, dad.
What, someone's eaten them.
Karen can't have  chocolate 
Who said I can't?
I love Ferrero Roche
I thought I'd won after the  Kevin I thought, I thought I'd won after the third round so I ate them.
Do like Ferrero Roche.
Jolly nice if it was on.
Turn your light on Michael.
I'll put the kettle on.
the sandwiches aren't made yet, I don't know why.
I'm sure, well done mate.
Hang on is this .
Anybody want to have a look at 
Yeah.
Yeah.
I've forgotten what it looks like.
I've got one at home, but I've
much nicer.
Don't you remember using the 
Yeah.
cos  
Gosh aren't they tiny 
What's that?
A threepenny bit.
That's a threepenny bit 
I've never seen that 
You know the first time I came in this country cos it was not decimal yet
Oh yeah.
Didn't they have character those coins.
Yeah, but I can't  sides than that.
Yeah gran because of the fifty pence piece.
Yeah, yeah.
Remember those?
No, I've never seen
Can you, now there's twelve countries in the E E C, can you tell me what they are?
That's the  the four colours , used to be on the 
Er
Twelve of them, but I can't work out 
Holland, Belgium ,Luxembourg 
Er, let's start from the top, there's Holland, Belgium, Luxembourg, Italy, Spain 
Spain 
France 
France 
Germany
Greece
Greece.
Greece 
Greece 
England if 
Ireland.
Ireland.
No Ireland is
Eire
Oh yes, and 
Twelve
Where's the other two, is Denmark in it?
 
Put them down there love 
Denmark 
just for a joke.
Sweden has applied, but they're not in yet
I don't know if Denmark 
I'm not sure if Denmark
Cos Den 
Didn't they come out, Denmark were going 
They have their own little grouping and I, how, how do you make twelve, there are twelve in there now
Yes, I know there are twelve
well who are the other ones then?
Twelve what?
Twelve countries in the E E C.
Oh 
It's your 
Can you
Can you name the twelve?
You see.
How about Portugal?
Well what about Portugal?
Portugal of course.
No it's not.
Yes it is, well 
Portugal's in it,
Yes.
Well it's in the process of  Spain.
Oh, I know that er, Austria
Austria and Sweden
Austria and Sweden are 
I'm surprised Austria wasn't in it anyway.
Oh no,photographs .
Are we  now?
Yeah.
I think, oh I don't know .
Is it getting cold, oh my feet are getting cold.
Well these are warm 
Well that's open that's why.
The others were perfectly alright, but they've just worn out, do you like these?
Has someone got a ?
No.
Where, the spare  were given to the children .
Who wants a Ferrero Roche?
Dad, dad.
half of mine.
Who wants a Ferrero Jacque?
Adrian , cos I know you do 
Ferrero Jacque, Ferrero Jacque, dormez vous .
He's got one.
I've had, I've had Karen's.
Who wants one?
I've got one.
You've had one?
Who hasn't got one?
No I don't want one thank you.
Who hasn't got one? oh well, ha 
A hundred and seventy five 
Cor I 
I didn't think these were so good in their  
How many .
Yeah, I got about half 
Well we got other things, we've got to drop the kids off  skating
Oh I see
Yeah.
And take the car back.
Take the car back to you, cos they're off tomorrow 
use it tomorrow morning and
Sorry?
Got to use it for the paint.
No I ain't.
No he isn't.
Oh.
It's not insured 
He was originally , when he was doing the 
December the second.
No.
No , it runs out at twelve o'clock tonight.
 
Oh does it?
I think, now you say that, it's probably twelve o'clock tomorrow.
Well I even say the originally, he was going to come over with Robert stuff
Mm.
Now  
Oh yeah I see 
with this Molly lady.
How you getting back  
This afternoon 
Er one minute past midnight on the second of December.
Oh that's alright, today's the thirty first  tomorrow's the first.
No, tomorrow's the second 
Is there a birthday today?
No.
No , it's the second tomorrow.
Second tomorrow.
So it just runs out past midnight tonight.
on the second  it's the, it's the first today isn't it?
No, a minute past midnight on the second.
They don't have to be that 
Right, so other words one A M on the second  that's right.
 

Well you really want it  don't you?
Mm.
You really want it  really   
and er I'm
How you getting back from Joy and  tonight?
Carole's picking me up.
Are they?
Carole's picking me up, oh she'll pick me, yeah, but we've got to go to Epsom anyway  so we'll go  pick up Carole's car and
Yes I only opened it, cos I want Angie to come over to help bring the food over, cos we've only got the one little car,
Yeah.
and if the food and the drink to come over
Yeah.
well 
Uncle Adrian
Yeah.
Do you want, do you want the 
You're more likely to drop something.
Anybody want to see the one with the ?
Jill can come over about
There, er nineteen
Nineteen fifty two, that's the older one.
that 
Pick up the food and drink, it's, it's all be at our house , van stopped to get the drink on and the glass 
Paul, the coin shop?
Yeah.
I've got old sixpences here and 
before nineteen twenty,
Ma, ma
Saw the content in them
Joy, you must ring up Jerry  about the 
Yes,
There's one there, nineteen, nineteen, the other one nineteen sixteen.
I think the oldest one we've got is something like  got us a Roman coin , they .
We never recall one thing.
I never ever buy  but they
Oh thank you.
I recorded three full tapes and then the head was slurry
Ooh.
everybody slurry plays 
Some places it's perfect and other places it's slurry.
Have you tried to record ?
Yeah.
Dad, you've only got one of them.
Radio.
Mum.
Yeah, I, I 
You rest you've got loads of  
I have some lovely tunes I have 
No, it's very complicated 
but 
there used to be a  
no in places it's so slurry, it's almost slowed down  
mind you, I think Arthur will have plenty done.
 

There's one thing about it, only been a year old the heating is in good condition, you're warm in there.
It's only a year old that ?
Yes.
No, you're  this is a new one.
Oh it's been out there longer than a year though.
No, is it longer than a year?
Yeah, mm.
Too much exercising.
Well it's the same age as Waitrose isn't it?,
I would then say yes.
Before that.
Before that I would say 
How old do you think it is then?
Well it's
Well I think a, they, knock, had to knock down the old brown  hall
Yeah
build Waitrose
Yeah 
they must before that they moved them out  five or six years.
Oh not as much as
Joy it's not five or six years old is it?
About two or three I think.
I would say two, three, yeah, probably three I'll say
Mm
cos I I saw  
It's been a year  practically hasn't it?
Yeah.
it's been finished, so it was, I would say I was going to town.
Where do you play badminton, upstairs?
No, downstairs in the front.
we're in the back are we?
 

When you see the all attractive with  
What do  top scoring then 
Eighty.
eighty.
Narcissi smell strong Joy?
Pardon?
The narcissi smells strong.
They always do don't they?
It must be coming your way, it's not coming here.
No I can't smell it.
Were you here on the day your  Joy?
No, I didn't, I said 
Why'd you 
We 
Did you, yeah.
There are a lot of 
I mean that erm,I don't like, what's that called 
Yes,
Yeah.
and erm,
marigold erm, eh comes from Africa.
Oh by the way Adrian my 
Yeah,
yeah, mine's going along quite nicely too and my, I've taken some er cuttings and they're popped up this week
Oh yeah.
and er that plant you gave me, whatever it's called, is er growing extra leaves
Oh yeah.
left, right and centre.
Wow, you 
He's training
Andrew,
Mm.
Andrew got some wonderful flowers on here,
Well two years ago I did, but I didn't have any last year, two years ago it was a beautiful flower  
Well last year we moved it out into the gardens.
Yeah  mind you it's coming again now.
Oh, it might be something to do with the .
The original 
It's something to do with the genes I think.
Oh, you can find out.
Ours have even doubled that ours 
wasn't it?
That was when?
A bit straggly in comparison to ours isn't it Eric?
Oh dear.
Oh that will come on the 
Look at that one we had 
Erm, when all the flowers are gone do you feed it?
Well you just leave it alone don't you?
What?
After the flowers are gone, do you leave it?
Oh I leave it alone once the flowers are gone, I 
Put it outside and that's it.
put it outside.
Couldn't .
Yeah, but you can't put it outside .
Well in the greenhouse if it's
Oh, mm.
Yes, I won't touch it after the flowers have gone 
Cos it , it, it really is a miserable looking flower in the, in the winter 
I started  
Did you?
Yeah.
Again
A little er  fish, fishes 
Mm.
Do you 
Tropicals?
No 
No 
No 
Goldfishes
Oh right
How's your funny one?
What funny one?
The black one?
Black one
She's alright, I think so.
Yeah,.
Is she alright?
Yeah.
The other one keep 
The other one bullies him a bit 
The other one bullies him though does he?
There's still some  though 
I mean  the way he chase round the edge  chase round the bowl
Not male and female are they?
What with    
What happened to Julie?
Oh not until about one o'clock.
Oh, the neighbour rang me up and said by the way she'll be a bit late 
Er, mm,
well, definitely a bit later.
It's alright, erm, want to sit down yet Paul?
Our lock is still
no
then.
Yes.
Yes, I'll shall have to go and see  at the traffic and find out what's gone wrong.
 
I really need to hang on to the key, is that alright?
If I hang on to the key?
We'll take it back tonight,
if I hang on to that and put it away in the garage and hang on to the key so I can get the right, the right lock 
this morning, and then the key, the key wouldn't work in the lock.
Oh dear.
 

So when, when you going to send 
The mind boggles.
Tuesday 
Tuesday 
at one o'clock.
what you go in Karen's car?
Yeah.
It's not worth extending your hours cos you might get one any minute
No  we can manage with one car, bus or walk 
Our bus service is pretty good now though 
The two one three is marvellous
yeah, I get, you know, walk to Bognor and then, never have walked back.
Karen couldn't believe I got back so quickly the other day.
Mm.
Dad
one of those.
Eight or ten minutes is all you usually wait though if you  
Well I didn't even wait that long.
No, came along
Erm, when was the last time I caught a bus from you?
Paul
Friday.
He'll be in favour with your dad won't he because I went, I, I 
I got a, I went, I, I walk down 
No Thursday 
the bottom of the road
yeah
across the road and took my cigarettes out, out my pocket to light up a cigarette and a bus came round the corner so I put it back again.
 
Is it Marks', they Marks'?
Yes, to 
Are those Marks'?
No.
No.
No Tudor Williams 
Tudor Williams 
Oh, Marks's have got a whole range of them as well.
No, but you can get , you can you can get, you can get to Wickham Avenue, the other end of Wickham Avenue from that .
A very nice shopping  yeah big one.
Yeah
I think British 
I've caught some, where I'd caught a bus to you, if, remember when I was decorating the flat?
Walk down Wickham Avenue and catch a bus at the end of the road 
What bus is it?
Four O six is it?
Oh is it, the four O six?
No, no, it's a red bus.
A red bus or 
I can't remember 
My one 
but it stopped outside the baths.
Yeah.
You can get to us, you can get on at the ba , at the baths and it comes up past  Park and you get off, you get off at the end of Wickham Avenue 
 
 
No it's the two nine three
How you going to  
That's it 
I can tell you .
Yes you did Joy.
Oh yeah.
As many services as possible 
I mean fancy expecting me to go by tube  
 
Two nine three
Yeah.
It stopped outside erm  
The two nine three's every half hour.
Is it every half hour, as  as that?
I think so, yeah,
 
Cos I looked at the timetable , I looked at the timetable when I, when I caught it over there,
it was on time too.
And the ninety three, I'll always remember
Yeah.
 

You can catch a ninety three from Alison's to us
What rubbish.
the ninety three comes to us 
Yeah, instead of walk right round nearly up to the 
What's this  
What Wimbledon station?
Yeah, cos the ninety three comes to the bottom of the  as well.
Does it?
Not the ninety three, two ninety three, ninety three finishes 
No, the ninety three comes to Wickham Avenue as well.
I thought it finished at North, er North Cheams.
It comes off at North Cheams and goes down Church Hall Road, and up Priory Road, till it the end of  Avenue 
Oh, I see, that end
Mm.
I'm thinking it going from 
Yeah, well I used to, I used to when I  used to go .
Very good.
You ever see that 
They 
No not his, but another one.
Yeah.
and held his finger in a  for three hours
Ooh, held his finger there
and surgeons battled to save his life 
 

I don't think Baker's been a very good Home Secretary.
 
He's a bit of a flapper isn't he?
He flaps a bit, he always
He covers it up well, I never been as  things wrong 
He moves too late, I think 
And then he fires from the hip while  
Yeah then he fires from the hip and doesn't  far too strongly.
It was a bit of a
Yeah 
I don't think he's good at the job at all.
Well I don't know, I think he's covered up he's not good for a long time, I didn't know he was that bad.
What's that?
Er, table .
who was doing, who was erm Secretary before him?
 

Did you want any help?
Nope, we're alright
So you tell my  that are frightfully posh drive, he comes in backwards  oh who's that?
It feels colder out there, I don't 
I felt cold, I feel it's got colder definitely  
 
Sorry.
Oh.
Two little piggies
Oh,
that's what they used to do when they were young  I always made two cakes.
Well which one's, well this one's Karen's, the one with the piggy on it 
Piggy 
Yeah.
You take great delight on that don't you?
No.
I only did two pigs 
No 
  

Which one's mum?
Which one 
The pink one 
do you think is mum?
the pink one is mummy 
Oh the  
the one with the piggy on it.
The  is that, is that actually
It's one of fudge and one of  
Happy birthday to you  
one of sponge and one of fruit one.
believe that 
and they all like the fruit one best 
Yeah.
of course and they always wanted to 
Isn't that nice?
Mm.
No, no I know he doesn't do them does he?
Who made that?
Who's the  
 
Pink I suppose is Karen isn't it?
Yes of course pink is Karen
Pig for Karen.
Pig for Karen 
Thank you dad for being so serious 
What, it's a lovely idea 
for me.
Yeah.
I thought it was you 
I would, I wouldn't call you a pig at all.
I thought it was a  
I think that's the way I 
pig.
Karen if you go and sit on that seat over there then, come on 
Oh alright 
Oh no it isn't alright, I've got a bone 
sit next to Karen  and warm up 
Now you can't always  
It's a long way to have one 
I think dad must of  
You alright, a couple of  there?
Yes, that's fine for Eric  for a while.
 
Change places 
I quite like sitting on especially to eat.
Well I do actually
Do you?
Seventeen ninety three?
That was a wild guess 
Cor, strewth 
Seventeen ninety three for the great fire of London.
That's when the fire brigade arrived.
Yeah, that's when the fire brigade arrived.
Paul, I had eighteen something 
Thank you 
You didn't?
Yes I did
Mine was a guess, I didn't know.
We just had a, we didn't know did we?
No.
What's query 
 
what's query, query, query, query, query, query.
Query queen
You didn't know that
If you'd ask me to  Battle of Hastings, I'd know that one 
 
You alright?
it's the only date I did remember from school 
Do you know it  twenty to six  we played that for about two hours was it?
Time goes doesn't it?
Thank you 
What was the question for number seven?
He's got down wearing on his  what's that?
I think Brian Adams is Everything I Do isn't it?
 
Oh I see.
Er, mum what are you doing?
That'll be a good game trace, guess the questions from the, from the answers.
Not much  questions.
Number nine a gun, what the hell's nine?
I don't know, I didn't hear the erm correct 
Kev
What?
you're right about that as well, not much used at all .
Mum where do I, where's sitting?
She's reading Kev so you can say anything you like now.
No you can't she's listening now.
Anybody that hasn't got a plate take it.
Yeah.
Sorry.
Are we 
What was number one?
Yes.
Paul.
 

I thought you do this 
You know what he had for nix?
Knickers
Knickers.
Oh I see
Eric, Eric
What?
I thought you do this  done it.
I've done it
Oh.
Sometimes I don't do things 
 

Horn  don't it?
No, blackberries.
What do you have horns for?
 
Yeah 
What's  
What dear?
Yeah, er, I sa , thought Eric would knock some here, but no, I mean  
I mean what's Bournemouth colours?
Dunno.
What's Bournemouth colours Paulie?
red and white stripe 
 
It's red and black
Red and black.
What do mean,wha ,wha what's  Bournemouth?
You had Bournemouth.
That's what I put the  I thought the
Oh.
clue was in Bournemouth.
Sheffield
That one.
We had Sheffield 
do you have tea?
I knew he'd have 
was wearing tangerine.
Never put 
What's the difference between gold and tangerine?
Go on  
Mind you, I think, it's a bit unfair on Paul here cos 
Where, they wanted  
  
I know, I know now, the minute he said that.
Oh isn't it terrible?
Oh isn't it terrible that?
Oh.
Wasn't it awful?
A little tiny  it was.
until she wouldn't lose, do what they exactly  
Yeah, she had all the money 
He said my father can have it, he can do, have it, I only want money for my charity,
and of course then there was 
You can't keep your eye on every single player in the league.
Taking on 
You've got your eye on the goalie
Yeah I know. 
Cos the scorer alright, erm, have defended themselves 
But he couldn't make it more horrible 
Mum,
Mind you we shouldn't  
Mum 
Who's sandwich out here, there's you ,
That's our biggest mistake 
Nan 
just when are you 
Andy, Michelle, Michael, Paul, Ruth and Kevin 
Who's that new player we've got our eye on?
 
Kevin, third division 
I'll do him.
That's er beef and tomato and turkey and cranberry
Oh.
Yeah, that's it 
Penny for them 
penny for them.
Oh you  
Yeah I got one 
 

Beef and tomato, turkey and cranberry,
Turkey and cranberry oh
or  and cress 
I haven't got turkey and cranberry 
Oh isn't it?
Who'd like turkey and cranberry?
It's bubble drops and cranberry.
Bubble drops and cranberry?
Yeah.
What the bleeding bubble drops?
I don't like you any more, they're all English 
Kevin, Kevin 
questions.
I'll believe 
Kevin
questions.
Ah, thank you.
Paul was  
Bubble drops eh?
Bubble drop.
Don't you talk to me like that.
Arsenal are too strong for Tottenham.
Yeah.
Er 
Two nil.
Two nil.
Ian Wright again, oh.
I've got to go and  fresh bubble drop.
No, that's my 
Thank you.
Everybody will laugh.
Karen can't do the catering if 
one chance in ninety minutes.
Causing the 
Yeah
in Sainsbury's  
Oh dear.
A woman of previous good character 
Ruth always makes lovely sandwiches.
So you say.
Kevin buttered the bread 
I hoped to  
 
I hope you give all the crusts to the hungry ducks?
No.
Should do 
They always look neat and perform mine don't 
I  in the garden and Kevin told me off
Oh  well  would love  
I would  get here Paul , Paul
Erm 
Can you get it in the bag?
Well, it's Sunday, but it's not until next week is it?
They were so hungry the dogs.
Those rotten dogs.
Ruth.
The gulls came do come down and pinch it in front of them.
Was it?
Well the 
So hungry they are.
That would be alright till next week, if you put it in the fridge.
The radio was  
But you can't stop  
 
The only thing you can do is to quiet him down, to frighten him off.
Mm.
Well that's a fat lot of good if you  
I expect you'll find  
And it was two remote controls, one for the video and one for the television,
Mm.
have perfect   
eventually  
Oh
I like that new Amstrad double decker.
I don't  
What's that?
too bad 
What that .
 
That's right.
Hey where was the tea for dad?
I drank mine away from the .
I'm always so thirsty.
I think they're making so many  
If I didn't know Karen I should think I was the candidate for diabetes.
Is worth hiring not buying at all.
The first one we had, I  
Because you could  
Not much milk Karen.
Not much milk for  
Not much milk 
Thank you.
The  of art was  
Sugar?
No, no thank you.
What  that turkey in?
They're all  underneath
Thank you.
What's in that one that 
Cranberry.
No it's not cranberry.
It tastes like 
The other thing is with the, the 
Is it cranberry with?
What, what's in place with the cranberry, something you're using.
Ah, eh, no I didn't, I said it's not turkey 
Oh.
I said it's pork.
Right, pork.
It's apparently an  actually.
What is the sauce on it?
It's cranberry and orange and claret actually.
Oh.
I think, we bought three bottles of cranberry sauce didn't we?
From 
Yes, I thought it was sweeter than ordinary cranberry.
Mm, nice 
Mm.
Somebody collecting horse brasses?
What you do, I mean talk about 
They look quite nice on there though.
Yeah.
They take a lot of cleaning though.
No, they never get cleaned.
Don't they?
Nor will they ever.
They're old brassy.
 
Antique finish they've got. 
Have a cup of tea yet?
Oh Kevin
I haven't had mine yet. 
it won't go to your lips unless you put your hand inside there, that's it, that's it, stir round, right, open your mouth, time it right.
Mum and dad get 
You didn't tell me it was there.
Well you got eyes, you got  
No, how do I know whether it might be Paul's.
Normally you 
Did you eat your 
No.
Oh lovely.
Why is it that a cup of tea goes down so well?
Were all that  
 
Can I go and  myself  
Oh the little ones like you haven't got the 
Do you drink tea ?
I didn't know you drank tea. 
Blimey that's the first picture I've had there isn't it?
Yeah, which one did you have?
I like them all, I like the, especially like the erm 
 
Joy,has a recipe  never liked before
Oh.
then she realized how good,
these two.
That's right,
potatoes 
And she, she wait, she made out she'd driven on a road 
Michael do you want ?
in the States, I think she's 
Adrian is  very much wider scope of food now,before, far more wary weren't you?
Mm.
Can't change Kevin though,
I'm all sweets things  and savoury I like
I think when you realize how much you've missed something  
Ah  
out, to say, I'm sorry I can't feed that to, someone else is out  what's put in front of him, so that's why now he eats fish fingers and now he eats pizza.
Who's this Paul?
Paul , yeah, yeah.
How did you, did you start him on pizzas?
Wow 
Even quite likes them .
Well he went to someone's house and all the  eats them so he ate it.
Must of brought him up well.
My brother was like that once, he, he used to hate  he used to hate  he used to hate peas  thank you, and once he got invited to a friend of his and there was peas, and he put just  of four peas on his plate and said   
and he  this plate of peas   
Now, peas are harmless aren't they, they haven't got  taste.
A lot of people don't like them though.
Has,for me he has a strong dislike for
When you 
I had some money 
What you done that for?
I don't know whether you could, you could
Bet you could use that as a cooking 
I cook in this.
Mm.
Yes, pretty solid.
Cook toffee in it, the idea is a toffee tray.
Oh to cook toffee oh alright .
You'll be able to cook toffee now.
That's why I came second in the quiz 
No, I wanted to cook  
Would of won it if I'd been on
Didn't bring me one, no honestly
Mum
honestly you didn't
who is it?
It sounds like Basil Fawlty 
No really I'm waiting for it
That's for watching too much  
You  one yourself 
I see, I thought I delivered you two cups
and you've only had one, right, O K
You find it Paul?
How do you 
You want one  plenty more 
In that case no thank you.
I'm quite , is this being recorded?
Yeah 
I'm quite  thank you.
Who can come out with the longest words in a minute  
I wish I have  he'd say one or two nice
Oh yes he would
nice word.
We got a little one  
 
everything haven't we, everything in the English language.
if you ask me.
Don't know .
Erm, I've just discovered from the 
I think it's something 
No, we had that question the other day didn't we?
Oh it's the  the miners' disease,something, something  disease of miners whatever.
 Economosis 
Yeah, something like that but it's longer, the whole full name's about thirty five letters.
What 
Sorry
I know the er name of that  
 
 
Thirty years ago.
I got, you got train 
Sixty one or sixty three is, a little while ago.
Mm 
Hang on
I think it is about, coming up thirty years now.
Was it back in ninety sixty three?
Sixty one or sixty three didn't  
For an hour what, seven  
There's your third cup of tea.
No it wasn't.
And can I have second cup of tea?
I probably will have a, I will have, probably will have a third.
I no you ain't 
Dad can I have a third tea?
A third 
Third 
What number's that?
Go on Colin.
Why's he getting  so thirsty?
Cos there's all this  
 
 
You leave my little  alone.
 

You have to  
Why I'm  
 

You worried about it you see it.
Yeah
You're joking  
 
 
why should I sit between them?coming over the edge of the stool, one saying are you safe on that stool?
now they're asking me to go and sit down between them,
Hey  
no thank you very much   
Karen could move up that way
Oh, there's room enough for him
Alright Karen, I'll go and sit on the toilet 
Thank you 
compliment.
I'll take that as a compliment.
What did she say then?
 
sit on the toilet, she said I might fall in, I said I'd take that as a compliment after  
You know, he said just for the eh, erm, friendly he had when he was in the, in the Air Force, he was flying in  and one of the properties in America was the big fat ladies they'd pull the chain sitting on the loo and those loos there  and it was
God 
and the only way said  put your finger there  
Oh yeah.
Great vacuum
Oh how embarrassing.
want to do that.
On the front, I went to  
 
today
and on the front page of the Sunday Sports, was it the Sunday Sport?
There was this picture, I don't know whether it was a man or a woman taken from the 
You bought the Sunday Sport?
No,
You've looked at it, you bought the other one and read the Sunday Sport 
there was this picture of this, I don't know if it was a man or a woman naked in a cubical and it filled, well he or she filled the cubical and you couldn't see where the, the bottom began to 
Something like the  five stone.
Yeah, Adrian did a modelling job a couple of weeks ago.
What for?
What's you so rude about you for. 
I won't go in the loo and sit
cos I'd still be able to hear what you're saying.
Thank you love.
Picture is so gross   on the front page as well  
toffee Paul, don't show your ignorance.
having a toffee for?
That's the way to break it.
Oh that's the way you break it 
I've got a toffee apple 
 
I haven't tried yet, but I don't think so, no ha, the only thing I've got was a 
Gone a bit quiet over there  
Don't you break my chair 
Here are
I'll tell you how much it cost if you 
Is it as dear as that?
Yeah.
It cost a hundred and sixty five quid
Cor blimey
Yeah
Did it?
We've got those at work and they're like  
Was it new?
New Ruth?
Quite new, quite new
Was it?
A hundred and sixty five, is it worth it?
They've got them at work like that and they were about nearly three hundred pounds new 
Kevin, why did he give Michelle those glasses, I didn't wash them properly, is that the first time  
Yeah 
Yeah , yeah.
I think it might only  
talking at the same time 
I know, I know
  
 
My name's  
 
years old alright?
This tape has to go, this tape has to go back.
 
 
How do they know what's on the tape? 
Does anybody want any fruit bread or fruit cake?
I'll try a piece
Cut up our cake and then Karen can take her 
Are you ready?
This is difficult.
Is it all play?
Yeah.
It's action.
It's an action.
Smoothing.
Washing.
Cleaning?
Bathing.
 
Shrinking.
Eye glasses.
Nurses 
Shrinking 
morning.
Erm
Sweating, smelling, washing.
Cleaning.
Oozing.
Erm 
Blowing your nose.
Erm  nasal man 
Erm 
hair
Shaving.
Erm  spots?
Scraping
Erm
Oh dear.
Walking er an old man with a walking stick.
bath  bath  hip bath.
Getting dirty  peeing 
Elderly man 
 
elderly erm
Ageing.
Ageing  O.A.P.
Sweating.
erm retired person.
Getting older.
Er getting older.
Wrinkling, geriatric-ing.
Oh dear.
Parents 
Three ages of man.
Seven ages of man.
 
Degenerate?
No?
Old age.
Erm
Thatcher.
No!
Come on!
Don't say the word!
Pubescent 
Pubic.
Pubic.
Maturing.
Yeah 
Yeah that's right, maturing 
Maturing, yeah
being rude.
he was  drawing big willies and little willies.
Well how are you supposed to draw the difference?
I thought  straight away.
I mean you can't draw
One two three four five
cracking up.
You're only one behind us now.
getting older.
Dear oh dear.
What's that one?
Is it all play?
No.
I'm going now.
You're going now.
Where have we got to?
no just me.
Just you?
Green one.
Yeah.
Ready?
Can I have a look ?
Can I have a look?
green.
Green.
Yeah it looks difficult but 
You don't have to do it though.
Yeah but we know it's difficult but
Er  title, book title.
 
Is it more than one?
Open book.
I know what .
Mhm.
Er pages  front pages
Mm.
er
Mhm.
Frontispiece.
er
We know what the word is.
Mm mm 
are we?
Front page?
Yes.
Index?
Yeah you just said it.
Front page?
What front page?
Oh.
Oh I didn't  
Mum you missed one!
Did you deliberately miss that  one?
No.
Front page.
I know but  you had something in front of it so I moved it back.
Oh no that means I know what it is now doesn't it?
No.
What do you mean?
There was a green one, here.
You missed it.
I had already taken this out.
It was in there.
Yes but this is where we're taking them from and we're putting them in here.
Oh.
What was this one ?
You to draw.
Alright.
Is it me drawing?
Well it's  
Is it an all play?
Is it an all play?
P, what's P?
No it's not got an arrow.
Ah!
So you're just the two .
do this one.
can we see what it is?
Kevin?
Oh right.
see it.
I can see it.
Yeah I had.
What colour?
Oh we've had this one before.
Are you ready?
Yep.
Butterfly  crocodile  alligator.
Yes!
Well that's handy.
That was easy peasy.
Well we're catching up a bit.
Two, one two.
My turn to draw.
Actions.
Where do I take one?
You don't.
You put that one back.
It's me that takes.
Is it all play?
No.
This is where you're lucky when you get
starting 
this is when you're lucky when you get two or three playing on your own  without all play.
What is it?
Plains
It's a brown one.
What is it?
What colour?
Brown.
Oh she's off again, look.
What colour?
Oh brown.
Vase er er base erm  whirlwind.
I know what I'd draw.
Definitely know what
Base of a fire
Oh mum that is a awful drawing.
Simplicity .
Er root of the fire, base of the fire.
Simplicity.
Just do what  you always do it too .
on with it Paul.
Vase  bottle 
What is she doing?
Come on mum, think!
Shh.
Cigar  tin opener
What?
What 
electric iron  then goes on to erm  she's ironing
What is she doing!
she's ironing this frantic frenzy again.
Erm
Yes that's it!
Er burnt, scorched!
Thank you.
I would have drawn us, drawn us a toaster and some toast really.
Did you get it right?
Why did you get it right?
She had erm
Careful you don't go back on that Paul.
What've I got to do?
What colour?
D.
Green.
Is it an all play?
It's got, yeah arrow D.
Black arrow?
Who do I show it to?
What is it?
What, what is it?
Here you are.
I'll show it to dad first then.
I don't know what it is.
 

What colour?
D.
I'm blue.
It's got an arrow on it.
Who's who's drawing over here?
I need it back again cos I've forgotten what it is.
It's green.
It's not blue.
it's a green one anyway, and you can 
 

You said  blue!
Oh what 
You told me blue.
She said blue.
I thought it was blue.
That's what it's got  
What colour is it?
Green
Er er colourblind!
Green, sorry.
green 
Green, er no no we can have that one.
Cabbage.
Go on then.
Green   where's my pen?
it's here, sorry.
never even saw
It's here anyway.
Is it green or blue ?
Green.
Then it's an all play!
It's this one!
This green.
Look!
Why do you keep changing them?
Paul, we don't.
You're sticking them back into a
Shhhh.
Go!
Oh she's picking wrong colours
Erm  are are you drawing for us?
No he's only on his own.
We're not playing draw.
Oh.
Oh.
said we were playing P.
I know!
I mean that's what
It's a difficult one.
Speaking
It's very difficult.
two words  hot air 
There's only one word 
He says it's two words.
Yeah but he's wrong.
I thought it was 
 

It's a hyphen is it?
It's a hyphenated word.
Loud- mouth
One word.
I can see it's, I dunno
It's one word.
Speech mark.
Sick.
Of you.
Er  I think Ruth says anything in the hope that it's somewhere near right.
Stomach upset .
Oh blimey I don't know what to do.
Stomach upset .
You can't blame me for that.
What would you draw  for this?
I wouldn't know.
It's quite hard.
I think 
What would you draw?
Nausea  indigestion.
No you couldn't tell  
You're not allowed hand signs.
Hot air.
Puke.
Oh!
Come on!
Have you seen what he's drawn?
That's quite good!
Hot air.
Stomach contents.
I tried  
I just don't know what to do what to do with that one.
Finished .
It's comedy.
Comedy ha ha ha ha .
Comedy .
What?
Comedy.
Ha ha.
Why did you say it was two words?
Ha ha.
Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha 
Oh well yes I should have done one word.
Yeah I was trying to do ha ha .
You didn't write ha ha.
No I didn't, I didn't.
I know you're not allowed to do that.
What has this got to do with comedy?
Ha ha ha ha ha ha 
Alright  roll the dice don't we?
How did you do the ha ha then?
No I couldn't do that.
It was too hard.
No you don't roll the dice.
Oh no.
You pick a card.
it's me isn't it?
Is this the right side?
So action.
Is it all play?
Is it all play?
Is it all play?
No it's me only.
It's lucky when you get 
What colour is it?
It's all play is it?
No.
What colour is it?
It's, it's brown.
Brown.
marks, get set, let's have a look.
Ooh, it's difficult.
Oh I know what I could do for that.
Oh crumbs.
First aid, St John's cross, red cross, red green cross code
Ambulance
accidents 
on there.
ambulance 
patients 
What have you got for that?
Rushed to hospital erm
emergency?
emergency units
injured
intensive care
What ?
er 
emergency, rescue 
doctor, stethoscope er
rescue?
specialist, surgeon
 

It's an action.
Not a thing.
Rushed to hospital
heartbeat 
go to hospital
Mhm.
erm travel to hospital, erm
airlift to hospital
No that's not it .
drive to hospital  rushed to hospital 
transported to hospital  transported?
It's a frog.
Three legged frog.
Wait for hos what?
Oh it's gone, it's gone.
What on earth  .
the right word  
 
Yeah.
Can you see it then?
Run out.
Not yet.
Now it has.
Visit.
Visit.
Oh that wasn't bad.
It was visiting the doctor.
It was a visit.
Doctor's visit, yeah.
Oh well I got the idea  
And there's his visitors but I mean it was  
Some words are so abstract aren't they?
Yeah.
Oh it's terrible.
somebody carrying a  and going in a house.
How would you draw a visit?
I would have done two doors I think, someone knocking on a door and   but I don't think anyone would have got it.
No.
No.
No I don't think so.
Your turn.
Are you drawing Eric?
Yep.
Exhausting, this game isn't it?
 
You're on a  A P play.
Oh play again!
Oh my god.
Am I drawing to you?
Yeah.
About time you did 
All play.
you were so rude about mine.
What colour?
What colour?
Red.
Red.
Give it to Andrew.
Mum.
Uncle An , Uncle Andrew needs to look at it .
Alright.
Right.
Now you turn it over.
Newt.
Loop.
She got it.
Oh.
 

How did you get that so ?
 

tadpole.
That's what I drew.
No that's a circle.
That's 
I think it's the start of a  scribble, that is.
No it's the way you draw it.
That's the sign of the fish.
It's the way you draw it.
Well I think that's a good 
Who's  mum?
It's your turn again.
Do you have to roll the dice mum?
That was a quickie .
It's your turn again.
drawing.
Paul's drawing.
Oh it's an all play again.
All play again .
Is it all play?
We've got to catch up.
We're last.
Has anyone seen the words?
Who's drawing?
I am.
drawing.
Joy is.
That's quite hard.
Is it er all play?
Yes.
It's quite hard.
Is it the  which colour?
Red is it?
Red Ruth?
Red.
Yellow red.
Are you ready?
Yeah.
It's quite hard isn't it?
Ready go!
Erm er
A man  one word.
Another single word.
Cigar, iron, bus 
vase,
taxi erm car
money, earning money
money
Here she goes again.
She's off.
Frantic money .
Hey what are you doing there?
Circulation of money.
Smart money.
Erm
Spending money.
Erm
Spinning money
Taxi fare.
Erm
Tumbling coins.
Earning money.
Expenditure.
Collection.
Making money.
Sounds like 
Credit 
Sounds like
Profits.
profits.
Er triangles.
Interest rates erm
Scoop.
Pocket, sounds like pocket.
Sounds like
Wealth.
Money bags.
Money bags.
Wealth.
Ingots.
Rich.
Ingots.
He got him, he got him .
got it?
What was it?
Rich.
Sounds like ditch.
Oh blimey.
I drew a  I was drawing a plane.
I'd have done  I'd have done a quick, a little man carrying a bag with dollars 
Yeah that's what I did.
I did a man with dollars 
You're not allowed to do symbols 
Oh yeah.
You're not allowed to do symbols.
any symbols.
That's not symbols.
It is isn't it?
What is it?
You're not allowed the hatch symbol that's all.
What's the hatch symbol?
Hatch symbol's the 
Dollar.
sketches may not include reference numbers or the  hatch symbol .
Oh.
I thought you weren't allowed 
Because that means number in America doesn't it?
I drew a rolls royce and not a plane .
sounds like your little man titch.
I mean that's  
You're not allowed to do numbers .
the letter though.
that you would be allowed to do notes  drawing a note and use it.
I thought if I just had a man who had a yacht and  he had a rolls royce and a yacht .
Wouldn't you?
Well I don't think that's much like a rolls royce.
Oh my god.
And this is a yacht is it?
yacht and a plane.
it's a red one.
Is it hard?
I don't know what that one means.
Pass it on.
Pick another one.
Pick another one.
Is it all play?
I think this one, I think I know what it is.
All play.
Red.
  

For you, yes.
you're drawing yeah?
Yeah.
Red?
Red.
Red.
Bottom.
Mm she didn't end up with the word 
You're not supposed to look at it are you?
I didn't see it.
Well what are you reading it for?
What's it mean?
What is it?
I didn't see it.
If y if she gets it straight away we know.
I didn't see it!
No she can't see it.
She couldn't see it from there.
Why would I lie?
Right.
Go.
How many words  mm
How many words?
One.
Box.
Man.
Two boxes.
Man goes 
Crown, king  king.
Aerosol .
Telephone.
Aerosol.
Party hats erm
Erm
Balloon pump.
different words  
Disco dancing.
Er what's that?
Aerosol.
Royalty.
Gas canister.
I know I know I know.
Sovereign.
Gas canister.
Balloon.
Chef's hat.
Hot air.
Gas 
Letter?
Tube.
Disco dancing.
Cinema.
Walking the dog.
Light bulb.
draw.
 
Light, dark.
No light.
Switched off.
Off switch.
Come on.
What's this?
On it's head.
there's this  bulb.
Hat.
Er
Dead canister.
something else, something else.
Full of er
Wear.
Fused.
Lights out.
Out.
Defused.
Fused.
Out.
Say something mate  
Gone.
Vamoosed.
Dead.
Empty gas canister.
Dead.
Nought.
Disco dancing.
Erm obsoleting
Obsolete 
Dancing on  
Dud
 
Dancing on a stage.
Acting.
Religious is it?
Oh dud.
No, erm
We're done.
No, we've done it.
It's gone.
Oh it's gone.
Very good.
What was it then?sounds like suds.
Yeah, should have done a sounds like as well.
red.
Are we red.
Yes.
No you're green.
Oh yes 
 

knows.
dear oh dear .
This is really easy.
This is really easy.
Auntie Michelle is it all play?
Yes.
If it was a dunce, you would have done that.
This is really easy.
me to draw.
Really easy, so we'll get  do I, quickly  really quickly to get down to it.
Ooh I like quick ones.
 
Okay?
Ready, go.
Yeah.
Go.
Bed, no cushion.
Candle erm 
Church, steeple
Flame.
Steeple.
Got it got it got it got it.
 

Look at that little church.
Oh erm right, we've got to get a high.
Oh I'm sweating.
Oh we've done that one, perspire.
sweating, perspire.
Just by myself.
If you 
Who's blue?just got one up there.
They have.
They're scorching 
Right.
This is a quick one.
We've got there in the lead.
Well just think about it.
Think about it.
is it?
They're doing  a brown one.
It's action.
On their own?
action.
Don't listen to action.
Go.
One word.
a line, two lines, three lines, a text.
Waves.
Sea.
Erm 
Oh Paul!
Scales.
Oh I don't know.
That's alright.
That's what I would have done.
That's not what I would have done.
Erm lift erm  yeah but
yeah you'd have done
Action, raising, going up.
Building.
Rising.
Rising.
Brick, brick laying, erm  steps 
Construction?
going up some steps.
Making steps.
Erm
Building?
I think you should have done it the other way.
Going up the other way.
Money.
Perhaps think of it as an action then.
Start at the bottom and go up the top.
Going up.
Erm 
Climbing.
Climbing.
Er
Rising, growing  mushrooming.
Plates on the sink is that?
On the table?
Yes a table.
I don't know what that is.
Preparing.
Preparing, making.
Ooh!
He's gone and knocked the sand out 
Erm  dishes erm.
Washing up.
Washing up.
Drying up.
Finished 
It's a pile.
What would you have drawn?
We would have done that, you know like a pile of
Your turn Eric
peat.
and it's all play, and it's your turn.
Pile like in 
Steaming pile yeah.
It's all, it's me again.
All play.
All play.
There's supposed to be a er  er 
seen it.
have to be him.
How do you see it then?
I never  
I've seen the word now.
No  showing it to me.
Who's who's who's drawing?
Don't keep showing it to me.
Red.
Where's the red?
God this looks, is gonna be hard.
Okay.
Red?
Well how many words?
One word.
How many words?
Bed  er bed-settee, car, car wheels 
Car, travelling.
Hub caps.
Caravan.
Speed.
Move speed.
Burning rubber.
Meandering.
Smoke, oh exhaust.
Winding.
Exhaust pipe 
Fumes.
Fumes.
Er gas 
Smoke.
Carbon monoxide.
Carbon  He's got it.
Smog.
No you didn't say smog.
Yes I did.
You said carbon monoxide.
smoke.
You said smoke didn't you?
No she said car smog.
You said smog.
I said smoke.
What was it?
She said carbon monoxide.
It was smog.
Smog.
I said,said smoke, I said smog, somebody else said carbon monoxide.
He said smog.
Yeah I think I heard him say smog.
car was the smoke, smoke from the exhaust and he sa I said smoke  carbon monoxide  smog 
What would you do for smog?
I was just going fumes, smoke, smog, smoulder 
car on the road and all that.
No I think he, he he did  smog.
Yeah, smog.
I thought someone said carbon monoxide.
No she said carbon monoxide.
I did.
I said carbon monoxide.
What were you calling out for?
Cos I was getting  yours!
Oh yeah sorry.
You were playing yeah.
Yeah you can play with me.
Aren't you my partners.
one two three four five .
miles behind mum.
Action.
Look where they are!
Yeah.
Half way through.
Alright.
Has it got a black arrow?
No, no.
Is it hard?
How many words?
Okay, now.
One word.
One word.
Erm  what colour was it?
Brown.
Have they seen it?
Yeah.
Ooh there's a delicate little drawing going on here.
It's an action 
Oh Andrew's always very slow but at the end of it  bending his head.
Long neck, peer, peer over, nosy parker 
Fishing.
Er flag.
Linesman.
Er 
British.
patriot, er
British patriot.
Warrior.
Er
Dead, soldier.
Erm
These are the only glasses I can play in.
I've got other glasses but I 
Killing, soldier supporter
Warrior 
Cheering.
a bit inbetween.
ever so old and I lost the thing
They are old 
A supporter!
Can you get those repaired then?
Japanese.
War, war 
countries 
The third world war.
Erm
And they're scratched.
But I can't
Going into war.
Erm.
Invasion.
coffin.
Coff-, coffee?
I thought if in doubt  
Dead soldiers erm 
Remembrance.
Remembrance day.
It was action.
Yes I know but I mean er
Move, er travel
Dead
Finished .
Defeat.
That was hard.
How would you do that?
Very difficult one.
white flat.
Somehow.
Eric.
It's an all play.
Oh no, Joy.
Pass it on.
How do you do a white flag unless you
We've got to get off this all play mum.
It's holding us back.
Is it all play?
Is it all play?
It's amaz amazing how often people resort to matchstick men  
What, what what is it?
Oh it's just all play.
Well it's the thing you can draw the quickest isn't it?
It's all play.
Come on hurry up, I'm ready.
Turn it over.
How many words?
Pop hasn't seen it has he?
Yes he has.
Quick.
Okay?
Quick.
Now.
Go.
Go.
Fat, obese.
A big 
Cull erm
Insect.
Yes.
Oh!
Insects.
Back!
Get back!
What did you draw for that Ruth?
She's quite good.
Six legs is six legs.
Very well done.
You know what's holding us back?
That all play.
Cos they all have a go.
You don't all have a go on this one.
We do when we're stuck on a  
Can we have one of these?
You do get stuck on a regular, then your chances 
What is it?
What is it?
What number?
It's a green one.
Ready steady  go.
Oh I shall never get that.
Two words.
Green one.
Impossible.
Erm 
I'd love to see  
Oh she won't get this.
Television  er
Oh she's not!
She is, she is 
She's zapping the zapping the television.
Very good idea.
Sounds like 
Yes it is good.
That's a very good idea.
Revolution.
Er clock face, clock 
 
clock, sounds like clock.
Clock 
Mum!
Clock, timer.
Mm.
Oh come on mum!
The other word.
What's the point?
Alright.
Clock.
The other word.
Surely.
I can't draw that .
Shows you how much we rely on  
 
She's off again .
Frenzy again.
Er
show you how much you do.
Mum!
don't you point at me.
Er erm 
No, no pointing.
And if you don't speak someone's language
Right.
that's the difference between 
Twenty five.
That's cool.
er er er clock tow tow , clock 
If you don't have the football what else can I have?
Said sounds like clock.
Oh sounds like clock.
I'm going clock clock clock.
Stop .
Stockmarket.
You should have got that one.
I'd have drawn a market.
Oh dear.
Every day you come home  stockmarket  
Oh yeah.
That was quite good.
I would have drawn a market.
Yeah I would have gone up and down with graphs.
Well I should have done the financial
No yours all go down.
Oh yeah alright .
I should have done the Financial Times.
go right down .
Well who's go is it now?
Do you know the share he bought for ten p each last week went down to three and a half pence each.
Would you believe it?
Shhh.
Er it's their go.
Action.
Strong smell of burnt fingers going on.
Oh it's a it's a long one.
Oh, is it hard?
How many words?
Write it out.
Your turn.
Did you buy any BT Kev?
Mm?
BT did you buy?
Who's drawing?
You or Eric?
Eric.
Well I sent the money off.
Remember to put how many words.
Only if it's  
What is it?
What colour?
Brown.
It's an action.
That's us as well.
Brown.
Another one we can do is long and short words.
Oh, ready?
Right.
One word.
Short word .
come on.
up.
Er  book
.
One point.
Er what is that?
What is that?
 
Yes.
Got it.
No no she had it first.
she said  No way.
Yeah I heard  before.
Tiebreaker.
Do it again.
Do it again.
Do it again.
You should shout louder.
Have another go.
Have another go.
 
she's got it.
Least she got it though.
Well we could play the tape back.
We can see who got it first  
Yes.
Yes.
Brilliant idea.
Brilliant idea.
You won't hear Ruth.
but I think they got it first.
Have a tiebreaker, another go er er
Alright.
Do another brown then.
Do a tiebreaker.
Whatever the brown one is on this
Well let let her have a look.
Let her have a look.
whatever the brown one is you do it.
You look.
Oh we'll call.
Right.
Eric you look.
Yeah.
Oh it's another one.
Is it?
Yeah.
Another all play?
Yeah.
No no no  
 
I'm not in.
just the two of you  
Oh I don't get a chance.
tiebreak.
Poor old  
This is a tiebreaker.
It's a good one now.
Right, now.
Right .
Ready go.
Tap.
Hangman's noose.
Oh crikey.
Hangman.
Noose.
Falling.
Drop.
Falling.
Shower.
Yes yes  
What did you draw for that?
Oh yeah it's a shower.
A shower.
Wasn't a shower!
What ?
 
Looks like a hangman's  scaffold.
A shower!
That's a bath!
What?
Let's have a look.
That's a shower!
That's not a shower.
That's a shower.
That's a nice bendy shower.
It shows you what it is.
 
And a person standing underneath it.
It's my turn to draw.
 
That was rise.
They drew a chair and it tips forward you know and helps you up.
Those chairs that  bend forward.
What is it we've got to do now?
No paper.
We've run out of paper.
We've got to get off that all play otherwise
Oh yes.
I mean what is it?
Everybody's in again?
Is it?
Right.
Er I don't know yet.
You've got to look cos I can't  
What what am I on?
It's a brown.
Brown.
Action.
It's not an all play.
Oh.
Oh.
and we're on all play all the time.
We can't get off it.
Go.
Hang on mum I'm not ready.
Wait.
You see you all have a go.
We don't have a second turn.
Give it back to me.
You've got five seconds.
Go.
Go.
It's  of being on red.
Not if you're winning you don't get five seconds.
One word.
One small word.
One big word.
word.
Alright so we get .
It's not difficult.
Door.
Action.
Two doors.
Action.
Going through the door.
Going from door to door.
Entering.
Yeah that's that's alright.
Entering's alright.
Entering.
Yes that's it.
Yes he got it.
He got it.
He got it.
Entering.
Enter.
What should it have been?
Entering.
Enter.
Entering's alright.
Got a smart guessing team over there.
Actually for a second there I forgot it.
I was gonna do ex I was gonna try and put  some exits.
Mind you, they've got two guessing.
That's good.
Well done Annie.
Your drawing's 
Er  it's Andrew now.
Four.
One two three four 
Yes, oh we're thrashing them.
Oh no.
We're being walloped.
Oh we're nearly there!
Murdering them.
Perhaps we'll catch up.
We caught up when  
We're getting walloped.
Right.
This is an all play.
Oh good.
Yeah you can get back in here .
I hardly ever have a go.
I'm very unlucky.
I doubt it.
It's an object.
Oh well you never know.
Go on Joy.
Object.
I don't know where to start.
Wherever there's 
Hang on.
Wait a minute.
off this red one mum.
Object.
That's the one at the bottom.
Erm 
Red .
That's it.
Right.
I'm glad you got it that quickly it's a
That's red.
Isn't it?
No it's blue.
No.
It's blue.
Oh sorry.
Wait a minute.
Blue.
Sorry.
My fault.
Blue.
Blue blue blue blue blue.
Did you, you your  with this?
Blue?
Go.
Boxes.
Pawn.
A steeple.
Boxer.
Steeple.
Target.
Light.
Hat.
Radiation.
Radar.
A lighthouse.
Radar.
Radar.
Information.
Satellites.
Telephone.
It's a mobile telephone.
Oh yeah.
Mobile telephone.
Er two
Radio erm audio erm 
Er which one is that?
Bigger bigger 
fish.
Fishes.
Erm er 
Division
Two words.
Walkie talkie.
Well done Eric.
What did she draw?
Yes it's a walkie talkie.
Oh that's a good one.
I think mine was .
You got that from  
You got walkie talkie out of that?
quite good.
You see I was doing  
 
I don't  yes  it's got the earphones and
That's not a walkie talkie  that's a walkie talkie.
Let's see.
Yeah, it's not bad.
Yeah.
What's I can't even see, hang on 
You got walkie talkie from a Sony Walkman there.
 

what they're talking about.
Anyway they get a go now .
There's fifty years of empathy 
Surely they won so they ?
No.
. They have, they have to have their go.
 
What?
move that.
They have to go.
They can't move.
Now if they win this one
Yes that's right.
on their own one then they get a well done.
 
but we can't get off of there unless we 
We can't get off it.
You can if you win this.
If you win this 
Yeah
If it's on it's own.
That's, you have to keep  
You're on your own now though.
Well how, what advantage was it to him to win that then?
Well I 
 
You see he's so unlucky that his is on all play.
Hang on  
Right.
There you are.
 
Well lets just test that out because  I'm I'm suffering enough.
I've been suffering 
 
Ever since the game started you 
You're suffering, she's wet!
This time we'll do it.
Next time he can move if he wins it.
After that, afterwards.
Yeah but every time we have an all play.
Whatever happens.
Yes I that that does seem a bit odd.
Okay next time we'll move.
All  all play.
Yeah read all play for goodness sake.
In the all play category the word card is shown to the  picturist of each team.
The all play word is sketched simultaneously by picturists in their respective teams at the start  
 
Regardless of who's all play it was, the first team to identify the word earns control of the die and immediately rolls and advances the number of squares indicated.
The team now continues in turn with a new word.
If no team identifies the word in the time allotted the die is passed to the left.
Yeah.
However the team does not roll the die but begins its turn by pulling a new card and sketching the word corresponding   
What does that mean?
So why is there no advantage to them to have guessed walkie talkie?
I mean I've won the game.
I mu 
an all play.
advantage because it's all play.
You could have been the next player  
If he was  
We'll never get off all play then?
all of theirs er
Yes you will.
It's you've got to be first to find it.
Yes!
You've got there's your disadvantage.
Yes.
It's just bad luck that you happen to be stuck on .
Just bad luck.
You're right.
It's not  
We've  since the game begun.
All play.
What is it does it say?
All play.
No.
Next time you  next time they can roll the dice if they get it.
She's going to give it to Joy.
All play.
What is it?
All play.
What is it?
What an action or
Who's who's go?
Who who's drawing for you?
Michelle.
Yeah.
It's reds yeah, but it hard?
How many words?
Remember short words or long words.
Ready  go.
How many words?
Words.
it seems to me we have to win two to get off.
Collar.
Neck.
Tie.
Oh she's got 
Brooch.
Collar.
Necktie.
Er  bow tie.
Cravat.
Collar.
Bow tie.
Bow tie.
Scarf.
Clothes.
T shirt.
Erm
Jacket.
Long necked.
Long necked.
Er er er
Short necked.
Rolo neck.
Er collar.
Polo neck.
Yeah.
Polo neck.
I'm drawing a polo horse and you're going  look I've done the collar, polo.
I was trying to remember the name of that collar.
I said oh what's it called.
I don't throw the dice do I?
Well why not say polo?
Right so we're on there
We'll never, we'll never get off.
We've got to get twice to get off.
We've got to win twice  to get off 
Yes.
You've got to you've got to win twice to get off.
I think
Never get on a red.
No.
Everybody does this one.
If you get stuck on a red you've had it.
It's a bugger of a square to get on, that one.
What are we on?
Brown?
It's a terrible square to get on mum.
 
I think the rule should be you should move on soon as you win one, I think.
Oh that's easy.
Do you wanna take a card out?
I don't think that's quite right 
This is a quick one.
A quick one.
I'm sure you're supposed to go two 
Well Paul that's not fair.
If mother hasn't even seen it.
I know.
I know.
to say, it's a quick one.
I can't think  
brown 
because you're on all play you're stuck there forever.
Right.
 
What's what's that behind over there?
That that over there?
This, that bit there.
Well don't look.
Don't look.
 

Red now.
Ready steady go.
What's that?
One word.
Erm volcano 
Vesuvius 
Volcano.
Eruption.
Yes.
Lava .
What was it?
Erupt.
I don't think they should be allowed that.
What?
Why?
It was erupt.
And as you are winning by so much I think we should  
Oh no no no eruption, erupt is alright.
Oh come on.
That's not fair.
What did you say then?
Because we're given them.
Yeah yeah.
Yeah I think 
How precise an answer must be is up to the teams playing.
Yeah.
Should be decided at the start of the game.
For example is bunk bed  is bunk acceptable for bunk bed?
Yes.
No 
Depends whether you're winning by half a board or not..
Thatcher for Margaret Thatcher.
Enlarged or enlarge.
No it doesn't.
Yeah.
Alright.
Yes.
I think it is.
Go on then.
Your turn.
Blue.
Hang on.
Can  can I just raise a rule?
What?
If they win an all play on somebody else's they are immediately allowed to roll the dice and they won't stay 
for two.
on all play.
So they can get off all play.
And then  
Do you mean you want to change the rule?
No no.
You've got to agree in at least 
I'm sure that rule is wrong about  being on all play.
If we have another all play 
If a word is not identified in the time limit the die is passed to the left.
Yeah.
The team receiving the die begins its turn by pulling a new card from the pack
Yeah.
not a roll of the die.
That's right.
 
Quite clearly you can't roll the dice the first time you win.
Well it's just one of those unlucky things.
The only times the die is rolled to advance the token is when a word is identified within the one minute time limit 
Yes.
And you have another go.
Yeah?
or the team is first to identify the word in any  hang on, hang on  the only the time the die is rolled to advance the token is when a word is identified within the one minute time limit comma  or a team is first to identify the word in any all play situation .
Ah.
Yes.
Oh well we did that.
 
We've been, twice we've had it.
We should have had  twice we've 
Yeah .
I tell you what, you can have two rolls of the dice.
Give them the dice.
Right.
Right.
Yes.
I thought it was wrong.
Mum thought it was wrong.
No but it's still our go.
It's still our go.
And another.
It isn't it's  five 
Five.
Yes it is.
It's still our go cos we won it.
One two three four five.
your go you have to pick a blue.
Who's drawing?
That's better.
me.
Me.
Now what do we do in future?
When you win one 
No.
You haven't got a blue.
If you're in an all play situation you can move on straight away.
Can we ?
Can we ?
It's me to draw.
What?
You did the volcano.
You to draw.
You did the volcano.
Oh yeah.
Yeah.
 
We'd have been there forever.
Michelle to draw.
You're right and  wrong 
You did the er  Oh no yes it's you to draw.
Yes 
Still I think we done fair by giving two rolls of the dice.
Have you looked at it?
Oh I've got to see it.
No.
I haven't seen it.
Is that it, the card?
It's not all play.
Oh.
A Andy's got  it's just a blue one.
Did we roll our dice?
Did we roll our dice?
are you on your own?
Mhm.
Hang on.
Did we
No it's it's an all play.
Ah.
Blue, isn't it, it's on blue?
Blue.
Yeah.
Blue with an arrow 
Did we roll our dice?
Did we roll  we didn't roll the dice.
Did we roll our dice?
No you don't roll it.
Yes why not?
We didn't have to roll  
You haven't got control.
Oh yes.
You haven't got control.
We won that eruption.
Yes.
But it was their go
Yeah.
so you haven't got control.
Why was it their go?
Because they were on all play.
Because it was an all play, for them.
Blue is it  have I  blue?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Give it to Joy.
Don't go yet.
Who's drawing?
No, me.
Right.
Blue.
Yeah.
Who wants it?
Ready 
No, turn it down.
Oh.
How many words?
What on earth is that?
Shadow.
Tap.
What is it, an object?
Ah I can't see what this is.
Reflection.
A play game .
A play board.
Erm  scrabble.
Canasta
Chess.
Er chess.
Puzzles.
Chess.
A chess man.
She said it.
What puzzles?
She said it.
Puzzle.
Puzzle.
I was trying to do  that was a jigsaw puzzle 
Oh jigsaw puzzle.
What did you do for puzzle?
Oh  
Oh jigsaw, that's good.
So you got it so you throw.
Oh good.
Right.
It's  Michelle's 
La la la la 
One 
All that effort.
Action.
Is it all play?
No.
Action.
Oh well I don't mind.
I don't like action ones .
Go.
How many words?
They don't go.
Shall I put that one back, that card?
Wait a minute.
Not yet.
Get ready for how many words?
Can't stand 
It's not that one.
Oh.
That's the card.
It's not th , it's that one.
Right.
Go.
Get ready for how many words?
One medium quite long one.
Oh that's easy.
Oh yes.
Oh yeah.
Doddle.
Action.
Site?
No.
Lying down.
Asleep.
Asleep.
Diving.
Diving.
Diving board.
Swimming.
Swimming.
Yes.
Swim.
That's a good drawing there wasn't it?
Yeah very good drawing.
Oh it's bird's eye view.
Don't draw such good drawings Michelle.
Normally you draw the water er er  over the head don't you?
Michelle.
Don't draw such good drawings.
Yes but I mean you wouldn't guess that.
It's hard to draw isn't it?
Yeah.
Whereas if there was someone in  
Have you played this game in France?
Right you throw the dice again.
Don't  your foot under my legs.
It drives me dotty.
 
Two.
All play.
all play oh my god.
Oh we've got to get off that mum.
What have you got to do to get off it?
Er  Have you looked at it?
It's red yeah?
Yeah.
Mhm.
Oh how are we supposed to get that?
Quite easily.
Have you seen it mum?
 
No.
Turn it over.
Red, mum.
No I'm not drawing  
You know it you know it do you?
Oh yes.
Okay ready
Okay ready.
Go.
Go.
Camel.
Waves.
Er bendy 
Big waves.
Storm.
Speech 
Er waves.
Storm.
Gales.
Rainbow.
Er typhoon.
Hurricane.
Typhoon.
Hurricane.
Waves.
Tidal wave.
Gales.
got it.
Tidal wave.
He got it.
Yes.
A tidal wave.
We are brilliant.
We are motoring.
Motoring.
 
Oh now how do we get off that now?
We've won it.
We throw the dice.
We go again.
We throw the dice.
We throw the dice yeah.
Please 
More paper please.
One two three four five.
All play again.
Right.
Is there any more paper Ruth?
All play.
All play.
in the drawer.
I'll get it later.
There's no need.
We are motoring.
Wait a minute.
see what you drew ?
Tidal wave.
 
We're nearly there.
Mum, mum I was a bit slow.
I got that one  
Have you got to get there exactly?
No, I'm alright.
I had typhoon.
I was going typhoon and 
Right it's all play and it's your turn to draw.
We are really motoring.
Have you seen it?
Yes, perhaps I do.
No.
Thank you.
What colour?
It's all play.
What co , oh.
Red.
Wait a minute I haven't seen it yet.
Dad we haven't seen it.
Oh.
Nobody's seen it .
I wasn't going to look 
Yeah I've got it.
How many words?
Ready
How many words?
Erm
One  
Dropping.
Dead.
Dead.
Graveyard.
Graveyard.
Crematorium.
Lots of people dead.
Mortuary.
Mortuary.
Funeral.
Oh Ruth!
Why do you think of everything but funeral?
Mortuary, rigor mortis.
There's no man.
You have to have a 
a man  
I was just  draw a cemetery.
 

What did they draw then?
She thought of everything
I think you might win this time.
Oh no you there's problems at the end  winning aren't there?
There's erm 
You've got to win on a
Ooh Ruthie!
 
If we can get a five  it doesn't matter 
And it's a ten!
Two.
One two.
Object.
Oh two.
Oh he's got it.
He's got it then.
Who's drawing?
Michelle.
Is it all play?
Blue .
Oh yes.
Once you go past the end you go on to the red and if you win it 
So you want to see it?
Alright.
All play isn't it?
Is it all play?
All play.
Two.
Hang on.
I haven't  
Hang on.
Oh this is ridiculous.
There's no way.
Wait a minute coming round.
Here it is, blue.
Everybody ready?
No we haven't seen it.
No Ruth's not ready.
Hang on, it's blue.
Ready  steady go.
Go.
One word.
Goldfish bowl.
Erm
Hammer
Erm baths.
Baths.
Loo.
Toilet.
Yeah.
Oh 
This is brilliant.
We are going 
I .
I was nearly there.
 

Another couple of seconds I'd have got that.
Let's see.
How could she not get that.
That was brilliant wasn't it?
Who did the drawing?
chain.
Toilet .
Very good drawing.
You have to do it quickly  
Yeah oh that's  sorry
Have you done 
To win a team must reach the final play square for the chance to win.
It must be the first team to identify the word in the same manner  play as in previous all plays  .
Oh yeah.
It's my go.
It's your go?
Oh, it's exhausting  
Okay.
So if we can get a three if we get a three it will be an all play.
Three or more it will be all play and if we win it we've won the game.
Right.
A team that reaches the final all play square cannot win the game by winning a round controlled by another team.
You must first regain control of the die to attempt the winning word .
I don't think there's any worry of that.
Yeah.
We're too far back.
So if we get to the all play and we win the all play we've won.
The exact roll isn't 
Yeah.
Whoo whoo whoo whoo whoo
Yeah but we  if there's, if it's an all play .
An exact roll of the die is not required to enter the square .
 
Three or more.
Yes.
Six.
Right.
So this 
It's all play.
The deciding all play.
Right.
You drawing.
I didn't see it.
All is in your hands, it's very serious you know.
Pass it on.
All play red?
Red.
Yeah.
Oh what!
What is it?
We haven't seen it.
Don't start it yet.
We haven't seen the card.
Card.
Ah, I think I can get this actually.
Right.
Are you ready?
Ready  steady  go.
Two words.
Aren't your drawings  
 
Heraldry.
Hand.
Water.
Full.
Water 
Throw.
Oh no erm 
Water pump.
Water, water 
Bucket.
water shading.
Water  wiltering
Can.
Filter.
Erm.
Irrigation?
Is it irrigation, the watering, sunshine, growing.
No, no  
liquid?
No.
Erm   
Transfusion.
Evaporation.
Evaporation.
Sweat 
Indians.
Hey!
Mm
Is it a country?
Cos I know she won't get it but I'm try pretty confident nobody else will but  erm.
Axe  in the head.
Indian.
Fight.
Two words.
Red indians.
Red indians.
Gathering erm
Are both the words the same?
indians.
Flowering, farming th planting,
Don't think you'll ever get that word
Seeds.
so I'm trying to give you that one.
Er smoke, bomb
Indian arrow, arrow, bow and arrow.
Erm 
No.
It's it's gone.
I don't think anybody's gonna get this.
Bongo drums.
Yes!
Oh sorry no.
I thought it had gone.
Oh no.
It's bongo drum.
Oh.
Bongo drum.
I don't think anybody would have got that.
got it 
What did you draw 
Who would have got bongo drum then?
There's a drum 
he was drawing it.
Let's see yours.
A man sitting there without a
I don't think anyone would have got bongo  
  
swap over.
That's a man sitting there.
people would have got drums 
Drumsticks.
Would they have got bongo?
I mean 
What about this man here with a great big bass drum?
But you would have thought of it if you had a man in it.
Didn't that help?
No it didn't.
What happens now  do we try the next all play?
Erm
No it goes  
 
And we can't win.
We can't win until we get 
What's that?
hit the drum with.
Oh.
It's an all play.
I thought you used your hand , bongo drums.
So it's their turn?
Yeah.
It's your turn and if they  all play then we all play.
I was doing sticks I must admit.
I can't draw hands.
It's an all play this one ?
I dunno, has it got an arrow on it?
D O, the blue one?
Has it got an arrow?
Oh.
Has it got an arrow on it?
Don't  don't shut  
A black arrow.
Er  yes.
It has.
It's all play then.
It has.
So we can't win if we get this.
We can't win.
We've just got to get control then we can win.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Go on.
No don't look at it!
Oh yeah  
 
That writing on the blue is ever so difficult.
Yes.
It's dark isn't it?
On your marks ready go.
Ready steady go.
Man.
Fat man.
Big man.
Good man.
Vest.
Pockets.
Oh.
 
What was that Ruthie?
Why did you do pockets because of the 
 
Oh yeah.
Well!
You see when she if you don't get it with Ruth 
Well I was trying to  
in the first ten seconds she goes ccchhhrrr
Yeah.
She scribbles it all up.
 
That was pretty good, a pocket with buttons.
Agog in whirlwind of, frenzy of frustration.
Oh that's  of Ruthie isn't it?
It's like  if you don't get hold  
It's cos you're so thick!
I'm going to smack you.
that's Ruth did a coat.
Go on then.
our go.
action.
do a coat when I could  
Oh here we go with this.
Come on.
Right.
U  U is A. 
She did the shoulders  
Is it brown?
Is it all play?
Brown?
Oh not brown.
 
I don't like brown.
Can I have another colour?
No.
arrow.
It's an arrow, yes.
Oh well 
Oh we've got to get control to win this.
It's easy if we don't show you what it is.
Go on.
There!
Don't   don't draw that.
Don't show it, don't show it to them all.
not supposed to see it.
Oh.
She doesn't want to see it.
You can't see it when it's like that..
What colour is it?
Brown.
Brown.
Brown oh that'll be, it's impossible.
Erm
Are you ready?
How many words?
Go.
One word.
One big word.
Extra .
I don't know.
Emulate 
Piano.
Car.
Er
What is it?
Driving.
Harpsichord.
Piano
Er
Driving.
What is it?
What's this, action ?
Er  it's an action.
Races.
Saw, sawing.
 
Driver.
Sawing.
Shooting.
Banging.
Bullets.
Baaaaaa machine gun.
Shoot blanks.
Gliding.
Surrender.
Surrender.
Er hands up.
Defeat.
Surrendering.
Surrender.
Victory.
Victory.
Ceasefire.
Shot.
Submit.
Submitting.
It's all yours.
Ceasefire.
Erm erm surrender.
Surrendering.
Hands up.
Don't move.
Erm er
Surrender.
All I can do is
Surrender.
Give in.
Give in.
Er  stop 
We're giving in.
Vic er prisoner of war 
Er 
White flag 
Take over bid.
Hands up.
Hostage.
Something to do with a vehicle somewhere in it.
Er
Ambulance.
you're nicked mate.
Erm
policeman.
Arrested.
Er
Bank robbery.
Robbery.
Arrested.
Hi-jack.
How do you get that?
That's what a  tr with a transport 
I'd have done it with an aeroplane but 
That's harder.
 

That means  Mum, we we've got
how do you do a hijack?
Right.
It's your turn again.
Yes, if we win this we've done it.
Okay?
It's an all play.
All play.
Come on, let me have a look first.
Ha!
And me.
Ha!
It's a red one.
What colour?
That's simple.
What colour?
Oh red.
Red.
Red.
A quick one then, is it?
Is it a quick one?
Are we all ready?
Yeah.
On your marks, go.
A man.
Raindrops.
Skirt.
Er snowing.
Hand, tennis court erm  loudhailer.
Erm
Pair of dolls.
Music.
Singing.
Tennis.
Coach.
Recorder.
Erm erm
Er referee.
Erm.
Ref.
Here we go again, she's off.
Erm
Blood.
It's a 
 
Oh yes erm  a conductor.
Conducting.
Orchestra.
Yes.
Aah!music.
Conducting an orchestra.
Erm  erm.
Orchestrate.
Symphony.
Play.
Orchestra.
Come one, anything else.
Choir.
Said choir.
. Oh 
Symphony.
Erm philharmonic orchestra.
Chamber music.
Philharmonic.
Opera singer.
Miss classic music.
Erm
Erm
Classical.
Violinist.
Er percussion.
Soloist.
Got everything but.
Don't listen to them mother, draw.
I can't.
I've forgotten what it was.
Tenor.
Erm baritone.
Run out.
Concert.
Concert!
 

What are these then?
That's the people playing on the violin for the orchestra.
And you missed your go so it's Eric.
Thank goodness for that, they didn't get it.
to catch up then.
Blue.
Er 
We're on a white dot all play.
you're on your own.
On our own.
Good chance to catch up.
 
How many words?
I'll let you draw it, right.
Cut it out you two .
Is it all play?
Ready, go.
Oh no, on our, on our own.
What is it?
Oh what is it?
Blue.
It's blue.
Oh we've got to have one on our own.
What a nerve.
They won't get it.
Erm how do you do
What is it?
Start then.
Brown is it?
It's an object.
It's blue.
Blue.
It's an object.
He done us proud.
That's 
I know what I would do.
Sounds like
Don't  well I suppose you can help them, yeah.
No.
Er
Book.
Definitely know what I'd do.
File.
Erm 
Can I whisper something in his ear?
No!
Oh go on.
He's miles behind.
No.
Sounds like 
Mm?
Somebody  what?
No  on the word you showed me how it could possibly
I'm a good drawer.
What?
 

Oh yes.
Done.
What is it?
I'll draw it.
Rag.
Rag.
I would have done a car with somebody holding it  
Rag?
Yes, this is tag.
Sounds like 
I I I honestly, look what he's drawn me  for rag .
Yes rag is quite  funny isn't it?
It's 
For action
I did a tag.
It's brown is it?
And a and a suitcase with a tag on it.
confuses me.
Well it sounds like
You said you didn't think it sounds like r rag.
Well what's thing here with a hole in it?
Ready steady go.
Tag.
How do you draw a tag?
I hope you get this  
I thought you said dancer.
No sounds like.
Well that's a mag.
Sounds like  .
Waves, waving.
A mag  magazine.
Oh my god  
 
Be quiet  
 
word with ing on the end.
Rippling.
That's it.
Yeah that's it.
good.
Thank you.
Your go.
Do you want another piece of paper?
No.
We're coming up, we're coming up.
Here we come.
sixteen.
My turn to draw 
A long long way to go though.
Difficult.
Well look where we are then.
And we're on our own.
Yeah.
Ready steady  go.
Oh they're on their own.
That's lucky.
It's a 
One word?
Manuscript.
Er tent erm
They won't get that.
What is it?
What colour?
You have to be a fairly good drawer 
Man.
else they'll start scribbling.
Hieroglyphics.
Erm alphabet, pen, calligrapher.
It's hard.
Very good 
Shorthand, pitman ty erm my gawd we've got a door.
Er  er  we've got a lot of squiggles on that door.
You're gonna get some  you're gonna get some  on it in a minute too if you don't  up.
erm erm 
Chisler.
Erm  what do they call it.
Not quite.
Sculptor.
No, not quite.
Erm grey stone er
Dad.
Dad.
How does she know looking at, that's funny, that's from someone's subconscious.
How would you know that that was a footballer?
Alright?
I mean 
But I I would have said somebody like that 
it's weird.
That someone could get half the question right.
He doesn't look like  a football shirt on.
And it looked modern.
It looks like a modern photograph to me.
It was taken about nine it was when he was eighteen.
It was about nineteen fifty eight.
Good looking though isn't he?
hair.
How did  manage to get that  Rupert bear?
Easy.
Eric,
I got that, got that  Eric thought it was a lion.
Oh no.
He did.
I got that straight away.
Oh  your mum's 
A policeman?
So can somebody find me the other one and I'll looks, oh that's alright.
That's okay.
I have got two.
Well  this one .
I need, can you find that, oh I bet I've thrown that other one.
Mind you that's the only one I can't  
Oh this is  that was, that was a 
You didn't like the Africa one?
Too hard.
No.
Too hard.
You you should have done  counties of England.
Yeah, that would have been a good one.
That would have been  good interesting and funny.
Ruthie got five marks for that didn't she?
No, she didn't get as many as you expect.
I got  Sudan one.
Nobody else got that.
Ruthie is that one reserved for your mum, or can I take that one to the office?
Si at the supermarket.
Oh 
Oh we .
We all had our go right?
I, I guessed  I got Sudan  I don't know how Michelle managed to get Tunisia  no-one else got that.
She got Tunisia  all had a guess 
Well  french speaking I wonder if  french speaking  
Tunisia I would have got it.
Yes.
But I didn't think of it.
It's french speaking.
I wonder whether she's had a holiday there.
There's Morocco we should have got.
We forgot about that.
Yes she should have got those .
French Morocco.
Yeah Morocco and Algiers, Tunisia and Algiers are all French, French African  colonies.
Yeah.
So she would have done that in her geography.
Geography, see Michelle should have  I was conscious that perhaps Michelle was gonna be a bit out of that bit, some of those  
Well so was Mutty .
Thank goodness we didn't put Michael with them.
Yes.
That's what I said.
That's why I moved Michael away.
I said that's why I thought  she had you and Mi Michael with Mootty and Michelle.
I said no, we've gotta 
Well, I thought Michelle was
I said you've got to put Paulie in there to balance it up a bit.
Lucky he did cos Michael just shoved off didn't he?
Well I was, unfortunately he didn't really balance it up enough did he?
No, not quite.
I couldn't.
I mean I, I  I didn't know all those.
I mean I got the  Maxwell I mean I think Mum got that.
No, I didn't.
Did Paulie's team come last then?
Yeah.
Yeah.
By a long, quite a long way though.
There was nothing I could have done though.
I mean I didn't know all those things.
this is why Karen and Adrian won, forgetting John Wayne like that.
I mean they're going  
I I I suspected that anybody with Karen was gonna win.
I think Karen was, Karen was just 
?
No no 
Didn't get that was Ernest Saunders.
I mean I recognized his face.
Bernard Manning.
That was good, how they got those.
Right, tape seven.
I thought I was quite good.
I mean  mum wasn't that good was she because she  I mean 
Freely admit I'm hopeless.
General knowledge mum would have good.
But either your questions, they weren't general knowledge  were they?
They were things you know like sports and what happens  
Couldn't people put cocktail sticks in the bin.
I've come across cocktail sticks all night.
Why don't they?
I put mine in the bin.
Oh I don't put them in the bin.
they're so hard to put in the bin aren't they?and then forget about them.
Well I never think 
 
What?
I think they're doing quite well on those tapes.
Well have I got any presents to come tomorrow?
I haven't now have I?
Not from me.
Mine.
Might have got er 
Oh Paulie's.
but not a present.
Something from
You've got some cards haven't you?
my sister.
And you've got my one.
Other than that, no.
Oh well wicked dude.
You  those bird tables every time you go past on the way to Palace don't you?
Yes.
I was really hoping you weren't going to buy one  
Paul .
Did you see how much they were?
Only twenty four pounds.
I know.
I bet  
I'm glad you don't know how much ours was.
I don't know what's been spilt on here.
Ugh something disgusting.
Where did you hide that?
Where did you go to get  ?
garage.
Oh.
Got it at 
That was expensive though.
How long ago did you have to buy that?
Weeks  
Ages ago.
Soon as I got paid last month.
I went with her  after school.
You got it in the garage?magic yeah 
Awfully difficult to get it in the car wasn't it?
I was gonna say.
It was much bigger than I thought it would be.
Can you dry the inside of that for me?
Both sides of that.
That has to dry before it gets 
What happened?
Michael constantly spilt things.
I know.
Did you see, yeah he got, you know his duvet, your duvet's in ?
What's he gonna sleep under?
I didn't know it was the duvet  duvet.
Yeah.
Well bring it down and put it in the wash now then.
He has.
I have.
I'm hu I've hung the actual oth other bit up.
The whole duvet or the cover or what?
The whole duvet.
Well I'd better put the duvet in the wash then.
It's alright, it's hanging up.
Well it'll be wet.
What has he spilt?
I think, I dunno.
Red Rock Cider or something like that.
I don't know what he was drinking.
It wasn't coke..
I think those are the new extra life.
I think they're both dead.
It wasn't  that's all I know.
It wasn't coke?
It was something er weird 
lemonade base .
Bring me the duvet  
I think it was lemonade base Red Rock.
It looked like the Red Rock that I've had.
Bring me the duvet and let's have a look at it.
Oh  oh and my project could so easily have been ruined.
Oh I know .
You'd have been  .
All that work.
And then  I had to clear clear it all up.
I suppose I offered because it was my  .
Did he sa did he say sorry?
Er  not  well he did I suppose.
Ah it's dried off mostly mum.
Okay.I'm really really really gonna do this.
Are these Christmas cards?
Mum?
Yeah she was quite proud of old Paulie though cos he, he stays and plays and  all the other two just keep wandering off don't they?
I mean I suppose  
Where did we buy this?
I we allowed to open our Christmas cards?
The glass is chipped.
No.
Oh.
mine.
Is it off ?
No, don't think so.
. Chipped  oh yeah.
it's dirty but 
Well it's cheap and cheerful but I was keeping it, you know within your budget.
Yeah.
You bought me both those within the budget?
 
Oh you're recording mum.
Okay I'll keep all my  Christmas cards somewhere.
Mum.
What?
I'll have to  you've gotta  give me chance to buy papa and grandma's  grandpa's  and I can wrap them up and give them to them at the golden wedding or can't I?
No, what?
Whose?
Grandma and grandpa?
Grandma's and grandpa's and nana's and papa's.
I've got a few days I can go into work  disco poster, I've gotta do this and that.
Not this month, it's all gone now you can clear that off.
Nothing.
What's that mean?
Number eight three 0 three.
That means number three's got party.
Eh?
Num number number three he's got a party.
Number three at eight thirty.
Oh.
What for?
Oh you  
No it doesn't matter, I'll take Paul.
Monday Tuesday Wednesday are free.
Next weekend .
He was shoved down the steps.
Who by?
Palace fans.
No!
He was.
Very very rough he said.
He was standing with a whole load of Palace supporters.
What, she had a Manchester United scarf on did she?
They both did.
Mm.
Anyway
It stands to reason that you're gonna 
not pleased.
Well 
get the more  yobbo-y fans standing than the ones sitting.
That's  right?
We had Palace  Manchester United people sitting round us and there was no problem were there Paul?
I mean, they have a dig, we have a dig at each other like you're talking and you you you talk, you know like you used to do?
Talk  to the next person but really you're talking to there say and they do it back to you, but  erm  Oh so he didn't, he won't be going again then?
Think he was quite cross.
So where was he standing?
You should put it in context though.
Ten years ago he wouldn't have dreamt of doing that at all, would he?
No.
Right?
If you'd gone into a, with an opposing team's colours  into a standing zone  police wouldn't have let you go in there let alone wa you wanting to go there.
They'd come out half dead.
So what did they do to them?
Pushed them downstairs, pushed them both downstairs.
What in  
They literally pushed them down the stairs?
Mm.
What in that, all that  that that ground they pushed them down the stairs during the game?
during the game.
It was probably after wasn't it?
Moira said  she didn't tell me all of it but Moira said he was very upset .
Peter said it was a good game   when they came home and found that Woking had won five nil they thought they'd chosen the wrong one .
Who  Terry?
Peter.
What was Ian like?
 

I don't think they should pay, pay .
You going to football tomorrow night?
Yeah.
Oh.
I never heard, are we going with Michael?
No.
Homework.
You offered didn't you?
Homework.
Half 
Dad?
half, yeah.
Are we being recorded?
No.
Oh yes, we are being recorded.
Yes we are being recorded, yes.
Paul , have you done your homework?
Not really.
Sort of.
Maybe.
Could have done  
Go on, have some flan.
Don't like the flan.
Oh go on.
I don't really like it.
Oh Paul!
I tried a bit.
I don't like it one little bit.
It's not nice.
Have some rice then.
It makes you see in the dark.
Have some rice then.
This is the other rice.
I 
What 
There's white rice in the other bowl.
Cold?
Mhm.
Why?
We usually have hot rice.
Boil in the bag.
So has it been cooked?
So did you speak to Terry about the game?
Not really.
Did John  when they scored?
He said got very nasty when they scored two goals within two minutes  around  
 
Hear no evil, think no evil, do no I dunno.
Can you explain the other one to me?
Least mine's explicable.
Hear no, no, hear no evil, see no evil, speak no evil, which leaves do no evil available.
Do you understand it?
 talking to self Hear no evil speak no evil  hear no evil see no evil speak no evil 
Do you understand it?
Yeah.
 
What?
Well it's the only available e evil that's left.
But it said do no.
Yeah.
What  that doesn't make sense.
Ah Paulie  's card.
That was a nice one.
Paulie didn't get that on his own did he?
Take that, no that, no!
Oy.
Come on, off.
Ruthie!
What?
I'll break Paulie's arm.
Look, there's three minutes to go before the news.
No  get off, get off  get off Ah get off 
Oh my watch!
If that's broken, you're paying.
If that's broken I'm paying nowt with nowt taken out..
Does this mean we didn't get the whole of London's Burning?
I don't know Ruthie.
 Bailiff's dead.
Is he?
Did he die?
Mm  here's 'Arry, here's 'Arry boy.
Oh he's singing  .
Look mum, dad.
You've got a hammer.
I'm missing my news.
I bet you're not.
Look, mum.
You've got a hammer.
Yeah I know.
Oh yeah.
Let's have a bit.
have a hammer.
tools .
Watch out  leave it at that please mum I wanna watch   Oh go on!
Be a devil.
She's tucking in to your toffee.
Mm.
But she  banging it.
You have to bang it Ruthie.
Bang it with the paper on it then it won't go all over the place.
It's all about  American poets.
Fire away.
Tell me any American poet you know.
 Brian Patten 
He's not American is he?
Paulie's making it all up .
Is Brian Patten American?
Geoffrey Chaucer.
There you are.
He's ma , he's he's er  squitting It's complete  squit He's been exposed.
What about one Eric something.
Eric McGraw.
What's an anagram of times to?
What?
How's it spelt?
T I M E S T O.
Let's have a look.
Rather!
What's a religious container?
How many words?
One word, eleven letters.
  

Take it away from me.
Take it  do you want a bit dad?
No thank you.
small bit.
Name a game with four letters ending in O. 
Solo.
Polo?
Solo.
Yeah I know but  it says game for a change.
It's game for a change.
 

Polo, solo 
Rollo.
That's not a game!
Dolo, scolo   does it have to be O L O?
No.
Could be 
Game for a change.
Might be an anagram of for a.
Faro, look up F A R O. 
Mm?
Look up F A R O.
What country's that Kevin?
This is Italy.
Doesn't look like Italy.
No such word.
Oh yes there is.
A game of chance played by betting on the order appearance of certain cards.
Thank you.
How did you get that?
What was that?
Faro.
Ridiculous!
We're having a whole  day next term to sort out testing for the eleven year olds.
Which is a total waste of time cos they'll rewrite it all in a year's time.
Oh I'll go and .
We're having Christmas dinner.
Oh thank you Paul.
Paulie, bring me in my, my  or has it gone upstairs?
Can you  go upstairs, it's in  Si's bedroom for us?
I am certain to have 
Si's room.
  

Do you want this lunch then Paul?
No.
You don't want it?
Paul come on.
Don't be silly.
Oh what!up there to get it for you.
Not me.
Mm.
Mm.
Paul.
What?
Do you want christmas lunch?
One pound eighty five, do you want it?
I don't really know 
That's illiterate.
The cost is not one pound eighty five pence.
The cost is one pound eighty five.
Do you want it?
Turkey, quiche or packed lunch.
You'll have turkey won't you?
Turkey with all the trimmings?
Yeah.
Yeah?
Good.
But that's not the ti , the day we break up though is it?
No.
Why are we going home at two  two o'clock then?
Mum.
Mum.
I don't know.
What form are you in?
There's no money in my purse.
Has anyone got any change?
Oh, you give the money now?
Yeah.
Well, by Friday.
You have to be joking.
It's Sunday morning so I didn't want to do it.
Right.
I was asked though.
They said I was good.
Have you got any money?
What  to play rugby ?
Personally asked.
Kevin.
Paul was personally asked if he wanted to join  a rugby club .
I'm wicked at rugby.
I'm well skilful.
Nobody else was asked.
Blimey.
Did he have a white cane?
 
Eh?
Like we watched  
 
Right we had  had this  like we had er  ten minutes rugby of the world cup like and this guy  he went whoooo ah .
And then when we went out right, we had to do a tackle, you know a big tackle bag.
We had to go boom like.
Right  while  
Have you got any idea what he's talking about?
No.
he had this big red bag, you had to tackle it.
Yeah I know what it is, yeah.
Right, and it's about A there okay?
And he said aim for that A.
Andrew comes up.
Andrew   jumped up, holds on to it, was standing with two  .
Then along comes somebody else, I've forgotten his name.
I think it was Philip or something.
And he comes up, kicks it, goes boom.
Hits it so low, he knocks it off and he comes down the wrong way and lands on top of us.
I did a beautiful .
Come in, dive in  boom on the A, excellent tackle.
Yeah because you'd watched how the other two .
In other words you get into the rugby team because you happened to go third instead of fourth.
I did another one right
Paul, was this in your lunch hour or in P E?
P E right.
The lady like, you know you have to hold it and let it go right.
The lady was holding it like that  I run up, I go ooh bang  and it goes  .
Are you allowed to laugh in your P E lessons?
Can you imagine anybody being hit by Paulie going ?
Sorry, no!
What was he, a pygmy or something?
Anybody less suited to play rugby, Paul, is hard to imagine.
No.
Stubby was good.
Old good old Stubby.
Stubby himself.
Not Stubby Wilkins?
Stubby .
Stubby .
It  like something out of Bu Billy Bunter doesn't it?.
.
What's the old country, Kevin?
Eh?
What's the old country?
Talk about the old country, what is it?
In what context?
Give me a context.
Anything.
The old country, you know.
When people say old  the old country.
Is it England?
Yeah think so.
Stubby .
His name's Stubby .
Brilliant.
I think Andrew's was the funniest where he just jumps up, goes woof  
What were you meant to do?
Right.
There's this big red bag.
It had said four A's, four A's 
Name some types of leather?
It had A's up there.
Pigskin.
And Andrew, he wasn't started so he jumped 
More.
and sort of went like this and landed on it and went bang down.
More.
Hide.
He really came down like this.
He was rolling all over the floor 
More.
.
Then I came up.
Stubby  sent it for six.
He comes, he goes poof.
He knocks it and he goes woof.
But the lady's such a wimp though.
lady or how you call them.
What's raw fish?
Salmon.
Disgusting.
Pukey, I dunno.
What's it begin with?
They're not, they're cryptic clues.
Okay.
What's a raw fish.
What's a raw fish not, not a good spot.
Who wrote Leaves of ?
Nobody.
It's anonymous.
that word?
It was anonymous.
Anonymous.
Get your homework done Paul please.
Eric .
Well that's Eric Wheeler.
I can see Wheeler in there.
Oh I don't think it is.
Well I'm so brilliant.
I should know.
Also what's happened to my  book?
It's  disappeared hasn't it?
Mum.
Well you can't have it.
my 
Paul!
You can't have it.
You work on that table.
Put that table like, hang on to that  no, sit up at that table .
Why can't I 
Just do as you're told.
Why can't I
Do as you're told.
Oh please!
Go on.
No.
No .
Ooh there's a horrible bit coming up  where she bounces off a white, they use a white car, it's disgusting.
One of Mike's friends
What?
her sister committed suicide.
I reckon she watched this.
She was cooking the meal, right?
Cooking the evening meal, her husband's left her but has been pestering her or something.
And erm  she's just cooking the meal and she went upstairs  went into her son's bedroom, got his belt and hung herself  and her children coming back from school and find that.
Lovely thing to do to your child.
Doesn't matter how desperate.
Who, who hung herself?
Who hung herself?
Mike's  friend's  sister.
And Mike's friend's sister  said  that if this husband comes to the funeral he's gonna  swing for him.
He's gonna go for him.
Gonna assault him.
Who, Mike's friend?
Yeah.
How old is Mike's friend?
And the dad of the wo woman says  not if I get to him first.
Blimey.
You don't think of your children to do something like that do you?
How can you, could you do that if you've got  I mean he's about twelve or thirteen comes home from school 
on tranquillisers because the balance of your mind is disturbed.
Must be.
Is that the bit of the body I think it is?
It's a knee.
Well shall we just see that again?
I thought you weren't meant to let them sleep on their fronts like that.
Well you're not really.
It's up to you.
Paulie always slept on his front  and he's alive to tell the tale unfortunately.
Do you know any American poets?
I just told you, Eric Wheeler.
You know when I do A squared, do I write four squared as well  four ?
No.
What's that ?
I don't really do, do I?
I do 
A squared which is two times two equals four.
What about an A with a little little three, a little little three, a little little three.
That's two times two times two.
It's A times A times A.
Yeah.
So there.
Two times two is four  times two is eight .
A four.
Eight times two is sixteen.
C two 
If you're at football tonight can't do any recording tomorrow night or will you record on the way again?
I don't really know.
record on the way again, can't we?
No problem.
Actually we're doing quite well with that tape recorder.
We didn't, we've done two sides already now, tonight.
Leave your nails alone.
Well I can't see the television.
Why did you move the chair back where I left it?
You moved the chair.
Why don't you sit in that seat?
Mum, this seat is lovely if you lean back.
It wasn't him, it was that ginger haired woman cos she always takes the
Go on.
mushrooms.
What's sixteen times four mum?
Mum.
Six  four.
No.
Are you allowed to transact business at the door Paul?
That's fantastic.
I've just started doing all this  and I'm supposed to be doing section H.
Well done mum  for reading that out wrongly to me.
What are you doing?
Section A?
H nine.
You start  up A squared don't you?
Yeah.
Why?
That's section G.
Oh aren't you going to do section G?
Oh this is 
Oh mum!
Well it won't hurt 
Mum!
you to do section G.
section H .
It won't hurt you to do G .
I'm supposed to do section H and section I.
Well will it matter if you do G?
I don't really know.
It might.
It might not.
I might jump in the lake, I don't really know.
You might get an extra merit mark if you do an extra session.
I don't really know.
I don't!
I don't really know.
Oh fantastic!
That's a great lot of help you are.
It'll do you good to do G. 
It won't do me good to do pipsqueak questions.
If they're pipsqueak why are you asking me?
I'm not  Two A three.
Two A means two times two is four.
No it doesn't.
Two times A cubed.
So what is it?
What's A cubed?
It's eight, so it's sixteen.
Mm?
Two B two C.
Now then  Two B.
Two B squared C?
Yeah that's what I already said.
What?
Don't forget
Two B little two with a C after it.
Two B squared C?
What?
Show me.
What G seven?
Two B squared C.
Well what's C?
B, you do the square bit first.
B squared.
Oh.
Nine.
Right.
Times two.
Eighteen.
Times C.
Eighteen times C.
Eighteen times what?
Times two.
I knew that.
What, and was it seventy two?
Mm.
Come on Paul.
Get it done.
You're supposed to be sitting up at the table.
That's what the table's there for.
Four A two B.
I don't understand how to do these.
You do the A squared bit first.
Two squared is 
Four.
Times four.
Sixteen.
Times C. 
Sixteen times three?
Is forty eight.
Mm.
What are horse's odds Kevin?
You what?
What are horse's odds?
Horse's odds.
Mm.
What are they?
Well what could they be in letters?
Evens?
is it a ?
I don't really know.
No letters?
Ah.
Right outside our house.
Father Christmas is 
What is it?
walking around.
Well you'd better get some money ready then hadn't you?
I haven't got a penny in my purse.
There's a pound upstairs Paulie.
Have a look upstairs .
Hurry up.
Quick  
and no-one's singing.
Who's it for?
That's a milkfloat isn't it?
Effective isn't it?
Who is it, Rotary?
Yeah it's Round Table  for the old people.
Bit early I agree but  
See what they've done they've waited for December haven't they?
It's rather crafty and they're gonna do it every night.
Well I bet they go on every night until
go out stop it again Paul.
Bang.
Bang.
Oh Paul get on with your job.
I asked you for your one pound eighty five and you said no.
You pay, I'll pay you back.
paper I can have Paulie?
I don't really .
So three A two mum, what do I do first?
The A two?
Yes.
So I do two  squared is four  times the three?
Mum?
Mum.
Three A two.
A equals two, two times two is four times three?
Yes.
Oh.
Times four B so I keep it.
Twelve plus four B?
What's B?
Three.
Well it's twelve plus twelve.
That's twenty four.
Twenty four's the answer?
so  American  poets.
I told you Eric Wheeler.
I'm not gonna keep saying that one.
It isn't Eric.
It's E something L something.
Eldric.
Doesn't fit!
Mum  guess  
What's colloquial for greens?
Pulses.
three letters.
Greens is in golf isn't it?
Greens?
What is it G A B A V E?
What's he doing  
Golf, what do you play on?
Golf
Well don't let him in yet.
course
going?
tee.
Minus twelve.
What's minus twelve?
got to answer the question  forty eight minus sixty.
Is it minus twelve?
Surely it's forty eight times sixty.
Is it M A and U minus twelve?
It's N  cubed minus M N U.
N is four t N 
Four fours are sixteen.
Sixteen fours are sixty four.
What!
You said forty eight!
You asked me what sixteen threes are.
Oh!
Sixteen .
So it's four, the answer.
He's a dreadful actor isn't he?
No well  suppose 
Well 
he's doing that quite well.
I mean what he's done what the director's telling him to do.
Well yes.
Yeah.
It's a crummy part isn't it?
Utter rubbish.
This isn't London fire oh  can you re- run that please?
Well I don't think we want to see that do we?
Oh I l I l I like looking at it that's the main thing.
Oh!
Please.
It's better going up  than down.
Yeah .
Yeeeow.
Yeeeow.
It's the same thing over again on two.
Yeeeow.
And again yeeeow.
Four times.
That's when it came down on him.
That's the end.
That last one  was when it came down on him wasn't it?
That was his view.
Oh dear.
Bang.
Ooh.
Hot spot.
What is a hot spot  is not a good spot.
Aren't you a bit early for chrissy decorations isn't it?our tree  when  send for it.
Made eight hundred and fifty quid on Saturday.
Hundred down.
Joyce  said their fare was a hundred down as well.
How was sorry what was  how much?
We made eight fifty  that's a hundred down but Joyce  said their fare was a hundred down as well.
Mm.
The people who used to get a thousand aren't quite  getting a thousand any more.
Mum!
Erm  what is three M squared U?
Three M squared U?
M squared first  M squared first!
Hello, we're at fisticuffs here.
Except his cop badge.
What is M squared mum?
I'm cracking up.
M equals three.
Three squared is nine.
Nine threes are twenty seven.
What's U?
Five.
Twenty seven fives?
Paulie's burnt out like that fireman, look.
He's got  algebra fatigue.
He's gone.
Come on mum!
A hundred and thirty five, use your maths.
You, she shouldn't be using her maths!
You should be doing it.
I just did!
A hundred and thirty five!
What's the problem then?
Don't understand how it looks.
Can someone please tell me the names of some American poets!
We don't know any.
Is that the answer?
A hundred and thirty five?
Might be.
Oh.
Come on .
What is a fabled being?
A unicorn, what else?a fabled being.
I don't know.
Perhaps it's  a rug.
Oh look.
It's me favourite.
Or  or dad or
Ugh!
or a rug.
Or
What ugh?
Geoffrey Archer or magic Johnson 
with a stick?
No.
or Ian Maxwell or a video recorder or a packet of hula hoops.
You're not helping?
I've never got so  I've never not got so far with this crossword.
interesting.
Dad can I ask you seeing she's totally void of any brains.
Yeah I can knock it, I'll knock it home.
Oh look!
The watch on the right there they both get smashed but the one on the back will cost you  the one on the right will cost you as much to replace its glass as the one on the left completely.
You think the other one's gonna be alright but of course they both get smashed.
But the one on the right  it's glass will cost you more to replace than the complete 
Beware of an expensive imitation.
Okay dad.
They're good because that's the company you bought me 
Dad  the one with the brain can I ask you?
Yeah.
And the one with the sense of humour and the one that actually  
Daddy can't do algebra.
Well you can't either obviously, can you?
You can only do it when you're in the right mood.
Three Q R squared.
What!
Three Q R squared.
Three Q R squared?
What's R?
I don't really, oh I'm looking at the wrong bit.
You're not concentrating at all Paul are you?
Two N two M.
N two first  N squared equals four  is sixteen times the two is thirty two 
Why don't you do it on a calculator?
times three  ninety six.
It's against my rules to use a calculator!
Well who's gonna know!
Make note of that brilliant word used there.
What?
Morals.
Morals.
You said it's against my something else didn't you?
Morale, no it was a wicked word.
Oh what a weird advert this one, look.
Post in spell?
Holsten  pils.
Oh.
Stupid advert.
Pil ce  not pils.
Tut.
Pils!
It is pils.
You say 
Pilce.
can I have a pils when you go.
No, you pilce.
Oh you haven't gone up to a bar and asked for a pils have you?
No, but you have.
You have.
Have I.
You always ask for a pils.
What's wrong?
Oh what's he done?
a child minder I suppose.
What goes on water?
A boat.
Water skiers.
Going on water they must stage a  .
It's
What's another word for a brawl?
S skirmish.
Er 
Quarrel.
A scrap.
Yeah, a scrap.
 Motteose 
Who?
What?
I dunno.
A motteose?
Times to find character in brawls .
I think it might be an anagram of times to.
Well write it down.
I'm writing it down.
Strike.
Or perhaps it's in brawls and means .
What's the sound of nails?
What are burdens?
What?
What is a burden?
You know what burden means.
Three letters.
He's in London's Burning.
Mm.
Who?
Which one?
Him.
As who?
Dunno but he is.
He's the one who's just had a breakdown.
Who has?
No it's not.
That man with a beard has just had a breakdown in London's Burning.
Mum
What the one  no we haven't just seen him.
No.
Yeah with the beard off.
No it's not!
No way!
No I'm not, don't rewind it.
It's not.
I can't rewind it.
Easy to tell it's not.
He's got a beard on, he's different, looks different with a beard on.
Mum, you think you've seen everybody before.
Why is she in a huff?
She's pregnant.
Give me a first name that begins with R and ends in an H. 
Two times one is two  yeah?
Yes.
Plus three cubed that's two.
Three times two is six, that's seven.
Four R  nineteen .
P Q R.
That's P times Q times R.
One times two is two, times three is six 
She reminds me a bit of Jen  this girl.
Don't think Jen would thank me for that though.
No.
Nor do I.
Give me a three letter word for a  .
What's wrong with her?
Why, why wouldn't she thank you for that?
well I dunno, well I think she's quite nice actually.
Jen might think she's a bit tarty but she plays a tarty bit in it doesn't she?
It's a horrible part, she .
What is one squared?
One times one is one isn't it?
That's one plus two times three, six.
The answers six.
Give me a type of weapon.
A gun  an arrow  er.
Give me the letters.
What, how many letters?
Seven.
Er slingshot.
A sword  a shield  an axe  spear er a dagger.
Dagger?
It's longer.
Don't know.
I want a fabled being.
What?
Fabled being.
A mythical creature.
Er  
Ha!
December the second nineteen seventy one.
Twenty years ago.
Is it deliberately supposed to be that because it's December the second today?
Yeah.
Four P Q R mum, does that mean 
It means four times P times Q times R.
Oh yeah I know that.
 
Do it for him then.
Four times P
When the letter goes dot next to it it's multiply isn't it?
Dad!
Dot?
Well you know  next to each other like, like Q P R  that's Queens Park Rangers.
Queens Park Rangers.
You multiply queens by park by rangers.
That's like saying six bananas times four apples.
You can't do it.
Yes you can if you know what it is.
You can't.
You can't multiply four bananas by six apples.
But then why  me to be able to do four four Q P R?
Because they're different units.
They're not actual things.
Oh stop going on about rubbish.
So it's
I can't do this crossword because I don't know any American poets.
four times one.
Come on, forget about it .
It's not very important.
Well what's that?
Yes this is.
It's miles more important than that.
Mr  will tweak his ear off if he doesn't get that done.
Four plus two is eight times three is sixteen  no twenty
What's colloquialism for the green party?
Environment.
Have they got any initials?
No seats.
Yes!
I've finished it.
Oh I hate maths.
It's really hard, specially homework.
Algebra!
How many points is er   in front of you now?
Mm he's got  sixty one and I've got fifty four.
Oh well he's just pulling away.
Like if you look like er  Woking, you're W he's Woking and you're Enfield.
Paulie.
I've just beaten him 
Your maths  like Laura .
What's Laura  got?
She's a .
God if you're away you lose points.
Vital points.
she doesn't lose any vital points.
You what?
Oh 
lose any vital points.
only got one  when she gets back.
Paulie I want my back scratched.
Come on!
Get out of it!
Means money.
Not a chance.
Not a chance in a million.
Dad.
D'you know what that guy's name is?
Who?
Desmond.
Which one is Desmond?
Desmond!
Which one?
Oh the old one?
Yeah Desmond  doo doo doo Desmond.
His name is Desmond.
Da da da Desmond.
His name is Desmond.
Desmond, his name is Desmond.
Da da da da .
Right get that tape going Paulie, quick.
It's on.
Oh yeah 
 

I didn't see  in the end.
I thought  see him .
Went out to see the puppet,, one good thing at least it shows he's being quite a good boy    not sure about the school 
about the school .
Well, they've had, they've only had  you must of been better or Miss Johnson would of said you couldn't go to the public 
Well, it's because it's a waste of time stopping him going to see them, if that doesn't work you don't keep doing it do you?
Yeah, but how do you know it didn't work?
He didn't even know did he?
What did uncle Edward say about .
the Rumbelows cup, I said you said that without  when they don't win the league you say ah, its only the league.
Well we beat them four, three in the F A cup final  cup.
She don't, the first time in our history 
Yeah, and the  , that's ever been made to have one  
in that competition, they've been beaten  cup.
European's in the F A cup then?
That ain't terrible they mentioned Swansea in the early sixties, but eh  
Does  the top 
I don't, I'm thinking if I had some scrapers  always managed eventually get through like we did.
ah, ah  they've got a better crowd for that day ain't they dad?
I don't know why.
Warmer  There must of been three thousand, two and a half thousand, membership at Birmingham's 
So what Birmingham's 
Do they? don't know   with all that corner and a, a, and one with great, one with the lock in the   Alex could 
have to take a day off work .
Oh a couple of  there's youngsters, there what, those two boys that talk to us they must of been about, at the most eighteen I think, messing about getting chips and fish and burgers and stuff,rubbish.
home.
There's two blokes, that, in there, in the fish shop the one in the blue, the tall one,eighteen, they were about twenty three
No.
they weren't, they weren't in their teens, no way.
 

You went to see that bloke only  maybe still at school just finishes school about two years ago
Yeah
really, that guy in the blue?
Got the  car things going through.
Mm,got them, on Monks Lane the 
But he's injured.
Yes, and its not through yet, presumably they'll have another look at it at the end of the month.
You want the papers  you've yet to find someone with a painting and 
He is fast  quick off the mark  when he gets going 
That's what he says, I really have seen the place, the man in the  pass him 
Why?
What's wrong with that penalty I saw it,
but Paul doesn't agree.
How do you know it's on now?
 

What's wrong with that?
Seems to me like he saved it.
Yeah  
Just  mucking about, look, look, he  .
Oh.
eating.
Who me?dad.
Pretty good  
Paul just eat.
I 
Sshh 
Oh,thank you treasure  when you've finished your milk Paul you can have the paper back. 
it off.
Have we seen it?
No.
Eight o'clock I'll record it for you, you are watching it?
sequel  rip off 
Yes, your right
What?
I haven't seen it before 
I think I might of done
No.
Tom Banks and some twelve year old in a thirty five year old body  anyway you are not watching it because you are going to bed eight o'clock, is that not right daddy?
What time did you get in last night?
Twelve 
Is it necessary to be so rude Paul?
What did uncle  say about .
the Rumbelows cup, I said you said that without  when they don't win the league you say ah, its only the league.
Well we beat them four, three in the F A cup final  cup.
She don't, the first time in our history 
Yeah, and the  , that's ever been made to have one  
in that competition, they've been beaten  cup.
European's in the F A cup then?
That ain't terrible they mentioned Swansea in the early sixties, but eh  
Does  the top 
I don't, I'm thinking if I had some scrapers  always managed eventually get through like we did.
ah, ah  they've got a better crowd for that day ain't they dad?
I don't know why.
Warmer  There must of been three thousand, two and a half thousand, membership at Birmingham's 
So what Birmingham's 
Do they? don't know   with all that corner and a, and one with great, one with the lock in the   Alex could 
have to take a day off work .
Oh a couple of  there's youngsters, there what, those two boys that talk to us they must of been about, at the most eighteen I think, messing about getting chips and fish and burgers and stuff,rubbish.
home.
There's two blokes, that, in there, in the fish shop the one in the blue, the tall one,eighteen, there about twenty three
No.
they weren't, they weren't in their teens, no way.
 

You went to see that bloke only  maybe still at school just finishes school about two years ago
Yeah
really, that guy in the blue?
You heard about the eh education secretary's faux pas somebody from Jack  section, he, he's apparently he slipped up er, and said  right and Jack  said to him I was  to tell the education authorities  suggest that you do  when the education  er clerk turn to Mr  and said you are just ,streaming is when he put one child in the same group for all subjects, setting is when there in different groups according to their ability, so you could be a  Maths set A or an English set B, awkward isn't it?
Imagine rushing out to find your equipment  
Yeah 
so Jack  good cos he's a teacher.
Yeah, funny but he had to shout 
 
you are just playing with the 
So what, what have, we've been 
No, you've been streamed, oh no you've been  are  on different groups then?, have you got a photo of them in the top set for something and the bottom set for  
top set for  bottom set for a, at least a year.
Are they?
down the stream they are 
it's strictly speaking streaming is when Paul would be in the top group for everything not necessarily, I mean settings better really it's important 
 
if he can do it, ain't that awful education then?
So do you mean settings a 
No I think he generally thought they were the same thing, I think I would of done if I wasn't an educationalist, but I mean it's his business  to know really isn't it?
What's Samantha?
Words, she's playing with words.
We're not are we?
No, quite.
There's a different   why would you want to be a  streamed, after all .
Well streaming's easier, the completion  
Yeah, Ruth look, crumbling school 
Is it?
You could always say your spending more  
 
every year.
Well John   
to spend more
cos John just phoned  up by three hundred pounds.
Mind you he gets things done  doesn't he?
Yeah, but we can't afford that, says he might have to loose staff  
he says anything that comes into his head.
Very dodgy position, but your the one that's just taken up full time post 
I'm not.
Maybe  
Well  got a contract that made redundant 
I'm not permanent 
What?
I'm not permanent.
What do you mean?
What, er, Vicky and that have got temporary contracts, Moira's got a temporary contract 
I mean if you want  could you say I want the same as fourth year job?
No, I would say I want the same school, you can do with me what you like, Paul I suggest you don't throw that  away before I loose my temper with you.
He, he's allowed to choose which one he makes sacks, sacks though isn't he, I mean
You can't, you have to, people with temporary contracts have to first
Really?, have too?
Yeah and he got  I think.
Are you  look how much he's eaten.
Are you friendly with the governors?
I don't need to be,
It's a bit like me, you don't expect to loose your job but you, you can, you can, no one these days can say you can't 
No , no
Everyone now knows you can.
Yeah 
Trouble is with all this efficiency right and we can cut cost and do this and we streamline this, in the end  unless you tell people, you've still got those people on your hands haven't you, you still in the end you've got to pay their unemployment benefit haven't you?
Yeah.
and then you wonder sometimes, okay it makes everybody off balance 
 
balance, the balance all balance their books, but in the end they all start complaining about that extra tax and corporation tax, why, because the governments got to play with the people of income  
Mum 
employed.
Yeah 
do you reckon  at the end of this year will offer you a full time job?
I've got a permanent contract, I'm safe until September ninety two then my job doesn't exist any more, then I'm not 
Hang on, will he offer you the job?
Offer me what job?
You've got one year fourth year, yes?
Yeah
Well he 
I've got two years
two years
Is everybody like that though, is to mean here's Jan, where's Jan's contract go too?
Jan  
Yeah, she's permanent 
Well 
The only reason is because my year vanishes
oh
in two years time my year doesn't exist any more 
so you could be made redundant then 
I could be, yes,
But don't you get one option 
I was given two year option in the first place, so so  
So he doesn't 
moved down
vanish does he?
well he does really.
Everyone moves down one.
Yes, but a lot of people  refuse to move down one.
It's only one year difference is it?
You'll find that 
No one wants to move down one.
Yeah, but you'll find that when the people will get threaten with their job loses they do everything, do anything.
Oh I won't.
Well you want to  keep searching.
I don't mind teaching one year though, but nobody else wants to move down, I move down and Liz moves down that's this places Jo  erm, Jan  they won't want to move down, they move down that  the next two, they don't wanna move, Terry  doesn't want to go down any lower
Why does go down in the first place?
You should of seen he has decorated the school, I said 
Who?
you really like Christmas don't you John?, he said yes, the hall way you cannot move in the hall way, it is dripping with decorations, right,
the phone goes this morning, hop of Daisy, goes to answer it, Santa's Grotto he says, a member of the public phoning to say that they found a child's bag in the high street.
What?
Oh dear.
What do you do with a man like that?
How what, how 
It's a child really isn't it?
I didn't get that, say that again.
Because he's got so much decorations up, he answers a funny  
he's in Murphy's decorating shop 
In the  right 
He's been doing it for twenty years 
picks up the phone not knowing who it is and says Santa's Grotto  it is funny isn't it?
 
but as mummy says it's not what a respectable headmaster is supposed to do is it?
He  laugh it.
Well, I tell you something all the children in my class have got perfect  as near as your gonna get.
He just hasn't got a clue, apparently he said last night he never thought it would be so hard, he had a confession with Liz or something, never thought it would be so hard and he's really struggled this year, really, really hard work, nothing like being a deputy which to me he's an idiot if he didn't know that, he's feeling guilty about the phone bill, but  hasn't got any money at all for anything 
But then I, I, it's unfortunate that you had your first  I mean  someone who had no experience of headmastership, head, head teachers, I mean all the head teachers I should think are in financial problems this year cos it's really there first full year 
Yeah 
isn't it?, right, but I mean, he has, he's had other problems to compound it and distract it
yeah
and he's made it probably an even worse hash than, than the average teacher 
He just can't manage money, full stop.
I mean he's a, he's got to a, he's got to be a claim all across the whole sitting is that the, that their budgeting is not enough is it?
Yeah, but 
Mum, mum 
What?
why do  these things, you've done it, why  library  
Paul  
It is.
The books have been stolen at the rate of twenty or thirty a day.
That's his fault, is it?, it's the teachers fault
Is that really true or is that an exaggeration?
Look at the shelves
Think about it, is it twenty or thirty a day?
Yes, he came into the hall the other day and he tipped out 
Well he only asked , I mean that's obvious that he can say children 
he tipped out a pile of library tickets onto the thing and it was, it was a, it was, must of been, it was hundreds 
Yeah, what  
And he said this is a month, this was a month after the end of term,this, can't find books for any of these tickets, they're not in any children's
Well he borrowed 
 
the books for  didn't he?
No.
He checked, who checked up
 
 
They're not found in the library, all the loose tickets, a mountain of them, surely you just take the tickets out and shut the book.
But then if it's twenty or thirty it stands to reason that's probably about the same 
household
the same children stealing them 
yeah 
every day, well why 
yeah 
don't you clamped down on these kids?
Well, we've tried.
When a child came in this morning, the one I, that we accused of taking that out, he said he didn't take it, I went on and on and on, he said he didn't take it, I said I want a letter from your father to say that you bought it then, that doesn't mean anything, the father could lie.
Why did you ask for?
The point is you don't do these children any service by letting them getting away with it, cos they think they can get away with it.
What can you do?
You can't prove they did it 
It does sound quite good if you give them, I suppose for math tuition   probably sat twenty five to .
Why you're doing this Christmas, it may be my last, John said what do you mean, I said well, I don't know if I'm going to be in a classroom this time next year, I mean, I really enjoy Christmas with the children, fifteen years since I've done it, I've forgotten how I enjoyed myself.
Then what did he say?
Why?
They were testing those big signs on the motorway today 
Yeah , yeah 
Said this is a test ignore, this is a test and there was sort of like keying in 
typing on them?
Yeah.
What will it be able to tell you then?
Well anything, any message I suppose, you can key in any message you want 
What Mr  leave at junction forty  
Yeah I should imagine so  but they wouldn't, but they could.
Gosh, posh, cosh, cough, have you seen this headline? gosh, posh, cosh, cough
Dad
What?
want to look at these 
What's he  to me know?, what?
What, remember, surely your going to be   
Well I, I, don't think no, no, there not gazing up is it really, I mean is, its so huge you couldn't miss them 
Have you seen this Paul?, gosh, posh, cosh, cough 
Gosh, posh 
Posh 
cosh
your pathetic , and what do these make it, cough 
 
You don't see the, the
tabloid there, I read those, the headlines are hilarious, the headlines I think the manager who runs the headlines in The Sun is more funny than  it all together.
That is it, what's that one that , gosh, posh, cosh, cough, gosh, posh, cosh, gosh posh, cosh, gosh
Come on hurry up, homework.
Why they, dad, dad, why they posh in the  because that  
It doesn't make sense, does it?
is at Liverpool  
Hey, can you speak any Italian yet?
Yeah.
Go on then.
 
Have you got your Italianers your father says, you should have a text book called El Italianer.
I have got a text book called Chow.
chow.
There's not much of an  is it Italian?
Chow, bon acerous.
What does that mean?
Eh,
Bon acerous  you say anything else?
Want a lot?
 
 speaking Italian 
What does that mean?
 
 

School
What?
School.
its so simple.
It doesn't sound simple.
But right, there's this word,a on the end right, some  right  that means boy, because O means boys and  E with an e on the end
Means girls.
Girls and, and with  with an I is  erm 
Boys and girls.
No girl.
is girl and  is girl 
You get boy, girl, boys, girls, look I show you, I read you out everything I've done.
Giacomo, Martin is Martino, Paul is Paulo
oh Martino
Nicholas is Nicola 
give it to me  
er lets see  er here are  speaking Italian is boy  speaking Italian is boys, speaking Italian is girl and  speaking Italian is girls.
Is that 
Yeah, if you add O, you put an O on it to make it plural and A you just put an E on it .
where is the beach?
Oh what a very useful thing to know cos your not likely to go to live there 
lease to meet you,wicked, wicked   take this sentence er  er   what  with me 
See this picture  in the centre court, did you see that?
Yeah.
Brilliant isn't it?
all day long.
What?
Would you?
No 
What doing to it?
Putting a roof on it 
No more umbrellas.
 
These papers are the same  aren't they, exactly the same stuff in them.
 

Huh, just surprise it wasn't eighty per cent 
office they're all right.
I dunno, don't wanna go.
Oh, maybe
I don't get any free time off you see, cos Jenny  goes to Australia on Monday.
  
She only had two weeks from her free time.
Who do they know in Australia then?
and she's off for eleven full days and John could only afford to supply the three of them.
Say that again, sorry I can't 
She's off for eleven school days and John can only pay for supplies for three of them.
Hasn't he got enough money?
What did we have for dinner last night?
Nothing, you went out to football.
what did we have for dinner the night before that?
Oh I had flan, you had nothing  don't you dare get me into trouble because  had nothing to eat.
, nothing,milk, nothing.
O couldn't really be nothing.
Well what 
What about the eight packets of crisps you've had?
I haven't had eight packets of crisps 
I expect so.
I had flan on Monday night, daddy had nothing  you had cheese 
I had 
Posh, nosh 
Gosh, posh, cosh, cough  
Sshh, Paulie.
You want coffee Ruthie?
Yeah 
That milk?
there's one Caffitino left, I'll have it in a mug, as full as possible 
 

This is full?
Oh, that's hard on the eyes isn't it Ruthie?
Yeah 
Oh no it's Graham the er cartoonist of Fred Bassett died.
Mm, I saw that 
I wonder if somebody else will take it on?my new mug.
It's lovely I've tried 
Oh yeah.
It's not very full.
It's your last one you'll ever have Ruthie
I know.
Weird is it?
 
What?
I  drank my last orange one in school, chocolate and coconut 
Has it got, we had a  and you're allowed to fire the shot are you?
Yep.
Oh come on
 

The sketch involved staggering around completely blotto.
Who?
This, can you see this Davro.
Oh yeah.
And he said it wasn't his fault, he, he  told to do by the script writers, but I mean it's to make out that he had no right to, it's ridiculous.
There's only one light, a bit naught, it's  
waited for 
not right is it ?
What is?
When you said them all to  
That can 
Yeah, I've already read that book this morning  song, I lovely Christmas book, only two twenty five and er .
Right  eat up some of this  salad I'm only on some 
Must put that champagne, once you've done that orange er Ruth, orange, put the champagne in there 
.
You thinking of a special occasion?
Yes my birthday Rufus 
Right, what do you want, spritzer or 
No I'll have an orange that erm, straight from the bottle.
Paul what do you want to drink?
Er 
There's not enough room to 
Er 
Can I have a coke please?
Some of those dishes need to go up here.
Up where?
Pass them to me I'll do it now, some of those fruit dishes, there's not enough room there for the glasses , I  like them then I'll take them.
Right, while we .
You going to this, what a toy party is it?
Well I might call in  there.
Best to, I  place.
Yes I know.
You've got some great 
There's some more in there.
No, you've got some er grapefruit to drink up 
Daddy, daddy, daddy , dad, dad, dad, dado 
Yes .
I ought to cancel the milk tomorrow.
, what did you do with the  of the milk we had?
Oh I chucked that.
So much 
I gotta make a dozen mince pies for the , she said can you make a dozen mince for the , I said no Sheila, she said pardon, I said no, I said I'd buy twelve I will not make twelve, so after that she's, then went round everybody could  make twelve mince pies,it's a bit of a nerve isn't it?, seems a bit of a nerve asking us to buy the wool and make 
Well, can't be fairer than that, she was passing on John's  weren't she?
Ah , typical   
another one like Trevor no matter what they, how they reason with what they saying it always puts people's backs up.
We've only got
I think it's both the same
no, that's yours and 
Of course, he's gonna say no isn't he?
Local firm designing twenty five warning signs.
Oh, first is it?that 
Rochelle and Company,
I  just opposite Macdonald's road 
What they've fallen down, broken down have they?
No,.
They confirmed to make up to a thousand different messages  You know that Chinese shop in Woking?
Yeah, Mah Jong
Three of them.
Two Mah Jong's.
Mm.
Where's the other two then?
Ah, Twickenham, Norton.
Those coke ones are yours now, they're not , they are ones we don't do without.
We had twelve
Yeah 
taking those?
No, I can't take them.
Well we'll crush them, and then you can take them, wash and crush them, then you can take them in a box, to your school, put them in your school , yeah.
crush them for school .
No  someone has to.
They crush them  they have people standing round  crushing
Why did I, why did I do, put them in the machine instead of dropping them on the floor then?
I  at school was he?
Well he should of carried it home and carried it all the way back again 
Would you have done?
Er,
Take those a waste of time.
You must have put about six of those in the bin.
Yeah, you can saying oh,
Dad, you wasn't 
Get in trouble 
Dad,he can't be still.
Oh  because we, we don't, we don't have  at school, we have Pepsi in our machine.
Our machine actually is a Pepsi, it sells Lucozade, Ribena, Apple Tango
Well we could put them all in the thing can't we? all in the canned box, it's lovely  and we could put at the top no Pepsi can 
Oh, she's doing well in the 
They get some weird trips don't they?
I think you have to er, er, you have to be a certain kind of person, you have to be prepared to anything don't you?
I don't think, I don't think you're allowed to say ooh, I don't think I'd like to do that.
There's a job down  don't they .
Only for a bloke actually it's pretty easy, but for some of the girls I mean they  sometimes has to false herself.
There was a scene where she had to go upsta up the top of a windmill weren't there  windmill wings oh what those things, I don't think she was too keen on height 
Wasn't it the first black  they'd ever had there, dad?
Dunno.
Those black  you only had 
Spooky, it's spiritual, it's like re-in I often believe in re-incarnation when you hear stories like that, how can someone just sit down, little child sit down and play the violin.
Three and he just came on and played the piano.
Like somebody dare.
See Palace have bought Franz Carr.
Palace what? oh  what they're gonna buy him soon?
Like you say, I don't think he can be too good at, if he tried, he has had a lot of injuries apparently.
He was a brilliant player , bright  some players do.
Oh they've dropped Goodman now, good  I preferred Goodman with, to Gabbiadini.
Goodman's rubbish.
What?
Spurs go to the Soviet.
Ooh, how many Tuesdays is this in the row that plays the  dad?
Too many.
Six?
No
How, but if we go to those two games each Tuesday  count to three.
Do they?
No go through them.
to me 
Birmingham away 
Yeah
Birmingham home, Q P R away, Birmingham home, Chelsea at home, Swindon away 
Swindon away , yeah, you're right.
I thought  I thought you meant weekly  
born free 
Homework.
Well after this  if they got a big rest didn't it, because I looked at, when we played Norwich and it was March the nineteenth, well given that there was a game the week before, are you listening to me?
Yes.
What did I say?
Given the game before
That doesn't make any sense,before 
That's what you said 
yeah, you
Norwich.
no I'm just saying once I, this, this semi-final gets over it doesn't look like the southern final gets played till February March.
Quick,
probably will 
are we  , we're in the semi-finals so if we win that
Southern semi-final.
If we win that we're in the final at Wembley, what, what if we beat Chelsea at Wembley?
No.
Yes, you said that 
No, whoever wins this has got to play the southern final, that's what I'm just saying, the southern final was Norwich last year 
then the final 
and that wasn't till March this year
born free,
March nineteen ninety one they played that.
So why is he killing ourselves getting this over and done with?
I don't know.
Weird.
I noticed Dennis took precedence over the foot run by Pat, but he, he  
Got a  , pull one back , then he's five behind, here he comes, he's beaten Nora ,two behind Nora  now.
What merit points?
You're two behind Laura
and I'm five behind er Hinds.
Hinds' gone into the lead.
He and Heather, Laura 
Wow.
Laura's burnt out.
What?
Laura's gone and burnt out, he's streaks ahead he is.
They are three days .
didn't get one for English, I did, I did 
What for?
I got one for English I did, I did 
What for?
born free  for that Daily Telegraph bit .
Did any one correct your spellings?
Born free, oh by the way I went to that study centre, I went to that study centre and she looked at it she asked me what spilt over it and she said oh it's still readable and she said well done for coming to er
I told you.
apologize, I think she was a .
Paul, do you think you could start loaning this directly in the whole article about loneliness?
How do you spell it?
Loneliness, loneliness is a state of mind.
Loneliness, loneliness what do I do?
Oh Paul you've spelt your wrong, didn't anybody correct it?
What.
born free, born free 
What's spelt wrong now?
He's spelt longliness
Longliness
and your, Y O U R apostrophe E  good use of alliteration.
Tommy tarantula had torn his tattered trousers to threads before his terrible teeth consisted of tea, toast and trifle and some tapioca followed by  T-bone steak, plus a round of 
Did the teachers spell alliteration right?
Tandoori takeaway, yeah the teacher spelt, good writing.
Why some of these  underlined in red Paul?
What?
Why some of these words underlined in red?
Well it's the T words here, that's what I used in there.
No you didn't.
What, which one didn't I use?
Takeaway, toast,
Tandoori takeaway it's all there
toast
Toast there
It's not there though.
born free   look at  merito I've got a  merito for every piece of work I've done 
Well I wish they'd correct your spelling.
she looks at the  
Say that was good?
Merita, merita, oh merita
Oh Paul whose w W H O apostrophe S, that's dreadful  whose
Oh, oh says Paulie.
What to do, she, she met, she did do it
Yeah, she corrected it.
I beat Heidi on that, though still got a merito, got nine point for my spelling test.
Why don't you 
that is quite a good one that.
Oh Paul, oh Paul, oh,then the mother unfortunately deceased  what on earth does that mean?
Died.
well, deceased is having died, not died  you mean die, unfortunately die
I don't want to use die twice
I can remember quite 
die 
far back in my life so I can recall my first piece of actual writing, I have a scrapbook at home and I look at it regularly, it had my first pieces of work in it, I usually drew pictures and then wrote things, my first piece was on A four and I have drawn a table, my mum and myself, I was holding a , I wrote one sentence and it was surprisingly literate  this is what I wrote, it is my party and I wait for my friends to come, I did many pieces of work 
it's my party and I cry  
like that and eventually with the help of my mum I could join sentences together to make a real piece of writing.
My first page of writing was about Bluebell Railway where we used to go with my brothers and ride on the sea bed  have you seen this Kevin?
Mm.
it's my party and I da, da, da, da  
I wrote one sentence and it was surprisingly literate   all you need is to do something about your spelling 
it's my party , look at my nice writing mum, that was 
You got all  in that, English there, English there, English there and English there, and that  I had six merit points yesterday.
Right, homework  Thursday design a drama.
Well it doesn't mean you don't have to do it.
I don't know what homework I've got.
Why aren't you suppose to find out?
I probably  ,homework, because her daughter was dying or something and she, her daughter was quite seriously ill and taken to hospital, so we just had  Miss  so we weren't given any homework for that
What did you do in Miss ?
I  wasn't I? and  I don't think I have any, I don't know.
Well you're trying to say you haven't got any homework?
No, I've got to revise for my erm science test tomorrow and I've got loads of stuff to do, I've got  to keep going for the weekend, actually I haven't got that much to do, I've got drama that I can do if you just would be so kind turn over to number three so I can have a look at some adverts  I've got a, will there be any adverts after
We don't want number three now.
I know, but can I just have a burst of adverts?
You know all the adverts off by heart 
some adverts  Cleared out my locker  I put all the     that's what I'm doing  
There's a woman here called Miss , who had a baby in Asda, she's called her daughter Danielle Elizabeth Asda  
Well she's the woman,I've just realized that, look, look.
I can't see 
Oh fair enough.
The woman in what?
Emmerdale.
Oh yeah the barmaid 
The barmaid.
Oh where have I seen her face?
Cheeky blighter.
Not that face 
Perhaps that's where this .
That guy at Engin  Ruth, he gave a reasonable talk didn't he  they reckon he's got a  mental age of ten years old.
You mean the hostage.
No, Engin  the, one of this Tottenham three 
Well most of the ten year olds in my class can speak reasonably.
Do they?
Didn't, one of those hostages had suffered brain damage from the 
Oh, I don't know.
Well 
.
cos he was thrown against the wall and hit a mole on his head or something and it caused a bruise and it has actually damaged his brain.
I think there's brain damage and brain damage but 
Did your little group get Winston Silcott, on my quiz?
Yes.
Who did?
Not me.
Ah, dad wasn't it?
  
I suppose, take this problem .
for 
Watched she sing?, when I got Silcott on the 
Yeah, you said,
Her  
what's her name was
Silcott 
You don't .
Is Radcliffe's school called Magna Carta?
mum, I read out all these school names, see if you know what they are,
Mm.
brown.
Mm.
Mm.
John the Baptist.
Mm.
 Silegions.
 Silegions.
Mm.
Magna Carta.
Mm.
Mm.
Mm, mm.
You have them?, er Guildford County School.
Mm, that's the .
George Abbott.
Mm.
Who goes to George Abbott?
Don't know, Simon's mother teachers at Guildford County.
Where's Park Vile?
Park Vile is a school for disabled children in Guildford, Maread 
Oh what kind of 
and Mohammed's gonna go there
What's Ma , Magna Carta?
That's the only one I don't know  Oh that would never do would it?
Can't , can't please their youngsters out of thirty pound shirts 
I don't think  at all.
I've won the pools.
Why is it called mange tout Paul?
Peas.
What does mange tout mean?
Little
No  why are mange tout peas called mange tout?
Erm, small.
No.
What?
Mange tout, your french mange means
tout means 
I don't know.
everything, all, mange tout, eat all, that's why it's called mange tout cos he eats everything, and mange tout peas are called mange tout cos you eat the pods, twit 
Okay, out of all these whose high school, out of all these list which one do you reckon will be the most complex system of ,,, St John the Baptist,, Magna Carta, Bishop , Hart Brown,county school, George Abbott.
Say John the Baptist.
How did you know that?
Cos I'm a musician.
And what would they be, what 
St. John the Baptist.
No.
I don't know  crotchet.
Quaver, crotchet, quaver, crotchet, quaver  
Sounds like you 
No you're not going.
Ya, ya, ya,
Dad's says Liverpool are winning 
  
Weren't Liv weren't the easy team they've had so far, they were,was quite hard as well I think,what you should of said, yes and I'm Peterborough UEFA cup.
I don't think you'll get through.
.
Ah, we don't need the UEFA cup miss, it's only a UEFA cup.
Don't,.
Well grovel answer we get the  
 

One of those tapes has got big on, leave it,
 

That's your football one isn't it?that one's free now, your thinking of vice versa weren't we?, when I was thinking of big, yeah 
I was .
You think what?
Get off
That weren't wicked 
this bookline outlines these    I have done some  down in Wales, computer studies  I have done most work well, I  
Blimey, everybody helped themselves to my toffee without asking 
I did these questions and  
mum.
Cocky little what's it
What?
you have to write down what you find difficult, I have found nothing very difficult  Paul, now go and get the hoover 
I can't.
I have not found anything  
 
In modern languages, C D T I have found nothing very difficult.
put virtually all his down the very easy column.
Drama, I have found nothing very difficult, music, I have not found very difficult.
Best thing is.
Geography I have found nothing very difficult.
Anything he found difficult, maths.
Computer studies  Paul
Mum can you stop shouting, it's on there.
You, you've been hacking at this one bit, it's gone too soft, look that's why, yes, gone too soft 
From my point of view I have achieved quite a lot of those , I am very punctual and helpful.
, just remember when you turn up    
If anyone has set me a test I have done very well especially in  look, look at his , can't even sign his name 
Reply, Arthur Badger.
I have 
Badger.
Oh Heidi was 
 
This is my summary.
Who's he kidnapped? oh, oh she wanted him.
No, he wants her head.
What, that bogie bloke?
Yeah, he's just putting on 
What as a policeman, was he a policeman then?
No, he was a criminal
No, but what 
He's just come out of prison 
why did his, her husband  
evidence 
Ah, we're getting there now Ruth , right that's enough you lot, crikey, you 
You've got tons there dad.
It's very fattening.
Yeah,.
You're not going to be nine stone eight 
Nine stone 
I've got to do me egg.
Oh.
I've got to do me egg, like .
Don't mess with me dad,, Ivor was so big headed, it was like a  he kept going on and on, he kept going er, my geographical instinct, my maths instinct,
my science grade, ah.
It's quite likely to be quite bright though isn't he?
With geographical instinct 
Well his father's a surgeon, I mean
I've finished reading it Paul 
Haven't 
What happens to it now?
She's reading, can I just finish reading it?
Supposed to do it every turn?
I'm gonna stop it soon,
About time you did find something difficult really isn't it?
If I find the time I 
Let me find you some 
 

I will try to slant my handwriting to be more adult like, I will try to get many merit points, I will try to get at the top sets for every lesson  you are in the top sets for every lesson  do well in them, I want to carry on my good progress in the sports area, I do many sports now and I want to do more  
This is new how, how  is this 
 
is this psychology?
been here 
Oh cos you've just started it as well haven't you?
Did you all put this in 
Mm.
Does he, do you consider a very successful way of getting inside to what children think?
They have the right I think 
Only about ten per cent of children 
What?
or maybe twenty per cent, ten per cent think they're better than the teacher thinks they are, ten per cent think that  
Maybe they said  
eighty per cent are just exactly what you always thought, it's a waste of time writing it 
But I suppose you get insight er  twenty per cent was  she can't outrun him  I think this bit she gets killed and she turns up in Little England, this  come on.
Oh ha, ha  she's  to escape  does he think she's tied up, does he?
I'm going to the toy party 
She's  
for half an hour and then I'm releasing Moira so she can go for half an hour, she's 
Who's tying her up?
She's  
started    she's got to go through that gate 
What gate?
She's too near the wall 
Ooh lovely  ah, ah, ah, ah, ah,
Come on you silly cow, oh he's run right into her path 
ah, ah, ah, ah, ah, ah 
Oh there's a lovely soft patch that she can fall on, god.
Ha, she's had me panicking like mad  oh planes going over  
Yes, she 
Does she wanna out, out 
What?
Yes he's starring, yes he stars in Little England next year.
Little England isn't English, is it?
No, it's ex-  in Maibai, you'll watch it Ruth as well 
No, because it's on the same time as Emmerdale.
You'll drop Emmerdale.
No I won't, I like Emmerdale.
Oh.
Nice  oh, er, oh no, Sarah's got a cool head she won't panic, aha, ha, ha  please let me go   
Oh no, they  and he turns up in some  hanging from a chain  he's being cruel to her isn't he?
There are, she's dead  she's buried  this is quite good isn't it?
Do they do this purposely cos that man's just been sent to prison  the same thing isn't it?
What?
John  killed that bird when she said
Oh
she wants to be near  and he said couldn't let her go 
Paul, homework, now
I'm going.
Oh yes she saw the blood starting to come out of her neck and he caught her 
Sighed , tell you what Kevin you go and make a drink, I'll empty the tumbledryer and put the washing away, number one
Yes.
Paul what have you got on?
I'll call you a Pakistani, they wear three t-shirts, I said do you go to bed in them and then just leave them on the next morning put your school shirt on top?
Er?
Er, Vicky says you are awful going er, I said that's what they do, they grunt at me like an animal I grunt back at them.
She thinks you're , you do that to me.
What, er 
Er 
er, so I do it now, I get in first, I said have you done your homework  er , who's a  er, animals grunt  Your  magic box Kevin? dearie
Sorry.
magic box   watch my lips  magic box.
I've got the power.
Oh number one please
He's got the power.
I wanted to see my shares 
 
My shares are plummeting  
What are they now?it's only paper money, what's it matter?
Some of these you can't do.
That's not number two.
Yeah.
Intelligent people are never bored  Miss Hall's  nineteen forty three.
What?
Intelligent people are never bored.
Miss Hall's  nineteen forty three.
Is that when she said it?
I think so, looks like the first one 
Everybody  
accident at  service cos he wants all year four holding
You just said that though.
lighted candles
What would you rather like to be doing?, would you, if you're bored here, what would you really liked to be ?
Who said that?
A perpetual 
Who said that?
Hassan, all our naughty boys are called Hassan, sorry, I'll re-phrase that, all Hassan's in our school are naughty  it's the equivalent of Jason  the Pakistani equivalent of Jason
three and a half Kevin,that was one of the worst investments you have ever made.
What, you put 
You put 
on one.
Yes, but you've put twice as much money into it as your other investments.
it was greed, I couldn't help it  
Didn't you?, sheer greed.
 
Gone down from ten pence to three and a half.
When they did that black 
I mean that is embarrassing  lost so much  how much 
 

What kind of things, I mean amongst people of your age, what are the kind of things that people might be involved?
Getting bored.
oh
Can I have a look at this please?
BAA 
Dad what's the  
gone down?.
Goodbye in it?, ever, ever  ever, ever  how do you say that  goodbye in Italian?
 Italian 
 Italian 
No, affidavits, affidavits
Affidavits.
Yeah.
It's a sworn affidavits in legal thing.
Oh illegal.
Legal 
 
I think it means like if you saw that boy do something, the police, you, you take out a sworn affidavit that you saw him do that and, I think it's a legal document, look it up, it's
You wake that mum up 
a legal document 
It's not 
copy  what?
Mum, what does affidavit mean?
The Lord  twenty years old, first part of 
B, E,
 
Oh what means?, argumentative like mummy.
How do you spell argumentative?
Argumentative  argumentative 
Countenance
It's your face  isn't it mum?, countenance  I won't countenance any
with countenance
Give up yeah?
What?
Condone
Condones.
Cordons 
Cordons 
it's like a party game isn't it?
cordons.
Tied up 
Abutment
God knows.
That bit at the side, something abut something.
Siblings.
Siblings?
loud , noisy.
Just one I think  
What  
I don't recognise it  is that ford, that's ford Ruth isn't it?, that's what it is, it's a back ford, Pearly Way, those factories I'm sure.
What did you say about abutment mum?
Something next to something 
What?
meeting or , that was the name of an arch 
It's a building, it's a part of a building abutment 
Not a word I would of thought it was worth finding out the meaning of.
Well who gave them to us?
this book called The Flight of Doves by Nina Gordon.
Oh  that's the way I work.
That's photocopied isn't it?, are you studying that book?
No she wants .
If it's photocopied Paul, she didn't write it down for each one of you did she?
Paul are you studying that book in class?
Yes, we're reading it.
Give me a sentence with evolution in it, and tell me, telling me what it means evolution.
Darwin's theory on evolution does not mean for many Christians, no some Christians do not accept Darwin's theory of evolution.
There's a lovely in there, in there, in the er  life line, Christian windows now double glazing group given terms of Christian windows.
Some Christians
do not accept Darwin's theory of evolution  Darwin with a capital D and then apostrophe S  theory
Someone's up to naughties.
Affidavit  got a sentence with that?
What's it mean?
This is declaration.
Oh   witness needs a sworn affidavit 
A  witness
witness 
What?
in
What's  got?
Oh
affidavit 
Disaster would be  
The crime was disastrously.
Yeah.
disaster.
Bugsy Malone admitted  
Yeah, the guy who tied, who, who, who tied the women up on the railway lines, dastardly, wicked.
Which is that?
Well you know the film, you know the film  
Dastardly,
, you can get a big bowl of Babycham now Ruth.
Can you?
Yeah, that's good marketing 
How's committed spelt?
Ooh, it's a stinker.
How's it spelt?
Is it two m's, two t's? yes.
I got it right.
You never
I did 
Dastardly committed  
There's your  here you've not drunk 
 

How about criminal?how's criminal spelt?
That looks good Hot Shot.
Yeah.
How's criminal spelt?
Criminal?,
C R I M I N A L, criminal   you like her don't you Paul?
Mm
Gone off her.
she was better ages ago  
The man's countenance changed when he was convicted of a murder.
Yes Paul wonderful.
What do you normally, grades do you normally get for your English?
I think work must be too easy then.
Ooh, wanna see that, next Monday, Wall Street 
What is this I'm drinking, chocolate and almonds?
Yeah 
I don't think it's chocolate coconut.
That's good,tha that's clever that, there's a 
It's marvellous 
that's marvel no, no it's not, it's slandering, no it's not it's liable, it's liable cos you in trouble.
, three cheers  can I check it Paul?
No 
 

 

Did you check my spellings .
Evolution.
E V O L U T I O N
Non,
N O N P L U double S E D
Impeccable.
I M P E double C A B L E
I thought abutment had two t's  affidavit.
A double F  I D A V I T
Dastardly
D A S T A R D  L Y
D E L del, I G E R E 
Countenance
C O U N T E N , start again C O U N T E N A N C E
Cordon
Don't know that 
D O R D O 
Abutment
A B U T M E N T
Erm, I've looked in there it is.
Abutting has two t's  abutting.
S O B L I A N T how's it spelt?
S I B 
sibilant .
This is a good talk about good jobs, that's Schofield g , landed himself a nice little series there.
What Jason Donovan?
, no not , yeah I mean he's done well, like that 
Schofield's Europe 
Schofield's Europe, that's his second tour, and he's been all round the blinking Europe
Yeah, he's brilliant ain't he?, goes anywhere he wants 
Talk about , yeah all at BBC's expense 
One black mark, wrong, red mark, no homework, I forget it 
Oh no , has it, what, exclamation mark?
has it got no homework exclamation mark.
Just done a wrong one 
    
No, if I go over there 
Are those mine  mum hasn't rung and said Adrian's got that job yet has he, she?
No news is good news.
Might be.
I  just stop  in your mother 
Ah weekend.
that is pure  as a mother.
That's old that
Is it?
Bought that about eighteen months old that picture.
No.
It is, you gave the coat away  more than a year ago
Oh, it's my  sibo 
What pure  sibo 
That's pure unadulterated  sibo that is 
Look at those shoes dad, that's ages ago
What's that?
There well 
what's that green track suit?
I think that's, you're right 
 
that's Robbie in the same class isn't it?,
Robbie there.
mummy, mummy reputed.
David.
You can't be right about everything 
I don't know who is he?
David.
Robbie pre-crew cut, Robbie
David.
Looks like Robbie to me.
Robbie hasn't got dark hair .
I don't think it's Robbie 
That's David, I know who's in his class.
That boy still in his class?
Yeah, that's him.
David still in his class?
I don't think, I know Robbie's gone, I'm not sure about him 
Well look at the sell buy date on the  
Well all you've got to know that Robbie's gone
Look at the mark on the sell by date on the 
Look at the sell by, very funny Ruth.
Well,
what are you talking 
look at the sign of the packet , I think it's ninety one.
Can't be 
Oh,
Yeah, who's Roy , oh the South African 
he's  Prime Minister.
It was eight four Ruth.
Oh I thought he was dead a long time ago.
Oh Ruth
Didn't know he was still alive,
 
 
he's made more money  you can make more money 
April ninety one.
Yeah 
That means it's at least a year old
Mm 
Who sent it?
At least a year ahead.
Who sent it?
Guy sent it, gee look that's half a million quid.
Who died?
Britain's smallest house is for sale at one and a half thousand pounds   I'll buy it  
How big is it, nine foot?
Don't make sense really.
Nine foot tall, that's not so bad if you 
No 
stand in that  might just be one room 
 
Might just be one room  wonder if I got my  on my er B T shares?foods cold by the time you get 
they're more entertaining than the programme some of these adverts, more coffee Jason   even Mrs  cries 
What about?
Did she left?
She left  What time was the party from then?
Half past eight  doesn't start till half past nine  , blast I think I'll watch the telly at Moira's  .
, I didn't know you was doing a fashion parade, I thought you was going to get some toys.
.