

Is there any more last minute entry for the quiz?
Okay, sit, sit still, be quiet and listen to this, you ready?
Question one  which of Britain's colonies is most populated?
Okay  if it's any help just look at the opening
tonight, nothing tricky that, it's just  er which of Britain's colonies is the most populated?
Question two, which city did Lady Godiva ride naked through the streets of?
I'm sure you know the story, which city did Lady Godiva ride naked through the streets of?
Coventry.
And number three whose was the signet ring which is sometimes known as the fisherman's ring?
Okay, whose was the signet ring sometimes known as the fisherman's ring?
Question four, fashion model and T V presenter Marie Helvin was married to which famous photographer?
Maybe if you think along the lines of fashion
That's the only one I know
er
I'm not supposed to give clues, okay fashion model and T V presented Marie Helvin was once married to which famous photographer?
I can see we're having difficulty with these questions  no it's just the answers, okay, question five, now this one's easy if you're a surgery, if you have a tracheotomy, where would you show off the scar?
Okay
The neck
if you've had a tracheotomy where would you show off the scar?
Question six  okay for anybody who's interested in eating, as we are, pate de foie gras is made from what?
Right we'll be even more specific right, a help for ya, pate de foie gras is made from the liver of what?
Right, can't get any easier than that  do you want it again?
 
Right, okay question number seven
which substance used to be known as brimstone?
Okay it's, shall we say a mineral?
I shall
which substance used to be known as brimstone?
she's giggling again, what the questions are a bit difficult?
No, too easy, question eight, in Britain we play draughts what do the Americans call the game?
Checkers.
Okay
in Britain we play draughts, what do the Americans call the same game?
Brimstone I dunno what it is
Question nine, M G sports cars, famous in Britain, what does the M G stand for?
I think everybody knows M G sports cars, what does the M G stand for?
And question ten in medical terms  tetanus is better known by what name?
Okay to you and me tetanus is known by what?
question eleven, what is the length of time of an association football match?
Okay
Ninety minutes.
an F A football match, what is the length of time of an F A football match?
question twelve who hosts the T V programme, sorry T V quiz The Krypton Factor?
who hosts the T V quiz The Krypton Factor?
number thirteen, okay  I'll be very surprised if you don't know this one, who painted the Mona Lisa?
again, who painted the Mona Lisa?
question fourteen  Middlesex Street in London has a very famous market, okay, better known as which market?
Middlesex Street in London has a very famous market and the street's better known by this name, what is it?
and question fifteen, right listen carefully 
 
which of the following names is not a bone in the body a femur, patella, radius, cornea or temporal 
Cornea.
so you've got a choice of five, one of them is not a bone, which is it?
Femur, patella, radius, cornea or temporal
It's radius innit?


Final section questions sixteen to twenty 
question sixteen which country is the world's leading coffee producer?
Okay, I've said go for the obvious ones didn't I?
Which country is the world's leading
Could be
coffee producer?
either Brazil
or Kenya 
Question seventeen
Coffee producer
the Pyrenees mountain range lies between which two countries?
Okay and we want 'em both  no half points for this
What is it?
The Pyrenees mountain range lies between which two countries?
Question eighteen, in which book would you find the character Long John Silver?
Desert Island er not Desert Island


okay, in which book would you find the character Long John Silver?
Question nineteen  which letter of the English language is most used?
E
Which letter of the English language is the one we use most?
I'd say E
I don't know
And finally question twenty, which country uses the Drachma as its unit of 
Greece 
currency?
Okay  again, the final question number twenty, which country uses the Drachma as its unit of currency?
Cross it out you plonker 
Question six, pate de foie gras is made form the liver of, okay literary of a fat goose, but we accepted goose alright, so pate de foie gras from a goose liver.
Question seven, which substance used to be known as Brimstone?
That's sulphur
I'd erm cod liver oil.
question eight, in Britain we play the game draughts, in America the same game is called checkers  er, number nine, one or two of you got it right, most of you caught out with M G sports cars, the M G actually stands for Morris Garages
Ah got that one
oh shit
Okay, you got half, you got Morris, question ten, tetanus is better known by what name to you and me it's lock jaw, at least if you've ever had it, it is, question eleven
what is the length of time of an  of an F A football match?
Ninety minutes, excluding injury time and all that stuff, ninety minutes, question twelve, who hosts the T V quiz The Krypton Factor?, that's Gordon Burns  question thirteen, who painted the Mona Lisa?
Leonardo de Vinci  fourteen, Middlesex Street in London has a very famous market lends its name to the street it's Petticoat Lane  question fifteen, which of them is not a bone, okay, we, we asked you which of these is not a bone, a femur, a patella, radius, cornea or temporal, the one is cornea, that's part, that's part of the eye  question sixteen, which country is the world's leading coffee producer?
I said go for the obvious one Brazil  question seventeen, the Pyrenees mountain range lies between which two countries?
France and Spain, okay, if you only got one of those countries right we couldn't give you the point, it has to be both, question eighteen, in which book would you find the character Long John Silver?
Treasure Island