

I killed my cat with a fucking spade  We are at the scene of the crime Mr  what did you see?
That was Ashley not me, no
You absolute bastard Mr  what did you see of the crime?
What, what, explain to me what you saw please.
I was walking my dog right  through the common and this great big black fat hairy man came along and sharpened his great big long tool into, into this cattle, the bad thing about it was the fucking cow exploded 
The cow exploded did you say?
Yes the cow exploded.
Thank you very much Mr  for your comment this is Wain  reporting for news at six.
We are watching the brides of Christ probably never ever to be seen again in the year two thousand and fifty six.
Janice is writing away on her pad.
Shaun's sitting cross legged
And Darren looks like an oversized leprechaun, all dressed in green and ready to go, meanwhile I'm reporting this excellent news to you guys  if you are listening out there from the national library association, er, er, er, er


we, ee, ee, ee, ee, ee


hello, hello
What does
that word mean in the year twenty five, twenty thousand?
Oh I've got to phone my ma 
 Blik blik slogger logger a 
Masturbate explain masturbate
by the way
Well if you take a
and cross it with a fuel injection between her and nitro oxide
And take with crystals from the 
you'll put it with a box of speed with about seven hundred leggings, twelve per hour.
I'd like you to ring us back up in the past and ask us, tell us if there's a war and how often you have sex in them days.
We do it seven days a, seven, seven times a day, seven times a week, in the year nineteen ninety two
Excluding bank holiday Mondays
fifty two weeks a year
excluding bank holiday Mondays
and Christmas Day
excluding bank holiday Mondays and Christmas Day
all too pissed
Thank you very much for listening and
this is er, er
I should work for the B B C shouldn't I as a news reporter
this is Nigel  
That's a burp you may not experience that word from where you come from
Yes by the year two thousand and fifty six comes, burps may be anonymous
Smells alright but there you go 
Here mum how am I supposed to get that hi fi up to Reggie's house when I can't remember the way through that fucking maze of flats with you 
Well I'll come with you, that's no trouble
wants that one, but I'm gonna get him a little one to go on there
Next time I see him, I'll probably see him tomorrow no I, you usually see him round town, so I say I'll arrange a time
Yeah 
that's if he still wants it, I suppose he does 
Oh he hit the flag old 
time, bastard   
Did any one see the
from that van yesterday?
No
All Joanne said was did you catch up with Wayne weren't it?
Yeah


oh, it does add a bit more cleanliness to it Wayne, mind you the rice is
so
are you, well you eat it the way you want to do it and I'll eat it all up
Oh ya, ya, ya, ya
nice and rich ha
oh ya, ya, ya, ya
now I've got the mini ones I can play some new chords you see
oh ya, ya, ya, ya, oh ya, ya, ya
it's called a midi
ya, ya, oh ya, ya, ya
I know what it's called but I would like it
da, ya, da, ya
Best get a stand for it
Oh have you?
I'll fix that, how you gonna put my fence up for me?
Mm, mm, mm where's it got to be?
Well
Is this on an employed basis innit?
In what way employed basis?
Because I can't 
Am I being employed to put this fence up for you?
I haven't got any money if that's what you're after?
I hope 
That's what employment means don't it?
Well I've got no money Wayne, don't forget I'm still on sick pay until next week then I get me full week's money
That's true, that's
and I've helped you as much as I possibly can in the past, a few weeks, to the best of my ability
If you don't get a job, I will get a job for the time being and you want me to take some money off your bill, you can get rid of some of that rubbish out in that fucking shed, in the back of that van
Yeah
Don't wanna 
No mum's giving you a fair, what she say?
Claire
Oh
I want them sheds cleared out cos I want to get that garden sorted out for the summer
There's piss all jobs in there
I know, er, well where the path is, the only problem is where the edge finishes at the other end, at the bottom end, right, there's gonna be a gap there and I wanna close that gap off somehow.
Where?
At the bot , where the edge is right?
Yeah
It'd been there
right near the gate
look
where the gate supposed to be
Hang on let me show, let me find a bit of bloody paper here, silly bloody arse 
You'd have to dig a couple of holes and you'd have to concrete the bugger in
No
it won't just sit there
Right, that's the path right, this is where the edge finishes, yeah, this is the front edge, yes?
Yeah
This is the path coming up to the house and you've got the green like that  between there and there, there's a gap, I don't know how I'm gonna do that 
No I don't know what the fuck you're on about here, it's upside down, where's the house?
There's the house, right
Yeah
there's the window
Yeah 
that's the path
Yeah
and that's the path green to the alleyway
Yeah
and this is the path coming onto the big main path
Oh right, yeah I get you
right, this is the edge
Yeah
and it stops about there, between there and that path is a gap
That's alright just do it straight down
right, yeah, but that means there's gonna be ground on this side, what I want to do is come as close as I can to this path, don't worry about this
You've got a gate there
Well I, I might just block it off get another piece of wood and put it in there and just nail that fucking lot up and block off completely, otherwise Nick's, if Nicholas is playing in the garden he'll be out of there like a shot, so you're gonna get one post there, say one in the middle and one at the end.
Stop the fucking cats coming and shitting in the garden
Mm
And you've got the gate out there, repair that, put it up somehow, well it's only a temporary job
 
get some gates probably down the dump or something.
Well if you get through some of that rubbish, that's beginning to smell
You talk to him about that
It's beginning to smell 
if you can make arrangements maybe we can sort something out between us
There's loads of shit out there got to
nearly all of it's gotta go really, there's two gas fires out there
If we can flog them 
we might be able to bloody flog them to somebody Wayne
Ah
get a couple of 
I'd flog my necklace first I'm so fucking skint
You flogged it?
No
Oh, Alfie might buy a fire off you dear
I doubt it  I wouldn't er bother asking him
Yeah, well you don't need to put concrete in it because if you can little bit with a sledgehammer 
If you have to put concrete in concrete, you have to cement it in 
Well it's only a bloody temporary job innit?
You want a sledgehammer don't you?
Oh yeah while I think of it 
No 
while I think of it, you owe Maggie thirty one pound ninety five P, I've paid thirty pound for you up to now
Thirty one, you might as well say thirty two quid
Talk of Maggie, when you see her tomorrow say Wayne said he's not gonna give you any more money until he gets his videos back, cos she's got two of my videos, my Razor video and my IN X S.
Well I'll just ask her for your videos first
Just say Wayne said can he have his videos and if she don't cough them up in the week, say you don't get any more money until he gets his videos back.
Well I asked her how much you owed and she said thirty one ninety five 
Say thirty two quid dear
No that's right
Yeah well it's only a couple of bloody pennies short of money 
Wayne wanted to know what you
Thirty quid whoop fucking new man
Well it was sixty 
See really all you need to do is pull it, you've got two posts, how high do you want to go with the posts, about that high?
Which is about what four foot?
That's all you've got to go, so them poles have got to be cut down to five foot, two five foots, four, four five foots
First thing to do is level the fucking ground off
Well the spade, Martin has got the spade
Yeah and they 
That spade's crap, it fucking bows
Oh what else was I gonna say?
Oh do you want to stay in the social club?
Well I did say that, yeah
Well, what, what, what 
Well what for?
Snap
Well if there are any trips I can get them cheaper can't I?
You get them cheaper anyway without being in the Social 
No you won't 
Yes you will, oh yes you will, I fucking see to that, seeing as they couldn't even send me a fucking get well card 
It's only fifteen P a week, it's not exactly expensive
No, but it all adds up  I was sitting there the other day adding up your things
Right now you can discuss with Wayne about the sheds
I don't want to worry about sheds for now.
As I say I was sitting there adding it up, a pound for this and a pound for that and your meal, a fiver for Maggie, I'm twenty pound short off you
Yeah was cutting house keep short
Yeah alright, alright
We're not having a go at you Wayne, we're just talking dear
See I was just adding it up
you know, it's a hell of a bloody whack out when you, you know, when you're short
Especially rent week
Oh I'm bored  I suppose that
will it take us to granddad's?
No
Let me ask him, he's driving the damn thing
Well it'll take fucking ages and it'll be very uncomfortable for you, whoever's sitting in the back.
It'll be me, because I can stretch me legs out
It'll be very uncomfortable sat in the back 
What's in the back there at the moment?
A couple of cushions, it's very low to the floor as well 
Is it?
and there's a lot of holes in that floor, if you fell through it 
Yeah  can you get three in the front?
Mm, mm no way hos
No way, oh


Bless you
Squashed me and Martin in the front, I keep hitting his leg when I fucking change gear
Yeah


Bless you, now you see, now straight away I've asked him a simple question, he's given me a simple, straightforward answer


And we've said bless you three times 
Best to wait until get a car
and now, now it's eliminated you see
That's a point when we gonna get this fucking car off of John?


When I get a hundred and eighty quid 


I said I've just gone back


Will you shut up
Shut up
Bless you, stupid mummy


Shut up
I suppose that
the fucking
no let him renew
Let him renew Wayne cos our phone bill 
our phone bill I can't afford it any more 
you be ten P a time
I'm gonna move it back over here 
Yeah




Bless you
Is Shaun there please, it's Wayne, how dare you, hello, hello, I'm sorry to trouble you there's an ostrich on your phone line
You'll be on our bloody phone line if you don't move your ass


Bless you
Ah?
Oh wow, amazing   you going out with or, yeah, no I've got
yeah  so, before seven, well, yeah alright, you alright?
He's right next door to Reggie's flats when you go down and pick him up
you can do that for me
Ask if she was
what was you gonna say dear?
What was you gonna say dear?
What, what was you gonna say?
 
 
ah?
Chris
yeah alright
bolting, puppy, dog 
Yeah I know that
He had to go to Wales, son went to Wales to pick it up yesterday
something to do with Joanne's family or something she was on about
Oh I don't know about that 
something on about  it's got a, it's one of them little square Welsh terriers
Hooray
Welsh terrier


he brought it in this morning 
Is that thing recording?
Yeah, I ain't said nothing to Wayne
He'd soon fucking hear you


How much you said you swear
I'm sneezing more than anything
What's it all about then really?
Speaking, just, normal conversation?
Yeah just, to tape the conversation
Yeah but if you're having
It might be something private Wayne
Yeah
It doesn't matter
Yeah it does matter to us 
It does matter to us 
it does to me
Well I'd known if you said anything private, and I wipe it off
No something you er, something you've got to be very careful of, because that can also be discriminating in, in a court 
No she said to me 
Ah, you mean, might say something privately here, not knowing that switched on and it might be about somebody else and that person might know that person er with the evidence 
I don't 
you never no, oh use at work by all means yeah
But she said to ask people
I'd love to do her work 
tell them that you're recording out of common courtesy as was, but I didn't think you two would mind because it's, well I don't know interesting, interesting talking to you 
Might of done mightn't we?
things like that I don't know
Really exciting that is innit?
What time you going out?
When your 
way to the fox 
twenty to six?
Twenty to seven
As I said you could take that down Reggie's then
I haven't got petrol mum
Well you're going down there
I've got to drive down there and back up here, then I've got to go to Darren's then I've 
Well how long you gonna be?
got to drive back home again
When you gonna do that then?
Well I can drive to Shaun's then go Darren's, then leave the van there and then pick, drive us back home again, but I won't have enough to go backwards and forwards, backwards and forwards all the bloody time, it's nearly on zippo
I say Reggie's on the way
Yeah that means coming back over here don't it, I'm not driving around like with my fucking hi fi in the back 
Oh I
What, like you're going out to a pool
in it?
Yeah, our
got to come anyway, er I don't know if I've got enough money to bloody pay him, it's a bad week
Yeah
your bad week
these days
Oh


if I pay him I won't be able to pay the Provident bloke tomorrow night 
It's
money mum
I don't care
See what I mean
What?
When you say things like that 
Well there you go
that's personal in this family
They say it's anonymous, they just log it on computer and it's just, to show people in the future what we spoke like in the nineties
Yeah
We speak like motherfuckers


I know
Didn't say that into Tom 
I know what we do mother
er him, don't shout in my bloody ear hole, cor does he shout
will do the apple and pears at number ten 
erm, how am I gonna pay the Provi bloke tomorrow darling?
do the jock strap
I can't
Lend us ten grand mum
I didn't even pay Chris today cos I didn't have enough money
Don't look at me I can't give you no more bloody loot
Lend us forty million
Ha, ha, he wants fifty four pound fifty today 
I can't even have a bet on, on Saturday
Oh what a sheer catastrophe that is
It fucking is, I like backing me ponies
I've a
today erm 
Dirty little sod
sat here with Marcus and I said oh, I got a, got a flash, and he say I got a flash or something
Dirty sod
it's like, it's either king or knight something, knights or kings something has won a race
Just what?
Just watch, I'll put the Teletext on, out of all the races there was one there King's Fountain, first, it had, it had only just come first and I'd switched it on, I went wow
King's Fountain?
Yeah
I don't think it were
It did
It didn't
It did, I'll show you, don't piss me off mate
Oh wait a minute I shall see
cos I'll have you
I shall tell you
three, three, six, three
That's what I want, there it is look King's Fountain
Oh yeah
four, six
Yeah
Weird innit?
Have you got a pound coin I can borrow of you dear?
I owe you a pound, yeah, I can't give it to you dear because I've still got exactly a ten pound note dear and I'm waiting for the pools lady dear
Cos I
Now as soon as she arrives dear I give you 
I put one in here last night
your pound dear
Oh it's just dropped, did you hear that go?
No
Oh
Now quick, do you know we're fucking shaking, mm
No, it's thirteen hours I want 
He reckons if he wants any more money when he comes round here tell him
tell him there's scrap
I'll tell him
Yeah, you know why don't you because that side bits down the back, he probably thinks you've been bloody fiddling with it.
You can't no way 
Well he said if he accuses me of fiddling with the telly I'll punch his fucking
all you have, all you have to say to him is dad's back at work, he's not been using the telly 
He's done that 
and that's it
I was gonna say kiss my arse motherfucker
Yes that's it exactly, him as well is there nothing on rehearsals
oh that crap Brinley dinner time oh she's gone to look at 
Oh fucking hell 
a Metro, I told her if she sees one she likes, get it
Don't keep telling me I don't want to fucking know 
Too late , Tom come in and said he see Angie right, up the Wale Road
It's discreet this
I'm telling Wayne 
Well I'm not interested
Fucking Brinley's a big fucking tart as far as I'm concerned  there are young man are you coming to discover us with young Sam?
Get the fuck out of here, how's he gonna get six quid for a ticket?
Exactly for a start
Sam might pay exactly I pay for it
Who wants to go to a poxy fucking disco anyway it's crap
You always say you like discos
Yeah but not with a bunch of old fucking faggots running around
There won't be old faggots, there's new faggots coming down from Salisbury 
get in with their walking stick 
oh no they won't, in that case he'd hold a fucking dinner and dance, he wouldn't hold a disco
It'll be full of old faggots and dickheads
Not from my head office there won't
That's right, the 
and big fat girls 
There's Tom  though, he's with us, hooray
Lucky bastard
 



How old are you?
I shall be forty nine this July
I told them all you're forty seven
Oh thank you very much
She said how old's your dad and father then?
Are we talking about Poppa?
Fuck knows forty eight I think, I don't know, forty eight, forty seven
behave
Please, please
I've got to go to the loo in a minute anyway  after I steal one of your cigarettes, notice the word cigarettes instead of the word fags  oh I don't know, I think I'll go and sell my body, might make a couple of quid and leg it down the
 



I get it
 hockedy pockedy 
the Rock of Gibraltar
You ain't been better your missus
Good evening
How are you?
Well if you say yes to my first question, I'll answer you, can I have ten thousand pounds?
No
Well that's, that then, alright then
There's Nigel aah
Aah Nigel aah,
Have a race with a Lada today Martin, got seventy five out of this on the motorway
I told you not to fucking thrash the bollocks out of it
Was it thrashing the bollocks out of it?
Only do fifty Wayne, you fucking blow the bastard engine up, you'll fucking get a sore


I would think so
 

no, no
 

look out
Whey,
Fucking idiot what you doing?
Oh listen
You stupid guy
let's be good citizens shall we and let everyone through 
Here are, race that fucking whore and get her out the bloody way 
Let's all be very good citizens and kill everyone man, fucking stupid cunt
 

fucking stupid bastard
Very bastard, very bastard 
There you go, don't get struck out
drop me down tomorrow right
One o'clock out
No you pick me up
yeah outside
bye now
I won't be able to drive this tonight it's got no fucking petrol in it, what a cunt, stressed out
have you got any more money left?
Fucking slap another fiver on the bitch 
You'd never slap anyone
No it's 
come on you Lada shit, get out the fucking way
Yeah what you doing man?
Look at this, he's fucking after me look 


do you want me to take you home?
Please
Don't say please just say yes, let's go
No
Fucking old man


Fucking kill
I love it when a plan doesn't work   how dry I am, how dry I am, nobody knows how dry I am  will you get me whisky for me?
Da, la, dan, dan  get off and milk it, hooray
It's not our milkman is it?
Fucking hell mate where you going you prick?
Fucking arms off in a minute
hooray, sorry love, sorry I'm a laugh today, I'm
in a good mood today
well I'm not quite sure


Virgil,Virgil , what are you doing driving a vehicle, I didn't know you could drive, haven't seen me drive motherfucker, get her in here and fuck her shit
nice white ones, use Persil?
Get off and milk it  hooray go on pop in for a pint, wife won't mind  go on pop in for a pint, wife won't mind, hooray 


What's this stupid boy doing  mummy, mummy as well, oh look at him he's fucking hard, he walks like a hard man,
Oh he's having a test isn't he?
Take him on the outside
take him on the outside, take him on the inside, take him on the outside, inside, outside, let him through outside, inside, in  squeeze them between the lot of them look


this lane is faster than your lane, no my lane is faster than yours leg it, what the fuck's going on?
Queue
Queue, queue  barny magrew leg it, run, leg it   I know a short cut, it's a long shot but it might just work
Don't go over the roundabout that way
No I was gonna go through Crin , to the fucking tunnel at Cricket's Way
You can't the
blew up
So  got through there, it goes, we slip in them trees, here you are, you can drive through that other open path and out he other side, whey
It's illegal
Who gives a shit?
Hooray, I, what a boy, you can go to King Arthur's from here?
Fly
Let's fly along, wings   I'm waiting for sex, oh yeah , Stuart looking out they're the banana boy's
yeah fucking Doris, move you fat bitch
Trying to cut you up the arse
Trying to cut up a Lada, get over this thing now and
fuck is your bollocks I'm going on the second lane, hooray
Hooray, okay go on,
lovely lovely 
Lovely lovely


Oh I can't


to shoot his loaf, I don't think he's brushed up on his cream that he dropped look
Look at the state of her
he dropped all his porridge   that was fucking well crafty, ah the indicators are still going  oh you stupid man, keep going 
hey ho and off we go with a run legged run, run, run, hey ho and off we go la, la, la, la, la  ninety nine mate please, with a flake and lots of sauce  revenging boys, revenge of the giant cucumber lotion 
Oh everybody out, quick, get out hooray
I've had this, I've had this tape on since I've left my house 
  

some of this lot ain't happening


god
stop here and now, turn round now
Does he stall it?
No he doesn't
No he doesn't
See you tomorrow
Okay my little sweetness  bye, bye   have I told you lately that I love you, oh yeah  hurry up cos I've gotta get out of here, I've got to boot it, is there anything behind?
I don't know squash it
I mean is there anything your way over there?
No 
 

Shut up kid
It ain't that loud mate, it's only a fucking seven fifty
 

Wake up mate er, cos you'll have a slippy fan belt for supper  I suppose you wanna go home now
No you've got another six years, whey 
 

Look out


Fucking shit herself
  

it's fucking hot in there mate
er it's probably a load of noisy engine on there


like crunching the gear
oh dear
 

Ha, great turbo
Watch out mind that granny
Whey, shit
Get over you twat 
Stop me with
in reverse
No, stop it, doing a fucking hundred mile an hour you cunt 
shit man a hundred and twenty
Fucking hey must be lunatics it's only a single lane carriageway  hurar hurar and it's a one way street, dead end fucking inverted brain leg it of the moon, the sun


What's this what 
This is how the British speak nowadays, during the nineties, it's a load of bullshit, teach us more proper English bitch, was that Tom?
Oh bastard 
     

Shit, get over this side
Groan that gear box, crunch it well 
Do it  georgdi off the ground  
hand brake, skidded down the hill 
 

what did you do that for mate?
Oh a caterpillar ran out the road in front of me
which one, the bloke or the dog?
watch it mate I'm gonna have
they all queue up, they're not gonna let me out though the bastards
one nil
Seven nil
Oh god I'm getting them
wow, what fucking happened there?
Hit that fucking bollard
I was looking at that bloke in the Metro going  fuck me
aah
He wasn't impressed
Ooh he's turning round hey he's coming, hey 
 
he's flying up behind
He ain't, he's pissed off, you won't catch me I'll be gone, I mean ee ah  what you doing I haven't got no petrol to fucking, drive round the town you cunt
So
the old dear's, hooray
I wanna watch fucking Neighbours in a minute
Oh shut up
Watch Neighbours
 Gaybours everybody needs a  gaybour get some money for petrol I'll be round the town later on
Phone later on ah, Ron, Ron later, later on
about elevenish
Eleven
Fuck off
don't look like he's allowed to see her
Ain't she going to work, I'll pick her up from work
Go on then
 

My god 
 

Who's that?
the town'll be chock-a-block 
Oh dear
Could of made that if I had a Lamborgini 
Go 
pulled up my mum last night, she's been going fucking apeshit on me
Yeah?
Yeah so I won't be getting any money off of her 
 

Shortie'll give us some money for petrol, he's thick
Ain't got any money
Never fucking has
 



some one stoned it
They did
fucking Ghostbusters look, hooray
That's the one we went to London ther