

and I thought, right, this bloke's a wanker
You move down please
And you said no
because there's no room and Sonia goes  shut up, where d'you want us to go?
. Right, the block shuts up right 
old Army General, line up and get in a single line
we can maximise the  space if you get in that leg room of about one millimetre or lie down on people's laps and then we can build or may be even lie down on 
 
The worst thing is right is old women trying to get on the train
We can't, there's no room .
I was just asking
Old women 
Oh look, there's a fucking camera out there
walking sticks and they've got like Parkinsons Disease 
knocking everyone out the way
camera
these two ladies and this old biddy, she's right, she always gets on the train first and all the businessmen and all the kids hat her
that that one with the black hat?
No, she gets on, she's always there in the morning.
She gets her friend and they sort of lock arms and sort of do a rugby scrum and they knock everybody out the way.
And one day and this businessman goes, do you mind, stupid cow, cos she always they just erm run
and no matter and one day we we did a rugby scrum and we rammed them out the way and they went flying.
It was really funny and we got
The worst is 
 
the worst is when you're on a carriage which is packed with J F S kids cos they're like, they're just lying down  
 
and they dragged two of them in and there's about ten people in the other side of the carriage in about this much space and there's like two J F S kids lying on the floor in the middle of the carriage
we get on the train at , most of them get on at Elstree  luckily so what we do is we open the doors and they're always crowding up the bit where the door is and they say excuse me may I get on please?
And th and then they let all their friends get on first 
There's one at Kentish Town, a businessman who smokes big fat cigars like this and he's half finished them and he throws them on the train and when the doors open no-one clears out the way and he steps on  and he's such as bastard
they go, bloody kids, pushing, all the
but they're the ones who always
they think they think they like
And the things is, they always laugh, they're always laughing when they get on the train
D'you know what I hate
crowd all the seats yeah and you can hear them
and they're like so loud and high-pitched and then when they laugh
and this woman's like saying, I've saved you bloody cow and they're always shouting.
D'you remember that time that that fat boy said, save your seat you bloody cow, sit in it.
She said no and they start having a fight.
Stupid.
slob right in front of the doors
and like you're trying to get off the train, d'you mind
yeah, the doors come apart, the doors come apart, and they're still stuck there
and like there's a puddle of spit  and you just sort of push past them and the bloke goes  don't care  and I hate businessmen
and he's carrying his briefcase and he decides he wants to get a paper right and he's absolutely massive
really hate is when you're on a crowded train and you're all getting on the train and someone else who's getting off lights up a cigarette and 
They all s they stand there at the door going  lighter as if it matters they have to get off the train with a cigarette in their mouth or they're uncool, some shit like this
The worst paper  is The Times
No,n or The Financial Times.
They go
and they're holding it up here
and I got, I got a bit 
and he goes
and also him and this lady they sit there and they start murmuring about you
such a bloody annoying bastard and if you talk they stare at you like this
she never smiles.
I've seen her laugh but I think she's taking the piss.
what d'you wanna do after school like that 
and you step on their foot by mistake and they
the trombone and they think the trombone shouldn't be there and this man says, look, picks up the trombone and puts it outside the train.
He said look you don't need to take that to school, it's just taking up space which I could stand in.
Fuck you you old bugger.
He's such a tosser.
he thinks that he can buy  I could buy this standing space because I'm a businessman and I've got lots of money.
Fucking tosser.
Mom, mom    reasonably  hold on a second, just gotta put this on
really nasty  
I hate this subject, especially with a  teacher who doesn't know anything about it.
every time is just compare sources which bores me stupid.
Bastard teacher  he's the one that reacts and freaks and pisses you off    don't know.
What's that under my foot?the accused 
Okay 
Maybe.
No no no shut up.
Cos I don't want to, it's boring  .
Mom?a nice time after school cleaning the desks.
Mhm?
Rupert's having a nice time after school cleaning the desks.
No.
Being sarcastic mother, you know what a  he is.
Yeah, well teachers are all dicks so  they don't know how to discipline anyone.
They're all thick.
Pardon?
Barbara
Oh, Barbara, silly cow.
Bertie Wooster 
 
and the resourceful Jeeves Hugh Laurie and Stephen Fry find themselves back in New York in the first new episode of the new and final series of Jeeves and Wooster beginning on I T V this week.
What time, what day is it on?
Writer Clive  has created the plot lines by interviewing 
 
What?
Boring as hell
I mean, it's not a boring programme but you'd find it boring, believe me.
What kind of computer does he want?
He wants an expensive computer
What's it called?
The B B C shit?
I mean  bollocks shit or something
He just wants a better one than they've got now but a very basic 
No he wants a decent computer.
He doesn't want a P C bollocks
I said that's what he's got 
I bet he wants a bollocks P C.
Bollocks.
Well why doesn't she buy him a computer?
Well bollocks .
Look, if she can send him to Westminster or Eton she's got money.
Yeah, well, then I don't see why he his father can't pay for it.
Well why can't his father pay for a computer?
 
 
I'm not doing as much homework but bloody hard at school which Roland won't appreciate, which really pisses me off cos I don't 
 
Well, sometimes, I mean, yes at the moment but we're working very hard at s 
Well cos we're working much harder in school at the moment and also the exams are coming up
Bollocks.
one, Arsenal three, Arsenal two, Leeds United two, Leeds United two, Arsenal three, Arsenal three, Nottingham Forest nil, Ipswich two, Arsenal four, Arsenal one, Tottenham Hotspur nil.
Fuck you.
Got t I'm keeping it.
I just wanna cut the picture of Kim Basinger off the front page.
Well, just a couple f pages out of it.
. Mom you know the quality of this sound recording thing well it's not very good.
I don't know how they expect to get anything out of it.
It's very bad    I'm reading.
No  Wh why don't you just go out?
You'll feel better.
Believe me, I feel like that every morning and I'm never sick.
Yeah, well I do, believe me, I feel very s Mom, I gag on the way t 
Who's Laura ?
Have you heard of someone called Laura ?
She's a Hollywood gossip.
what?
This one.
Sh what this one?
No, it's not made up, I've seen her before on T V
in a minute.
that's the life  .
Ever seen the film called A Man For All Seasons?
Is it good?
Is it any good?
Sir Thomas Moore
Look mom, the pick of satellite films mom, I mean three of them only get two stars.
Shows you what a load of crap they have on satellite.
Yes, one second.
One, sorry I wanna read this, I'll be b I promise I'll be there in a minute.
I'll just quickly read what I want to   Okay .
I said I would I'm g 
No, taking it just from him just cos he's an  old sod   come too often.
Here.
Is  coming?
Who?
I'll be back after 
set the table?
Well, I didn't know he'd gone  did I?mother fucking right and my fucking  
London, Europe, England, the world is a complete prat he he he.
I recorded that Caelia 
Be quiet
That was her
shut up
I wasn't recording, I paused it
hairy legs
I wasn't practising, I was on a perfectly 
perched up on the roof surrounded by 
No  the garden
Dad, dad, the crews will be sweeping down that side passage and then coming over and then past my window again.
No, they really are, they've got the dive bombers on us next week mom, or is it this week?
Oh shit.
Shut up shut up.
Yes.
Yeah.
Yes.
Don't pick your toe nails 
I wasn't.
I was at her but I wasn't  Yes.
Yeah well shut up
shut up
shut up
Oh look it's 
shut up.
Mom, they've got the Dambusters.
Dad, is the Dambusters a good film?
It certainly is 
Is Dambusters a good film?
It's on next week.
Saturday.
It's on Saturday.
Well we'll video it 
No, no, we're not videoing the Dambusters cos there's got the cup final on tomorrow.
We might already have 
We don't, we don't
Are you sure
Yeah
Yeah but we can't record it cos we'll either record the cup final and I wanna record the cup final
yes I do 
Alright, I don't mind
We'll stay in and watch the cup final
Yeah well granddad better let me.
I'm not  I'm watching the cup final
so don't worry
There is.
I'm pretty sure there 's 
are over now
Better let me watch it, I'm gonna watch that    .
Yeah, they were swooping, they were  up on you know across there, you know across erm er opposite  there's that house where th that has the garden at the bottom of ours.
Well, they were perching on the erm chimneys of that one and then they've been coming they're gonna be swooping round up not actually low but above it, about fly to the bathroom then spread up, turning a circle, coming down and going past my window and land 
they were big crows
they must have seen it land or something like that.
Yeah well th cos they've been waiting up there on the thing and they've  land or they've just been circ 
moving moving 
No it's not
 
No, it's not, it just wakes them up 
and it just moved a bit and I went in again, I looked at the window  and they moved again
Well of course it's gonna move, if she says your face she might be sick  cos it sees Caelia's face  punishment 
She's Caelia, that's Caelia of course 
there should be boiling water 
here comes the man  
I don't know.
Oh God, I forgot.
I set the table but I forgot about the water.
Oh shut up.
I set the table.
Oi, shut it.
Dad?
Now don't shout  
 
cauliflower won't take very long
Sorry, I did forget mom, I swear.
really nice 
I'm sorry for it
gonna dive bomb, bird shit at the ready     No I won't.
Caelia go away, Patrick go away.
Don't, you're so sad, get lost.
d'you wanna come up?
Yeah.
Yeah okay, bring it, leave it in here.
there's a heron in our garden
a heron? where?
just round the side
Is it dead?
No, it got attacked by some crows, they bit it
Yeah, it's just not working right.
It don't work right.
It's an old one, very old 
Yeah, pull the trigger  my dad, my dad goes  I went like this, he said don't worry it's not loaded  fired, just past my dad's head
what, a bullet?
gun powder in it?
It's a bit blocked up at the moment but yeah it would
I'm getting an automatic next time I go in there.
The man said he'd save me one,un unclipped
they won't let me get .
No, he'll get it for fifty.
Next time you go 
Uncapped.
It's uncapped  you know the thing you put in  banging of the guns under a hundred years, it hasn't got that in it.
It's wicked.
It comes with three cartridges.
You know those ones you click on and then you put bullets
buying an air gun
Is that air gun good?
Yeah, very good
What's it like?is it? have you seen it?
Yep  yeah
sure?
fifteen pounds
metal ball bearings yeah
I would
Could've done, probably shoot myself
Joe's got one
shoot a cat's tail off, it can shoot a cat's tail off 
Joe shot a pigeon
I know, his head blew off
exploded, his head exploded
it didn't, his head went like 
picked it up, dropped it in the bin
his head exploded
Sick, I wouldn't do that
I'd do that, I'd do it to a dog 
I'd never shoot a dog
I like dogs
the biggest thing I'd shoot would be a little bird
I'd only shoot a little bird if it was dead, if it was like half dead, like if Joe had shot it al 
Mom it's Sally
did you  to America or
I bet I've been to more schools than  Australia, I've been to four schools in Australia
what those things there?
Shoes  my schools shoes
the other school blazer's a hundred pounds
might as well just give you a blazer and 
it's cheaper now, it's forty pounds.
Yeah?
You'll have to go s Yeah, I know Pa dad, call me 
I ain't got any
when we us the last two and that one exploded on me I had this  and it goes  and exploded all over me and went over 
Some things are different
a silly old git isn't he? a turkey
yeah, see what I do, shit.
I do the opposite  too hard.
What do you do in America?
No, cos you have examinations to  you have to be
Yeah, but you had to pass an examination, didn't you?
Yeah, I passed.
I find it I don't find it very hard bu well not all of it some of it hard, it is hard though.
I don't know where it is now 
do you now, do you know Max?
Max , yeah I know him.
He's thick.
He's intelligent but he's a dick head
Why, what does he do?
He's just thick he.
Oh fuck.
I gotta go.
You gotta go now Pat.
down the pub?
I'll be down in about twenty minutes, okay?
Pat, come over here in about twenty five minutes, okay?
Do you know Adam?
Adam Adam ?
Adam 
Do you know his name though?
what does he look like?
Bye Pat, come back in about twenty five minutes.
. That boy went to the same primary school as 
I'll take your word for that
That's about all I want, okay, I'm not very hungry.
That's about all I want mom cos I'm not very hungry today.
rush out, it's just that I'm not very hungry.
Caelia  use your fork use your fork.
Okay, one more, one more.
Come on, take a piece.
Shall I stop this while we're eating?
No no 
Well, I'll take the microphone off cos  I'll put it like this, down here like this  No Caelia, no just leave it alone.
This side's nearly finished so
erm, bit less than Caelia
same amount
I'm not very hungry  I'm just not hungry
didn't I?
careful, careful 
that's hot
shut up 
d'you want erm any more
what stage are you on?
you just switch it on again
Alexander, d'you want some more
Alexander
What?
D'you want some more?
Ah, yes please.
don't you know it?
No?
No
Wow
Which one are you playing?
How far have you got yourself?
Which level have you got to?
First?
Yeah.
I can get to erm fourth level
Which one have you got to Alexander?
Twenty two, but that's only cos use the keys
Did that go on the floor?
Yeah
that's only cos I use the keys 
 
have your wits about you .
No.
or  this morning, I can't think if I remembered
Yeah
I did
tape should be ready in a minute.
Should be ready after we've finished our  
Are you rewinding something on the video?
Yeah
Yeah
I wondered what that noise was?
Shortly after you've finished that, I really ought to take you back Jake
after we've finished the video
Well, how long will it take?
Not finis, just see a little bit
Is it, is the new one then?
Yeah
The beginning?
right not
Well he can come another day and look at it darling because I don't want you to be too late tonight, you've got all that Lego to clear up
Just that, just that video 
We have to be early tomorrow because of going up to London you see.
I know.
Mommy?
Have you seen  square inch
Mommy, please can we just do him? please?
Goldfinger?
Just watch Goldfinger 
It takes about two hours to watch it
Not all of it.
Not two hours for all of it.
Well then you'll say you don't want to stop.
You can watch it until quarter past six and no longer, right?
Well
Yes, absolutely, because I said I'd have Jake back about six at home
No I did not
I'm sure you did
Because I want to give you time to clear up
Did you got to pick him up or did
No, his mother brought him
I didn't see his mother
remember  it's upstairs, isn't it?
No cos you weren't even dressed 
cos that's 
Is that beef cooked enough?
Mhm, yeah  they're home made
absolutely disgusting
That's not very nice
absolutely disgusting
is it?
Well
Alex?
Yes, remember to close the tree house door when we go out.
Just in case it rains
Alex?
Yeah?
You know those rice krispy things at school for pudding.
Yeah
Do you know how to make it?
No
I do
Yes you do know how to make it
What?
Those chocolate rice krispies
chocolate ones
golden syrup
Mhm.
Yeah.
It's butter  and syrup then you put condensed milk in
condensed milk do they have in them?
Mhm
I've never made them with condensed milk.
Are they yummy?
Mhm
Is that how they make them at school darling?
Yeah
Do you eat them?
Mhm
Actually that's what affects your eczema because condensed milk 
What is condensed milk?
It's that stuff that comes out of a tin that's very rich
ugh 
You probably don't have it  you've probably never had it.
I've probably had it
I used to make it for the girls when they were little
Why?
For puddings very occasionally
Pudding?
Condensed milk, wow
Jake, do you want the other half?
Erm, I'll have a bit of it please
I'll have the other bit
I'll have a tiny bit
Come and tell me how much you'd like.
Bring your plates  like that, or do you want like that?
Erm, no that will be enough
Yes please
Does mommy make peaches , I expect she does
No, my nanny does
Your nanny?
Oh, you've got a nanny at the moment, have you?
Yes 
Nice, is she?
Yes 
Where does she come from?
Is she
Erm she comes
Local?
Does she live in or just come daily?
She comes daily
Alright?
cheese or mozzarella?tomato base
Everybody at school says mozzarella cheese is disgusting  I take no notice of them
Well I should think that's quite right.
They probably, they probably get it given to you on your school pizzas 
What cheese is disgusting?
Mozzarella, the one you're eating
It's nice
I know, that's what pe people say is disgusting
For some reason or another I've found a pizza that doesn't affect his skin
That cheese.
You took these didn't you?
got a bit crisp.
Have you finished with that, shall I give it to the birds?
Alexander?
Shall I give it to the birds?
Yes thank you mommy
No, Alexander.
Just behave nicely.
I should pick it up and bite it with your teeth if it's getting too difficult.
Don't worry.
It's possibly the best way of getting it.
Is it too hot?
Is it still very hot?
Is it really?on the top there  D d cos I suppose Amber has to go to school on Saturdays, doesn't she?
Mhm
But not your other sister?
Not the little one?
No
Mozzarella cheese
So is Amber going to board when she comes to 
I'm not sure.
I think she is.
Weekly board I suppose, like you.
Do you know where the girls are going to sleep yet?
Oh, some of them are gonna sleep in the surgery
In the surgery?
Yep.
Dad's gonna change it into a girls dormitory.
And where are they then gonna have the surgeries?
Don't know
In the sand
That's gonna be difficult
Where's the sand then?
Which is where?
Is that where the big ones have the sand with the television?
I should have thought they might have had them in a separate house really but I suppose there won't be enough of them to begin with
House?
Do you know how many girls Amber's going to have in her form?
There are three in your form.
Might be only two or three  Jake, do you want some fruit or anything now?
Have some fruit, have a banana or a tangerine or something.
cheers
Jake, what would you like?
Apple?
It's like Swiss cheese, swiss cheese is like that.
Would you like a banana?
Yes please
Do you want to give me your plate  have it on a little one.
Do you want any more cakes or anything?
We've got fifteen minutes to watch James Bond 
 
Alex, look at the time
I didn't like it first, when I bought it I thought it was a bit crap
Yeah, I first heard it
Did you hear jump around?
Yeah, I heard jump around.
Have you heard the remix of jump around.
Yeah
It's real funny innit?
strange
jump around, jump around
Did you think it was any good?
Pardon?
What did you think? what did you think?
I thought it was crap at first.
I listened to it again and I thought it was good.
The first time, right, I thought this can't be house of .
Put it on again, thought, hey it's sweet.
Didn't like it first time .
I've read more pages.
I've read pa I've read I'll show you how much I've read .
I read from there, fifty six, to there, that much.
Shit, that'd take me a week.
 

This is the remix.
No, put on the real one.
Turn it over.
It's go it's you can hear the words better on that one.
It's got wicked words.
Right, that one.
Yeah, you're right.
They do make out they're black.
I'm glad cos they're all black and overweight.
Bastards.
Specially Iced Tea, he's a monk.
got my history homework 
My gran and granddad are coming round.
When's that?
Pardon?
When?
Coming round tonight, that's why I've gotta record some of this.
I'm supposed to have six tapes.
I've only done one.
This is my second one .
Mhm
When you first heard this, what did you think?
I thought it was shit then I thought it was good.
I look that bit actually where they go 
What?
It's a good bit that actually  pick it up, pick it up.
right, is that the same size as your book?
What?
Pick up a book.
Is that writing the same size or is yours smaller?
Mine's a wee bit smaller.
It's probably about one size  
What're you doing for Humanities?
Erm, roots
roots?
roots
About the film?
It's good 
I've watch it already.
We're just doing about blacks 
Have you seen a f have you heard of a film called The Unborn?
I've heard it I haven't seen it
Another one I wanna see is called erm, I can't remember what it's called.
It's like this people th they're deep sea divers and they discover, they're stuck in the crevice, a big erm nuclear submarine and what it's for is an experiment that's gone wrong and it it's to make  and instead they make an abomination you know, incredibly powerful and intelligent but really nasty you know, murderous and killer and so they take they take him to these people.
They they come down there but they haven't got enough oxygen to get up and so they gotta stay on this thing with this creature.
It's a bit like Alien ex and it kills them off one by one.
The nastiest one I've seen is called, have you heard of a film called Brain Dead?
Sick isn't it?
That man with 
Shit reviews though man
It's horrible isn't it?
The reviews it got
Real sick though isn't it?
Is i that's the one with the picture of a man on the front isn't it? with his head in that metal thing
Yeah
It looks really disgusting.
I wanna see it
Do you?
I don't wanna see it  be sick
No, I can't cos I've gotta do this.
I can do some but.
Oh shit fuck
Here Pat ssh 
Let's do a record.
What do you have to record?
Do you like ?
Bollocks
conversation
yes, talk normally, just talk normally, right come on
what, are you doing it now?
Yes, just shut up  just talk normally okay
Patrick  goes out with  sparrow legs.
Patrick  is an English book who goes to  school.
He lives at 
London, England, the world
it comes out at the beginning.
It goes 
by the time 
and you're going, you asked for it you guys, you asked for it


so sad cos 
Have you seen The Running Man?
Yeah
It's good isn't it?
It's quite good though isn't it
It's not bad
Do you know what it is?
Do you know the story 
Yeah, I know like  kind of thing
Yeah   jump up jump up get down 
Are you recording?
Jump around, jump up g recording what?
  

king of the crew 


I am a  and my name is Tom people say to me your head looks like a condom.
I am a punk and a and he goes and he 
Oh shit
and he goes erm I am a con my head looks like a condom.
My name is  
I can't help it, it's not my fault 
funny it's like  cos they had the keyboard and that sort of rap beat it's like,and all my kebabs are  in salad cream, rap it on, stack it on, that's my scene,gimme some kebab kebab gimme  ages, wicked tune, I mean all these words
I sang a song about  and he goes shut up okay shut up
After this 
was the best because he got wicked .
I'm gonna get Howard.
when he walked through the bushes
Yeah
Yeah I did.
He came through the bushes so I  in his head.
He thought it was me
I thought it was you and I ran off, it was you, and th and I saw you come from the bush with Howard.
Oh fuck.
fuck
quite hard
that's what they do on the front, that's what they do on the front of  invasion.
It's got a man smashing his head in and killing his dad.
It's Ice Tea coming in killing the boy's dad.
The boy  ear phones has his dad being killed and his mom being raped.
That's him killing his dad 
No it's not, it's not him, it's Ice Tea doing it
I know cos that's wh you sh you have to listen to words carefully
What's it saying?
Well it's saying I'm gonna rape your mom and
Yeah, I know I heard that
I can't remember but anyway it 
Can I take  cos I wanna listen to it
No you can't, sorry Pat, I can't let you.
You can ta you can borrow .
I was gonna buy it but I thought no, it ain't worth it
What ?
Yeah
jump up jump and get down.
Hey, I'm glad they're English cos all the bloody groups are black.
I'm gonna show it to my dad.
Hey Pat, come and show it to my dad
What?
House of pain.
I wanna show him the cover  the true Irish people.
Where's the cover?
Where did you put the cover?
Jump up jump up and get  .
Pat, you dr you know when you dropped the tapes on the floor, you dropped your one down there.
What?
Here comes the one you dig, the one's you don't .
Dad look, I just wanna show you the tape I bought.
House of Pain.
Irish.
It's an Irish rap group.
Parental advisory there are explicit lyrics.
Ha, that's on all my taps.
I ain't got any tapes which doesn't say that on them.
They all have parental advisory.
What about 




I haven't done my history yet
You haven't done it?
No
What have you been doing?
I've been recording for this
that gotta be in tomorrow?
Yeah, there's not that much of it left to do
Well, I think Patrick  stay much longer than half an hour
Okay, half an hour.
Come on, let's go upstairs Pat 
Why?
Basketball.
Yeah, might as well.Okay .
You got the one's you dig, the one you want.
House of pain .
You said yesterday you were going along with the Irish
Did you think I was serious?
No  I wish I was Irish, I wish I wasn't English.
Here we go, here we go.
Oh, here we go.
I'll come, wait a second I'm coming.
Transfer.
Okay.
Okay, got the thing?
Where did you put it?from the bath, that's good.
If my mom sees you you're dead Pat.