

5 The northern Anglian hegemony in the seventh century
The dominance in the seventh century of Anglian political and military power in southern as well as northern England was accompanied by an extension of Anglian influence into British territories and over the Picts and Scots beyond the Forth.
The Humbrian overlordship of Eadwine
Deira, as Bede appreciated, remained Eadwine's essential power-base (HE III, 1).
The leader of Eadwine's pagan priests was in charge of the sanctuary at Godmunddingaham , possibly Goodmanham, near York, and when Eadwine was converted he was baptized at York (HE II, 13).
He conquered the still-surviving British kingdom of Elmet (HB ch. 63) and extended over the men of Lindsey (among whom the missionary Paulinus baptized at Lincoln and Littleborough (HE II, 16)), a lordship which must soon have come to embrace the Mercians north of the Trent and, no doubt by slower degrees, those south of it.
Even more so than Aethelfrith, Eadwine established himself as a Humbrian king.
Nor did his ambition rest here.
For Bede he became the fifth overlord of all the Anglo-Saxons south of the Humber (HE II, 5).
The period immediately following the death of Raedwald among the eastern Angles was one of internal strife between Raedwald's son and successor, Eorpwald, and his half-brother, Sigeberht (see Appendix, Fig. 5), who was driven into exile in Gaul, and probably also one of tension between pagan and Christian factions as the kingdom lapsed further into paganism under Eorpwald (HE 11, 15), so that Eorpwald was not able to maintain the influence that had been Raedwald's.
It is not known when Raedwald died but it must be significant that when Eadwine sought a new bride (before c .
624 (see above, p. 41), he did not do so at the court of the king of the eastern Angles but at that of the still-powerful Eadbald, king of Kent, whom he seems to have continued to treat with considerable respect.
Bede specifically excludes Kent from the kingdoms south of the Humber which he regarded as subject to Eadwine (HE 11, 5)(see above, p. 43).
Nevertheless, Eadwine's overtures to Eadbald for the hand of his sister Aethelburh (HE 11, 9) suggest a northern ruler already prestigious in his own right.
The impression is very strong that Raedwald  was dead by now and Eadwine well on his way to establishing a dominant position amongst the Angles.
He was a significant enough figure by c .
624 for Pope Boniface V to write to him and his queen (HE 11, 10, 11).
Even so, good diplomatic relations were consolidated with the eastern Angles, also in part through marriage.
Hereswith, the daughter of Eadwine's nephew, Hereric, married Aethelric, Raedwald's nephew (see Appendix, Fig. 5), to become the mother of Ealdwulf, later king of the eastern Angles (HE IV, 23).
The probability indeed is that the eastern Angles either had been or were in the process of being brought into a dependent relationship with Eadwine by the time of his marriage to Aethelburh or at least not long after.
The way in which Eadwine was able eventually to induce Eorpwald, king of the eastern Angles, to accept Christianity (HE 11, 15) would suggest that the eastern Anglian court was more amenable to Eadwine's influence than the Mercian upon which Eadwine could not prevail in the same way.
The possibility arises of a special relationship between Eadwine and his former benefactors, the eastern Angles, so that an alliance between Eadwine and Eorpwald, though one in which the northern Anglian rather than the eastern Anglian king was now the dominant party, may have come to characterize Eadwine's ascendancy as an overlord.
It was probably with his authority already established over the Angles of the east and the midlands that Eadwine also aspired to subject to his rule the Saxons of the upper Thames valley.
This process was under way by c .
625–6 when Cwichelm, styled by Bede king of the West Saxons but perhaps more correctly thought of as a king in the upper Thames valley (see above, pp. 48 ff.), sought to have Eadwine assassinated; Eadwine's retaliating attack, when he is said to have slain or subdued all those who had plotted against him (HE 11, 9), confirms that he was reaching the height of his power by the mid-620s.
The Ecclesiastical History places the baptism of Eadwine in York at Easter in the twelfth year of his reign, which Bede, who dated Eadwine's accession to 616, considered to be 627 (HE 11, 14), but if Eadwine's accession were not in 616 but in 617 this date would need to be corrected to 628.
Less is known about the circumstances of his conversion than the relatively copious material suggests.
Bede's account of Eadwine's successive ‘conditional promises’(as they have been called) to accept Christianity — if he should find it acceptable after marrying Aethelburh (HE 11, 9), if he should be victorious in the campaign against Cwichelm (HE 11, 9), and if his counsellors should advise it after consultation (HE 11, 10)— carries with it an air of literary artificiality.
The Historia Brittonum (ch. 63) states that Eadwine was baptized with thousands of his people by a Briton, Rhun, son of Urbgen (possibly to be identified with Urien, lord of Rheged), but this may rest on a confusion of Bede's account of mass-baptisms by Paulinus in the River Glen near Yeavering (HE 11, 14) with the occasion of the baptism of Eadwine which took place in York (HE 11, 14).
While  it is possible that the missionary who baptized in the River Glen was the Briton, Rhun, and that Bede was mistaken when he located Paulinus at Yeavering, the statement about Rhun in the Historia Brittonum , inserted as it is in a somewhat garbled account seemingly extrapolated from the Ecclesiastical History , cannot be regarded as undoubtedly signifying this and it is uncertain what weight can be attached to it.
There clearly was quite an extended period between Eadwine's marriage to Aethelburh — some time before c .
624 — and his baptism by Paulinus in 627 or 628.
Despite the fact that Aethelburh was accompanied north when she married by Paulinus as her chaplain, and that Paulinus was subsequently consecrated bishop of York by Archbishop Justus in 625 or 626 (HE 11, 9), Eadwine did not hasten to embrace the new faith and it needs to be emphasized that his eventual baptism was untypical among the Anglo-Saxons at this time.
Eorpwald, king of the eastern Angles, was a pagan.
The Mercians were pagan.
There was no Christian king anywhere in England outside Kent.
That the most northerly of the Anglian kings should have been the first non-Kentish ruler to adopt Christianity in the 620s is, at the very least, surprising.
It was part of Eadwine's success, however, that he was in tune with the more advanced trends of contemporary political life.
The standard which was borne before him as he progressed through his kingdom was reminiscent of Rome (HE 11, 16).
His marriage to Aethelburh gave him a connection with cross-Channel diplomacy and his children by Aethelburh were kinsfolk of a Merovingian king in Gaul.
His wife's Christian beliefs put him in touch with Rome itself, and even before 625 made him and his wife recipients of papal letters and gifts from the head of the Christian Church in the West.
It will have been in the aftermath of this contact with the papacy that Eadwine, though still a pagan, allowed an episcopal see to be established at York for Paulinus, and in itself this shows the direction in which Eadwine was moving.
His prestige, like Aethelberht's before him, could now find further expression in the diffusion of the new religion among the territories subject to him and through his personal participation in ecclesiastical affairs at the highest level.
Paulinus preached and baptized in the dependent territory of Lindsey and his activities there — and in Bernicia, if Bede is correct in placing him at Yeavering — serve to delineate where Eadwine had most effective control outside Deira.
The success experienced among the eastern Angles with the conversion of Eorpwald may have been due in part at least to the influence of older patterns established by missionaries in the time of Raedwald, but nevertheless it testifies to Eadwine's real influence in the East Anglian area at this time.
There was also continuing close contact between Eadwine's court and that of Eadbald, king of Kent.
It has been suggested that one reason for Eadwine's preferential treatment of the Kentish kingdom was the location there of the southern archbishopric at Canterbury, and there certainly emerged at this time a clear intention to implement Pope Gregory the  Great's original plan for two archiepiscopal sees among the Anglo-Saxons.
Paulinus consecrated Honorius, archbishop of Canterbury, at Lincoln, after which Eadwine joined with Eadbald in requesting a pallium for Honorius and another for Paulinus (HE 11, 17, 18).
This would have had the effect of endowing York with metropolitan status as Pope Gregory the Great had originally intended and it is likely that Eadwine, on Bede's testimony a thoughtful and sagacious individual (HE 11, 9), appreciated the significance of this development.
The pope despatched two pallia in June 634 (HE 11, 18), but the death of Eadwine in battle in Hatfield Chase against combined Welsh and Mercian forces, either in October 633 or more likely October 634, and the subsequent collapse of the ecclesiastical community at York with the flight of Paulinus to Kent (HE 11, 20)(see below, p. 83 ff.), terminated this phase in the history of the church of York and arrested its development as an archiepiscopal see for a hundred years.
It is important not to allow this to obscure the fact that, at the height of his power, Eadwine had embarked on an ecclesiastical programme to establish a separate northern province of the Anglo-Saxon Church.
The overthrow of Eadwine was the consequence of further shifts in the political equilibrium of the Anglian world.
Eorpwald, king of the eastern Angles, was slain by a pagan, Ricberht, soon after his conversion and a period of three years elapsed before Eorpwald's half-brother, Sigeberht, who had been baptized during his exile in Gaul, became king and Felix, a Burgundian, was appointed bishop of the eastern Angles by Honorius, archbishop of Canterbury.
The date of these events can be inferred only by the episcopal chronology of the bishops of the eastern Angles.
Felix was bishop for seventeen years and his successor, Thomas, for five, and then Berhtgils (or Boniface) was consecrated by Archbishop Honorius, who died on 30 September 653 (HE 111, 20).
On these figures, Felix must have become bishop by 631 at the latest, so that three years before this gives 628 for the slaying of Eorpwald, whose conversion would have followed very rapidly indeed on Eadwine's and his assassination very swiftly on his conversion.
But the figures should not be deployed too rigidly.
It is not even certain that Honorius was archbishop in 631.
The pope did not send him a pallium until June 634 and, given the long-standing papal concern with the well-being of the church of Canterbury, a three-year interval between Honorius' appointment and the sending of a pallium would seem to be rather a long time.
A date c .
632–3 for Honorius' appointment is perhaps more likely.
There are other considerations.
The three-year period, for example, between the death of Eorpwald and the accession of Sigeberht, could signify that Sigeberht succeeded in the third year after Eorpwald's assassination.
Felix may have died in his seventeenth year or Thomas in his fifth.
There is a possible error here of some three years in the calculations.
The assassination of Eorpwald could easily have taken place as late as 630/1.
Even so, the sequence of events remains rapid  and Eorpwald's death must have constituted a serious threat to Eadwine's position south of the Humber.
The paganism of the eastern Angles over the next two or three years suggests that Eadwine's influence in the region was no longer what it had been in Eorpwald's lifetime.
Indeed, a factor of some importance in the slaying of Eorpwald may have been hostility to the way in which the kingdom of the eastern Angles had sunk under his rule to satellite status.
Nor can it be assumed that Eadwine found new allies among the eastern Angles in c .
632/3 when Eorpwald's half-brother, Sigeberht, returned from Gaul to partition the kingdom with his kinsman, Ecgric.
Bede has much to say about Sigeberht's Christian patronage within his kingdom (HE 111, 18) but nothing of Ecgric's, and the probability is that Ecgric was and remained a pagan.
Sigeberht's position was possibly insecure because he was only Eorpwald's maternal brother — that is, he was Raedwald's step-son — and before long he abdicated to enter a monastery, and Ecgric ruled alone (HE 111, 18).
Deprived of the support of the ruler of the eastern Angles, Eadwine was vulnerable also to undercurrents of restlessness in other parts of the Anglian world.
The coalescence of the Mercians across the first half of the seventh century into a powerful midland kingdom radically reshaped the patterns of power among the Angles and provided a serious long-term challenge not only to the authority of the northern Anglian kings but also to any hopes of a revival of eastern Anglian power.
This process was beginning in Eadwine's last years.
Penda —‘a most vigorous young man of the royal race of the Mercians’, as Bede calls him (HE 11, 20)— was aspiring to royal power.
When the British king of Gwynedd in north Wales, Cadwallon ap Cadfan, invaded Eadwine's territory in 633 or 634, Penda joined him and participated in the overthrow of Eadwine in battle at Hatfield Chase (HE 11, 20).
Descent from Icel was claimed for Penda, certainly in the course of time, through his father Pybba, also reputedly the father of Eowa and Coenwealh.
The kings of the Mercians until at least the time of Ceolwulf (821–3) claimed descent from either Penda or one of his brothers (see Appendix, Fig. 8).
The chronology of Penda's reign has been confused by a variety of different regnal lengths.
According to Bede, who records the death of Penda in the battle of the Winwaed , which he places in 655 (HE 111, 24), Penda ruled the Mercian nation for twenty-two years from his victory at Hatfield to his defeat at the Winwaed (HE 11, 20), that is from 633 to 655.
If Eadwine was slain not in 633 but in 634, the battle of the Winwaed will have occurred not in 655 but in 656, so that Bede's 633–55 may need to be emended accordingly to 634–56.
The attribution of a thirty-year reign to Penda in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle A (s.a. 626), however, would indicate an accession in 625 (reckoning back from 655) or (if Penda was thought of as having died in his thirtieth regnal year) 626.
By contrast, the Historia Brittonum claims only a ten-year reign for Penda, dating it evidently from the battle of Cogwy (ch. 65)— Bede's Maserfelth , which Bede dates to 642 but which again may need to be emended (in accordance with any adjustment of Bede's other Northumbrian dates) to 643 (HE 111, 9: V, 24).
Nevertheless, neither the Chronicle nor the Historia Brittonum provides an acceptable alternative to the Bedan chronology.
The Chronicle A represents Penda as 50 years old when he began his thirty-year reign, and grave suspicion attaches to both round numbers.
The image of Penda as an octogenarian at the Winwaed but still with two young sons (Wulfhere and Aethelred) has not proved a credible one to historians.
The Welsh annals misdate the battle of Cogwy (that is,Maserfelth ) by two years, to 644 (AC s.a. 644) as opposed to Bede's 642, and place the death of Penda in 657 (AC s.a 657), but the interval here between the alleged date of Penda's accession and his death is more than ten years.
Moreover, when the Historia Brittonum (ch. 65) accords Ecgfrith, son of Oswiu, a reign of nine years, this is an error for fourteen (viiii for xiiii); x years for Penda could conceivably be a partial transcription of xxii.
There can be no doubt that twenty-two years is a sounder regnal length for Penda than either ten or thirty and that neither of the two latter present a significant challenge to Bede's figure.
It seems most likely, therefore, that Penda was king of the Mercians from 633 to 655 or from 634 to 656.
Who had reigned over the Mercians in the period before 633/4 is unknown.
Cearl had probably died some years earlier.
The complete absence of information makes it very difficult to uncover the processes of change which may have been at work among the peoples north and south of the Trent during the reign of Eadwine, but it is inconceivable that Eadwine was able to extend his hegemony southwards without first achieving domination of the Mercians.
If the battle in which Penda fought Cwichelm and Cynegils at Cirencester, dated to 628 in the Chronicle A (s.a. 628)(which is almost certainly a few years too early), can be safely placed before 633/4, Penda was already a formidable force before Hatfield, but even if it were to date to a little after 633/4 it still reveals the wide-ranging character of Penda's early activities.
Whether the progression was from Cirencester to Hatfield or from Hatfield to Cirencester, here was a Mercian leader whose military exploits far transcended those of his obscure predecessors.
Terms were agreed at Cirencester by which, it would seem, the western Saxons lost control of Cirencester and the lands along the Severn which became part of the territory of the Hwicce, so that the kingdom of the Hwicce has come to be regarded as a Mercian creation of the time of Penda.
It is true that the Hwicce appear to have been within the sphere of influence of the Mercian king from the reign of Wulfhere at the latest and Penda's presence at Cirencester c. 630 certainly reveals Mercian involvement with the region at a still earlier date.
Nevertheless, though Penda may have embarked on a programme of domination of the south-west midlands, there is no evidence that he was responsible for the formation of the Hwiccian kingdom.
In the course of time the Mercian  kingdom also came to embrace much of the territory, for example, of the Wocensaete or Wreocensaete, who took their name from the Wrekin and dominated the north Shropshire plain, and it would probably be the case, if charter-material had survived for this area of north-west Mercia analogous to that which has survived for the Hwicce, that kings of the Wreocensaete emerged in varying degrees of dependence on or subjection to the Mercian ruler.
Unless it is to be assumed that all these territories represent kingdoms established by the Mercians, what the evidence indicates is that the Mercian leaders were extending their influence into originally independent kingdoms on their borders.
Penda's presence in the environs of Cirencester against the kings of the Gewisse, at about the time he became king of the Mercians, provides a glimpse of how advanced this process was even by the early seventh century.
As David Dumville comments, ‘the creation of a Midland hegemony was achieved by a remarkable series of expansionist campaigns in a number of directions almost simultaneously’.
Eadwine's British wars
In 633 or 634 (see above, pp. 67–8 and Appendix, Fig. 7.3) on 12 October Eadwine, king of the northern Angles, was defeated and slain in battle in Hatfield Chase by Cadwallon ap Cadfan, king of the Britons of Gwynedd, acting in concert with a Mercian force under Penda.
This was an event which was to have profound repercussions.
Bede says that the affairs of Northumbria were thrown into confusion by the disaster (HE 11, 20).
He describes how one of Eadwine's sons, Osfrith, perished with his father and another, Eadfrith, surrendered to Penda, while the queen, accompanied by Paulinus, took flight for Kent with her daughter, Eanflaed, and her young son, Uscfrea, and Osfrith's young son, Yffi.
Bede also records that Osric, son of Eadwine's uncle, Aelfric, took the kingship of the Deirans, and Eanfrith, son of Aethelfrith, that of the Bernicians (see Appendix, Fig. 6.1 & 6.2), thereby fracturing Eadwine's overkingship.
Osric certainly continued the war with Cadwallon, and besieged him in a fortified stronghold.
It was not until the following summer that Cadwallon surprised Osric's forces and slew the Deiran leader, thereafter ravaging widely across Anglian territory and slaying Eanfrith when he came to sue for peace (HE 111, 1).
Eanfrith and Osric are said by Bede to have reverted to paganism on their accession, but it may be that Paulinus and the queen did not take flight immediately upon the death of Eadwine but only on the death of Osric.
This was the moment when the Deiran royal court was destroyed.
Nor, indeed, did the young Deiran princes survive to claim their inheritance.
Uscfrea and Yffi died in infancy in Gaul among the Franks, where they had been sent for greater safety (HE 11, 20).
Into the power-vacuum created by the slaying of Osric and Eanfrith stepped Eanfrith's brother, Oswald, who slew Cadwallon in  the battle of ‘Heavenfield’ near Hexham in the autumn of either 634 (if Eadwine was killed in 633) or 635 (if Eadwine did not perish until 634)(see Appendix, Fig. 7.3), and assumed the kingship of both the Deirans and the Bernicians (HE 111, 1, 2).
The outline of these events is well known.
Bede's account of them — the unexpected defeat of Eadwine, the emergence of apostate kings, the ravages of Cadwallon, and the recovery of the northern Angles under Oswald, a Christian who prayed to God on the eve of the battle of ‘Heavenfield’— constitutes one of the most dramatic and best-known parts of the Ecclesiastical History .
There are, however, some enigmas.
What brought a king of Gwynedd on such a far-flung military campaign along the banks of the Humber and north to the vicinity of Hadrian's Wall?
How was it that one of the exiled sons of Aethelfrith was so close at hand (and another not far behind) and in a position to assume the kingship of the Bernicians when Eadwine fell?
According to Bede, Eadwine not only established himself as overlord of all the kingdoms south of the Humber with the exception of Kent, but he also ruled over all the inhabitants of Britain, Angles and Britons alike (HE II, 5).
It is difficult to evaluate this very general statement.
There is no evidence, for example, that Eadwine's influence was felt among the Britons of Dumnonia, on the one hand, or of Strathclyde, on the other.
Oswald's achievement was certainly magnified.
Bede represents Oswald as bringing under his sway all the peoples of Britain, divided by language into Angles, Britons, Picts and Irish (HE 111, 6), but elsewhere writes that it was his brother and successor Oswiu, who made tributary the Picts and the Scots who inhabited the northern parts of Britain (HE 11, 5).
He seems to have allowed his awareness of the different native languages of Britain to lead him into defining Oswald's Anglo-British imperium in excessive terms.
Even his description of Oswiu's overlordship in Britain may convey an inflated impression of military activity under Oswiu.
When Bede came to write further of him, he referred only to his subjection of the Picts (HE 111, 24).
It was certainly a Northumbrian claim, however, that the Scots as well as the Picts had been subject to Northumbrian domination.
Bede says that after the defeat and death of Oswiu's son and successor, Ecgfrith, in the battle of Nechtanesmere in 685, the Picts recovered their land which the Angles had held and the Scots who lived in Britain and certain of the Britons (perhaps of Strathclyde) their independence (HE IV, 26).
The implication of the evidence as a whole could be that it was only in the reign of Ecgfrith that Northumbrian overlordship embraced the Strathclyde Britons and the Scots.
There was undoubtedly a tendency to push back in time the establishment of a far-flung military hegemony.
Alcuin, possibly basing his statement on the words of Bede (HE 11, 5), later claimed that Eadwine subjected Saxons, Britons, Picts and Scots.
Bede's material was certainly leading in this direction.
The ecclesiastical jurisdiction of the church of York was thought of as having been advanced by the military conquests of successive northern kings.
Bede says of the episcopal authority of Bishop Wilfrid in the reign of Oswiu that it embraced Northumbrians and Picts as far as the power of Oswiu extended (HE III, 3), and the Life of Wilfrid that in the reign of Ecgfrith it widened still further so that Wilfrid was bishop of the Saxons (that is, the Northumbrians) in the south and the Britons, Scots and Picts in the north (Vita Wilfridi , ch. 21).
A close connection was evidently established between the territories dominated by the northern Anglian king and the claims of the church of York to wide-ranging ecclesiastical authority in north Britain, these claims perhaps encouraging a tendency to exaggerate the extent of the Northumbrian hegemony.
In addition there is no indication in the Ecclesiastical History that Bede thought of Eadwine's successors as failing to maintain Eadwine's overlordship of all the Britons.
He allows his readers to infer that the position he attributes to Eadwine was little changed before the battle of Nechtanesmere ; Oswald ruled the same territory as Eadwine and Oswiu ‘almost’ the same (HE 11, 5).
The impression is conveyed of an ‘imperial’ view of Northumbrian history in which the age of Northumbrian supremacy formed an essentially unbroken continuum from the reign of Eadwine to that of Ecgfrith.
Such a view necessarily underscored the battle of Nechtanesmere in 685 as an overwhelming catastrophe.
There can be no doubt, however, about the far-reaching character of Eadwine's impact in some British territories.
The king's residence at Yeavering in the Cheviots reveals the solidity of his royal presence in the British hinterland of Bernicia.
It is uncertain what weight can be placed on the evidence of a medieval Welsh triad which refers to Eadwine as nurtured in Môn (Anglesey), implying that he had spent some time — perhaps while in exile — on the island, but set into the earliest surviving Welsh tradition is the memory of armed conflict between Eadwine and Cadwallon.
The Welsh annals (s.a. 629) refer to the besieging of Cadwallon on the island of Ynys Lannog (Priestholm) and Bede says that Eadwine brought under Anglian rule the Mevanian Islands, by which Môn (Anglesey) and Man are meant (HE 11, 5), making it clear that the northern Anglian king must have established an impressive naval and military presence in the Irish Sea.
Welsh bardic tradition was that he carried his offensive into the heartland of Gwynedd.
Two early poems appear to shed some light on what happened.
Marwnad Cadwallon (‘Lament for Cadwallon’) is a battle-poem which catalogues Cadwallon's exploits against Britons and Saxons.
Cadwallon is described as ‘a fierce affliction to his foe, a lion of hosts over the Saxons’.
His ‘camp on the uplands of Mount Digoll’— that is the Long Mountain, near Welshpool, in Powys in the centre of a district called Meigen — is recalled in the references in the Welsh triads to the ‘action of Digoll’ between  Cadwallon and Eadwine.
It would seem that the region of Powys in north-east Wales remained as much in the front-line of warfare with the northern Angles in the time of Eadwine as it had been when Aethelfrith defeated the men of Powys at Chester.
Indeed, Eadwine may have used Chester as a base for his attack.
A second and earlier poem Moliant Cadwallon (‘In Praise of Cadwallon’), possibly by Cadwallon's bard, Afan Ferddig, celebrates Cadwallon's victorious progress against Eadwine ‘the deceitful’ after his return from Ireland, where he may have been in exile, though an alternative possibility is that he had been gathering reinforcements there.
Cadwallon is ‘lwydawc Prydain’—‘battle-hosted one of Britain’ or ‘ruler of the armies of Britain’, Eadwine ‘(m) vneir Prydein’—‘lord of Britain’.
Cadwallon's people are the Cymru and their land is ‘Cadwallon's land’.
Cadwallon has gathered a victorious host and appears to have been encamped on Môn (Anglesey) with a fleet nearby.
He refuses to treat with the men of Bernicia, for Eadwine is a too deceitful leader.
In the face of Cadwallon's army, Eadwine is depicted as retreating, if not fleeing, many of his army being slain as the Britons pursued them across the salt sea, and Cadwallon advances to Caer Caradog , even setting York ablaze.
The poem makes no reference to the slaying of Eadwine.
If it is to be regarded as a genuine composition from the court of Cadwallon, it would seem to belong to the very eve of Hatfield.
A fragment of yet another poem alludes to the bringing of Eadwine's severed head to Aberffraw (principal residence of the kings of Gwynedd on Môn (Anglesey)) and clearly refers to a moment after the battle of Hatfield Chase.
What lay behind Eadwine's assault on the kingdom of Gwynedd is never made clear, but Aethelfrith had campaigned as far afield as Chester against the men of Powys and the Anglian attack on the north Britons was a continuing process.
In Moliant Cadwallon Gwallawg, Taliesin's ‘judge over Elmet’, and ‘the sadness of Catraeth of great honour’ are recalled.
By the early ninth century at the latest, the kings of the first dynasty of Gwynedd were regarded as descendants of Cunedda from Manau Gododdin (the plain of the Votadini between the Rivers Avon and Carron) in the territory of the Votadini (HB ch. 62).
If Cadwallon believed himself to be descended from a Votadini chieftain, he may well have wished to support the Votadini in their continuing war with the northern Angles.
It would certainly add a significant dimension to Eadwine's attack on Gwynedd and the retaliation of Cadwallon if Eadwine saw in Cadwallon a powerful king likely to offer substantial military aid to the north Britons who were resisting the Anglian advance.
Cadwallon evidently sought to strengthen himself in his war with Eadwine by a series of alliances.
That he invaded Eadwine's territory with the support of Penda, a Mercian aetheling, is well known (HE 11, 20).
It may be that other disaffected Anglian elements also gave assistance and it would be surprising if no help had been forthcoming from the men of Powys, who cannot have  been unaffected by Aethelfrith's victory at Chester and the recent warfare between the northern Angles and the king of Gwynedd.
Moreover, it must be of considerable significance that when Eadwine was slain in Hatfield the sons of Aethelfrith were nearby to take advantage of the situation.
They had taken flight on Eadwine's accession into exile among the Picts and Scots (HE 111, 1), Oswald and Oswiu finding refuge in Scottish Dál Riata (HE 111, 3, 25) and Eanfrith evidently in Pictland where his son, Talorcan, subsequently reigned as king of the Picts in the mid-650s.
The reappearance, first and most immediately, of Eanfrith and subsequently of Oswald in Bernician territory at so crucial a moment in the history of the northern Angles could imply military assistance for them from the Picts or the Scots or both and even perhaps a certain ability to act in concert with the British king, Cadwallon.
One common denominator is Ireland.
There is some evidence that Oswald, while an exile, may have fought in Ireland — according to one story in the retinue of the Uí Néill king of Tara — and Moliant Cadwallon refers obliquely to Cadwallon's sojourn in Ireland during the time of Eadwine's attack on Gwynedd.
The probability is, therefore, that a wide-ranging set of alliances was entered into in the period immediately preceding the final conflict between Cadwallon and Eadwine, involving not only Cadwallon and his allies, including Penda, but the Bernician royal exiles with likely Pictish and Scottish support, possibly even contingents of Irish troops.
The alliances did not survive the overthrow of Eadwine for any length of time.
How long Penda remained in the territory of the northern Angles is unknown but he probably returned swiftly to Mercia to secure himself as king.
He took with him Eadwine's son, Eadfrith (HE 11, 20), thereby retaining an interest in the royal succession among the Deirans, but his immediate military involvement was over.
When Cadwallon finally slew Osric in the summer of 634 or 635, the exact year depending on whether Eadwine fell in 633 or 634 (see Appendix, Fig. 7.1), this should have been his signal to withdraw.
Instead he began to ravage more widely.
The slaying of Eanfrith, which followed soon after, may have been an important turning-point.
Until that moment the sons of Aethelfrith had possibly been in alliance with the British leader.
What now became clear was that Cadwallon was prepared to tolerate neither the family of Eadwine nor that of Aethelfrith as rulers of the northern Angles.
The site of the battle of ‘Heavenfield’, in the vicinity of Hexham, shows that Cadwallon advanced north against Oswald, presumably intending to deal with the Bernician aethelings before they could consolidate their position further.
This may be what lies behind Bede's statement that Cadwallon intended to destroy the whole nation (HE 11, 20).
Despite his immense forces (though Bede or his sources may have exaggerated Cadwallon's numerical superiority for dramatic effect), it was Cadwallon who proved the more vulnerable, far from home and by now an isolated member of the alliance which had  conspired to defeat Eadwine.
Oswald commended himself and his men to God and his victory over Cadwallon established a new Christian king over the northern Angles.
The reign of Oswald
Oswald, whom Bede regarded as the fifth overlord of the peoples south of the Humber and described as ruling within the same bounds as Eadwine (HE 11, 5), clearly became on this testimony as powerful a ruler as Eadwine had been, but on his accession he faced an immediate challenge in midland and eastern England from Penda.
It may be that eastern Anglian influence among the middle Angles was still appreciable and resented by Penda.
Penda's invasion of the territory of the eastern Angles in 635/6 or 636/7, when he slew in battle both King Ecgric and the ex-king, Sigeberht, who had been brought out of his monastery to lead the army with Ecgric (HE 111, 18), terminated, as far as can be seen, the exercise of royal power among the eastern Angles by the direct descendants of Raedwald (see Appendix, Fig. 5), and made the repression of Penda's ambition imperative if Oswald were to reconstruct the paramount position which had been Eadwine's.
The first stage must have been the re-establishment of Eadwine's Humbrian confederacy to embrace Lindsey, for example, over which Oswald certainly established himself as a conqueror (HE 111, 11), and to bring the Mercians back into a dependent relationship; and the second to restore Eadwine's position of dominance in southern England.
It seems likely that Oswald achieved the same accord as Eadwine with Eadbald, king of Kent.
In a bid to protect them from possible attack by Oswald and Eadbald, acting in collusion, Aethelburh sent the Deiran princes for greater protection to the Frankish king, Dagobert I, for fear specifically of Oswald and Eadbald (HE 11, 20).
Of Oswald's dealings with the eastern Angles nothing is known, but it was probably the case that Anna, son of Eni, Raedwald's nephew (HE 11, 15: III, 18), was established as king of the eastern Angles with northern Anglian assistance.
The presence of members of Anna's family in Gaul at the nunnery of Farmoûtier-en-Brie (HE 111, 8) emphasizes the continuing Frankish orientation of his kingdom and throughout his reign Anna appears to have been involved in opposition to the Mercians.
It could be that the Christianising of the Middle Angles began under the auspices of the eastern Angles in Anna's reign.
He gave shelter to Cenwealh when he was driven out of the territory of the upper Thames valley Saxons by Penda (HE 111, 7) and he was eventually slain in battle by Penda (HE 111, 18).
Certainly, Oswald was a significant force at least as far south as the upper Thames valley where c .
640 he stood sponsor to King Cynegils at his baptism and joined with Cynegils in giving Dorchester-on-Thames to the missionary bishop, Birinus (HE 111, 7)(see  above, p. 48).
Oswald's marriage to Cyneburh, daughter of Cynegils, reveals clearly that relatively cordial relations could prevail between an overlord and a dependant if both stood to gain from the relationship.
The Thames valley Saxons must have been as anxious as Oswald and Anna to contain Penda.
Even so, in three important respects Oswald's reign represented a break with Eadwine's.
First, there is no evidence that Oswald was ever the presence in north Wales which Eadwine appears to have been.
When Penda fled before Oswald in Oswald's final campaign and took refuge among the Welsh, the northern Anglian king advanced no further than the vicinity (possibly) of Old Oswestry (see below, p. 90).
Second, according to Adomnan'ś Life of Columba , Oswald is said, reputedly on his own testimony, to have had a vision of St Columba on the eve of the battle of ‘Heavenfield’, and as soon as he was established as king he sent a request to Columba's monastic foundation on Iona among the Dalriadic Scots for a bishop, receiving in due course Aidan (HE 111, 3).
Oswald had been brought up as a Christian prince in Celtic lands from the age of 12, so it was perhaps natural for him to look to an Irish religious foundation for ecclesiastical and spiritual direction, and it may be that these overtures to Iona also reflect a dependence on Dalriadic military support at the time of his accession.
The Church in Bernicia and Deira was now brought within the familia of Iona and subject to the authority of the abbot of Iona.
The assimilation of the northern Anglian area within the diocesan structure of the ecclesia Anglorum was consequently halted.
Aidan's episcopal see was on the island of Lindisfarne near the Bernician royal stronghold of Bamburgh (HE 111, 5, 6).
There was no attempt to revive the church of Paulinus at York and no further pursuit at this time of a pallium for a northern archbishop.
This was a development which also disseminated throughout northern England the idiosyncratic customs of the clergy of the Celtic regions of the British Isles which the Church of Rome, as it comprehended them over time, came increasingly to view as schismatic — not simply a different, more archaic method of calculating the date of Easter (which Iona retained long after other Irish communities had abandoned it), but a whole range of differences in ritual practice and, in the absence of an established ecclesiastical hierarchy of bishops and archbishops, a barely recognizable ecclesiastical order.
Third, within the territory of the northern Angles a Bernician leadership had reasserted itself and the political centre of gravity shifted northwards away from the plain of York.
Oswald and (probably) his brother, Oswiu, were the sons of Aethelfrith by Acha, sister of Eadwine (HE III, 6), and this may have facilitated acceptance of Oswald as king among the Deirans and the restoration of an overkingship, but the deaths of many of the Deiran royal family will have left a political vacuum at the heart of the Deiran kingdom which cannot have been immediately filled by Aethelfrith's sons.
It may have been in the early 630s, when Oswiu was in his late teens, that he married Riemmelth, granddaughter of Rhun (HB ch. 57), for he had a son, Ealhfrith, and a daughter, Ealhflaed, old enough to be married c. 650 (HE 111, 21).
Rhun is thought to have been a son of Urien of Rheged (see above, p. 78), and Oswiu's marriage to Riemmelth may have cemented an alliance with the north British principality of Rheged as another important strand in the web of alliances which conspired to overthrow Eadwine.
If the rulers of Rheged were able to preserve a role as Oswiu's allies, this may have directed the main thrust of the Bernician attack on British territory at this time towards the Forth.
The Bernicians may have reached the Firth of Forth under Oswald, for in 638 the Irish annals record the siege of Eten (AU s.a. 637:AT p.184:CA p.144), which is to be identified with Edinburgh in the territory of the Votadini, and the siege has been interpreted as probably marking the capture of this important British stronghold by the northern Angles.
Before the mid-650s the Anglian frontier had also been extended to include Iudeu or Giudi , identified as probably Stirling; Oswiu retreated here on the eve of the battle of the Winwaed (HB chs 64, 65).
Possession of Stirling, the natural fortress at the head of the navigable waters of the Forth and commanding the crossing of the Forth by the Roman road leading north into Pictland, implies the annexation of Manau Gododdin .
If Manau Gododdin was annexed by Oswald and Oswiu at this time, the Anglian frontier in the north would now march with those of the Britons of Strathclyde to the west and the Picts to the north.
It may have been the Anglian advance towards Stirling which tempted Domnall Brecc, grandson of Áedán, son of Gabrán, and king of Scottish Dál Riata, to attack the Strathclyde Britons in 642 (AU s.a. 641:AT p.186:CA p.144).
Domnall's death in Strathcarron underlines the strategic importance of this ‘the central cross-roads of Scotland’, where Britons, Scots and Angles intermingled.
Indeed, the possible conjunction of the northern Anglian princes and Domnall Brecc in the same area could imply that an alliance between Angles and Scots or at least concerted action between them was the key to Anglian success in north Britain in the reign of Oswald.
Oswald was vulnerable, however, south of the Humber.
In 642 or 643 (depending on whether he became king in 634 or 635)(see Appendix, Fig. 7.3) he was slain fighting Penda at the battle of Maserfelth (HE 111, 9) or Maes Cogwy (HB ch. 65;AC s.a. 644), traditionally though not certainly Old Oswestry, and his body dismembered.
Oswald's adversaries here may have included Cynddylan ap Cyndrwyn, a prince of Powys.
It is unfortunate that the verse saga ascribed to Llywarch Hen, which celebrates Cynddylan's defence of the River Tern in Shropshire on the Powys border and laments the destruction of his residence at Pengwern , situated perhaps on the Wrekin or at nearby Wrockwardine, is essentially unhistorical, but the statement, ‘I saw armies on the ground of the field of Cogwy [Maes Cogwy ]and the battle full of affliction: Cynddylan was an ally’, may possess value as an independent fragment.
Bardic tradition certainly associated members of the Cyndrwynyn kindred with (probably) the battle of Chester and a battle in Meigen in the time of Eadwine.
Moreover,Marwnad Cynddylan (‘Lament for Cynddylan’), perhaps by the bard, Meigant, may be of seventh-century date or at least no later than the ninth.
It recalls what was evidently a memorable expedition —‘magnificent combat, great the booty’— to Caer Lwytgoed (Lichfield), when there was no escape for ‘book-holding monks’.
But Cynddylan does appear as an ally of the family of Pyd (Pybba), father of Eowa and Penda, in Marwnad Cynddylan which declares, ‘when the son of Pyd desired, how ready he was’, almost certainly meaning that Cynddylan was prepared, when the opportunity arose, to join forces with the Mercians.
So Cynddylan's presence at Maes Cogwy is a possibility.
When the twelfth-century bard, Cynddelw, recalled ‘the clash of Powys…with Oswald’, he was looking back on an episode which had considerable significance not only for the Welsh but also for the Mercians.
For it was not only Oswald who perished in the battle but also Eowa, king of the Mercians and Penda's brother (AC s.a. 644).
It has been suggested that Penda's political power was in eclipse at the time and that Eowa was the dominant ruler among the Mercians as a subject king of the northern Angles from the mid-630s until his death, possibly in Oswald's army, in the battle at Maserfelth , but there is no reason why Penda and Eowa should not have been ruling jointly, with Eowa as king possibly of the northern Mercians and Penda as king of the southern.
It was over the southern Mercians that Oswiu, king of the northern Angles, later established Penda's son, Peada, in the aftermath of Penda's death at the battle of the Winwaed (HE Ill, 24)(see below, pp. 96–7).
The Mercians may always have been ruled by more than one king, possibly several, before the mid-seventh century, and Bede certainly thought of Penda as king at the time of his attack on the eastern Angles in the late 630s (HE 111, 18).
Following Oswald's ascendancy it is difficult to imagine that Penda and Eowa were other than both subject to his overlordship.
Whether Eowa was in alliance with Oswald in 642 or 643, it is impossible to say.
The first consequence of the battle of Maserfelth was that Penda was left as sole king of the Mercians, without question the most powerful Mercian ruler so far to have emerged in the midlands.
A second consequence was that the northern Humbrian confederacy fragmented when, as the Historia Brittonum records, Penda separated the Southumbrians from the Northumbrians (HB ch. 65), and Oswald's brother, Oswiu, was able to assume royal power only among the Bernicians.
This constituted a further major dislocation of the northern Anglian hegemony and seriously destabilized the dynastic situation within Deira and Bernicia.
Though Bede considered Oswald's brother and successor, Oswiu, to have been the sixth of the overlords of the Anglo-Saxons (HE 11, 5), it is clear that it was many  years before Oswiu could securely establish himself as king even over all the northern Angles let alone as overlord of his southern neighbours and that this latter position was very  short-lived .
Penda had taken Eadfrith, son of Eadwine, into Mercia with him after the battle of Hatfield, possibly with the intention of restoring him one day in Deira as a dependent ruler, but perhaps ill-advisedly put him to death during the reign of Oswald (HE 11, 20)— though conceivably prevailed upon to do so by Oswald.
Nevertheless, despite the decimation of Eadwine's family, a Deiran prince, Oswine, son of Eadwine's cousin, Osric, emerged as king among the Deirans (HE 111, 14)(see Appendix, Figs 6.1 and 7.1), though he was evidently unable or disinclined to revive the Canterbury mission at York.
If Bede is to be believed, Oswine proved an attractive ruler who gained the admiration of Aidan, which suggests that Oswiu faced a dangerous rival in this Deiran king whom he eventually out-manoeuvred and slew by treachery the ninth year of the latter's reign (HE 111, 14).
To Bede, for whom Oswald became king in 634 and died in 642, Oswine's ninth year was 651 (HE V, 24), but again, if Eadwine was killed in 634, not 633, and Oswald perished in 643, not 642, Oswine's ninth year would be 651/2 and the year of his death, therefore, might need to be emended to 652 (see Appendix, Fig. 7.1).
It was no doubt in part at least to consolidate himself dynastically in the face of the threat posed by Oswine that Oswiu married Eanflaed, daughter of Eadwine and Aethelburh, and therefore of part-Deiran, part-Kentish extraction,c. 644 (her son, Ecgfrith, was in his fortieth year in 685)(HE 111, 15).
This must also have secured for Oswiu an important diplomatic contact with the Kentish court of King Eorcenberht (640–64), son of Eadbald, and re-established the former relationship which had prevailed in the time of Eadwine and Eadbald.
Eanflaed's kinship with Oswine subsequently obliged Oswiu to found a monastery at the place of Oswine's death at Gilling in Yorkshire in expiation of his murder (HE 111, 24).
On (or soon after) Oswine's death Oswiu's nephew Oethelwald, son of Oswald, secured the kingship in Deira (HE 111, 23)(see Appendix, Figs 6.2 and 7.1), though whether appointed to this position by Oswiu or acquiring it in opposition to his uncle is unknown.
His elevation to the kingship may have been a manifestation of the support he could command in his own right among the northern Angles as the son of the victor of ‘Heavenfield’.
The battle of the Winwaed
In the context of this dramatic eclipse of northern Anglian military might, Penda experienced a steady increase in power.
By November of the year 655 or 656 — Bede gives 655 (HE 111, 24) but again this date may need to be emended in the same way as Bede's other Northumbrian dates (see Appendix, Fig. 7.3)— Penda was able to challenge Oswiu at the battle of the  Winwaed with a mighty coalition, for he had spent the intervening thirteen years consolidating his position.
The Middle Anglian communities passed under Mercian rule and out of any possible eastern Anglian orbit and Penda appointed his son, Peada, their ruler (HE III, 21).
The eleventh-century claim that Merewalh, king of the Magonsaete, was also a son of Penda cannot be authenticated, even though in the 740s Aethelbald, king of the Mercians, appears to describe Mildrith (later regarded as the daughter of Merewalh and Aebbe (Eafe), a Kentish princess) as his kinswoman (CS 177: S 91); and the likelihood is not that the Magonsaete were a Mercian creation but that Mercian control was being imposed upon their territory across the mid-seventh century.
It is not inconceivable that Merewalh was the son of a sister of Penda.
Penda gave one sister in marriage to Cenwealh, king of the upper Thames valley Saxons, and when Cenwealh repudiated her he drove him out of his kingdom by c .
650/1 and into exile among the eastern Angles (HE 111, 7), an important stage in the establishment of the upper Thames valley as a Mercian sphere of influence.
Whether Penda was able to dominate Sigeberht the Little, king of the eastern Saxons (HE 111, 22)(see Appendix, Fig. 2), is unknown.
He attacked the eastern Angles between 649/50 and 652 and expelled King Anna whose unexpected return temporarily checked the Mercian advance, though only until 654 or 655 when Penda invaded East Anglian territory again and this time slew him (HE 111, 18).
It is possible that he now established Anna's brother, Aethelhere (see Appendix, Fig. 5) in his place, to judge from Aethelhere's presence in Penda's army at the Winwaed , if not as a dependent ruler at least as an ally (HE 111, 24).
An alliance with the Welsh leaders was also concluded.
Though it has been suggested that Cynddylan may have been among Penda's British allies at the Winwaed , there is no direct evidence for this, but when Penda attacked Oswiu in the mid-650s he is said to have been supported by British kings (HB ch. 64), principal among whom was Cadafael ap Cynfedw, king of Gwynedd (HB ch. 65).
According to Bede, Penda led thirty duces into battle at the Winwaed , including Oethelwald, king of Deira, allied with those who had slain his father rather than with his uncle against them (HE 111, 24).
It was, therefore, a most impressive and formidable army which the Mercian king marshalled against the Bernicians.
Relations between Penda and Oswiu in the years between the death of Oswald and the battle of the Winwaed had been variable.
At an unknown date, but before the death of Aidan, Penda campaigned deep into Bernicia, storming Bamburgh and endeavouring to fire it (HE 111, 16).
There may well have been other such incidents.
In the early 650s, however, Oswiu's son, Ealhfrith, married Penda's daughter, Cyneburh, after which Penda's son, Peada, now ruler of the Middle Angles, requested in marriage Oswiu's daughter, Ealhflaed, and received missionaries in her company, being urged to accept Christianity not least by his recently acquired brother-in-law, Ealhfrith (HE III, 21).
It may be that it was the removal of Oswine  which enabled Oswiu and Penda to treat on these equal terms.
A precise chronology is impossible, but Bede says it was in 653 — by which 654 may need to be understood, for Bede also says it occurred two years before the death of Penda (in 655 or 656)— that Peada was converted (HE V, 24).
What is striking is that Peada was baptized by Fínán, Aidan's successor as bishop of Lindisfarne, at Ad Murum in the vicinity of Hadrian's Wall, and that he took back with him four priests, Cedd, Adda, Betti and Diuma, to work among the Middle Angles, the Irishman Diuma receiving consecration from Fínán, according to Bede, as bishop of the Middle Angles and the Mercians (HE 111, 13).
The Mercian prince had clearly not turned southwards to Canterbury for religious advice and ecclesiastical direction.
His political and cultural orientation was still northwards, his world essentially that of the Humbrians.
Moreover, for Diuma to have been consecrated bishop of the Middle Angles and Mercians (assuming that Bede has not made an error here), while Penda remained a heathen, must have been tantamount to treating Penda's territory as a northern Anglian sphere of influence.
Simultaneously with the conversion of Peada, Oswiu was also prevailing upon Sigeberht the Good, king of the eastern Saxons (see Appendix, Fig. 2), the successor of Sigeberht the Little, to accept Christianity.
Sigeberht paid regular visits to King Oswiu's court and was also eventually baptized at Ad Murum by Bishop Fínán, Oswiu then sending priests to the eastern Saxons, most notably Cedd, who was now detached from the Middle Anglian mission and subsequently consecrated bishop of the eastern Saxons by Fínán (HE 111, 22).
A new wave of evangelization was carrying the influence of the church of Lindisfarne deep into southern England, symbolizing a new political initiative on the part of Oswiu.
Furthermore, the consolidation of Bernician domination of the northern Britons had probably been proceeding unhindered.
For Oswiu, driven north when Penda's attack materialized in the autumn of 655 or 656,Iudeu (probably Stirling)(see above p. 90) proved a safe refuge (HB ch. 65).
Nor was Oswiu necessarily without allies in the north of Britain.
Though there is no specific reference to Dalriadic support for Oswiu in these years, the suspicion that a Dalriadic alliance was a constant factor in the Bernician situation under Oswald and Oswiu must be a strong one.
In addition, in 653, Oswiu's nephew, Talorcan, son of his brother, Eanfrith, became king of the Picts.
It must be regarded as extremely probable that Oswiu was able to seek help in the confrontation with Penda not only from the Scots but also from the Picts, possibly even from the Irish (see also below, p. 99).
Oswiu certainly needed all the support he could attract.
What precipitated the final crisis with Penda and the attack on Oswiu which culminated at the Winwaed on 15 November in 655 or 656 is obscure but Penda was almost certainly the primary moving force, the centre of a coalition which included Cadafael, king of Gwynedd (HB ch. 65), Aethelhere, king of the eastern Angles, and Oethelwald, king of the Deirans (HE 111, 24).
A passage in Bede's account attributing responsibility as the author of the war to Aethelhere, is now generally regarded as corrupt, but Oethelwald's support for Penda certainly implies a complexity of factors.
It may also be that the aims and intentions of Penda and his allies were mixed.
For Cadafael, king of Gwynedd, Oswiu's domination of the north Britons, perhaps particularly the Votadini, may have been of principal concern.
Among the Mercians there must be a reasonable probability that Penda regarded Oswiu's activities in general as contrary to Mercian interests in particular his involvement, for example, with the eastern Saxons, and possibly his likely reception of Cenwealh from the upper Thames valley whom Penda had expelled (see above, p. 58).
It may also be that whereas the British kings intended to replace Oswiu with a more acceptable candidate, Penda sought only to reduce Oswiu to the status of a dependant and at the same time effectively to establish territories such as Lindsey as falling within a southumbrian Mercian orbit.
Penda was no stranger to Bernician terrain across which he had campaigned before (HE 111, 16), and his army successfully traversed the whole length of Oswiu's kingdom to besiege him at Iudeu .
He obliged Oswiu not only to give his son, Ecgfrith, aged 10, as a hostage — Penda sending the boy into the keeping of his queen, Cynewise, in Mercia (HE III, 24)— but also to part with great treasure to Penda and his allies (HB ch. 65).
Bede says that Oswiu was forced to pay this tribute as the price of peace on condition that Penda would cease to devastate his kingdom and withdraw (HE 111, 24).
Penda and his allies had left Oswiu's territory by the time Oswiu, with his son, Ealhfrith, and a much smaller force, according to Bede, caught up with them.
Oswiu seems to have taken them by surprise and brought them to bay on the banks of the River Winwaed , now swollen by autumnal rains, and probably to be identified with the River Went, a tributary of the Don.
The invading army was evidently homeward bound and perhaps disinclined for a renewed engagement, which may explain why Cadafael (HB ch. 65) and Oethelwald (HE 111, 24) withdrew before battle was joined.
There may even have been some dissatisfaction among Penda's allies with what had been achieved at Iudeu .
But not all Penda's allies deserted.
Aethelhere, king of the eastern Angles, and the majority of Penda's duces perished in the ensuing battle in which, according to Bede, more died in the flood-waters of the river than were slain by the sword (HE 111, 24).
There must at least be a possibility that Penda's decapitation by Oswiu was an avenging of Penda's earlier dismemberment of Oswald's Gody.
The last phase of northern domination in southern England
The repercussions of Oswiu's victory at the Winwaed were profound.
Oethelwald is not heard of again after the battle and Oswiu re-established  an overkingship of the northern Angles with his son, Ealhfrith, as co-ruler or sub-king over the Deirans (Vita Wilfridi , chs 7, 10).
In the mid-660s, Ealhfrith was replaced by Oswiu's younger son, Ecgfrith (see below, p. 103), but the territory remained firmly in Bernician control.
When Ecgfrith succeeded his father, he appears to have established his younger brother, Aelfwine, in his place (HE IV, 22;Vita Wilfridi , chs 17, 24).
Following Aelfwine's death in the battle of the Trent against the Mercians in 679 or 680 (HE IV, 21;Vita Wilfridi , ch. 24)(see below, p. 117), Deira was ruled from then on directly by the Bernicians (see Appendix, Fig. 7.1).
The Mercian kingdom was divided, Oswiu entrusting the southern Mercians to Penda's son, Peada, his son-in-law, but retaining north Mercian territory in his own hands.
The following spring Peada was murdered at Easter, allegedly, according to Bede, through the treachery of his wife, Oswiu's daughter, Ealhflaed (HE 111, 24).
The whole of Mercia (and Middle Anglia) now passed under Oswiu's control.
At the same time the Welsh annals record that ‘Oswiu came and took booty’(AC s.a. 658), presumably in the Welsh marches, and possibly from Cadafael, king of Gwynedd, and the contemporary rulers of Powys.
Clearly Oswiu experienced a tremendous increase in personal power and prestige following his victory at the Winwaed .
First, it must have enabled him to consolidate his hold on Anglian territories north of the Humber, establishing himself securely now not only in Deira but also presumably over the more outlying regions of his kingdom.
When Ecgfrith and his brother, Aelfwine, gave estates to the church of Ripon in the early 670s on the occasion of its consecration by Wilfrid (on whom see below, pp. 101 ff.), they granted transpennine estates in the presence of sub-kings (Vita Wilfridi , ch. 17).
One such sub-king was the Beornhaeth who campaigned with Ecgfrith against the Picts in the early 670s (Vita Wilfridi , ch. 19)(see below, p. 100), and whose territory may have adjoined the southern Pictish frontier.
It seems highly probable that the northern kingdom achieved a greater cohesion and a more rigorously defined hierarchy of power in the decade or so after Winwaed .
Second, Bede says that Oswiu established his rule over the southern Anglo-Saxon kingdoms for three years after Penda's death (HE III,24 — on Bede's chronology 655–8 but perhaps to be emended to 656–9.
Unfortunately, very little evidence bears on Oswiu's standing in southern England during these years.
If it was in the aftermath of Penda's death that Cenwealh re-established himself as king of the Thames valley Saxons, it is likely that he did so with Oswiu's approval and even support.
The eastern Saxons are almost certain to have remained at this time within the orbit of Oswiu and it may also be the case that Aethelwald, the brother of Aethelhere (HE 111, 22)(see Appendix, Fig. 5), received Oswiu's support as the new king of the eastern Angles; it is certainly not at all impossible that he ruled at first in a dependent relationship.
There is no evidence which bears on the position of Eorcenberht, king of Kent, though Bede, who exempted Kent from the area of Eadwine's hegemony, implies that Kent's special position was maintained during the reigns of Oswald and Oswiu (HE 11, 5).
But Bede himself appears to limit Oswiu's southern imperium chronologically to the three years following Penda's overthrow.
At the end of that period Penda's young son, Wulfhere, came to power in a coup in Mercia which expelled Oswiu's governors and threw off Oswiu's overlordship (HE 111, 24).
Oswiu had attempted a re-assimilation of the Mercians into the Humbrian federation from which Penda had earlier broken free, dispensing with a Mercian king and governing through his own agents in a dramatic extension of the powers of an overlord in one of the major kingdoms of the Anglo-Saxon heptarchy.
It is not surprising that he failed.
The successful seizure of royal power by Wulfhere reflected a substantial change in the situation.
New political patterns began to emerge in southern England.
This was probably the time when Cenwealh established his own overkingship of the western Saxons.
Sigeberht the Good, king of the eastern Saxons, over whom Oswiu's influence had been considerable, was murdered at an unknown date (but well before 664 for Sigeberht's successor was dead by 664) and replaced by Swithhelm, son of Seaxbald (HE 111, 22)(see Appendix, Fig. 2).
Aethelwald, king of the eastern Angles, seems to have made the most of his opportunity to extend his authority into Swithhelm's territory, for when Cedd baptized Swithhelm he did so among the eastern Angles in the royal manor of Rendlesham, near Sutton Hoo, in the presence of King Aethelwald, who was his sponsor (HE 111, 22) .66 The foundation of a monastery at Barking in Essex for Aethelburh by her brother, Eorcenwald, later bishop of London (HE IV, 6), could indicate an extension also of Kentish influence into the territory of the eastern Saxons.
Both Aethelburh and Eorcenwald, if not of Kentish royal extraction, had Kentish connections, for Eorcenwald was founding-abbot with the support of Ecgberht, king of Kent, of the monastery of Chertsey in the Kentish-controlled territory of Surrey (HE IV, 6)(CS 34: S 1165).
The date of the founding of Barking is uncertain but it would seem to have been c .
660 if the king, Swithfrith, who appears to have given a foundation gift to the monastery (CS 87: S 1246), was a co-ruler with King Swithhelm who died c .
664 (HE 111, 30).
Until Wulfhere was able to establish a dominant position for himself among the southern kings (see below, pp. 114 ff.), the evidence suggests a multiplicity of regional overlordships.
Oswiu's involvement must have been minimal in all of them.
Oswiu died on 15 February 670, according to Bede (HE IV, 5), reckoning a reign of twenty-eight years (HE 111, 14) from an accession in 642, but if Oswiu became king in 643 he would have died in 671 (see Appendix, Fig. 7.3).
There is some evidence that this may have been the case.
Ecgfrith, his successor, is given a reign of fifteen years in the Northumbrian regnal list, but Bede says that he was killed on 20 May 685 in his fifteenth year  (HE IV, 24), and that Ecgfrith was indeed in his fifteenth year in 685 is confirmed by the inscription at Jarrow which records the dedication of the church on 23 April (which fell on a Sunday in 685), a month before his death, in his fifteenth year.
What was meant by the year of a king?
The first year of a king ran from the day of his accession in one calendar year to the eve of the anniversary of that accession in the following, his second from the first anniversary of his accession to the eve of his second, and so on.
The eighth-century Northumbrian annals in the Historia Regum and the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle D (s.a. 761) show that Aethelwald Moll began to reign as king of Northumbria on 5 August 759, and the battle of Eildon, which lasted from 6–9 August 761, is described as taking place ‘at the beginning’ of his third year.
Aethelwald's third year clearly extended from 5 August 761 to 4 August 762.
In Ecgfrith's case, by the same principle, if he was killed in the fifteenth year of his reign and had only been king fourteen years, he may have become king in 671 and certainly could not have done so before 21 May 670.
If Oswiu died on 15 February 670, an interval will have occurred before Ecgfrith succeeded and, though an ex silentio argument is not conclusive, evidence for such an interval or interregnum is lacking.
Moreover, a date for the death of Eadwine in 634 as opposed to 633 would have the cumulative effect of pushing the year of Oswiu's death from 670 into 671.
In this case, Ecgfrith would have succeeded his father almost immediately in early 671 and only just begun his fifteenth year as king when he was slain.
It has been suggested that Bede, in order to synchronize diverse chronological tradition, ‘considered the whole year of the Incarnation, in which a king died, as his last year and reckoned the next year of the Incarnation as the first of his successor’, so that if, for example, Oswiu died in 670, the whole of 671 was Ecgfrith's first year for Bede and the whole of 685 his fifteenth.
The ultimate clue to Ecgfrith's regnal chronology, however, is the documentary report of the council of Hatfield which Bede includes in the Ecclesiastical History (IV, 17) and which demonstrates, by reference to Ecgfrith in his tenth year on 17 September in a year which can only be 680 (see below, p.113), that Ecgfrith certainly succeeded no earlier than 17 September 670 — which introduces an even longer interregnum if Oswiu had died in the February of that year and makes his death in February 671 more likely still.
Given this degree of ambiguity in the chronological indicators, it certainly cannot be regarded as out of the question that Oswiu died and Ecgfrith became king in the early months of 671.
Military recovery in north Britain under Oswiu and Ecgfrith
It is to the period immediately following the battle of the Winwaed that Oswiu's wars with the Picts should probably be assigned.
Bede places  Oswiu's subjection of the Picts in the same context as his domination of the southern kingdoms, in the years immediately after the battle of the Winwaed (HE 111, 24).
The death of Oswiu's nephew, Talorcan, king of the Picts, in 657 (AU s.a .
656:AT p.195) could well have been the signal for an attack.
If Donuel (Domnall), father of Talorcan's successors in the kingship of the Picts, first Gartnait and then Drest, could be securely identified as Domnall Brecc, formerly king of Dál Riata, Gartnait and Drest could perhaps be viewed as the beneficiaries of an alliance between the Scots and the northern Angles against the Picts; but Donuel's identification with Domnall Brecc is not certain, and what could have been a break in the succession of kings of the Picts occurred from 663 to 665/6 between the death of Gartnait and the accession of Drest.
It may be this which signals the high-water mark of Oswiu's intervention in Pictland, analogous to his activities in Mercia in the three years after Penda's death, and it does not imply an obvious community of interest between Oswiu and the sons of Donuel.
It seems reasonable to assume that Oswiu certainly brought into subjection to himself the Pictish kingdom of Fortriu (between the Forth and the Tay), for Bridei, the son of Bili, king of Strathclyde, and Ecgfrith's cousin (HB ch. 57), who became king of the Picts on the  expulsion of Drest and later fought against Ecgfrith, is described specifically in the Irish annals as ‘king of Fortriu’ at his death in 692 (AU s.a .
692:AT p. 212).
The kingdom of Fib (Fife) with Forthreve ( Kinross-shire ), possibly a dependent territory of Fortriu and one which the Northumbrian Cuthbert visited as prior of Melrose in the course of his pastoral responsibilities, was probably also subjugated.
It must also be borne in mind that in 685 Ecgfrith was able to invade through Strathmore as far as Nechtanesmere (Dunnichen), near Forfar, which will have been in the more northerly kingdom of Circinn (between the Isla and the Dee).
The impact of the northern Angles on the Picts, therefore, should not be underestimated.
Though Bede says at one point that Oswiu also made tributary the Scots (of Dál Riata)(HE II, 5), there is no direct evidence for this.
Even Adomnán's reference to ‘strangers’ holding sway among the Dalriadic Scots cannot be construed as a reference to the agents of King Oswiu (or Ecgfrith) because these strangers are represented as oppressing Dál Riata from c .
639 to ‘this day’, that is, Adomnán's time of writing,c .700, which is some time after the power of the northern Angles beyond the Forth had been shattered at Nechtanesmere in 685, and the reference is rather to the failure of the kings of Scottish Dál Riata to regain control of Irish Dál Riata in Antrim.
This territory was lost when Domnall Brecc was defeated at the battle of Moira c.639 by the Uí Néill ruler, Domnall, son of Áed, king of Tara.
Oswiu's campaigns beyond the Forth were almost certainly confined to the Picts.
It may even be that he receive Dalriadic assistance.
This would have been in keeping with the likely  pattern of Bernician-Dalriadic relations.
The Pictish king, Talorcan, son of Eanfrith, had defeated the Scots in 654 (AU s.a .
653:AT p. 193:CA p. 145), and a divided Dalriadic kingdom across the period c .
650–60 may have left Conall Crandomna, Domnall Brecc's brother, joint king of Dál Riata, anxious to preserve good relations with Oswiu, who was, after all, his brother's protégé.
Such a state of affairs may also have prevailed throughout the reign of Domangart, son of Domnall Brecc, from 660 to 673.
Oswiu's son and successor, Ecgfrith, rather than Oswiu himself, is far more likely to have asserted his lordship over the Scots in the wake of his suppression of a Pictish revolt c. 672.
The Picts are said to have fiercely resented their subjection to the Saxons and attacked Ecgfrith who defeated them with the help of his sub-king (subregulus ), Beornhaeth (Vita Wilfridi , ch. 19), probably between the Avon and the Carron (in Manau of the Gododdin).
This episode occurred early in Ecgfrith's reign and is probably to be associated with the expulsion of Drest, king of the Picts, in 672 (AU s.a .
671:AT p. 202).
Ecgfrith was a king who was prepared to send his army in 684 under a military commander, the dux Berht (HE IV, 26), probably to be identified with Berhtred,dux regius (HE V, 24), son of Beornhaeth (AU s.a. 697:AT p. 26), to ravage in Ireland (including the Uí Néill territory of Meath)(HE IV, 26:AT s.a. 684:AT p. 202).
He must have been well placed to advance from the re-establishment of his supremacy over the Picts in 672 to the imposition of it also on the Scots, and an opportunity may have been provided when Domangart was slain in 673 and his nephew, Máeldúin, son of Conall Crandomna, became king.
Máeldúin reigned until his death in 689 (AU s.a. 688).
He was king at the time, therefore, of the battle of Nechtanesmere , after which Bede says the Scots recovered their independence.
If there were any Scots with the Pictish army in 685 Máeldúin would have sent them.
Indeed, for all that is known to the contrary, Ecgfrith may have been facing a Pictish-Scottish alliance in 685.
Such a transformation of allegiances would help to explain the reversal of northern Anglian military fortunes beyond the Forth at this time and could well have been provoked by the changed relationship between the Angles and the Dalriadic Scots.
The probable father-and-son relationship between Beornhaeth, who was associated with Ecgfrith in his defeat of the Picts in the early 670s, and Berht, who led the Northumbrian forces into Uí Néill territory in Ireland in 684, even suggests Irish support for the Picts in their wars with the northern Angles.
Furthermore, an additional factor is likely to have been British support for Bridei, king of the Picts, as the son of Bili, former king of Strathclyde.
Territory was lost, possibly to the Britons, by the Northumbrians along the south bank of the Forth, whence Bishop Trumwine was expelled from his bishopric at Abercorn in the aftermath of Nechtanesmere (HE IV, 26).
Ecclesiastical politics
The military involvement of the northern Angles against the Picts may have been a factor in the success of Wulfhere's coup in Mercia in 658 or 659 and in the disintegration thereafter of Oswiu's southern imperium .
Nor was the eclipse of Oswiu's influence in southern England without repercussions among the northern Angles themselves.
It cannot be entirely coincidental that the following years witnessed the heightening of tensions which threatened to divide Oswiu's kingdom from within.
The council of Whitby, which Bede places in 664, symbolizes this.
According to Bede this meeting to adjudicate between the Roman Easter and the by now largely obsolescent Easter observances of Iona was held in Oswiu's twenty-second regnal year, thirty years after the arrival of Scottish monks (HE 111, 26).
Bede's reckoning from 642 for the accession of Oswiu would suggest to him the year 664, but if Oswiu did not succeed until 643 the reference to his twenty-second year would point to 665 as the year of the council.
The indications are, however, that in this instance 664 is the correct year.
The year of the council was the year of an eclipse (HE 11, 27), which took place on 1 May 664, and an outbreak of plague (HE 111, 27).
Either, therefore, Oswiu did become king in 642, as Bede says, or Bede was able to date the council of Whitby to 664 by reference to the eclipse and plague of that year and he calculated Oswiu's regnal year at this point for himself on his own assumption of a succession for Oswiu in 642.
Cedd, who acted as interpreter at the council, died in this plague (HE 111, 23), probably on 26 October 664, and so did Tuda, appointed bishop of Lindisfarne in succession to Colmań who returned to Iona after Oswiu had given his decision at Whitby in favour of the Catholic Easter (HE 111, 27).
Oswiu's queen, Eanflaed, observed Easter according to Catholic custom within the paschal limits of the nineteen-year tables of Dionysius Exiguus, with her chaplain, Romanus, and James the Deacon, a survivor from the mission of Paulinus.
Oswiu and his son, Ealhfrith, adhered to Iona's older fourth-century eighty-four-year cycle (HE 111, 25).
Ealhfrith must have been about 20 years old at the time of the battle of the Winwaed , after which he became king of Deira, taking over the former territory of his cousin, Oethelwald.
It was very soon after this that he began to show signs of dissatisfaction with the ecclesiastical situation in the north.
He was on good terms with Cenwealh, king of the Thames valley Saxons (Vita Wilfridi , ch. 7), whose first bishop was Agilbert, a Frank and later bishop of Paris, a Catholic bishop, therefore, observing the customs and practices of the Roman Church.
It was Cenwealh who recommended to Ealhfrith c .
658 Wilfrid, a young Northumbrian recently returned from the continent where he had visited Rome and received the Petrine tonsure in Gaul (Vita Wilfridi , chs 3, 7).
Wilfrid was already well versed in Roman orthodoxy, and well aware of differences of observance among Irish and  Britons, whom his biographer calls ‘schismatics’(Vita Wilfridi , ch. 5).
At some point before 664 Ealhfrith ejected Eata, abbot of Melrose and a pupil of Aidan (HE III, 16), and his companion, Cuthbert, who would not accept the Catholic Easter and other canonical rites of the Roman Church, from his new foundation at Ripon and committed it instead to Wilfrid (HE III, 25: V, 19) It was with Ealhfrith that Bishop Agilbert and his priest, Agatho, stayed when they visited the northern Angles prior to arguing in favour of the Dionysian Easter at the council of Whitby (HE III, 25).
Hence, Ealhfrith began to favour Roman tradition while his father, Bede says, considered that nothing was to be preferred to the teachings of the Scottish clergy (HE III, 25).
Oswiu's decision at Whitby in favour of the Roman Easter indicates an appreciation of the need to bring the Church among the northern Angles into some degree of greater conformity with the Church of Rome, though he evidently envisaged a relatively slow process of accommodation to Catholic requirements under the Irish Tuda as the new bishop of Lindisfarne.
Tuda wore a Petrine tonsure and observed the Roman Easter.
The issue between the Roman and the Celtic clergy, however, turned at this time as much if not more on the question of the validity of orders as on the date of Easter or the shape of the tonsure.
Tuda's episcopal consecration in southern Ireland would not for long have been acceptable.
When the highly orthodox Wilfrid was sent, evidently with Oswiu's consent, to be consecrated as Ealhfrith's bishop, he went to Gaul in the absence (after the death of Deusdedit, archbishop of Canterbury, on 14 July 664) of bishops in England of recognized orthodox and canonical soundness (HE III, 28: V, 19:Vita Wilfridi chs 11, 12).
Though there is an element of ambiguity about the whereabouts of Wilfrid's see, it is most likely that Ealhfrith intended him to be bishop of York, the significance of which is unlikely to have been lost on Wilfrid and his royal patron if Pope Gregory's original plan to establish York as an archbishopric was known to them.
It was not until c .
666 that Wilfrid returned to Deira by which time Tuda had died and King Oswiu had appointed Chad, the brother of Cedd, as bishop of York.
Chad had received consecration from Wine, bishop of the western Saxons, and two British bishops (HE III, 28).
The abandonment of Lindisfarne by Oswiu in favour of a bishop at York implies an awareness on the part also of Oswiu of the importance of York in the Gregorian scheme for two metropolitan provinces in England.
Chad was a northern Angle and undoubtedly orthodox in matters of the tonsure and the date of Easter, but his readiness to accept consecration from the British bishops reveals a continuing failure in Oswiu's entourage to appreciate the importance of canonical rectitude.
Archbishop Theodore made this quite clear when he subsequently reordained him through every ecclesiastical grade (Vita Wilfridi , ch. 15), which was in effect to treat Chad as a layman despite his previous consecration.
Wilfrid withdrew to Ripon and, although he acted on occasion as bishop for Wulfhere among the Mercians and even ordained priests and deacons in Kent, he did not at this time exercise episcopal functions north of the Humber (HE III, 28;Vita Wilfridi , ch. 14).
Moreover, nothing further is heard of Ealhfrith.
At some point in the mid-660s he was forbidden by his father to go to Rome with Benedict Biscop, who was later to found the monastery of Wearmouth and Jarrow.
The conclusion might have been that Ealhfrith abdicated in a voluntary acceptance of the religious life were it not for Bede's silence on the matter and his statement that Oswiu was attacked in the course of his reign by the Mercians, his nephew, Oethelwald, and by his own son, Ealhfrith (HE III, 14).
There is a possibility, therefore, that Ealhfrith lost his life in a rebellion against his father while Wilfrid was receiving consecration in Gaul.
Such a disturbance could help to explain Wilfrid's delayed return.
Ealhfrith's personal religious predilections need not necessarily have borne undertones of political dissatisfaction but the differences on ecclesiastical matters between father and son, coming as they did at a time of profound change in Oswiu's former position of influence in southern England, probably reflected a crisis of potentially serious dimensions.
Oswiu's appointment of Chad to York suggests that he was moving towards a re-affirmation of his authority in the whole northern Church, not least in Deira.
Ealhfrith may also have been apprehensive about his father's plans for his younger half-brother, Ecgfrith, who appears to have married Aethelthryth, widowed daughter of Anna, king of the eastern Angles,c .
660.
A young man in his late teens by the time of the council of Whitby and the son of the reigning king in Bernicia by Eanflaed, daughter of Eadwine, Ecgfrith was almost certainly in a position to attract support not only among the Bernicians but also among the Deirans in the territory of Ealhfrith, and in the last years of his reign Oswiu did make him sub-king of Deira.
Another larger issue could well have been the major redirection of Bernician military might and political power needed to secure an advance north of the Forth.
Despite the earlier campaigns to the Forth against the Britons, this further offensive and the resources which it required and continued to require while Mercian strength increased in southern England represented a serious dislocation of northern Anglian royal aspirations, especially at a time when Oswiu remained committed to the maintenance of his influence south of the Humber, at least in ecclesiastical affairs.
Bede's statement that Chad was sent by Oswiu to the archbishop of Canterbury to be consecrated, only to find that Deusdedit had died (HE 111, 28), is unlikely to be correct because Wilfrid had known that Deusdedit was dead when he was earlier seeking consecration as Ealhfrith's bishop and the probability must be that Oswiu's court would have known this too.
Indeed, it could well have been the death of Archbishop Deusdedit in July 664 which rendered it essential for Oswiu, faced by the resurgence of Mercian power under Wulfhere, to establish his Catholic orthodoxy at  Whitby if he was to play a part in finding a replacement for Deusdedit.
Nevertheless, there is no reason to doubt that Chad was sent to Canterbury.
Oswiu's appointment of Chad to Paulinus' former bishopric at York instead of Lindisfarne represents a most important change of direction on the king's part, and his immediate dispatch of Chad to Kent suggests a desire to renew an older relationship with the archiepiscopal community there.
Moreover, Oswiu appears to have entered into immediate relations with the papacy.
In his History of the Abbots Bede says that Ecgberht, king of Kent, sent a certain Wigheard to Rome where he wished him to be consecrated archbishop, and only subsequently in the Ecclesiastical History does Bede report that Oswiu and Ecgberht consulted together on what action to take about a successor to Deusdedit and that they agreed on the choice of one of Deusdedit's clergy, Wigheard, whom they sent to Rome to be consecrated (HE III, 29).
Wigheard and all his companions, however, including a messenger of Oswiu's, died shortly after their arrival in Rome, presumably in a local epidemic.
The involvement of the northern king is confirmed by Pope Vitalian's letter to King Oswiu (HE III, 29).
The pope acknowledges Oswiu's conversion to orthodoxy and the Roman Easter, thanks him for the gifts he has sent but grieves that the bearer of these gifts had died in Rome, and regrets that he has not been able at the time of writing to find someone suitable to send as Wigheard's replacement.
The pope envisaged that whomsoever he sent would eradicate all that required uprooting throughout ‘your island’— that is, Britain — and such wide jurisdiction at this time belonged only to Canterbury.
This seems to have been a major attempt on the part of Oswiu, by associating himself with Ecgberht's archbishop-elect and by a recognition of the authority of Canterbury, to establish a new beginning for the Anglo-Saxon Church.
For Oswiu it was perhaps preparatory to a request for a pallium for the bishop of York.
Following Wigheard's death, Abbot Hadrian of Hiridanum recommended Theodore of Tarsus to the pope for the vacant see of Canterbury and Theodore, accompanied by Hadrian, left Rome on 27 May 668.
He arrived in Canterbury on 27 May 669, having been escorted from Gaul, where he had been staying with Agilbert, by a representative of King Ecgberht, not of Oswiu (HE IV, 1).
Theodore was determined to assert his authority throughout the whole Anglo-Saxon Church and it must have become immediately apparent that Oswiu's influence over the new archbishop was minimal.
Chad, Oswiu's bishop at York, was deposed and Wilfrid installed.
Though a reconsecrated Chad was shortly afterwards appointed bishop of Lichfield with Oswiu's consent, this must have seemed to the northern king a high-handed way for the new archbishop to act.
The consequence of Oswiu's decision at Whitby, therefore, was the destruction of the authority of Iona in Anglo-Saxon territory and the restoration of the authority of the archbishop of Canterbury over the northern Angles.
There is no evidence  at this time of any further move towards the provision of a pallium for the bishop of York.
The reign of Ecgfrith witnessed a working out of the tensions which had emerged under Oswiu.
The authority of the archbishop of Canterbury continued to bear on the Northumbrian Church.
Theodore behaved not unreasonably.
He treated Lindsey as subject to a Mercian bishop when Wulfhere controlled it and as part of Ecgfrith's kingdom c .678–9 when Ecgfrith held it (HE IV, 12).
Though committed to increasing the number of bishops in England since the council of Hertford in 672 (HE IV, 5), he did not attempt (so far as is known) to partition Wilfrid's vast diocese of York until Ecgfrith quarrelled with Wilfrid and expelled him in 678 and even then king and archbishop appear to have been in agreement about the subdivision (HE IV, 12: V, 19, 24;Vita Wilfridi , ch. 24).
Wilfrid, however, reacted passionately, if not to the partition of his diocese then to his expulsion and to the bishops who were appointed from communities other than his own — Eata, who had been obliged to leave a new monastic foundation at Ripon to make way for Wilfrid in Ealhfrith's time, now consecrated bishop in Bernicia with his see at Wilfrid's monastic foundation at Hexham; Eadhaed, a former companion of Chad (HE 111, 28), bishop of Lindsey; and Bosa, trained at Whitby where the community under Abbess Hild had opposed acceptance of the Roman Easter at the council of Whitby, bishop of Deira at York (HE IV, 12).
Though these men were perfectly acceptable to Theodore, Wilfrid is said to have declared himself unable to serve God in unity with them because he regarded them as strangers to the Catholic Church (Vita Wilfridi , ch. 30).
They were in the ecclesiastical tradition which would have prevailed in the north if Wilfrid had not been forcibly installed at York by Theodore in place of Chad.
It was impossible for Theodore to maintain the integrity of Wilfrid's position while at the same time attempting to conserve the tradition which Eata, Eadhaed and Bosa represented, and in the years which followed it was the latter which was consolidated.
Though in 681 Tunberht, formerly one of Wilfrid's monks at Ripon and subsequently abbot of Gilling (and the brother of Bede's abbot, Ceolfrith), was made bishop of Hexham (HE IV, 12), he was deposed in 685 (HE IV, 28).
When Ecgfrith lost control of Lindsey, Eadhaed became bishop of Ripon and when Tunberht was appointed to Hexham, Eata moved to Lindisfarne, while Trumwine, whose antecedents are unknown (though he was remembered in Cuthbert's circle and his subsequent retirement to Whitby suggests a background similar to Bosa's), became bishop of Ecgfrith's Pictish subjects at Abercorn on the Forth (HE IV, 12, 26).
On Tunberht's deposition in 685, Eata's companion, Cuthbert, was appointed bishop of Hexham but allowed to remain at Lindisfarne while Eata returned to Hexham (HE IV, 27,28).
Undoubtedly, this reorganization of the Northumbrian Church pleased Theodore, who secured the establishment o additional bishoprics  north of the Humber, and Ecgfrith, who was not only rid of a bishop whom he did not want but able also to secure the appointment of men whom he personally favoured, men generally prepared to deal sensitively with the legacy of the Scottish mission in a post-Whitby era.
Indeed, these appointments both enhanced and stabilized the Church in Deira and Bernicia and defined its character into the eighth century.
The crisis of 678, however, was very much a consequence of Theodore's intervention in 669.
Moreover, the approval of Theodore remained crucial at every stage.
It was Theodore who consecrated Bosa, Eata and Eadhaed, Theodore who appointed Tunberht and Trumwine, and Theodore who consecrated Cuthbert.
From 669 to 678, as bishop of York with its former metropolitan associations (cf.,Vita Wilfridi , ch. 10), Wilfrid, lord also of his own great monastic foundations at Ripon and Hexham, had dominated the northern Church.
He was, according to his biographer, second to none in largesse (Vita Wilfridi , ch. 21), and his retinue of armed followers was considered by Ecgfrith's second queen, Iurminburh, to be the equal of a king's (Vita Wilfridi , ch. 24).
His fall from power in 678 was not unique among the bishops of this period.
In the final analysis, the king's power was greater than the bishop's.
Ecgfrith was able to imprison Wilfrid (Vita Wilfridi , ch. 34), even allegedly plan his death (Vita Wilfridi , ch. 27).
Nevertheless, the expulsion of a bishop was a relatively rare phenomenon.
Nor is it at all clear why Ecgfrith and Wilfrid quarrelled.
It may well be that Wilfrid was no more acceptable to Ecgfrith than he had originally been to Oswiu.
In addition, it is likely that all bishops were deeply involved in the politics of the day.
Shortly before he became bishop of Lindisfarne, Cuthbert is said to have been asked by Aelfflaed, abbess of Whitby and daughter of Oswiu and Eanflaed, who would succeed her brother (who had no son).
It is  salutary to note the political involvement of even this reputedly other-worldly figure.
Cuthbert was evidently able to remind Aelfflaed (if she really needed reminding) of the existence of Aldfrith, illegitimate son of King Oswiu, at that time resident among the islands of Britain.
There were many branches of the Northumbrian dynasty, however, and many noble families who claimed descent from Ida and thereby expressed aspirations to the kingship.
Aelfflaed's question to Cuthbert reveals the ambition of this family, which had possessed royal power continuously for fifty years since 634 or 635, to hold on to it.
Rather than asking Cuthbert ingenuously who would succeed Ecgfrith, Aelfflaed was probably testing his loyalties.
It may be that an element in the antipathy of Ecgfrith and his queen, Iurminburh, to Wilfrid was that Wilfrid was not committed enough to Ecgfrith's family.
To whom might he have been more attached?
One possibility is Oswald's family.
The patronage of royal saintly cults implied dynastic predispositions and one cult highly favoured in Wilfridian circles and at Hexham in particular was Oswald's.
Wilfrid could well have  transferred his allegiance to an otherwise unknown prince of Oswald's line when he lost his patron in Ealhfrith.
Or Ealhfrith could have left sons.
Osric, king of Northumbria (718–29), could have been a descendant of Ealhfrith (see below, p. 147).
Another possibility is that Wilfrid's sympathies lay with descendants of the Deiran royal family of Eadwine.
Aethelwald Moll, who became king of Northumbria in 759, may have been of Deiran royal descent; his power-base certainly seems to have been in Deira (see below, p. 150).
One of his forebears could have won the support of Wilfrid.
When Wilfrid was a prisoner in the late 670s at Dunbar, it was Aebbe, abbess of urbs Coludi (Kirk Hill, south of Coldingham), uterine sister of Oswald and Oswiu, the daughter of Eadwine's sister, Acha (HE 111, 6), who was instrumental in procuring his release (Vita Wilfridi , ch. 39).
In other words, it was a kinswoman of the Bernician royal family, but one with strong Deiran connections, who interceded on this occasion for Wilfrid.
It may even be that the Eadwulf who challenged the accession of Osred, son of Aldfrith, in 704, and whose son was with Wilfrid at Ripon at the time (Vita Wilfridi , ch. 59)(see below, p. 146), was of royal Deiran extraction.
It is not possible to demonstrate adequately a specific hypothesis but one fact is certain: Wilfrid so earned the enmity of Ecgfrith that despite an appeal to Rome which endorsed the justice of his case, he remained in exile and was still an outcast from his church when Ecgfrith fell in battle against the Picts on 20 May 685.
The southumbrian kingdoms from the mid-seventh to the mid-eighth century
By their action in rebelling against King Oswiu and setting up Penda's young son, Wulfhere, as their king (see Appendix, Fig. 8), the Mercians again broke free from the northern Anglian Humbrian federation and re-entered the arena of southern politics.
The reign of Wulfhere
Wulfhere was probably in his mid-teens when he became king three years after the battle of the Winwaed .
If Winwaed was fought in 656 not 655 (see above, p. 92), the revolution which led to the expulsion of Oswiu's agents from Mercia occurred in 659 not 658.
According to Bede, Wulfhere reigned seventeen years (HE 111, 24), which led him to 675 for Wulfhere's death, reckoning forward from 658, but if Wulfhere did not  become king until 659 a seventeen-year reign would suggest 676 for his death.
Some light on the date of the accession of Wulfhere's brother and successor, Aethelred, is shed by the proceedings of the council of Hatfield, dated by reference to 17 September of the Eighth Indiction and by the tenth year of Ecgfrith, king of the Humbrians, the seventh of Hlothhere, king of Kent, and the sixth of Aethelred, king of the Mercians (HE IV, 17).
The year of the Indiction could be 679, if the Greek Indiction was being used, or 680, if the Caesarean.
Bede's methods led him to give 680 for a year he would otherwise have thought of as 679.
A charter of Hlothhere, however, refers to 1 April 675 as ‘in the first year of our reign’(CS 36: S 7), which means that he became king in 674 at the earliest and 17 September in his seventh year can have fallen no earlier than 680.
If, therefore, 17 September 680 fell in Aethelred's sixth year, Aethelred began to reign at some point after 17 September 674 and before the anniversary of that date in 675.
Bede presents Aethelred as abdicating to become a monk in 704 after a reign of thirty years (HE V, 24), but the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle A (s.a. 704) states that he held the kingdom for twenty-nine years, that is, he died in his thirtieth year.
Taken together this evidence indicates 675–704 for the reign of Aethelred and makes reasonable the conclusion that Wulfhere  did not reign seventeen years but died in his seventeenth year, so that his reign will have been 659–75.
It is perhaps not without significance that Wulfhere's queen was Eormenhild, daughter of Eorcenberht, king of Kent (640–4), a marriage probably intended to bring the Mercians more closely into association with the Anglo-Frankish world of the Kentish court at a time when their kingdom was being Christianized under Wulfhere.
No details are known of the conversion of Wulfhere but he reigned as a Christian king with a succession of bishops — Trumhere, Jaruman, Chad and Wynfrith — with their seat, at least from the time of Chad, at Lichfield (HE 111, 24: IV, 3).
For a time Wilfrid, exiled bishop of York, acted as Wulfhere's bishop (Vita Wilfridi , ch. 14) before Archbishop Theodore provided the king with Chad c .
669 (HE IV, 3).
Perhaps some of Wilfrid's monasteries in Mercia (Vita Wilfridi , ch. 64) date back to this period in his life for Wulfhere was a patron of monasticism.
He gave land to Chad at Barrow in Lindsey for the building of a monastery (HE IV, 3), and when Chad died Wynfrith, who succeeded him as bishop, was evidently abbot of Barrow (HE IV, 6).
Wulfhere's reign is primarily distinguished in the surviving record, however, by his re-establishment of the Mercians as a significant political and military force in southern England and it is difficult to envisage Oswiu, king of the northern Angles, maintaining after c .
664 more than a shadow of the influence in southern England which had been Eadwine's or Oswald's.
Attempts were made by Wulfhere to detach the kingdom of Lindsey from its dependency on the north Anglian king, for Chad probably and Wynfrith (672-c. 674) certainly, successive bishops of Lichfield, exercised episcopal authority over the Lindesfara (HE IV, 3) and the political foundations for this may have been laid in the 660s.
Nothing is known of Wulfhere's power among the eastern Angles, where the accession c .
664 of Ealdwulf (in his seventeenth regnal year at the time of the council of Hatfield (HE IV, 17), son of Anna's brother, Aethelric, brought to royal power a new branch of the royal family (see Appendix, Fig. 5), but Ealdwulf's Northumbrian connection — he was the son of a Deiran princess (see above, p. 78) and in continuing contact with Northumbria (HE 11, 15)— did not necessarily enable him to exist independently of Wulfhere's sphere of influence.
Despite a reign of about fifty years — he died in 713 and was succeeded by his son, Aelfwald — almost nothing is known about him.
The kingdom of the eastern Saxons, however, certainly passed into a Mercian orbit.
When Swithhelm, king of the eastern Saxons, died c .
664 to be succeeded by his kinsmen, Sigehere and Saebbi (see Appendix, Fig.2), and Sigehere and his people lapsed into paganism in the plague of 664, it was Wulfhere who organized their reconversion (HE 111, 30).
With domination of the eastern Saxons went control also of London.
Wulfhere was in a position by c .
665–8 to sell the bishopric of London to Wine, recently expelled from his bishopric at Winchester (HE 111, 7).
Archbishop Theodore was  to appoint his own choice, Eorcenwald, abbot of Chertsey, as bishop of London in succession to Wine, probably in 675 (HE IV, 6), but there can be no doubt about the reality of Mercian power in Wulfhere's last years not only north but also south of the Thames, facilitated in all probability by the death of Ecgberht, king of Kent, in 673 (see above, p. 44) and the disintegration of the overkingship of Cenwealh among the western Saxons across the years 672–5 (see above, pp. 52 ff.).
The province of Surrey, most recently under the control of King Ecgberht appears to have passed under the domination of Wulfhere at this time.
Between 673 and 675 Wulfhere is found at his royal residence at Thame in Oxfordshire confirming a grant by which Frithuwald, sub-king of Wulfhere in the province of Surrey, gave land to Chertsey in the company of three other sub-kings, most probably of the regions bordering on Surrey — Osric, Wigheard and Aethelwald, all representing territories soon to be wholly subsumed within larger political creations (CS 34: S 1165).
The occasion of Wulfhere's intervention in Surrey is likely to have been the death of King Ecgberht, which appears to have been followed by an interregnum or at least a contested succession.
Ecgberht's two sons, Eadric and Wihtred, must have been very young in 673 — infants of perhaps 2 or 3 years of age — and Ecgberht's brother, Hlothhere, did not become king of Kent until 674.
Such an interruption of the Kentish regnal succession may reflect disturbed conditions attendant on Wulfhere's annexation of Surrey for Wulfhere, the uncle of Eadric and Wihtred, could well have been hostile to Hlothhere's succession in Kent.
It may even be that in Kent for about a year after Ecgberht's death, ‘Wulfhere could have been the effective ruler’.
Among the witnesses of Frithuwald's grant to Chertsey was his son, Frithuric.
The appearance of a Frithuric among the Middle Angles in the reign of Wulfhere's successor, Aethelred, giving Bredun , probably Breedon on the Hill in Leicestershire, to the monastery of Peterborough in the time of Seaxwulf, Wynfrith's successor as bishop of Lichfield, and Breedon's connection with the monasteries of Bermondsey and Woking in Surrey, raises the intriguing possibility that Frithuwald was a Middle Angle intruded into Surrey by Wulfhere or at the very least that Frithuwald represented a ruling family in Surrey which had strong Middle Anglian connections.
Frithuwald was certainly a man of some importance.
There is evidence to suggest that the territory for which he was responsible under Wulfhere extended across the Thames into north Buckinghamshire and the environs of Thame.
It is clear that Wulfhere's presence in the Thames valley placed the Gewisse of the upper Thames under very serious pressure (see above, pp. 58 ff.).
According to the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle A (s.a. 661), Wulfhere harried Ashdown in 661, in which year he is also said to have attacked the Isle of Wight and given it to Aethelwealh, king of the southern Saxons.
Bede, however, says that Wulfhere's attack on Wight and the gift of the  island to Aethelwealh occurred ‘not long before’ the mission of Wilfrid to the southern Saxons in the mid-680s (HE IV, 13), which suggests that Wulfhere's actions should be placed later in the reign than 661.
One of the regions adjacent to Surrey which is referred to in Frithuwald's charter is Sonning, the province of the Suningas in east Berkshire, and it is possible that one of the three sub-kings who witnessed with Frithuwald ruled here, in which case Wulfhere's presence in Berkshire was already established at the time of Frithuwald's grant.
Indeed, given a campaign by Wulfhere as far as the coast, it is difficult to see how the whole extent of the northern territory of the western Saxons from Berkshire to Somerset could have escaped Mercian pressure in these years, creating perhaps precedents for further Mercian involvement in these districts at a later time.
Wulfhere's subsequent advance to the Isle of Wight suggests a near-total collapse of political and military order south of the Thames.
According to Bede, Wulfhere was able to give the Isle of Wight and the territory of the Meonware in the Meon valley of Hampshire opposite the Isle of Wight to Aethelwealh, king of the southern Saxons on the occasion of his baptism in Mercia in the presence of the Mercian king, possibly on the occasion of Aethelwealh's marriage to Eafe, a Hwiccian Christian princess (HE IV, 13).
The later hostility of Caedwalla and the western Saxons to Arwald, king of the people of Wight, and indeed to his family (HE IV, 16), suggests that the ruling dynasty of the Isle of Wight responded favourably to these arrangements and welcomed the conjunction of Mercian and southern Saxon interests.
It seems likely, therefore, that the men of Wight and the Meonware were allies of Wulfhere who helped to make his advance possible.
Clearly, important diplomatic contacts were being established which were designed to benefit both the Mercians and the southern Saxons through the creation of a new hierarchy of power in southern England.
At this point the historic West Saxon kingdom of the eighth century could have been stillborn or at least confined to political insignificance beyond Selwood, but there was not enough time for Wulfhere to consolidate his position south of the Thames before a major crisis confronted him.
The new king of the northern Angles, Ecgfrith, son of Oswiu, represented a challenge to the Mercian hold on Lindsey.
Despite the presence in his army of southern leaders — the Life of Wilfrid says that he stirred up ‘all’ the southern kingdoms — Wulfhere was defeated by Ecgfrith c .
674 (Vita Wilfridi , ch. 20) and Lindsey passed temporarily out of Mercian control (HE IV, 12).
Wulfhere's position in the south was immediately weakened.
In 675 the Chronicle A (s.a. 675) records that Aescwine, son of Cenfus, one of the kings of the western Saxons, fought him at Biedanheafde .
Though the outcome of the battle is not recorded, Wulfhere's premature death (in his mid-thirties) that same year and the inability of Aethelred, his brother and successor (HE V, 24), to maintain Wulfhere's southern hegemony enabled the kings of the western Saxons to survive without further serious  dismemberment of their territory.
Nor is there any evidence that Saebbi, king of the eastern Saxons, continued to acknowledge the overlordship of the Mercian ruler.
Aethelred's initial acts on becoming king should perhaps be seen as primarily a securing of Mercian border territories.
His devastation of Kent in 676, in the course of which Rochester was ransacked (HE IV, 12), may have been partly designed at least to deter the Kentish king from attempting to repossess Surrey.
Moreover, though married to Osthryth, sister of King Ecgfrith (HE IV, 21), in 679 or 680 Aethelred fought against the northern Anglian king and by a victory on the Trent, in which battle Ecgfrith's brother, Aelfwine, was slain, secured Lindsey — permanently as it turned out — for the Mercians (HE IV, 12).
This defeat of Ecgfrith represented a decisive stage in the delineation of the frontier between Mercians and northern Angles — so that henceforth the power of the king of the northern Angles was more narrowly defined as north-Humbrian — and went some way towards redressing the débâle of Wulfhere's last year or so.
There was probably some extension of Mercian influence into northern Wiltshire and the territory of the western Saxons at this time also, for Aethelred (and possibly his kinsman, Cenfrith (CS 58: S 73) may have given land c .
681 to Malmesbury (CS 59: S 71), and a certain Berhtwald, possibly the nephew of Aethelred, who befriended Wilfrid for a time c .
680 (Vita Wilfridi , ch. 40), appears in a charter of doubtful authenticity in the same area as a sub-king of Aethelred.
The late 670s and early 680s were remarkably free of political and military disturbance in contrast with what had gone before and what came after.
These years were more a time of disturbance within the Church as Archbishop Theodore sought to reorganize its diocesan structure.
The canons of the synod of Hertford (672) established a model for good episcopal order (HE IV, 5) and subdivision of the great kingdom-dioceses proceeded as opportunity presented itself.
The diocese of the eastern Angles was divided in the mid-670s on the illness of Bishop Bisi (HE IV, 5), the Mercian diocese likewise, probably on the deposition of Bishop Wynfrith and the appointment of Seaxwulf, abbot of Peterborough, as bishop, c. 674–5 (HE IV,6), 17 and the territory of the northern Angles was partitioned in 678 following King Ecgfrith's expulsion of Wilfrid, bishop of York (Vita Wilfridi , ch. 24:HE IV, 12).
Theodore thereby gave a wholly new dimension to the authority of the archbishop of Canterbury within the Anglo-Saxon Church.
He also moderated political conduct, mediating peace between Ecgfrith and Aethelred in 679 following the battle of the Trent at a time when Ecgfrith was otherwise honour-bound to pursue hostilities to avenge Aelfwine (HE IV, 21).
The relative peace of these years, therefore, may have owed much to Theodore's influence.
The ascendancy of Caedwalla and its aftermath
This quiescent phase in the political life of the Anglo-Saxon kingdoms came to an end in the mid-680s.
The western Saxons, one of whose kings, Centwine, was still a pagan in the mid-680s until shortly before his abdication c .
685–6 when the pagan Caedwalla came to power, and the southern Saxons under a Christian king, Aethelwealh, but still otherwise largely a pagan people, appear to have been beyond the range of Theodore's metropolitan power.
It was from these territories that further political disruption derived, affecting directly the kingdom of Kent but drawing Mercians and eastern Saxons into a new power-struggle.
The kingdom of Kent had enjoyed political stability for some time.
According to Bede, Eorcenberht (640–64) ruled the kingdom ‘most nobly’(HE III, 8) and his son and successor, Ecgberht (664–73), afforded a secure base from which Theodore could embark as archbishop of Canterbury on his work of ecclesiastical reorganization.
The court of Ecgberht was in touch not only with Rome (HE III, 29) but also with Frankish Gaul (HE IV, 1), and possibly Lombard Italy, its continuing economic vitality reflected in the adoption of the silver sceatta (see above, p. 43).
Dynastic tension within the kingdom, however, was a source of weakness.
With the example before him of the exclusion from the succession of the line of Eorcenberht's brother, Eormenred, and the murder of Eormenred's sons, Aethelred and Aethelberht, Eadric, son of Ecgberht, may have feared exclusion by his uncle, Hlothhere (see Appendix, Fig. 1).
There is no certain evidence that Hlothhere shared royal power as king of Kent with his nephew.
The laws of Hlothhere and Eadric appear in their extant version as a single code issued jointly by Hlothhere and Eadric as kings of Kent, but they may represent a conflation of two originally separate sets of laws or even a confirmation by Eadric of the dooms of his uncle.
They reveal the Kentish kings still with commercial interests in London under the supervision of a royal reeve, and suggest that Hlothhere was a ruler of some standing.
In the mid-680s, Eadric, probably by now a youth of about 15, attacked him.
He did so with the support of the southern Saxons and, after a reign of eleven years and seven months (HE IV, 5), Hlothhere died from wounds received in battle either on 6 February 685 (HE IV, 26)(if, as Bede believed, he became king in July 673) or 686 (if he did not become king until 674).
Eadric now assumed royal power.
He was the nephew of Wulfhere and it is reminiscent of the political alignments of Wulfhere's day that the southern Saxons should have supported him against Hlothhere.
Moreover, what this episode testifies to is a resurgence of the power of the southern Saxons as they sought to further their own ascendancy in the south-east, the foundation of which had been laid by Wulfhere, and it seems likely that Eadric was established as king in Kent as a southern Saxon satellite.
The impact of these events on the church of  Canterbury is unknown but Theodore's increasing ill-health (Vita Wilfridi , ch. 43) may have meant a serious diminution in Canterbury's influence at this time.
The single most dynamic individual in southern England in the mid-680s, however, was neither Eadric nor Aethelwealh but Caedwalla who both frustrated southern Saxon expansion and furthered the creation of a new overkingship of the western Saxons which was the foundation of the West Saxon kingdom of King Ine.
Caedwalla first appears in the records as a noble exile in the forests of Chiltern and Andred (Vita Wilfridi , ch. 42).
Remembered as a son of the King Cenberht who had been a co-ruler of the western Saxons with Cenwealh before his death in the 660s (see above, p. 49), he may have been as much a victim of the impact of earlier Mercian expansion under Wulfhere as of internal strife.
He was in his mid-twenties in 685, still a pagan and the leader of what was evidently a powerful fighting force.
It was while in exile in Andredsweald that Caedwalla encountered Wilfrid, exiled bishop of York, who had come c .
680–1 into the territory of the southern Saxons where he enjoyed the patronage of King Aethelwealh and where he was engaged in converting the people to Christianity (Vita Wilfridi , chs 41, 42:HE IV, 13).
The author of the Life of Wilfrid , who represents Wilfrid as persuading the king and queen to accept the word of God and as preaching to a people who had never before heard the Gospel, undoubtedly exaggerates the paganism of the southern Saxons, for Bede reveals from non-Wilfridian sources, first, that Aethelwealh had married a Christian princess and had been baptized himself and, second, that a number of ealdormen and thegns had likewise received baptism, with the priests, Eappa, Padda, Burghelm and Aeddi ministering to the common people either at the time of Aethelwealh's conversion or subsequently (HE IV, 13).
The account of Wilfrid's activities among the South Saxons in his Life , therefore, must be used with caution.
Nevertheless, that Wilfrid enjoyed good relations with Aethelwealh is confirmed by Bede who records the king's gift to him of 87 hides of land for a monastery at Selsey (HE IV, 13), the site of the bishopric subsequently established among the south Saxons in the time of Daniel, bishop of Winchester (HE V, 18).
Wilfrid's dealings with Aethelwealh were at about the time of Aethelwealh's involvement in Kent in support of Eadric when a new southern Saxon hegemony extending from Wight into Kent could conceivably have challenged the existing political map of south-east England.
While a beneficiary of Aethelwealh's patronage, however, Wilfrid is said to have been sought as a spiritual father by Caedwalla (Vita Wilfridi , ch. 42).
Though Caedwalla remained unbaptized until after his abdication as king in 688, it is not inconceivable that he approached Wilfrid in such a capacity, and certainly by the time of his abdication Caedwalla had resolved to seek baptism in Rome itself.
He was presumably influenced  in this direction by the churchmen around him, among whom Wilfrid is conspicuous for his known familiarity with the see of St Peter.
It was against this background that Caedwalla attacked the southern Saxons.
He was at first driven out by the duces , Berhthun and Andhun, but it was not long before he attacked again and slew King Aethelwealh (HE IV, 15).
Berhthun and Andhun then governed the kingdom, possibly as kings.
Aethelwealh's possession of Wight and the Meon valley since before 675 and the consequent shift in political and military relationships were almost certainly the reason for Caedwalla's hostility, together with a desire to prevent a further extension of southern Saxon influence in the south-east.
That he was able to summon the military force necessary for this invasion of southern Saxon territory, however, is surprising and a vivid demonstration of power by an exiled aetheling.
One possibility is that he had already begun to campaign in western Saxon territory and that additional troops joined him from his supporters there.
It is not necessary to suppose that Wilfrid behaved treacherously to Aethelwealh in associating with Caedwalla; the warfare between the two was probably outside his control.
The impression conveyed by Wilfrid's career in these years is of a Church still very dependent in the pursuit of its own interests, certainly in territories outside Canterbury's sphere of influence, on the unpredictable inclination of the princes with whom it had to deal.
There is no indication that Wilfrid exercised any influence on Caedwalla's secular and military activities.
Nevertheless, it is likely that he was quick to accommodate himself to the victor and to profit from a new source of patronage.
The Chronicle A (s.a. 685) says that Caedwalla began to contend for the kingship in 685, but it was not until 686 that he established himself as king over the western Saxons.
The West Saxon Genealogical Regnal List allocates him a reign of three years, with one variant reading of two, but Bede also says that Caedwalla reigned for two years before his abdication in 688 (HE IV, 12: V, 7)(see also above, p. 51).
His predecessor, Centwine, abdicated on his conversion to enter a monastery, but of the details of the process by which Caedwalla established himself over the western Saxons nothing is known.
It certainly should not be thought that he overthrew all other kings.
If the evidence, admittedly not here of the best, of land-grants can be accepted, Bealdred, a king in the region of Somerset and west Wiltshire c .
681 (CS 61: S 236), was still reigning in 688 (CS 71: S 1170), and Cenred, the father of Ine, also appears to have been ruling as a king somewhere in Wessex in Ine's early years (CS 78: S 45)
In 686 Caedwalla ravaged Kent with his brother, Mul (ASC A,s.a. 686).
A second invasion of southern Saxon territory, in which Berhthun was slain (H E IV, 15), may also belong to that year.
The Isle of Wight was also attacked (ASC A,s.a. 686) and Bede gives details (HE IV, 16).
Caedwalla attempted, according to Bede, to exterminate the natives and replace them with inhabitants of his own kingdom, vowing, though still a  pagan, that he would give a fourth part of the island and the booty seized to the Church if he were successful.
This vow he fulfilled by granting extensive estates to Bishop Wilfrid.
Among the casualties of Caedwalla's attack on Wight were Arwald, king of the island, and his two young brothers who escaped to the opposite mainland where they were captured and put to death after Caedwalla had first allowed them to receive baptism.
It is conceivable that it was Arwald's accession as a young king which was the signal for Caedwalla's attack.
In Kent, after a reign of a year and a half (HE IV, 26), Eadric died either in 686 (if he succeeded Hlothhere in 685) or 687 (if he succeeded Hlothhere in 686) on 31 August.
Mul was evidently established as king in Kent but he was burnt to death there and Caedwalla responded with a second invasion in 687 (ASC A,s.a. 687) and may then have ruled Kent directly for a time.
Bede says that he reduced the southern Saxons to a more grievous servitude on the death of Berhthun (HE IV, 15), and the situation in Kent may have been similar, the kingdom reduced to economic and political disarray.27
Caedwalla's presence in the south-east was sustained.
He is represented as granting land at Hoo in Kent to an Abbot Ecgbald (CS 89: S 233), and a grant of land at Farnham, perhaps dating to 686, for the founding of a monastery reveals him with authority in Surrey (CS 72: S 235).
It was in 686, in the second year of King Aldfrith (Vita Wilfridi , ch. 44:HE IV, 19), that Wilfrid returned to Northumbria.
Theodore's reconciliation with Wilfrid took place in the context of Caedwalla's dramatic ascendancy in southern England and if it is true that he expressed the wish that Wilfrid succeed him at Canterbury (Vita Wilfridi , ch. 43) this may have been in recognition of Caedwalla's new regime with which Wilfrid was associated.
Eorcenwald, bishop of London, is said to have been privy to discussions between Theodore and Wilfrid (Vita Wilfridi , ch. 43).
It is becoming clear how important was Eorcenwald's role in the evolution of the diplomatic form of early Anglo-Saxon charters in the 680s and thereafter; indeed he may have been responsible for drafting Caedwalla's charter to Farnham.
The presence of such individuals in Caedwalla's entourage confirms the Gewissian prince as a significant political figure.
Not only had he transformed the political situation among the western Saxons but he had also established himself as the most powerful ruler in southern England.
If his achievement had been consolidated, a new and formidable political and military order might have been established which could have proved resilient to subsequent Mercian attack.
The grant of Oethelred, a kinsman of Saebbi, king of the eastern Saxons, to Abbess Aethelburh of Barking, Eorcenwald's sister, which was possibly drawn up by Eorcenwald, has West Saxon witnesses (including Bishop Haeddi) and would seem to belong to 686–8 (CS 81: S 1171)(see above, p. 20).
Together with Caedwalla's grant of land in Battersea in Surrey, also to the monastery of Barking (CS 87: S 1246), it constitutes the first sign  of an extension of western Saxon influence north of the Thames and an indication of potential development.
Not surprisingly, Aldhelm was to describe Caedwalla some years after as ‘renowned in war and arms…a powerful occupant of the throne’.
Whatever brought about Caedwalla's abdication in 688, therefore, probably changed the political direction of the southern kingdoms in the late seventh century.
The most likely explanation is that the illness which took his life within ten days of his baptism in Rome on 10 April 689 was of long standing and that Caedwalla abdicated in the knowledge that his health was failing.
What is striking about it is that he is the first Anglo-Saxon king known to have abdicated to go to Rome and that he went to Rome not as a baptized Christian but to seek baptism.
He was remarkable not only in his military achievement but in the circumstances of his renunciation of power.
The abdication of Caedwalla created a power-vacuum in southern England.
Among the western Saxons Ine may not have acquired royal power until the following year; he abdicated in 726 and the West Saxon Genealogical Regnal List gives him a reign of thirty-seven years which implies an accession in 689, not 688.
He was the son of and seems to have been co-ruler with King Cenred (see Appendix, Fig. 3), whose advice he acknowledges in his laws which date to the period before 693/4 (when Eorcenwald, bishop of London, whose help he also acknowledges, died).
Unsettled conditions among the western Saxons, therefore, may have prevailed in the aftermath of Caedwalla's abdication.
A disturbed situation also reveals itself in the south-east.
In Kent a prince of the native line emerged in Oswine, a descendant, so it would seem, of Eormenred, brother of King Eorcenberht.
In a record of a grant of land in Thanet in January 690 to Aebbe (Eafe), daughter of Eormenred and now abbess of Minster-in-Thanet, Oswine refers to her as his kinswoman (CS 35: S 13), and in another charter granting land to Aebbe which had once belonged to Eormenred he expresses gratitude at his restoration to the kingdom of his fathers (CS 40: S 14).
Oswine, therefore, was probably Aebbe's nephew.
In January 690 he was in the second year of his reign, so his accession took place in 688, no doubt in the immediate aftermath of Caedwalla's abdication.
In this venture, Oswine appears to have had the support of the king of the Mercians.
Land he gave to St Augustine's, Canterbury, in 689, which had come to him from his parents, had been confirmed in his possession by King  Athelred (CS 73: S 12).
Denied an opportunity to intervene since 676, Aethelred was clearly seeking to re-establish a Mercian presence in Kent.
Simultaneously, however, into Kent came princes of the eastern Saxons.
Sigehere, king of the eastern Saxons (HE II, 30), appears there with Swaefheard, son of his co-ruler Saebbi (so identified in (CS 42: S 10), confirming the grant of land Caedwalla had made at Hoo (CS 89: S 233)(see Appendix, Fig. 2).
Swaefheard first emerges in the circle of Oswine, witnessing Oswine's  grant to St Augustine's in 689 and that to Abbess Aebbe in January 690, but if he was in the second year of his reign by March 690 (CS 42: S 10) he must have succeeded before March 689.
Oswine's power was clearly already weakening by January 690 for he refers in the grant to Abbess Aebbe at that time to those Kentish nobles who were able to be with him.
Swaefheard, on the other hand, had the support of his father, King Saebbi (CS 42: S 10).
It is not clear how far these princes of the eastern Saxons were operating in Kent on their own initiative or to what extent they were under Aethelred's control.
With the rulers of the eastern Saxons possibly free of subjection to Aethelred for the last ten years or more, their presence in Kent suggests a revival of eastern Saxon power and implies at the very least that Aethelred needed their assistance.
Even though, therefore, in 691 Aethelred confirmed a grant of land by Swaefheard to Abbess Aebbe in 690 (CS 42: S 10), and confirmed also the successive donations to Hoo (CS 89: S 233), it may be that he was not entirely master of the situation.
The disarray in Kent at this time is reflected in the failure on the death of Archbishop Theodore on 19 September 690 to elect a successor until 1 July 692 (HE V,8).
The fundamental weakness in Oswine's position was not necessarily so much the challenge from Swaefheard as the lack of support within the kingdom for a prince of Eormenred's line.
Bede, drawing on Canterbury sources, says that when Eadric died, various usurpers or foreign kings plundered the kingdom until the rightful king, Wihtred, son of Ecgberht, established himself on the throne (HE IV, 26).
The usurpers or foreign kings will have included Caedwalla and Swaefheard and his family.
They will also have included Oswine.
Wihtred, a descendant of Eorcenberht rather than Eormenred (see Appendix, Fig. 1), was evidently viewed as the legitimate heir in a way in which Oswine never was.
The weight of the church of Canterbury was behind Wihtred and it may have been this which ensured his success.
Wihtred was in his sixth regnal year in April 697 (CS 96: S 18), so he secured the kingship either early in 692 or after April 691, when he will have been a young man of about 20.
At first he reigned with Swaefheard.
Bede records that when Beorhtwald, abbot of Reculver, was elected archbishop of Canterbury on 1 July 692, Wihtred and Swaefheard were ruling in Kent (HE V, 8).
There is no trace of Swaefheard in Kent, however, after this date.
Saebbi, king of the eastern Saxons, died in 694 and was succeeded by his sons, Sigeheard and Swaefred (HE IV, 11)(see Appendix, Fig. 2), and Wihtred was left in Kent as sole ruler.
It is clear that the Mercians under Aethelred had been unable to assert Mercian authority in Kent in the confused circumstances of these years and the limits to Mercian power in this area had been strikingly reaffirmed.
Nevertheless, Mercian overlordship of the eastern Saxons was consolidated.
Aethelred granted land to Eorcenwald's successor, Wealdhere, bishop of London, in the period 693–704 (S 1783) and in 704 consented to a grant by King Swaefred in Middlesex, subsequently confirmed by Aethelred's  successors, Coenred (704–9) and Ceolred (709–16)(CS 111: S 65).
Coenred also confirmed with Sigeheard, king of the East Saxons, a grant by Tyrhtil, bishop of Hereford, to Wealdhere (S 1785).
Offa, king of the East Saxons (c .
705–9), whose father, Sigehere, may have married into the ruling family of the Hwicce, gave land as sub-king in the territory of the Hwicce to the church of Worcester in the reign of Coenred (CS 123: S 64).
Reconstruction
With the re-establishment of stable kingship in Kent and among the West Saxons under Wihtred and Ine respectively and the confinement of Mercian power, a period of relatively peaceful consolidation followed which lasted for a quarter of a century during which time kings in southern England embarked on that redefinition of their realms which is embodied in the extant laws of Wihtred and Ine.
In 694 the people of Kent came to terms with Ine by which a payment of 30,000 pence, signifying approximately 7,200 shillings and the value of an aetheling's life, was made to the western Saxons in compensation for the burning of Mul (ASC A,s.a. 694).
This agreement may have involved the ceding of border territory and Ine seems to have retained Surrey, referring to Eorcenwald, bishop of London, whose diocese included Surrey, as ‘my bishop’ in the preface to his laws.
Wihtred's long reign, though devoid of known incident, is distinguished as a period of close co-operation between the royal court and the Church in Kent under Archbishop Beorhtwald.
Bede's statement that Wihtred was the rightful king of Kent who brought the rule of the usurpers to an end (HE IV, 26) reflects the viewpoint of a Church thoroughly committed to him.
In return, Wihtred's laws, issued at Bearsted on 6 September 695, freed the Church in Kent from taxation and concerned themselves extensively with religious matters, pronouncing against irregular marriage unions, non-observance of Sunday as a day of rest, and continuing pagan worship.
Wihtred, it has been said, ‘legislated with the Church in the forefront of his mind’.
Four years later he granted immunity from all royal burdens to the churches of Kent (CS 99: S 20).
At the same time ‘a sharply punitive element’ and ‘a new authoritarianism’has been detected in the secular clauses of his laws in which royal judgement could transcend normal procedures and supplant the payment of compensation.
The contemporary laws of Ine, king of the western Saxons, while not unconcerned with religious matters — baptism, observance of Sunday, rights of sanctuary, Church taxes — deal more than do the Kentish with a range of civil as well as criminal matters, including aspects of agrarian economy.
Wihtred was heir to a legislative tradition in Kent which went back to Aethelberht but no king among the western Saxons is known to have  legislated before Ine.
His achievement in bringing together such an elaborate code has been highly regarded, Stenton describing it as ‘the work of a responsible statesman’.
Richardson and Sayles thought Ine's legislation ‘more mature, less experimental in some ways, than the surviving body of Kentish law’.
The laws of Ine and Wihtred contain one clause in common concerning the need for a stranger to shout or blow his horn if straying off the trackway if he did not wish to be mistaken for a thief.
This clause and the adoption in Wihtred's laws of the West Saxon term gesith for noble in place of the eorlcund of the laws of Aethelberht, Hlothhere and Eadric perhaps strengthen a possibility that some degree of collaboration attended the drawing up of these codes.
Certainly, it seems very possible that both were produced in a period of reconstruction immediately following the termination of hostilities and the payment of compensation for Mul.
If it is true that kings only legislated when faced with an urgent need to enhance their standing with their subjects by prestigious acts of law-making, the appearance of royal codes of law in Kent and Wessex at this time may reflect something of the very considerable crisis through which these regions had recently passed.
It seems reasonable to suspect that a certain political and military stability had first to be achieved and that the capacity to make law required consensus and mature counsel among the wiser men of the realm who advised the king which transcended his purely personal ambition.
Both Wihtred and Ine were evidently alive to the importance of ecclesiastical support and the need to secure the goodwill of their great men in preserving, as the laws of Ine put it, ‘the security of our kingdom’.
It is not possible to reconstruct a detailed history of Ine's reign but the indications are that he ruled with firmness.
Bede says that he subjected the kingdom of the southern Saxons to severe oppression and their bishopric was soon absorbed within the diocese of Winchester (HE IV, 15).
The southern Saxons appear to have been divided among more than one king at this time — King Nothhelm (otherwise Nunna) is found in association with a King Watt in the 690s (CS 78: S 45) and a King Aethelstan c .
714 (CS 132: S 42).
The description of Nothhelm as Ine's kinsman in an annal recording Nothhelm's assistance to Ine in his war with Geraint, king of Dumnonia, in 710 (ASC CDE,s.a. 710), indicates that the two ruling families were now connected by marriage.
Their campaign was part of a military advance into British territory by Ine which brought the West Saxon frontier in the west to the Tamar.
On his eastern border, Ine brought pressure to bear on the eastern Saxons who were sheltering exiles from his kingdom.
A letter of Wealdhere, bishop of London, to Archbishop Beorhtwald in 704–5 reveals a state of estrangement between Ine and the eastern Saxon rulers, Sigeheard and Swaefred; in return for the expulsion of the exiles, Ine undertook not to inflict vengeance on the eastern Saxons and a forthcoming council at Brentford, to be attended by the kings and their leading men both ecclesiastical and lay, was expected  to resolve the crisis.
Indirectly this must have represented a challenge to the influence of Aethelred of Mercia in the East Saxon region.
Ine was the patron of several churches in his kingdom — Malmesbury, Muchelney and Glastonbury appear to have been beneficiaries — and a genuine act of general exemption from secular burdens may lie behind the suspect extant privilege to West Saxon churches and monasteries of 704 (CS 108: S 245).
He seems to have worked well with leading churchmen — such as Eorcenwald and Haeddi whom he acknowledges in the prologue to his laws — and Wynfrith, a monk at Exeter, later known in the course of his mission to the continental Germans as Boniface.
According to his Life , Boniface entered the public arena c .
710–15 as King Ine's envoy to the archbishop of Canterbury (Vita Bonifatii , ch.4).
There can be no doubt that it was Ine who set the seal on the creation of the historic kingdom of Wessex and defined its horizons as a Christian realm in which monasticism and men of letters flourished amid active involvement in an overseas mission.
Ine did not allow the displeasure of Canterbury at his failure to agree to a partition of the diocese of Winchester to drive him into action on the matter, despite threats of excommunication.
It was not until the death of Bishop Haeddi in 705 that the territory of the western Saxons was partitioned between Aldhelm (at Sherborne) and Daniel (at Winchester)(HE V, 18).
Ine appears as a hard-headed, resilient leader in rigorous pursuit of his own interests.
His kingdom had come some considerable way from the remote and backward region it had been at the beginning of the seventh century.
By c .
700 the area of circulation of the sceatta or penny, introduced probably in Kent in the 670s, was widening to embrace the Thames valley and Hamwic , near Southampton, was emerging as an important trading settlement to become within a few decades ‘possibly the largest and most densely populated town in eighth-century England’.
One of the unexpected features of this period is the relative quiescence of the Mercians.
This is all the more surprising in view of the fact that the northern king, Aldfrith, was now confined largely north of the Humber, the Northumbrians preoccupied with their own problems of reconstruction following the Pictish victory at Nechtanesmere in 685 and seemingly unable even to take possession of Lindsey again.
Despite this absence of distractions to the north, however, Aethelred, king of the Mercians, exhibited no further expansionist leanings in the south.
It could be that he too was preoccupied nearer home, for example, in wars with the Welsh and the Life of Guthlac may provide evidence of this.
It was also at this time that the Hwicce (and possibly other border peoples such as the Magonsaete and Wreocensaete) were brought more completely under Mercian control.
Among the Hwicce, Osric ruled as king (HE IV, 23) from the mid-670s when he granted land to the abbess of Bath (CS 43: S 51), and Oshere granted land as king of the Hwicce to Cuthswith, abbess of Bath, in 693 (CS 85: S 53).
But Aethelred's consent was being sought from the mid-670s (CS 43: S 51) and there can be no doubt that he regarded Oshere as his sub-king (CS 156: S 1429;CS 217: S 1255).
A letter to Boniface, written c .
680 by a suppliant, Ecgburh, expresses her grief at the loss some time before of her brother, Oshere, whom a bitter and cruel death had taken from her, and it may be that her brother was Oshere, king of the Hwicce.
It is likely, therefore, that Aethelred was involving himself quite extensively in the affairs of the Hwicce across these years, being personally associated, for example, if the relevant document has an authentic base, with the founding of the monastery of St Peter, Gloucester, in 681 (CS 60: S 70).
In the 690s Aethelred granted land in Hwiccian territory to Oftfor, bishop of Worcester, seemingly without reference to any local prince (CS 76: S 76;CS 75: S 77); Aethelbald was certainly doing so at the beginning of his reign in 716–7 (CS 137: S 102).
Withdrawal from southern England, therefore, may have been accompanied by a period of consolidation in the more immediately adjoining territories around the Mercian heartland, analogous to processes at work in northern and southern England.
Aethelred is best known in his later years for his support for Wilfrid, exiled bishop of York.
His marriage to Osthryth, the sister of King Ecgfrith, inhibited him from bestowing royal favour on Wilfrid until Archbishop Theodore engineered a reconciliation of offended parties in 686.
Following his subsequent quarrel with King Aldfrith c .
692, Wilfrid took refuge with Aethelred who made him bishop of the Middle Angles (Vita Wilfridi , ch. 45;HE IV, 23) and stood by him when Wilfrid refused to submit to Aldfrith and Archbishop Beorhtwald at the council of Austerfield c .
702 (Vita Wilfridi , chs 46–8).
Aethelred's reasons for so doing are not made clear, but Wilfrid was head of a chain of monasteries which extended into Mercia (Vita Wilfridi , ch. 64).
To support Wilfrid was also to engage in a protracted dispute which must have been a long-term embarrassment both to the Northumbrian king and the archbishop of Canterbury.
It is conceivable that Aethelred would have preferred Wilfrid as archbishop of Canterbury to Beorhtwald and associated Beorhtwald with that eclipse of Mercian influence in Kent which is a feature of the early 690s.
When Wilfrid returned from his final visit to Rome Aethelred had abdicated but he summoned his nephew and appointed successor, Coenred, to meet Wilfrid and is said to have urged him to uphold Wilfrid's cause (Vita Wilfridi , ch. 57).
Wilfrid was resident in Mercia at the time that Queen Osthryth was murdered by Mercian nobles in 697 (HE V, 24).
This could have been a vengeance slaying for the killing of Peada forty years before, allegedly by the treachery of his wife, Ealhflaed, the sister of Osthryth (HE 111, 21, 24), but no further details are known.
It was seven years later, in 704, that Aethelred abdicated to become a monk and abbot at Bardney in Lincolnshire (HE V, 19, 24:ASC A,s.a. 716), to which monastery Queen Osthryth had earlier translated some of the relics of Oswald, former king of the northern  Angles and her uncle (HE III, 11) and where she herself was buried.
Again, Aethelred was clearly much involved with a territory bordering on Mercia which he was in the process of bringing into closer dependence.
Coenred, son of Wulfhere, was a man of at least 30 years of age, possibly older, who abdicated five years later in 709 to live as a monk at Rome (HE V, 19, 24) and who was succeeded by Aethelred's son, Ceolred.
Ceolred is said not to have been a son of Osthryth, so that if he were the son of Aethelred by a subsequent marriage after Osthryth's death, he would have been aged only about 10 or 11 at his accession.
He did not acquire a good reputation.
A visionary at Much Wenlock, on the testimony of Boniface, proclaimed in Ceolred's lifetime that the angels surrounding him had withdrawn their protective shield and abandoned him to demons because of the multitude of crimes he had committed.
Thirty years after his death in 716, Boniface criticized him for his disregard of the laws of the Church and for his personal immorality and depicted him as struck with madness while feasting with his nobles, so that he died ‘gibbering with demons and cursing the priests of God’.
Boniface expresses a body of tradition violently hostile to the king.
The visionary at Much Wenlock was a member of a community founded, according to its own tradition, by Mildburh, daughter of Merewalh and a princess of the Magonsaete.
The animosity of the community to the king is evident and reflects perhaps the resentment of a dependent people.
Perhaps Boniface was also prejudiced by one particular episode.
Ceolred evidently felt secure enough to attack deep into the territory of King Ine in 716, fighting against him in battle at Woden's Barrow (Adam's Grave) overlooking the Vale of Pewsey (ASC A,s.a. 716).
The outcome is quite unknown but Ceolred was unquestionably the invader and it should not be assumed that Ine won.
Ceolred was remembered in some quarters at least as a profligate, but Wilfridian circles seem to have believed that Wilfrid could have worked well with him (Vita Wilfridi , ch. 64).
Ceolred's father, Aethelred, had become a monk and abbot and his cousin, Coenred, had renounced his kingdom to go to Rome.
This is a paradox characteristic of Mercian history at this time.
When Coenred went to Rome he went in the company of Offa, son of Sigehere and king of the eastern Saxons, who abdicated at the same time (HE V, 19), and the harmony which appears to have prevailed between Coenred and Offa is another  salutary warning not to describe relations between overlords and their royal dependants in this period as one of constant hostility.
On the other hand, Ceolred's attack on Ine demonstrated the harsher reality of that desire for military prestige and territorial aggrandizement which is the more constant feature of Anglo-Saxon political history in this period.
It ended the era of peaceful co-existence among the southumbrian kingdoms and inaugurated what has become known as the age of Mercian supremacy.
The reign of Aethelbald
Ceolred was not without at least one rival as king of the Mercians, namely Aethelbald, son of Alwih, who is depicted in the genealogies of the kings of Mercia as a descendant of Penda's brother, Eowa (see Appendix, Fig. 8).
The Life of Guthlac , written after c .
721 at the earliest and dedicated to Aelfwald, king of East Anglia, who died in 749, describes Aethelbald as of a famous progeny, whom Ceolred drove into exile and pursued (Vita Guthlaci , chs 40, 49).
Aethelbald, probably a young man in his teens, took refuge in the fens of the east midlands with his companions in the vicinity of Crowland and the cell of Guthlac.
Guthlac himself was of distinguished Mercian stock and a descendant of the Iclingas, the Mercian royal dynasty (Vita Guthlaci , chs 1, 2), and formerly an exile in the time of Ceolred's father, Aethelred, among the Britons (Vita Guthlaci , ch. 34).
The Life of Guthlac claims that Guthlac-reputedly appearing after his death in a vision to Aethelbald — prophesied that he would receive the kingdom from the hand of God, who had foreshortened Ceolred's life for its wickedness, and triumph over his foes (Vita Guthlaci , ch. 49).
If this prophecy conveys anything of the sentiments of the Crowland community at the time, it must have been from congenial company hostile to Penda's descendants that Aethelbald emerged to establish himself as king in Mercia, if not when Ceolred died (ASC A,s.a. , 716) then certainly when an otherwise unknown Ceolwald, who may have succeeded Ceolred, died or was driven out.
Aethelbald's accession broke the monopoly of royal power in Mercia by Penda and his descendants which had lasted over seventy years.
It is a striking coincidence that in the same year that Aethelbald came to power among the Mercians, the assassination of Osred, son of Aldfrith, in Northumbria and the accession there of Coenred also broke the entrenched power of the family of Aethelfrith which had dominated the kingship of the northern Angles for more than seventy years (see below, pp. 47 ff.).
Changes of some significance were evidently affecting the established dynasties of the northern and Mercian Angles as new princes emerged to dominate the Anglo-Saxon kingdoms in the early eighth century.
Sir Frank Stenton was of the opinion that with Aethelbald's accession ‘the history of southern England enters upon a new phase’.
For Stenton, the half century before 716 when no Anglo-Saxon king had been able to establish more than a local ascendancy, had ‘little significance in English political history’ because it had given no promise of the great advance, as he saw it, towards the unity of England which was to be made by the Mercian kings before the end of the eighth century.
A preoccupation with the unification of England, however, in which the desire to unify was perceived as a guiding factor in a succession of early but powerful kings has channelled much of the study of pre-Viking history into too narrow an appreciation of political activity in the several kingdoms  of the Anglo-Saxon heptarchy.
The half century before 716, in fact, is full of political interest.
The southumbrian kingdoms could have developed in any number of directions, three of which in particular seem to stand out: a southern England could have emerged, the domination of which was shared between the Mercians and the South Saxons (this was the prospect in the reign of Wulfhere if the trends of that time had been maintained); or even a south-eastern England dominated by the South Saxons (this was perhaps a prospect in late 670s); or a southern England dominated from the reign of Caedwalla by the West Saxons (the prospect in the mid-680s).
In the event, not one of these possibilities for the immediate future materialized and a period of balance emerged in which the three principal southumbrian kingdoms — Kent, Wessex and Mercia — existed in a state of political equilibrium and the stability of Kent and Wessex was in striking contrast to the volatility of the recent past.
It could be argued, therefore, that the rise of Mercia in the eighth century represented a serious destabilization of the southumbrian situation before the return to a new balance between the Mercians and the West Saxons in the first half of the ninth.
Absence of record material obscures Aethelbald's earliest years as king.
Until the mid-730s he is described only as king of the Mercians but in an important charter of 736 concerning the granting of land in the territory of the Hwicce, the oldest Mercian original text to survive, Aethelbald is variously ‘king not only of the Mercians but also of all the provinces which are known by the general name South Angles’, ‘king of the South Angles’ and ‘king of Britain' (CS 154: S 89).
The other charters in which Aethelbald is styled ‘king of the South Angles’(CS 157: S 94;CS 163: S 101) are either not necessarily earlier than 736 or not certainly genuine (CS 164: S 103).
This spate of exalted titles for Aethelbald, which finds no echo elsewhere in texts from centres other than Worcester, could well be a purely local phenomenon in the mid-730s, peculiar to Worcester, with authority.
It was because of a rebellion that the young Boniface had been sent as Ine's envoy to the archbishop of Canterbury c .
710–15.
In 721 Ine slew the aetheling, Cynewulf, whose relationship to Ine is unknown (ASC A, D,s.a. 721).
In 722 the Chronicle A (s.a. 722) records that Ine's queen, Aethelburh, demolished Taunton which the king had built.
This could suggest a domestic crisis, for the Chronicle records immediately after that the aetheling, Ealdberht, whom Ine had exiled, went into Surrey and Sussex and it is not inconceivable that Ealdberht was either Ine's son or the son of his brother, Ingild, who died in 718, seeking recognition perhaps as Ine's heir.
This rebellion was serious enough to involve disaffected groups in Surrey and Sussex and in 725 Ine fought against the South Saxons and slew Ealdberht (ASC A,s.a. 725).
That this aetheling could find refuge in Surrey and among the South Saxons suggests a change in the situation in the south-east since Ine's earlier years as king.
These territories appear to have been breaking free from West Saxon domination and it may be that Ine's weakening hold on Surrey at this time reflects either renewed Kentish influence in the area or a stage in the growth of the power of Aethelbald.
The following year Ine abdicated to go to Rome ASC A,s.a. 728), an event strangely not referred to by Bede.
He left behind him a disputed succession between his kinsman, Aethelheard (ASC A,s.a 726) and a rival aetheling, Oswald, allegedly a descendant of Ceawlin (ASC A,s.a. 728), who survived until 730 (ASC A,s.a. 730: cf., D,s.a. 730).
Such a civil war would create exactly the conditions for the Mercian ruler to consolidate any advantage gained in the south-east at Ine's expense.
The situation in Kent was also changing.
The death of Wihtred in 725, the year before Ine's abdication, leaving three sons as his heirs — Aethelberht, Eadberht and Ealric (HE V,23)(see Appendix, Fig. 1) resulted in a partition of the kingdom.
The Eadberht, king of Kent, who was in his thirty-sixth regnal year in 761 (CS 190: S 28; cf.,CS 189: S 29), was presumably the son of Wihtred.
He ruled at first in a subordinate position to his brother, Aethelberht (CS 159: S 27), but whether or not the Aethelberht, king of Kent, who died in 762 (ASC A,s.a. 760), is to be identified with Aethelberht, son of Wihtred, has been disputed.
Another Eadberht, styled king of Kent, died in 748 (ASC A,s.a. 748) and an Eardwulf, son of Eadberht (CS 176, 199: S 31), reigned from c .
747 (CS 175: S 30) to some unknown date after the death of Boniface in 754.
So here also circumstances may have been more susceptible to external pressure.
The years immediately following 725/6 must have been a crucial period in the establishment of Aethelbald of Mercia's domination of southern England.
It is evident from the Life of Guthlac that a harmonious relationship prevailed for some time after Aethelbald became king between the Mercian king and Aelfwald, son of Ealdwulf, king of the East Angles, otherwise it would be difficult to explain the dedication of the Life of a Mercian  saint to King Aelfwald.
Perhaps an alliance with the East Angles was the cornerstone of Aethelbald's ascendancy.
It is unfortunate that the Life of Guthlac cannot be more closely dated.
Though the Life says that Aethelbald's happiness as king had grown in succeeding years (since his accession)(Vita Guthlaci , ch. 52), it is not certain that this means that Aethelbald was ‘apparently at the height of his power’, and it is not impossible that the Life dates to a period before Aethelbald had asserted his authority outside his own kingdom — perhaps c .
725.
If the Life is later than that and if it belongs to the 730s or even 740s, however, it would again demonstrate that the relationship between a dependant or sub-king and his overlord was not inevitably confrontational but on occasion at least perfectly acceptable to both sides for as long, presumably, as it remained of mutual benefit.
The charters of the kings of Kent reveal no trace of Aethelbald's overlordship, though an Eadberht, king of Kent, consented to Aethelbald's remission of tolls on half a ship (probably in London) for the abbess of Minster-in-Thanet in 748 (CS 177: S 91).
That Aethelberht, king of Kent, exercised authority over his brother, Eadberht, is clear from the way in which it was necessary for Ealdwulf, bishop of Rochester, to secure confirmation of a grant of land from Eadberht in 738 from Aethelberht and Nothhelm, archbishop of Canterbury, acknowledging that he had erred in not doing so sooner (CS 159: S 27), but nothing is said of any necessity to secure Aethelbald's confirmation.
It may be simply that no document has survived in which Aethelberht was required to acknowledge Aethelbald as his overlord, but so far as can be seen there was no restriction on the power of the Kentish king to grant land to whomsoever he wished.
Nor, on the evidence of a rather poor run of West Saxon charters was there any such restriction on the power of the West Saxon king to do so.
There are very few South Saxon charters from this period and again none which reveals any necessity to secure the consent of Aethelbald.
If it did not manifest itself in this particular way, however, Aethelbald's power was none the less real.
The election of Tatwine, a priest in the monastery of Breedon on the Hill in the territory of the Middle Angles, to be archbishop of Canterbury on the death of Beorhtwald in early 731 (HE V, 23), should perhaps be seen as an expression of Aethelbald's influence, and likewise that of Nothhelm, a priest of London, to Canterbury in 734–5, and of Cuthbert, probably the former bishop of Hereford, to Canterbury in 740.
There is no evidence that the East Saxons under Swaefberht, who seems to have succeeded Offa (see above p. 124) and who died in 738, and then under Selered (see Appendix, Fig. 2), who died in 746 (ASC A,s.a. 746), were anything other than subject to the Mercians at this time and Aethelbald appears to have been master of the land of the Middle Saxons (CS 182: S 100).
He granted a number of remissions of tolls on ships in the port of London — to the bishop of London (S 1788), for example, to  the bishop of Rochester (CS 152: S 88), to the abbess of Minster-in-Thanet (CS 149: S 86 ;CS 150: S 87;CS 177: S 91) and to the bishop of Worcester (CS 171: S 98).
Among the West Saxons it may be that it was Aethelbald's support which enabled Aethelheard to defeat the aetheling, Oswald, and that this established both Aethelheard and his brother, Cuthred, who subsequently succeeded Aethelheard in 739, as Aethelbald's dependants or at least obliged them to make territorial concessions.
In 733, Aethelbald occupied Somerton (ASC A,s.a. 733), probably a seizure of West Saxon territory by the Mercian king.
Subsequently both Aethelbald and Cuthred witnessed the sale of land to Glastonbury with Aethelbald's consent (CS 168: S 1410) and in 746 Aethelbald gave unidentified estates to the abbot of Glastonbury (S 1679).
He gave the monastery of Cookham in Berkshire to Christ Church, Canterbury (CS 291: S 1258), indicative of control also of this area.
The impression these records give is that Aethelbald brought certain West Saxon territories directly under his own authority.
The Mercians would seem to have had influence in Berkshire at an earlier date in the reign of Wulfhere and the same may well have been true of Somerset, in which case what Aethelbald was doing was appropriating border territories traditionally in dispute between the Mercians and the western Saxons.
In 756–7 he granted land, probably at Tockenham in Wiltshire, another area in which Mercian influence had been a feature of the recent past, to Eanberht, possibly abbot of Malmesbury (CS 81: S 96).
It must be regarded as probable, therefore, that under Aethelbald the Mercian position in areas bordering on other kingdoms was consolidated at the expense of surrounding neighbours.
Presumably a similar border dispute lay behind Aethelbald's attack on Northumbrian territory in 740.
At the same time, however, domination of the West Saxon kings by Aethelbald was certainly a feature of Aethelbald's overlordship.
In agreeing to the sale of land to Glastonbury with Cuthred, Aethelbald's consent was what was crucial and his precedence over Cuthred is clear (CS 168: S 1410).
The charter recording Aethelbald's grant of land to the monastery of Abingdon in Berkshire between 726 and 737, in which he is styled ‘king of the Angles of Britain' (CS 155: S 93), is a forgery and unacceptable as an authentic record, but its attestation by Aethelheard, king of the West Saxons, while on expedition beyond the Severn against the Britons, could derive from a genuine fragment.
The Chronicle A (s.a. 743) records that in 743 Aethelbald and Cuthred, king of the West Saxons, fought the Britons.
It may be that these West Saxon kings were obliged to join the Mercian ruler on occasion at least in his military campaigns, as indeed earlier kings had assisted Penda and Wulfhere.
Though in the mid-850s Burgred, king of Mercia, and the West Saxon king, Aethelwulf, joined together in a campaign against the Welsh without any indication of the subordination of one to the other (see below, p. 195), the evidence as a whole suggests a West Saxon subjection to the Mercians in the mid-eighth century.
Cuthred is said to have fought  bravely against Aethelbald (ASC A,s.a. 741) and in his twelfth year, which the Chronicle gives as 752 (ASC A,s.a 752) but which may need to be corrected to 751, to have defeated and put the Mercian king to flight at the battle of Beorhford .
This action, elsewhere characterized as an insurrection, probably established Cuthred as an independent ruler.
It is not impossible that on Cuthred's death in 755 Aethelbald supported Cynewulf against Sigeberht in the ensuing struggle for the West Saxon kingship.
In 756 Cynewulf was able to seize the kingdom from Sigeberht, confining him to the region of Hampshire where a swineherd slew him at Privett (ASC A,s.a. 755); but he was obliged in 756–7 to witness Aethelbald's grant of land in Wiltshire to Abbot Eanberht (CS 181: S 96).
That Aethelbald's position in southern England at the end of his reign was still a dominant one is suggested by the description of him in the record of this grant as ‘king not only of the Mercians but also of the surrounding peoples’, but it may be that a diminution of power in the early 750s played a part in exposing him to assassination in Mercia a few years later.
What happened in East Anglia on Aelfwald's death in 749 is not clear.
The kingdom is said to have been divided among three kings, Hun, Beonna and Aethelberht, of whom Aethelberht was still reigning in 794 (ASC A,s.a. 792)(which would give him a reign of forty-five years).
The later Lives of Aethelberht place his accession in 779 so that the suspicion must arise that this note is perhaps based on a misreading of a king-list which concluded by simply listing these names and misled the annalist into thinking that the kingdom had been partitioned among them.
Beonna may have come to power c .
758.
The minting of his own coins by Beonna could suggest that he too broke free for a time from Aethelbald's domination.
These coins can be dated no more closely than the late 750s or early 760s, but they are possibly to be associated with the disintegration of Aethelbald's imperium in southern England following his death.
Aethelbald is alleged in a ninth-century list of benefactions from Gloucester abbey to have slain the kinsman of a Mercian abbess (CS 535: S 1782) and his eventual assassination at Seckington, near Tamworth, by his own bodyguard in 757 (ASC A,s.a. 755) has tended to reflect unfavourably upon him.
He was buried in state at Repton but a contemporary visionary pictured him in hell.
This impression of a somewhat unpleasant individual is strengthened by the letter which Boniface and seven other missionary bishops among the continental Germans wrote to the king in 746/7, which is intensely critical of him.
Aethelbald was rebuked by Boniface for his failure to take a lawful wife and more especially for his violation of nuns and virgins.
The letter implies that some of these nuns were themselves leading immoral lives but this in no way exonerated Aethelbald in Boniface's eyes.
Gloomy prognostications of Aethelbald's life being in danger of passing away like a shadow and his soul into eternal perdition — although conventionally expressed — imply an unhappy conclusion to his life as a real possibility.
Boniface wrote to Ecgberht, archbishop of York, authorizing him to amend the letter in any way he thought desirable, and to Herefrith, a priest, who was to make known Boniface's views to Aethelbald by reading the letter to him and explaining it — Herefrith being one to whom Aethelbald was prepared to listen.
The letter raises the suspicion that there was a threat to Aethelbald's life in 746–7 and that Boniface was responding to a potentially dangerous situation in Mercia at that time when any personal idiosyncrasy of behaviour on the part of the king, which was unacceptable to Christian morality, would be magnified.
This attack on the king is part of a general condemnation by Boniface of the adulterous life of many Anglo-Saxons, but Aethelbald is also censured for his violation of the privileges of churches and monasteries, including the seizure of revenues, and violence done to monks and priests.
Boniface was looking back to an age in which the privileges of the churches of the Anglo-Saxons had been untouched and inviolate, or so it was thought, and he saw this age as ending — as he tells Aethelbald — in the time of Ceolred, king of the Mercians, and Osred, king of the Northumbrians (both of whose reigns ended in 716), whom Boniface accuses of behaving as Aethelbald was now doing and as a consequence of which they both perished miserably.
Boniface's perspective was shared by Bede a decade or so earlier.
Bede regarded the period after the death of King Aldfrith — that is, beginning with the reign of Osred — as one in which the monastic life was abused by laymen.
It is difficult to ignore this combined perspective on Anglo-Saxon society in the early eighth century and its implication that it had entered ‘a highly unstable phase’.
But Osred provides a useful example of a king who could be sharply criticized for character defects in some Northumbrian circles though remembered as a generous patron of an ecclesiastical community in others (see below, p. 147).
Aethelbald similarly was well regarded at Crowland and by no means wholly unacceptable to Boniface; he performed good works, gave very many alms, prohibited theft, perjury and rapine, defended the widows and the poor and maintained a firm peace in his kingdom.
For all these things, Boniface commended him.
Moreover, the king was indeed associated with Church reform.
Boniface's concern about the state of the Church in England generally is revealed by his letter to Cuthbert, archbishop of Canterbury, which, it has been said, ‘amounts to a far-reaching critique of the English Church’.
Boniface informed the archbishop about the holding of Frankish synods and sent him a copy of their decrees, particularly those of the council of 747, urging him to reform the behaviour of bishops and condemning their adornment of dress and propensity for drunkenness.
He pronounced against secular control of monasteries and the forced labour of monks on royal buildings and other works, ‘a thing unheard of anywhere’ except among the Angles.
The whole tone of the letter appears designed to urge  Cuthbert to hold a synod — as Boniface had done among the Franks — the implication being that he had not recently done so.
Perhaps to some extent in response to this letter and certainly with the decrees of the Frankish synod of 747 in mind, Archbishop Cuthbert did hold a synod at Clofesho in 747, attended by all the bishops of the southern province of the Anglo-Saxon Church, in the presence of King Aethelbald.
Among other matters it dealt with lay control of monasteries, excesses of dress among churchmen, and the immorality and drunkenness of Anglo-Saxon clergy, and ordered the holding of diocesan synods to implement the decrees of the council.
At the council of Gumley in Leicestershire two years later, possibly as a response to some of Boniface's criticisms, Aethelbald issued a grant of privileges to the churches in Mercia, conceding immunity from royal food-rents and from all works and burdens except the building of bridges and the defence of fortresses against enemies (CS 140, 178: S 92).
Aethelbald's association with these councils does not give the impression of a king so totally outside contemporary conventions as Boniface's letter to him seems to imply.
There is no evidence that sceattas circulated widely in the Mercian hinterland and some reason to suggest in the light of a multiplicity of distinctive sceatta coinages in eastern and southern England that Aethelbald, who may have minted in Canterbury, failed to impose his authority over the issue of coins by others, ‘a critical commentary’, perhaps ‘on what Bede asserts, and on Aethelbald's own claims’.
It may be that from c .
714 on, however, Anglo-Frankish trade was prejudiced by a greater degree of political instability in Gaul.
At a time when only the Northumbrians, and then only for a time in the reign of Eadberht (737–58), minted coins of pure silver, southern England experienced a decline in the quality of its sceattas .
From c .
730 progressive debasement of sceattas reduced their silver content quite dramatically and, if there was a decline in the silver available from c .
730 onwards, this could have been a factor in the aggressive policies of Aethelbald in southern England at this time.
7 Northumbria in the eighth century
King Ecgfrith was advised by Cuthbert, bishop of Lindisfarne, and presumably informed circles among the northern Angles not to invade Pictland in 685 (HE IV, 26), and Cuthbert's personal familiarity with the Niduari Picts in Fib (Fife) affords a glimpse of the probably extensive contacts between northern Anglian circles and Pictish communities immediately north of the Forth.
Ecgfrith remained undeterred, however, and his army had traversed Strathmore when it turned aside to experience total defeat on 20 May at Nechtanesmere , otherwise known as Dún Nechtain (AU s.a. 684:AT p. 209) and as the Lake of the Heron (HB ch. 57), now Dunnichen in Forfarshire.
F. T. Wainwright commented that ‘it is easy to over-estimate the political significance of Nechtanesmere ’.
It is certainly true that one strand at least in a Northumbrian view of the past seems to have thought of Nechtanesmere as destroying the position of military dominance originally achieved by Eadwine in the first half of the seventh century (HE II, 5), whereas Eadwine's ascendancy over the Britons in Wales had disappeared by the mid-630s and an overlordship of the southern English kingdoms, restored only temporarily in the late 650s, was lost long before 685 (see above, p. 85).
Nevertheless, the defeat of Ecgfrith was obviously a serious military setback for the northern Angles.
Bishop Trumwine fled from his bishopric at Abercorn, which was never restored (HE IV, 26).
The Dalriadic Scots and the Britons, probably of Strathclyde, whom Ecgfrith had almost certainly driven into alliance with the Picts in 685 through his claims to supremacy over them (see above, p. 100), regained their independence, and the Picts threw off the overlordship of the northern Anglian king and recaptured territory formerly held by the Angles (HE IV, 26).
The Northumbrians never retrieved their pre-685 military position in North Britain (cf.,HB ch. 57).
In 698 the dux regius Berhtred, son of Ecgfrith's sub-king, Beornhaeth, a Northumbrian ealdorman and probably the Berht who had led Ecgfrith's raiding party to Ireland (HE IV, 26), was killed by the Picts (HE V, 24;AU s.a. 697:AT p. 26).
Ecgfrith's brother and successor, Aldfrith (see Appendix, Fig. 6.2), appears to have accepted that he could restore his kingdom only within narrower bounds (HE IV, 26).
Given all this, however, the successors of Ecgfrith preserved and maintained a secure realm within what were still wide-ranging frontiers.
Northumbria remained rich, politically stable and intellectually gifted enough under  Aldfrith and his immediate successors to enable that creative synthesis of Celtic, Anglo-Saxon and Mediterranean art — which is so striking a feature of post-conversion Northumbrian civilization — to achieve its maximum expression in the renaissance of the late seventh and first half of the eighth centuries.
Moreover, so far as can be seen a Northumbrian hegemony continued to prevail between the Humber and the Forth and across to the west, above and below the Solway from the Mersey to the borders of Strathclyde, at least until the mid-eighth century.
The somewhat stormy dynastic history of Northumbria should not be allowed to obscure this important aspect of the history of the northern Angles.
Aldfrith, known to the Irish as Flann (AU s.a. 703:AT p. 219:CA p. 148), was an illegitimate son of King Oswiu by Fín, daughter, according to genealogical tradition, of the northern Uí Néill king in Ireland, Colmán Rímid, who died c .
604.
If this were correct, Aldfrith would probably have been born c .
630, when Oswiu would have been about 18 years of age, and Fín already at least 26, or not long after.
In this case, Aldfrith would have been in his early fifties when he became king, yet his marriage to Cuthburh, sister of Ine, king of the West Saxons (ASC A,s.a 718)(unlikely to have occurred earlier), and his subsequent fathering of Osred, born c .
696, and of other sons, Osric (possibly) and Offa (see Appendix, Fig. 6.2), may suggest a somewhat younger man.
If Fín were the granddaughter rather than the daughter of Colmán Rímid, however, these dates and ages would lose their element of incompatibility.
She might then have been younger than Oswiu and her liaison with him could have occurred c .
650.
Aldfrith would then have been a man in his early thirties at his accession in 685, which seems more credible.
If this reconstruction is sound, Oswiu's encounter with Fín occurred at about the time that he may have been seeking Irish support against the forces of Penda.
Aldfrith appears to have been very much on the periphery of Northumbrian dynastic life before his accession.
On the eve of Ecgfrith's campaigns against the Picts in 685 he was living on Iona.
Bede says that he was in exile for the purposes of study and he subsequently described him as a most learned man (HE V, 12).
For the author of the Life of Wilfrid (chs 44, 45) and for the Irish annalist (AU s.a. 703:CA p. 148) he was sapiens , ‘wise’.
According to Alcuin he was devoted to the pursuit of learning from his earliest years, a wise man who was both king and teacher.
In Bede's opinion, Aldfrith was most learned in the Scriptures (HE IV, 26).
After he became king, Aldhelm wrote a treatise on metre for him in the form of a letter to Arcircius (Aldfrith) and Adomnán, abbot of Iona, gave him a copy of his work on The Holy Places (HE V, 15).
Abbess Aelfflaed's question to Cuthbert, bishop of Lindisfarne, as to who would succeed the childless Ecgfrith need not imply that she had otherwise forgotten about Aldfrith's existence, but rather that she was testing Cuthbert to ascertain that his loyalties lay in the right place.
Cuthbert's oblique reference to Aldfrith  in his reply seems to have satisfied her.
Here was a family determined if at all possible to keep royal power in its own hands.
Its prolonged domination is really quite amazing, and the way it held on to power at this time is an impressive lesson in dynastic skill.
On Oswiu's death, so far as we know, the succession passed peacefully to his son, Ecgfrith, but concern for what would happen on the death of Ecgfrith is likely to have been acute.
Though the prestige of Aldfrith's descent from the Uí Néill will not have been negligible, he was born out of wedlock and there must have been many legitimate sons of other Northumbrian lords who claimed descent from Ida.
The prestige of Oswiu's family, or else its capacity for intimidation, must have been very considerable for Aldfrith to return and rule in what seems to have been domestic peace.
Bringing Aldfrith back was a master-stroke for those who wished to perpetuate the monopoly of royal power in the hands of Oswiu's family.
It seems likely that they received support from parties within the Uí Néill territory in Ireland, even from among the Dalriadic Scots and perhaps the Picts, anxious to have the bellicose Ecgfrith replaced by a more pacific figure.
Aldfrith certainly possessed some of the qualities of a diplomat.
Ecgfrith had sent a raiding party to Meath in 684 despite the exhortation not to of the Northumbrian priest, Ecgberht, who was residing among the Irish (HE IV, 26).
In 687 and again in 688 Adomnán, abbot of Iona, visited Aldfrith and secured the release of those whom the Northumbrians had seized during this expedition and kept in captivity (AU s.a. 686:AT pp. 210, 211:CA p. 134).
At Theodore's urging in 686, Aldfrith also made an attempt to resolve the outstanding quarrel with Wilfrid and Theodore certainly seems to have prevailed on the king to restore Wilfrid first of all to Hexham (during a vacancy there, Eata having died, though in 687 John of Beverley, a monk of Whitby, was appointed bishop); then to York (from which see Bosa, who was still alive in 704 (Vita Wilfridi , ch. 54), was removed) and Ripon (from where Eadhaed was also removed)(Vita Wilfridi , ch. 44).
When Cuthbert died (also in 687) Wilfrid administered Lindisfarne as well for a year until the appointment of Bishop Eadberht in 688 (HE IV, 29).
The final position, therefore, was that Wilfrid had been restored to York and had regained control of Ripon.
This represented a quite remarkable compromise which required the co-operation of Aethelred, king of the Mercians, who restored Wilfrid's Mercian possessions, and Aelfflaed, abbess of Whitby, whose influence with King Aldfrith is likely to have been considerable (Vita Wilfridi , ch. 43), but it may have been a manifestation of the insecurity of Aldfrith in the years immediately following his accession.
By 692 the king felt politically strong enough to countenance the seizure of some of the estates of the church of Ripon and project its restoration as a bishopric.
Refusing to accept dismemberment of his remaining territory, Wilfrid took himself into Mercia where he acted for King Aethelred as bishop of the  Middle Angles (HE , IV, 23;Vita Wilfridi , ch. 45).
A bishopric was not re-created at Ripon (perhaps because a papal privilege was now recognized as protecting the monastery there), but Wilfrid was never restored to York during Aldfrith's reign.
Rather, Bosa again presided in his place.
A further attempt at a settlement was made at the council of Austerfield in Northumbria c .
702–3, Archbishop Beorhtwald presiding, but the terms are said to have been that Wilfrid relinquish his episcopal office and retire to his monastery at Ripon and they were unacceptable (Vita Wilfridi , chs 46–7).
Wilfrid withdrew into Mercia and from there resumed his appeal in person at Rome where he appears now to have expressed a readiness to relinquish his bishopric provided he could retain Ripon and Hexham (Vita Wilfridi , ch. 51).
The quarrel between Aldfrith and Wilfrid cannot have been without its political dimension.
It is not known who was the mother of Osred, Aldfrith's son and successor, nor when Aldfrith's queen, Cuthburh, parted from him to found a nunnery at Wimborne (ASC A,s.a. 718).
Aldfrith may not have had an obvious heir across the late 680s and early 690s, for Osred was only about 8 years old on his father's death and not born, therefore, until c .
696.
It must always have been a real hope on Wilfrid's part that a king of Northumbria from another branch of the royal family or from a noble line claiming royal descent would be more favourably disposed towards him than the descendants of Oswiu.
When Aldfrith died, a certain Eadwulf, unfortunately of unknown descent, became king.
Wilfrid was at Ripon with Eadwulf's son, probably the Earnwine, son of Eadwulf, who was killed in 740.
Osred with his supporters, led by a nobleman, Berhtfrith (possibly a son of the Berhtred who perished fighting the Picts in 698), was at Bamburgh.
It is made quite clear in the Life of Wilfrid that Wilfrid was intending to give his support to Eadwulf (Vita Wilfridi , ch. 59)
The Northumbrian regnal list gives Aldfrith a reign of twenty years and Bede correspondingly assigned him a reign from 685 to 705 (HE IV, 26; V, 18), but Bede also knew, perhaps from knowledge of a more precise regnal figure, that Aldfrith really reigned nineteen years (HE V, 1) and died before the end o his twentieth regnal year (HE V, 18).
Aldfrith, therefore, almost certainly died in 704.
His death occurred on 14 December (ASC D,s.a 705).
He succeeded Ecgfrith some time after 20 May 685.
If he died on 14 December 705 he would have reigned a full twenty years and probably several months as well.
Only if he succeeded after 14 December 685 would he not have completed twenty years by 14 December 705.
Consequently, it has been suggested that Aldfrith did not succeed until after 14 December 685.
He was certainly living on Iona on the eve of Ecgfrith's final campaign, and there may well have been a delay of a month or so before he became king, but to suppose a delay of seven months or more seems unwarranted.
At such a critical time Aldfrith would surely  have returned to Northumbria with all speed.
The Irish annals also place Aldfrith's death in 704 (AU s.a. 703:AT p. 219:CA p. 148).
However, since Osred's reign began in 705, no further dislocation of Northumbrian chronology occurs at this point.
Aldfrith appears to have governed well.
The coins which bear his name are the first Northumbrian silver coins.
His failing health, however, by late 704 presented a serious crisis for his immediate family, for his son Osred was very young and this time there was certainly a rival for the throne in the person of Eadwulf.
According to the testimony of Abbess Aelfflaed, it was Aldfrith's dying wish that his successor should come to terms with Wilfrid (Vita Wilfridi , ch. 59).
It may be that Wilfrid's personal support could still be of assistance to an aspiring aetheling, but it is interesting that Eadwulf spurned Wilfrid's overtures.
Wilfrid's failure to secure a sympathetic hearing suggests that it was not only Oswiu's family which found him unpalatable.
The nobleman Berhtfrith subsequently attributed Osred's victory over his enemies at Bamburgh to the decision of Osred's party to do justice by Wilfrid (Vita Wilfridi , ch. 60) and the indications are that Wilfrid came to an understanding with Osred's party following his rejection by Eadwulf.
Osred even became Wilfrid's adopted son (Vita Wilfridi , ch. 59).
Once secure in power, however, the new regime, with which Abbess Aelfflaed was closely associated, did not prove particularly generous.
In Osred's first year a council was held on the banks of the River Nidd, again presided over by Archbishop Beorhtwald, at which both Aelfflaed and Berhtfrith spoke in Wilfrid's favour; Wilfrid was not restored to York, of which John of Beverley, bishop of Hexham, became bishop, but he was allowed to retain his former possessions of Ripon and Hexham as bishop of Hexham (HE V, 19:Vita Wilfridi , ch. 60).
He lived quietly during his remaining years, dying on a visit to his Mercian possessions, probably in 710.
The Life of Wilfrid offers two versions of Aldfrith's dying injunction concerning Wilfrid which may reflect two stages in its production.
In the first, which the author derived from Abbess Aelfflaed, herself an eye-witness, who died in 713 (HE 111, 24;AU s.a. 712:AT p. 222), Aldfrith is said to have urged his successor, whoever he might be, to come to terms with Wilfrid (Vita Wilfridi , ch. 59), and in the second, seemingly later version, to have urged his son and heir, Osred, to do so (Vita Wilfridi , ch. 60).
Aelfflaed's testimony suggests that Aldfrith had not certainly engineered his son's succession and that Osred's triumph over Eadwulf was the work of a powerful faction at court devoted to the preservation of royal power in the hands of the descendants of Oswiu.
Its influence must have been very considerable for the boy to have been so successfully supported for the kingship against an adult rival.
As a consequence of its success, the Northumbrian establishment which had been responsible for the débâcle of Nechtanesmere and the limited recovery under Aldfrith  perpetuated itself in power a little longer and sporadic warfare with the Picts was resumed.
Berhtfrith praefectus , almost certainly the Berhtfrith who fought on Osred's side at Bamburgh and who later spoke in favour of a settlement with Wilfrid at the council on the Nidd (Vita Wilfridi , ch. 60), perhaps also a kinsman of Berhtred, son of Beornhaeth, was involved in a conflict in 711 in what had been Manau Gododdin between the Rivers Avon and Carron when the Picts were defeated (HE V, 24;ASC D,s.a. 710;AU s.a. 710:AT p. 222).
Continuing Pictish-Northumbrian military confrontation was a part of the background, therefore, of Osred's reign.
Osred was slain in 716 ‘to the south of the border' (ASC D,s.a. 716), which may refer to a boundary with the Picts.
The contrasting images which survive of Osred are probably a reflection of the increasing divisions within the Northumbrian kingdom at this time.
Bede welcomed him as a new Josiah, the king of Judah in whose reign a religious reform movement purified the Temple worship, but came to lament the decline, as he saw it, of ecclesiastical standards after the death of Aldfrith, sentiments echoed later by Boniface.
At Beverley, where John of Beverley was bishop of York throughout the reign, Osred was remembered for his benefactions; but the picture given in Aethelwulf's De Abbatibus , written in the early ninth century, is of an uncontrollable youth who slew many of his nobles and drove others to seek refuge in monastic life.
The explanation for such divergent viewpoints may lie not in Osred's reign as a particularly inauspicious period so much as in the dynastic rivalries of this time, accompanied by a failure to sustain Aldfrith's silver coinage under Osred or his immediate successors.
The slaying of Osred in 716 at the age of 19 or 20 was certainly an event of some significance for it broke the monopoly of royal power which the descendants of Aethelfrith had maintained since the accession of Oswald.
The accession of Coenred (716–18)(HE V, 22), son of Cuthwine, son of Leodwald, a representative of a hitherto obscure line of Bernician aristocrats who appears in the Anglian genealogies as a descendant of Ida, set a new pattern.
Osric, king of Northumbria (718–29)(HE V, 23), no details of whose reign are known, could have been a son of Ealhfrith or of Aldfrith, and either way his accession will have represented a restoration of Oswiu's family to royal power (even if, in the former case, of a branch which had been in political eclipse for half a century), but his successor Ceolwulf (729–37) was a brother of Coenred (HE V, 23) and Ceolwulf's successor, Eadberht (737–58), son of Eata, son of Leodwald, was Ceolwulf's first cousin.
A substantial shift of power had occurred within Northumbrian royal circles and families formerly excluded from power now held the kingship (see Appendix, Fig. 9).
Though Ceolwulf abdicated in 737, he lived until 764, and so was probably only in his early twenties at the most when he succeeded Osric.
It is unfortunate that knowledge of this important phase in Northumbrian  dynastic history is so slight but Bede says that Osric nominated Ceolwulf as his successor (HE V, 23), and Bede appears to have welcomed his accession, sending him a draft version of the Ecclesiastical History for his comments and criticism and dedicating the finished work to him (HE Preface).
Bede perceived in Ceolwulf a love of religion and recommended him to Ecgberht, bishop of York, in 734 as a willing helper in the work of ecclesiastical reform and organization.
Certainly, there were significant developments at this time.
It was in Ceolwulf's reign that the church of York finally acquired archiepiscopal status in 735.
That this was a matter of interest and concern in Northumbria in the early 730s is clear from Bede's letter to Ecgberht in 734 in which Bede expounded at length on the necessity for more bishops and a proper organization of the Northumbrian Church under an archbishop at York.
The creation of a northern province ended Canterbury's sole direction of the Anglo-Saxon Church, which had characterized the archiepiscopates of Theodore and Beorhtwald, and an important stage in the development of the Church in England was reached with the establishment of the Northumbrian kingdom as an independent ecclesiastical community within the Catholic order of western Europe.
Relations with the Picts across these years changed dramatically.
No later than early 716 Nechtan, son of Derilei, king of the Picts, approached Ceolfrith, abbot of the monastery of Wearmouth and Jarrow, for guidance on Dionysian Easter tables and the Roman dating of Easter (HE V, 21)— probably at the time that the Northumbrian priest, Ecgberht, was persuading the church on Iona to adopt the same (HE 111, 4; V, 22, 24)— and in 717 expelled the Columban communities from Pictland into Dál Riata (AU s.a. 715, 716:AT p. 225).
These developments almost certainly signalled the inauguration of a more peaceful period in Pictish-Northumbrian relations with the accession of Coenred.
The seal on this rapprochement was set with a treaty of peace with the Picts to which Bede refers in the penultimate chapter of the Ecclesiastical History as a significant aspect of the situation in 731 (HE V, 23).
This treaty was probably made either before 724 or after 729, for during the intervening years Pictland was torn by the dynastic in-fighting among rival princes which preceded the ascendancy of the powerful Pictish king, Óengus, son of Forgus.
Bede's reference to it in the context of the situation in 731 could suggest, on balance, that it was concluded when Ceolwulf became king or very soon after.
There would seem to have been, therefore, some important and substantial developments within Northumbria during Ceolwulf's reign.
At the close of the Ecclesiastical History Bede wrote that such serious commotions had characterized the beginning and course of the reign that it was impossible to know what to say about them or anticipate their eventual outcome (HE V, 23).
These words were probably written after the capture  and tonsuring of the king in 731 by unnamed opponents who kept him for a while in a monastic centre, somewhere presumably in Northumbria.
The same year, Wilfrid's former companion, Acca, bishop of Hexham, was expelled.
It is not known whether Acca's expulsion was connected with the temporary deposition of Ceolwulf or with his subsequent restoration in the same year, or whether it was a totally unrelated crisis.
It was undoubtedly serious.
Though Acca lived until 740, he was never restored to Hexham and in 734 Ecgberht, bishop of York, consecrated Frithuberht to the still vacant see.
Acca's continuing exile from his see would suggest that he did not enjoy the favour of Ecgberht and that Ceolwulf was either too ineffective to arrange his return or hostile to him.
The probability must be that Ceolwulf and Ecgberht were in accord over the future of the diocese of Hexham and that both approved of Acca's continued exclusion.
What we do not know is who came to power in Northumbria during Ceolwulf's temporary deposition nor whether there was any connection between the controversies surrounding Wilfrid and those now involving Acca.
In 737 Ceolwulf abdicated and was tonsured, apparently this time at his own request, to become a monk on Lindisfarne.
His successor was his cousin, Eadberht, the brother of Archbishop Ecgberht, but it is not possible to say whether his powerful relatives brought pressure to bear on him to resign.
Ceolwulf may genuinely have wished to renounce the world.
He granted several estates to the monastery of Lindisfarne when he entered it and was subsequently venerated as a saint, his relics being removed in the ninth century to Norham with those of St Cuthbert — and eventually to Durham.
Eadberht was Ceolwulf's cousin, according to the Anglian genealogies which give his alleged descent from Ida (see Appendix, Fig. 9).
The indications are that he only began to reign in 738, for an eclipse of the sun, followed by a lunar eclipse, which occurred in January 753, is described in the eighth-century Northumbrian annals as happening in his fifteenth year, whereas Eadberht's fifteenth year if he succeeded in 737 would have been 751–2.
Moreover, an attack by Eadberht, in alliance with Óengus, son of Forgus, king of the Picts, on Dumbarton is placed in 756 in Eadberht's eighteenth year, whereas his eighteenth year, again if he succeeded in 737, would have been 754–5.
What is most probable is that Ceolwulf resigned the kingship at the very end of 737 and that Eadberht's accession occurred in early 738.
Eadberht's son and successor, Oswulf, perished on 24 July 758 but his successor, Aethelwald Moll, did not begin to reign until 5 August.
Despite the survival of eighth-century Northumbrian annals, without Bede's informative Ecclesiastical History and in the absence also of Northumbrian charters, only the most skeletal account of post-Bedan Northumbrian history can be reconstructed.
Even so, it is clear that Eadberht, in contrast to Ceolwulf, was a warrior-king who reversed the quiescent policies of his immediate predecessors and extended the bounds  of his kingdom, annexing the plain of Kyle in Ayrshire in 750 together with other territories.
His military expeditions were sometimes ill-fated.
While he was attacking the Picts in 740, Aethelbald, king of the Mercians, devastated part of Northumbria.
In 756, after successfully campaigning against the Britons of Strathclyde and besieging Dumbarton at the time of the alliance with Óengus, son of Forgus, king of the Picts, almost the whole of Eadberht's army perished at Newburgh on the Tyne, perhaps at the hands of the Britons.
Some recently acquired territory may have been lost at this time or soon after.
Despite these reverses, however, a revival of seventh-century northern imperial ambition had evidently occurred among the Northumbrians at the court of Eadberht, and though the dominance of Óengus, son of Forgus, in Pictland probably impeded its fulfilment, the indications are that Eadberht was bringing new prosperity to his kingdom.
This can be seen in the revival (at an unknown date) of a substantial regal silver coinage in Northumbria together with an archiepiscopal coinage combining Eadberht's name with that of his brother, Archbishop Ecgberht, which has been described as ‘ahead of its age’ in its fineness.
Dynastic tension, however, had not abated.
The killing of Earnwine, son of Eadwulf, in 740 may have been a prolongation of older rivalries which sparked off a new cycle of vendetta.
In 750 Eadberht imprisoned Cynewulf, bishop of Lindisfarne, at Bamburgh, and besieged Offa, son of Aldfrith, in the church of Lindisfarne until, almost dead with hunger, he was dragged from sanctuary.
This episode reveals a deep and continuing rift between the descendants of Oswiu and the kings of Leodwald's line.
There can be no doubt that such hostilities were having important consequences; they created opportunities for new dynastic families to emerge.
Eadberht abdicated of his own accord in 758, handing the kingdom over to his son, Oswulf, and becoming a cleric at York (where he died in 768), but Oswulf was killed within the year by his own household in 759 near the unidentified settlement of Methel Wongtun and replaced by Aethelwald Moll, who is likely to have been associated with those who were responsible for Oswulf's murder; nor did Eadberht's descendants recover royal power for twenty years.
Oswulf's overthrow seems to have been the consequence of challenge to the monopoly of royal power by the descendants of Leodwald as dynamic new forces entered the arena of Northumbrian dynastic politics.
Aethelwald's ancestry is unrecorded.
His power-centre appears to have been located in Deira.
He is probably to be identified with the ‘patrician’(the term signifies an individual of very high standing indeed) called Moll to whom King Eadberht and Archbishop Ecgberht gave the monasteries of Stonegrave and Coxwold in Yorkshire, seized by them from Moll's brother, Abbot Forthred, for which action Pope Paul I reproved them.
In 762 he married a certain Aethelthryth at Catterick.
It may be that Aethelwald's genealogy does not survive because his family did not claim descent from Ida and it is possible that he was descended from  Oswine of Deira.
If he was of Deiran royal descent, he ended more than a century of Bernician domination.
Alternatively, he may have represented a powerful aristocratic family descended from neither the Deiran nor the Bernician royal family and which was aspiring to royal power for the first time, though the likelihood is that some such affinity was at least claimed.
The high standard of Eadberht's coinage declined before his reign ended, but these years immediately following Eadberht's abdication were not so disruptive of Northumbrian political life that Aethelwald was unable to mint.
Nevertheless, he faced rebellion, possibly a challenge from a rival aspirant to the throne, in 761 when, after a three-day conflict, he defeated and slew a certain Oswine, who is otherwise unknown, at Eildon on 9 August; and in 765 the annals record that he lost the kingdom of the Northumbrians at Pincanheale on 30 October.
Pincanheale was the site of two Northumbrian church councils in 787 and 796, and it may be that Aethelwald was overthrown at a gathering there of his magnates and leading churchmen.
According to the Irish annals he was tonsured (AT p. 262:CA p. 137).
It was not, however, a descendant of Leodwald who replaced him.
Instead royal power passed now to Alhred, a representative, according to the Anglian genealogies, of a quite separate line of descent from Ida though the way one annalist observes that Alhred was said by some to be of the lineage of Ida implies that he was regarded by others as an intruder into the kingship (see Appendix, Fig. 9).
The claim to descent from Ida, nevertheless, suggests that it was a Bernician family which intervened at this point.
Alhred's power-base may have been in the lower Tyne, for the body of his son, Osred, was carried to Tynemouth to be buried in the monastery there.
In 768 Alhred married Osgifu, daughter of King Oswulf (758–9), presumably an attempt to strengthen the dynastic aspirations of both families by a judicious alliance, and the indications are that he made an effort to behave in a way appropriate to his new position.
He minted coins and his patronage of continental missionary activity is a noticeable feature of his reign.
Aluberht was consecrated bishop of the Old Saxons at York in 767, and Alhred presided over the council which sent Willehad to the Frisian mission field c .
770.
He sought the friendship of Charles, king of the Franks (Charlemagne).
In a letter to Lul, archbishop of Mainz in 773, Alhred and Osgifu expressed the hope that Lul would help the Northumbrian envoys in Gaul to establish peace and friendship between the Northumbrian and Frankish courts.
But the letter also refers to disturbances in the Northumbrian Church and among the Northumbrian people.
The Frisian, Liudger, later bishop of Münster, was studying at York under Alcuin when civil disturbances at York, involving Frisians and presaging perhaps the eventual overthrow of Alhred, obliged Alcuin to send him back to Frisia.
This evidence sheds valuable light, therefore, not only on the  first recorded Northumbrian royal overtures to the Frankish court but also on the disturbed state of the kingdom on the eve of Alhred's expulsion in 774 when he was driven from York at Easter (ASC D,s.a. 774) into exile among the Picts.
Alhred's eclipse seems to have been total.
He is said to have been deprived of the royal household and nobles with the counsel and consent of all his people, and to have fled from Bamburgh with only a few companions, which would suggest an almost outright rejection.
The reference in the letter to Lul to disturbances in the Church and the fact that Alhred was dethroned in York may hold the key to part of the explanation — that Alhred did not perhaps enjoy the support of Aethelberht, archbishop of York, who had replaced his kinsman Ecgberht in 767.
A second factor must certainly have been the challenge to Alhred from Aethelred, son of Aethelwald Moll, who was crowned in Alhred's place ‘with great honour’.
Alhred was clearly extremely vulnerable in Deira to a Deiran rival and Aethelred's acquisition of the kingship at this point indicates the residual power of his family, notwithstanding his father's deposition.
If Aethelwald and Aethelred do represent a revival of Deiran royalty, it may be no coincidence that Archbishop Aethelberht (though at an unspecified date) constructed a new great altar in the minster at York on the spot where Eadwine was said to have been baptized.
Aethelred's parents had been married in 762, so he will only have been about 11 when he became king on Alhred's expulsion and those around him must have exercised real power.
Very little is recorded of his subsequent activities but on 22 March 778 he ordered three duces (ealdormen) to be slain by the nobles, Aethelbald and Heardberht — Ealdwulf, son of Bosa, at Coniscliffe and Cynewulf and Ecga at Helathirnum (ASC D,s.a. 778), and this action may have weakened his position for in the following year he was driven out by Aelfwald, son of Oswulf (ASC D,s.a. 778).
Again, a substantial withdrawal of allegiance from Aethelred must have occurred.
Archbishop Aethelberht is said not to have spared evil kings, and there must be a possibility that he was soon as disenchanted with Aethelred's faction as he had been with Alhred's.
Under Aelfwald the kingship passed back into the archbishop's own family — the descendants of Leodwald (see Appendix, Fig. 9), to whom Aethelberht, as a kinsman of Ecgberht, will have been related.
Aelfwald was certainly involved with Northumbrian ecclesiastical developments.
He sent for a pallium for the new archbishop, Eanbald (1), in 780 or 781 (ASC D,s.a. 780) and in 786 received the papal legate, George, bishop of Ostia, who had come to York to inquire into the state of the Northumbrian Church, at a council attended by all the chief men, ecclesiastical and lay, in the kingdom, when the legate pronounced on much that displeased him.
The Northumbrians were instructed not to establish as king anyone who was illegitimate (a slighting reference perhaps to Aldfrith and his descendants, or, for all that we know to the contrary, to other rulers  — Aethelwald or Alhred) nor to conspire to kill a king who was the Lord's anointed, and any bishop or priest who was involved in such a crime was to be expelled from the Church and any layman excommunicated.
The decrees of the council were confirmed by King Aelfwald, Archbishop Eanbald and the Northumbrian bishops, and the ‘patrician’ Sicga and two duces (ealdormen), Alric and Sigewulf.
Alric may have been a son of the Heardberht of 778 for an Alric, son of Heardberht, perished in 798 (ASC D,s.a. 798).
Subsequently, however, in the 790s in his letters of that time, Alcuin detected a serious decline in the standards of Northumbrian life ‘from the days of King Aelfwald’— that is to say, inclusive of the reign of Aelfwald — with an increase in sexual offences, even against nuns, and law-breaking.
These somewhat standard indictments nevertheless came from a scholar who had grown up in the York school under Archbishop Ecgberht and gained maturity in the household of Archbishop Aethelberht as master of the school until he joined the court of Charlemagne in the early 780s.
By the early 790s, though still only a deacon, he was corresponding on behalf of Charlemagne and the Frankish court with Anglo-Saxon kings, abbots, bishops and archbishops, and was not given to mincing his words.
His rather peremptory and often harshly critical letters sought to bring the diplomatic influence of the king of the Franks to bear on Anglo-Saxon political and ecclesiastical circles to act in accordance with Frankish desires.
Alcuin had become an instrument of Frankish policy.
His criticism of Aelfwald, therefore, must be heeded.
Moreover, he must have known Aelfwald personally for as Aelfwald's representative he accompanied George, bishop of Ostia and papal legate, south into Mercian territory in 786.
On the other hand, what Alcuin has to say must be set beside the respect accorded Aelfwald's memory at Hexham where the king was buried (ASC D,s.a. 788), which shows that the community at Hexham thought highly of him in the twelfth century and probably earlier.
Aelfwald was residing in the far north of his kingdom when George arrived in Northumbria in 786 and this and the association of his cult with Hexham seem to locate this Bernician prince essentially outside Deira.
His reign lacks recorded political incident.
It began inauspiciously with the burning of Bearn, a ‘patrician’ of the king in Seletun by the duces (ealdormen) Osbald and Aethelheard on 25 December 780 (ASC D,s.a 779), and it ended with the assassination of the king at Scythlecester (perhaps Chesters) near Hadrian's Wall on 23 September 788 after a conspiracy had been formed by Sicga, Aelfwald's ‘patrician’and principal lay representative at the legatine council of 786 (ASC D,s.a. 788).
Aelfwald's sons, Oelf and Oelfwine, took sanctuary in the church of St Peter at York.
The intended beneficiary of this dynastic coup was Osred (II), the son of King Alhred by Osgifu, Aelfwald's sister, a youth of no more than 19 at the time, who reigned for a year but then fell a victim to further shifts of allegiance when in 789  he was taken prisoner, deprived of his kingdom, tonsured at York and expelled, and Aethelred, son of Aethelwald, resumed royal power (ASC D,s.a. 788, 789).
Aethelred's recovery is impressive and testifies to the strength of his following.
It came about almost certainly because of the division within Bernician royal circles and the (probably) Deiran support which Aethelred was able to rally.
The tonsuring of Osred at York could suggest that he did not enjoy the support of Archbishop Eanbald, whereas the likelihood that Deira was the power-base of Aethelred receives strong support from the records for his second reign.
In 792 he took a new wife, Aelfflaed (ASC D,s.a. 792), daughter of Offa, king of the Mercians, marrying her at Catterick where his own parents had been married.
This is not to say that Aethelred was without rivals, among whom was one with apparently Deiran connections.
In 790 a Northumbrian nobleman, Eardwulf, was captured and brought to Ripon where orders were given by Aethelred for him to be put to death outside the gates of the monastery.
Left for dead, the body was carried into the monastery by the monks and laid in a tent outside the church, but after midnight Eardwulf was found in the church alive.
There is a possibility that Aethelred was seeking to make an example of Eardwulf in Eardwulf's own territory and that the attempted assassination was frustrated by Eardwulf's supporters.
Nothing is known of Eardwulf's ancestry except that he was a son of an Eardwulf, but that he belonged to a family with strong Ripon associations is probable.
Eardwulf escaped into exile.
Others were not so fortunate.
The sons of Aelfwald, still in sanctuary in York minster, were persuaded in 791 to leave the church by what are said to have been false promises and then killed, presumably drowned, by Aethelred in Wonwaldremere .
Such an act may well have provoked strong reaction in both ecclesiastical and lay circles, and Osred, exiled son of Alhred, was tempted back the following year from exile on the Isle of Man by the oaths of certain Northumbrian nobles; but his supporters then deserted him and he was captured by King Aethelred and killed at Aynburg on 14 September 792.
Alcuin was resident among the Northumbrians in 790 and remained there for some time in the hope of influencing Aethelred, whose accession he welcomed, though evidently to no avail for shortly after he declared that he was working against injustice and that Aethelred's attitude was not as he had hoped.
Alcuin wrote to Aethelred, probably in 791, expressing affection for him and urging him to display kindness not cruelty and reason not anger in his deeds, and to speak truth not falsehood, but the sack of Lindisfarne by Vikings in June 793 (ASC D,s.a. 793) provided a shocked and outraged Alcuin with an opportunity to declaim against the evils of Northumbrian society, as he saw them, and the shortcomings of the king himself in a letter to Aethelred and his nobles.
He denounced the immoralities which had prevailed in Northumbrian society since the  days of King Aelfwald and contrasted the adornments of dress and hair and the luxurious standard of living of Aethelred's court-circle with an absence of concern for the poor and the starving.
In a subsequent letter to Aethelred, the ‘patrician’ Osbald (possibly to be identified with the dux (ealdorman) Osbald of 780), and another Northumbrian lord, Osberht, Alcuin warned against worldly ambition, the pursuit of pleasure, and lust for revenge.
He reminded them of how their predecessors had been punished for their wickedness and repeatedly urged obedience to the commands of the Church.
Though these letters, in common with other hortatory epistles of Alcuin, mirror an ideal standard of kingship and moralize within the framework of conventional Carolingian political thinking on kingship and its obligations and responsibilities, the image conveyed by Alcuin is of a somewhat vainglorious, quarrelsome and vindictive, even ill-advised aristocracy rent by the consequences of faction and vendetta.
Nevertheless, the Frankish court, where Alcuin now resided, was favourably disposed towards Aethelred and it may be that Frankish support was what enabled a prolongation of his rule.
Charlemagne sent gifts to him in late 795 or early 796, but when Aethelred was killed in 796 and the Frankish envoys returned to Gaul with the news, Charles recalled his gifts, furious that the Northumbrians should murder their lord and holding them worse than pagans; and this sudden loss of his Northumbrian protégé may well have endangered the delicate balance Charlemagne was seeking to maintain in England to circumscribe the power of Offa of Mercia (see below, p. 176 ff.).
Aethelred was assassinated on 18 April 796, perhaps at Corbridge, by a group of conspirators which included the ealdormen Ealdred and Wada, and the kingdom plunged into confusion.
Ealdorman Torhtmund, a loyal servant of Aethelred, who slew Ealdred in vengeance for his lord in 799, was warmly recommended by Alcuin to Charlemagne in 801 when he visited the Frankish court.
The immediate choice of king by those Northumbrians responsible for the murder of Aethelred was the ‘patrician’, Osbald, but others recalled Eardwulf, son of Eardwulf, from exile and after only twenty-seven days the royal household and nobles deserted Osbald and he was forced to flee, sailing from Lindisfarne to the kingdom of the Picts as Alhred had done from Bamburgh before him.
There is no record of Osbald's parentage but a Bernician extraction seems highly probable.
He is almost certainly to be identified with the Osbald of Alcuin's letter to Aethelred and perhaps with the Osbald who burnt a ‘patrician’ of King Aelfwald in 780.
The indications are that Aethelred needed to involve leading members of the Bernician aristocracy with his court, which may have been an element in his undoing.
When Charlemagne gave his support and patronage to Aethelred, he was honouring only one of at least four princely lines — Osred's, Osbald's, Aethelred's and Eardwulf's — and even with Frankish blessing Aethelred was unable in these circumstances to  establish a long-lasting regime.
Nor was Osbald any better placed.
When Alcuin wrote to him in exile, probably in 798, he reminded him of how much blood of kings, princes and people had been shed by him and his family.
Northumbrian regnal tradition gave a reign of ten years to Eardwulf, who returned from exile and was acclaimed king of Northumbria on 14 May 796 and consecrated on 26 May at York by Archbishop Eanbald and the three Northumbrian bishops of Hexham, Whithorn and Lindisfarne (ASC D,s.a 796).
The impression is of a king who at his accession was thoroughly acceptable to the Church but the persistence of dynastic in-fighting demonstrates that he was by no means universally popular among the lay nobility.
Eardwulf met and countered a succession of threats from rival aethelings in the first years of his reign.
In 798 those who had plotted against King Aethelred now came together again, probably with the intention of restoring Osbald, for Alcuin wrote to Osbald evidently seeking to deter him from renewed intervention in Northumbrian affairs.
This letter was written to Osbald in exile, two years after he had failed to take Alcuin's advice and enter a monastery.
Its most likely date, therefore, is 798.
The conspirators were led by Ealdorman Wada but were defeated in battle on Billington Moor, near Whalley in Lancashire, on 2 April 798 and put to flight.
Amongst the slain was Alric, son of Heardberht, though it is not clear on which side he was fighting (ASC D,s.a. 798).
Osbald died a year later in 799 as an abbot and was buried in York.
Other challenges to Eardwulf were also countered.
In 799 Ealdorman Moll, whose name may have family associations, was killed by the urgent orders of King Eardwulf; and Ealhmund, said by some to have been a son of King Alhred, was seized by Eardwulf's men and put to death in 800.
Among those not wholly enamoured of Eardwulf was Alcuin.
In 797 he wrote to the people of Kent lamenting that scarcely any ruler was now to be found of the old stock of kings.
It is not quite clear what he meant by this; the point may well be not that the new kings — Eardwulf in Northumbria, and Coenwulf in Mercia — were of non-royal stock but that they were not of the lineage, respectively, of Aethelred and Offa — but it could easily be construed as a slur.
Certainly, however, Alcuin was greatly concerned for the safety of Eardwulf.
Personal sins, he warned him as early as 796, could lose him his kingdom, for of his predecessors who had lost life and kingdom God condemned the perjury of some, the adultery of others, the avarice and fraud of others, and the unjust deeds of the rest.
Specifically relevant to Eardwulf was adultery for, according to Alcuin, the king had dismissed his wife and publicly taken a concubine and Alcuin feared that this affront to God would soon cost him his throne.124
Eardwulf's adultery was in fact potentially serious because he became estranged from Eanbald (II), archbishop of York, who succeeded his namesake in 796.
According to Alcuin the oppression of the Church by  the secular power had been for some time a feature of Northumbrian political and ecclesiastical life, but the problem now was that Eanbald was said to be accompanied on his journeys through Northumbria by a retinue more numerous than any which had attended on his predecessors and inclusive of low-born soldiers, and Alcuin affected to be at a loss as to why he needed so large a force.
In Alcuin's opinion, part of Eanbald's trouble arose because he received the king's enemies and protected their possessions and because he was involved in seizing the lands of others.
The dispute between Eardwulf and Eanbald, therefore, also concerned property and conflicts of landed interest and probably some support for rival aethelings.
The alienation of king and archbishop gave added significance to long-standing grievances at a time when by protecting Eardwulf's enemies the archbishop was allying himself against the king.
In addition, this was at a time when Coenwulf, king of the Mercians, was also giving protection to opponents of Eardwulf.
It cannot be without significance that Ealhmund, slain by Eardwulf's men in 800, was buried at Derby and venerated as a saint in Mercia.
In 801 Eardwulf responded by leading an army against the Mercians.
After a long campaign a firm peace was made by the advice of the nobles and bishops on both sides which the kings confirmed with an oath.
The relatively detailed information in the annals and in the correspondence of Alcuin for this phase of the reign of Eardwulf enables us to perceive more clearly than is usually the case the way in which an attempt to challenge a Northumbrian king could embrace both internal dissent and external interference.
Alcuin's worst fears were not fulfilled until 806.
The sequence of eighth-century Northumbrian annals is lost after 801 but the sparse fragments of a former continuation which are preserved in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle terminate in 806 with a note of the expulsion of King Eardwulf (ASC D,s.a. 806).
According to Roger of Wendover's Flores Historiarum he was expelled by a certain Aelfwald (II), who was accorded a reign of two years (806–8) in Northumbrian regnal tradition.
It is the sequel, however, which is particularly revealing.
Frankish annals record that Eardwulf visited Charlemagne and Pope Leo III and that he was escorted back by imperial and papal envoys and re-established in his kingdom in 808.
How long he survived his restoration is not certainly known for Northumbrian regnal tradition retained no memory of Eardwulf's second reign, but there is a possibility that it lasted some three or four years (see below, p. 196).
Despite Alcuin's reservations about Eardwulf, the king must have stepped into the shoes of the slain Aethelred as a recipient of Carolingian favours and may even have married a kinswoman of Charlemagne.
It would be difficult to demonstrate more dramatically the value of Frankish support for a Northumbrian ruler.
It should not be assumed that the royal and princely feuds of this period necessarily brought the Northumbrian kingdom into serious governmental  disarray.
Some of the Northumbrian noblemen who were styled ‘patrician’ were clearly very powerful men, even potentially over-mighty subjects, but they were not peculiar to Northumbria.
The monetary system remained intact in Aethelred's first reign and under Aelfwald, and in Aethelred's second reign a coinage with a higher silver content was even introduced.
Thereafter, however, there was monetary breakdown.
Aethelred's new coinage failed in the early 790s and no new coins were minted under Eardwulf.
When a coinage did reappear in the reign of the Northumbrian king, Eanred, in the early ninth century it did so at a lower silver standard which continued to decline.
There would seem to have been a shortage of silver in Northumbria from the 790s on, certainly for minting purposes.
It may be that a variety of non-Northumbrian factors also played a part here — not least the early Viking raids, the likely disruption of shipping routes and Anglo-Frankish trading disputes — but the cessation of minting during Aethelred's second reign is in such striking contrast to what happened in southern England that essentially it remains a mystery.
There may, however, have been a diminution in tribute and revenues from possibly less securely held border regions and it would be surprising if the political problems of this period were not at least a factor in what has been called a ‘drastic economic collapse’
8 Offa
According to the Anglian genealogies, Offa, son of Thingfrith, son of Eanwulf, was a descendent of Eowa, the brother of Penda (see Appendix, Fig. 8).
If the genealogical information is correct, Eanwulf was Aethelbald's cousin, and he received from Aethelbald land at Westbury and Henbury in the territory of the Hwicce (CS 272, 273: S 146).
Indeed, Eanwulf's connections with Hwiccian territory appear to have been considerable, for he founded the monastery of Bredon in Worcestershire, of which Offa was subsequently a patron (CS 234, 847: S 117;CS 236: S 116) but Offa's family is not certainly known to have been related to the princes of the Hwicce.
There has been a suggestion that Aethelburh, kinswoman of Ealdred, sub-king of the Hwicce, and abbess of Fladbury in Worcestershire (CS 238: S 62), was Offa's daughter of the same name who was also an abbess (CS 251: S 127), but there were clearly several prominent women of this name.
Ealdred's kinswoman could have been Abbess Aethelburh, daughter of a local lord, Aelfred, who was given Withington in Gloucestershire in the 770s (CS 217: S 1255).
None of Offa's immediate forebears had been king of the Mercians and Offa himself is another example (like Aethelbald) of an aetheling competing successfully for the kingship from outside the innermost core of royal power.
According to the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle A (s.a. 755) Beornred succeeded to the kingdom on the death of Aethelbald but held it only for a short time and unhappily.
It is not known how he was related to former kings of Mercia, but it is possible that he represented a line claiming descent from Penda.
Northumbrian annals record that Offa put him to flight (perhaps with Hwiccian help) and took the Mercian kingship.
A record of the settlement of a dispute involving the bishop of Worcester in 789, which refers to Offa as then in his thirty-first year as king (CS 256: S 1430), means that Offa cannot have become king before 758.
Within Mercia and among its traditional dependencies, it is difficult to judge the impact of the assassination of Aethelbald and the civil war of 757–8.
The evidence indicates an immediate confirmation of Mercian overlordship in the territory of the Hwicce, when at the beginning of his reign Offa defined the relationship of Eanberht and his brothers, Uhtred and Ealdred, rulers of the Hwicce, to himself as that of reguli , kinglets (CS 183: S 55;CS 107: S 56), but Offa's position may have been more secure here than elsewhere.
Aldfrith, king possibly but no longer certainly of Lindsey, only witnesses one of Offa's charters and that after c .
789 (CS 262: S 1183), but whether Lindsey detached itself from Mercian control in 757–8 and, if so, how long an interval elapsed before Offa reasserted himself is unknown.
Similarly the history of the East Saxon kingdom under the successive kings, Swithred and Sigeric (I)(see Appendix, Fig. 2), in the time of Offa is quite unknown.
Offa must certainly have been concerned from the earliest years of his reign to secure Mercian control of Middle Saxon territory (CS 201: S 106) and London.
In response to Frankish currency reform he began to mint new silver pennies in the 760s and 770s, when London emerges as an important royal Mercian minting centre, if not Offa's principal mint; it may have been here that his first coins were produced.
What the evidence does show is that, even in an area where a traditional Mercian involvement was sustained, relations with Offa were not hostile and Mercian influence not at first particularly oppressive.
Offa's description of Ealdred as ‘my subregulus ,dux , that is, of his own people, the Hwicce’(CS 223: S 113), which reveals dux becoming an acceptable term for a sub-king, dates to as late as 778, twenty years after Offa's accession.
Thereafter Offa assumed direct rule of Hwiccian territory in the 780s, and by the 790s the province was under the command of an individual known simply as dux (CS 272, 273: S 146), but it is worth emphasizing how long this process took.
Beyond the traditional Mercian heartland there are signs that Aethelbald's imperium had disintegrated and that ‘the Mercian polity…was in disarray’.
Cynewulf, king of the West Saxons, having successfully vanquished his rival, Sigeberht (ASC A,s.a. 755), was clearly in a strong enough position to advance into Berkshire, an area previously controlled by Aethelbald.
His seizure of the monastery of Cookham, which Aethelbald had given to Christ Church, Canterbury (and the purloining from Canterbury of its Cookham charters c .
760), reveals him as a presence in what Stenton called ‘the debatable land’ along the Thames (CS 291: S 1258).
In East Anglia, where Beonna probably became king c .
758, the trading centre at Ipswich seems to have been expanding and the first attempt to restore a southern coinage was made, predating Offa's first issues and suggesting an impressive degree of independence on Beonna's part.
The western marches of Offa's kingdom may have been experiencing renewed British harassment.
It is evident from the massive character of the great border dyke which Asser in his Life of Alfred in the late ninth century attributes to Offa (Life of King Alfred , ch. 14), running from Sedbury Cliffs near Chepstow to Treuddyn, linking up now with Wat's Dyke which ends at Basingwerk in north Wales, that considerable energy and manpower must have been devoted to the delineation, construction and maintenance of this frontier line.
Military vicissitudes were a feature of border life at this time.
Cyngen ap Cadell, king of Powys in the mid-ninth century, erected a monument, Eliseg's Pillar, to his great-grandfather, Eliseg, who is said to have annexed the inheritance of Powys from the power of the Angles.
Eliseg is probably to be dated approximately to the mid-eighth century.
On this evidence the loss of previous territorial gains by the Mercians would seem to have characterized Mercian-Welsh relations in the period before the building of  Offa's Dyke.
The Welsh annals record a battle at Hereford between Britons and Saxons in 760 (AC, ByT s.a. 760), the harrying of men of south Wales by Offa in 777 or 778 (AC s.a. 778:ByT s.a. 777), and a further harrying of the Britons by Offa in 783 or 784 (AC s.a. 784:ByT s.a. 783).
In 786 the papal legate Theophylact, bishop of Todi, visited the territories of Offa, including ‘parts of Britain'.
The indications are, therefore, that Offa was engaged fairly intensively against the Welsh across the first twenty-five or so years of his reign and this may have prevented him from pursuing Mercian interests in eastern and south-eastern England too vigorously before the mid-780s.
During Offa's first years as king the southern kingdoms were relatively stable.
The first signs of instability appeared in the south-east in Kent.
When Aethelberht, king of Kent, died in 762 (ASC A,s.a. 760), the position of his co-ruler, Eadberht, was immediately threatened.
Eadberht last appears in 762 as a witness to a grant of land at Rochester to the bishop of Rochester by Sigered, king of Kent (CS 193: S 32), the name suggesting a possible East Saxon origin.
Sigered was styled very soon after in 763–4, however, only ‘king of half Kent’(presumably west Kent) when he granted land, again to Rochester, subject to the confirmation of a new co-ruler, Eanmund (CS 194: S 33), possibly in east Kent.
This sequence of events resulted in the intervention of Offa.
In 764 Heahberht, who had witnessed Sigered's grant of land to Rochester in 762, appears as king of Kent in the company of Offa and members of the Mercian nobility in Canterbury when Offa granted land to the bishop of Rochester in Kent in his own name (CS 195: S 105), the first occasion on which a Mercian king is known to have done so, and the same land which had only recently been granted to Rochester by Sigered and Eanmund.
The evidence would suggest at least that Heahberht was established and secured in power in Kent through Offa's intervention and support.
In the course of the following year, however, Offa confirmed at Peterborough a grant of land in Rochester by Ecgberht, king of Kent, to the bishop of Rochester which King Heahberht also witnessed (CS 196: S 34).
Ecgberht may have received wide support in Kent and cannot necessarily be regarded as wholly dependent on Offa for his kingship.
In 776 the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle A (s.a. 773) records that the Mercians and the men of Kent fought at Otford but does not state the outcome.
Stenton believed that Offa dominated Kent down to 776 but that the Mercians were defeated at Otford and Mercian authority not re-established in Kent until 785 when Offa again granted land in Kent in his own name (CS 247: S 123).
If there is no certain indication that Offa was able to establish his authority in Kent in the aftermath of Otford, however, there is no substantial indication either that he continued to be a political presence in Kent after 765.
A grant of land by Offa to St Augustine's, Canterbury (CS 207: S 140), for which the date 772 has been proposed, could, even if genuine, be  much later.
Two other records of grants of land in Kent by Offa to Archbishop Jaenberht, dated 774 (CS 213: S 110;CS 214, 215: S 111), are of doubtful authenticity.
Moreover, some time in or after 765 King Heahberht witnessed a charter by which King Ecgberht granted land to the bishop of Rochester without any reference to Offa (CS 260: S 37).
The indications are, therefore, that Offa's involvement in Kentish affairs in 764–5 was  short-lived , either a response to or an attempt to take advantage of a particular crisis — almost certainly the emergence of so many rival rulers in Kent in the immediately preceding period- and that the advent of Ecgberht terminated it.
It is not certain how long Heahberht survived Offa's withdrawal.
He was secure enough to mint his own silver pennies, which must have been among the first of the new coins to be produced and an indication of the economic vitality and continuing independence of his kingdom.
Ecgberht also minted his own coins and was doing so by the early 770s at the latest if one of them, as has been suggested, served as a prototype for one of Charlemagne's which must date to before c .
772, if not before c .
770.
It was Ecgberht who ruled in Kent across the 770s.
He was still king in 779 when he granted land to the bishop of Rochester (CS 228: S 36) and it is not until 784 that a new king, Ealhmund, appears, granting land to the abbot of Reculver (CS 243: S 38 ).
Ecgberht enjoyed good relations with Archbishop Jaenberht, whom he described as dear to him in all things (CS 196: S 34), and the archbishop's kinsman, Ealdhun, was his reeve (CS 332: S 1264;CS 319, 320: S 1259).
He was a generous patron of Christ Church, Canterbury, and c .
780 Ealdhun also gave lands which Ecgberht had given him to the familia of Christ Church (CS 293: S 155; cf.,CS 319, 320: S 1259 and CS 332: S 1264).
Whether the battle of Otford in 776 was fought in the aftermath of the death of Heahberht or as a consequence of some other matter in dispute between Ecgberht and the Mercians, after 765 there is no certain evidence that Ecgberht was for long, if at all , ‘a mere dependant’ of Offa.
One of the features of the years 765–85 may have been a closer involvement on Offa's part with the kingdom of the East Angles.
East Anglian independence survived long enough for coins to be minted for Aethelberht, king of the East Angles, and it has been suggested that Offa's East Anglian coinage may not have begun much before c .
790.
That one of Beonna's moneyers, Wilred, went on to mint coins for Offa, however, may imply a somewhat earlier date for some at least of Offa's East Anglian coins, and Offa's position in East Anglia was already secure enough for the East Anglian bishoprics of Dommoc and Elmham to be included in 787 in the new archdiocese of Lichfield (see below, p. 174).
It may be that it was because he was so secure in East Anglia that Offa was subsequently able to involve himself so much more forcefully in the south-east.
A crucial stage in the reign of Offa was certainly reached in 784–5 when he intervened again in Kent, this time decisively.
The death of Ecgberht  and the emergence of a new king, Ealhmund, subsequently identified by a later Canterbury scribe (ASC F,s.a. 784) as the father of Ecgberht (ASC A, Preface;s.a. 855);(see Appendix, Fig. 3), king of the West Saxons (802–39), was probably what led to this renewed involvement, for nothing more is heard of Ealhmund nor did any successor to him appear in Kent, even as subregulus.
Instead, Offa's direct personal participation in Kentish affairs is revealed in a series of documents across the years 785–9 (CS 247: S 123;CS 248: S 125;CS 254: S 128;CS 253: S 129;CS 257: S 130;CS 244: S 131), and in 792 it was Offa who confirmed the immunities from secular obligations of Kentish churches (CS 848: S 134).
Furthermore, the donations of King Ecgberht and the reeve, Ealdhun, to Canterbury were revoked by Offa (CS 293: S 155; cf.,CS 319, 320: S 1259 and CS 332: S 1264), who objected to the fact that his minister (thegn) had presumed to give land allotted to him by his lord into the power of another without his witness (CS 293: S 155).
There is a possibility that minister here refers to Ealdhun and that Offa was angered because Ealdhun had given his lands to Christ Church, Canterbury, without King Ecgberht's permission, but even if this were the case, it is clear that Offa's reaction was to the way in which Ecgberht also had made grants of land without his permission; he revoked both Ealdhun's donations and Ecgberht's, not only to Canterbury but to Rochester.
In a document of 811 Wulfred, archbishop of Canterbury, specifically declares that Offa had cancelled one of Ecgberht's charters on the grounds that Ecgberht had no right to grant land by charter in perpetuity (CS 332: S 1264).
What was now involved here was more than the imposition of Offa's overlordship upon the rulers of Kent; it was the annexation of the province and the suppression of the native line.
From 785, as Patrick Wormald observes, ‘Offa was the rival, not the overlord, of Kentish kings’.
It is disappointing that South Saxon charters for these years are frequently of doubtful authenticity, if not entirely spurious, but they hint at a sequence of events similar to those in Kent.
A certain Osmund appears to have been king of the South Saxons until at least c .
770 (CS 206: S 49), evidently in association with three other kings, Ealdwulf, Aelfwald, and (?)
Oslac (CS 197: S 50).
The names of Offa, his queen, Cynethryth, and his son, Ecgfrith, have subsequently been attached to the witnesses of a grant of land by Ealdwulf (CS 197: S 50), but Offa appears to have consented to Osmund's grant of 770 (CS 206: S 49) and in 771 he gained a victory over the men of Hastings.
His intervention at this time, in the same way as his intervention in Kent in 764–5, was probably a response to political instability among the South Saxons.
Furthermore, just as in Kent in 764–5, so in Sussex in 770–1, Offa's involvement appears to have been limited and  short-lived .
It must be stressed that if the record of a lease of land by Offa to Oswald, bishop of the South Saxons, in 772 (CS 208: S 108) is what Stenton called it — a ‘patent forgery’— there is no evidence for Offa's presence as a dominant factor in South Saxon affairs until the late  780s.
Though Oslac,dux of the South Saxons, and Ealdwulf, also dux of the South Saxons, may be identical with the kings of these names c .
770, it was not until after c .
789 (when Wihthun was bishop of the South Saxons) that Offa confirmed their grants to South Saxon churches (CS 237, 1334: S 1184;CS 262: S 1183)(cf., Offa's consent to a further grant by Ealdwulf in 791,CS 261: S 1178).
The first clear indication that Offa had gained control of the South Saxons, therefore, comes only c .
790, suggesting a Mercian annexation of the area in the late 780s.
These developments closely parallel those in Kent.
The almost simultaneous involvement of Offa in both Kent and Sussex in the mid-to late 780s may suggest a connection at this time between the two.
The central fact of the history of the south-east before 784 is the independent rule of Ecgberht, king of Kent, and it is not impossible that before the late 780s Sussex was more within his sphere of influence than Offa's.
This may have been true also of part at least of Surrey and conceivably part at least of the kingdom of the East Saxons.
The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle A was later to claim that Kent, Sussex, Essex and Surrey had been wrongfully forced away from the kindred of Ecgberht, son of Ealhmund, king of the West Saxons (AS C A,s.a. 823).
A possible explanation of this is that Ecgberht was indeed regarded as Ealhmund's heir and that Ealhmund in turn inherited from King Ecgberht of Kent a local overlordship of south-eastern England which in varying forms had been a recurring feature of historical development in the area since the time of Aethelberht, son of Eormenric.
For the kings of the East Saxons to have acknowledged a dependency on the king of Kent would have been in the oldest known tradition of Kentish-East Saxon relationships, and the same is true of Surrey.
Though Offa granted land to Woking in Surrey (CS 275: S 144), he cannot be shown to have had influence here before 784–5.
It may be that the battle of Otford was a Kentish response to Mercian interference in the mid-770s in areas that were regarded by Ecgberht as within a Kentish sphere of influence.
A Kentish hegemony in south-east England at this time is not, therefore, wholly out of the question, and Offa's intention in intervening in 784–5 and thereafter may have been to gain mastery of it and contain it.
Moreover, Cynewulf, king of the West Saxons, is not found (apart from the unacceptable evidence of  CS  208: S 108)in Offa's entourage, nor does Offa's confirmation of Cynewulf's grant of land at North Stoke, north of Bath (itself not above suspicion), to the monastery of Bath in the territory of the Hwicce (CS 327: S 265) necessarily imply a position of dependence on Offa.Rather could Offa have been securing himself in territory only recently recovered from Cynewulf.
Cynewulf's annexation of land bordering on the Thames in Berkshire in the early years of Offa's reign certainly appears to have been followed up by further action in the original Gewissian territory around Dorchester.
It was not until 779 that Offa was  able to defeat Cynewulf in battle and take Bensington, near Dorchester, from him (ASC A,s.a. 777) and begin the re-annexation of this territory.
Only thereafter in 781 was he able to consolidate his position also in West Saxon land along the south bank of the Avon (CS 241: S 1257).
This does not give the impression of a Mercian king in control of the south-eastern provinces from the mid-760s.
Cynewulf, remembered for his campaigns against the Britons (ASC A,s.a. 755), was probably a force to be reckoned with, and it is conceivable that Ecgberht, son of Ealhmund, took refuge with him in 785.
Cynewulf was slain in 786 by a rival aetheling, Cyneheard, the brother of the former king, Sigeberht, whom he had been seeking to expel from Wessex (ASC A,s.a. 755), and succeeded by Beorhtric.
It is interesting that Offa subsequently required the assistance of Beorhtric to effect the expulsion of Ecgberht from England (ASC A,s.a. 836).
Offa's victory over Cynewulf in 779, therefore, would seem to have been a signal for intensified Mercian activity on Offa's southern border which may have been an essential prerequisite to any sustained involvement in the south-east.
It was probably the deaths of Ecgberht in Kent c .
784 and of Cynewulf in Wessex in 786 which then enabled the political map of Kent and the adjacent territories to be redrawn.
It cannot be entirely coincidental that these years were a time of important new developments in both the Church and the Mercian kingdom.
In 786, for the first time since the coming of Augustine, papal legates visited England to reaffirm papal authority and ensure conformity to the requirements of canonic law.
In 787 the ecclesiastical province of Canterbury was divided to create a second metropolitan see at Lichfield in the heart of Offa's kingdom.
The same year Offa's son, Ecgfrith, was consecrated king and associated in the kingship of the Mercians with his father.
At a time when what would seem to have been a ‘Carolingian connection’ can be identified in insular art, architecture and archaeology, a Carolingian emphasis on the importance of increasing the number of metropolitans and re-establishing metropolitan authority is likely to have created a context by the mid-780s for consideration of the situation in the Anglo-Saxon Church where the archbishop of Canterbury presided over as many as twelve suffragans.
A subdivision of so large a province may well have seemed desirable in purely pastoral terms.
Unfortunately, there is no contemporary account of the setting up of the archdiocese of Lichfield.
What evidence there is comes from partisan statements made in 798 after the death of Offa by Offa's successor, Coenwulf, and by Pope Leo 111.
It must be appreciated, therefore, that when Coenwulf maintained that Offa wished to diminish the dignity of Canterbury because of his hatred of Archbishop Jaenberht and the people of Kent, whereas Pope Leo declared that it was because of the vastness of his lands and kingdom that Offa had desired it, both were representing Offa's motives in ways which suited their immediate purposes.
Coenwulf now wanted London  to supersede both Lichfield and Canterbury as the single metropolitan see of the southern province in accordance with the plan of Pope Gregory I, and was therefore concerned to minimize any argument for more than one archbishopric based on territorial extent; Pope Leo, on the other hand, was anxious to disassociate the papacy and his predecessor, Hadrian I, from complicity with Offa in acting against Canterbury for so base a reason as Offa's antagonism to the people of Kent.
Both Offa's dislike of the men of Kent and the extent of the territory now coming under his control may have been factors in the situation in the late 780s, but in 798 Coenwulf and Leo were deploying these arguments selectively and in a way which compromises their validity as single explanations of what was probably a complex situation.
It is disappointing that the report of the unique legatine mission to England in 786 of Theophylact, bishop of Todi, and George, bishop of Ostia, as emissaries of Pope Hadrian I, accompanied by Abbot Wigbod representing Charlemagne, contains no reference to this matter.
The legates were first received by Archbishop Jaenberht at Canterbury, from whence they journeyed to the court of Offa, who received them most favourably, and Offa, together with Cynewulf, king of the West Saxons, came together in a council where papal letters directing attention to the need for reform in the Anglo-Saxon Church were consulted and promises of reform made.
At this stage in the proceedings the papal party split up, Theophylact visiting Mercia and ‘parts of Britain'; George went into Northumbria, where a council was held in the presence of King Aelfwald and Eanbald, archbishop of York, in which canons were passed to correct the erroneous ways into which the Northumbrian Church was thought to have fallen.
George's return from Northumbria, in the company of Alcuin, a representative on this occasion of King Aelfwald, was followed by a great southern council, presided over by Archbishop Jaenberht and King Offa and attended by all the bishops of the southern province, at which reforming decrees were promulgated.
The report is unfortunately incomplete.
It represents George's view of events and retains a lengthy account of the proceedings of the Northumbrian council while doing less than justice to the southumbrian gatherings.
Nothing is said of the progress of Theophylact in Mercia and ‘parts of Britain’.
There is no reference in the report to Offa's undertaking to Theophylact and George to send money every year to Rome for the support of the poor and provision of lights, the details of which are known only from Pope Leo's letter to Coenwulf in 798.
The absence of reference to a division of the southern province, therefore, is not altogether surprising.
The matter was probably not one on which the legates were even required to report because it was a quite separate issue from the question of Church reform with which they were concerned.
This need not mean, however, that it was not discussed.
That there were issues important enough seriously to disturb Anglo-papal relations at this time is confirmed by a letter of Pope Hadrian I to Charlemagne which dates to between 784 and 791.
The anxiety of the pope over a rumour concerning Offa's malice towards him is here very evident.
Charlemagne and the pope had received information from certain persons that Offa was suggesting that the Frankish king should depose Hadrian and replace him with a new pope of Frankish extraction.
Envoys of Offa, however, had arrived at the court of Charlemagne affirming that this rumour was the work of men who were enemies of both Charlemagne and Offa, and had gone on their way to Rome, accompanied by Frankish envoys, to reiterate Offa's denial of a plot against Hadrian before the pope himself.
The pope remained torn between disbelief that Offa would ever have attempted to persuade Charlemagne to adopt such a course of action and lingering suspicion of the Mercian king, but he finally received Offa's representatives and seems to have accepted their assurances.
The identity of the enemies of Offa and Charlemagne is never clarified.
It would be natural to assume that this attempt to create a rift between Offa and the papacy occurred before the visit of the legates in 786 and that the visit was part of a process of reconciliation, but this is not wholly justified for Hadrian's letter could date to the late rather than the mid-780s, and reflect hostility to one or more of a number of Offa's actions.
Nevertheless, the letter shows clearly the intensity of feeling in England in this period, and the creation of a new archbishopric at Lichfield is certain to have been an extremely controversial matter.
The legatine visitation would provide Offa with an opportunity to acquaint the pope with his plans and the thinking behind them, but there can be no question about the opposition to them at Canterbury.
Those whose interests were prejudiced by the events of 787 are likely to have joined the ranks of Offa's enemies, and it was later believed that Archbishop Jaenberht even plotted with Charlemagne against Offa to guarantee him free entry into Kent if he should invade.
Though this is probably fanciful and certainly without basis in contemporary record, Jaenberht's alienation from Offa may have been very real, because of the suppression of Kentish independence after 784–5 and now the partition of his province.
Alcuin's opinion in 796, as expressed in a letter to Archbishop Aethelheard following the death of Offa, was that the unity of the Church in England had been destroyed not by reasonable consideration but by lust for power; and in 803, when Canterbury's rights were being restored at a council at Clofesho , Aethelheard pronounced that ‘tyrannical power’ had presumed to diminish Canterbury's honour, the pope having been deceived into granting a pallium to the bishop of Lichfield by deception and lies.
The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle A (s.a. 785) refers to the council of Chelsea in 787 as a contentious synod when Archbishop Jaenberht lost a part of his province and Hygeberht, bishop of Lichfield, was chosen to be archbishop of a second metropolitan see  by King Offa.
Even though Hygeberht received the pallium from Pope Hadrian, his status as archbishop was not willingly recognized by the community at Canterbury (CS 254: S 128).
Perhaps surprisingly, the indications are that Offa continued to hold Canterbury in high regard.
Aethelheard, abbot of Louth in Lindsey, who became archbishop of Canterbury in 792, may have been seen in Kent as a ‘symbol of Mercian rule’, but he appears to have obtained from Offa a confirmation of the immunity of Kentish churches (CS 848: S 134) 52 and he presided without Hygeberht over a synod at London attended by most of the bishops of southern England (CS 265: S 132).
Moreover, between 793 and 796 Aethelheard but not Hygeberht subscribed to a grant of land by Offa to the church of Worcester within the archdiocese of Lichfield (CS 272, 273: S 146), and in 796 to a grant of land also in Hwiccian territory by Ecgfrith, king of the Mercians, Offa's son and  short-lived successor, again without Hygeberht (CS 277, 278: S 148).
On the other hand, there is nothing here to show necessarily a diminution in Offa's enthusiasm for an archbishopric of Lichfield or lessening regard for Hygeberht.
Indeed, Alcuin had advised Offa that it was in order for Aethelheard to be consecrated on 21 July 793 by Archbishop Hygeberht, now the senior metropolitan.
Only in the political disarray which followed the deaths of Offa and Ecgfrith is there evidence of an eagerness to abandon Lichfield, when Coenwulf, king of the Mercians, proposed in letters to Pope Leo in 797 and again in 798 the creation of an archiepiscopal see for a single southern province for Aethelheard at London to replace both Canterbury and Lichfield.
There may always have been some in Mercia who did not approve of Offa's Lichfield policy and the realization that London would be the ideal centre for the southern provinces offered a neat solution to a tangled ecclesiastical and political situation.
Coenwulf and his counsellors reminded Pope Leo that Gregory the Great had originally intended two metropolitan sees, one at York, the other at London, and blamed the decision about Lichfield on papal ineptitude — Pope Hadrian presuming to diminish the authority of Canterbury simply because of Offa's enmity towards Jaenberht and the men of Kent.
The papacy did not respond well to this criticism of Hadrian, and Leo retaliated sharply in 798.
First, the pope asserted that it was upon evidence presented by Offa that Hadrian had based his judgement, Offa testifying that it was the unanimous wish of all that a pallium be sent to the bishop of Lichfield.
Second, he refused to transfer all metropolitan authority in the southern province to London on the grounds that whatever Gregory's original intentions, Canterbury now possessed the primacy by ancient right.
The pope made no direct statement about Lichfield at this time but Aethelheard visited Rome in 801 (ASC A,s.a. 799) and the pope wrote to him in January 802 (and to Coenwulf) conceding to Aethelheard and his successors authority over all the churches of the Anglo-Saxons (with reference specifically to the  twelve bishoprics of the southern province).
The following year, on 12 October 803, at Clofesho , the restoration to Canterbury of all its rights and the declaration that never again should an archiepiscopal see be placed in Lichfield or anywhere else in the southern province other than Canterbury, completed the destruction of Lichfield's position.
But Hygeberht had been demoted some time before.
Despite Alcuin's plea to Aethelheard that he not be stripped of his pallium during his lifetime, it was only as bishop that Hygeberht attended the council of Chelsea in 801 (CS 302: S 158) and as abbot, that of Clofesho in 803.
It is probable that his last act as archbishop was to consecrate as his successor as bishop of Lichfield, Ealdwulf, who witnesses as bishop from c .
800 (CS 201: S 106).
Offa's plans for a metropolitan see at Lichfield, therefore, collapsed on his death.
Why had he been so determined to create a second see of archiepiscopal rank in the southern province in the first place?
Offa's choice of Lichfield, the principal Mercian see, as the recipient of the new honour would indicate that the scheme had a particular Mercian significance.
The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle A (s.a. 785) records immediately after the appointment of Hygeberht as archbishop that Offa's son, Ecgfrith, was consecrated king, by implication by Hygeberht.
It is generally assumed first, that this ‘ceremonial recognition of his son as king in his own lifetime was something new’(although Aethelred of Mercia, for example, is said to have appointed Coenred as his heir (Vita Wilfridi , ch. 57), second, that it was the first royal anointing in England (though reservations have been expressed as to whether Ecgfrith was anointed or, if he was, whether he was the first), and, third, that Offa was basing his action on the recent papal consecration in 781 of the Frankish princes, Pippin and Louis, sons of Charlemagne (though Byzantine precedents are also possible).
So the precise significance of what occurred in 787 is ambiguous.
It is possible that Offa would have liked Ecgfrith to have been consecrated either by the pope or by the papal legates.
It may be that Archbishop Jaenberht refused to consecrate him so that Offa was driven to establishing a metropolitan see at Lichfield in order to procure an archbishop who would perform the ceremony.
On the other hand, Ecgfrith's consecration was a specifically Mercian matter for he was being consecrated as Offa's successor in Mercia, and it may be that Offa desired archiepiscopal status for the Mercian bishop who would officiate and whom he had always intended should do so.
The correspondence of Alcuin reveals that there was opposition within Mercia to the succession of Ecgfrith, presumably from princes who felt in danger of being excluded from the succession, and Offa evidently embarked on what could be described as a purge of these opponents.
In a well-known passage, Alcuin laments the blood shed by Offa to secure the kingdom for Ecgfrith as the kingdom's ruination.
The consecration of Ecgfrith by Hygeberht as archbishop of Lichfield, therefore, was probably designed to enhance Ecgfrith's position as Offa's heir and consolidate support for him  within Mercia.
In other words, Offa may never have wished this to be anything other than a wholly Mercian ceremony.
There may have been an additional dimension to all this.
The extent of Hygeberht's authority perhaps sheds light on Offa's principal area of interest.
The suffragan sees of Lichfield were Worcester, Hereford, Leicester, Lindsey,Dommoc and Elmham; Canterbury retained Winchester, Sherborne, Selsey, Rochester and London.
Hygeberht's archdiocese, therefore, embraced Mercia and its dependent border territories in the midlands and East Anglia.
The pallium gave Hygeberht no jurisdiction in Saxon territories or in Kent but it did afford him metropolitan rights over all the Anglian peoples north of the Thames and south of the Humber, which may suggest that Offa was seeking not just an archbishop of the Mercians but a new ecclesiastical order for the Angles of midland and eastern England.
So much evidence, relatively speaking, survives to illustrate Offa's dealings with the men of Kent and to a lesser extent with the South Saxons and so little to illuminate his relations with the Anglian groups of eastern England that the order of importance of these areas to Offa can easily be inverted.
It used to be thought that, when Offa was styled on occasion in the charters of the period rex Anglorum , this signified that he aspired to lordship over all the Anglo-Saxons or at least to make himself the only king south of the Humber.
It is true that he gave one daughter, Eadburh, in marriage to Beorhtric, king of the West Saxons (ASC A,s.a. 787), and another, Aelfflaed, to Aethelred, king of Northumbria, in 792, but the revival of a Northumbrian coinage at this time by Aethelred (see above, p. 158) and the inauguration of a new West Saxon coinage by Beorhtric at Winchester or Southampton testifies to their continuing independence.
It is not even certain that rex Anglorum is anything other than a later tenth- or eleventh-century interpolation in those charters of the reign in which it appears.
If it occurs anywhere in Offa's reign it does so as Of Rx A on a few of Offa's coins by the London moneyer, Alhmund.
It need not, however, have had the significance it acquired in tenth-century documents when it did come to express claims to a kingship of all Anglo-Saxons.
The title Rex Anglorum had been adopted in early papal correspondence.
The Life of Guthlac uses it to describe Aethelred, king of the Mercians (ch. 1).
REX ANG was used on some of his coins by Aethelstan, king of the East Angles, in the 830s and subsequently REX AN by Eadmund, king of the East Angles.
The creation of an Anglian archdiocese could have been primarily intended as an expression of a new southern Anglian political community.
Its ecclesiastical centre was Lichfield, its principal trading emporia London and Ipswich.
What happened in Kent and Sussex can obscure the central fact of the reign, namely, that Mercia had changed from ‘a confederation of peoples under Mercian overlordship to a vast kingdom comprising most of the English areas between the Thames and the Humber’.
Here the continued acceptance of a dependent relationship  with the Mercians on the part of the East Angles was crucial.
Without East Anglian acceptance of a subordinate role, Offa's Anglian empire would be of short duration.
The greater the Mercian involvement in south-eastern England, particularly Kent, however attractive control of Kentish resources may have been or however militarily desirable the containment of a possibly unstable local hegemony, the more vulnerable was Offa's position in the face of hostile anti-Mercian sentiment south as well as north of the Thames.
If to this is added the domestic tensions occasioned by Offa's determination to secure the succession of his son, Ecgfrith, it becomes clear how highly charged the political atmosphere must have been in Offa's last years.
The 790s are one of the best documented decades in Anglo-Saxon history and this enables the years of crisis which followed the establishment of Offa's dominant position to be comprehended in some detail.
The Carolingians maintained close contact with Offa's court and Alcuin congratulated Offa in the late 780s on his eagerness to encourage learning in his kingdom, sent greetings to Queen Cynethryth, and urged Ecgfrith not to be unworthy of his noble birth.
In the early 790s Charlemagne is thought to have been anxious to secure Anglo-Saxon support against iconoclasm at the council of Frankfurt in 794.
A heavier penny coinage was introduced by Offa to conform with contemporary Carolingian developments.
In 796, at a time when the volume of long-distance trade was increasing, the two rulers were corresponding about their mutual commercial interests and reciprocal protection of merchants.
Not surprisingly, therefore, Sir Frank Stenton believed that Offa was able ‘to deal on equal terms’ with Charlemagne.
Perhaps the most conspicuous feature of the early 790s, however, was the often uneasy relations between the two rulers.
Offa's increased power and prestige across the 780s evidently introduced a new factor into Anglo-Frankish relations and rendered them somewhat ambivalent.
A proposal by Charlemagne c .
789–90 that his oldest son, Charles, should marry one of Offa's daughters may already have been more an attempt to ‘patch up bad relations’ than to give effect to good ones, and, when acceptance of this extremely prestigious offer was made dependent by Offa on one of Charlemagne's daughters marrying Ecgfrith, so affronted was Charlemagne that he gave orders that no one from Britain and the Anglian race was to land on the sea-coast of Gaul for the sake of commerce.
The reality of this breakdown in relations is confirmed by letters written by Alcuin in 790 in which he reported a quarrel between Charlemagne and Offa so serious that on both sides traders were forbidden to sail.
Alcuin thought he might be employed in making peace, but the fact that he found it necessary to protest that he had never been disloyal to Offa suggests that his allegiances were being called into question.
Gervold, abbot of St Wandrille, who had for some time supervised the exaction of tolls at various Channel ports (particularly Quentovic) and established cordial relations with Offa, evidently mollified  Charlemagne and a trade embargo was not maintained.
If Offa thought he could attempt ‘to deal on equal terms’ with Charlemagne, therefore, he was mistaken, and the likelihood is that the Frankish court had come to view his ascendancy in southern England with misgivings, destroying as it had done the traditional shape of political power in the south-east.
Carolingian involvement with kingdoms other than Mercia and with elements opposed to Offa certainly now becomes a feature of Anglo-Saxon political life.
Welsh rulers, with whom Offa may have been at war and who possibly ruled in British territory subject to him, could have been among the kings of the Scots (Irish) who recognized the lordship of Charlemagne.
Among the Anglo-Saxons Charlemagne sought to establish good relations with Northumbria.
Alcuin was soon disappointed in the new king Aethelred, son of Aethelwald, and his disapproval of Aethelred and his court circle for excessive self-indulgence and immoral and unrighteous conduct was consistently sustained (see above, p. 154).
Nevertheless, he vowed that he would never cease to give Aethelred advice, and when Charlemagne was so enraged by the assassination of Aethelred in 796 that his Northumbrian gifts were recalled, threats of worse consequences were averted in Alcuin's view only by his intercession.
Alcuin was also critical of the new Northumbrian king, Eardwulf, but when Eardwulf was driven out of his kingdom in 806 he was restored two years later through the intervention of Charlemagne and the pope (see above, p. 157), a clear enough demonstration of the continued maintenance of Northumbria at this time as a Carolingian sphere of influence.
No volume of correspondence similar to Alcuin's survives to illustrate Charlemagne's dealings with other Anglo-Saxon kingdoms but the support Charlemagne is known to have given to Offa's enemies reveals widespread diplomatic activity around the borders of Mercia.
In a letter to Archbishop Aethelheard and Ceolwulf, bishop of Lindsey, written 793–6, Charlemagne asked them to intercede with Offa for certain individuals who had gone into exile with their lord, Hringstan, who had now died.
Ceolwulf left England himself in 796 in the company of the bishop of London (ASC A,s.a. 794) but whether to go on pilgrimage or into exile is not known and he died the same year (ASC D,s.a. 796).
In 796 Charlemagne was giving shelter to an important exile from England, the priest Odberht, almost certainly to be identified with the Eadberht Praen who was accused of being an ex-priest and who subsequently seized the Kentish kingdom at some point after the death of Offa.
Archbishop Aethelheard was at Rome seeking to secure the person of Odberht/Eadberht to answer charges brought against him by Offa, but Charlemagne had also sent Eadberht and others, who were in fear of death from Offa and had sought his protection, to Rome to defend themselves in person before the pope.
Another exile in Gaul was Ecgberht, son of Ealhmund, who had been driven out by Offa and Beorhtric, king of the West Saxons, and who sought refuge in Gaul (ASC A,s.a. 836) where, according to William of Malmesbury writing in a later age, he learnt the arts of government.
He certainly learnt that of survival.
The keynote for the last years of Offa, however, is sounded by an event much closer to home than the Carolingian court.
In 794 Offa had Aethelberht, king of the East Angles, beheaded (ASC A,s.a. 792).
Nothing further is known of the episode from contemporary sources.
Aethelberht had evidently been left as king among the East Angles but whether as a regulus or subregulus is unknown in the absence of East Anglian charters.
Certainly, he had been stopped from minting his own coins.
His later Lives do not inspire great confidence in their historical details about a young king seeking the hand of Offa's daughter in marriage and falling a victim to the machinations of Queen Cynethryth, who alleged that Aethelberht's real intention was to reconnoitre the Mercian kingdom with a view to invading it, and when the Chronicon ex Chronicis also claims that Aethelberht was put to death by Offa at the instigation of Queen Cynethryth it is not necessarily independent of the legend.
Nevertheless, however it came about, Offa's slaying of Aethelberht represented a serious blow to the realization of a peaceful union of south Anglian peoples under the overlordship of the Mercian king and augured more forceful compulsion.
Following this confrontation, a succession of crises seriously undermined the Mercian position further.
The first was not so much Offa's death on 26 or 29 July 796 (ASC D,s.a. 796) as the death of Ecgfrith, his successor, 141 days later (ASC A,s.a. 755) which threatened all that Offa had struggled to achieve within Mercia and created dynastic uncertainty at the centre of the Mercian polity as royal power was assumed by Coenwulf, a prince claiming descent not from Eowa or Penda but from a certain Coenwealh, allegedly in the genealogies a brother of Eowa and Penda (see Appendix, Fig. 8).
Coenwulf had several brothers and would seem to have been a member of a very powerful kindred, some of whose landed estates were centred on the region of Winchcombe, but none of his forebears had reigned as kings and Alcuin's observations in a letter to the people of Kent in 797 that scarcely anyone was to be found now of the old stock of kings and the more obscure their origin, the less their courage, could certainly be construed as a slight on Coenwulf.
It was not at all clear at his accession how far the new king would pursue Offa's policies nor how he would deal with the Carolingians.
Alcuin was so far from being certain of this standing with Coenwulf that he asked a Mercian patrician — probably the senior Mercian ealdorman Brorda — to greet the king peaceably ‘if it is possible to do so’.
Alcuin regarded the dynastic purges of Offa's reign as an unmitigated evil, for which the premature death of Ecgfrith represented divine retribution.
Nevertheless, he viewed Coenwulf as a tyrant, who had compounded his deficiencies by putting away his wife and taking another (as Eardwulf had done in Northumbria), and urged the Mercian patrician to advise the Mercian people to observe what he  referred to as the good and chaste customs of Offa.
When he did feel able to write to Coenwulf he reminded him of his humble origins (but avoided reference to his matrimonial difficulties) and exhorted him to remember always the very best features of Offa's reign, avoiding Offa's displays of greed and cruelty.
No other material illustrates more vividly the political consternation and diplomatic uncertainty attendant on the accession of a new king.
Moreover, at some point — probably on Ecgfrith's death — Eadberht Praen, recently an exile at the court of Charlemagne, returned to England and established himself as king in Kent (ASC A,s.a. 794), his grip on the kingdom underlined by the minting of his own coins at Canterbury.
The implication must be that Eadberht denied that he had previously taken holy orders and affirmed the legitimacy of his claim, but Archbishop Aethelheard fled and Christ Church, Canterbury, was probably sacked.
The minting of coins, possibly simultaneously, in East Anglia in the name of a king, Eadwald, indicates that the East Angles also emancipated themselves from Mercian control.
At the same time a breakdown in the relations between the Mercians and the West Saxons left the Mercians temporarily friendless and isolated in southern England (see below, p. 179).
Alcuin was furious with Archbishop Aethelheard for fleeing but there must be a possibility, representing Carolingian interests as he did, that Alcuin was more disturbed by Aethelheard's refusal to accept as king the Carolingian protégé, Eadberht Praen.
That Aethelheard's flight was not generally seen as discreditable is clear from Leo III's subsequent praise of him for endangering his life against ‘Julian the Apostate’, as the pope described Eadberht, but Alcuin gave Aethelheard no such credit and remained highly critical of him for allegedly neglecting his Christian duty and it is possible that in his absence the Kentish leaders were considering the election of another archbishop.
It is clear that Coenwulf did not dare to risk ecclesiastical sanction by proceeding against Eadberht until the papal position on the matter was made quite clear.
In his reply to Coenwulf, the pope refused to countenance the removal of the archbishop of Canterbury to London, but the impact of this papal prohibition was offset by the papal recognition of Eadberht's earlier ordination and consequent ineligibility for the kingship and permission was given to proceed against him as a pretender to royal power.
The Church has no alternative but to condemn him, excommunicate and reject him, as Pope Leo put it, ‘having regard to the safety of his soul’, the pope expressing the hope that in return Coenwulf would be more generous to the Church of St Peter than Offa had been.
The failure of the pope to pronounce on this matter until 798 meant a dangerous delay for Coenwulf and was probably a factor in his desire for an archbishopric at London, but the papal judgement when it came gave  him a free hand and made London as an archiepiscopal see dispensable.
Coenwulf vigorously crushed the revolt in Kent and captured Eadberht, who was blinded and mutilated and taken in chains into Mercia (ASC A, F,s.a. 796) where he was imprisoned for some years at Winchcombe.
Aethelheard returned to Canterbury and set about imposing his authority anew on the bishops of the southern province, and by 901 at the latest Coenwulf had installed one of his brothers, Cuthred, as king in Kent, to govern the territory more securely (CS 303: S 157).
What happened in East Anglia is obscure but Eadwald disappeared and c. 805 Coenwulf resumed the minting of coins in East Anglia in his own name.
It seems probable that rebellion in East Anglia was as rigorously suppressed as in Kent.
By 799 Coenwulf was also in a position to conclude a new treaty of peace with the West Saxons, which seems to have terminated a period of temporary estrangement (CS 295: S 154).
In that year Coenwulf allowed himself the luxury of the elaborate royal style rector et imperator Merciorum regni (CS 289: S 153), ‘the first time a western ruler had called himself ‘emperor’ in an official record since the Roman Empire’.
He had survived the crisis of 796–8 remarkably well.
His plan for a metropolitan see at London had been stillborn but he had rid himself of the problem of Lichfield (a process completed by 803), successfully confounded his enemies and consolidated the position Offa had established at the height of his power.
Offa had been a powerful king whose interventionist rule was no more acceptable to those outside the Mercian kingdom and its traditional dependencies than that of previous overlords.
It is probably anachronistic to imagine that Offa intended to create a single southern Anglo-Saxon kingdom under one ruler.
What he aspired to was the union of southern Anglian peoples under the leadership of a Mercian king and a Mercian archbishop.
He displayed no desire to interfere militarily in Wessex or Northumbria though his response to what was probably a local Kentish hegemony in the south-east after 784/5 reveals his potential for aggression.
The skill with which Coenwulf conserved Offa's imperium , however, can obscure some fundamental shifts of emphasis.
First, the abandonment of a Mercian archbishopric implied a renunciation of the idea of a southern Anglian realm as a distinct political entity.
Second, the Mercian grip on Kent and the south-east tightened.
Offa's still rather distant control had been replaced by a permanent Mercian royal presence.
Third, the diplomatic accord which the Carolingians had earlier enjoyed with Offa in Mercia had been destroyed (see below, pp. 185 ff.).
Though Coenwulf's ‘empire’ may look like Offa's, therefore, the crisis of 796–8 had helped to establish possibly a less flexible regime and certainly one more insular in outlook.
The degree of stability to which it could attain remained to be seen.