

4
Jannie instinctively hid her cigarette behind her back when the kitchen door opened; John hated to see her smoking while she cooked.
But it was not John — it was Bob.
She brought the cigarette out again.
‘Jannie,’ said Bob, ‘is there anything I can do?’
‘Not really, Bob.
You can stay and talk to me if you like, though.’
Bob drew one of the rush-bottomed chairs out from the great dining-table in the middle of the kitchen and sprawled in it.
The room was full of the fat, brown smell of gigot aux haricots .
It was a dish which Jannie often cooked for Bob.
He was a glutton, and the rich heaviness which the golden-crusted beans absorbed from the exhalations of the mutton touched some deep chord in him.
John hated the dish.
‘Can't peel the potatoes or anything?’
Bob asked.
‘No.
What's John up to?’
‘He's reading the paper.
Very good about him getting on the television.
Are you pleased?’
Jannie leaned against the edge of the dresser, smoking  and looking down at Bob.
She bit her lower lip anxiously.
‘I suppose so,’ she said.
‘I don't know.’
‘He's as pleased as Punch about it.
He's been bouncing about the office all day like a rubber ball.’
‘You don't think he's going to make a terrible fool of himself, do you, Bob?’
‘He'll be all right, Jannie.’
‘I can't bear the thought of sitting here watching him.
I don't know how I shall manage to look at the screen.’
Bob picked up one of the knives laid out for dinner and scored along the grain of the table with it.
‘How are the boys, Jannie?’ he asked.
The worried look on Jannie's face softened.
She began to laugh.
‘Poor old Bob!’ she said.
‘No,’ said Bob, ‘I'm very fond of them.’
Jannie smiled at him, wondering if he could even remember how old they were.
When he came at week-ends he played with them vigorously, until they screamed and wept with over-excitement.
He was very good with them, as the phrase went.
But Jannie was used to friends, particularly childless ones, who were good with the children to the point of dedication, and who a month later called Gawain Damian and Damian Adrian, or who sent the six-year-old Gawain a pull-along elephant for his birthday, and gave Damian a velvet party frock, in the belief that he was called Deborah and was a girl.
‘They're fine,’ she said.
‘How's Mrs. Mounce?’
‘Well,’ said Bob, ‘things aren't too good at the moment.
She cooked me dinner last night.
Just marched in and set to work.
There was nothing I could do about it.’
‘I think you ought to watch out for that woman, Bob.’
‘I know.
I know.
But what can I do?’
‘She'll land you in trouble.’
‘You really think she's after me, Jannie?’
‘What do you think, Bob?’
Bob sat back in his chair, playing with the pepper-mill, grinding a little pile of pepper into his left palm.
He was like an old cushion in the chair, thought Jannie, a plump, shabby, comfortable old cushion.
With his fisherman-knit Marks and Sparks sweaters, and his broad suede shoes, and his mild, sleepy eyes, he fitted into the background of 43 Spadina Road so well that you hardly noticed him.
‘She bit me last night,’ he said, dragging up his trouser-leg and showing her the line of tiny red marks.
Jannie stared at them, trying to imagine the scene — Bob, retreating backwards round the room, and Mrs. Mounce, on all fours, snarling and barking, snapping at his trousers.
‘How on earth did it happen, Bob?’
Bob shrugged.
‘She just suddenly bit me,’ he said.
‘But what led up to it?
Something must have led up to it.’
Bob sighed.
‘She said, ‘I won't bite you.’
Then I suppose she changed her mind.’
‘Honestly, you are a bit wet sometimes, Bob.’
It occurred to her that she hadn't made the salad.
She began to wash the lettuce, while Bob made the dressing, hunting luxuriously through her spice cupboard for the oil and vinegar.
‘How's Tessa?’ she asked.
‘Fine.
Do you think a little cinnamon would help?’
‘No.
Does she know about all this business?’
‘All what business?’
‘Mrs. Mounce.’
‘No, no.
How about tarragon?’
Bob was always evasive about Tessa, which made Jannie suspect that he might be serious about her.
It also made her want to find out more about the girl, and gave her a terrible desire to tease Bob about her.
‘When she comes to London,’ said Jannie, ‘she can always have the spare room here, you know.’
‘That's very kind of you, Jannie.’
But of course, thought Jannie, feeling foolish, Tessa would stay with Bob.
Now Bob would think she disapproved.
‘I mean,’ she said, ‘only if she wants to.’
‘Yes, yes,’ said Bob.
He sounded embarrassed.
‘I mean…
Oh, you know what I mean.’
‘Yes, Jannie.
Ill put some sugar in the dressing, shall I?’
‘I mean, there's a bed here if ever she wants it.’
‘Sugar, Jannie?’
He was holding the sugar-jar up questioningly.
She gazed at it for some moments in silence, thinking about a flat in Manchester where she and John had spent a ghostly week one winter before they were married.
It had belonged to a man called Flowers, and they had gone to Manchester just because he had offered them the flat.
It had been bitterly cold.
They had stayed in bed most of the time.
In the afternoons they had walked around the cold, grimy streets.
She had a picture of sooty red brick, quiet, empty streets with grey winter haze at the end of them, little corner shops with paper decorations left over from Christmas, gritty smoke blowing down from the chimneys.
It had been just after Christmas; she had worn a new pair of fur mittens her sister had given her.
She could remember standing by the window of the flat and crying, but not why she was crying, or indeed much else.
Except that the mattress had smelt musty, and that as they lay in bed through those long cold mornings they could just see the spire of the Congregational church through the window.
‘Half a teaspoonful, Bob,’ she said.
‘What were you thinking about?’
‘Oh, things.
It's funny how…’
She put the lettuce in a bowl and dried her hands, staring unseeingly at the loose tile above the sink.
The grittiness of the coal smoke coming down on those gaunt January afternoons was still in her nostrils.
She could hear the rising engine-note of the Corporation buses as they pulled away from the stop at the corner, coming from nowhere either of them had ever heard of, going on through the gathering winter dusk to destinations equally obscure.
‘How what, Jannie?’ asked Bob, taking a teaspoonful of sugar from the jar and slowly licking it up.
Jannie pulled another of the chairs out from the table and sat down.
‘How you suddenly remember something very vividly,’ she said, ‘and you think for a moment you've really got hold of it.
But then…’
She hesitated again, dismayed by the difficulty of delineating such fleeting, unshaped feelings in words.
‘But then,’ she said, ‘when you try to think what it is you've got hold of, it's not very easy to say.’
Bob took another teaspoonful of sugar.
‘What was it that you were remembering, Jannie?’ he asked.
‘Oh, a bleak time.
A lot of things you remember like that are moments of desolation.
Sometimes I wonder if one really knew they were so desolate at the time.’
She watched Bob as he took another spoonful of sugar.
He followed her gaze, saw what he was doing, and quickly pushed the sugar jar away.
‘Sorry,’ he said.
‘1 didn't realize I was doing it.’
‘You'll get fat, Bob.’
‘I've got fat.’
She rested her chin in her cupped hand.
‘Do you get on with women better than men, Bob?’ she asked.
‘I get on fairly well with everyone, to tell you the truth.’
She examined him curiously.
He was definitely plump.
When he turned his head to look at her the flesh folded underneath the jawbone into the beginnings of a double chin.
He was so different from John in every way that it was amazing to think the human race could contain them both.
She thought of her husband shaving in the morning in trousers and vest.
Dark, gaunt — almost emaciated — leaning forwards anxiously towards the mirror as if afraid his reflection might suddenly vanish altogether.
‘What's Tessa like?’ she asked.
‘Oh, you know…’ said Bob, a little uneasily.
‘Dark or fair?’
‘Dark.’
‘What colour eyes?’
Bob frowned.
‘I think they're brown,’ he said, playing with the pepper-mill again.
‘And she's attractive?’
‘Oh, yes.’
‘How old is she?’
‘Oh, about twenty.’
Jannie felt she wanted to laugh.
‘Why haven't we seen her here?’ she asked.
‘She hasn't been up to London yet.
She's at a kind of college of citizenship in Bath.’
‘You go down there?’
‘Well, they're a bit tough about letting them out.
It's a sort of finishing school, really.’
She couldn't prevent herself from bursting out laughing.
‘Bob, Bob, Bob!’ she said.
‘What?’
‘You.
Carrying on with someone at a finishing school.’
‘I know.’
John came into the kitchen, holding three half-full sherry glasses.
‘I found a drop in a bottle at the back of the knitting cupboard,’ he said.
‘What are you two up to out here?’
‘Oh, flirting,’ said Bob, with a sigh.
‘Charming,’ said John.
‘Got to earn my supper,’ said Bob.
Bob and Jannie teased Dyson all the way through dinner, and he became more and more irritated.
‘It's not just the money,’ he said, stabbing at his beans and sending a scattering of them across the table.
‘Though I may say that I shall be getting twenty-five guineas next Thursday for doing nothing but sit around in a television studio for half-an-hour, instead of beating my brains out all week-end to write a script for the BBC Overseas Service and getting ten guineas for it.’
‘I thought you told me you'd be getting a hundred guineas a time if you were a television personality, John?’ said Bob.
‘So I shall, Bob,’ said Dyson irritably, ‘if I make a success of this and begin to make a name for myself.
And that's the real point.
It's not just the money.’
‘Though you don't despise the money,’ said Jannie.
‘Though I don't despise the money, certainly.’
He stopped suddenly and took another mouthful of lamb.
‘What is it, then?’ said Jannie.
‘Well,’ said Dyson, chewing hard, ‘1 must admit that I should like to make a name for myself, just for its own sake.’
‘Oh, John!’ said Jannie, laughing.
Bob grinned silently.
‘All right,’ said Dyson.
‘You may laugh if you like.
But I'm thinking purely of the practical advantages.’
Bob and Jannie laughed again.
‘Look, Jannie,’ said Dyson seriously.
‘Do you remember when we wanted to get Gawain into Almeira Road school, and we couldn't, because all the middle-class parents in s.w.23 were trying to get their kids into Almeira Road, and  we live just over the zoning boundary?
Well, do you honestly think the answer would have been the same if I'd been Norman Ward Westerman or Lord Boddy?’
‘You mean you'd have been able to pull strings?’ said Bob.
‘I shouldn't have pulled strings — other people would have pulled them for me!
‘If we had Lord Boddy in the Parent-Teacher Association,’ they'd think, ‘we might have a little influence at County Hall.’
Or they'd realize that it might be rather agreeable to say to visiting parents, ‘That's Noel Westerman — you know, Norman Ward Westerman's son.
He's a scamp — aren't you, Noel?’
Pat-pat on Noel's well-connected head.’
Bob and Jannie gazed at him.
‘Listen, if I wasn't just John Dyson, but The John Dyson, people wouldn't even waste their time asking me to do ten-guinea talks for the Overseas Service — they'd know I'd be fully occupied doing pieces for Playboy and Esquire at a thousand dollars a time, and going on television at a hundred guineas an appearance.
It's a matter of purely practical economics.’
‘You sound very impassioned, John,’ said Bob.
‘Well, I am , Bob.
I am very impassioned.
Look I don't want to be so famous that I have to write autographs all over the place, and can't travel by bus in case I'm mobbed.
Moderation in all things.
But if I was The John Dyson, do you think crowded restaurants wouldn't be able to find a table for me?
If I was The John Dyson, don't you think I'd have a better chance of getting theatre seats?
I know you two think I'm a tit, going on like this.
But I have a serious point here.’
‘Eat up your meat, John,’ said Jannie.
‘You haven't put a mouthful in for the last ten minutes.’
‘I have a serious point,’ said Dyson, ‘and that is that  nowadays it's not excellence which leads to celebrity, but celebrity which leads to excellence.
One makes one's reputation, and one's reputation enables one to achieve the conditions in which one can do good work.’
‘You do talk a lot of shit sometimes, John,’ said Bob mildly.
‘It's not shit, Bob!
Look, take me.
Let's be honest with ourselves; I'm a small but vital link in the business of producing one of the most important daily newspapers in the world.
But shouldn't I do better work if I weren't driven from pillar to post to supplement my salary?
Well,shouldn't I ?’
‘John, love, said Jannie, ‘do eat up.
The rest of us have finished.’
‘Or take you, Bob, said Dyson.
‘You're a writer.’
‘I'm a writer?’ said Bob
‘I didn't know you were a writer, Bob,’ said Jannie.
‘Bob is a marvellous writer!’ said Dyson, his voice almost breaking with emotion at his own generosity.
‘Perhaps a great writer.’
‘But I haven't written anything,’ said Bob uneasily.
‘Have I?’
‘Exactly!
Exactly !’
Dyson leaned forward in great excitement.
‘And why haven't you written anything?
Because you're slaving away in that little office all day doing stupid, piddling little jobs for me!
That's why!’
‘Oh, I shouldn't say that.’
‘I drive you hard, Bob.
I realise that.
I make you work like a dog.
He writes like an angel, Jannie!
And I make him work like a dog!
I drive you hard because I drive myself hard, Bob.’
‘Really, John, you're very reasonable…’
‘No, no, I'm a slavedriver and I know it.
But don't think I don't understand what it costs, because I do.
I know you  both think I'm an egotistical shit, going on about wanting to be famous.
But it's not just for myself.
I want Bob to become well known, too, so that he can liberate himself from me .’
‘What about me?’ asked Jannie.
‘Do you want me to become famous and liberate myself from you?’
Dyson put down his knife and fork, frowning, his exaltation all turned to dust.
‘All right, pick holes,’ he said sulkily.
‘All right, I haven't got my ideas completely worked out and watertight.
I know that.’
He pushed his plate away.
‘Aren't you going to have any more?’ asked Jannie.
‘It's too rich for me — it always gives me indigestion.
I don't know why you keep serving it.’
Jannie cleared the plates away, catching Bob's eye for a moment and pushing her bottom lip up in mock guilt.
Bob looked quickly away, trying not to smile.
Dyson sat pouting and rubbing his hands together, glaring down at various parts of the table.
‘Shall we take our puddings into the next room and watch television?’ suggested Jannie.
‘Why don't we?’ said Bob.
‘Load of shit,’ said Dyson.
‘There might be a discussion about the colour problem,’ said Jannie
‘Oh, very sarcastic.’
‘It's the old movie tonight,’ said Bob.
‘Oh, go and switch it on then, Bob!’ said Jannie.
‘Condescending lowbrows,’ said Dyson sourly.
‘Highbrow lowbrows.
No — not even genuine highbrow lowbrows.
Middlebrow highbrow lowbrows.’
The old movie sent Dyson to sleep.
Bob looked round to say something to him, and there he was, in the flickering  bluish light from the screen, with his head back and his mouth open.
We shouldn't have insisted,’ said Bob.
‘No, he must have been enjoying it,’ said Jannie.
‘He always goes to sleep when he's enjoying something.
Open another bottle of beer, Bob.’
‘Will you have some?’
Jannie was absorbed in the film again.
‘I'll have a sip,’ she said eventually.
‘What's the name of the girl who's playing the reporter?
I don't mean Myrna Loy, do I?’
‘No, no,’ said Bob, pouring the beer.
‘I know who it is.
I'll think of her name in a minute.’
He settled back in his armchair with his beer, full of mutton and beans and well-being.
He felt as though there were a space for him in the universe, and he exactly filled it.
‘I don't mean Carole Lombard, do I?’ said Jannie.
‘No, no.
The name's on the tip of my tongue.’
White telephones were brought to night-club tables.
Stars were surrounded by reporters as they emerged from stage doors.
Tycoons snarled.
Eyes sparkled mistily.
There were skyscrapers and luxury suites.
Life was suspended…
Once Damian cried out in his sleep, and fell silent again.
Once Dyson snorted, and Jannie leaned over and stroked his hair.
‘It's not Jean Arthur, is it?’ she said.
‘No.
I think the brother's the bloke who was in The Philadelphia Story .’
‘Was that the one with Katharine Hepburn?’
‘No — the one with Katharine Hepburn was the one with Cary Grant.’
From somewhere outside at one point there came a distant rumble and chinking, like old milk bottles clashing together.
‘Is that the rubbish coming over the wall?’ asked Bob.
‘I suppose so.’
‘Shouldn't we wake John up and tell him?’
‘He'll find out soon enough.’
Bob opened another bottle of beer.
‘Poor John,’ said Jannie.
Dyson drove Bob home in the old Standard Vanguard, through the dank, dead streets of the inner suburbs, yellow under the sodium lights.
Bob felt comforted by their calm and familiar variety.
Yellow high streets, with yellow electrical shops, and in the windows of the multiple tailors blank-faced dummies leaning discreetly forward in eggily dark worsted.
Yellow Victorian mansions, with their front gardens asphalted over to make yellow parking areas for the flatholders' yellow cars.
Now it was mercury vapour country.
Bluish second-hand car lots; sagging bluish fences; bluish Unitarian churches; small bluish factories, some Odeon-fronted, some glassed and rectilinear, but set at odd bluish angles to their surroundings.
Now they were back among the sodium, passing yellow pre-war flats — Keeps, Courts, and Mansionses, with yellow gables and yellow weatherboarding.
There were few people about, but many cars.
As soon as they got within range of Dyson everyone seemed to drive badly.
They overtook him when he wasn't expecting it; they pulled up at the side of the road and trapped him behind them; they got in front of him at traffic-lights and then decided to turn right.
‘Oh, for God's sake !’ snarled Dyson, snatching at the wheel, thumping the accelerator up and down uncertainly.
He sat forward tensely in his seat, as if he found it difficult to see the road, and frequently wiped at the windscreen with his handkerchief.
At one point something heavy fell off or out of the dashboard on to Bob's foot and rolled away beneath the seat with a metallic ring.
Dyson peered down into the darkness after it, driving the car steadily out across the white line in the middle of the road.
‘Don't worry about that, Bob,’ he said.
‘That's always coming off.
Incidentally, Bob, those brown patches on the wings aren't rust, you know.’
‘Which brown patches, John?’
‘I thought I saw you looking at them before we started.
They look like rust — it fooled me at first.
But it's rather interesting — it's brown undercoat.
It's quite remarkable when you come to think about it.
The car's fifteen years old, it stands out in all weathers, and the undercoat's still intact.’
‘Remarkable.’
‘Of course, it's not just the paintwork.
Everything was built to a slightly higher specification then.
They hadn't learned to cut quite so many corners.
It's worth remembering, Bob, if you ever buy a car.’
Dyson swung left into a main road, looking over his shoulder to watch out for traffic from the right, and drove over the edge of the kerb.
The thump of the back wheel coming back into the gutter brought Bob's window down.
‘Jam it with that wedge of paper,’ said Dyson.
‘I suppose some damned fool left a brick lying in the gutter.’
In the middle of a yellow common the engine died, and the car rolled jerkily to a halt.
‘That's funny,’ said Dyson.
He pressed the starter.
He pressed it again.
He went on pressing it until the starter engine ground to a halt.
Then they sat in silence for some moments.
‘George God strikes again,’ said Bob.
In a sudden access of enraged energy, Dyson jumped out of the car, slammed the door violently behind him, and wrenched the bonnet open.
Bob followed him apprehensively.
Dyson was glaring into the hot, oily darkness of the engine as if he were about to smash it to pieces with his bare hands.
‘Perhaps it was that bump we went over,’ said Bob hesitantly.
Dyson straightened up and transferred his glare to Bob.
‘Do you know anything at all about cars?’ he asked curtly.
‘No, John.’
‘Then be a good fellow, will you, and try not to make imbecile remarks.’
Dyson bent over the engine again.
‘If you want to know,’ he said, ‘it's probably the points.
Or something to do with the plugs.’
He put his hand into the engine, touched something hot, and sprang back a pace.
‘Christ !’ he hissed, sucking his knuckles.
‘John,’ said Bob, ‘may I ask a very naive question?
Are you sure it hasn't just run out of petrol?’
‘Oh, shut up, Bob,’ said Dyson, peering into the engine and trying to see what it was he had touched.
‘But would it perhaps just be worth looking at the petrol gauge?’
Dyson straightened up slowly.
‘Look, Bob,’ he said.
‘I'm extremely tired.
I'm extremely angry.
I'm extremely likely to hit you.
Every single thing without exception has gone wrong today.
It's been the most awful day of my life.
And now you pester me with idiot suggestions about something you know nothing whatsoever about.’
He plunged back into his contemplation of the engine.
Bob did not like to remind him that up till then it had been an awfully good day for him, on which every single thing without exception had gone right.
He crept inconspicuously back to the dashboard, switched on the ignition, and looked at the gauge.
‘The gauge doesn't work,’ snapped Dyson.
‘I know precisely how much petrol I've got because I know precisely how much I've put in and precisely how many miles I've been.
I put in two gallons on Saturday, and I can tell you for a fact there's at least quarter of a gallon left.
I hope that satisfies you.’
When Dyson was hidden beneath the bonnet again Bob tiptoed round to the boot and eased it open.
Beneath a heap of old rags and newspapers and raincoats he found an empty petrol can.
He put it under his overcoat, gently closed the boot, and tiptoed away along the yellow pavement in search of a yellow garage.
‘I'm not waiting for you,’ shouted Dyson when he was about fifty yards away.
‘As soon as I've got the car going I'm off.’
Dyson undressed quietly in the dark, so as not to wake Jannie, sighing loudly in the hope that it would.
As he got into bed she rolled over towards him and put her arms round him.
‘What time is it?’ she asked sleepily.
‘Half-past one,’ said Dyson.
‘I ran out of petrol.’
She ran her hand down over his chest and stomach, and seized him softly and irresistibly by the roots.
‘No, Jannie,’ he said.
‘No, really…
No, honestly, I'm terribly tired…
No, honestly, Jannie, I shall be absolutely deadbeat tomorrow as it is…
Now, Jannie!…
Jannie !
Well, look, Jannie…
Well, I suppose…
Just…
Oh, well…’
5
Dyson made thorough preparations for his television appearance.
All week-end he drove about the outer suburbs with Jannie and the boys, calling on relatives and letting fall the news in the course of conversation.
‘The poor old souls like to know what one's doing,’ he explained to Jannie, as they jerked along in the traffic stream between aunt and aunt.
At the office during the week he found circumstances made it necessary for him to ring most of his influential friends and acquaintances — Sims, the paper's tame lawyer; Sir William Paice; Brent-Williamson, the Literary Editor; Huysmanns at the French Embassy.
‘I hope you'll be watching the box on Thursday night,’ he said to each of them in a humorous voice.
‘What?
Well,I'm going to be on…
Yes!
Isn't it preposterous?
Ten-forty-five on the commercial — some ghastly programme called The Human Angle .’
Bob's gaze disconcerted him.
He would turn his back on him while he was talking, or look down smiling into the mouthpiece.
‘It's naughty of me, I know,’ he would say as he put the  phone down.
Or: ‘I'm sorry, Bob.
I'm behaving outrageously.’
And he would dial another number.
He also gave some serious thought to how he should look.
Should he lean forward passionately and denounce things?
Or should he sit back in his chair and smile calmly at the idiocies of mankind?
He rehearsed a calm smile in front of the mirror at home; it looked like an apologetic grin.
He tried an expression of passionate commitment; it came out indistinguishable from defensive surliness.
Either way, his finger-tips became moist with sweat at the thought of producing the expression in front of the television cameras.
There was also the question of what he was going to say.
He began to note down suitable thoughts and epigrams on pieces of office copy-paper, not really with the intention of learning them off by heart, but with the idea that he might put them in his jacket pocket and touch them from time to time during the programme to give himself reassurance, knowing that if the worst really came to the worst he could take them out and refresh his memory.
‘T prob of t multi-racial soc,’ he wrote, ‘is in ess merely t mod versn of t time-hon prob of unitg tribes in nationhd.’
The real problem was to avoid the obvious.
He was not being paid twenty-five guineas to tell people what they could manage to think out themselves for nothing.
‘T troub is,’ he tried, ‘tt we aren't prej enough !
Shd educ ourselves to be dply & bttrly prej — agnst prej!’
He tried it over uneasily in front of the mirror.
If one of his deans or canons had written it in a Meditation he would have read it out to Bob in a mock-clerical voice, and deleted it, snarling.
However, this was a television programme, not a newspaper article.
Different criteria applied.
The trouble was that they would all agree with  each other.
They would all sit round deploring racial prejudice and suggesting how to avoid it.
Perhaps he should try to play the devil's advocate?
He noted down one or two cautiously controversial points.
‘Mst try to undrstnd att of man whse hse val falls.
— Ind ckng delightfl but hly fragrnt;— Mst admt I pers h diff in undrstndg next-dr neighbr's Eng.’
He would keep the liberal thoughts in his left-hand pocket, he decided, and the provocative ones in his right-hand pocket.
Then he would be able to put his hand immediately on whatever he required.
And jokes, of course— he'd need jokes.
He could keep a list of jokes in his inside breast pocket.
The idea of race opened up a few humorous possibilities.
Something about the three-legged race, perhaps, or the egg-and-spoon race?
Bn estab by scientists tt all races are of eql intell, except prhps egg-&-spn race.
Something along those lines.
Professionalism, that was what counted — thorough, serious preparation for even the most informal and evanescent of undertakings.
Whenever Dyson's phone rang that week it was the television company.
Could he give them a few facts about himself for the company's press release?
They hoped that he would be able to join the other participants for dinner at the studios beforehand.
A car would be sent for him at seven-thirty.
The final members of the team had now been settled — Miss Ruth Drax, a social worker, and Mr. Lewis Williamson, a barrister from Trinidad.
The car would be coming at eight.
A list of likely topics of discussion was on its way to him by post.
The car would now be calling for him at seven.
Every time the phone rang Dyson's fingers became moist with sweat.
So did Bob's.
Every time Dyson looked at himself in the kitchen mirror, trying to imagine it was a television screen, his stomach and Jannie's stomach turned over  in unison.
Jannie was beginning to doubt whether she actually would be able to bring herself to watch the programme.
‘Would you like to go round and hold Jannie's hand on Thursday night, Bob?’ said Dyson at the office one morning.
‘I'd be awfully obliged if you would.
She's in a terrible state about the whole thing, poor poppet.’
‘I'm in rather a state about it myself, John,’ said Bob.
‘You can hold each other 's hand, then.
I'm in a frightful state about it, too, and there's no one to hold my hand.
It's funny — I never get in a state about doing radio programmes.
Do you, Bob?’
‘I don't do radio programmes, John.’
‘Of course you don't.
I get a few qualms just before the green light comes on.
Nothing to worry about, though.
But I must admit, when I think about Thursday night I feel absolutely sick with nerves.
Do you do any television, Bob?
I can't remember.’
‘You know I don't, John.’
‘You're very sensible, Bob.
Take my advice — stick to good old steam radio.’
Bob had troubles enough of his own.
‘Bob my darling,’ wrote Tessa.
‘What a strange letter you wrote me!
I know it's very stupid of me, but I couldn't understand what it was supposed to be about at all.
Did John Dyson really have a fight with a man called Cox, or did you make all that up?
It was all like something you read in a book.
My private idea, which I hardly dare mention in case I've got it all wrong, is that you were copying the style of some book or other to see if I would recognize it.
Darling Bob, don't be cross if I haven't got it right, but is it one of your beloved American writers?
Is it supposed to be someone like John dos Passos or James Joyce?’
And Mrs. Mounce was crowding him closer and closer.
She had got a key to his room out of Dotty, as she had threatened.
She came and went while he was out, tidying up, laying the table for his evening meal, and no doubt reading his letters and looking in his drawers to see if he had a rupture belt or kept a stock of contraceptives.
She left dishes she had cooked for him, with notes underneath them.
‘Have a good nosh darling,’ said the notes, or: ‘Sorry Bob I broke the milk jug, I will get you another.’
‘Have borrowed one of your Frank Chacksfield records, promise faithfully not to scratch it.’
And, under not a dish but his pillow, folded into his pyjamas: ‘How's the bite Bob, sorry but you did ask for it sweetie.’
Bob stayed away from home every evening, pursuing old Hitchcock films he had seen before to art cinemas in Kilburn, Tooting, and Putney, and eating cheaply in Indian and Cypriot restaurants.
But she usually heard him creep in, however late it was, and came scratching on the door just as he had got his trousers off, or just as he was scraping her uneaten steak-and-kidney pie into a polythene bag to throw away at the office next day.
It embarrassed him to receive her in his dressing-gown.
It embarrassed him still more when she arrived dressed for bed herself as well, a complex bundle of diaphanous nightwear from the midst of which her poised cigarette arm stuck out oddly, like an awkward projection emrging from some ill-wrapped Christmas parcel.
‘I hope you're not shy, darling,’ she said, kicking off her high-heeled slippers and snuggling sensuously down into his armchair.
‘You've caught me in my frillies.’
‘I'm sorry,’ said Bob.
‘Still, I'm sure you've seen girls in their frillies before.
Haven't you, Bob?’
Bob made some small, noncommittal noise.
Mrs. Mounce blew out cigarette smoke provocatively, narrowing her eyes against its sting.
‘And without, I bet, sweety pie.
Oh, you don't have to tell me.
I know you're not one of these lily-white mother's boys.
I can tell a real man when I see one, believe me.
I could tell you a thing or two, darling, I really could.
I may look like a demure little wife who sits at home minding the house, but darling, I could tell you one or two things that would make your ears stand up on end.’
She was going to get him finally, he could see that.
She was going to edge him into a situation where it would be openly discourteous to refuse her, and nothing in his education or his upbringing had prepared him to be discourteous to anyone, least of all a woman.
He felt a terrible queasy emptiness in his stomach at the thought; it was as bad as the prospect of Dyson's going on television.
Worse, Mr. Mounce had begun to look at him oddly.
Or so it seemed to him.
When he met him in the office, or on the stairs, his habitually offensive glance seemed to have a new dimension of thoughtfulness.
One Saturday morning Bob came face to face with him as he emerged from the communal bathroom on the first half-landing.
‘I want to have a little chat with you sometime, Bob,’ he said.
Bob was numbed with fear.
To be actually accused point blank by an outraged husband!
He had never dreamed that it would happen to him.
He went out immediately, and stayed out for the rest of the week-end.
He had an idea that he would find himself another flat, and he actually called at a number of agencies in the Bayswater area and asked for their lists.
The prices were unbelievable.
Small bachelor flats were offered at 500, 650, 1,000 a year; plus 1,600 — 2,000 — 2,500 for furniture and fittings.
Where did the people who could pay such prices come from?
What jobs could they possibly  have?
How could there be so many of them?
Some advertisements asked for only ‘a reasonable figure to cover F & F.’ But how much was that?
He could offer them — what?— not more than fifty or sixty pounds altogether.
Was that a reasonable figure?
He didn't have the nerve to ask.
He gave up flat-hunting and went to the cinema.
After the cinema he had tea, walked the streets for an hour, had a couple of  Guinnesses in a pub to keep out the sharp evening air, and ate a biriani.
Then he went to a party.
There was a party almost every Saturday night given by someone in his circle of friends.
It was that sort of set.
A motheaten sort of set, as he frankly recognized — indeed, as they all frankly recognized — left over from Cambridge, and outgrown and abandoned by all its more enterprising members.
The remaining half-dozen or so clasped the last tattered shreds of the undergraduate life around them to keep out the cold winds of the world.
The party that night was like all their parties.
Old Dave Meadows put old Brubeck records on the gramophone.
Old Mike Ramsden got out his guitar and sang old Tom Lehrer songs.
Old Ian Strachan locked himself in the bedroom with old Caroline Pickthorn, and old Peter Staithes pissed out of the window and threw empty bottles down into the basement area.
On Monday morning they would all disappear into the Shell Centre and Unilever House and various grim out-departments of the BBC, yawning rebelliously.
Bob sat up till three drinking red table wine from a bottle marked Red Table Wine, and talking to old Janet Moss about life and death and their relations with their respective parents.
Then he dozed in an armchair for a few hours, until he was too cold and stiff to bear it any longer, when he got up and made tea for everyone, and discovered that there was nothing to eat for breakfast.
Sunday went by in a haze, long and grey and unreal.
He sat over breakfast in a cafeteria for a long time, reading the Sunday papers.
He walked round Kensington and Earl's Court and Chelsea until his feet were sore, met old Mike Ramsden and old Caroline Pickthorn for drinks, had lunch on his own in a spaghetti house, walked again.
Afterwards, he remembered that Lots Road power station had smoked whitely into a grey sky, and that along the Embankment a cold wind had been whipping off the river, driving spread-eagled pages from an old newspaper before it and wrapping one of them round the legs of a tall, frail man in a tweed overcoat.
After tea he dozed through an old Peter Sellers film at the King's Road Classic, dined off a biriani, dozed through an old Tati film at the Baker Street Classic, and crept upstairs to his flat just in time to meet Mounce coming downstairs from his den.
‘Ah,’ said Mounce.
‘The prodigal returns.
I want to have a word with you, lad.’
‘All right,’ said Bob.
He gave up.
He had no fight left.
Mounce unlocked the flat which had been converted into a bar.
He switched on the strip lights behind the bottles, and the electric fire, and poured out two large glasses of whisky.
Bob perched on a bar stool, still wearing his overcoat.
It was cold in the room, and the air smelt musty and unbreathed.
‘The point is this, Bob,’ said Mounce, leaning across the bar towards him and swilling the whisky round in his glass, ‘I'm away a lot, as you know.
I've got to be.
I'm a married man — I've got responsibilities.
You know what I mean, Bob?’
‘Yes,’ said Bob, remembering from his childhood just how much it hurt to be punched on the nose.
‘The point being that while Dad's out earning the  housekeeping, certain things could conceivably be occurring behind his back.
I'm not saying they do.
But you know what I'm driving at?’
‘Yes,’ said Bob.
Or perhaps Mounce would punch him in the eye.
A flash of light — then darkness — the sight perhaps permanently damaged.
‘I mean,’ said Mounce, ‘I'm not going to give you a lot of crap about being pure as the driven snow myself.
I'm not saying that.
All the same, there are limits.
There are some stinking limits.
I don't know whether you'd agree with me on that?’
‘Oh, yes,’ said Bob.
‘Yes.
Yes, indeed.’
Mounce swilled his whisky round moodily for some time, as if trying to think what to do next.
If he just suddenly hits me without warning, thought Bob, I shall almost certainly go straight over backwards with my feet still caught up in the bar-stool, and split my skull open on the floor.
‘Do you see much of Glenda while I'm away?’ asked Mounce.
‘No,’ said Bob eagerly.
‘Oh no.
Scarcely at all.’
‘You never drop in on her?’
‘Never!’
‘You never ask her in for a drink?’
‘No!’
Mounce frowned.
Oh God, thought Bob.
It's all just about to happen.
‘You are a rotten sod, Bob,’ said Mounce.
‘Honestly, Reg…’ began Bob, trying to get one foot down on the floor behind him.
‘No, you're a rotten sod, Bob.’
‘I assure you, Reg…’
‘You're a rotten, stinking sod.
You might just ask her in once in a while.
You know, hold her hand and cheer her up  a bit.
Keep her out of trouble.
Do you see what I mean?’
Bob took a long draught of whisky, spilling some of it down his chin.
‘I never thought of it that way,’ he said.
Dyson had expected to find the television studios a blaze of activity in the middle of the evening viewing hours, and humbly anticipated that he would himself be treated as a completely unimportant part of the machine-jostled indifferently in the corridors by actors, musicians, and cameramen, sighed at offensively in the studio by the technicians and professionals.
But when he stepped out of the Humber Snipe which had been sent to pick him up he found that the building was in darkness and apparently deserted.
The only light he could see was in the lobby, and the only person in the lobby was an anxious girl with a clipboard who was waiting to greet him personally, and who seemed personally grateful for his skill in getting himself found and driven there by the company's chauffeur.
She led him along deserted, echoing corridors; nothing was happening in the whole enormous building, he realized, but the tiny preparations for this one tiny programme.
All the rest.
of the evening's television was pre-filmed, pre-taped, or provided by other companies.
The preparations for The Human Angle , Dyson discovered, were going forward in a room on the first floor furnished with a sea-blue fitted carpet, a number of discreetly abstract paintings, and a walnut sideboard.
A dozen or so well-bred men in dark suits — some of them, noted Dyson with interest, wearing Brigade ties — were standing about drinking gin and smiling agreeably at each other 's jokes.
A selection of them pressed forward upon Dyson deferentially, introducing themselves, fetching him drinks and salted peanuts.
Like the girl with the clipboard, they  seemed consumed with gratitude and admiration for his skill in getting there.
‘You got here all right, then?’ they asked anxiously.
‘The driver found you all right?
You found your way upstairs without any difficulty?’
The only person in the room Dyson recognized was de Sousa, the producer, and he seemed to be the least important of them all.
There was a woman — presumably Miss Drax, the social worker, and a man with rather dark skin — clearly Williamson, the Trinidadian barrister.
Dyson never caught the names of any of the others, or found out what they did, apart from drinking the company's gin with a reassuring deftness.
Dyson assumed they were the company's directors, bankers, and financial advisers; they all had an air of unassuming integrity and human dignity which in Dyson's experience was acquired only by daily contact with very large sums of other people's money.
He liked them, he discovered.
He liked their deference and he liked their gin, and within ten minutes he was explaining to them exactly how the daily supply of crosswords in a newspaper was maintained.
They were fascinated.
‘Really ?’ they said.
‘How extraordinarily interesting!’
Dyson began to feel that everything was going to be all right.
His pockets were full of remarks to make, and a bottle of bismuth in case he got nervous indigestion.
He began to feel that he would not need either.
Lord Boddy arrived.
He was a large, slow-moving man with bushy grey eyebrows and dandruff on his shoulders.
‘I must tell you, Lord Boddy,’ said Dyson deferentially, ‘how very much I enjoyed that collection you did of your father's papers.
Of course, I'm a great admirer of all your books.’
‘Really ?’ said Lord Boddy, pushing up his eyebrows with no less deference in return.
‘It's very good of you to say so.
Most kind, most kind.’
Deference bred deference.
Lord Boddy, grasping his gin-and-tonic in his right hand and talking about the greatness of Asquith, put his left hand in his trouser pocket.
A moment later Dyson realized that all the men listening to Lord Boddy had their left hands in their trouser pockets, too.
His own left hand, he discovered, was in his trouser pocket.
He took it out hastily, lest Lord Boddy notice it and jump to the conclusion that Dyson was mimicking him, and transferred it to his jacket pocket.
At once Lord Boddy did the same, and one by one, as they listened and nodded, everyone else followed suit.
Embarrassed, now that he had noticed what was happening, Dyson removed his hand from his jacket pocket and slipped it inconspicuously behind his back.
Boddy, describing very slowly and emphatically how Asquith had died just before he could meet him, put his own hand through the same manoeuvre, and one by one all the other spare left hands disappeared behind their owners' backs, too.
Mutual deference could scarcely be carried farther.
And yet, when Norman Ward Westerman arrived, it was.
Dyson could imagine Lord Boddy and the executives gathered around him putting deference aside from time to time in order to get on with the gardening, or to discipline some delinquent guardsman.
But Norman Ward Westerman was deference made flesh.
When he bent that famous craggy face and strong jaw down from its natural elevation to the level of ordinary human beings it was not to advance any opinions or tell any anecdotes of his own.
It was purely to bring his ear reverentially into line with the mouth of whoever was speaking.
‘Exactly,’ he murmured.
‘Exactly .’
And Dyson knew from the depth of humility and reverence in his inflection that he was getting a larger fee than even Lord Boddy.
Dyson felt awed by him.
He felt awed by Lord Boddy, for that matter, and by the company  in general.
He felt awed by himself.
They were all gods, gathered in godly discourse.
They moved into the next room and sat down to dinner.
White-jacketed waiters tiptoed reverently around them, pouring hock with the frozen scampi, a claret with a fruity, full-bodied label to go with the reheated roast lamb.
‘Thank you,’ murmured Dyson with heartfelt respect to a waiter at his elbow.
‘Thank you, sir,’ said the waiter.
‘Thank you,’ said Dyson.
‘Or take Baldwin,’ Norman Ward Westerman was saying to Lord Boddy.
‘I find him…an enigmatic figure.
Would you think that was a fair assessment, Frank?’
‘Oh, indeed.
Indeed, indeed, indeed.
I think that's a very fair assessment of him.
It's rather interesting you should mention Baldwin, as a matter of fact, because I never met him.’
‘Didn't you?
That's extraordinarily interesting.’
‘No, I never met Baldwin.’
‘You interest me, Frank, because I didn't know that at all.’
One of the financial figures was leaning deferentially across the table towards Williamson.
‘You don't happen to know a man called Firmead, do you?’ he said.
‘Firmead?’ said Williamson deferentially.
‘Curiously enough I don't believe I do.’
‘David Firmead, to be precise.’
‘Curiously enough I don't believe I've ever met him.’
‘He was in Trinidad for some time last year.
Something to do with oil, I think.’
‘Really ?
How very interesting.’
‘I just thought you might have run across him.
awfully nice man.
We were at school together.’
‘Really?
That is most interesting.’
‘Married a terribly nice girl.
Lives near Guildford.’
‘How extraordinarily interesting.’
The financial figure turned his head slightly to include Miss Drax in the conversation.
‘You don't know him, do you, by any chance?’ he asked.
‘A man called Firmead, David Firmead?’
‘As a matter of fact,’ said Miss Drax, ‘I don't think I can honestly say I do.’
‘Awfully nice man,’ said the financial figure.
Dyson felt he had grasped enough of the general principles of the conversation between Boddy and Westerman to risk joining in himself.
‘I find Halifax a curiously intriguing figure,’ he said when there was a pause.
‘I don't know whether you'd agree?’
Westerman swung round in his chair to give Dyson his full attention.
‘I think that is an awfully good point,’ he said.
‘Halifax is a figure who intrigues me, too.
Do you find Halifax at all intriguing, Frank?
Or do you feel that there's nothing really interesting about him?’
‘No, I think as Mr. Dyson says, Halifax is an extraordinarily intriguing figure.
Most extraordinarily intriguing.
But do you know, Norman, in all the years that Halifax held office I never met him once.’
‘Really ?’ said Westerman.
‘That is absolutely fascinating.’
‘Not once.’
‘That is most incredibly interesting,’ said Dyson.
The meal went by like a dream.
Dyson felt as though that small room, surrounded by the dark emptiness of the studios, was the one speck of warmth and life in an unpeopled universe.
Of course, there were other subsidiary settlements if one stopped to think.
Somewhere in the building was a room where a hired chef was unfreezing the scampi, reheating the meat, and opening the giant economy  can of fruit salad.
Somewhere there was a studio with five black leather armchairs waiting.
But the real richness of life was concentrated here — brilliant conversation, warm mutual esteem, a man who had not known Baldwin or Halifax, and good claret warmed by discreet waiters on some radiator well out of sight.
This, realized Dyson with a sense of homecoming, was where he belonged; this was the way of life for which his character and education had fitted him.
‘Norman,’ said de Sousa as the coffee and brandy were being poured, I wonder if we ought perhaps to have just a tiny natter about the programme.’
‘I think that would be an awfully good idea, Jack,’ said Westerman.
He took some cyclostyled papers out of his pocket and looked at them.
‘Well, as I understand it, Jack — tell me if I'm wrong — we open with the credits on telecine.
Right?’
‘Right,’ said de Sousa, lighting a small cigar.
‘Then we come up on me in the studio.
I say, ‘Good evening.
The film you're about to see is the record of a remarkable experiment in blah blah blah…’’
‘All on Autocue.’
‘All on Autocue.
Then we have the film.
Then we come back to me in the studio and I say, ‘The film you have just seen was an attempt to blah blah blah.
Now we have here in the studio tonight four people who are vitally and personally concerned with the problems of living in a multiracial community.
On my right is Lord Boddy, who was a member of the Royal Commission on blah blah blah…’’
‘And you go right round the table.’
‘And I go right round the table.
Then I'll turn to you, Frank, and say, ‘Lord Boddy, what do you think of the experiment we have just seen?
Do you think it holds out a ray of hope among the problems which perplex us all so sorely today?’
‘I say blah blah blah,’ said Lord Boddy.
‘You say blah blah blah.
Then we all join in blah blah blah.
Then when I get the sign from the studio manager I wind up and say, ‘Well, then, the conclusions we seem to have reached tonight are blah blah blah.’
‘All on Autocue,’ said de Sousa.
‘All on Autocue.
I think that's all fairly well tied up, isn't it, Jack?’
‘I think so.
Is everybody happy?’
‘Indeed, indeed, indeed,’ said Dyson.
‘I don't think I've ever enjoyed myself so much in my life.’
They trooped down to the studio for the line-up, taking their glasses of brandy with them.
A little of the festive warmth seemed to die out of the air as they took their places around the low coffee table in the corner of the great hangar.
Williamson kept clearing his throat.
Miss Drax smiled unhappily about her.
Even Boddy, who had been telling Westerman as they came down the stairs how he had been at Bad Godesberg in 1938 just two days after Hitler and Chamberlain had left, trailed away into silence.
Only Dyson lost none of his elation.
When the studio manager asked him to say something to check the microphone levels, he recited the first few lines of The Wreck of the Deutschland with appropriate gestures.
It seemed to amuse the studio crew.
Really, he thought, this was his evening.
By the time they had been to make-up, and tramped back up the stairs to have another drink, a definite uneasiness was beginning to settle over the whole company.
The men with the Brigade ties and their friends were running out of potential mutual acquaintances to describe.
Miss Drax seemed to have caught the frog Williamson had had in his throat.
Williamson, coming back from his second trip to the lavatory, passed Boddy on the way out for his third.
Westerman, shuffling the cyclostyled papers about in his  hands, dropped his glass and filled his shoes with brandy.
Dyson watched them all with amazement.
He himself was greatly excited, but not nervous in the least.
‘The public just don't realize,’ said Williamson to him gloomily, ‘the terrific amount of work that goes into making one short half-hour of television.’
‘Work?’ said Dyson.
‘It's pure pleasure.
I've never enjoyed anything so much in all my life.
I'm absolutely bubbling over.
I simply can't wait to get on.’
‘Good God,’ said Williamson.
One of the financial figures, still smiling deferentially, poured them both more brandy.
‘I wonder if you could try and keep the bottle away from Lord Boddy,’ he said quietly.
‘I think perhaps he's had almost enough.’
How interesting it was, thought Dyson, how extraordinarily intriguing, to find that out of the whole team the only one who was actually turning up trumps was himself.
‘I think perhaps we might go down now,’ said de Sousa.
‘I shan't be able to watch,’ said Jannie, as the film sequence in the first half of John's programme unreeled meaninglessly in front of her.
‘Honestly, Bob, I shan't be able to watch.
I know something awful will happen.
Oh Bob, supposing he's had too much to drink?’
‘He'll be fine, Jannie,’ said Bob.
‘Stop fussing.’
Jannie gripped the arms of her chair, trying to stop herself jumping out of it.
‘What on earth's this stuff they're showing us now?’ she demanded irritably.
‘It's the film they're going to discuss.’
‘Oh God, I know he's going to make a fool of himself.
I know it, I know it, I know it!’
When the film ended, and the face of the chairman appeared again, she put her hand over her eyes, unable to watch the screen.
The chairman was introducing Lord  Boddy.
She had a vision of John sitting hunched up in his chair, as he did at home sometimes when things were going wrong, all dark and gaunt and unhappy.
Oh, poor John!
Poor John!
But where was he?
The chairman had been introducing people for an eternity, and still no sign of him.
Perhaps he was ill.
She imagined him standing in some white-tiled institutional lavatory, suffering from nervous nausea.
Had he taken the bismuth with him?
But better for him to be in a lavatory somewhere than for him to be sick on the programme!
Please God he wouldn't be sick on the programme!
Of course, they would turn the cameras…
‘And on her left,’ said the chairman, ‘is Mr. John Dyson, a journalist and broadcaster who lives…’
And there he was!
Involuntarily she reached out and gripped Bob's hand.
And what in the name of God was John up to?
He was smiling and waving!
‘What's he doing?’ she cried, agonized, as the picture cut back to the chairman.
‘It's not that sort of programme!’
‘I don't know whether you noticed,’ said Bob, ‘but he was smoking.’
‘Smoking?’
‘Didn't you see?
He had a cigarette between his fingers.’
‘Don't be crazy, Bob.
John hasn't smoked since he was an undergraduate.’
‘Well, he's smoking now, Jannie.’
‘Oh God!’ said Jannie, holding Bob's hand very tight.
‘I shan't be able to watch, Bob!’
‘You're all right now, Jan.
Lord Boddy's set for the night.’
But someone was saying something at the same time as Lord Boddy, making him falter and finally stop in midstride.
The cameras hunted round the team, trying to locate the intruder.
They were all smoking, observed Jannie, but John, as she saw when the camera finally settled on him, was smoking more than most.
He was smoking and talking simultaneously, taking little melodramatic puffs between phrases.
‘If I might butt in here,’ he was saying (puff).
‘If I might possibly butt in a moment…
(Puff, puff) I should just like to say that I find what Lord Boddy is saying extraordinarily interesting.
Extraordinarily interesting.’
He took another energetic puff, and blew out a dense cloud of smoke at the camera as Lord Boddy resumed his discourse.
‘Oh God,’ said Jannie.
‘Sh!’ said Bob.
Dyson was back in the conversation again.
‘That is fascinating,’ he was saying.
‘Most fascinating.
I find that absolutely fascinating.’
Jannie squeezed Bob's hand so hard that he flinched.
‘Poor John!’ she said.
When Miss Drax's turn to speak came, Dyson was fascinated by her thesis, too.
‘Indeed!’ he kept murmuring.
‘Indeed, indeed!
‘Why is he behaving like this?’ cried Jannie.
‘Why is he smoking, and waving his arms about in that awful way?’
‘He waves his arms about at the office sometimes,’ said Bob.
‘I don't object to that.’
‘But why does he keep saying things like ‘extraordinarily interesting’ and ‘indeed, indeed’?
I've never heard him say anything like that before.’
‘I've never heard him say ‘indeed, indeed,’ I must admit.’
Williamson was talking.
Dyson turned out to be extraordinarily interested in his views, as well.
‘Indeed,’ he murmured.
‘Indeed…indeed…
Oh God, indeed!’
Jannie sank down into her chair, trying to work out who would be watching the programme.
All John's family, of course.
All her family.
Her parents had invited the neighbours  in to see it, too.
Her friend Belinda Charles — she'd rung up to say she'd seen John's name in an article about the programme in the paper.
Out of nowhere the idea came to her that Lionel Marcus might be watching.
Please God, not Lionel Marcus!
‘John Dyson,’ the chairman was saying, ‘do you, as a journalist, agree with the suggestion that what we need is for the press to take a firm moral lead and play down all news to do with race relations?’
Dyson did not answer at once.
He frowned, then leaned forward and stubbed out his cigarette thoughtfully in the ash-tray.
‘He's got a sense of timing, anyway,’ said Bob.
‘I can't bear it,’ said Jannie.
Dyson sat back and put his finger-tips together, as if about to deliver his verdict.
But at the last moment he changed his mind, and instead leaned forward again and took another cigarette out of the box on the table.
‘Oh God, Bob!’ said Jannie.
Dyson picked up the table-lighter, and with an absolutely steady hand lit the cigarette.
Then he snapped the top of the lighter down, drew in a mouthful of smoke, and let it out again slowly and meditatively.
‘I think it's an extraordinarily interesting idea,’ he said.
Jannie put her spare hand over her eyes as if shielding them from the sun, and closed out the sight of her husband.
‘You're exaggerating, Jannie,’ said Bob.
Later he said: ‘People who don't know him wouldn't get the same impression at all.’
Later still he said: ‘Honestly, Jannie, nobody watches this sort of programme apart from the relatives of the performers.’
It seemed to Jannie that the noise of John blowing cigarette smoke out almost drowned the conversation.
She kept  her hand over her eyes until at last Westerman halted the discussion and summed up.
He paused before saying good night, and a voice from off-screen cut in at once.
‘That is absolutely fascinating, Norman,’ it said.
Jannie put her head on Bob's shoulder and wept.
Dyson walked up and down the bedroom in his overcoat, making large gestures, and trailing in his wake the cosy smell of digested alcohol.
Jannie lay in bed, looking at him over the edge of the covers.
It was after midnight.
‘Honestly, Jannie,’ said Dyson excitedly, ‘I astonished myself!
I simply didn't know I had it in me!
How did it look?’
‘Very good, John.’
‘Really?
You're not just saying that?’
‘No, John.’
‘I actually enjoyed it, Jannie, that was the thing.
I was amazed!
The others were all shaking with nerves!
Even hardened television performers like Norman and Frank.
But honestly, I could have gone on all night.
I didn't use my notes at all.’
‘I thought you didn't.’
‘Didn't touch them — didn't even think about them.
I was absolutely in my element!
How did I come over, Jannie?’
‘I told you — very well.’
‘I didn't cut in and argue too much?’
‘I don't think so.’
‘I thought perhaps I was overdoing the controversy a bit?’
‘No, no.’
Dyson stopped and gazed at Jannie seriously.
‘I feel I've at last found what I really want to do in life, Jannie,’ he said.
‘It's so much more alive and vital than journalism.
Honestly, Jannie, I'm so exhilarated!’
He began to stride up and down the room again, smiling at himself.
He glanced in the mirror as he passed it and straightened his glasses.
‘What did Bob think?’ he asked.
‘Did he think I was all right?’
‘He thought you were fine.’
Dyson stopped again, smiling reflectively.
‘Frank Boddy is an absolute poppet,’ he said warmly.
‘He really is.
Oh, Jannie, I adore television!
I can't tell you!
You really think I looked all right?’
Later, as he was crawling about the floor in his underclothes, looking under the bed for his slippers, Jannie asked, ‘Why were you smoking, John?’
He straightened up and gazed anxiously over the end of the bed at her.
‘You thought it looked odd?’ he said.
‘No, no.’
‘You don't think it seemed rather mannered?’
‘Of course not, John.
I just wondered how you came to think of it.’
Dyson smiled with pleasure as he remembered.
‘It was sheer inspiration on the spur of the moment,’ he said.
‘I just saw the box of cigarettes lying there on the table, and everybody else smoking, and I just knew inside me with absolute certainty that I should smoke, too.
I think it absolutely made my performance.’
He fell asleep almost as soon as the light was out, and woke up again about an hour later, his mouth parching, his whole being troubled with a great sense of unease.
What was occupying his mind, as vividly as if it were even now taking place, was the moment when he had said, ‘That is absolutely fascinating, Norman,’ and then realized it was supposed to be the end of the programme.
Had he really done that?
How terrible.
How absolutely terrible.
He sat up and drank some water.
Still, one little slip in an otherwise faultless performance…
Then with great clarity and anguish he remembered the moment when Westerman had put his question about a moral lead from the press, and instead of answering at once the idea had come to him of leaning forward and judiciously stubbing out his cigarette.
It had been scarcely a quarter smoked!
He lay down in bed again slowly and unhappily.
All the same, when he had finished stubbing the cigarette out he had given a very shrewd and pertinent answer…
No, he hadn't!
He'd taken another cigarette!
In absolute silence, in full view of the whole population of Britain,.
he had stubbed out a quarter-smoked cigarette and lit a fresh one!
He turned on to his right side, then he turned on to his left, wracked with the shamefulness of the memory.
It was strange; everything he had done on the programme had seemed at the time to be imbued with an exact sense of logic and purposiveness, but now that he looked back on it, all the logical connections had disappeared, like secret writing when the special lamp is taken away.
And what about the time he had interrupted Lord Boddy, and then realized that all he had wanted to say was that it was interesting?
Extraordinarily interesting…
Had he really said that?
He himself?
The occupant of the tense body now lying obscurely and privately in the dark bedroom of a crumbling Victorian house in Spadina Road, s.w.23?
Was that slightly pooped gentleman with the waving arms who had (oh God!) told Lord Boddy that his views were absolutely fascinating, and (oh God oh God!) lit another of the television company's cigarettes with their silver butane table-lighter every time he had seen the red light come up on the camera pointing at him — was that  exuberantly shameful figure really identical with the anguished mortal man who now lay here stretched as taut as a piano-string in the dark?
‘Jannie,’ he groaned.
‘Are you awake, Jannie?’
There was no reply.
He turned on to his right side.
He turned back on to his left.
He hurled himself on to his face.
Still, Westerman and Boddy and Williamson and Miss Drax sat around in conversation with him.
He went through his whole performance second by second, from the moment Westerman had introduced him and he had waved at the camera , to the moment Westerman had summed up, and he had told him it was absolutely fascinating .
He went through it again and again, trying to improve it slightly in his memory, in the face of an increasingly hostile reception from the other four.
By the time morning came he was convinced he had been wide awake the whole night, though by that time he had remembered with the utmost clarity that the whole performance had taken place not in a television studio at all but in an enormous public lavatory, with Sir William and Lady Paice among the large crowd around the coffee table, and that his final humiliation was to discover at the end of the programme that he had been sitting on one of the lavatory seats throughout, with his trousers down around his ankles.
6
Raindrops trembled on the office windows, coalesced, and ran down, leaving paths like silver snail tracks against the lightness of the sky.
Dyson watched them absently, grimacing as he bit each of the finger-nails on his right hand trim in turn.
Bob sat sucking toffees, and watching Dyson from behind his hand.
Old Eddy Moulton, who was awake and in an unusually forthcoming mood, looked at Dyson and Bob alternately as he talked.
‘I knew Stanford Roberts,’ he said.
‘But then I knew most of them.
Walter Belling, Stanley Furle, Sir Redvers Tilley — you name them, I knew them.
Stanley Furle carried a cane with a solid gold knob — never went anywhere without it.
The knob unscrewed and the inside of the cane was hollow.
Stanley used to keep it filled with Scotch — three solid feet of Johnnie Walker.
One night he was at the old Blackfriars Ring.
At the end of every round off came the gold knob and up went the stick.
He was with a man called Naylor — not Freddie Naylor of the Mail , but Allington Naylor, who later worked for A. W. Simpson on the Morning Post .
A. W. Simpson was one of the great ones.
So was Allington Naylor.
So was Stanford Roberts, for that  matter.
Real journalists.
Real professionals.
Stanford could turn you out an impeccable paragraph on any subject you liked to name at the drop of a hat.
He'd have done a par about the lead in his pencil if you'd asked him — a stick and a half — a column — whatever you needed; and all of it full of wit and erudition.’
Dyson went on staring at the raindrops, saying nothing.
‘Honestly, John,’ said Bob, ‘you were great.
I don't know what you're worrying about.’
Dyson gave no sign that he had heard.
‘Anyway,’ said old Eddy Moulton, ‘when Stanley Furle came out of the Ring at the end of the evening, he fell down the stairs and blacked his eye on the knob of his cane!
I was in the Kings and Keys the night J. D. Maconochie told Bentham Miller that 0.
M. Pargetter's Tibetan Terror story was a hoax.
Oswald hadn't been nearer Tibet than the end of Folkestone pier!
I was in the Feathers the night Sandy MacAllister punched Laurence Uden on the nose for saying that Stanford Roberts had been drunk at poor old Sidney Cunningham's funeral.’
‘Come on, John,’ said Bob.
‘Cheer up.’
‘In fact,’ said old Eddy Moulton, ‘Stanford was drunk at Sidney Cunningham's funeral.
I met R. D. Case afterwards — he was on the Westminster Gazette at that time — and he told me that Stanford was so drunk that he'd almost fallen into the gravel Apparently he'd just been caught in time by George Watson-Forbes, who later wrote a remarkable series of articles in the Daily News on the Home Rule question.’
Dyson stirred himself, and sighed.
‘Would somebody ring Morley, Bob,’ he said, scarcely opening his mouth to let the words out, ‘and ask him where his copy is?
I can't face talking to him today.’
‘Now don't be silly, John,’ said Bob.
‘Jannie and I both thought you were tremendously good.’
‘The last job I went on with Sidney Cunningham,’ said old Eddy Moulton, ‘was an explosion in a gas-main at Newark, which killed thirteen people.
I travelled up from Kings Cross with Sidney, Daryl Bligh of the Graphic , K. B. D. Clarke of the Times , ‘Tibby’ Tisdale of the News , Stanford Roberts, of course, and I think we had Norton Malley with us, who would at that time I suppose have been on the Morning Post , though he later went back to the Irish Times .
Anyway, the day after we all arrived in Newark, Tibby announced that it was his birthday, and Stanford had the idea of hiring a private dining-room at the Ram…’
Dyson suddenly turned on old Eddy Moulton, silencing him with the sourness of his expression.
‘You never went on a gas-main explosion in Newark Eddy,’ he said irritably.
‘You're getting mixed up with one of your ‘In Years Gone By’ columns.’
Old Eddy Moulton stared at Dyson, his mouth slightly open.
‘You did a fifty-years-ago about a gas-main explosion in Newark the week before last,’ said Dyson.
‘Don't you remember?’
‘I went to Newark on the story, too,’ said old Eddy Moulton.
‘You're getting mixed up, Eddy.’
‘That was my own story I put in the column,’ said old Eddy Moulton stubbornly.
‘Oh, for God's sake, Eddy!’ snapped Dyson.
He jumped to his feet and walked quickly out of the room, slamming the door behind him.
Old Eddy Moulton looked at Bob, who looked away.
‘I was only trying to cheer him up,’ said old Eddy Moulton.
The rain had almost stopped, but various projections over the pavement in Fleet Street dripped on Dyson as he passed, wetting the lenses of his spectacles and making it difficult for him to see where he was going.
He had decided to show himself to the crowd, and take the plunge into the humiliation that was awaiting him.
He walked with self-conscious haste up the south side of the street towards Temple Bar, staring into the face of everyone coming the opposite way, challenging them to give any sign of their pity and contempt.
It was difficult to know whether they recognized him or not.
Every time he removed his glasses to wipe the rain off them he could see that everyone was taking advantage of his short-sightedness to stare at him and grin and point.
But as soon as he got his glasses back on again, they had all smoothed the hazy, unfocussed grins off their faces and seemed intent on their own affairs.
Several times he swung round suddenly to see if people were turning to stare at him from behind.
They seemed not to be, but it was difficult to be sure that they had not simply managed to turn away again in time.
Outside the Lord's Day Observance Society he caught the eye of a tall girl with a red face, who looked quickly away.
He jerked his own head away almost as fast, galvanized by the shock of embarrassment.
That had been recognition, all right!
That had been a pointed enough comment, by God!
Or had she thought he was staring at her ?
He stopped, confused, by the bus stop opposite the Protestant Truth Society, and gazed unseeingly at the list of routes.
Suddenly he realized that everyone in the queue was staring at him with frank interest and uninhibited hostility.
This was it, then!
They hated him!
He had tried to rise above them, and had fallen back among them, there to be hated once for his attempt, and twice for his failure!
He hurried away, his heart beating fast, shocked but obscurely satisfied by this revelation.
He was across the road and halfway back down Fleet Street before it occurred to him that they had been staring at him like that because they thought he was trying to push in at the head of the queue.
He went into an espresso bar and drank some coffee.
No one turned round to look at him.
He was a failure, certainly.
Failure, it occurred to him, was the secular equivalent of sin.
Modern secular man was born into a world whose moral framework was composed not of laws and duties but of tests and comparisons.
There were no absolute outside standards, so standards had to generate themselves from within, relativistically.
One's natural sense of inadequacy could be kept at bay only by pious acts of repeated successfulness.
And failure was more terrifying than sin.
Sin could be repented of by an act of volition; failure could not be disposed of so easily.
Sin could be avoided by everyone, if he chose, but failure could not.
For there to be any who succeeded, there had to be some who failed; there was no better without worse.
The worse had their function.
Without himself, thought Dyson, or at any rate the possibility of himself, Norman Ward Westerman would be unadmired, unloved, and unrewarded.
‘Seen you somewhere before, haven't I, squire?’ said a weary young man in a coffee-stained white jacket who was clearing the tables, without any great interest.
‘Possibly,’ said Dyson, feeling himself flushing at once with apprehension and pleasure.
The young man sank slowly into the seat opposite him, and got out a cigarette.
‘Yes, I seen you somewhere all right,’ he said.
‘Not in here.’
‘No, I haven't been in here before.’
‘Where was it, then, captain?
Up the Oasis, was it?’
‘No, I don't think so.’
‘Down the club, was it?’
Dyson discovered that he wanted the young man to know where it was more than he wanted him not to know.
‘I do a certain amount of television,’ he said offhandedly, with a slight disclaiming smile.
The young man went on staring at him; the idea that he had seen Dyson on television seemed to be too far-fetched even to penetrate his consciousness.
‘No, I seen you somewhere, captain,’ he said.
Dyson's slight disclaiming smile vanished.
‘Yes,’ he said rather irritably.
‘On television .’
The young man rose slowly to his feet, and took Dyson's empty coffee-cup back to the counter.
He gazed mournfully out of the window into Fleet Street for some minutes.
‘Up the Streatham ice-rink, was it?’ he suggested.
Not to have achieved recognition as a failure, felt Dyson, was almost worse than the failing itself.
It made him feel that he had failed even at failing.
When Dyson got back to the office old Eddy Moulton had subsided into sleep again.
‘Thank God,’ muttered Dyson to Bob intensely.
‘I don't think I could have stood any more of that this morning.’
He sat down and plunged himself into his work.
The item uppermost on his desk was a note in his own handwriting which said: ‘Straker hol — chck Daw 1st 2 pts Pellings chchiness.’
What the hell was that supposed to mean?
He looked up, frowning, and saw that Bob was gazing at him apprehensively.
‘I've been walking up and down Fleet Street, if you want to know,’ he said, ‘to see whether I could still show my face in public.
Did somebody get some copy out of Morley?’
‘It's promised for tomorrow,’ said Bob.
‘I'm sick of Morley.
He's not a real professional.’
‘He's a canon, John.’
‘He's a stupid little prick.
I'm not going to use him any more.
That's final.’
He scrabbled angrily among the papers and galleys on his desk until he found the copy pad, and wrote on it: ‘Morley stpd lttle prck.
Rmmbr n to use.’
Where had he been, when Bob had interrupted him?
Oh, yes, looking at this note about Straker.
‘Pellings chchiness’?
What in the name of God could that be?
Well, he hadn't time to mess around unriddling Pellings tomfooleries.
He screwed the note up and threw it in the general direction of the wastepaper basket.
Bob was still looking at him.
‘How about a bite of lunch, John?’
Bob asked anxiously.
‘I don't want any bloody lunch,’ said Dyson, thinking of the usual crowd standing round in the Gates.
It didn't matter if you made a fool of yourself in front of strangers — he saw that now.
It probably didn't matter much if you did it in front of your friends.
The shameful thing was doing it in front of strangers, and being seen by your friends in the process.
He turned to the next item on his desk, a note on top of a copy-pad which said: ‘Morley stpd lttle prck.
Rmmbr n to use.’
What drivel was this?
He tore it off and threw it at the wastepaper basket.
The next thing was a memorandum from Bill Waddy, the News Editor, which said: ‘Your department's turn, I think.’
Clipped to the back was a letter headed ‘Magic Carpet Travel Limited.
Specialist consultants in all forms of travel management.’
‘Dear Sir,’ said the letter.
‘Magic Carpet Travel announce with pride the opening of an entirely new sunshine holiday area — the Trucial Riviera.
The exotic shores of Trucial Oman, washed by the warm sparkling waters of the Persian Gulf, and rich in all the Arabian Nights  romance of the Middle East, offer something unique in holiday experience to the get-away-from-it-all holidaymaker…
‘To celebrate this remarkable new breakthrough in British holiday technology, we are inviting the press to join us on a special round trip to Sharjah, the Pearl of the Trucial Riviera, next month…’
Whose turn was it for a facilities trip?
Bob had had the Bulgarian State Non-Ferrous Metals Trust jamboree the previous month, and he'd had the Cosmosair inaugural to Saarbrucken himself.
It was old Eddy's turn.
‘Eddy,’ he said, ‘would you like a little jaunt to Trucial Oman?
Eddy?’
No reply.
Well, to hell with him.
If he chose to be asleep when the lollipops were handed round, that was his lookout.
Dyson couldn't be expected to wet-nurse his staff — he'd far too much on his hands already.
In fact, he'd do the trip himself.
He desperately needed a holiday.
The Saarbrucken trip had been a disaster; it had rained continuously.
In fact, it had just added to his burdens.
He was ill with overwork.
He really was.
He was suffering from insomnia and hypertension.
And now his tlvsn apprnce (his mind sheered off identifying it more fully even to himself) had finally set the seal on it all.
His health was breaking down.
‘I couldn't eat any lunch if you paid me,’ he said.
‘We could go to the Mucky Duck for a change,’ said Bob.
Dyson sat hypertensely clenching and unclenching his fingers, trying to think of a headline with no more than ten characters for a piece about the dangers of the exaggeratedly indifferentist liturgical tendencies inherent in ecumenicalism.
He could remember a time when he had fallen asleep as soon as his head touched the pillow, and when he had always had a healthy appetite.
By half-past twelve each  day he had had a hunger pain.
He had a pain in his stomach now, ironically enough, which felt almost exactly like a hunger pain.
He knew what it was.
It was the irritation of overstrained nerves.
The stomach acid, with no food to work on, was quietly starting to digest and ulcerate the stomach lining.
‘Perhaps I ought to try and eat something,’ he said; ‘to give the stomach acid something to work on.’
He jumped up hypertensely.
‘The Mucky Duck?’ said Bob, getting to his feet too.
Dyson shook his head impatiently.
‘The Gates, the Gates, the Gates,’ he said.
‘Let's get it over with.’
But no one in the Gates had seen him.
‘I didn't know you were on, John,’ said Ralph Absalom.
‘I didn't know he was on.
Did you, Lucy?’
‘I knew he was on,’ said Gareth Holmroyd.
‘But I thought he said it was tonight.’
‘Anyway,’ said Mike Sparrow finally, ‘how did it go, John?’
‘Terrible,’ said Dyson.
‘He was very good,’ said Bill Waddy, arriving with more drinks for people.
‘He was very good indeed.’
‘You saw him, did you, Bill?’ said Andy Royle.
‘No, I missed him, unfortunately,’ said Bill Waddy.
‘Old Harry Stearns told me.’
‘John was very good,’ said Bob, who had told old Harry Stearns that he was very good in the first place.
‘You saw him, did you, Bob?’ said Ted Hurwitz.
‘Yes.
He was very good.’
‘Yes,’ said Bill Waddy, ‘old Harry Stearns said he was very good.’
‘Yes, he was,’ said Bob.
‘Very good.’
‘I was terrible,’ said Dyson.
‘You were very good, John,’ said Bill Waddy.
‘Old Harry Stearns told me.’
‘Good for you, John,’ said Pat Selig.
‘What was the programme about?’ asked Gareth Holmroyd.
‘The colour problem,’ said Dyson.
‘Well, anyway,’ said Gareth Holmroyd, ‘I'm glad you made a good job of it.’
It rained on and off most of the afternoon.
Dyson sat back in his chair watching it, yawning, his hands behind his head.
He was in a rather more agreeable mood.
Jannie, Bob, old Harry Stearns, Bill Waddy, Gareth Holmroyd — they could scarcely all be wrong.
In fact, if one tried to think about it objectively, they were likely to have been able to make a more accurate assessment of his performance than he could himself.
One couldn't help being over-critical of one's own performance.
One knew just how much labour and effort had gone into it.
One knew exactly where there had been difficulties and compromises behind the scenes.
But Jannie and Bob and old Harry Stearns and Bill Waddy and Gareth Holmroyd saw only what was put before them, which was in fact all that counted.
And of course he had been extremely relaxed and natural, he could see that.
He had been very fluent and articulate.
‘Do you believe in success and failure, Bob?’ he asked, yawning.
‘I suppose so,’ said Bob, not looking up from his work.
‘Do you think competitiveness is just an aspect of the society we live in, Bob?’ said Dyson.
‘Or do you think it's absolutely endemic in man?’
‘I don't know, John.’
Dyson yawned.
‘I think I'm really competitive by nature,’ he said.
‘I have a tremendous fundamental urge to get out  and make my way in the world.
Do you feel that, Bob?’
‘No.’
‘Well, of course, you're a writer.
It's different for you.
I'm merely an administrator, an organizer.
It's natural for me to be more aggressive and pushing.
I make no apology for it.’
He yawned again, uncontrollably.
‘God, I'm really going to make a resolution about no beer for lunch,’ he said.
One fought and struggled, he thought.
Sometimes one had terrible doubts about how one was doing.
But one tried to put a good face on it and keep them to oneself.
One could not afford to admit to weaknesses, the competition was so ruthless.
Once one had slipped, no helping hands would be extended.
Well, he liked it like that.
He welcomed it.
And what happened if you failed to make the grade?
You ended up like poor old Eddy Moulton, put out to pasture in some quiet department where nobody bothered to talk to you, doing small unworthy chores and dozing the day away.
Dyson looked at old Eddy, head down behind the dusty newspaper files, nothing visible of him but his tousled white hair.
Who knew now, or cared, what old Eddy had done in his prime?
What stories he had beaten the great Stanford Roberts on, or even whether Stanford Roberts had been great after all?
Well, thought Dyson suddenly,he cared.
Old Eddy meant something to him .
He would take him to the Gates that evening and get him talking.
He would ask him about Stanford Roberts.
About Walter Cunningham and Sidney Naylor.
Just get him talking, and then listen, really listen, while old Eddy disinterred one man's life from the dust of time, and put it together again before his eyes.
There was something about old Eddy's appearance which had been worrying Dyson subconsciously for some minutes, and he suddenly realized what it was.
‘Eddy,’ he said sharply, leaning forwards and bringing the front legs of his chair down onto the floor with a crash, so that Bob looked up startled.
‘Eddy!’ said Dyson, scrambling to his feet and going across to Eddy's desk.
‘Eddy !’
He hesitated, frightened of making an embarrassing mistake, then felt the wrinkled white hand lying on Eddy's desk top.
‘Fetch someone, Bob!’ said Dyson.
‘I think Eddy's ill!’
From the scared tone of Dyson's voice, Bob knew that what he meant was that he thought Eddy was dead.
People kept phoning up, after the body had been removed, and Dyson and Bob were rushing to catch up and finish preparing the copy that had to be set overnight.
‘I hear you were on the box last night,’ said small, cheerful voices in Dyson's ear.
‘I'm told you were rather good.’
‘Very kind of you to say so,’ Dyson would reply, not knowing what else to do, but turning his back for shame on Bob and poor old Eddy's empty desk.
‘I'm glad your wife enjoyed it…
Yes, I enjoyed doing it…
Well, I thought it went off quite well, but one never knows with these things…’
Events were devoured by events, thought Dyson, states of affairs were overtaken by states of affairs…
He cut five lines from the Country Day by Day proof, then restored them, realizing that he had misread the layout sheet.
He felt very shaky.
How long had Eddy been dead before they noticed him?
Already the phone was ringing again.
‘Hello, David…
Yes, I wanted to talk to you about your Country copy.
You've written, ‘I saw a pair of golden plover…
’ What?
Oh, it's very kind of you to say so…
Well, I thought it didn't go off too badly…’
They went to the Gates afterwards to have a glass of whisky.
It was late; they were both very tired and shaken.
And Dyson felt that something ought to be said.
But what?
They sat in the private bar at the Gates looking down into their glasses, trying to think what it should be.
Dyson tried over inside his head: ‘It's funny to think that only this morning poor old Eddy was talking about Stanley Cunningham's funeral…
’‘It's funny to think that only this morning we were trying to persuade poor old Eddy to go off and enjoy himself on a facilities trip to the Persian Gulf…
’‘It's funny to think that just this afternoon I had the idea of getting poor old Eddy to come over to the Gates and tell me something about himself…
’ But the funniest thing of all, really, was that until just a few hours ago Eddy had been, and now he was not.
That, thought Dyson, really was the funniest thing about death; that's what really took some getting used to.
He looked up and caught Bob's eye.
‘God strikes again,’ said Bob thoughtfully.
7
Tessa got out of the train at Paddington already painfully sensitive to the erotic implications of the city.
Between Newbury and Reading a middle-aged man had pressed his knee against hers, and she had had to change compartments, doing her best to look unconcerned about it, as if she often heaved her suitcase down from the rack halfway between stations to try the view farther down the train.
In the corridor she had passed compartments full of young men playing cards, who looked up and appraised her face and figure with impersonal interest, and when she found another seat it was in a compartment with three other women travelling up to London on their own, all with suitcases and trim suits and carefully made-up faces.
The train hastened through the flat Thames Valley fields and flat Western suburbs with single-minded impatience; Tessa felt that everyone aboard, like herself, must be on the way to some metropolitan sexual encounter.
And Paddington had changed.
Whenever she had arrived before, with her mother, or on her way to stay with relatives and school friends, it had been full of innocent bustle presaging lunch at Marshall and Snelgroves and tea  at Fortnums.
Now its innocence had vanished, and it was thronged with worldly-wise urban people intent upon sophisticated urban undertakings.
It was half-past four.
Self-contained men in well-cut dark overcoats strode across the concourse with the air of being on their way from spending the afternoon in small Bayswater hotels with other men's wives.
Girls with white faces and heavily kohled eyes hurried out towards Praed Street, as if hastening to appointments with abortionists in seedy consulting-rooms behind the Edgeware Road.
The taxi-drivers waiting on the rank looked knowingly at the racing pages of evening papers folded into quarters, ready to suggest to uncertain fares the addresses of drinking clubs and prostitutes.
Tessa did not take a taxi.
She had been brought up to be thrifty and careful.
She did not take taxis if she could walk.
She did not throw clothes away if she could mend them or alter them to make them more fashionable.
She did not go up to London to see her lover without first drawing fifteen pounds out of her bank account, and thinking up a convincing story to tell her parents, and packing a good book to read on the train (it was U.S.A. by John dos Passos, and she had read four and a half pages of it before she had been interrupted by her neighbour's knee), and looking up her lover's address in the A to Z.
She walked briskly out of the station, and set off in the direction of Bayswater, stopping every hundred yards or so to put down her dark blue Revelation suitcase (a Christmas present from her parents) and change hands.
She did not like to stop and rest her arm for too long.
She was afraid that one of the men who hung around the London termini waiting for girls arriving from the provinces would come up and offer to carry the case for her.
She would not be taken in, of course; but it might be difficult to refuse politely.
She hated herself for being impressed and frightened by  London, but she was impressed and frightened all the same.
The long terraces of stuccoed houses — how self-sufficient and unattainable and urban they seemed!
The traffic was somehow specially London-like, too.
On and on it flowed past her, indifferent to her and her suitcase.
Ford Cortinas, Minis, Volkswagen vans, Rovers — they all looked strange in these grey London streets, navigating with an inscrutable sense of their own direction and destiny.
Even the grey, slightly misty afternoon light seemed impersonal and uniquely metropolitan.
And the most impressive and frightening and metropolitan thing of all about London was that it was where Bob lived.
At the thought of Bob, unpredictable and darkly smiling, her mouth went dry and her stomach felt liquid with impatience and nervousness.
She passed women with blonde hair and ski-caps, walking their dogs, and olive-skinned girls in belted raincoats, carrying portfolios or violin-cases.
She knew they were more attractive than her.
At every moment she caught sight of some slight figure with twinkling knees, slim golden calves, and massed, luxuriant hair.
She felt uneasy; she did not fit in here at all.
Her raincoat was not belted — her skirt was too long — her brown hair hung down her back with a pale blue kerchief tied over the top of it to keep it clean on the train.
It was all hopeless!
She felt like a peasant.
Well, of course, she could get her hair cut and buy new clothes.
But she was the wrong shape altogether.
She was tall and big-boned, with strong, thick legs, and big breasts that jounced up and down as she walked.
She didn't know what to do about her breasts.
If she strapped them up they stuck out like a shelf, and ached.
If she strapped them down to make herself look boyish they just stuck out a foot farther down, and ached.
And really her wrong shape was only a symptom.
She was the wrong sort of person, that was the basic trouble.
She was awkward, and naive, and thrifty, and ill-read, and genteel.
She had a great square face, with a large jaw, and cheeks that were permanently red.
She had no right to Bob.
She had no right to anyone , in a world so full of slight creatures with delicate bones and neat boyish faces.
She wasn't a girl at all, in any sense that the fashion magazines would recognize.
She was just a young female human being, fit only to be somebody's cousin or aunt.
It took her much longer to get to Leominster Gardens, where Bob lived, than she had expected.
Streets which had looked short on the map seemed endless when one had to walk them with a suitcase.
She lost her way; new fiats had been built across roads marked in the A to Z, and it was difficult to find anyone who had heard of Leominster Gardens.
The light became greyer and smokier.
Small corner shops shut as she approached them.
But when she did find the street, it seemed curiously familiar.
Bob had never described it to her; it just seemed right for him.
The cream stucco on the houses — the imposing pillared porches with their black-and-white tiled steps; she felt as if she had seen it all before in a dream.
Through the ground-floor window of one house she saw a room lined with dusty books.
A man with his back to her bent over a large table covered with papers, his silver hair catching the light from an overhead lamp.
She knew that if he turned round she would recognize his face.
At other windows she could see tables with folded paper napkins and nickel plated cruets.
They were small private hotels.
She knew exactly how the dining-rooms smelt inside, and how they would look at seven o'clock, when the weak lights in their brown parchment shades were turned on, and large, ungainly old men with sticks stumped to their tables.
As she drew near to number 86, her mouth went dry again, and her heart beat painfully.
She stopped and put  her case down for a moment to try and collect herself; her hands were trembling uncontrollably from the weight.
It was stupid to be like this.
It was silly to have come at all if she was going to feel so shaky and helpless.
Anyway, Bob probably wouldn't be home yet.
Her plan was really just to find the place, then go away and have tea somewhere while she waited for him.
She tucked stray wisps of hair back under her kerchief, then picked up her case and walked up the steps on to the porch.
‘Flat 4,’ it said on the board, ‘R. Bell.’
His name!
Somehow it was a terrible shock to see it.
Her cheeks were blazing red, she knew.
The bell-pushes on the board were all empty, so she tried the door and it opened.
Inside was a hall with a dingy maroon carpet, and a massive veneered dining-table covered with old election pamphlets, soap coupons, and handbills from firms purchasing second-hand jewellery.
She tiptoed up the stairs, wondering what she would say to anyone who saw her.
One of the stairs cracked sharply beneath her foot; she heard the front door of one of the ground-floor flats open behind her, and as she turned the corner of the staircase she caught a glimpse of a single eye and a draggle of grey hair at the crack.
There were no windows on the first-floor landing, and in the dark it was difficult to make out the numbers on the doors.
She crept about, grasping the suitcase, putting her eye very close to each of the two bell-pushes in turn.
Absurd anxieties fled across her mind.
Had she posted her letter telling Bob she was coming?
Had she put a stamp on it?
As she hesitated outside Bob's door she heard a muffled metallic thump from within, as of a saucepan being put down on a gas-stove, then the sound of a tap being turned on.
He was in!
She quickly rang the bell, not knowing what to think or to feel.
There was a silence, and then the sound  of quick, light steps coming towards the door.
He was running!
Oh, Bob, she thought.
Oh,Bob !
The door opened.
‘Oh, Bob!’ she said helplessly.
‘Come on in, darling,’ said the sharp little woman who was holding the door, screwing up her eyes shrewdly against the cigarette-smoke she was blowing out in order to speak.
‘I'm just making the great man's supper.
We can have a little heart-to-heart while we wait for him.’
‘Throw all those bedclothes off the chair and sit down, darling,’ said Mrs. Mounce, peeling potatoes at the sink.
‘I'm all right, thank you,’ said Tessa, standing with her hands behind her back, pretending she was examining Bob's pictures.
‘Lovey, he may not be back till eleven!
Go on, sit down.
I was airing his sheets, you see, darling.
They never get aired properly if I don't do it myself.
Go and pour yourself a drink, love — you look whacked.
Do you know where it is?
It's over on the bookcase.’
‘No, thank you.’
‘I'll make us some tea, then.’
Poor kid, thought Mrs. Mounce, she really did look whacked.
For a moment after she'd come in her face had gone all stiff, as if she were trying not to cry.
Bob was a stinker.
He could have been at home to meet her.
‘He could have been here,’ she said.
‘It wouldn't have killed him to be here for once.’
‘I expect he's busy.’
‘I expect he's boozing.’
Tessa looked disapproving.
‘Do you cook and clean for Mr. Bell?’ she asked.
‘Oh yes, darling!’ said Mrs. Mounce, turning her head  upwards and sideways, so the smoke from the cigarette in the corner of her mouth missed her eyes.
‘I'm just the skivvy round here!
Cook the din-dins, put the cat out, clear up the junk on the great man's desk, and hope my lord throws me a kind word from time to time.
That's me, sweetheart!’
And when he came in at eleven o'clock breathing beer and curry fumes, try to fight off his hot little hands.
Oh, she knew what was going through his head all right, and how careful she had to be not to say or do anything he might misinterpret.
And now she was expected to entertain his lady-friends until such time as he chose to remember they were there!
Well, she knew who this lady-friend was, anyway.
This was the famous Tessa, who wrote Bob twelve-page letters which he left lying around open on top of his desk.
This was the famous lady-friend who went round wearing Bob's letters down her blouse.
Frankly, she looked as if she'd got a few bundles of twelve-page letters stuffed up her woolly even now.
Either that or she'd got two woollies on.
Honestly, people talked about the kids today as though they were all Dior models, but they still had spots and puppy-fat just like kids always had, and always would have.
Poor kid, she looked so pathetic sitting there on the edge of the chair, all stiff and upright like some tragedy queen, thinking Woe is me, my precious Bob has fallen into the hands of this designing woman.
Well, making his room fit to live in was just possibly a better way to go about it than writing him twelve-page letters, as dearest Tessa might in time come to realize.
‘The water's almost boiling,’ she said.
‘Incidentally, I know what you're thinking, and I'm not.’
Tessa's face went red all over, from neck to temples.
‘I wasn't…’ she said.
‘I didn't…’
‘I'm just a good fairy, darling.
That's all.
I live downstairs, you see.
I just pop up from time to time to see if Bob's all right.’
‘Well, of course…that's very kind of you.’
‘Just keeping him in good condition for you, darling.’
‘Thank you.’
Poor kid — she was out of her depth.
‘Did you manage to get anything to eat on the way?’
’ I had a sandwich at Taunton.’
‘Sweetest !
You must be fam ished!
We'll get Bob's old birthday cake out!
Though I must admit, I only have a bite at lunchtime myself.
I have to think of my figure.’
‘Your figure's very pretty,’ said Tessa politely.
‘Do you think so?’ said Mrs. Mounce.
She swivelled round on her heel, and struck a pose with her left hip thrown sideways, and her cigarette hand extended in a rather classical way She could have been a model, people always said so.
She could have been a dancer if she'd taken lessons.
‘Like a model,’ said Tessa.
‘Perhaps you are one?’
‘I could have been.
But you know how it is, with one thing and another.
Of course, I have to keep slim for my hubby.
He'd go mad if I started putting on weight.
I put on five pounds at Torremolinos one year and he went on and on about it.
Was I sure I wasn't pregnant?
You know.’
‘Well, I wish I looked like you.’
‘You're absolutely lovely as you are, darling.’
And really, thought Mrs. Mounce, she wasn't such a bad-looking kid.
A little of the old black-coffee-and-orange-juice, and a good roll-on, and she really wouldn't look too awful.
‘Are you an undergrad or something, darling?’ she asked.
‘I'm at a college of citizenship in Bath.’
‘Dar ling!
That sounds terribly brainy.’
‘It's not, really.’
‘Do you study economics and all that kind of thing?’
‘A bit.
We do History of Ideas.’
‘Lovely.’
‘And we have a course in World Literature.
Last term it was Russia.
Next term it's India, China, and Japan.’
‘How super, darling.’
‘Well, I'm not sure.
One never seems to catch up.’
‘I know, sweets — once you start swotting there's no end to it.
That's what put me off studying, really.
Do you do ordinary things like Domestic Science?’
‘Well, we do Nutrition.
And Contemporary Culture Appreciation, and Social Situation Training.’
‘Super.’
‘We all think it's terribly draggy.
There's a terribly draggy lot of people teaching us.’
Mrs. Mounce made the tea.
‘I should be helping you,’ said Tessa.
‘How rude of me!—’
‘All right, sweets.
Make the bed — then you can lie down and take the weight off your feet while we talk.
But tuck it in properly, darling.
Make proper hospital corners, or one of you will be falling out in the middle of the night.’
Tessa's face went red all over again.
Mrs. Mounce watched her with discreet curiosity.
She'd never seen such a champion blusher.
Kids weren't getting tougher these days at all— they were getting soppier .
Well, she'd learn, she'd learn.
She just needed someone to take an interest in her, someone to draw her out and tell her what time of day it was.
Mrs. Mounce kicked off her beaded moccasins, curled up in the armchair with her cup of tea, and began to tell Tessa about her hubby and his job, about Dotty and the work they were having done in the house, and about their friends.
Tessa first of all sat down on the edge of the bed, with her knees together, her feet crossed and slightly to  one side, her back straight, and her cup and saucer at chest height, as she had learnt in Social Situation Training.
By the time she had fetched her second cup of tea, Mrs. Mounce was on to their relations with their bank manager, and Tessa kicked off her shoes and tucked her legs up beneath her to be companionable.
Her third cup of tea she balanced on her stomach, lying full length on the bed and pointing her stockinged toes into the air, sighting various objects over them with one eye closed.
‘How frightful,’ she murmured from time to time, as Mrs. Mounce catalogued another misfortune, another misunderstanding.
‘How absolutely frightful.’
‘Because there I was,’ Mrs. Mounce ran on, as the blue haze of cigarette smoke thickened in the dusk, ‘honestly, darling, without a stitch on, and this lunatic hammering on the door and shouting he'd wake the whole hotel if I didn't open up…’
‘Anyway, I told Dotty, ‘Dotty darling,’ I said, ‘this terrible possessiveness of yours about the house is definitely something sick, something absolutely psychological.’
I mean, I had to be frank with her.
‘Dotty, precious,’ I said, ‘this is the sort of thing they lock people away in mental asylums for…
‘Well, I went to clinics, I went to specialists, they poked and they peered and they prodded, they took X-rays, they did tests, I don't know what they didn't do, and they all said the same thing.
‘Mrs. Mounce,’ they said, ‘there's absolutely nothing wrong with you.’
Well, lovey, I knew there was , you see…’
It was half-past eight when the key turned in the lock and Bob came in.
Tessa had turned on the little light on the bedside table, but otherwise the room was in darkness, and for some moments Bob stood by the door, twisting his head backwards and forwards, trying to take the situation in.
‘It's a pity you bothered to come home at all, darling,’ said Mrs. Mounce.
‘We were having a very cosy little chat here.’
‘Oh, it's you,’ said Bob.
He came over to the bed, holding up his hand to shade his eyes from the bedside light, and peering almost comically close, so that Tessa could smell the whisky on his breath.
‘Who's this?’ he said.
‘It's me, Bob,’ said Tessa in a small voice.
‘Oh God,’ said Bob.
‘Tessa!
What on earth are you doing here?’
‘Didn't you get my letter, Bob?’
‘Your letter?
Oh, yes.
Yes, yes, I did.’
‘What did I tell you?’ said Mrs. Mounce.
‘He'd clean forgotten about it.’
‘No, I got held Up at the office.’
‘You are a stinker, sweetie,’ said Mrs. Mounce.
‘You really are.
If I hadn't let her in she'd have had to sit on her suitcase in the hall for three hours.’
‘I'm sorry, I got held up at the office.’
He went over and kissed Tessa, who was half sitting up, not knowing quite what to do with herself.
‘Anyway,’ he said, ‘it's marvellous to see you.’
She hugged him roughly.
‘You've been boozing,’ said.
‘Of course he's been boozing,’ said Mrs. Mounce.
‘I had to stop for a quick drink on the way home with John Dyson,’ he said.
‘I couldn't really get out of it.’
He straightened up.
Tessa would have liked to hide her face in the covers and cry.
‘Well, well,’ said Bob.
‘Where are you staying, Tessa?’
‘Bob!’ cried Mrs. Mounce.
‘You absolute skunk!’
‘No, it's just slipped my mind for a moment…’ said Bob.
‘She's staying here, for heaven's sake!
Where do you think she's staying?’
‘Well, don't get excited — that's all I wanted to know.’
‘I'm going to find a hotel,’ said Tessa.
‘You really are a stinker, you know, sweetie!’
‘Look, she's perfectly welcome to stay here — I just didn't know exactly what her plans were.’
Mrs. Mounce jumped out of the armchair and twinkled away to the door.
‘Well,’ she said, ‘I'll leave you to it.
There's din-dins for two in the uvvy.
Tessa sweetie, be firm with him.
And if you get depressed at all, come downstairs and have a chat.’
Tessa couldn't think of anything to say after Mrs. Mounce had gone.
She sat on the edge of the bed, looked down into her lap, and felt great tears run out of her eyes.
They ran down her red cheeks, and splashed like huge summer raindrops onto her hands.
‘Oh,Tess !’ said Bob, sitting down on the bed and putting his arm round her shoulders.
‘Don't cry, Tess.
I'm terribly sorry everything got so buggered up.
I must have misread your letter somehow.’
‘I don't think you read it at all.’
‘Yes, I did, Tess.
Honestly I did.
Only everything's been so buggered up today in general…,’
‘Anyway, it doesn't matter.
I'm sorry to cry like this.
It's just that everything's so different from how I imagined it.
I kept imagining coming up to London to see you.
And now I've come…
’ She sobbed.
‘And everything's just not quite how I expected it.
I mean, arriving here and finding Mrs. Mounce…’
‘I'm terribly sorry you got stuck with her,’ said Bob.
‘She's a dreadful woman.’
‘No, she was very sweet to me.
I thought she was dreadful  at first.
I suppose she is rather dreadful.
But, Bob, she's had such a sad life!’
She wept again.
‘I just suddenly thought,’ she said, ‘everyone's life is very sad really.’
Bob got up and began to put the things on the table for dinner.
Tessa stopped crying and sighed a deep, uncontrollable sigh like a yawn.
She got up, and seized Bob as he moved between table and oven, putting her face down on his shoulder and hugging him fiercely.
She would have liked to dissolve into him and become part of him, so that she could never be subject to his indifference, or even be looked at by him in any objective way.
‘Sometimes you're not at all good to me, Bob,’ she said.
‘I'm sorry?
Tess,’ said Bob.
He kissed the top of her head, and moved on to get a saucepan out of the oven.
She caught him again on the way back between oven and table, and sank herself into him once more, but after a moment became conscious that he was having to make a considerable effort to hold the hot saucepan away from her at arm's length.
When they sat down at table she couldn't manage to eat anything.
She held Bob's left hand in both of hers under the corner of the table and gazed at him.
‘Oh, Bob!’ she said.
‘Oh, Tessa!’ said Bob, taking a forkful of stew with his disengaged hand.
The doorbell rang.
It was Mrs. Mounce.
‘Sorry to disturb, darling,’ she said to Bob, ‘but I've brought you a bottle of Sauternes to wash the stew down with, so you can celebrate.
I don't suppose you thought of bringing any booze home yourself.’
After Bob had closed the door he poured out two tumblers of the wine.
‘To us, Tess,’ he said.
She took his hand again.
‘To you, Bob.
Whatever happens to us, I hope things always go right for you.’
Bob put his glass down.
‘Tess,’ he said, ‘I'm honestly not worthy of you.’
That's a silly thing to say, Bob.’
‘It's true, Tess.
You're generous and selfless in a way I could never be.’
He picked up his fork, prodded ineffectually at his stew for some moments, and then withdrew his left hand from hers.
‘I just want to cut up this piece of meat, Tess,’ he said.
‘I love you, Bob.
I've never really loved anyone before.’
The doorbell rang again.
‘Bob, sweetie,’ said Mrs. Mounce, ‘I've just remembered you haven't got any salt.
I thought I'd pop up with some.
Don't worry, I'll leave you in peace after this.
How's the stew?’
‘Oh, Bob!’ said Tessa, as Bob sat down again.
‘Oh, Tess!’ said Bob.
Bob lay in bed gazing vaguely up at the ceiling, which was glowing red in the light from the gas-fire, not entirely sure whether he was awake or asleep.
There was a dull pain in his left biceps — Tessa's head was pillowed on it.
He cautiously pulled his arm free.
He couldn't think whether they had been in bed for an hour, or four hours.
‘Poor Mrs. Mounce,’ said Tessa.
‘Mm,’ said Bob.
‘I'm glad she's not your mistress, Bob.’
‘What?’
‘I didn't really think she was, of course.
I thought she was the cleaning woman first of all.’
‘I don't know what she is.’
‘I think I'd understand if you wanted to sleep with other  women, Bob.
I know it's different for men.
All the same, I suppose I'm glad it's not Mrs. Mounce.
She's so tied up with unhappiness.
She'd pull you down into it.’
‘Yes.’
‘Poor Mrs. Mounce.’
Bob dozed.
’…into Taunton yesterday,’ he became conscious of Tessa saying some time later, ‘to get some special new antibiotic for Jester.
Did I write and tell you about Jester falling?’
‘Mm.’
‘Poor old Jester…’
Bob felt himself swooping down again into the great soft darkness of sleep.
Somewhere down there he stubbed himself against an ill-defined but hard mass of fact, and brought it up to the surface to examine it.
‘John Dyson was on television last night,’ he said.
‘Did you see him?’
‘Is that the Giant Dyson?’
‘What?’
‘Who subdued the Tyrant Cox?’
‘Search me,’ said Bob, sinking slowly away into the depths again.
’…frightened when I arrived in London today,’ he heard Tessa saying at some stage.
Time was no longer sequential; it was mere isolated incidents unrelated by before and after.
’…a stupid thing to feel, I know…on the train…cars in the streets…like a child…’
Tessa turned over, unwinding the bedclothes off him as she went.
He turned over himself, to wind them back on.
There was scarcely room enough to turn; it was surprising how obstinately single a single bed was.
‘I'm right on the edge,’ he said.
‘Are you sure you couldn't move over an inch or two?’
There was no reply; now that he was fully awake, she was fully asleep.
He tried cautiously to shove her over by main force, but she was too heavy.
He lay on his side, holding the covers over him by their edges, gazing at some of his copies of Vogue , which Tessa had been looking through and left lying on the carpet in front of the fire, where they glowed pink and red.
He thought about models' bottoms, feeling Tessa's bulking large against the small of his back.
Funny how he never seemed to meet girls…
Just not attractive to women in some way…
The copies of Vogue slipped slowly sideways and upwards, and disappeared into darkness…
’…told me,’ said Tessa's voice hours or minutes later, ‘that they've borrowed a lot of money from the bank to do some conversion work in their flat.’
‘Um?’ mumbled Bob.
‘Whosiss?’
‘Mrs. Mounce and her husband.
Her husband's impotent.
Did you know that?’
‘No.’
‘But terribly jealous.
She has affairs with other men and he finds out and flicks her.’
‘Does what?’
‘Flicks her.
With the back of his fingers somehow.
She says it hurts terribly.’
Bob felt suddenly wide awake.
For some reason he had just remembered poor old Eddy Moulton.
‘A man in the office died this afternoon,’ he said, then immediately doubted his own words.
Had it really been that afternoon?
‘A man’—‘died’— could poor old Eddy, leaning drunkenly across the desk with his hand shading his eyes, really be fitted into those abstract, impersonal formulae?
It seemed like some event described in a legend, remote and formal.
‘Someone you knew well?’ asked Tessa.
‘He was a very old man who worked in the same room as John Dyson and myself.’
‘Is that why you were late back this evening?’
Bob considered.
‘1 suppose it was,’ he said.
‘Why didn't you tell me?’
Bob tried to remember why he hadn't told her.
It was probably because the blue fug of cigarette smoke in the flat when he had come in, and the light, and the voices, and the terrible feeling of guilt, and Mrs. Mounce shouting, and Tessa weeping, had all swept poor old Eddy's death right out of his mind.
But he couldn't really remember the reason.
It was already lost — part of the jetsam of discarded immemorabilia which disappeared astern all the time.
From hour to hour one's life slipped away from one into the haze, before one had really looked at any of it properly.
‘I suppose I didn't think of it,’ he said.
‘You are a gink, Bob.’
Bob said nothing.
The word gink seemed a good ten years too young to bear thinking about.
Tessa turned carefully over towards him, rolling the undersheet away from beneath his legs.
‘I can stay for three weeks, if you'd like me to,’ she said.
‘Oh, Bob!
Three weeks together — on our own!’
‘Marvellous,’ said Bob.
‘Everything's always so much more complicated and awkward than one bargains for,’ she said.
She settled her head on his left biceps again and closed her eyes.
‘I shall always love you, Bob, whatever happens to us.’
‘I love you, too, Tessa.’
The doorbell rang.
‘God in heaven!’ said Bob, wide-awake, and casting about for his dressing-gown.
‘God in holy heaven!
Still at it, at this hour!
This is the fifth time she's been up!
I swear I'm going to throw her downstairs and break her neck!’
It was indeed Mrs. Mounce yet again, and in her frilly nightwear, but Bob did not throw her downstairs and break her neck.
‘Hello,’ he said politely.
‘Oh, you've gone to bed already,’ she said, trying to peer past Bob into the room to see.
‘Yes.’
‘Oh, sweetie, I'm sorry!
I just thought — Reg is away tonight, so why don't you and Tessa sleep in our double bed downstairs?
There's a single bed in one of the upstairs flats I could sleep in.
You'd be much more comfy — you don't have to tell me what it's like sleeping two in a single bed, darling.’
‘We're very comfortable here, thanks.’
‘Well, it was just a thought.’
‘Yes.
Thanks.’
Bob shut the door.
‘Poor old Mrs. Mounce,’ said Tessa.
‘But at four o'clock in the morning!’ said Bob.
He looked at his watch in the firelight.
It was quarter to twelve.
Well, it felt like four.
And four and a quarter hours later, when it actually was four, and the bedclothes both above and below were a mere conglomerate heap, and Tessa's strapping behind had pushed right across the bed, and Bob was cold and stiff from head to foot, and had been neither asleep nor awake for a moment, it felt as though the solar system had finally run down and stopped, and closed off the ever-renewing spring of pure, fresh time for good and all.
8
God knows I'm a failure, an insignificant speck of human nothingness trampled on indifferently by every casual passer-by, thought Dyson as he followed his wife out of the kitchen into the living-room, with his fists clenched in his trouser pockets and his face set in an unyielding frown, but there is one thing in this world that I'm not going to stand for, and that's being nagged by my wife.
I'm not reduced to that .
God knows, he thought, I shouldn't say anything about it if she nagged me in any halfway reasonable manner.
I'm used to being treated like dirt I'm not proud.
It's this nagging by saying nothing that I can't stand.
It's this terrible pseudo-rational nagging by just carrying on normally, as if she weren't nagging me at all.
It's this stupid leaving me to guess what I'm being nagged about.
Well, I'm honestly not going to spend the whole of Saturday morning putting up with this sort of thing.
Ill just go out of the house without a word, and stay at my club for a few days.
Or I would if I had a club.
‘Look, Jannie,’ he said reasonably, following her back to  the kitchen, ‘just tell me what it is you're going on about.
That's all I ask.’
‘I'm not going on about anything, John,’ said Jannie.
‘Yes, you are, Jannie.’
‘No, I'm not, John.’
‘Look we both know we're having an argument!
Let's not have another argument about whether we're having an argument or not!’
Jannie gazed into the food cupboard, picking up cereal packets and shaking them to see if they needed replacing.
‘There's some coffee in the pot, if you'd like to light the gas,’ she said.
Dyson lit the gas absently.
It was self-defeating, this sort of nagging, he thought.
That's what I really object to.
If I haven't the slightest idea what the hell I'm being nagged about, how the hell can I possibly do anything about it?
‘Put some milk on, too, will you, John?’
He put some milk on, sighing.
I mean, he thought, I know what she's up to , all right.
I'm not a complete fool.
This was the classic method of brainwashing, after all, used by interrogators, priests, and psychoanalysts alike.
‘I think you have something you want to tell me’— that's what their technique was.
Then they simply waited for you to accuse yourself.
Jannie sat down at one corner of the great kitchen table and began to write a shopping list.
Dyson stood by the stove, gazing down at her with serious ferocity.
‘Jannie…’ he began.
‘Yes, John?’
Dyson stopped, frowning harder.
‘Why do you call me John in that tone of voice?’ he demanded.
‘Don't you like me calling you John?’ asked Jannie, not looking up from her shopping list.
‘You don't normally go round calling me John all the time.’
She didn't answer.
Good God, he thought, I should like to do something that would really make her jump out of her skin for once.
He pictured himself smashing both fists down in the middle of the kitchen table, or taking a china jug off the shelf and hurling it across the room.
It was absurd that Norman Ward Westerman and Lord Boddy should listen with real deference to his views on Halifax, while at home he couldn't even get a hearing from his own wife.
Scribble, scribble, scribble, she went.
Eggs, butter, tea, coffee — oh God, the smallness of things!
The endless petty demands of life!
They rained down like small coal from a sack, filling the air with choking dust which settled grimily over everything and made the whole world smell grey.
‘It's that patch of mould on the ceiling in the boys’ room, isn't it?’he said.
‘That's what you're going on about, isn't it, Jannie?’
Rice Krispies, navy thread, tuna fish, wrote Jannie.
‘Well, I can't do anything about it today,’ he said.
‘And that's final.’
One bottle Thawpit, wrote Jannie, cigs, birthday present for John's sister-in-law.
‘Look, be reasonable, Jannie,’ said Dyson.
‘I'm going to be absolutely up to my eyebrows in work this week-end.
I've got a piece to write for the Overseas Service.
I've got an obit of poor old Eddy Moulton to do for the Journalist .
How can I possibly make a career for myself when you keep on, nag, nag, nag, about patches of mould on the ceiling?’
Jannie looked out of the window, chewing the end of her pencil thoughtfully.
‘The milk's boiled over,’ she said.
‘Oh,God !’ cried Dyson, springing away from the stove, then springing back to turn the gas out.
‘This is exclusively your responsibility!
You realize that, don't you, Jannie?’
‘The cloth's in the sink, John.’
‘I don't see any reason on earth why I should clear this up.
Where's the cloth?
Why the hell is there never a cloth to hand when it's wanted?’
Oven-cleaner, wrote Jannie on her list.
‘The phone's ringing,’ she said.
Let it ring — what do I care? thought Dyson, as he hurled himself out into the hall to catch it before it stopped ringing.
God really was seeping in this morning from every direction, and chiefly through the condition of marriage itself.
That was what was holy about holy matrimony, he realized suddenly; it was just another divine instrument for increasing entropy, like damp and coronary thrombosis and woodworm.
‘Hello; Dyson,’ he snapped.
‘Bob!’ he said cheerfully a fraction of a second later, smiling warmly into the microphone.
‘How nice to hear from you!…
No, no — not an inconvenient moment at all…
Who's with you?…
Tessa?
Is that your lady-friend from Somerset?
Well, give her our regards, Bob…
Can you do what?…
Oh, I see…
Yes, by all means…
By all means, Bob…’
Dyson walked back to the kitchen grinning.
Ah, bachelorhood!
The idea of being a bachelor, and having bachelor affairs, suddenly seemed almost unbearably sweet…
A girl coming to stay in one's flat…
He envisaged a slight girl with a tender face and dark, tumbling hair, wearing a pair of borrowed pyjamas which came down over her hands and feet…
‘Bob's got his girl-friend staying with him,’ he said to Jannie, still grinning, as he sat down at the kitchen table and sipped absently at the cup of coffee which had appeared there.
‘She's called Tessa.
Apparently her parents think she's staying with wanted to know if she could send them our phone number and say she was staying here.
I said we'd be delighted.
If anyone rings and asks  for her, we're to say she's out, then pass the message on to Bob so that she can ring back.’
Dyson went on grinning to himself.
The slight girl with the tumbling hair, he was thinking, would take a shower (bachelor flats had showers), putting her head back and letting the water cascade down between her breasts…
In the afternoon they would make love, with the great windows open to the sky, and a hot, heavy summer rain falling, crushing the flowers and filling the air with the scent of roses…
‘Did you invite them round?’ asked Jannie.
‘No.
Should I have done?
Wouldn't they rather just get on with it in peace?’
Jannie returned to her shopping-list in silence.
‘Do you think we should?’ said Dyson.
‘If you'd like to, you go ahead.’
Leg of lamb for 6, wrote Jannie.
Dyson remembered, at the sight of her silently writing, that she had been nagging him.
‘Look, Jannie,’ he said, his good humour abruptly vanishing, ‘I'm not going to ring them.
It's the wife's job to send out invitations and manage a couple's social life, not the husband's.’
Paper napkins, flowers, wrote Jannie.
‘Good God, Jannie,’ said Dyson.
‘It was your idea, not mine.
If you want to satisfy your curiosity about Bob's girlfriend, you ring him yourself.
I'm far too busy to mess about with this sort of thing today.
And that really is final…’
‘That was John Dyson again,’ said Bob, as he put the phone down.
‘He was inviting us for Sunday lunch tomorrow.
I said yes — I hope that was all right.
Their kids are quite sweet, as a matter of fact.’
Tessa watched him, completely absorbed in him, as he sat wearily down at the table again, located the brown  sugar among the remains of the breakfast things, and dug a spoonful out to lick at.
She was sitting curled up in the armchair like Mrs. Mounce, nursing a final cup of cold Nescafé.
‘You're very fond of the Dysons, aren't you?’ she said.
‘I suppose so,’ he replied.
He thought about the Dysons' solid, regular married life, and it filled him with nostalgia.
The Dysons didn't have to exhaust themselves wondering if they loved each other, and what they should do about it if they didn't.
They weren't overwhelmed by the sheer mechanics of daily life.
Happily married couples, he thought, stood not face to face, absorbed in each other, but back to back, looking outwards upon the world.
He gazed despairingly about the room.
The breakfast things were still on the table; the bedclothes lay tangled on the floor; Tessa's clothes straggled across the carpet from her open suitcase.
Tessa wasn't even dressed — she was wearing his old tweed overcoat over her pyjamas.
By the time they had got the room cleared up and were ready to go out it would be getting on for twelve.
By the time they had done the shopping and got back and Tessa had cooked the lunch (as she insisted on doing in her eagerness to keep house for him) it would almost certainly be something like three o'clock.
A world of muddle seemed to enclose Bob like a jungle.
He rubbed his eyes and yawned.
‘Didn't you get to sleep at all?’ asked Tessa.
‘I think I must have dozed off about six.’
‘Poor old Bob!’
He took another spoonful of sugar.
It hadn't been a night they had lived through; it had been the Dark Ages — all seven centuries of them, with wars and oppressions, visions and turbulences.
The worst moment of all, he thought, had been at a quarter to nine that morning, when he had been roused from the bottom depths of heavy, dream-tangled  sleep by the door bell, and when, having stumbled across the room, still not knowing where he was or what was happening, he had found Mrs. Mounce at the door, asking if she could do any shopping for them.
Tessa came over and kissed him.
He opened his eyes quickly, unaware until then that they had fallen shut.
‘I'm going to have a bath,’ said Tessa ‘Where's the bathroom?’
‘Well, it's a bit awkward,’ said Bob.
‘There's only one in the house, on the landing halfway downstairs.
Are you sure you want a bath?’
‘Not if it would be embarrassing for you, Bob.’
‘Oh, I don't mind.
I was thinking about you, Tess.’
‘I don't mind.
I've burned my boats now.’
‘I suppose so.’
He took her down to the bathroom, and turned on the geyser for her.
‘Are you going to come in the bath with me, Bob?’ she asked, reddening.
‘Well, I think I'd better wash up the breakfast things, if you don't mind.
Otherwise we shan't be getting lunch till teatime.’
‘Oh, yes.
I'd forgotten about the breakfast things.’
Bob had almost finished the washing up when the doorbell rang.
He threw down the washing-up mop and stood stock-still for a moment, gripping the edge of the sink.
He thought very carefully what he was going to say.
‘Mrs. Mounce,’ he thought he might put it, in a calm, almost pleasant voice, ‘if you ring this bell once more I will call the police and have you charged with causing a nuisance…
’ No —’…will instruct my solicitor to proceed against you for trespass…
’ No, no.
The bell rang again.
He strode across to the door.
The words’…unless I receive an assurance that you will seek immediate psychiatric advice…’ flashed into his mind with horrible pleasingness.
But it was not Mrs. Mounce — it was Mrs. Hennessy, the cleaning woman.
Bob stared at her with his mouth open.
‘Forgotten I was coming, had you, love?’ she said agreeably, rolling hugely past Bob into the room, from one swollen carpet-slippered foot to the other, trailing brooms, brushes and vacuum-cleaner behind her.
She dumped all her equipment down, breathing heavily.
‘You could leave it today, if you liked…’ said Bob uneasily, stepping on Tessa's suspender-belt, and kicking one of her shoes backwards under the armchair.
‘Don't worry about me, love,’ said Mrs. Hennessy.
‘I'll only take me ten minutes…
What have you been doing with your bed, love?
Been having nightmares, have you?’
‘Oh, yes,’ said Bob.
‘Yes, I did have rather a bad night.’
Mrs. Hennessy looked at the open suitcase.
‘Going away for the week-end, are you, love?’ she said.
‘No,’ said Bob, following the direction of her gaze only slowly.
‘I mean, yes, I am.’
‘Have a lovely time.’
‘Yes, I will.’
Mrs. Hennessy bent down and began to pick up the bed — clothes.
Bob bent down, too, and moved discreetly about picking up the more obviously feminine articles of clothing around the floor.
He wished he didn't mind about it, but he did.
He wished his first instinct had not been to conceal the traces of Tessa's existence, but it had been.
It was not because he would be embarrassed if Mrs. Hennessy knew he had a girl staying there, he told himself.
It was not even because Tessa would be embarrassed.
They were both a little too adult to care what other people thought.
It was Mrs. Hennessy he was trying to protect.
It was she who would be embarrassed if she knew, or at any rate, if she knew that he knew that she knew.
‘That's right, love,’ shouted Mrs. Hennessy over the noise, as she switched on the vacuum-cleaner.
‘If you just clear your little bits and pieces off the floor I can get round with the vacuum.’
Bob pushed everything into the suitcase and crammed the lid shut, ignoring the various shoulder-straps and corners of translucent nylon which stuck out.
He was just looking round for some quiet corner to put the case when faintly above the noise in the room he heard the doorbell ring.
God, it was Tessa coming back from the bathroom!
He hurried across to the door, still grasping the case.
‘Bye bye, love,’ shouted Mrs. Hennessy.
‘Have a lovely time.’
‘Oh.
Yes.
Thanks,’ shouted Bob.
He opened the door.
It was not Tessa outside — it was Mrs. Mounce.
‘Bob, darling!’ she whispered dramatically, taking his hand and leading him out on to the landing out of Mrs. Hennessy's earshot.
‘I meant to tell Mrs. Hennessy not to disturb you.
Shall I get rid of her for you?’
‘No,’ said Bob.
‘That's Fine.’
‘I just thought I'd offer, sweetie.’
‘Everything's fine.
Don't worry about us.’
Mrs. Mounce looked down at the suitcase.
‘You off somewhere, darling?’ she asked.
‘No, no.
Well, you know, we might go somewhere.’
‘Well, don't forget I'm downstairs if you want me.’
‘I shan't forget.’
He shut the door and carried the suitcase back into the room.
Mrs. Hennessy looked at him in surprise and switched the vacuum-cleaner off.
‘I thought you'd gone, love,’ she said.
‘Well, not quite.’
‘What's the matter?
Forgotten your pyjamas?
Here they  are, love — I was just going to put them under the pillow.’
‘Oh, thanks,’ said Bob.
He opened the suitcase and crammed the pyjamas inside.
‘Got everything else, have you?’ asked Mrs. Hennessy.
‘Got your shaving kit?
No, I can see it over by the sink.’
She rolled effortfully across to the draining-board and fetched it for him.
‘Thanks,’ said Bob, stuffing it into the case.
‘You'll forget your own head one of these days,’ said Mrs. Hennessy.
‘What else haven't you got?
Slippers?
Look they're on the floor here all the time!’
‘I don't really want slippers, thanks.’
‘Course you want slippers!
Catch your death on some of these cold floors.
Come on, love, put them in.
What about your dressing-gown?
Your dressing-gown's hanging up behind the door!
There you are, then.
Now, are you sure you've got a change of socks?’
‘Yes, yes.’
‘And plenty of warm woollies?’
‘Yes, yes, yes.’
Reluctantly, Mrs. Henry bent down and switched on the vacuum-cleaner again.
Almost at once the doorbell rang.
Bob hurried to answer it, trying to force the lid of the overloaded case shut as he went.
‘You off then, love?’ shouted Mrs. Hennessy.
‘Ta-ta.
Have a lovely time.’
‘Oh, thanks,’ said Bob.
‘Yes, I will.’
This time it was Tessa, holding her pyjamas in her hand and wearing nothing but the tweed overcoat pulled tightly around her.
‘Oh, Tess,’ whispered Bob, pushing her back on to the landing and pulling the door to behind them.
‘It's a bit awkward at the moment.
Mrs. Hennessy's here.’
Tessa gazed at Bob seriously.
‘Who's Mrs. Hennessy, Bob?’ she asked.
‘She's the cleaning woman, Tess.’
‘Another woman who does your cleaning, Bob?’
‘Oh, Mrs. Hennessy's just, you know, the char.
Look, I've put all your things in the suitcase.
Take it back to the bathroom and get dressed there, Tess.’
Tessa gazed at Bob sadly in the half-darkness of the landing, and shivered slightly.
‘I don't think you ought to be embarrassed about me now I'm here,’ she said.
‘I'm not embarrassed, Tess.’
‘Well,I'm not, Bob.’
‘I know.
It's Mrs. Hennessy I'm thinking of.
I don't think we ought to embarrass her, you see.
Look, all your clothes are in the case.
I'll come and call you when things are a bit less hectic.’
He watched Tessa start reluctantly down the stairs, cradling the open suitcase in her arms, then went back into the flat, wishing it were the middle of the night once more.
‘Back again?’ said Mrs. Hennessy, turning off the vacuum-cleaner.
‘What have you forgotten this time, love?’
‘Oh, you know, I thought perhaps I'd just check through things and make sure.’
He began vaguely opening drawers and cupboards, trying to see out of the corner of his eye whether there were any more of Tessa's belongings lying about the floor.
For a moment they caught each other 's eye.
Bob looked away hurriedly, and Mrs. Hennessy bent down and switched on the vacuum-cleaner.
The doorbell rang.
‘Off again, are you?’ said Mrs. Hennessy, watching him run.
‘Ta-ta then.’
‘Bob, I'll have to come in,’ whispered Tessa.
‘Mrs. Mounce is in the bathroom.’
Bob pushed her back onto the landing once again, and  again pulled the door to behind him.
‘We can wait out here for a bit, can't we?’ he asked.
‘Mrs. Hennessy won't be a moment, Tess.
Let me carry the case for you, anyway.’
They stood, not looking at each other, with Bob holding the case.
Tessa started to shiver.
‘George God strikes again,’ whispered Bob.
‘What?’
‘George God — he's getting at us.’
‘Who's George God?’ asked Tessa.
Her teeth were chattering.
‘I know,’ whispered Bob suddenly.
‘Mr. Mounce is away, so if Mrs. Mounce is in the bath their flat must be empty, and she's probably left the door open.
Go and dress down there.’
Bob watched her all the way down the stairs, agonized on her behalf; still more agonized when it occurred to him, just as she went out of sight, that he should have gone down with her and carried the case.
‘Hello,’ said Mrs. Hennessy, turning off the vacuum cleaner once again as he came into the room.
‘You remind me of radishes, the way you keep returning.
I know what it is this time, though, love.’
‘Oh?’ said Bob.
‘What is it?’
‘You've left your money on the bedside table.’
‘Oh, so I have.’
‘Can't get far without money, you know.’
‘No, you can't.’
Mrs. Hennessy collected up her equipment.
‘Well, I'll say ta-ta, love,’ she said.
‘Don't forget anything else, now, will you?
Got your ticket?’
‘Yes.’
‘That's right.
Have a lovely time, then.’
She rolled across to the door, trailing sticks and poles.
Bob hastened across and then flung the door open for her.
There on the threshold, barring her progress, stood Tessa, still wearing nothing but the tweed overcoat and still nursing the overstuffed open suitcase.
She looked desperately from Bob to Mrs. Hennessy and back again.
‘I'm sorry, Bob,’ she said wretchedly, ‘but Mrs. Mounce's husband's home now.’
‘You get something on before you catch your death, love,’ said Mrs. Hennessy to Tessa reproachfully.
‘If you're looking for your undies, I've folded them up and put them on top of the TV for you.
Ta-ta, loves.
Have a lovely time.’
It was Damian, the Dysons' younger son, who first brought up the subject of marriage.
He stood up on his chair all the way through lunch, with the gravy running down his great red face on to his bib and flying off the spoon he was waving on to other people's clothes; and in his loud, pharyngitic voice he kept up a perpetual background noise of questions and comments.
His brother Gawain ignored him, gazing at the salt cellar or the window for minutes at a time and stolidly chewing.
So did Dyson, intent upon pushing a heavy agenda through committee-roast lamb, the state of the newspaper industry, the beauties of Tessa's native Somerset, second helpings of lamb, the shortcomings of primary education, the exact age of poor old Eddy Moulton, apple crumble, and how funny it was that only the morning that poor old Eddy had died, etc.
He seemed unaware of the noise Damian was making.
Bob's head ached and filled with fog at the effort of filtering the adult conversation out from it.
‘Are Bob and Tessa married, Mummy?’ he became aware that Damian was asking, over and over again.
‘Are Bob and Tessa married, Daddy?
Are Bob and Tessa married, Mummy?’
‘No, we're not, Day,’ he said, to halt the noise.
‘Why aren't you married?’ asked Damian.
‘We're just not,’ said Tessa.
‘Not everyone's married.’
Damian thought about this, scratching his private parts thoughtfully with his spoon.
‘Mummy and Daddy did be married,’ he said.
‘Sit down and eat up your lunch, Day,’ said Jannie.
‘Jack did be married,’ said Damian.
‘Oh, not Jack,please , Damian!’ said Dyson.
‘Who's Jack?’ asked Tessa.
‘That's impossible to explain,’ said Bob.
‘Who did Jack marry, Day?’
‘Jack did marry his Mummy,’ said Damian.
He looked surprised when everyone laughed, then joined in himself, with very hoarse, loud laughter which made everyone start laughing all over again.
‘Jack did marry his Mummy,’ he said, as soon as the laughter had subsided, and laughed again himself, which made Bob and Tessa start again, too.
‘For God's sake don't encourage him,’ said Dyson irritably.
‘He'll go on for hours.’
‘Jack did marry his Mummy,’ repeated Damian, beaming around the table with the confidence of a man who knows he has a fully pilot-surveyed and market-researched product to offer.
‘That's enough, Day,’ said Dyson sharply.
‘Did you know,’ said Damian to Bob in a specially humorous voice, and with a risqué expression on his great round face, ‘Jack did marry his Mummy?’
‘Day!’ said Jannie.
‘Did you know…’ began Damian to Tessa.
‘Damian !’ shouted Dyson.
‘Did you know,’ said Damian, leaning humorously across the table towards Gawain, who was gazing transfixed at  the top button of Bob's coat, ‘Jack did marry his Mummy?’
Gawain roused himself from his daze.
‘Don't repeat your jokes, Damian,’ he said coldly.
Damian sat down slowly in his place, completely silenced by the rebuke, staring at Gawain as if he were trying to understand the thought-processes which had led up to it.
‘Marriage is something which I must say I'm strongly in favour of,’ said Dyson with comfortable good humour, cutting himself another sliver of meat off the joint.
‘I think everybody should marry.
Marry anybody.
No nonsense about waiting for your one and only soul-mate to show up.
It's the state of marriage that counts.’
‘Not peating my jokes,’ said Damian softly, gazing at his brother.
‘That's a stupid thing to say to anyone, John,’ said Jannie.
‘A bad marriage is much worse than no marriage at all.’
‘Not peating my jokes,’ said Damian, slightly more loudly.
‘Adaptation to the idea of marriage,’ said Dyson.
‘That's the only thing that counts.’
’ Yes, you are,’said Gawain to Damian.
‘You're repeating your jokes.’
‘Not peating my jokes!’
‘You've only got to look around you at the marriages of people we know,’ said Jannie, ‘to see that's not true.’
‘Damian's repeating his jokes again.’
‘Not peating my jokes!’
‘Good God, Jannie, think about it statistically !
How many marriageable girls does a man meet?
Or vice versa?
Twenty?
Fifty?
A hundred?
All right, say a hundred…’
‘Damian's repeating his jokes, isn't he, Daddy?’
’…of whom we think in our romantic way that one and only one is the ideal mate.
All right.
Now the population of the world is three thousand million.
Divide by two for  members of the opposite sex — fifteen hundred million…
‘You know this is preposterous, John.
You're just being deliberately irritating.’
‘Not peating my jokes, am I, Mummy?’
’…so pro rata , even by our own romantic criteria for singling out just one girl from the hundred we meet, there must be at least fifteen million members of the opposite sex in the world who would make an ideal mate!…
What the hell is it, Gawain?’
‘Damian's repeating his jokes, Daddy.’
‘John, you're just trying to be shocking,’ said Jannie.
‘What do you think, Tessa?’
‘I beg your pardon?’
‘Day's repeating his jo-okes!’
‘Not peating!’
’…about marriage…?’
‘Day's repeating his jo-okes!’
‘Not peating!
Not peating!
Not peating!’
’…
Oh…very much like to…’
‘Like to what?’ shouted Dyson.
‘Shut up, Damian.’
‘Daddy, Damian can't say ‘repeat,’ can he?’
’…get married…’
‘Are you?
Shut up, Damian — I mean, Gawain!
Well, congratulations!’
‘I can say peat!’
’…thoroughly recommend it…’ shouted Dyson.
‘Damian's going to cry-y!’
’…haven't had children…really lived…do you think, Bob?’
‘Look, Daddy, Damian's crying!’
When everyone moved out of the kitchen into the living-room after lunch, leaving Jannie to put the coffee on, Bob lingered behind with her, savouring the sudden calm.
He felt something like battle-fatigue — a great desire to lie down  on the ground with his hands over his ears and take no further part in the war.
He remembered now; he always felt the same by this stage of every visit he made to the Dysons' house in the daytime, while the children were about.
Between visits nature obliterated the memory of them, in the same way that it expunged the dread of battle and the pain of childbirth, so that war and childbirth and social visits to the Dysons could continue.
‘I like Tessa very much indeed, Bob,’ said Jannie, lighting the gas and stacking plates.
‘Do you?’ said Bob, too worn down to think of any intelligent reply.
‘Good, good.’
‘You are serious about her, aren't you?’
‘Oh, yes.
Jannie, could I possibly borrow a couple of aspirins?
I've got rather a headache coming on.’
‘I think the aspirins are in the cupboard with the spice jars.
She's very much in love with you, Bob.
You know that, don't you?’
‘Yes.
Yes, I do.
This cupboard?’
’ That's right — at the back.
It would be terrible to hurt her in any way.
Wouldn't it, Bob?’
‘I suppose it would.’
‘You suppose it would?’
‘I mean, of course it would.
May I take four, Jannie?’
Tessa had subdued the two boys, Bob discovered with relief and admiration when he went out to the living-room.
She was telling them a story, and they were sitting on either side of her on the sofa with their mouths hanging slightly open, Gawain meditatively fingering a lock of her long, dark hair, Damian staring at her and absently scratching his balls.
Every now and then one of them would stand up on the sofa and trample restlessly round like a dog resettling itself into its sleeping place.
Bob sank into the scrunching springs of an old armchair, put a hand over his eyes, and  watched them through his fingers.
He was touched by the sight, and felt suddenly tender towards Tessa.
If that feeling wasn't love, what was?
He had felt sour ever since her arrival — he could admit it to himself now — but simply because it had all happened so unexpectedly and confusedly.
He liked life to be predictable and orderly.
He liked to have time to think what he was going to feel about something before it happened.
When Tessa went out of the room to see if she could help Jannie the boys turned on Bob at once with all their usual wildness, jumping up and down in his lap, punching him in the chest, and trying to pull off his shoes.
‘Ouch!
Ouch!
You would, would you?’ said Bob with as much avuncular bonhomie as he could force out of himself, feinting punches back at them, turning them upside down, and trying not to scream and double up when Damian trod on his genitals.
‘Just chuck them off if they're a nuisance,’ said Dyson, stretched out in the least broken armchair with the Observer and the Sunday Times .
‘Oh, I don't mind them,’ said Bob, wedging his head against the back of the chair, so that the colossal thumping going on inside his skull wouldn't shake it loose from its mountings.
‘Do I, men?’
‘Punch, punch, punch!’ cried Damian, finding Bob's nose.
‘Do you read Brooks, Bob?’ asked Dyson.
‘You mean the estate agent?
No — should I?’
‘I suppose you'll be reading him now.
The thing is, Bob, if I may give you some advice based on long and hard experience, not to start off by renting somewhere, if you can possibly avoid it.’
‘I suppose you're right.’
‘Punch punch punch!’ said Damian.
‘You're just wasting valuable years, renting.
Buy something  and get on the escalator.
Then at least you're not slipping behind the field as prices go up.’
‘I suppose not.’
‘Bash bash!’
‘And do be practical, Bob.
So many people start off with some hazy idea of finding a little Georgian house in W.I. for five thousand pounds.
The thing to do, Bob, is to face up to the fact right from the beginning that it's going to be something Victorian or Edwardian, and that it's going to be in some slightly less fashionable postal district.’
‘I suppose so.
Ugh!
Gawain, that really hurt.’
‘I don't know whether you know this area at all, Bob?’
‘Well, you know…’
‘Pinch pinch pinch!’
‘It's got quite a lot to be said for it, Bob.
For a start it's got a village atmosphere which I must say we find rather agreeable.
Well, you know, there are little corner shops which still have some sense of individuality about them.
There's a certain sense of community that you wouldn't find somewhere like Chelsea or South Kensington.
You've met our neighbours, Ecosse and Princess St. George?’
‘Yes.’
‘Then again, it's on the Tube, or almost on the Tube.
And, Bob, it's an area that's bound to go up.’
‘Bite bite.’
‘Definitely no biting, Damian!
Yes, I remember your saying, John.
‘Bound to.
Must do, you see.
Big, roomy houses just right for expanding middle-class families.
People have got to go somewhere.
It absolutely must go up.’
‘I suppose it must.’
‘Snip snip — I'm a hairdresser!’
‘Do fling them off if they're getting obstreperous, Bob.
Anyway, I'll get Jannie to look in the local agents and keep her ears open.’
‘Well No, Gawain, let go!— thanks, John.’
Bob lit the gas-fire and sank down on his bed without even taking his overcoat off.
‘You were very good with those children, Tess,’ he said, with his hand over his eyes.
‘It's just a matter of being sensible,’ said Tessa, lighting the gas-stove and filling the kettle, without taking her overcoat off either.
‘Will scrambled eggs be all right tonight, Bob?
They're quite nice boys, but those silly people just let them run wild.’
‘I don't think they really notice the noise themselves,’ said Bob, slightly irritated that she should presume to call them silly when they were after all his friends.
‘They're hardened to it.’
‘I'm hardened to the noise that D and Baby make at home, but I don't let them get away with it while I'm around.’
‘Perhaps it's a bit more difficult with children of your own.
‘Well, I shouldn't let them get away with it like that, all the same.’
Bob reflected in silence for some moments.
‘Jannie likes you very much,’ he said finally.
‘She told me so.’
Tessa broke three eggs into a bowl, frowning.
‘I'm not sure I like her all that much, Bob,’ she said.
‘I thought she was trying to marry you off.’
‘Don't be silly, Tess.
That was just some silly misunderstanding at lunch.’
‘Was it?’
‘Of course it was.
Anyway, we've got wills of our own.
There's no need to let ourselves be rushed into anything, just because other people think it would be a good thing.
It's up to us, what we do, not anybody else.
Isn't that right, Tess?’
Tessa said nothing.
She beat up the eggs, splashed a drop or two on the lapel of her overcoat, and wiped it off carefully with her finger.
‘Well,’ she said finally, ‘I thought your friend Mrs. Dyson was a little bit in love with you, to tell you the truth.’
Bob sat up on the bed and gazed at her in astonishment.
‘She wants to marry me off to you,’ he said, ‘and she's in love with me?
What on earth are you talking about, Tess?’
Tessa banged saucepans about irritably.
‘She thinks I wouldn't be too much competition for her,’ she said, ‘because she thinks you're not very much in love with me.’
‘She told you this?’
‘Of course not.
It's just what I think.’
Bob picked up one of his bedside Vogues and withdrew into the world of the advertisements.
One of them showed a pair of slim, naked legs, cut off a fraction of a millimetre below the groin, running through a meadow full of dewy grass and pale blue cornflowers.
They advertised depilatory cream.
He yearned for them, in all their innocence and simplicity, as if they were childhood.
‘What was all this about a house?’ asked Tessa.
‘Search me,’ said Bob.
He slipped a peppermint into his mouth and curled up, gazing at the legs.
If only he were attractive to women!
9
Dyson was invited to appear on television again.
He and Bob were rushing to get a whole day's work done before lunchtime, in order to get away for poor old Eddy's funeral in the afternoon, when a woman called Samantha Lightbody rang from the BBC.
She said she was terribly sorry to disturb him.
She wasn't disturbing him at all, said Dyson, swinging round in his chair and resting his elbow comfortably on the stacks of unsubbed copy and uncorrected proofs.
She said she was sure she had rung at the worst possible moment — she always rang important people at the worst possible moment.
The moment couldn't have been better, said Dyson, taking another armful of stuff from the messenger.
‘The point is,’ said Samantha Lightbody, ‘I'm researching a programme about — well, it's about race relations, I'm afraid.
I know — yet another.
Groan, groan, and all the rest of it.
I hardly dare tell anyone.’
‘It sounds absolutely fascinating,’ said Dyson.
‘Well, we thought it could be quite fun if we got one or two really interesting new people like yourself to come along and take an entirely fresh look at the subject.
I know  you appear in programmes about race relations from time to time, but you're not one of the usual old gang of faces that everyone's sick of.
Do you know what I mean?
Anyway, could we possibly persuade you?’
‘Well,’ said Dyson luxuriantly, pressing the point of his pencil through the surface of a copy-pad, ‘I am rather heavily committed, of course.
When is it?’
‘Friday the eighteenth, at seven o'clock, if that doesn't seem too hopeless.
It's in a series called New Perspectives .’
Dyson slowly turned over the empty pages of his diary.
‘I shall be away in the Persian Gulf that week,’ he said.
‘Oh dear…’
‘It's a terrible bore, but something has cropped up out there.
I don't think I can really get out of it.’
‘So you can't possibly do the programme?’
‘Oh, yes, I think so.
I mean, I shall be back from the Middle East on the seventeenth.
It won't affect us at all for the eighteenth.
I just thought I should mention it.’
‘Oh, marvellous.
That really is awfully kind of you.
I know everyone here will be tremendously thrilled.
I'll get our contracts department to ring you about a fee’
Dyson sat back in his chair expansively.
‘You know the man you ought to get for this sort of programme?’ he suggested.
‘Lord Boddy.’
‘Oh, we have!’
‘Have you?’
‘He's one of the team.
You know him, do you?’
‘Oh, I know Frank Boddy very well.
Very well.’
‘I suppose it's another of these tight little worlds, is it, the racial experts?’
‘Oh, pretty tight.
Yes, pretty tight.’
There was one small question nagging him which he asked just as Samantha Lightbody was ringing off.
‘Did you, as a matter of interest, happen to see me on The Human Angle last week?’
‘It's an awful thing to have to admit,’ replied Samantha Lightbody, ‘but I'm afraid I missed it.’
‘Did anyone there see it?’
‘I'm not sure that they did.
I'm terribly sorry.’
‘That's all right,’ said Dyson.
‘That's quite all right.’
Dyson scarcely had time to stride up and down the office that morning, lecturing Bob on the importance of television, but he was in great form all the same.
Bob was too busy to notice, but Tessa was in the office, trying to keep out of everyone's way and write a letter to her parents, and Dyson directed his surplus good humour at her.
‘It is rather naughty, you know, my lord,’ he would say into the phone; ‘I shall be coming after you with a big stick if the copy's not here by tomorrow.’
And he would catch Tessa's eye and make a humorous grimace, to show what he really thought about bishops.
Tessa blushed at the sight.
Bob would catch her eye in his turn as he telephoned.
But each time he looked quickly away.
He was embarrassed, she knew, because she was sitting at old Eddy Moulton's desk, upon the top of which poor old Eddy had so recently laid down his head and died.
She was sitting there because Dyson had invited her to, and Dyson had invited her to because there wasn't anywhere else to sit.
But at the sight of Bob's expression she got up, blushing again, and walked about the room as if she were looking for something.
She stood by the window for some minutes, looking down into Hand and Ball Court, where an old tramp was feeling his way round the walls and trying not to catch people's eyes.
She sympathized with his efforts.
When she felt she could not naturally stand by the window  any longer she went and inspected the gritty old review copies of books which had somehow collected over the years on the office shelves —Take Your Car to North Africa!
Think Your Way to Good Health and Dynamic Living!
The ABC of Practical Woodworking.
National Debt or National Death?— The Bankers Plot Exposed .
She took one or two of them down and turned the pages over, trying to persuade herself she was reading them.
But the meanings of the words seemed to dart away from her like a shoal of minnows as she advanced upon them, and she felt more uneasy still.
She would never catch up with the enormous range of reading which seemed to be taken for granted by Bob and his friends, never.
‘Tessa, Tessa, Tessa!’ said Dyson cheerfully, pressing his receiver rest down and then dialling another number.
‘Sit down and make yourself comfortable.
I can't bear people who walk up and down the room all the time.’
‘Sorry,’ said Tessa.
She blushed and went back to the chair in which old Eddy had died.
‘Are you happy, Tess?’ asked Bob, between calls.
‘Yes,’ said Tessa.
‘I'm going in a moment, anyway.’
‘Are you?
Oh, all right.’
‘I just want to know whether you want me to go to Mr. Moulton's funeral with you.’
Bob's face went blank.
‘Hello,’ he said into the phone.
‘Canon Morley?…
It's Mr. Dyson's office here.
Look, this copy you phoned in; when you say, 1 know only that I have a deeply satisfying face which shines with a radiance beyond the brightness of this world…’ —should that be ‘faith’?
And what about ‘…justifying God's wheeze to man…’?’
‘Bob,’ said Tessa, when he had put the phone down again, ‘do you want me to come to the funeral or not?’
‘It's up to you, Tess,’ said Bob.
They were both speaking  very quietly, so as not to disturb Dyson, who was still on the phone.
‘I'll come if you want me to.’
‘O.K.’
‘Do you think I'm dressed all right for it?
This is the darkest outfit I've got with me’
Bob ran a hand through his hair.
‘You want to come, do you?’ he said doubtfully.
‘Only if you want me to.
I didn't even know Mr. Moulton.’
‘I shouldn't come if you'd prefer not to.’
‘But, Bob, what do you want me to do?’
Bob's phone rang, and while he was talking Dyson, who was sitting back in his chair and waiting for someone at the other end of the line, covered up the mouthpiece of his phone and said, ‘Are you coming to the funeral, Tess?’
‘I was just asking Bob if he thought I should.’
‘Why don't you?
Funerals are quite fun, you know.
Well, perhaps ‘fun’ isn't the right word.
But the sheer language of the service is marvellous !
‘Man that is born of a woman has but a short time to live, and is full of misery…
’ Hello?
Hello Sir William?’
Bob put his phone down.
‘The only thing is,’ he said uncertainly, ‘if everybody started turning up with their girl-friends…’
‘I certainly don't want to embarrass you, Bob.’
‘It's not that.
But if everybody suddenly started turning up with their girl-friends…’
‘All right, Bob, I won't come.’
‘I mean, you're welcome to come as far as I'm concerned’.
But I somehow feel that it's not a sort of social occasion…’
Tessa folded up her half-written letter and put it in her handbag.
‘If ever you don't want me to come with you somewhere, Bob, you've only got to say.
I honestly don't mind.
I wouldn't have come to the office in the first place if you hadn't asked me.’
‘No, I was very pleased you came…
You're not going now?’
‘I thought I might go shopping, or visit St. Paul's.’
‘Well, if you want to.
But don't feel in any way…’
Bob's phone rang.
Dyson, putting his own down a moment later, as Tessa looked around for her gloves, said, ‘I know what, Tessa.
You look rather at a loose end over there.
Would you like to become a journalist for an hour or so, and copy out one or two ‘In Years Gone By columns for us from the files?
It would help us out of a most tremendous hole if you would.n
Tessa was already turning the tatter-edged yellow pages over, trying to find the right date, when Bob put his phone down.
‘I thought you said you were going? n he said.
‘John asked me to do a job for him first.’
‘I see.’
‘Is that all right, Bob?’
‘Of course it's all right.
Why should I mind?
It's nothing to do with me what you do.’
Dyson had brought his car into town specially, and everyone in the Gates at lunch wanted a lift to the funeral in it.
With six large journalists aboard, all well filled with beer and sandwiches, there was scarcely room for Dyson to turn the wheel or change gear without jamming his elbow into Ted Hurwitz's stomach.
‘Perhaps it's just as well Tessa didn't come, Bob,’ said Bill Waddy.
‘She could have sat in my lap,’ said Gareth Holmroyd.
‘Ay, ay!’ said Ted Hurwitz.
‘I thought she was a very nice girl, Bob,’ said Gareth Holmroyd.
‘Ay, ay, ay!’ said Ted Hurwitz.
Laurence Evenden belched behind his hand.
‘I beg your pardon,’ he said.
‘The point is,’ said Dyson, thumping the car down into second to slow up at the traffic lights, ‘a journalist ought to be specializing by the time he's forty.
That's really why I'm rather pleased about this BBC thing.
I do seem to be accepted as part of the regular television establishment.
Do you know what I mean?’
‘The light's green, John,’ said Ted Hurwitz.
Dyson let the clutch in with a belated jerk which brought some hard and heavy object tumbling down from the dashboard to hit Bill Waddy on the knee and roll away out of sight beneath the front seats.
‘God Almighty,’ said Bill Waddy, rubbing his knee.
‘What was that?’
‘The point is,’ said Dyson, ‘I don't feel one can go on just doing the general odds and sods indefinitely without more or less destroying oneself.
Do you see what I'm driving at?’
‘It looks like the other side of the road to me,’ murmured Bill Waddy.
Dyson swung the wheel to the left, then swung it sharply to the right again to avoid a lorry which was overtaking him on the inside.
‘My God,’ said Dyson, ‘the lunatics you meet on the roads these days!
I'm sorry to go on about this BBC thing but it does seem important to me.’
Laurence Evenden belched.
‘I beg your pardon,’ he said.
It was like a holiday, driving out through the suburbs  on a weekday afternoon.
Every now and then the sun came out, lighting up women out walking with prams and push chairs.
‘There's the Royal Oak,’ said Bill Waddy.
‘Do you remember the Siege of the Royal Oak in 1947, Gareth?
When the old publican went off his head and shut himself up in the snug with an ex-War Department Verey pistol, and shot distress signals through the serving hatch at anyone who came near?’
‘That's right,’ said Gareth Holmroyd.
‘You were on the Mail then, weren't you, Bill?
There was you and I there, and old Freddie Samuelson of the Express , and Walter Edgworth of the Mirror …’
‘Old Walter's dead now, you know.’
‘No!
Is he?
Poor old Walter!’
‘He went out to a paper in East Africa.
Got some disease out there.’
‘What will you do now that poor old Eddy's gone, John?’ asked Laurence Evenden.
‘Will you get someone else, do you think?’
‘I'll have to have someone, Laurence.
I was absolutely run into the ground as it was.
And now it looks as though I'm going to be tied up with television work pretty regularly.’
‘You know Harry Stearns wants you to take over ‘Lighting-Up Time’ and ‘Phases of the Moon,’John?’said Gareth Holmroyd.
‘I know.
I can't possibly do it.
Not without more staff.
I've told the Editor.’
‘Charles Baker's trying to get rid of ‘Shipping Movements,’’ said Ted Hurwitz.
‘I bet he manages to land them on poor old John in the end.’
‘He won't,’ said Dyson.
‘He can't.
I can't do it.’
‘He tried to unload it on me,’ said Gareth Holmroyd.
‘I told him I thought John Dyson was the man.’
‘Well, I'm not,’ said Dyson.
‘Old John'll manage somehow,’ said Bill Waddy.
‘Why don't you change down, John?
We've almost stopped.’
Bob, who had sat in silence from the beginning of the journey, crushed between Gareth Holmroyd and Laurence Evenden in the back sighed meditatively.
‘It's funny to think we're on our way to poor old Eddy's funeral,’ he said.
‘Look, Dancy Street,’ said Bill Waddy.
‘Wasn't that where some bakery foreman dressed himself up in a turban, said he was an Eastern potentate, and persuaded half a dozen women to move in with him as his harem?
Nineteen-forty-nine, I think it was.’
‘Nineteen-fifty-one,’ said Gareth Holmroyd.
‘The old king died next day and killed the story stone dead.
There's Holt's Depository — remember that?
Where the kids shot the skyrocket through the fan-light and set fire to all the furniture?
You know who was on that story?
Old Jimmy Mulholland of the Guardian .
He's a P.R.O.
with the Coal Board now.’
‘He's not, you know,’ said Ted Hurwitz.
‘He's dead.’
‘No!’
‘Died of lung cancer last summer.
I saw his brother in the Cock a couple of months ago.’
‘Well, who'd have thought it!
A great big strapping man he was.
Poor old Jimmy!’
‘I can't help feeling, to revert for a moment,’ said Dyson, ‘that television is rather more my metier .
I do think that one can put one's ideas over rather more forcefully and precisely when one's present in the flesh, with all one's conversational resources to hand.’
‘Poor old Jimmy!’ said Gareth Holmroyd.
‘It's a funny thing,’ said Bob, emerging from his silence again.
‘I was just thinking about poor old Eddy.
He'd have enjoyed being on this trip with us today, you know.’
‘He wouldn't have enjoyed going to his own funeral, Bob,’ said Laurence Evenden.
‘He wasn't morbid .’
‘I didn't mean that…’
‘Do you remember Basil Merriman's funeral, Gareth?’ said Bill Waddy.
‘It was snowing a blizzard, and we got lost in the middle of nowhere out beyond Aylesbury?’
Dyson swerved to avoid a hole in the road, hit it dead in the middle, and brought Bill Waddy's window down with a crash.
‘Don't worry,’ said Dyson.
‘That's always happening.
Just jam it with that wedge of paper.’
Laurence Evenden belched.
‘I beg your pardon,’ he said.
Tessa sat at Bob's desk in the empty department all afternoon, newspaper files stacked in front of her, trying intermittently to finish the job that Dyson had given her.
She didn't find it easy; she wasn't a great reader.
Between whiles she got up and looked out of the window, watching the pale sunshine come and go on the elaborate mouldings and cornices of the offices on the opposite side of Hand and Ball Court, until she realized she was being watched from a window of the floor above by two young men in shirtsleeves.
They smiled and waved at her, and she hurried back to the desk blushing.
It was quiet and calm in the empty room.
From time to time one of the phones rang, and she stared at it and held her breath till it stopped.
Now and then messengers would come in, look in the empty out-baskets, and go out again without a word; or put proofs on the desk beside her — rolled galleys and damp, folded pages.
‘Thank you,’ she said, not daring to look them in the face.
But most of the  time the only reminders of the outside world were remote sounds which merely emphasized the quiet of the room itself — the murmur of traffic away in Fleet Street, a typewriter clicking somewhere, some girls giggling, milk bottles falling over, a boy whistling.
She looked through the drawers of Bob's desk, curious to explore even the most unconsidered corners of his life.
She found a paper bag with two toffees in it; a book on Burma with a page of Bob's notes inside; yellowing, dusty copy paper, crumpled carbons, expired typewriter ribbons; a briar pipe, grey with age, left over perhaps from some previous occupant; a dusty brown shoe with a hole in it; three rusty razor-blades; an ancient copy of Queen magazine; a letter from herself…
She opened the letter and began to read it.
‘My dearest, darlingest Bob,’ it began.
‘Masses of hugs and kisses from your silly adoring Tessa, because the sun's shining, and I know there'll be a letter from you tomorrow, and because anyway all I want to do is to send you masses of hugs and kisses…’
She put her hand over her eyes, too embarrassed to read on.
How could she have written such stuff?
How could she?
It was like coming across an embarrassing old photograph of herself.
The letter was dated four weeks before.
It could have been four years.
She felt that she had changed entirely since it was written, and chiefly during the three days since she had been in London.
How would she write to Bob now?
She leaned on the files, making her sleeves grey with dust, looking up at the pale blue patches appearing and disappearing above the rooftops outside the window.
‘Darling Bob,’ she would start — nothing more elaborate, nothing more gushing.
No, not even that.
Just ‘Bob.’
‘Bob, I understand now that nothing in life is as easy as it at first seems, and that being in love  is a condition which can cause one a great deal of pain.
Of course, I knew that before.
But I supposed that it was only the sweet pain of yearning the sweet uncertainty of what-may-perhaps-be.
But now I see that the sweetness goes, and that the pain which remains is just the ordinary, unilluminating misery of humiliation, embarrassment, and inadequacy.
You have hurt me a lot in the past three days, Bob, and I think you will hurt me a great deal more in the days to come.
You don't love me very much.
Perhaps you don't love me at all.
But why should you?
I can see how hopelessly unsuitable I am for you; all I ever do is misunderstand what you say, and weep.
But you'll never have the strength to send me away — you're so weak , Bob, that it embarrasses me — and in the end the job will fall to me; I shall have to send myself away.
What a miserable responsibility to be loaded with!
I put it off from day to day out of pity for myself.
For in spite of everything, you are present in all my waking thoughts.
Whichever way I turn — you.
I revolve about you, dazed and unhappy, with my eyes fixed on you helplessly.
Look how I write you this letter!
I keep it inside my head, so that you'll never see it, or anything like it…’
Tears brimmed out of her eyes, and ran down her cheeks.
She walked about the room, hating herself for pitying herself.
She looked out the window, carefully read the titles of all the books on the shelf, from Take Your Car to North Africa ! to National Debt or National Death?— The Bankers' Plot Exposed , and stopped crying.
She sat down and set to work on the files.
The phone continued to ring from time to time; messengers continued to call.
Once or twice people put their heads round the door and asked her if the Meditation proof was up yet, or whether she knew ‘that she had four inches less than usual on page twelve.
‘I'm sorry,’ she told these heads, keeping her red eyes  turned away from them, ‘Mr. Dyson and Mr. Bell are at the funeral.
I don't work here myself.’
‘I see,’ they said, not seeing, and withdrew uncertainly.
The only caller who stayed for any length of time said nothing at all.
Tessa became conscious of a mottled red face gazing at her, and the right half of a short, bulky body wedged in the jamb of the door with one shabby braces strap visible.
When she looked up, the man smiled shyly and nodded at her.
She told him where Dyson and Bob were, and he nodded and smiled again, as if he had known already.
Then he gazed absently at the window for some minutes, blinking.
‘Can I help you at all?’ asked Tessa, increasingly nervous at this silent presence.
‘I mean, I don't work here myself.
Well, I'm working here now .
But I don't actually work here.’
The man nodded and smiled.
‘I'm really just waiting for Bob,’ said Tessa.
‘I'm his — his fiancee.’
She blushed to say such a thing.
But some sort of concrete explanation had to be offered.
The man nodded and smiled all over again — rather encouragingly, this time — and then, smiling in a somewhat more valedictory sort of way, edged slowly back out through the door.
Tessa could hear him breathing on the threshold outside for several minutes more, as if he were trying to summon up the courage to return and say something.
Many people had worked on the paper for twenty years, and never once come face to face with the Editor.
Dyson fixed his gaze upon the east window of the crematorium chapel, screwing up his eyes, trying to fill his head with the radiating rods of light and a steady contemplation  of death.
Light; flowers; brass fittings; solemn intonation; and in that box the already decomposing remains of the man who had occupied the corner desk in Dyson's office each day since he had taken the department over.
Then poor old Eddy had been a jungle of faint electric circuits connected to make thoughts and memories and aches and sleepiness, like a blackboard of chalk dust patterned to form the binomial theorem or the history of the Fourth Crusade.
Now those slight differences of electrical potential had disappeared, like the chalk dust at the end of the lesson.
Old Eddy had been wiped clean.
Dyson tried to fix his mind upon the tiny grains of chalk fleeing before the duster, filling the air, and settling upon shiny surfaces, totally and eternally discharged of theorem and crusade, or any lingering imprint of them.
There were a dozen mourners from the family in the front pews — women with grey curls and mild glasses, an old man bent over a stick, his head projecting forwards from the unoccupied collar of his overcoat like a tortoise's; a schoolboy in a neat navy-blue trenchcoat, holding a maroon cap.
Women in tweed overcoats, men in dark melton overcoats — they seemed more overcoats than people; the sort of people whose personalities are not large enough to dominate their outdoor clothes.
Two of the ladies' overcoats were sniffling, and with infinite discretion blowing their noses.
I have a lump in my throat, thought Dyson.
I definitely have a lump in my throat.
I am pervaded by a deep and solemn sadness.
Yes, yes, I am awed by a cognition of mortality.
A cognition ?
Why not ‘a sense’?
God, one's thoughts need subbing at times!
All the same, a cognition is what it feels like, set among these flowers, these stabbing rods of light, these solemn sacerdotal periods, this indisputable lump in the throat.
The lesson was from  Corinthians.
‘If after the manner of men I have fought with beasts at Ephesus, what advantageth it me, if the dead rise not?’
Such words!
Such sonorous words, breaking like a dark, silver-shot ocean upon this unpromising overcoated shore!
‘For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality.
So when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory.’
Yes, thought Dyson, at that I can feel a pricking behind the lids of my eyes!
At that I am almost ready to break down and weep!
And yet…do I in any sense believe that poor old Eddy shall put on immortality?
Isn't it rather terrible that what brings the pricking behind my eyelids is not old Eddy's death, or even the thought of human mortality in general, but certain strokes of rhetoric — certain alliterations, repetitions, and verbal sonorities which don't hold any literal meaning for me?
I'm more moved by literature than by what it describes!
The lump in the throat — where has it gone?
Oh God, have I forgotten how poor old Eddy sat at his desk in Hand and Ball Court on the last day of his life, talking about those past times which were most important to him, and how nobody took any notice?
Have I forgotten how nobody really cared, how nobody really knew him?
Doesn't that bring the lump back to the throat, if one really dwells on it?
Well, doesn't it?
And isn't it a little moving to think of all these various people being moved by poor old Eddy's death?
Moved enough, anyway, to abandon their days work and come here to be told that the trumpet would sound, and poor old Eddy be raised incorruptible?
There was anguish in thinking of the anguish felt within the overcoats; and in the hearts of people from the office with some substance and standing, like Gareth Holmroyd and Laurence Evenden; and in the heart of one whose face would be well-known to anyone in the front pews from their television screens, if they happened to turn round…
But I did feel something.
In that horrible moment when I looked across the room and realized that poor old Eddy was dead I certainly felt something.
I felt frightened, physically frightened.
What else?
I felt disbelief, and some sense of outrage that this should happen to me.
Yes, I certainly felt something .
And when the priest came to commit poor old Eddy's body to the flames, Dyson felt something else.
For slowly, propelled by some unseen force, the coffin began to jerk sideways, until it reached the wall of the chapel, when a trapdoor opened, and in a series of irregular jerks, man that was born of woman disappeared into the wings.
Dyson was stunned by the vulgarity of it.
That poor old Eddy should come to this!
That he should last be seen being dragged jerkily offstage by theatrical machinery, like the cardboard ship in Dick Whittington !
Dyson half expected him to come jerking back for a reprise of the First Collect.
It would have been different if the trapdoor had been the actual door of the furnace; or if the coffin had been dragged by visible human operatives; or if it had gone smoothly, as by the hand of God or the power of irresistible mechanical principles.
But as it was…
As it was, Dyson had experienced a genuine spasm.
And another, secondary spasm, when he thought about the first one, and realized that he was more appalled by vulgarity than he was by death.
With great discretion, the overcoats in the front pews blew their noses.
With great discretion, Laurence Evenden released the excess gas pressure in his duodenum.
With  great discretion, Dyson yawned, straining his muscles to keep his mouth shut at the same time.
He yawned again, uncontrollably, concealing it behind his service-card.
God, he thought, I really must give the beer at lunch a miss.
Reg Mounce marched into Dyson's department, kicking the door open in front of him.
‘Oh, it's you,’ he said to Tessa, looking sourly round the room.
‘Both at the wake, are they?’
He hesitated, frowning at a sheet of paper he was holding.
‘It was one or the other of your bright boy-friends who sent me this, was it?’ he demanded, tossing the paper down in front of her.
She picked it up and read it.
Editor to R. Mounce.
PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL
I cannot trace any acknowledgment from you of the memorandum I sent you on the twelfth of this month, regarding your talents and the scope for them in this office.
Since the matter is important, I wonder if you would take the trouble to write to me again, indicating particularly whether such other arrangements as you will be making are likely to commence at an earlier date than one might otherwise suppose.
Certain other arrangements which I must make naturally turn upon this.
I trust that your own other arrangements are proceeding satisfactorily.
‘Some sort of joke, is it?’ demanded Mounce bitterly.
‘I'm afraid I don't know.
It looks as if it's from the Editor.’
‘Oh, it looks as if it's from the Editor,’ said Mounce ironically.
‘It says it's from the Editor.’
‘Oh, it says it's from the Editor.
The last one said it was  from the Editor.
But it wasn't.
It was just a load of crap that some joker had sent.
All this crap about ‘other arrangement's!
It's just crap.’
‘Is it?’ said Tessa, wondering if perhaps it was.
She tried to focus her mind on the words.
‘Other arrangements’— well, other arrangements were alternative dispositions.
And alternative dispositions were — well, they were other arrangements.
But somehow, she felt, the words had passed right through her mind without leaving any deposit of meaning behind.
‘Well, isn't it?’ said Mounce.
‘People aren't asked to make other arrangements on this paper, are they?
Have you ever heard of anyone in this office being asked to make other arrangements?’
‘Well, no…’
‘So it's obviously a load of crap.
Everyone saw that.
This isn't the Express , after all.’
He took the note out of Tessa's hands and began to read it through again, rubbing his chin uneasily.
‘I mean,’ he said, ‘you don't think this is from the Editor, do you?’
‘I've honestly no idea.’
‘I mean, this is just the sort of shit the Editor would write.
‘Other arrangements' — that's just the sort of stinking thing he'd say.’
‘I thought,’ said Tessa timidly, ‘that you said people weren't asked to make other arrangements on this paper?’
‘No, but what I mean is, if they were asked to make other arrangements, making other arrangements is just what the stinking Editor would call it.’
Mounce held the note up to the light, as if looking for a watermark.
‘I wonder,’ he said gloomily.
‘Now you've put doubts in my mind.’
‘I suppose you could ring the Editor's secretary and check…’ suggested Tessa hesitantly.
Mounce stared at her absently, pushing his lower lip up.
‘I suppose I could,’ he said.
He read through the note again, frowning.
Then he went over to the window, and gazed down into Hand and Ball Court for several minutes, frowning and pushing his lower lip up alternately.
‘I suppose that would be one way of tackling it,’ he said.
He took another look at the note, putting a finger into his mouth and trying to dislodge some irritating morsel of lunch from between his back teeth.
Slowly, still rereading the note and still working on his teeth, he wandered out of the room.
‘I'll bear it in mind,’ he said gloomily, without turning his head, as he went through the door.
‘Hello’ said Bob, coming back into the office and holding out a bag of sweets to Tessa.
‘Have a peppermint.
How were things in the office, Tessa?’
‘All right.
How was the funeral?’
‘Fine.’
He picked up the mail and messages on his desk and at once sorted out a small brown envelope addressed ‘R. Bell Esqre.’
‘Oh God,’ he said, ‘something from the Editor.’
He ripped it open.
It said:
Editor to R. Bell.
PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL.
Congratulations.
‘What does it say?’ asked Dyson.
‘You look as white as a sheet.’
Bob shook his head blankly.
‘It just says ‘congratulations.’
But what on, for God's sake?’
Dyson thought for an instant, and then laughed.
‘Bob!’ he said reproachfully.
‘On your engagement !’
10
Bob, arriving at the office before Dyson one morning, found a man he had never seen before working at poor old Eddy's desk.
He appeared on the whole to be middle-aged.
His face was middle-aged — unnaturally neat and pale, with spare flesh padding the line of the jaw, and lifeless sandy hair brushed inertly to the shape of the head.
But his clothes were young men's clothes — a very dark jacket buttoned on four buttons, revealing a triangle of dark tan shirt with a strip of black suede tie, and an inch and a half of tan cuff at each wrist.
He looked up at Bob; his eyes were ageless and neutral.
‘Hello’ he said, and returned to his work.
‘Hello,’ said Bob.
He took off his overcoat and sat down at his desk, staring at the man.
He felt he ought to query his presence — particularly his use of poor old Eddy's desk — but everything about him suggested that his right to be in the room was finely established — perhaps more firmly even than Bob's.
Besides, Bob felt diffident about challenging an older man.
Without taking his eyes off him, he opened the drawer of his desk and felt about inside it until he had located a toffee.
The man continued to work.
He was writing  something in longhand, the paper turned sideways, the pen flying along the lines away from him at great speed.
His left hand rested on the desk a silver ring set with a large brown stone on the little finger, and between the first and second fingers a cigarette with a thin blue tape of smoke rising steadily from it.
The finger-ends were pale amber, the rest of the hand marble-white, and slightly fleshy.
As Bob looked at it, the hand performed a sudden evolution like a conjuring-trick, turning over and producing from nowhere a pack of American cigarettes, with one of the cigarettes extended towards Bob.
The right hand continued to write.
The blue tape of smoke from the left hand snaggled for a moment, then the snaggle slid up the tape and disappeared, leaving the smoke rising as steadily as before from the underside of the hand.
‘Cigarette?’ said the man.
‘No thanks,’ said Bob.
‘My name's Erskine Morris,’ said the man, vanishing the cigarettes as deftly as he had produced them, and continuing to write as he spoke.
It looked like some sort of play he was writing, so far as Bob could see.
There were names down the margin, each followed by a colon and a short sentence ending in a row of dots.
‘I'm Moulton's replacement.’
‘Oh, I see,’ said Bob.
‘Well, welcome to the department.
My name's Bob Bell.’
‘Hi, Bob,’ said Morris expressionlessly.
Bob wondered if he was an Englishman who affected American usages, or an American with an English accent.
Was he a young American with middle-aged English characteristics?
Or a middle-aged Englishman with middle-aged American mannerisms?
Or…
Another thought struck Bob.
‘Does Dyson know you're joining us?’
‘You tell me, Bob.’
‘He hasn't said anything to me about it.’
Morris wrote on in silence.
‘I don't think I've seen you round the office before,’ said Bob finally.
‘No,’ said Morris.
‘You've just joined the paper?’
‘Sure.’
‘Who were you with before?’
‘I was at university before.’
Bob stared at Morris — mainly at the back of his head, since it was turned slightly away from him to follow the speeding journeys of his pen across the paper.
‘You mean, you've just come down?’ said Bob, trying out of politeness not to sound incredulous.
‘Sure.’
‘You mean,straight down?’
‘Last year.’
‘Forgive me asking, but how old are you?’
‘Twenty-two.’
Morris's left hand stretched out from its one-and-a-half inch cuff and stubbed out its half-smoked cigarette in the ashtray.
Then, while the right hand wrote on, it conjured up the pack of cigarettes once again, conjured one out, and conjured a flame out of a butane lighter it suddenly turned out to be holding.
Bob followed each movement with his eyes.
‘Which university were you at?’ he asked.
‘Cambridge.’
‘Cambridge?
I was at Cambridge.’
‘Sure.’
‘John Dyson was at Cambridge.’
‘Sure, sure.’
Morris administered his sures and sure sures in a soothing  tone, like pats on the head for an importunate child.
Bob felt rather like a child, talking to Morris.
He went over to the window and gazed down into Hand and Ball Court.
Reassuringly familiar, homely figures like Gareth Holmroyd and Pat Selig were arriving for work, pacing out the well-worn diagonal trail across the court from the end of Hand and Ball Passage to the main door of the office.
They seemed almost embarrassingly innocent and unsophisticated, compared with Morris.
‘Are you on the paper's graduate trainee scheme?’ he asked.
‘Sure.’
‘I joined the paper as a graduate trainee.’
‘Oh?’
Bob tried to imagine Morris completing the trainee scheme, joining the pensions fund, and going on to groove out the diagonal of Hand and Ball Court morning and night for twenty or thirty years.
It was somehow not a very plausible picture.
Erskine Morris…
‘That's a coincidence,’ said Bob.
You've got the same initials as poor old Eddy Moulton.’
‘Sure.’
‘I'll help you move poor old Eddy's junk out of the desk if you like, so you can move your own stuff in.’
‘Thank you, Bob — I've done it already:’
Going back to his desk, Bob looked discreetly over Morris's shoulder.
The only page he could see of Morris's manuscript started off:
BENNY: If Patrick says you're going to get done, you're going to get done, sunshine.
Inne, Patrick?
OLD MAN: No!
No !
PATRICK: He's going to get done all right…
BENNY: You see, sunshine?
You're going to get done.
Patrick says so…
[The camera holds OLD MAN in M.C.U., tightens on his terrified eyes, then whip-pans to C.U. of knife in PATRICK'S hand .]
‘What did you do with poor old Eddy's stuff?’ asked Bob.
‘I put it in the wastepaper basket,’ said Morris.
Dyson got off on the wrong foot with Morris from the very beginning, even though Morris politely stopped writing while Bob introduced them, and sat back in his chair to look at Dyson.
‘Hi John,’ he said, with some slight suggestion of benevolence in his voice, as if he were taking Dyson on his staff in spite of a prison record.
‘Erskine's just joined the paper as a graduate trainee, John,’ said Bob.
‘He's apparently coming to us as a replacement for poor old Eddy.’
Dyson was visibly irritated.
‘I haven't heard anything about this,’ he said.
‘I think there must be some mistake here.
Are you certain you were told to come to this office?’
‘Sure,’ said Morris.
‘Well, I haven't heard anything about it.
I'm certainly expecting someone .
God knows, I need someone.
But someone experienced !
A trainee is no earthly use in here at all.’
Dyson took off his overcoat and went to his desk, frowning heavily.
Morris said nothing.
He put his cigarette to his lips, drew in smoke, sat silent and impassive for some moments, then blew the smoke out of his nose in two impassive grey plumes.
‘You can sit here for the moment,’ said Dyson, opening the mail from his in-tray, ‘while we get this sorted out.
You can watch us at work.
I haven't got time to start showing  you how to do anything.
But you might pick up a thing or two just by looking.
I suppose it's all experience.
Has Morley produced yet, Bob?’
Bob shook his head.
‘Oh God !’ said Dyson, clenching his fists.
‘Oh God, oh God, oh God !’
He looked across at Morris.
‘It's a madhouse in here,’ he said.
‘Which university were you at?’
‘Cambridge,’ said Morris.
When he was not writing or smoking, Bob noticed, he sat absolutely still, so still that the ribbon of smoke from his cigarette hung almost undisturbed for two or three feet above his hand.
‘Which college?’
‘King's.’
Dyson was impressed.
‘I was at Sidney,’ he said in a different voice.
‘Well, well.
As a matter of fact, I started on this paper as a graduate trainee myself.
It's not a bad office.
Of course, it's not typical .
But then I doubt whether such a thing as a typical newspaper office exists.
It's a very funny business, the newspaper business.’
‘Sure,’ said Morris.
‘You get quite a good general introduction to the industry as a graduate trainee, you know.
You'll probably do six months in the news room first, then six months in the subs, then maybe six months in the commercial room…’
Dyson broke off in mid-explanation, frowning at a piece of copy-paper he had taken out of a little brown envelope marked ‘J. Dyson Esqre.’
That's funny,’ he said irritably.
‘You are supposed to be here.
The Editor's sent you.’
‘Sure,’ said Morris.
‘I don't know why I wasn't told about this before,’ complained Dyson.
‘I think I should have been consulted.
The Editor knew what the situation was in here.’
‘Sure, sure,’ said Morris soothingly, conjuring up the cigarette  pack again.
‘Have a cigarette, John, and tell me what I'm supposed to be doing.’
Dyson set Morris to work copying out the extracts for the ‘In Years Gone By’ column.
But Dyson's opinion of him, which had risen noticeably on hearing that he had been at King's, had fallen back to zero again; his having been at King's was cancelled out by his having been right about his instructions to join Dyson's department.
A slight difficulty arose about whether he might type the extracts.
‘Eddy always used to write them out in longhand,’ said Dyson.
‘I'd prefer to type them.’
‘Yes…well…
I suppose you could.
There's only one typewriter in here, I'm afraid.’
‘I'll use that for now.
I'll get another one sent in later.’
‘I'm afraid you won't be able to get another one,’ said Dyson.
‘We have to make do with one in here, sharing it.
Poor old Eddy didn't type, you see.’
Morris typed throughout the morning, driving the carriage of the department's battered portable along with his two hammering fingers just about as fast as it would go.
He worked with scarcely a break to search out a new passage in the files, or to pick up the half-smoked end of his last cigarette from the ashtray, stub it out, light a new one, and put it down in its place.
The noise of the typewriter and the gathering haze of cigarette smoke in the room both seemed to disturb Dyson.
He kept glancing across at either the typewriter or the cigarette in the ashtray, and frowning.
Morris's presence also put him off his stroke on the phone.
‘Good morning, Sir William, I hope I'm not intruding,’ he would say, smiling self-deprecatingly at the distant  Sir William.
Then he would remember he was being watched by Morris, and he would frown, and stuff his finger into his left ear to keep out the noise of the typewriter.
‘What was that, Sir William?
You were just doing what, Sir William?’
Then he would realize he was smiling again for Sir William's benefit, and swing round in his chair so that Morris couldn't see the smile.
But when Morris stopped typing, just before lunchtime, and sat back in his chair looking through his handiwork, the silence disturbed Dyson even more.
He stared at Morris disapprovingly, as if Morris had spent the whole morning in idleness.
‘How are you getting on?’ he asked.
‘I've done a week's supply, John.’
‘Of hundreds or fifties?’
‘The lot.’
‘Twenty-fives and tens as well?’
‘Sure, sure.’
‘Let me have a look’
Morris clipped the papers together and tossed them across onto Dyson's desk Dyson had for some reason assumed that Morris would bring them over and stand beside him while he went through them.
He went through them none the less, frowning.
He had spent most of the morning frowning, except when he had been talking to Sir William Paice and others.
Morris lit another cigarette.
‘This is all right,’ said Dyson, taking pains to ink in one or two faint characters and slipped capitals, in lieu of anything else to correct.
‘This is quite good.
Quite good work.’
‘What next, John?’ asked Morris.
Dyson gazed at the sheets of copy, shuffling them about in his hand, trying to think.
‘You'd better do another week's supply,’ he said.
Morris accompanied Bob and Dyson to the Gates for lunch.
Bob invited him; Dyson frowned all the way there, and abandoned the other two as soon as they were inside.
‘Every newspaper office has its own particular pub,’ explained Bob.
‘The Gates happens to be ours.’
‘Sure,’ said Morris, looking round the bar with his noncommittal eyes.
‘Well, some people go off to El Vino's or the Falstaff.
But a certain set on the paper come here pretty regularly.
You can usually count on finding old Bill Waddy sitting up at the bar here, and old Gareth Holmroyd hovering about somewhere.’
‘Sure, sure,’ said Morris.
Bob introduced him to some of the usual crowd, and Morris asked Bill Waddy, who was buying, for a Pernod.
They all stared at him over their halves of bitter.
Morris appeared not to notice.
‘Who's the joker up the end?’ he asked Bob quietly.
Is he one of your team?’
‘The one leaning on the bar?
That's Reg Mounce, the Pictures Editor.’
‘He's high.’
‘A bit, possibly.
It's quite funny, actually.
You see that dog-eared piece of paper he's showing Gareth and Mike?
That's a note he got from the Editor the other day, giving him the sack.’
‘What's he flashing it around for, then?’
‘Well, he's surprised by it, you see.
The point is, people don't get the sack on this paper.
It's that sort of paper.
So he keeps going round asking everyone what they think he should do.’
Morris stared at Bob expressionlessly.
‘And?’ he said.
‘Well, everyone thinks he should just ignore it.
Pretend  he never got it.
People don't think the Editor would have the nerve to challenge him about it.
‘A popular man, is he, Reg?’
‘Oh God no.
Everyone thinks he's an absolute tit.
It's just a matter of solidarity.’
‘Oh.
That.’
‘It's that sort of office.’
‘Sure.’
‘It's really not at all a bad sort of office to be in.’
‘Sure,’ said Morris, conjuring another long cigarette out of the air.
‘Oh, sure, sure.’
Relations between Dyson and Morris deteriorated still further after lunch.
Morris left the Gates as soon as he had finished his Pernod.
When Dyson and Bob got back to the office, he was at his desk already, typing.
It was not the department's battered old machine he was typing on; it was a brand-new electric portable.
Dyson stopped in his tracks, gazing at it.
He was almost too angry to speak.
‘Look,’ he said, ‘I'm not standing for this.
Year in, year out, Bob and I have had to make do with one rotten reconditioned typewriter between us.
And the first day you arrive you contrive to get hold of this!
Well, I'm not having it.’
Dyson wrenched off his overcoat, dragging the lining out of the right sleeve.
He sat down at his desk, not looking at Morris, his face rigid with anger.
Morris watched him expressionlessly.
‘You can borrow it if you like,’ he said.
‘I can borrow it?’ cried Dyson, flaring up at once.
‘Did you say I can borrow it?’
‘Sure.
Whenever you like.’
Bob slipped a peppermint into his mouth, not daring to look at either of them until Dyson had found words to speak.
‘That typewriter's going back at once,’ he said inadequately.
Morris inhaled smoke, held it for some minutes, and then let it out down his nose.
‘John,’ he said impassively, ‘this isn't an office machine.’
‘What?’ snapped Dyson.
‘What is it, then?’
‘It's my own.’
‘Yours?
Where did you get it from?’
‘I bought it.’
Bob averted his eyes again.
It was as embarrassing to see a friend under the influence of adrenalin when one had not lost one's own temper as it was to see him under the influence of alcohol when one was sober.
‘Bought it?’ queried Dyson, as if the word were some rare form of Sanskrit preterite.
‘Sure.’
‘In a shop?’
‘Sure.’
‘In the lunch-hour?’
‘Sure.’
‘An electric typewriter ?’
‘Sure, sure.’
Dyson continued to gaze at Morris for some moments, his mouth very slightly open.
Then, abruptly, without a word, he turned away, picked up a piece of copy, and began to correct it with short, violent strokes and swirls of his pen.
Morris turned his head slightly and caught Bob's eye.
Bob at once stopped moving the peppermint about in his mouth.
‘If you pay Schedule D,’ said Morris, ‘it's tax-deductible.’
Bob made a point of taking a benevolent interest in Morris over the next few days, to balance out Dyson's hostility.
He got him an office towel for the washroom.
He told him to  whom to apply for union membership.
He showed him how to make out his expenses chits, filling in ‘Office duties, 5s. 6d.’ for each day of the week, as laid down in the house agreement between union and management.
Bob could remember his own loneliness and isolation when he had first come down and started work on the paper.
Morris didn't seem lonely or isolated himself, but a hard shell was usually a sign of vulnerability underneath.
People were also taking a benevolent interest in Bob.
Gareth Holmroyd, Ted Hurwitz, Mike Sparrow, Ralph Absalom — they were all keeping their eyes open for a house for him.
Each day they brought him cyclostyled sheets from their local agents, and the telephone numbers of friends' relatives whose relatives' friends had seen a board up somewhere.
Bob felt obliged to go and look at a certain number of these places out of politeness.
He took mornings off from work to inspect houses of character in Ealing, imposing residences in Hendon, and important properties in select residential districts just thirty minutes from Waterloo.
With unseeing eyes he gazed at usual offices, charming patios, ‘Ideal’ boilers, and mature fruit-trees.
He asked the young men from the agents who showed him round if the pipes were lagged and whether the soil was chalk or clay; he couldn't think of any other questions.
Almost the only thing he could think of coherently as he peered at the Dutch tiles and crazy paving was that according to his last statement of account he had 67 12s. 9d. in the bank.
He dwelt on the figure gratefully.
Whatever happened, however far he was driven by forces outside his control, there was surely no way in which a man with only 67 12s. 9d. could find himself acquiring a delightful property or superior detached residence.
In the last analysis the 67 12s. 9d. would stand revealed; the pen would be taken out of his fingers just before he signed across  the excise stamp; gentle hands would conduct him back to the comfortable shabby gloom of Flat 4, 86 Leominster Gardens.
Jannie was taking a benevolent interest, too, inviting not Bob but Tessa out to look at houses she had found for them in s.w.23.
The houses Jannie found did not have charming patios or mature rose-gardens.
Most of them were noticeably short even on usual offices, and it did not occur even to the agents to describe them as imposing or delightful.
Still, they had something; they had potentialities.
And sitting tenants.
‘It's just a matter of agreeing compensation with them,’ said Jannie, leading Tessa in and out of rooms impregnated with such poverty and squalor as she had never dreamt existed.
‘Everyone does it.
The present owner would probably arrange it for you, if you feel awkward about it.’
‘Yes,’ said Tessa, trying not to breathe the sweet-sour air into her lungs.
‘You could knock this wall down, and make one large room through from front to back.’
‘Yes.’
‘Or make the flat at the back into the kitchen, and rent the basement out as a bed-sitter…’
For Bob and Tessa's house Jannie projected all the reconstruction and improvement which she and John had never found either money or energy enough to carry out in their own.
As she took Tessa over a house, the West Indian family in the second floor back dissolved in her mind into an au pair girl, the brass taps and greasy gas-rings in the ground-floor scullery into a row of shining white domestic machinery.
She had never had an au pair girl or a laundry room herself.
Her visualization was as generous to Bob and Tessa as it was careless of the existing occupiers.
All Tessa could do was blush.
She felt she was blushing all the time on these trips, at the conditions of life they were intruding upon, at Jannie's plans to turn it to their advantage, at Jannie's evident affection for her.
Jannie really seemed to like her, in her oblique, distracted way.
Perhaps just because she was Bob's fiancée — but Tessa felt that it was for herself as well.
She wished she could like Jannie more in return.
She could see her qualities; she could see why Bob liked her.
All the same, when Jannie spoke in that curious Oxford-and-Cambridge accent she had, she seemed to Tessa immeasurably remote and eccentric — a woman of some quite different generation.
Then again, she was in love with Bob, and embarrassingly old to be.
It was as if one's aunt were competing against one.
‘It would be so nice if you did come and live near us when you're married,’ said Jannie wistfully.
‘One does feel a bit cut off out here.’
The whole business was ridiculous, of course.
They would never get married — it should have been obvious to everyone.
They couldn't get married.
Bob wasn't in love with her.
You didn't get married to people who weren't in love with you.
But if Jannie couldn't see this for herself, how could she explain it to her —now , after they had trailed round looking at all those houses?
How could Bob suddenly start explaining it to John, to Gareth Holmroyd, to the Editor?
How could she and Bob even put it in words to each other?
‘I mean,’ said Jannie, ‘it's very central here.
It's just that one sometimes feels rather — oh, I don't know.
You and Bob could get a mortgage all right, couldn't you?’
‘Oh, I should think so,’ said Tessa, blushing yet again.
She didn't know whether they could get a mortgage or not.
She had no clear idea of what a mortgage was .
And  she resisted finding out, in the way that other girls she had known kept themselves in deliberate ignorance of such things as impregnation, in the unarticulated hope that if they didn't know what it was it couldn't happen to them.
Mrs. Mounce busied herself with being kind to Tessa, too.
But this she found easier to bear, partly because Mrs. Mounce had so many troubles herself that she was able to be kind back to her, and partly because Mrs. Mounce's world and Mrs. Mounce's advice seemed even more remote and unreal than Jannie's.
‘Honestly, sweetest,’ said Mrs. Mounce, ‘don't go lumbering yourselves with a house and a mortgage right at the beginning.
Rent a nice little flat somewhere where you know exactly what your outgoings are — where you know you're not responsible for anything.
You can always do a little bit here and a little bit there to brighten it up.’
Tessa liked her, in a dreary sort of way — the sort of way one liked picking one's nails or staying in bed all morning.
They sat for hours drinking tea in Mrs. Mounce's flat downstairs, while Mrs. Mounce talked about her affairs with moustached men in export-import, and Tessa looked at the little bit here and the little bit there which Mrs. Mounce had done herself to brighten her own place up.
Most of the little bits seemed to be made of cream-painted hardboard and enamelled black wrought iron.
She imagined showing her parents round a home of her own decorated in the same way.
‘And this is the cocktail bar, Daddy.
Bob and I made it out of hardboard and Formica…
Do you like the individual wrought-iron bottle stands at the back?
Bob screwed them on the mirror himself…’
The thought made her smile to herself, for what she recognized were basically snobbish reasons.
She was pleased to find she was still able to smile, even snobbishly.
She had the impression that she hadn't smiled for several months.
Steadily, quietly, electrically, Erskine Morris typed the ‘In Years Gone By’ column several weeks into the future.
There had never been so much ‘In Years Gone By’ copy set, or so much waiting to be set.
From day to day the dark shades of his shirts, ties, and high-buttoning suits subtly changed.
But the pallid face above them remained impassive, and the waiting cigarette continued to smoke ritually in the ashtray, like a joss-stick before some inscrutable joss.
And Morris's presence continued to cramp Dyson's style.
He was if anything more irritated by the quiet drumming of the electric typewriter than by the clatter of the old mechanical one.
It was harder to notice exactly when it stopped, and Dyson liked to know.
Round about four o'clock in the afternoon he would sometimes forget Morris and sprawl back in his chair with his hands behind his head, yawning and looking at the ceiling, just as he had before Morris's arrival.
Then he would suddenly realize that the typing had ceased.
Fearing that Morris had stopped to watch him yawning, he would at once return to his work, and try to conceal his yawns behind his hand.
At other times, he would sit back in a thoughtful, philosophical mood and ask Bob whether he felt one ought to have one's name printed at the head of one's private writing-paper.
Morris's typewriter would stop at once.
‘Oh, forget it, Bob,’ Dyson would mutter.
A great deal of work was done by all three of them.
Dyson became quite unlike himself in his dealings with Morris.
Every time Morris got a telephone call which sounded from his laconic replies as if it were private business, Dyson frowned at him warningly.
He also prowled  about the room from time to time, passing as if accidentally behind Morris's chair and looking over Morris's shoulder out of the corner of his eye.
It was in this way that he discovered that not all Morris's application with the typewriter was devoted to ‘In Years Gone By.’
‘What's this?’ he demanded one day.
‘Terry had been on tea for four years before he first began using horse.’
What the hell's this?’
Morris helped himself to a couple of lungfuls of cigarette smoke.
‘It's an article on junk,’ he said.
‘Junk?’
‘Drugs.
It's for the features department.’
‘They asked you to do it?’
‘Sure.’
Dyson walked round the room like a patrolling schoolmaster.
‘Have you written anything else for other departments?’ he asked.
‘Oh, a couple of leaders.
Some diary pars.’
Dyson patrolled on.
‘If you want to write anything for anyone else again,’ he said roughly, ‘do it in your own time, not in mine.’
‘O.K., John,’ said Morris.
Dyson knew he was behaving stupidly, which made him more graceless still.
Bob tried to talk him out of it when they were on their own, at the sandwich bar in the Gates.
‘You'll have to find him something else to do, John,’ he said.
‘He's five weeks ahead on ‘Years Gone By’ already.’
‘But what else can I give him to do?’ wailed Dyson.
‘He's just a trainee — he doesn't know how to do anything.’
‘He can learn, John, just like you and I did.’
‘Bob, I can't let him sub, because I haven't got time to go through it all again and check it.
And can you honestly imagine him ringing up Sir William Paice?
Or the Bishop?
Or even Canon Morley?’
‘Well…’
‘He's just not the type, is he, Bob?
Anyway, poor old Eddy did ‘In Years Gone By’ for over ten years.
I don't see why Mr. Morris shouldn't stick at it for a week or two.’
‘Morris isn't the same sort of man as poor old Eddy, John.’
‘Don't tell me!
Honestly, Bob, that office was a happy place until Morris came.
To me he seems to cast a blight over the whole day.’
‘You do overdramatize things a bit, you know, John.
He's a bit shy, that's all.’
‘Do you know what Bill Waddy calls him, Bob?
Erskine Absinthe.
Fancy coming in here and demanding a Pernod on his very first day at the office!
And he didn't even buy a round himself!
He just swilled down his Pernod and walked out!’
‘He's a bit on the defensive, John.’
‘He never bought a round!
And all this classless business he tries to put across.
Honestly, Bob, he went to Rugby!
Did you know that?
I asked the personnel director.
You and I went to ordinary grammar schools, Bob — but we don't go round pretending to be classless.
And he went to Rugby!
Well, for God's sake, Bob!
For God's sake!’
Remembering all the dinners he had eaten at the Dysons' when he had been living on his own, Bob invited Morris back to his flat one evening so that Tessa could cook dinner for him in his turn.
Tessa was nervous about it; she had never entertained anyone in the flat before, apart from Mrs. Mounce.
She became worried about the appearance of the place, about her cooking, and about her anomalous position in the household.
But Morris turned out to be completely uninterested in all three.
When he arrived he put his cold, white hand in hers for a moment and said, ‘Hello, Tessa,’ as if he had always been aware of her as part of the background furnishings.
Then he ignored her for the rest of the evening.
He produced a full bottle of whisky from his briefcase, poured out three tumblerfuls, and asked if he could have the television on.
‘There's something coming up that I have an interest in,’ he said, fiddling expertly with the controls of the set.
‘Something you wrote?’ asked Bob, remembering the dialogue he had seen on Morris's desk.
‘Sure.’
‘A play?’
‘A song.’
‘What sort of song, Erskine?
A pop song?’
‘Sure, sure.
I'd just like to see how it goes.’
There was a whole programme of pop songs on.
Morris sprawled back in the one armchair with his whisky, watching them all impassively.
As each new number came up Bob looked at him and asked, ‘This one?’
Morris shook his head without interest.
Bob began to get nervous on his behalf.
‘You're very casual about it, Erskine,’ he said.
‘What is there to get excited about?’ said Morris easily, the flesh beneath his chin folding over the top of his collar as he leaned back into the cushions.
‘It's just a song.’
‘But to get it on television!
Or have you done it before?’
‘I've had a few numbers on.’
Bob stared at him.
‘What a strange man you are, Erskine!’ he said.
The corner of Morris's mouth twitched up into his cheek and fell back.
Bob became embarrassed at his own effusiveness, and turned back to the screen, tapping out the rhythm with his fingers on the side of his glass.
‘What's this number of yours called?’ he asked.
Morris blew smoke down his nose.
‘I Can't Stop Crying,’ he said.
A girl with dark-rimmed eyes and long straight blonde hair appeared on the screen, picking her way through a number of abstract decorative shapes at the back of the studio.
‘I can't stop crying,’ she sang in a plaintive voice.
‘All through the night, I can't stop crying.
Know it's not right, but can't stop crying.
I can't stop crying, 'cause I am crying for you.’
‘Is this yours?’ asked Bob.
‘Sure.’
‘I can't stop crying,’ sang the girl.
‘Though I'm a fool, I go on sighing.
Know I'm a fool, not even trying.
It can't be right to cry through the night.
I can't stop crying for you.’
‘Very good,’ said Bob, when she had finished.
‘I liked the tune.’
‘I did the words,’ said Morris.
‘Someone else did the music.’
‘The words were very good, too.’
Morris shrugged.
‘It's what the children like,’ he said.
‘They don't like anything new or strange.
Children are very conservative.’
They left the television on while they had dinner, because Morris wanted to watch a Western.
Thinking that he wanted to watch it because he thought it was funny, Bob made a few humorous remarks at the expense of the characters on the screen.
But Morris didn't smile.
He watched silently and impassively, chewing his overdone steak, and retrieving his cigarette from the ashtray between courses.
Bob took the point; Morris didn't think the Western was funny.
When the Western was finished they watched the hospital serial.
And when the hospital serial finished they carried their coffee across to the set and watched the courtroom  serial.
Bob and Tessa sat on the floor, their arms round each other.
Morris sprawled in the armchair, dispensing whisky.
Mrs. Mounce rang the bell and was invited in.
‘Hello, Glenda,’ said Morris when Bob introduced them.
She curled up on the floor and leaned against the arm of Morris's chair.
He poured her a tumbler of whisky.
‘Sweetest ’ she cried flirtatiously.
‘You're trying to get me tight!’
‘Sure, sure,’ said Morris absently, his attention on the screen.
And so they sat.
The telephone rang three times; each time it was for Morris.
‘Sure…’ they heard him murmuring into the mouthpiece, between the noise of gunshot and the scream of tyres.
‘I could be interested…
I should want to use him in a completely different context, of course…
Sure, sure…’
After the third call Morris said to Bob, ‘I asked some people to step round.’
‘Fine,’ said Bob.
‘They're welcome.’
But when they arrived, Morris didn't seem particularly interested in them — not, anyway, enough to stop watching the television.
‘Lake, Brian, Andy,’ he explained, scarcely looking up from the screen.
‘Tessa, Glenda, Bob.
Pour out the rest of the whisky, Brian.’
Brian and Andy lounged against the edge of the dining-table at the back of the group, half watching the television, half talking to each other.
Lake perched on the arm of Morris's chair and stared at the screen.
She was a girl; she was the girl who had sung ‘I Can't Stop Crying.’
Bob gazed at her, drinking her in.
She shone in the half-darkness of the room.
Her long bleached hair shone; her polished white raincoat shone; her white boots and her unstockinged knees shone.
‘How did it look?’ she asked Morris, not taking her eyes off the screen.
‘Great,’ said Morris, not taking his eyes off the screen either.
He slipped a noncommittal hand round her waist, so that the smoke from his cigarette rose past her left ear.
Bob couldn't stop staring at her, even though he had his arm round Tessa.
He rubbed his chin absently on the top of Tessa's head, so that he could look over it at the girl.
Tessa and Mrs. Mounce, he knew, were watching her out of the corner of their eyes too, as silent and overawed as he was himself.
He knew without even thinking about it consciously that she had no bottom worth worrying about.
God almighty!
A girl in show business, with white boots and no bottom — in his flat!
‘It looked all right, did it?’ she asked Morris again, perhaps forgetting that she had asked him once already.
‘Great, great.
Have you eaten?’
‘We're going to get something at Nick's.
You coming?’
‘O.K.,’ said Morris.
He stood up and put his cigarettes in his pocket.
‘Thanks, Tessa.
Thanks, Bob.
I enjoyed that.
Bye, Glenda.
Bye!’
They had gone, all four of them, almost before Bob realized they were going.
‘Darling!’ said Mrs. Mounce admiringly.
‘I never knew you had such smart friends!’
Bob drew the curtain to one side and looked out of the window.
The four of them were just climbing into a long red two-seater sports car standing double-parked almost in the middle of the roadway.
Its headlights came on full beam, and it accelerated away with a rising roar which brought heads to windows all along the street.
Silently, Tessa switched the television off and began to clear the table.