

The Kha-Khan elect had bathed, and he was freshly scented.
His hair was the colour of spun gold, and two body slaves were doing their best to comb it out so that it could be braided.
It was an exercise which was fraught with difficulty.
Artai was incapable of sitting still for long, and only his abnormal concern with his appearance made him submit at all to the restrictive nature of the ministrations of the Y'frike slaves.
When he craned to stare down at the crowds in the great square below the palace, his head moved so that it rested upon the parapet like a decoration.
The part-braided ends of his long hair escaped from the busy fingers which were engaged in their intricate task.
The dusky features of both slaves assumed long-suffering expressions, and one of them pursed his lips.
‘The people do not see me, or they would bow.’
Artai turned back from his scrutiny of the square.
Alexei was sitting on the end of a low couch which was positioned in the centre of the room.
He controlled the urge to laugh at the tinge of regret which had coloured Artai's tone.
‘Magnificence, you could attract their attention.’
Artai's great golden eyes opened wide.
‘Oh?
How?’
‘Well you could shout, or wave maybe.’
The expression which made its way onto Artai's face was familiar enough.
He wrinkled his nose, half closed his eyes, and then he surveyed Alexei as if he was trying to understand a bad joke.
‘That would not be fitting,’ he said finally.
He stared at Alexei for a moment longer, and then suddenly he grinned  impishly.
‘Of course you are not serious, but it would be fun.’
‘Yes.’
‘Ishiko would be outraged.’
‘Probably.’
Alexei nodded.
Ishiko was the Kha-Khan's major domo, a N'pani who was arguably the most powerful slave in the Khanate.
He was the supreme arbiter of protocol and courtly behaviour, and it was likely that he would be put out, to say the least, by the notion of a Kha-Khan who behaved with such a lack of reserve.
It was clear that Artai found the prospect attractive.
He craned over the balcony again, but finally he seemed to sigh.
Then he sat down again on the golden stool which had been placed on the balcony of the chamber.
Once more the body slaves began the process of dressing the golden hair.
‘When I am Kha-Khan, I will be able to do as I please.’
Artai was watching Alexei's face as he spoke.
Alexei considered the proposition.
There were almost no restrictions on the behaviour of the Kha-Khan elect, and his wilfulness was legend.
‘You disagree?’
Artai's tone was petulant.
‘Magnificence —’ Alexei attempted an equable approach.’
— There is surely more to concern a Kha-Khan than his own interests.’
‘Ho!’
Artai sat up straight.
‘You presume to instruct me?’
Alexei stretched out his legs.
He examined his booted feet for a moment, and then he raised his eyes.
‘Not at all, Magnificence.
Does it not say in the first Sura of the Yasa that the Kha-Khan is above all the servant of his people?’
Artai flushed.
‘The Kha-Khan's will is supreme,’ he said.
‘No power on earth is greater, and the Yasa is his to do as he —’ not for a Kha-Khan to amuse himself like a selfish child.’
The Kha-Khan elect stood.
The golden irises of his eyes seemed to have expanded, and with his head held too high he appeared to be staring at the ceiling.
‘I am the Exalted,’ he said.
Alexei looked back patiently.
After a moment Artai looked away.
‘I will be the Exalted.’
‘Yes.’
’— And if I am to be a great Kha-Khan, I ought to be able to recognise when I am being told the truth.’
He looked down his nose.
‘Even by an alien.’
‘Yes.’
Alexei ignored the mild insult.
He showed his teeth.
He had anticipated a tantrum, and he was surprised by Artai's self-control.
‘Hunh.’
Artai nodded slowly as if he was satisfied.
He sat down, and after a moment he gestured languidly.
‘I do not know if you are so frank with me because you do not care how I react, or if it is honesty which prompts you.
Do you speak so to other men?’
Alexei sat back.
‘Magnificence, it is too much trouble to lie.’
He watched Artai for a reaction.
‘Oh, well.’
The Kha-Khan elect raised his eyebrows.
‘My uncles and must of the other Khans take such pains when they speak to me, and yet you go to no trouble at all.
I think it is rebellious of you, that you cannot be bothered to find a falsehood with which to flatter me.’
It was true that the members of the court sometimes seemed to be in competition in their attempts to gratify Artai's vanity.
Alexei was amused to discover that the Kha-Khan elect was not deceived.
It provided a new slant on his character.
He laughed.
‘Your uncles would be shocked to hear that you think that they lie, Magnificence.
Targoutai thinks that he alone knows the truth.’
‘All of the Khans say proper things to me.’
Artai waved a hand.
‘But I watch their eyes when they speak, and I see what they intend.
I know they do not hold me in high regard.
Each of them seeks to use me for his own ends.’
‘Then judge them by their acts, Magnificence, and do not listen to what they say.’
The elder of the body slaves gathered the braided ends of his master's hair and bound them together with gold wire.
He twisted the queue forward and arranged it carefully.
The end of the wire was studded with jewels, and the effect was that of a snake poised to strike above Artai's scalp.
‘I can trust almost no one,’ Artai said.
He did not seem perturbed.
‘Perhaps I can rely upon the Merkuts, for they cannot yet aspire to the throne.
Burun loves power, but also he desires order in the land and so he will protect me.
It took me a long time to understand that.’
The analysis of Burun's character was so shrewd that Alexei was startled.
He avoided Artai's stare.
‘Why did you decide to serve me?’
Artai asked.
Alexei hesitated.
‘You are the Chosen,’ he said at last.
He was impelled by the circumstances to provide an honest answer, but as always there were degrees of the truth.
‘I served Nogai.
I was his friend and companion, and it was his will that you should ascend the Dragon Throne.’
‘You do not seek reward?’
‘Oh, certainly.’
Alexei grinned.
‘I am a member of the Kha-Khan's court, and without his favour I am nothing.’
Artai digested the information.
’— Then for your service to me thus far I will confirm you in the offices  and estates which you held from Nogai.’
It was as much as Alexei had expected.
He bowed from his seat on the couch.
‘Magnificence, you are generous and I thank you.’
The body slaves had finished their tasks.
At Artai's back they knelt, and then prostrated themselves.
as if he sensed their homage the Kha-Khan elect waved a hand in dismissal.
The slaves rose and backed out of the chamber, their eyes cast down.
Artai seemed to gaze out across Kinsai.
It was already late morning, and the red glare of the sun was evaporating away the moisture left by an earlier shower so that the golden roofs of the principal buildings were wreathed with a mist which eddied and flowed under the influence of the heat which rose off the plain.
Suddenly Artai turned.
‘Your father serves Burun in the rank of S'zltan.’
‘Yes, Magnificence.’
Alexei met the piercing glance squarely.
The observation did not seem to require any other response.
’— And yet you are not, I think, your father's heir?’
Artai walked from the balcony across the expanse of the chamber to a marble table which stood against one wall.
He was watching Alexei, his head cocked to one side like a bird examining a dubious worm.
There was an odd expression on his face.
‘No.’
Alexei shook his head.
‘My father's heir is Kadan, his son by the daughter of Burun.’
He felt no trace of resentment as he made the statement.
The estrangement which had accompanied his father's marriage to Turakina was an old wound, long since healed.
’— Then surely you have sworn fealty to some noble lord, and owe service for his favour?’
There was an alien caste to Artai's features as he spoke.
His eyes were abnormally large, and suddenly  Alexei realised that both the muscles around the eyes and the jet black pupils which were centred within the golden irises were affected not at all by the light but responded rather to some inner stimulus.
The discovery was unsettling, for it was commonly accepted that it was difficult to meet the impassive stare of the Kha-Khan elect for more than a few seconds.
Amber gold eye colouring was unusual but not unknown.
Now it occurred to Alexei to wonder why no one had remarked on the phenomenon before now.
Clearly Artai exhibited at least one mutated characteristic.
Possibly he possessed others which were even less obvious.
‘Magnificence, I have given my oath to no man.’
That much was certainly true.
Even as he spoke, his last conversation with Burun sprang unbidden into the forefront of Alexei's mind.
Artai seemed to ponder.
Then it was as if he had come to a decision.’
— Then I will dignify your estates of Khara Khitai with the ulus of a Khan,’ he said smoothly.
Alexei blinked.
As a reward for delivering the information which had led to the exposure of Sidacai's planned coup, the honour was excessive.
He was thrown off balance by the casual ease with which the Kha-Khan elect was controlling the interview.
Usually Artai behaved like a fractious child, his temper uncertain, his demeanour abrupt and discourteous.
‘I am scarcely worthy, Magnificence —’
It was a stock reply, one which invited dismissal, and Artai treated it accordingly.
’— You are worthy because your loyalty to me is beyond question,’ he said.
‘It is true that there are Khans enough in the land; but there are none I dare call friend.’
For a moment his look was piercing, and then he produced a rare smile.
‘The Lord of the Earth  choose to give you the rank which is proper.’
It was hard to know how to respond.
Alexei stood up.
He searched for a formula with which to answer, his knowledge of Artai's character combining with his just-formed suspicion to produce a chill of disquiet.
‘If you were more eager for my friendship, I would not trust you.’
Artai spoke softly.
He picked up a sheet of parchment from the table, glanced at it, and then raised his eyes.
‘Do you fear me?’
Alexei constructed a suitable reply, then discarded it in favour of plain truth.
‘Magnificence, I fear your nature.’
‘Hah.’
The Kha-Khan elect produced a snort of laughter.
‘You would fear me, if you knew my nature.
But you do not, and so you only fear what you suspect my nature may be.
Do you think I am mad?
The blood of Daijin runs in me, it is true.’
The question was uncomfortably close to the mark.
Watching Artai's expression, Alexei saw only amused curiosity, and he shrugged.
‘Is a man truly mad who knows his nature, Magnificence?
On this world there is scarcely a Khan who does not have a tyrant or a murderer in his bloodline.’
Artai's nose wrinkled.
‘You might as well argue that a man who knows that he is mad is less to be feared than a man who believes that he is sane.
Certainly the man who does not question his own sanity is mad indeed.
I like your answers better when they are honest, Alexei.’
The amber stare was difficult to meet without flinching.
‘It is true that I fear the part of your nature which at times you do not care to control,’ Alexei said steadily.
He held his breath.
The muscles of Artai's head and shoulders seemed to twitch.
Then he nodded.
’— And yet you have  chosen to serve me.
I am satisfied.’
Alexei released the breath he had been holding.
It was apparent that Artai's inquisition had been a kind of test, and that he had passed.
The Kha-Khan elect was studying the parchment in his hand.
All at once he looked up.
‘This is Sidacai's death warrant,’ he said.
‘I will sign it the day I ascend the throne.’
Sidacai was confined in one of the lower levels of the Golden Yurt.
A military council had already decreed the execution of the five principal conspirators, but confirmation of the sentences of death would not be lawful until the Dragon Throne was occupied once more.
‘Has Siban not petitioned for Sidacai's life?’
Alexei watched as Artai rolled the parchment and laid it aside.
In fact the appeal was common knowledge.
There had been no evidence to connect Siban with his son's plot to overturn Nogai's will.
The Khans who had joined with Sidacai were all members of the family of Kodai, who was a grandson of the Ancestor via the line of his second son Ordai, Conqueror of N'pan.
With their deaths, the Senjin Clan of the Altun would virtually cease to exist.
Artai did not turn.
He nodded.
‘He has reminded me that the beginning of a reign is a traditional time for the pardoning of malefactors,’ he said.
His tone suggested that he disapproved of the notion.’
— In truth I am ill-disposed towards mercy.
I would as lief offer my own throat to the knife.’
The news was scarcely a surprise.
The Yasa allowed for only a limited selection of penalties under the law.
A man might be fined, in which case it was usual for him to be ordered to make payment to the person or persons who had suffered as a result of his crime.
A  noble was likely to be stripped of rank and privileges — reduced to the status of a commoner.
for serious offences there was only one sentence — death by the knife.
Imprisonment was not regarded as punishment.
A person was only detained pending trial for a capital crime, or while awaiting verification of sentence.
‘I have never killed a man before.’
Artai was staring at the table as he spoke.
He looked up, but Alexei was unable to read the expression in his eyes.
The antechamber outside Artai's apartments was hung with silks like a yurt.
A long time in the past the Yek had been nomads, and even though the principal cities of the Khanate were constructed from stone, the interior decoration of many of the principal houses owed its origins to the heritage of the tent.
A group of lesser Khans stood muttering in one corner of the room, and when Alexei came through the hangings which provided access to the bedchamber they fell guiltily silent.
One of them bowed, a false smile on his face, but Alexei ignored him.
He strode past the lines of guards and attendants, nodded to the pair of officers who lounged at their ease in the shadow of the enormous length of midnight-blue fabric which hung suspended from the ceiling in lieu of a screen, and slackened his pace only when he was out in the long gallery which ran supported around the entire upper floor.
The inner wall of the gallery was pierced at intervals by high arched windows.
These provided a view of the great central staircase.
Burun was in one of them, sitting with his back to the side pillar, his booted feet stretched out along the sill so that he was perched above a sheer drop to the marble-floored hallway below.
He did not move when he saw Alexei, but nodded and smiled.
‘Khan, good morning,’ Alexei nodded politely, but he did not return the smile.
Burun wanted something, or he would not be here.
Certainly he was not waiting to see Artai — the Khan of the Merkuts was so powerful that he did not have to wait for audience like other men.
There was little doubt that Burun understood the reservation which was embodied in the greeting.
‘Noyon.’
He nodded calmly.
‘Is it a good morning?’
A Noyon was the son of a Khan, and so, strictly speaking, the form of address was incorrect.
Alexei tried to decide if Burun was mocking him.
If he was, it did not matter.
‘If you call a morning which has seen my ennoblement good,’ he said flatly, ‘then it is, very.’
Burun's feet came down off the sill.
‘Artai has given you a Khanate,’ he said.
He did not sound surprised.
‘He has dignified Khitai with the ulus of a Khan,’ Alexei nodded.
It was difficult to avoid sounding pleased.
‘Oh, well.’
Burun extended his hands, studying them.
His silver-tipped talons flashed, and then suddenly he looked up.
‘You warned me Artai's reward might make you independent of me.’
There were lines of amusement creased around his mouth and eyes.
‘So I did.’
Alexei guessed that he was being invited to assume that the Khanate, like the gifts which he had received during Nugai's reign, had come from Burun's hands.
Briefly he wondered if it could be true, and realised that there was no way to be sure.
A line of N'pani slaves came along the gallery.
Each carried an oval platter, and in the platters, embedded in snow, were the fruits of two continents.
When the slaves saw Burun they hissed and bowed, then passed silently through the door to the antechamber.
‘A Khanate is a responsibility,’ Burun said.
‘Who will you appoint to manage your estates?’
‘Perhaps I should oversee them myself.’
Alexei met Burun's stare steadily.
He knew he was being teased.
Burun shrugged elegantly.
‘Well as to that,’ he said, ‘it is true that the realm is at peace now.
But have you considered that Artai will desire to mark his accession with some conquest — some increase in his influence?’
Alexei allowed his nose to wrinkle.
‘Khan, if you are asking me what the Kha-Khan's intentions are, then I have to tell you that he has not confided in me.’
The fact that the title of Khan was a military as well as a civil appointment had not occurred to him until now, but now that he thought about it, the suggestion seemed ridiculous.
‘There is no one left to fight,’ he said.
‘A few bandits maybe.’
Burun showed his teeth.
‘Sometimes I forget that you are not native to this land, Alexei.
The Yasa says that there must be but one Lord upon the Earth.
Do you suppose that Artai has ever examined the old maps?’
‘If he has not,’ Alexei observed, ‘then I have no doubt that someone is showing them to him even now.’
He knew that his tone was tart, and saw Burun grin.
The maps held in the archives of the Sechem — the keepers of Yek knowledge and the interpreters of their law — showed two land masses of continental size on the far side of the Great Sea.
Not much was known about them, and no Yek had ever visited them — the Yek were not keen sailors — it was not even certain that they were inhabited.
Suddenly Alexei remembered Tarvaras as he had first seen it — a revolving holographic projection suspended in the viewing well of the briefing amphitheatre of an Imperial survey vessel, the  Simonova — off which he and five other humans had been marooned over twelve standard years earlier.
The Imperial survey had not cited a continent which was more or less populated than any of the others.
In almost the same moment Alexei recalled that his father had been at the same briefing.
Sergei Rostov, once Admiral of the White of the navy of the Third Empire, was now Suragai S'zltan, chief advisor and counsellor to Burun, and might easily have mentioned the survey assessment to his feudal overlord.
‘Khan, I don't know any more about what lies across the sea than anyone else,’ Alexei said.
Burun's expression did not alter.
‘Do you think Artai will believe that?’
Alexei considered the question and then shook his head.
He met Burun's eyes.
‘Khan, if you want me to encourage Artai to order an expedition, say so.’
‘I want you to offer to lead it,’ Burun said, and smiled.
‘What?’
Alexei was appalled.
‘Why should I?’
‘Oh.’
Burun gestured.
‘Think of the glory.’
‘Glory be damned.’
Alexei frowned.
He reviewed the route the conversation had taken.
‘Khan, it's clear that you want me out of Kinsai.
Is it my influence with Artai that troubles you?’
Burun looked mildly offended.
‘There are easier ways to supplant you,’ he said.
Alexei guessed that if Burun wished to discredit him with Artai he only had to link his name with any one of the intrigues which were a constant background to the life of the court.
Not for the first time it occurred to him how vulnerable his position was, and he reflected ruefully that there was probably no more security or protection in the rank of Khan than there had been in any of the various honours which he had received while he had been an intimate of the clique  which had surrounded Nogai.
So far as the Yek were concerned any man who was not of the race of the True people — the Yek, the N'pani, the Ch'noze — was an alien, barely human, and as such was forever suspect.
‘Trust me,’ Burun said, and spread his hands in a placatory gesture.
‘Do I not promote your interests along with my own?’
The wording of the entreaty was perfectly serious, but given the situation it was hard not to laugh.
‘So much for your independence,’ Alexei said.
‘Hah.’
The observation seemed to amuse Burun.
‘Noyon, your concept of independence is like your concept of slavery — confused and badly reasoned.’
They had argued the subject before, but in the midst of a society in which slavery was a commonplace, the comparison struck Alexei as one which was particularly inappropriate.
He opened his mouth to make an acid retort, and then remembered that the sura which permitted captives to be enslaved also went to considerable lengths to provide laws for their welfare.
A slave might not be ill-treated or subjected to undue hardship.
The circumstances in which freedom might be won were clearly defined, and Alexei knew that he had sometimes thought that the lowest class in the Empire — the proles, who worked for pay — were no less enslaved and had perhaps fewer rights.
He shook his head.
‘I won't argue with you, Khan.’
‘I should hope not.’
Burun stood up.
He smoothed the skirts of his coat, and then suddenly looked up.
‘Artai will be enthroned in three days,’ he said.
Now that the leaders of the conspiracy had been condemned, the remaining uncommitted Khans were falling over themselves to declare their support for Artai, their reservations suppressed.
Alexei gave  so inept,’ he said.
‘Even if he had desired it, he could scarcely have done more to ensure that the Khans would support Nogai's will.’
Burun's eyes were like dark featureless pools in his face.
They revealed nothing.
‘Sidacai was never comfortable with the planning or the preparation for a campaign,’ he said smoothly.
‘He was always hasty.’
The scheme to impose military control over Kinsai had been a logistical catastrophe, and it was the utter inefficiency above all which had made Alexei suspicious.
His own sources among the Altun had picked up vague hints of another conception upon which Sidacai had drawn or to which he had been led.
At first he had assumed that it must be Siban, baulked from attaining the Dragon Throne, who had hoped to govern the realm through the medium of his son.
Then he had realised that the originator of the plot could just as easily have been Burun — intending all the time that it should fail — achieving at a stroke the removal of effective opposition, placing Artai in debt to the Merkuts for the security of his throne.
Artai will not pardon him,’ Alexei said.
‘So I have heard.’
Burun turned as if to walk with Alexei towards the head of the stairs.
‘It is a pity.
I ever liked him.’
It was an unnecessary lie.
Burun had tolerated Sidacai, no more than that.
Alexei remembered Sidacai's veiled insolence — the times when he had used his status as the son of a son of Daijin to thwart Burun.
He said nothing.
Suddenly Burun swung round.
‘There could be a way to save him,’ he said, as if the possibility had only just occurred to him.
‘The Khans condemned him because it was the law, but none of them believes that he is a threat to the order of the realm.
If he were 
‘If, for example, he were to be engaged in the reconnaissance of the Unknown Lands,’ Alexei supplied.
He nodded, accepting Burun's intent.
‘Of course I would have to ask Artai for Sidacai to be freed into my custody,’ he said.
Burun stared impassively.
‘The whole world knows how the Kha-Khan elect trusts you.
How can he assign any motive but an honourable one to such a request?’
If Burun had originated the plot, it was possible that he felt some responsibility towards Sidacai.
Sidacai would not know that Burun had been at the back of it all, of course, and either way he would owe his life to the Merkuts.
‘How do you know that Artai will let me go?’
Alexei was sure that his suspicions were plain upon his face as he spoke.
He remembered what Artai had said about Burun's lust for power, and how it was tempered by a desire for order.
Burun shrugged.
‘Artai has elevated you.
Now he will start to wonder if his trust is well-founded.
When you ask him for leave to serve him on this mission he will welcome it as the solution to his anxieties, for even if you are only gone from Kinsai for a time, it will seem to him that you do not mean to impose upon his favour.’
The reasoning was convoluted in the extreme, and Alexei blinked.
‘And when 1 return?’ he asked.
‘When you return he will heap you with honours,’ Burun said simply.
‘You will have demonstrated that you are his servant, for by removing yourself from the court at such a crucial hour you will have proved to him that he was right to trust you.’
He started to walk along the gallery.
Alexei followed reluctantly.
He was more than ever aware of the control which Burun was capable of  exercising over the affairs of the Kha-Khan's court.
I have lived among them more than a third of my life, and still I do not understand them.
The intrigue, if one existed, was worthy of the inner circle of the Imperial court on far distant Knossos.
Alexei found himself recalling events from his childhood — the dimly understood shifts of influence from one family to another, his mother the niece of the Emperor, his father a commoner and always absent on the Imperial service — and almost before he was aware of it his hand had risen to the gold caste mark on his cheek.
He stroked the imprint absently.
On any world in the Empire it would have been recognised with reverence as a sign of his status as a member of the royal family.
Here it meant nothing.
I am the human.
It is the people of this world who are alien.
I must remember that.
The Yek — indeed all the races which possessed talons — were a mutation from human stock.
Alexei allowed himself to dwell upon the knowledge which he had retained from that long-ago survey briefing.
Every day he forced himself to recall it.
Every day he became less certain that the distinction between human and alien was an accurate one.
The stairway at the end of the gallery was a cascade of white marble which descended without interruption to the jet-black floor of the entrance hall.
Burun halted.
‘Noyon, you must forget your origins,’ he said, his tone sympathetic.
‘You will never leave us.’
Alexei jerked his hand away from his cheek, then laughed to dismiss the subject.
‘Khan, I am content.’
The expression reflected in Burun's eyes was candidly disbelieving.
Alexei flushed.
With the Khan of the Merkuts as with his own father he found it almost impossible to  conceal his true emotions.
He forced himself to bow politely, and then turned away and began to descend the stairs.
When he looked back he saw that Burun had been joined by a crowd of aides and counsellors.
It was without much surprise that Alexei marked the towering figure of his father at Burun's shoulder, but when their eyes finally met there was no hint of response.
The garden of Alexei's Kinsai house was surrounded by a waist-high wall.
Outside was the main street, and it was this feature, along with its complete lack of privacy, which made it Alexei's choice for the performance of his daily ritual of exercise.
His liaisons with various ladies of the Kha-Khan's court were not a matter which he had ever attempted to keep secret, and more than one irate would-be challenger — usually the father or brother of the lady in question — had gone away with a thoughtful expression on his face after witnessing a display of alien skill at arms.
A N'pani of Alexei's household had designed the garden, and as a result there was more art than agriculture to its appearance.
Raked expanses of shinshun — the black volcanic sand which covered great expanses of the G'bai desert to the south of the continent — were dotted with the occasional carefully pruned tree, and there were isolated rocks.
Nothing else marred the garden's absolute simplicity.
Alexei's favourite spot was in what he supposed might have been termed a clearing — at least it was in the centre of a circle of four rocks, each one the size of a crouching man.
A tatami, a triple-woven rush mat, had been placed on the sand, and as he walked towards it Alexei saw that the slave had raked over his footprints as he had departed, leaving the surface smooth and even.
He smiled sourly.
The moment he went back  into the house the gardeners would run out to eradicate the tracks left by his coming and going.
The N'pani professed to believe that tracks in the sand were disturbances in the wa , or harmony, of the garden.
They saw order in everything — even in the chaos of nature — and their patience was infinite.
‘Give me the sword, Ordai, and then go.’
‘Yes, Lord.’
The orderly was a Yek, a member of Alexei's guard, and the disappointment showed clearly upon his features.
Alexei undid the wire fastenings down the front of his tunic and pulled it over his head.
When he held it out Ordai took it one-handed, folding it awkwardly before tucking it under his arm.
He offered the sword.
It was not a weapon which was capable of being carried on a belt or in a sash.
The companies of Yek troopers who were armed with swords carried something which looked like a spatha , the Imperial short sword.
Some had adopted the jusei , the ‘great sword’ of the Manchu, which had been introduced by Yuan, an officer on the navy staff of Alexei's father, likewise a castaway.
Alexei hefted the practice sword experimentally, and Ordai stepped back.
The Yek were amazed by the chanthu , the two-handed straight sword of the Kurgan, the personal bodyguard to the Emperor, because of its size.
Only a tall man in the peak of condition could lift it, and when Alexei stood it on its point, it reached to his chin.
He whirled it at shoulder level.
The guard was an inverted vee which forked away from his hands, and by rotating his wrists one within the other it was possible to convert the axis of the blade into a glittering circle.
‘Go away, Ordai.’
The orderly was already backing away.
Alexei knelt  was the middle of the morning, and the red ball of the sun was already high in the awful blue of the sky.
He ignored the heat.
The Yek were practically immune to the extremes of heat and cold which were part of the climate of Tarvaras, and even they took shelter, if it was possible, from the midday intensity of the red giant around which the world and its two moons orbited.
The exercises followed a pattern, a dimly remembered copy of the Kurgan haiku — a two-handed reach skyward to the left, and then to the right, a reverse, two-handed, and then the single-handed moves.
‘Reach, reverse; thrust, withdraw.’
Alexei muttered the formula under his breath.
There were tiny flutes — raised striations of steel — down the blade, and its swift movement through the air produced a hum of sound which rose in pitch the faster the exercises were performed.
‘Reach-reverse-thrust-withdraw.’
An officer of the Kha-Khan's guard came into the street.
He reined in when he saw that Alexei was in the garden, watched for a time, and then spat expressively to left and to right and rode on.
Alexei smiled grimly.
The Yasa provided for the settlement of disputes and affairs of honour only between the races of the True People, for they alone were equipped with the talons with which the kanly — formal mortal combat — was fought.
The law said nothing about duels between species which were not considered to be human — although that did not prevent an offended party from seeking recourse.
Word of his prowess with the chanthu had spread, Alexei knew, and quarrels were seldom more than exchanges of acid words as a result, because were he  to be challenged the choice of weapons would be his.
I will not fear them.
I will live my life as I please.
Even as the thought came to the forefront of his mind, Alexei knew that it could never be that simple — that he was forced to conform to alien culture and alien reasoning.
‘Reach-reverse-thrust — withdraw!’
The kneeling position forced him to employ every muscle of his upper body.
There was none of the relief which might have been gained from a change of stance.
‘Reach-reverse-circle-thrust-reverse-circle.’
The rhythm changed with the progression of the haiku .
There was a slick of sweat along his arms and down his chest.
The skin, he noted, was still tinged golden — that faint tone which signified to those in the know that he had been subjected to the bi-annual treatment of Longivex, the Imperial longevity drug which, because of the rarity of the poppy from which it was produced, was restricted to the élite, the favoured few such as the royal family, the privileged, the very rich — and he frowned as he wondered how long it would be before the absence of the drug showed in his physique and appearance.
I am thirty — no — more.
A year on this world is approximate to standard, but there is a difference.
He was young by any measure, and Alexei knew that he should not feel concern.
Men lived a long time on Tarvaras.
Even his father did not appear to have aged greatly, although he was sixty or more years old.
Sixty ?
Alexei's jaw tightened.
Seventy would be closer.
Name of God, he is an old man!
Alexei revolved the blade in a glittering figure of eight, working the axis of the spin gradually across his shoulders.
The haiku was one which ended with a downward cut, followed by a single outward thrust.
Another sword encountering it would have shattered on impact.
The inner contemplation of the matters which troubled him merged suddenly with awareness that the sword was an unbearable weight at the end of his extended arms.
Alexei rose to his feet in a single effortless movement, twirled the chanthu one-handed, and speared it into the coarse black sand.
‘Ordai!’
The orderly had been watching, Alexei knew, from behind the large rock beside the path.
Alexei gestured at the still-quivering sword, and then strode on into the house.
The exercise ritual usually calmed him, but today he felt the remnants of the anger and frustration at his situation in the tenseness of his stomach.
The antechamber which he entered was filled with silent N'pani.
They unwound his sash and stripped away his sodden garments.
There was no taboo in this land against male nakedness, and some of the slaves were women.
Alexei pretended not to notice.
He stepped into the shallow copper tray which had been placed in the centre of the floor, and allowed himself to be showered — a constant sprinkling of water which was poured through a perforated funnel by one male slave, while others maintained the supply of water with buckets.
‘Enough.’
Alexei stepped out of the tray onto the floor.
The wood of the planks was almost white, but it had been sanded and then varnished with gums and resins until it glistened.
Every spilled drop of water was a reflection.
Female slaves mopped at them with cloths of unbleached fabric, and Alexei took one out of a pair of slim hands and towelled himself dry.
Yek bathing involved immersion up to the neck in water which was maintained at a temperature hot enough to strip  the flesh from a man's bones if he did not acclimatise himself to it gradually, and baths were communal.
He had found it difficult to accustom himself to the practice, although with the right kind of company there were undoubted compensations.
The bedchamber was hung with silks which were so fine that they bruised if something brushed against them.
The chamber seemed empty.
Alexei heard a whisper of sound at his back, but he did not turn.
Either the lady who had been his companion the night before was leaving, in which case it would be bad manners to notice, or she intended to remain, and would return to the chamber when she was ready.
Either way it made sense to maintain some degree of detachment.
A woman of this world who had passed her eighteenth birthday without being contracted in marriage was entitled to go with any man she chose — but did so on her own terms.
No commitment was ever implied, and it was customary to pretend, whenever she decided to depart, that her identity was unknown.
The assembly of the Khans met the same afternoon.
Because his ennoblement could not be ratified until the Dragon Throne was formally occupied, Alexei was not permitted to vote.
Like every other member of the court however, he was present in the circular council building.
The structure was built to resemble a stone yurt — the outer wall was a continuous string of arches which were covered with felt panels, there was a planed timber floor, and there was no provision for anyone to sit down.
A gallery had been suspended around the wall at the height of two standing men — the only concession to spectators.
The roof was a dome of beaten gold.
The only item of business, the election of the Khashort  space of time that it was clear to everyone that it was little more than a formality.
Artai's name was the sole nomination, and instead of a proposing speech by one of the Khans there was a reading by a court secretary of the portion of Nogai's will in which he expressed the wish that Artai should succeed him.
There were no votes against, and no abstentions.
‘See how the Merkuts hang back,’ someone at Alexei's side muttered.
A Noyon of the Seijin clan — his crimson eye shading was like a badge which identified him — made a face and shook his head.
‘The whole world knows that the Merkuts have given Artai his throne,’ he said.
If Burun's refusal to place himself in a position of prominence by acting as Artai's proposer was a subterfuge to disclaim his influence, then it was apparent that none of the Khans recognised it.
Everyone deferred to him in the casting of lots, and after he had tossed his white counter into the bowl which was placed in the centre of the chamber there was a wild scramble for precedence.
‘You were a boy when you came to us, but now you are a man.’
Turakina ran the needle through the folds of material several times, looped the thread upon itself, and then snapped it off short.
She laid the garment aside.
Alexei was sitting cross-legged on the morning-room floor.
Irina, his half-sister and the daughter of Turakina by his father, was kneeling intently on a cushion behind him while she attempted to dress his hair Yek style.
When he turned his head to look at Turakina she gave a gasp of annoyance and let go of the half-plaited queue.
‘Your concern does you credit, step-mother, and is a compliment to me, I know.
But I have no taste for marriage.’
Alexei formed a smile as he spoke, lest she detect a hint of the offence in his words.
Turakina raised her eyebrows.
‘You have taste enough for the fruits, I am told,’ she observed tartly.
Alexei stared calmly at her, and after a moment she produced a snort of half-amused annoyance and shook her head.
‘If our strangeness offends you, then a woman of your own kind might perhaps be found,’ Mei Ling offered tentatively.
Suragai's second wife was a N'pani, tiny, beautiful, regal, whom men called the Golden Lotus.
She had been a courtesan before Turakina had bought her contract as a gift for her husband.
When he had recovered from his embarrassment, Alexei's father had freed her — on the grounds that it was improper for a woman to be bought and sold like merchandise — and with Mei Ling's consent had opted to marry her.
Turakina had known from the first how he would react, but she had pretended resistance for a day and a night before giving her consent.
Now the two women were inseparable, although they were quite different in nature, and complemented one another like the two sides of a coin.
The sun was setting on the tops of the distant mountains.
Alexei stared out of the open end of the room, awed as always by the view.
His father's Kinsai house was built upon a natural plateau which rose above the curtain wall of the city.
The morning room was supported out from it on stilts, reaching into nothing so that to stand at the foremost edge of the platform was to seem to be poised above an abyss.
Kinsai was constructed on top of a plug of volcanic rock which rose sheer for almost a thousand metres  out of an almost perfectly flat and featureless plain.
In the late afternoon, with the red sun setting and the dust from the caravans crossing the plain hanging on the air, the whole edifice looked like a monolith rising out of the depths of a brooding red sea.
‘Lady, I do not want a wife — any wife.’
Alexei met Mei Ling's enquiring gaze, and after a moment she nodded as if she understood.
Kadan was stretched out across a couch which was placed under one of the windows which ran the length of the room.
He laughed softly.
‘I think I have heard this conversation before,’ he said.
’— And you will hear it again.’
Turakina glanced at her son, silencing him, and then she turned to stare at Alexei again.
‘Noyon, I have a duty to your father, my husband,’ she said.
‘You ought to be married — indeed it is the scandal of the Kha-Khan's court that you are not.
Is there no lady of family you will consider?’
Once, before she had married his father, Alexei had played at courting Turakina.
He had not been serious, and although she had thought herself in love with him at the time he had known that it would be a mistake for them to marry — even if Burun, who was her father, had been prepared to permit such a thing.
Kaidu and Hulagu, Mei Ling's twin sons, trotted into the room.
They hesitated as if they expected to be dismissed, and then hurled themselves noisily on Kadan.
He rolled them on the floor, growling in mock fury, and they giggled.
Mei Ling pretended a stare of disapproval, but when she saw that Alexei was watching, she smiled.
The twins were seven years old, and it was impossible to distinguish between them.
Alexei settled himself in front of Irina once more.
His father's family was by now a familiar part of his life, but he felt no particular attachment to any of them.
Because the Yek  mutation bred true, all the children had talons instead of finger nails, and they possessed both the remarkable powers of healing and the resistance to disease which were the genetic inheritance of the True people.
Turakina and Mei Ling were unfolding a sheet on the floor between them.
The sheet had embroidery in gold around its border, and Turakina began to inspect it section by section, snipping at loose threads or stitching them down.
‘Maybe I should marry,’ Alexei said lightly.
He saw Turakina's head come up.
‘But one wife would not be enough.
I should have two at least— three even — or else I would not be properly cared for.’
Turakina wrinkled her nose.
‘If you are not well cared for, it is the fault of the master of your household,’ she said primly.
‘A wife is not a servant — though she ought to concern herself with your comfort, it is true.’
Irina doubled Alexei's now plaited hair forward across his scalp.
She had worked strips of gold braid into the weave, and now she secured them in place.
‘There,’ she said.
Alexei glanced at his reflection in the mirror which was propped against a cushion.
‘I still do not look like a Yek,’ he said, grinning.
‘The colour of your hair is wrong,’ she said.
‘It is the colour of ripe corn.
If you were shorter, then you would look like a C'zak.’
The C'zaki were a subject people from the east coast of the continent, and so the observation was not a compliment.
Alexei looked up and saw that Kadan was laughing openly.
‘Are the women of your homeworld beautiful?’
Irina asked, ‘Or do they look like you?’
Alexei ignored Kadan's splutter of amusement.
He  squinted out of the corner of his eye to look at Irina.
She was about twelve years of age — standard years — and possessed the curious red-gold hair colouring of a descendant of the Ancestor.
‘They are not as beautiful as you,’ he said, and smiled.
She flushed, pleased.
Kadan scooped the twins up off the floor.
He sat down on the couch again, a boy on each knee.
‘Beauty is a matter of individual perception,’ he said seriously.
It was sometimes hard to keep in mind the fact that Kadan was not yet an adult.
He was already taller than most Yek, and his stature displayed the kind of lankiness which promised both strength and agility.
Alexei glanced at him, but said nothing.
‘Beauty is less important than character,’ Turakina said, as if she believed it.
Alexei showed his teeth in the pretence of a smile.
‘If you say it, step-mother, then of course it must be so.’
He guessed that Turakina had been engaged in yet another attempt to negotiate a match on his behalf, and wondered which family had been involved.
It was half a year, he thought, since she had last broached the subject of his bachelor status.
Turakina frowned at the sarcasm in his tone.
‘Noyon, I do not intend to argue with you,’ she said severely.
‘Good.’
Alexei nodded as if the news pleased him.
Almost all Yek marriages were arranged.
A contract was a matter for agreement between the respective parents, although the participants were consulted and there was a provision in the Yasa which prevented particularly women from being married off without their consent.
To submit to Turakina's intent would be to surrender his freedom.
Alexei remembered what  Burun had said about the definition of independence, and he smiled grimly.
The yard at the front of the house was paved with flagstones.
The sound of hooves ringing on them echoed through the house, and hearing them both Turakina and Mei Ling rose.
Alexei turned.
His father came into the room.
He was dressed Yek style in a loose tunic and breeches, and he had on a surcoat which was stiff with gold embroidery.
The hilt of a hiranu, the short sword of Manchu manufacture which was carried as an alternative to the jusei , peeped from his waist sash.
His hair was dressed in a manner which was appropriate to his rank.
‘It's done,’ he said.
‘The time is set.’
Kadan sat up straight.
‘Artai's enthronement?’
‘Yes.’
Suragai was carrying his gauntlets in one hand.
He cast around for somewhere to put them, and at once Mei Ling took them and gave them to a waiting servant.
He smiled at her.
‘Lady, you adorn my house,’ he said, then looked past her at Turakina.
‘Lady, I am happy to see you.’
It was a formula, one which Alexei had heard his father use many times before, and yet he saw both women smile.
Turakina had on a gown into which were woven gold and silver threads.
Her hair was long, and it was impossible to tell the place at which it merged with the fabric.
She said, ‘Then tell me, my Lord, how many times you have thought about me this day.’
Alexei saw his father produce a rueful smile.
‘In truth,’ Suragai said, ‘I did not think of you at all.
But were you not here to greet me I would miss you.’
He held out his hand to her, and she took it, laughing.
‘My Lord,’ she said, ‘Your answer is always the same.’
‘And why not?’
Suragai was looking past her at Alexei as he spoke.
‘It is always the truth.’
It seemed to Alexei as he considered it that a great deal of effort must be required to sustain such a relationship, and he could not imagine how his father could be bothered with it, or how the women could be content.
‘Artai is to be enthroned the day after tomorrow, at the tenth hour.’
They were standing together at the very edge of the platform on which the morning room was constructed.
The sun was setting, and the extent of the plain was lost in a crimson haze.
Alexei stared out over the view, and wondered why his father had caused his house to be built in such a style.
‘I had heard the day, but not the hour,’ he said.
‘I know.’
Suragai nodded.
‘Burun spoke to you.
I ought to congratulate you on your elevation, I suppose.’
Alexei snorted softly.
‘Spare me, please.’
He saw his father shrug.
‘As you wish.’
It was how most of their arguments started — the sudden stirring of discord caused by their lack of understanding of one another 's attitudes — an incautious word which stubbornness would not permit to be retracted.
Alexei took a breath, then exhaled slowly.
He gestured, one-handed.
‘Forgive me.
I did not intend to sound churlish.
Are you pleased for me?’
His father seemed to consider.
‘Of course I am,’ he said at last.
‘And if I sound reserved, then it is because, having risen so high, we both have further to fall.’
They had been speaking quite naturally in Yek.
Alexei glanced back over his shoulder.
Turakina and Mei Ling were still examining the sheet, and Kadan and Irina were playing with the twins beside the door.
He switched to Anglic.
‘You don't trust Artai.’
‘I fear him,’ his father said bluntly.
‘It is Burun I do not trust.’
Alexei opened his mouth, then closed it again.
It was on the tip of his tongue to observe that Burun was no more or less trustworthy than he had ever been, but he realised suddenly that he would be stating the obvious.
No one— no one who was not of Burun's own blood — knew so much about him.
‘Why do you serve him?’ he asked softly.
‘Oh,’ Suragai chuckled.
‘He rewards me — I owe him my life — he would kill us all if I did not — how many answers do you want me to give you?’
‘Necessity.’
Alexei knew he was making a face as he spoke the word.
‘Is that wrong?
Why do you make yourself an intimate of the younger Altun — why were you Nogai's friend?’
Anglic was the Imperial language.
On Tarvaras there were several subject races who spoke a variation of it — perhaps because they were descended from Second Empire colonists — and suddenly Alexei found that there was insufficient subtlety in it to convey precise nuance.
‘Expediency is a poor reason for doing anything,’ he said in Yek, and saw his father frown.
Horns rang out from the city wall.
The parapet which ran behind the wall was wide enough for two carts to be driven side by side along its length.
It crossed the face of the house at a level ten or fifteen metres below the supports for the legs on which the floor was braced.
Alexei glanced idly down, and he saw that a company of troopers of the guard — C'zaki  by their dress, under the command of a Yek officer — were marching up from the direction of the gate, picking up the sentries who had completed their tour of duty, dropping off the night watch.
The column passed out of sight below his feet.
‘Who am I?’
The abruptness of the question brought Alexei's head round sharply.
He hesitated, trying to divine his father's intent in asking it so that he could formulate the appropriate answer.
‘You are my father,’ he responded at last.
His father nodded.
‘But what is my name?’
‘Suragai.’
Alexei spoke without thinking — without examining the implications of his reply.
He understood what he had said, and nodded slowly.
‘You are Suragai,’ he said, and stopped.
‘Suragai who was once Sergei; the counsellor to a Khan who was once a servant of the Empire —’ his father pronounced.
‘Am I less than I was — or more?’
‘I suppose it depends upon who you ask,’ Alexei said slowly.
‘The Empire would consider it less.’
‘But you agree that the value of what I have achieved is relative to my circumstances.’
‘Yes.
I suppose so.’
‘Then you cannot criticise me for making the best of my situation.’
His father folded his arms.
They had conducted the same argument, at intervals, since the days after they had realised that they were isolated on an alien world.
‘You would have me remain what I was,’ Suragai said, ‘and alter the rest.’
‘If the Yasa permitted the application of our knowledge —’ Alexei started.
‘But it does not — not enough for us to dictate the nature of our surroundings.’
It was a truth which Alexei had never been able to  develop the ability to ignore.
Even when he was not thinking about it, it nagged at the edge of his awareness.
The Yek who ruled this world lived according to a complex code of law at the very core of which was a presumption which affected every part of their existence — the belief that technological advancement was to a great extent incompatible with the maintenance of civilisation.
Thus they treated innovation with extreme caution, and employed advanced technology only when they had satisfied themselves that it could be incorporated without visible effect into their style of living.
‘Do you remember when we fought the Alan?’
Suragai tucked his hands into the sleeves of his surcoat.
The Alan country was far to the south, beyond the G'bai desert, and its conquest had completed Yek expansion across the continent.
Alexei nodded.
‘The Alan had guns, but they could not stand against us.’
‘Hackbuts.’
Alexei recalled the weapons he had seen.
‘And muskets — short barrelled, with no range — their powder was badly made too.’
He saw his father nod.
‘That's true.
But do you think they would have beaten us — even if their weapons were better?’
Alexei remembered the sight of the Yek army moving across the plains.
The basic unit was the tuman — ten thousand men, mounted on st'lyan, covering two hundred verst a day.
The universal weapon was the compound bow, which had a pull of around a hundred and sixty pounds.
Against the Alan, as many as twenty tumans had been in operation, their movement co-ordinated with incredible accuracy.
Alexei shook his head.
‘They don't believe they can be beaten,’ he said.
Imperial marines could beat the Yek, Alexei supposed.
A marine regiment was equipped with plasma cannon, and the marine battle armour was proof against most weapons.
But faced with that kind of opposition the Yek would simply re-form and attack again, learning from each engagement until either they discovered how to defeat their adversaries or they were wiped out.
It was unlikely that it would ever occur to them to surrender.
‘The technology of this world is primitive, I admit,’ his father said.
‘But consider it in relation to the circumstances.
Your complaint has always amounted to the fact that the Yek don't think the way you do — that they don't accept your values.’
He paused, and then gestured as if to dismiss the subject.
‘How did we get on to this?
We will never agree, and so it's pointless.’
Once they would have come to blows.
We have progressed that far at least, Alexei thought.
‘We were discussing Artai,’ he said.
He glanced down.
The marching men were disappearing around the curve of the wall.
‘Do you know he is a mutant?’
‘You mean his eyes.’
Suragai nodded.
‘Yek mutations breed true.
If Artai has children, I wonder what they will look like.’
He seemed to shiver.
Among humans a mutation could take thousands of generations to become apparent.
The same medical technology which improved life expectancy and permitted the surgical replacement of defective organs also obstructed the process of natural selection, so that heightened abilities and levels of perception were still uncommon among ordinary men.
‘So many of the Khans fear Artai,’ Alexei said.
‘I wonder why they elected him.’
His father shrugged.
‘It was Nogai's will.’
‘And if Nogai was wrong?’
Suragai made a face.
‘How much harm can he do?
He is as much subject to the Yasa as anyone else.’
‘You mean the Khans think they can control him,’ Alexei said.
‘If that is true, then why do they fear him?’
He saw his father frown again.
‘He is your patron, not mine,’ he said.
‘You tell me what manner of ruler he will be.’
None of the Khans believed that Artai was so incapable of controlling the violence of his temperament, Alexei thought, or they would not have elected him.
‘If he finds that the task of ruling the Khanate is a challenge —’ he started.
‘The Khanate is settled, and has been for some time,’ his father said dismissively.
‘Where lies the challenge?’
Alexei had guessed that the path of the conversation would lead eventually to this.
’— Which is why I imagine Burun has taken steps to remind Artai that it is the ulus of the Kha-Khan to be the Lord of the Earth,’ he said.
Suragai opened his eyes wide.
‘Oh, I don't think he required much reminding,’ he said.
‘Indeed?’
Alexei stared disbelievingly.
‘In any case I am relieved to find that the embassy to the continents across the Great Sea has, as it seems, your approval.’
‘It has, without reservation.’
‘You don't think you might have consulted me before you suggested it?— It was your idea, I imagine.’
‘The Khans are concerned to keep Artai's energies directed.’
Suragai's face was immobile.
Alexei laughed harshly.
‘I thought you were going to tell me at least that it was for my own good.
Why me?’
‘Because Burun will not go — if it was reconnaissance I think he might, but it is not — and so I cannot.’
‘So?’
The point was lost on Alexei.
Suragai shook his head in apparent irritation.
‘I never thought you were stupid.
The land across the sea is inhabited — you agree?’
‘Yes —’
‘And probably the level of civilisation is no greater than it is within the Khanate — otherwise the embassy would be coming the other way.’
The argument appeared to make sense.
Alexei nodded.
‘Very well then.
So there are two unexplored continents — about a third of the land mass of this planet if the maps are to be believed — inhabited by people about whom we know nothing.
Do you know of anyone else who is capable of recognising an opportunity if one presents itself?’
‘Opportunity?’
Alexei's brow creased.
‘What kind of —’ The direction of the argument struck him suddenly.
He stopped, then nodded slowly.
‘Cities,’ he said.
‘Old science.’
‘Exactly.’
The lands ruled by the Yek were dotted with the traces of a Second Empire civilisation.
There was an abandoned city on the coast to the south of the G'bai, and the G'bai itself was almost certainly the result of either a nuclear war or an accident of such proportions that it had produced large-scale volcanic activity.
The black sands were wind-eroded basalt, and where parts of the sheet remained intact — and in basins and wadis — there was still radioactivity so that the desert could be navigated in safety only by the well-tried routes.
‘If anything had survived,’ Alexei objected, ‘there would be another more advanced civilisation.
The embassy would be coming, as you say, from the opposite direction.’
Even as he spoke he knew that there were circumstances  under which that argument would be invalid.
A survival of Second Empire technology could be so small as to be incapable of spreading its influence, or the science could have survived but not the necessary manufacturing techniques for its propagation.
‘If you are certain of that, then don't go,’ Suragai said.
Alexei considered a retort.
‘You didn't convince Burun to let me lead it by telling him that I would be looking for machines,’ he said finally.
‘Hadn't you better tell me what arguments you used to persuade him?’
The servants were moving around inside the room lighting the lamps now.
The sun was a thin red-gold line on a black horizon, and the twin moons were sitting like two silver pock-marked balls in the sky.
‘I told him I wanted you out of Kinsai,’ Suragai said, and showed his teeth.
It could be the truth, Alexei thought.
Even if the means could be found, there were reasons why they might never attempt to beam a distress signal into space.
To try to leave the surface of the planet was out of the question.
‘You are thinking about how we came here,’ his father said sombrely into the silence.
‘And why we were forced to remain.’
‘Yes.’
It had been no accident, but rather a botched assassination attempt, which had set Alexei's father down on Tarvaras.
The two assassins had joined the crew of the navy rescue expedition which had followed the escape pod down from the survey vessel from which it had been ejected, and they had been prevented from finishing off both their intended victim and the accidental witnesses only because of the timely intervention of a Yek patrol.
There had been no second  rescue attempt — the first vessel had been destroyed by a rigged explosion — and the conclusion the survivors had arrived at had been that they were assumed killed.
Tarvaras was a quarantine world, cut off from contact with the rest of the universe by orbiting weapons platforms which were programmed to destroy any craft which did not identify itself with the appropriate recognition codes, and it had seemed unlikely that the civilian survey crew would be tempted to break the stringent regulations which applied to the situation.
‘I thought you were content to remain here,’ Alexei said.
‘I did not say that I intended to leave,’ his father responded.
‘It is you who are unhappy here.’
Alexei flushed.
‘Don't condescend to me.’
Suragai grinned.
‘How sensitive you have become.
Very well, tell me you will lead this mission, and I will torment you no more.’
‘Tell me why you want me to go.’
‘I was under the impression that I had explained it to you.
We — that is you and 1 — as well as the Yek, ought to know what lies beyond the Great Sea.
You are the best person to go and look.’
‘Besides which, it will get me out of Kinsai for a while,’ Alexei observed ironically.
‘That too.’
He had been herded towards giving his agreement like a p'tar being driven to slaughter, Alexei thought, but even if the latter reason was the real one it was not an opportunity he could afford to pass up.
‘Damn you, father,’ he said.
‘Of course I'll go.’
‘Good,’ Suragai said, and smiled.
‘Beware Burun,’ Siban said.
‘You cannot trust him.’
They were both guests at T'zin's house — two  among fifty or so of the Khans and Noyons who, apart from Burun, were probably the most powerful and influential men in the Khanate.
Alexei leaned a little to one side so that a slave could heap his plate with k'va, the staple grain which was similar to rice.
The k'va was the colour of straw because it had been cooked over boiling k'vass, an ale which was made from fermenting the raw grain, and it steamed gently.
‘Burun would say the same of you,’ Alexei said equably.
Siban's face was seamed like old leather, and his hair was snow white.
He examined Alexei haughtily.
‘I am a grandson of the Ancestor,’ he said, ‘whereas Burun is a worthless Merkut chief —’
Alexei grinned.
‘Not all that worthless, I think.’
A second slave began to ladle stewed meat onto the heaped k'va, and the aroma of the ch'min in which it had been cooked made his nostrils twitch.
‘In any case —’ He looked back at Siban.
‘It is Artai I serve, and not Burun.’
‘The whole world knows who pulls Artai's strings,’ Siban said sourly.
‘There is no one with the power to gainsay him.’
Alexei took out his knife.
The Yek served themselves from their plates by extending their talons — in some cases the needle-sharp claws were more than three centimetres long — forking impaled meat into their mouths.
He started to eat, aware of Siban's insistent presence by his side.
‘Sidacai should be here,’ Siban said suddenly.
The comment was meaningless.
Siban's son was a prisoner under sentence of death for his conspiracy to seize power.
The slaves were bringing cups of chilled wine to the long table.
Alexei sipped experimentally, and wondered why some men still preferred k'miss.
There were no vegetables — the Yek grew only a  limited number — and he selected an apple from a pile in a bowl and started to peel it with his d'jaga.
He glanced at Siban out of the corner of his eye, but said nothing.
‘Heed me,’ Siban said.
‘Burun will trap you as he has trapped my son.’
Alexei raised his eyebrows.
‘My Lord, if you have proof of that, take it to Artai.
Everyone knows that the Merkuts crushed Sidacai's plot to seize power.’
Siban ate sparingly.
The meat on his plate had been cut into small segments because his teeth were no longer sharp.
‘My son was a fool,’ he said.
‘And if you cannot see a Merkut hand behind what has happened, so are you.’
It was easiest to shrug, ignoring the offence.
Alexei had expected to be seated beside Tulagai and Targoutai, the half-brothers of Nogai and T'zin, but instead he had been led to this place beside Siban.
Vaguely he wondered when Siban was going to come to the point.
Probably he was going to ask for help in obtaining a pardon for Sidacai, and Alexei thought about telling him that it was Burun's intent that he should be freed.
‘Pardon me,’ Siban said after a moment.
‘You are Artai's good friend, and I have slighted you.’
‘What?’
Alexei was unable to hide his astonishment at Siban's subdued tone.
He stared.
‘My Lord, don't grovel.
It doesn't suit you.’
Siban growled angrily.
He slashed at Alexei, talons out, but Alexei had anticipated the move.
He caught Siban's wrist and held it immobile.
Heads turned briefly, and from the far end of the table T'zin was watching, an interested expression on his face.
‘Attack me, and you will forfeit my favour,’ Alexei said softly to Siban.
He saw Siban start.
‘You are making a mistake —’ Siban started.
‘Oh?’
Alexei felt Siban's wrist bones grate together under his hand, and he eased the pressure he was exerting, ashamed at his use of force against an old man.
Siban's eyes burned angrily, but after a moment he allowed the muscles of his arm to relax.
‘You are right, Noyon,’ he said at last.
‘I had intended to secure your favour, or I would not let you live for this insult.’
Alexei showed his teeth in the grim pretence of a smile.
A slash from Siban's talons would have inflicted a wound which would have taken weeks to heal.
He released Siban's arm carefully.
‘My Lord, you struck first.
Do you want to challenge me?’
He saw Siban's lips compress.
‘You know I do not,’ Siban said, ‘or you would not dare ask.
Remember who I am.’
Only T'zin was still watching the exchange.
Alexei looked past Siban towards him, and inclined his head.
He saw T'zin react, surprised.
After a second T'zin nodded an acknowledgement, then turned ostentatiously to speak to Jehan, Burun's grandson, who was seated on his right.
‘My Lord, I am aware of your rank.’
Alexei met Siban's outraged stare calmly.
‘If you want something of me, then ask me politely.
Don't condescend to me, and don't accuse the men who have been my friends in my hearing.’
It was apparent that Siban was torn between his pride and his desire to engage Alexei's interest in his petition to the Kha-Khan.
He drew himself up.
‘Don't expect me to humble myself, Noyon,’ he said coldly.
‘I have ruled the armies of the Kha-Khan, and kings have come to petition me on their knees.’
Alexei kept his face expressionless.
He waited for Siban to find a way to phrase the request which was  so obviously his intent, but instead Siban rose to his feet and stalked away towards the door, his departure so abrupt that Alexei was taken by surprise.
Tulagai slid almost at once into the vacant place.
He watched as Siban went out through the door, and then glanced at Alexei.
‘Siban does not belong here,’ he said.
‘T'zin was mistaken to invite him.’
It was difficult to recall at times the fact that Tulagai was Artai's father.
Alexei remembered how Tulagai and Targoutai had fawned on Siban before Nogai had been elected Kha-Khan, and how they had voiced their support for Nogai, their own half-brother, as soon as it had become apparent that he had Burun's vote.
It seemed improper somehow that someone like Tulagai, his motives suspect, should mock Siban, who had served the Khanate so well, and Alexei thought that he was sorry that he had goaded him into leaving.
The bowmaker was named T'zun-tu, and he was very old.
His shop was in the merchants' quarter of the city — a maze of buildings which had been divided and sub-divided, so great was the demand for space, which lay within the strictly enforced boundaries of the streets which radiated from the Golden Yurt like the spokes of a wheel.
‘My father has seven of these,’ Jehan said, fingering a half-finished bow as it lay in its clamps.
‘Your father is Jotan,’ Alexei responded, ‘and can afford them.’
‘Oh.’
Jehan smiled engagingly.
‘That's true.’
‘Bows and women,’ Kadan said cheerfully.
‘Is there anything else worth spending money on?’
Jehan caught Alexei's eye, and they both smiled.
‘Well,’ Jehan said, ‘a few things maybe.’
Kadan was probably too young to be interested in  experiment with one of his mother's serving women if he was offered the opportunity.
‘Women spend money, not men,’ Alexei said.
‘If all that is said about you is true, then you ought to know,’ Jehan observed.
He avoided Alexei's eyes, and ran his fingers over the grain of the layers of wood and horn which were compressed between the clamps.
‘This is very fine,’ he said.
Kadan was humming softly.
Alexei thought about asking what latest scandal Jehan had heard, and how widely it was being spread abroad.
Whatever was being said, probably it did not matter.
He took an arrow from the table and sighted along it.
‘Not one of those, my Lord.’
The bowyer came out of the back of the shop, the bow case which he had been selecting in his hands.
‘Those have too little spline for your bow.’
The bow reached to Alexei's mid-chest.
The layers of horn and yew had been blended together with such care that it was hard to tell which was set upon which.
Alexei set the stock against his instep and nocked the string into place.
The great compound curves which swept out from the guard vibrated under his hand, and the bowstring produced a low musical sound.
‘Arrows fletched with peacock,’ Kadan said.
‘They are the best.’
Jehan wrinkled his nose.
‘Swan is better.’
Alexei tested the pull of the bow.
‘Give me an arrow,’ he said.
‘Take off your coat,’ Jehan protested.
‘You will fray the sleeve.’
‘He will fray his arm if he shoots without protection,’ Kadan observed.
‘T'zun-tu, find a wrist guard for my Lord.’
bow aside and took off his coat.
Jehan held out his hand for it.
Kadan picked the bow up.
He tested the pull, and looked at Jehan.
‘You should try this,’ he said.
‘I think it's too strong for me.’
Alexei took the bow out of Kadan's hands.
‘You haven't come into your strength yet,’ he said.
T'zun-tu was laying clothyard arrows on the table.
The fletchings were dyed in Alexei's colours, and gleamed silver-grey in the shafts of light which penetrated the shop.
Alexei took one and nocked it to the bow.
He drew and sighted out through the window.
‘My Lord —’ the bowyer began nervously.
Alexei loosed, and the arrow leapt from the bow and embedded itself in the wooden spike which rose from the dome of a house two streets away.
‘Solid hit!’
Kadan crowed.
Jehan took the bow out of Alexei's hands.
‘Someone give me an arrow.’
He drew the string halfway back, then let it out again.
‘Name of God.’
He looked at Alexei.
‘This has a pull like my grandfather's.’
The weight and power of Burun's bows were famous.
A normal arrow would shatter if it was fired from one.
Alexei opened his eyes wide.
‘If it is too strong —’
‘If it is too strong, then 1 must be sickening for something.’
Jehan flexed his right arm, then drew the bowstring back to his cheek.
He loosed, and his arrow hit the spike a hand's-breadth below Alexei's.
‘Here.’
Jehan offered the bow to Kadan.
‘You try.’
‘Oh well —’ Kadan took the arrow which the bowyer handed to him, nocked it, drew without apparent effort, and loosed.’
— It's powerful, certainly, but I think I could use one of these.’
Jehan shaded his eyes with his hand.
Kadan's arrow was stuck in the spike midway between the others.
‘I should have made you nominate your point of aim,’ he said.
‘You're like oxen, the pair of you.’
Alexei knew that he had gained muscle during his years on Tarvaras.
Kadan was his half-brother, and even though he was not yet fully grown, he had his father's strength.
In the street below the house with the dome people were pausing to look up at the arrows in the spike.
A Yek in the long coat of a merchant came out of the door of the house.
Someone pointed out the arrows to him, and he turned and glared in the direction of the bowmaker's window.
‘We could send Kadan to get our arrows back,’ Jehan said idly.
Kadan glanced out of the window, then drew back again.
‘Not likely,’ he said.
The bowyer was looking resigned.
‘My Lord, that is the house of Yesugai the mercer,’ he said.
‘I will send to him, though I do not think it will please him.’
Jehan laughed softly.
‘If there is a fine, we will pay it,’ he said.
‘I will pay it,’ Alexei corrected him.
Men were struggling through the crowd in the street, a ladder between them.
The mercer started to direct them as they propped the ladder against the side of the house.
The ladder reached the eaves.
A man climbed to the top and gazed helplessly at the curved expanse of the copper-sheathed dome.
He turned and shouted something to the mercer below.
Kadan picked up the bow case and slid the bow gently into it.
The bowyer was hovering expectantly, his hand not quite extended to receive payment.
Alexei took a leather wallet from his belt.
He unfolded it, and gold koban slid weightily into his  hand, forty of them, yellow as butter, the gold so soft that it deformed if one coin fell against another.
He held the money out.
‘Lord, thank you.’
The bowyer tried to pretend that he was not counting the coins.
His fingertips moved as he felt the edge of each gold piece, and then he bowed.
‘Lord, you are generous.’
The price of the bow was as much as the income of a common man for a year.
Alexei nodded as if it was of no consequence.
‘Your work pleases me,’ he said.
‘Send to me if the mercer asks for compensation.’
The man at the top of the mercer's ladder was clambering awkwardly out onto the roof.
He climbed a short distance up the curve of the dome, then his feet lost their purchase and he began to slide back down again.
As soon as he was close enough to the head of the ladder to use it as a support, he stood up.
He waved and shouted something at the mercer in the street below, then scrambled back onto the ladder again and started to descend.
Jehan watched.
He caught Alexei's eye.
‘You have left your mark on Kinsai it seems,’ he said drily.
‘We all have.’
Kadan nodded cheerfully.
Alexei said nothing.
He was not sure that Jehan had been talking about the arrows, and remembering that Jehan was Burun's grandson he wondered how much he knew, or had been told, about the plan to obtain Sidacai's freedom.
‘Siban has spoken with me,’ T'zin said.
‘Oh?’
They were lounging at their ease in an antechamber which was next to the throne room of the Golden Yurt.
Now that preparations had been completed for Artai's enthronement there was very little to do, and the normal business of the court — administration, legislation, taxation — had all but come to a halt.
‘He was my guest.’
T'zin reached out and took a cup of wine from a tray which was held by a N'pani who stood nearby.
‘You offended my hospitality by slighting him.’
Alexei frowned.
‘I am sorry for it.’
He sipped wine.
T'zin gestured dismissively.
‘It is a failing common to those of us who have achieved greatness,’ he said, ‘that we do not know how to beg for favour.’
‘I should have made Siban's task easier.’
Alexei nodded.
‘Ask on his behalf if you will.’
The cup in T'zin's hand was a sculpted crystal bowl set in a mesh of gold wire.
T'zin's gold-sheathed talons were only half retracted, and he held the goblet delicately between them.
‘I think you know what Siban wants,’ he said.
‘Sidacai's freedom?’
Alexei suggested lightly.
‘Sidacai's pardon,’ T'zin said.
Alexei pretended to stare.
Sidacai freed might be banished.
A pardon implied that he would retain his rank.
It would be as if he had never been taken in treason.
‘My Lord, I think you over-estimate my influence with Artai.’
T'zin emptied his cup in a single swallow.
He held it out in the servant's direction and let it go.
The servant got his hand to it just in time to prevent it falling onto the marble floor.
T'zin had already turned back to meet Alexei's eyes.
‘I think not,’ he said.
So many people were interested in Sidacai's fate that Alexei thought it was amazing they had not combined to petition Artai.
He noticed that although T'zin was wearing the fancy gold coat of the Altun he had no tunic on beneath it, and his bare chest was visible through the unfastened facings.
‘Artai trusts me,’ Alexei pointed out.
‘If I ask him to give Sidacai pardon, I will forfeit his favour.’
‘You are an alien,’ T'zin said.
‘It is well known that you do not reason as other men.
Ask Sidacai's absolution and Artai will believe whatever you tell him.’
Alexei snorted softly.
‘Artai is not a fool,’ he commented.
‘He will suspect my motives, no matter what I say.’
T'zin appeared to consider.
‘Secure Sidacai's pardon,’ he said, ‘and you will earn my friendship.’
The servant placed a filled goblet on the table at T'zin's side.
Alexei drained his own cup and put it down.
‘I will do what I can,’ he said finally, as if he doubted his ability to achieve anything worthwhile.
He thought about Burun's intent towards Sidacai, and wished he could discuss it with someone.
‘Ask Artai tomorrow,’ T'zin said.
It was advice which appeared to ignore the fact that if Alexei did not, Sidacai's death warrant would be signed and his sentence executed.
‘It is the day of enthronement.’
T'zin picked up the cup, then gestured with it.
‘Artai cannot defy custom — if you ask mercy for Sidacai, he must grant it.’
The women's chambers of the palace opened out onto an arcade which was roofed with trees.
The branches with their silver-green leaves spread out to meet one another, intertwined, and cast rows of delicate tendrils around the pillars which were the support for the gallery above.
In the centre of the arcade there was a pool in which huge golden carp basked like predatory sharks among the minnows and goldfish.
It was the custom for men to come to the place only by invitation.
This was where the Kha-Khan's wives, if he had them, made their entertainment — a  space at what was otherwise without question the heart of the government of the Khanate which was occupied with poetry and music, which men were wont to regard as idle pastimes — the place from which rumours were spread, and thus to which every lady of the court assigned an hour, or two, each day.
‘Men are fools,’ Zurachina said.
‘And you are no exception.’
Burun's chief wife was small and slim, handsome in the way that unremarkable women sometimes are when they have matured past the need for beauty, and the red-gold of her hair was as yet unmarred by the silver which would have betrayed her age.
Alexei trailed a hand through the clear water of the pool.
The carp feeding around the inlet nudged at his fingers.
‘Lady, I know it,’ he said.
Half of the women of the court were here — which fact, Alexei thought, should not have surprised him.
So long as Artai remained unmarried it was important to the self-esteem of each of them to demonstrate that while neither she nor her family had thus far been favoured with the Kha-Khan's selection, yet she was capable of exercising influence.
‘Your name has been connected with ten ladies that I know of,’ Zurachina said severely.
Alexei essayed a smile.
‘Only ten?’
She frowned at him.
‘Noyon, it is no laughing matter.
The licence which was permitted under Nogai is a thing of the past now, and while you have not broken the Yasa, there is the matter of custom.
The law was not formulated so that men and women could exchange favours promiscuously, but rather that a woman, being unable to decide upon a marriage offered to her, might select for herself without prior commitment from the men available and willing to accept her.’
Turakina was her daughter, and must have spoken to her.
Alexei had been surprised that the subject of his bachelor status had not been pursued with greater vigour in his step-mother's house.
Now he knew why.
‘Lady, my conduct is my own affair,’ he said.
‘Is it?’
Zurachina smoothed a finger down one cheek.
‘Noyon, your father is a son to me, through his marriage to my daughter.
My own son is husband to a lady of Altun blood, and I am Altun.
We must be seen to keep the spirit of the law, as well as the letter, or soon there will be no order in the land.’
Jotan's wife Arkhina was reclining on cushions in a nearby alcove, and her mother, a daughter of Arjun the Great, was engaged in conversation with the widow of her cousin, who had been parent to Nogai.
‘Tomorrow you will become a Khan,’ Zurachina pointed out with calm persistence.
‘Your vassals will come to you for justice, and you cannot expect them to accept your judgement if it can be seen that you hold the Yasa in contempt.’
Alexei eyed her.
‘Lady, respect for the Yasa is, as we both know, a fiction.
It is broken every day.’
He glanced pointedly in the direction of the mother of Nogai.
Sula was by birth a Manghutt princess, and she had lived under sentence of banishment until her son's accession to the Dragon Throne for her part in her family's attempt to install him as Kha-Khan while his grandfather Arjun yet ruled.
Zurachina followed the direction of Alexei's glance, and she sniffed.
‘Noyon your tongue is as agile as your mind,’ she said acidly.
‘Be careful you do not trip over it.’
Alexei laughed at her, then sobered.
He knew that the licence which had pervaded Nogai's court had been its least attractive feature.
‘Lady, I accept what you say,’ he said.
‘But if my name has been so discredited, I do not see a remedy.’
A lady of the court, the daughter of a lesser Khan of the Arcutt, moved gracefully along the passageway which bordered the arcade.
She saw Alexei, paused and smiled, and then descended the few steps and came towards him.
Zurachina turned when she heard the sound of approaching footsteps.
She stared coldly, and the lady's smile faltered.
She hesitated, then bowed to Zurachina and went away.
Alexei grinned.
‘Jotan has a daughter yet unmarried,’ Zurachina said.
Alexei sat up straight.
Jotan's daughter, the sister of Jehan, was the source of as much malicious gossip as he was himself.
A year or two younger than her brother she had refused every match offered her, maintaining instead a state of determined independence.
She kept, it was said, her own household and ruled her own fiefs, and although her name had never been linked with any man Alexei knew of, marriage to her was not a prospect which he thought he would be able to face with equanimity.
‘She is unwomanly,’ Zurachina said, as if she anticipated his objections, ‘and were it not for her beauty I would wish that she had been born a man.’
‘Lady, I do not think —’ Alexei hesitated, selecting polite phrases and discarding them again.
’— I doubt if your grand-daughter would accept me.’
There was no reason why she should after rejecting so many others, he thought, and wondered in the same instant if it would be interesting to court such a woman.
Zurachina's hands lay still in her lap.
‘There are reasons why she will accept your suit,’ she said.
‘Oh?’
The end of the arcade was full of women, all of them whispering and staring towards the place where Zurachina's servants had set down her chair.
A pot of  ch'ban, a beverage which Alexei thought was quite similar to earth stock coffee, bubbled quietly on a burner which was set in a shallow bowl of sand on the table at her side.
She lifted the pot and filled two tiny cups, offering him one.
‘Artai's interest has lighted upon her,’ she said.
Alexei was pleased to note that the hand with which he raised his cup did not tremble.
He sipped the bitter-sweet drink.
‘Then surely you consider that an honour which ought not to be declined,’ he said gravely.
Zurachina raised her cup between extended talons, but her eyes did not leave Alexei's face.
She drank from her cup, then set it on the table.
‘Even if Jehana would accept it,’ she observed, her tone prosaic, ‘it is not a match which her family would consider — appropriate.’
‘I would have thought that Burun's influence —’ Alexei began.
‘My husband's influence does not require to be increased by his grand-daughter's marriage to Artai,’ Zurachina said with finality.
Artai could not have declared any public intent to marry Jehana, Alexei realised, or it would have been the talk of Kinsai. probably there were rumours — nothing was ever entirely a secret at court — and he glanced again at the women who clustered at the other end of the pool.
‘If Artai asks for her hand —’ he began delicately.
‘If he asks for Jehana's hand,’ Zurachina said, ‘it will be refused.’
Rejection for whatever reason was not a matter which Artai would easily forgive.
’— A response which would damage rather than increase the influence of the Merkuts in the Khanate,’ Alexei observed.
Zurachina nodded.
’— And so it cannot be allowed to occur.
I am pleased you follow my reasoning so readily, Noyon.
If your betrothal to Jehana is declared quickly, Artai will be unable to demonstrate offence.
Has he ever mentioned his interest to you?’
‘No.’
‘Then he can have no reason to feel that you have acted contrary to his will.’
Her argument was so brutally simple that Alexei was lost for words.
He emptied his cup and set it down on the table.
The porcelain from which the cup was formed was so translucent that the grain of the wood upon which it sat was faintly visible through it.
I could refuse.
The thought came to Alexei with such force and urgency that he knew that it was not a reasoned reaction.
The expression on Zurachina's face was impossible to read.
‘You have nothing to say?’ she asked.
Alexei gestured helplessly.’
— Only that between you and your husband I see a conspiracy to force me to forfeit Artai's favour.’
Zurachina shrugged.
There was a kind of inevitability about the whole proposal which appalled Alexei.
In human terms the reasoning which had been presented to him was filled with flaws and false assumptions.
To a Yek accomplished in the ways of the court the whole scheme would make perfect sense however.
More than anything else Alexei knew that he was not like his father, and could never belong here.
This is not my world.
It was as if Zurachina had divined what he was thinking.
‘As to Artai,’ she said calmly, ‘he will be reminded that you are in alien.
You do not think like a civilised man, although your behaviour has become  civilised, and so he cannot ascribe to your actions motives which are suspect — or not according to his understanding.’
The observation contained an insult, but Alexei knew that if he attempted to explain it to her she would be unable to comprehend it.
He stared unseeing down the arcade, then looked back at her.
‘My courtship of your grand-daughter is then only a matter of form,’ he said.
Zurachina looked as if she thought that the observation was unnecessary.
‘I have said she will accept you,’ she responded.
‘She has already agreed.’
The plan was Burun's of course, and Zurachina was doing his will.
It occurred to Alexei to wonder how many people were party to the arrangement.
Turakina certainly knew — her words to him the previous afternoon had simply been a test of his resistance — and if she had knowledge of it, then so had Suragai.
Jotan, as Jehana's father, must have given his consent — and thus probably Jehan.
‘Say that you will accept it,’ Zurachina prompted.
A bitter reply rose to Alexei's lips, but he suppressed the urge to utter it.
Probably Zurachina was aware of his feelings, even though she was incapable of understanding them.
‘Lady, I am your servant,’ he said.
She sat back, considering him gravely.
‘Good,’ she said, then smiled.
‘Noyon, you shall not regret this, I give you my promise.’
It was clear to Alexei that if the Merkuts did not wish to see Jehana given in marriage to Artai, there were reasons which had nothing to do with the suitability of the match.
He recalled how Burun had dissociated himself from acting as Artai's sponsor.
Even though it was common knowledge that the Merkuts were the power behind the throne, no one could say that they had ever demanded precedence after Artai.
If Artai's reign was marked by disaster or excess they would be able to claim that they were not responsible, and their influence over the affairs of the Khanate would not be diminished.
‘You might have warned me.’
Alexei watched his father's face for a reaction.
He had met him on his way to the stables, and they stood in a yard which was busy with blacksmiths and farriers.
‘It might have come to nothing,’ Suragai said.
The look which Alexei produced was frankly disbelieving, and he smiled.
‘Marriage will settle you,’ he observed.
Alexei thought that marriage to Jehana was likely to be anything but settling, but he did not argue.
‘I have heard betrothal mentioned,’ he said.
‘Not marriage.’
‘I think one follows the other,’ his father said mildly.
A groom was leading a pair of matched sorrel st'lyan at the trot around the beaten clay of an exercise ring.
The gilding on the st'lyan's horns glittered as they tossed their heads.
Suragai watched critically, then waved a hand.
‘Good, Arvid.
Let them be reshod.’
‘I am surprised Burun chose me.’
Alexei scuffed his heel through the tan which had been scattered across the clay.
‘So am I.’ Suragai grinned.
‘Maybe he is concerned to improve his bloodline.
You know the Altun are becoming inbred.’
The Merkuts were not part of the Golden Clan, but the remark contained a certain amount of truth.
The principal families of the Khanate were all interrelated, and so it was not hard to understand why the defective genes which had been responsible for  Nogai's early death recurred in so many of his blood.
The explanation was not a serious one, Alexei thought, or if it was, it was not reassuring.
All that was apparent so far was that Burun's intent was to divert Artai's interest away from Jehana.
Artai was young, but once he chose a wife — an honour for which there would be contenders enough — reasons for breaking her betrothal might be easy enough to find.
Suddenly it occurred to Alexei that in the event that he failed to return from the embassy the question of solemnising the marriage would not arise, and he wondered again how far he could trust Burun.
Arvid was leading the st'lyan across the yard.
The smith was a freedman, tall and muscular, a Ch'noze whose facial tattoos indicated that he was of the family of a war-leader.
‘Those are nice animals.’
His father's head came round.
‘Yes — bred from a mare Burun gave me the year we fought the Alan.
Those are the second generation.
They're not as heavy, but they're just as strong.’
In appearance st'lyan were not unlike Terran stock horses, though they were much larger and faster.
Alexei held to the opinion that they could not be naturally evolved, and thought that the single horn which projected from the forehead of each had been the whim probably of some Second Empire geneticist.
Internally the equine similarities ceased.
St'lyan had an organ which acted like a supercharger, so that they were capable of long periods of exertion, and like the Yek they were able to endure remarkable extremes of heat and cold.
The smith lifted a hoof onto his thigh, then began to scrape the compacted tan and dung which clogged it with a hoofpick.
His apprentices stood in a respectful half-circle to watch, and a crowd of small  boys — most of them children of members of the household — loitered in a shy cluster in a nearby doorway.
‘Look in the doorway,’ Suragai said.
Alexei followed the direction of his father's gaze, and saw that Hulagu and Kaidu were edging gradually to the front of the group watching the smith.
‘I see them.
Where are they supposed to be?’
‘Somewhere.
Not here.’
The twins were notorious for their escapades.
Kaidu was venturing out of the doorway into the yard now.
He glanced towards the place where his father stood, a wary expression on his face.
Suragai pretended not to notice.
A pair of matched bays were being led into the exercise ring by a groom, and he turned away to watch them.
Kaidu picked up a hoofpick from the smith's bench, and he wrestled the off-hind hoof of the second sorrel up into his lap.
The huge animal dwarfed him.
‘He'll be trampled,’ Alexei said.
‘Not by one of my sorrels.
Watch.’
The smith was aware of Kaidu's presence now.
He glanced in Suragai's direction, his eyebrows raised in enquiry.
Alexei saw his father grin and shake his head.
The sorrel turned its beautiful head to stare over its shoulder at Kaidu.
It snorted, and carefully raised its hind leg and straightened it as if to rid itself of an encumbrance.
Kaidu tumbled head over heels.
The boys standing in the doorway tittered.
The sorrel whickered softly, looking pleased with itself.
Hulagu came out of the clustered spectators.
He pulled his twin to his feet.
‘Let me try.’
He took the hoofpick out of Kaidu's hand, then tried to lift the st'lyan's hoof onto his thigh.
Here, Noyon,’ the smith said.
‘It's easier like this.’
He showed both boys how to lift the sorrel's hoof between their knees, and suddenly there was a line of small boys at his side, all waiting hopefully for a turn.
The day of Artai's enthronement was one which Alexei was to remember afterwards as one of the most confusing of his life.
from the first it was apparent that it was not destined to be the faultless pageant which the stewards and controllers of the Kha-Khan's household had both intended and arranged.
It had rained heavily during the night — a sudden downpour which had filled the gutters and drains which supplied the city's water catchment system — so that when dawn broke it could be seen that many of the drapes and festoons over archways and down the faces of stands and platforms had been torn from the frames by the weight of the water which had soaked them.
The forests of banners and guidons which adorned every street corner hung limp and sodden, and where an otherwise laudable economy had resulted in the use of cheap cloth the colours had run so that the insignia upon the panels was streaked and indecipherable.
Alexei had risen before the sun broke the horizon, and because he was engaged to wait upon Jehana at the house of her father — a public display to advertise the fact of their intended betrothal which was designed, he guessed, to make it believable — he was among the first to witness the damage which the teams of wrights and carpenters now laboured to repair.
That much of the decoration was shredded or defaced beyond hope of repair, Alexei thought, was quite clear.
Clad in a coat which was so stiff with gold wire and seed pearls that he could scarcely bend his arms he rode with his escort beneath a line of arches  which were suspended on ropes between houses on opposite sides of one of the main streets.
The material which yesterday had draped them now lay in discarded heaps on the stones of the paving below, and men were hastily tacking new lengths — the mercers and drapers must have ransacked their warehouses to find enough, and the cost would no doubt make the court treasurer blench — to the framework.
The troopers of the Kha-Khan's guard who were detailed to line the processional route had been pressed into service to clear away the debris, and their facial expressions reflected their feelings as the dye from the cloth stained their hands and surcoats.
The puddles in the hollows of the paving stones shimmered with a wash of colour as booted feet splashed through them, and officials of the court stood with long faces as they counted the extent of the destruction wrought by the rains.
‘Bad luck,’ Ordai said, riding at Alexei's side.
He spat left and right.
Alexei frowned.
Some men were already saying that Artai's election was ill-starred.
‘Rain at this season is a good omen,’ he contradicted.
It was the middle of the orange month — almost the hottest time of the year — when the condensation from the mist which clung to the buildings every morning was welcome for the moisture it imparted.
His orderly looked politely doubtful.
‘If you say so, Lord,’ he said.
Away from the main streets there was less damage.
The burghers of Kinsai ranked is lesser Khans, and they had done their best to decorate in suitable style those areas of their city which were not in the path of the official progress.
Where cloth had been scarce they had pinned ivy or ch'in-sei, the silver-leafed creeper which grew where nothing else would  survive, and Artai's device — an eagle with an arrow in its talons — was painted onto friezes which were roped to gables and lamp cressets.
Alexei rode between dragons moulded from paper and paste which were lined up in a side street.
The dragons were for the procession, and were designed to be raised upon the shoulders of pairs of bearers.
They had been draped with canvas to protect them from the rain, and a watchman in wet buckram saluted civilly, then stepped back in haste to avoid the splashes thrown up by the hooves of the passing st'lyan.
‘Bow to your left, Lord.
The men in that yard are saluting you.’
‘I see them.’
Alexei inclined his head as far as the collar of his coat would allow.
The result was stiff, distant even, and the three or four burghers bowed even lower.
He smiled sourly.
He had acknowledged similar courtesies a number of times since riding out, and guessed that it was the sable hat of a Khan which he carried in his hand which was attracting recognition, rather than his actual eminence.
The hat and coat had been delivered the previous evening by an officer of the Kha-Khan's guard, and since the news of Jehana's betrothal had been spread through the court hours earlier it had to be assumed that Artai had heard of it, and that either he was inclined to forgive the offence which might be supposed to exist, or else he was pretending that he was aware of none.
Jotan's house was at the end of a street which curved to follow the line of the city wall.
The building was constructed from amber-coloured stone, and the roof ridges and gable ends were sheathed with bronze.
The sentries had been primed to admit him without challenge, Alexei noted, and as soon as his escort had dismounted a trooper wearing the gorget  of a provost came out of the gatehouse and led them away towards the stables.
‘Well met.’
Jotan detached himself from an alcove beside the main door.
Burun's eldest son was a tall rangy man with a lot of muscle and sinew.
A famous fighter in his youth, he was now one of the Khanate's foremost statesmen.
‘Good morning, Khan.’
Alexei bowed politely.
He had served under Jotan during the Alan campaign — they had acquaintances in common— but all at once he was unsure what form of address to employ.
He saw that he was being appraised, and flushed.
’— Custom dictates that we deal with one another like friends,’ Jotan said, but did not smile.
’— At least until we start to argue the matter of my daughter's dowry.
You could call me Uncle, I suppose, if it pleases you.’
Alexei's father's first wife was Jotan's sister, and so it was possible that the suggestion was a serious one.
Alexei made a pretence of considering.
’— A term which might be thought by some to overstate our relationship,’ he said finally, and was pleased to observe that his tone did not waver.
‘As you wish.’
Jotan nodded.
‘We were both more at ease, I think, when we were not required to hide our mistrust for one another.
The Yek offend you because we do not think you are human.
You consider the peoples of this world barbarians, uncivilised, and sometimes you do not trouble to conceal your opinion of us.
It will be hard for us to pretend friendship.’
Alexei was always taken by surprise by the Yek talent for blunt speaking, ‘That being the case,’ he said, ‘I am surprised you have given your consent to your daughter's betrothal to me.’
Jotan's head went back, and he looked down his  nose.
‘Your father is my brother,’ he replied, as if it explained everything.
Suddenly the corner of his mouth twitched.
He shook his head and laughed harshly.
‘I shall call you comrade, I think,’ he said, and laughed again.
It was a term used by common soldiers — men who had shared a tent, a bowl of meat, or the last of the wine.
Alexei did not understand why Jotan seemed to be amused by the notion, and so he said nothing.
The inside of Jotan's house was constructed on three levels — galleries off the main building which were buttressed by huge timbers — and the open ends of each living space overlooked the central hall, although the stairways which gave access to them were concealed.
Although it was summer a fire burned in the great stone hearth — embers which were all that were left of logs which had been burned during the night to repel the damp which always crept out of the stone walls.
The ceiling of the hall was also the roof of the building, and when Alexei looked up he could see the rafters, black with age, the heads of brass nails glittering across them.
The hall smelled of cedar wood and sweet wax.
The lamps in the cressets gave out the scent of perfumed oil, and somewhere a lutenist was playing quietly.
‘Sit.’
Jotan gestured towards a chair which was placed upon a circular carpet of Keraistani weave.
The colours of the carpet were blends of every shade from oatmeal to deep brown, and the pattern was so intricate that Alexei's eye could not follow it.
He sat, and at once a page came out of the shadows with a tray which contained cups and a flask of wine.
He went towards Jotan, but Jotan waved him away.
‘Serve my guest before you serve me.’
The page was a Y'frike, a boy of ten or eleven years of age, whose skin was the colour of roasted ch'ban  grounds.
Jotan had spoken Yek to him, for the tongue of the conquerors was employed everywhere, and there were few people in the known world who did not understand it.
The page hastened to serve Alexei, his face expressionless.
Like Alexei, he had nails on the ends of his fingers instead of talons, and he stared at Alexei's hands as he gave him a filled cup, then raised his eyes and bowed solemnly.
‘You were surprised to hear me speak my mind.’
Jotan took a cup out of the page's hands, then dismissed him with a flick of his head.
‘Does the truth offend you?’
‘Truth without malice has an unusual quality,’ Alexei said.
‘The man who takes offence at it is a fool indeed.’
Jotan was wearing full court dress — a brocaded coat without fastenings, the fabric embroidered with gold wire and decorated with gems and seed pearls, over a high-collared shirt in silk tissue.
The shirt was tucked into high-waisted trousers, and the trousers into soft calf-length boots which were embossed with gold.
No weapons were visible, although Alexei guessed that a dagger was  sheathed in Jotan's sleeve.
He touched the hilt of the hiranu in his waist sash, then stood, smoothing the skirts of his coat.
A door at the end of the hall opened, and Arkhina came in attended by a serving woman.
Jotan's wife was tall and slim, and there was a birthmark high on her left cheek.
She was Altun, and so her hair was red — a colour like a brightly burning fire.
The gold threads and the jewels woven through it sparkled in the light of the lamps.
Alexei bowed to her.
‘Khatun.’
It was clear that she had not expected to find him in the room.
‘Alexei.’
She nodded to him.
Her gown had a train which brushed the floor, and she waited  while the woman following her looped it up into neat folds and attached them to the fastening at her wrist.
‘I was not told you were here.’
There was the sound of movement on one of the galleries above Alexei's head, but he did not look up.
It was said that Arkhina was among the most influential women of the Kha-Khan's court, but she was too like her sister-in-law, his father's wife, for him to be on good terms with her.
A door crashed somewhere up beyond a curtain wall, and the voices of women carried like a peal of bells — melodious, chiming upon one another— into the well of the gallery immediately above.
Jotan sipped at his wine, and then set his cup in a niche in the wall beside the fireplace.
‘Jehana is coming,’ he said, and produced an amused smile.
‘Try and look like a suitor, will you?’
He held out his hand for Alexei's cup.
Alexei drank a little of the sweet wine, then handed his cup to Jotan.
The situation had too many of the elements of a farce about it, and he wondered briefly why he had agreed to such a scheme.
The door at the end of the hall opened again.
Pages and serving women hastened through it, each of them bearing an item of outdoor clothing.
The first, who was a very small page, carried a pair of jewelled gloves.
The second had a cap which was sewn with emeralds; the third bore a pair of the high-heeled boots which great ladies wore to walk about the city; and behind them, their faces solemn with barely suppressed mirth, came three women, a high-collared cloak folded lengthwise between them.
The white silk tissue of the lining of the cloak was just visible at the hem, and its black brocade gleamed with pearls.
Alexei stared frankly at the display.
‘My Lord, how prompt you are,’ Jotan's daughter  said from the shadow of the doorway.
He had not seen her enter because his attention had been fixed upon the well-ordered panoply of her retinue.
Now he knew that it had been a diversion, designed to hold his gaze so that he would be disadvantaged in his dealings with her.
He bowed quickly, searching for courtesies to pay her.
Jehana was beautiful — both by Yek and by human standards — and it was remarkable that she had remained thus far unmarried.
Alexei knew that he had always been aware of her — they were not strangers by any means — but now he straightened and stared in open admiration.
It was an examination which travelled upwards from the tips of the slippered feet which peeped from beneath the hem of her jewelled and embroidered formal gown to the crown of golden hair which sparkled unadorned like a halo around her head.
Her fair skin was covered with sprays of tiny golden-brown freckles, and he could see that she was colouring as she mei his eyes.
‘Lady, you dazzle me,’ he said simply.
Jotan stirred.
‘I believe thai was the intention,’ he observed drily.
What peacocks we have become, now that we are the masters of this land.’
The kind of wealth which would be displayed in the garments of the Khans and Noyons during the day's ceremonies was usually a product of oppression of the poor, but on Tarvaras there was no one whom Alexei would have cared to class as under-privileged.
Even slaves were part of an organised meritocracy, and birth alone was insufficient to assure any man of rank or position.
‘It is the role of a suitor to be dazzled,’ Arkhina commented, and touched the birthmark on her cheek.
’— And the role of a father to provide the wherewithal,’ Jotan said.
Jehana still had not spoken.
Her maids were unfolding her cloak, and the page who held her boots was kneeling so that she could put her feet into them.
Alexei offered a hand to her, and when she took it he stood, meeting her gaze steadily, while she stepped from slipper to boot first with one foot, and then with the other.
The neck of her gown was a collar of spun gold, and the front was open, court style, to the level of her breast.
Her touch was cold.
Her fingers lay slender and perfect, passive across his outstretched hand.
Her sheathed golden talons trembled once, and then they were still.
‘Thank you, my Lord.’
Her hand withdrew.
Wearing the boots she was taller, but still he was looking down on her.
Her perfume clouded his breathing, and he stepped back, then bowed again.
It was as if she was unaware of the gesture.
She waited while her maids adjusted her cloak around her shoulders, and then took her cap from the page who held it and put it on.
‘You ought to discuss your betrothal,’ Jotan said.
‘But there is no time.’
Arkhina looked amused.
‘Lord husband,’ she said, ‘they are in accord, I think.’
She walked past Jotan to the door, and the pages who were stationed there hastened to open it for her.
Jotan looked perplexed by her observation.
He glanced from Alexei to Jehana, and then shrugged and strode after his wife.
‘My mother is right,’ Jehana said.
She took her gloves from the page who waited with them.
‘There is nothing for us to discuss.’
There was no hint of warmth in her tone, and Alexei could think of nothing appropriate to say.
Of all the circumstances which he had envisaged — of all  her possible responses to his clearly demonstrated willingness to admire her — that with which he was now faced was the most confusing, the most difficult to comprehend.
She walked past him to the door, and though he followed and came quickly up to her side he did not again offer her his hand.
The Dragon Throne rested normally in an audience chamber within the Golden Yurt, the palace of the Kha-Khan.
Now it sat upon a plinth of stone the height of two standing men which was at the concourse of the broad principal streets which radiated out from Kinsai like the spokes of a wheel.
A canopy had been raised above it, but because the Yasa required the enthronement to be witnessed and acclaimed by people of every degree there was no other obstruction to the public view.
The ceremony of enthronement was simple enough.
Men cheered as Artai descended the steps in front of his palace, then walked along a corridor of his guards through the crowd of Khans and other notables who were gathered to witness his accession.
The cheers spread to the people who crammed every street which led from the concourse, but Artai did not turn his head or acknowledge them.
At the foot of the plinth he stopped and turned.
No shaman was present to preside or to ask for God's blessing upon Artai's reign, Alexei saw, for it was a fact that there was no such thing as organised religion on this world, and even casual superstition was not permitted to interfere for long in the affairs of men.
Artai was bowing to left and right now, the last time in his life he would ever be required to offer courtesy to others.
Everyone in the crowd was bowing back, and the waves of motion proceeded down each of the streets like ripples out across a  pool.
At once the officers of the Kha-Khan's guard came through the ranks of the troopers to Artai's side.
All of them were big men who had drawn lots for the honour of the occasion, and carefully they lifted Artai and carried him up the short flight of steps to the summit of the plinth.
There was a tradition that the Kha-Khan not be required to turn his back upon his people, and so they carried him facing out across the crowd, and placed him directly in front of the seat of the reclining dragon which had been the throne of Tamujin, Ancestor of the Altun, the first Kha-Khan.
Then they descended again to the concourse.
Artai sat down, and at once the people began to shout his name.
The men threw up their arms every time they shouted, and gradually what began as a confusion of noise became a solid roar of acclamation.
‘Artai!
Artai!’
It was now, at the moment of supreme triumph, that it became apparent once more that the fates were intervening to demonstrate that the day was to be memorable most of all for its disasters.
part of the process of universal involvement in recognition of Artai as Lord of the Earth now necessitated the removal of the Dragon Throne — a solid piece of carving of the weight of seven thousand diram — with its occupant from the top of the plinth down to the concourse from whence it was destined to be borne on a processional route on the shoulders of teams of men of every degree in the Khanate, most of whom had been selected by lot, although there were a few who had paid out considerable sums in gold koban for the privilege of inclusion.
Alexei, Jotan, Jehana and Arkhina were among those of the nobility who had elected to eschew the fervour of the crowd, and watched from a wooden platform which had been constructed across the entry  to a side street.
Troopers lifted the throne from its staging and passed it to the waiting hands below.
It sank for a moment, then rose again, and Alexei saw Jotan raise his eyebrows.
It was the Controller of the Household who later established that no one in authority who was within a reasonable distance of the incident could have realised that the members of the first team of bearers, most of them worthy if nervous burghers of Kinsai, had doctored strung-up nerves with wine and k'miss to such an extent that they were no longer capable of reacting with either fortitude or common sense to the kind of diversions which were now to be expected as part of the rejoicing.
The celebration of Artai's Khanate having properly commenced, the common people were anxious to come close to the path of their newly enthroned lord through their city.
A press of bodies developed which the guard were unable or unwilling to clear.
The cheering throng swayed, and so did the throne on the shoulders of its bearers.
A salvo of fireworks lit by a group of well-intentioned N'pani on the outskirts of the crowd exploded overhead.
Most of the men carrying the throne had served as army conscripts, and they reacted instinctively to the sound of the explosions.
They ducked and flinched, the throne tipped, and Artai fell off into the arms of his officers.
Jotan met Alexei's eyes in a moment of mutual sympathy and understanding, and then ignoring the obvious disapproval of their respective partners they buried their faces in their hands and wept in helpless mirth.
The fireworks were still exploding when the procession came to an end over in hour later.
In fact there had not been one unified element to  the train which followed Artai's progress but several, and those which were the designated efforts of individual districts of the city, or of the guilds, now moved away to become the driving force behind a carnival which ruled every street.
‘I have a thirst a C'zak would envy,’ Burun said.
He had joined them out of the press in the midst of a guard of taciturn Merkut troopers who were economical in their employment of the brute force necessary to clear their master's path.
With Burun were his wives, both of his younger sons, his grandson Jehan, and a small gathering of the senior members of his household.
Jotan looked as though he was considering the alternatives.
‘We are summoned to audience with Artai later,’ he said, ‘but until then we can do as we please.’
Alexei thought that if the phrasing of the observation suggested that Burun was anything other than his own master, it was surely an accident.
Burun gave Jotan a look.
‘Your house is closer than mine.
We'll go there.’
Which was how the Khan of the Merkuts — along with his escort, his retinue, and the principal members of his family — came to be crossing a bridge which was erected at the height of the second floor across several of the principal buildings in the better part of the merchants' quarter of Kinsai.
Space was at such a premium here that the narrow side streets had long since been filled with structures.
No one was permitted to build outside the city wall — indeed it would have been more or less impossible given the sheer drop to the plain — and as a result the ever-industrious Kinsani merchants had expanded in directions which were not forbidden by the law.
They had tunnelled down into the plateau, and they had  built upwards as far as their materials and construction abilities would allow.
Common thoroughfares ran everywhere and at every level from basement to attic.
Passageways were pierced through the walls of houses in some places, and in others they were supported on props along the faces of warehouses and shops, and it was across one of these — a sturdy bridge of timber which was designed to withstand the weight of carts as well as men — that Burun's party moved without very much opposition from the revellers, most of whom clearly preferred the breadth of the main streets.
Matching his pace to that of Jehana at his side, Alexei deduced from the snatches of conversation which carried back to him that Burun was not interested in discussing with Jotan either the agenda or the implications of their programmed audience with Artai.
Nor, it became clear, did he wish to talk about the role he intended to play now that Artai was secure upon his throne.
For a moment Alexei wondered why Burun did not arrest his eldest son's questions more sharply, and then he realised with admiration how much reassurance the noble hangers-on who had swollen Burun's retinue would draw from what they heard.
The Khan of the Merkuts did not fear for his position or for his influence.
He was satisfied to allow matters to follow their own course.
They were passing across an open portion of the bridge.
Shafts of red sunlight illuminated the timbers as they moved from the support of one building to another across a street filled with people.
The faces of the houses gleamed, and crystals in the stone reflected stray sunbeams.
Towards the street corner a single papier-maché dragon bobbed in the centre of a circle of dancing men.
A group of children clustered at the place where  the bridge forked to provide access to a set of warehouses.
There were few adults with them, but those who recognised Burun bowed.
A child darted out in front of the striding troopers so that they checked their pace.
An officer to Burun's right stumbled, and he clutched at the handrail at his side.
Alexei thought, but did not voice the opinion, that possibly the man was suffering from the effects of too much wine.
If that was the case, he would almost certainly be disciplined.
More children were crowding into the junction ahead.
Some of them waved, and the noise along the thoroughfare increased.
Another trooper fell out of line, and this time when he got a hand to the wooden rail at the side of the bridge he collapsed across it.
There was the sound of short swords being drawn, and a controlled explosion of anger and realisation from the officer in charge of the escort.
Burun turned his head without interrupting what Jotan was saying to him, and intercepting the look Alexei left Jehana's side and went unobtrusively into the line of Merkuts to the side of a grizzled warrant officer.
‘The children.
Move them out of the way.’
Alexei issued the order incisively.
The warrant officer nodded understanding, and he broke rank and moved quickly forward along the outside of the now almost stationary line of troopers.
The bridge though sturdy was not very wide, and one did not desire, on this of all days, an accident in which innocent children might come to harm.
Alexei turned to return to Jehana's side.
He had taken a pace or two when something tugged at the shoulder of his coat.
A trooper to his left threw up his hands to his face, crying out.
He went to his knees, and the men behind him moved aside.
Alexei was  moving to help when someone gripped his arm, and people closed in around him.
One of them was Burun.
He ran his gloved hand up across Alexei's shoulder, and pulled something from the stiff material of the embroidered coat.
Alexei jerked, surprised.
Then he saw the metal dart in Burun's hand.
’— Blown through a tube,’ Burun said.
‘The Ch'kasians use them.’
He turned and gestured to his officer.
‘Take some men.
Round up all the children, and tell them that they are to be treated to sweets to celebrate the day.
Find an adult with authority in the district and bring him to me —’
A mercer in a fur-trimmed coat was already emerging from a small crowd of bystanders.
He bowed to Burun, a worried look on his face.
The captain of the escort led him to one side, explaining.
Alexei reached out and took the dart.
‘Children?’
Burun glanced back at him.
‘Yes.
You can tell from the angle, and in any case an adult on his knees blowing through a pipe would have been likely to attract the interest of his neighbours.
Anyway I think I saw one of them.’
‘Oh?’
Alexei raised his eyebrows.
‘I did not know you were looking in my direction, Khan.’
‘My attention, as becomes my station, is everywhere,’ Burun said drily.
He turned to address the captain of the guard.
‘Is there a place to which the children can be taken?’
‘This man has offered his house, Khan.’
‘Good.’
The merchant still looked bewildered.
‘Lord, do you wish to question the children while they are detained —’
Alexei saw Burun make a face.
‘That would antagonise the parents,’ Burun said.
‘Also the blowpipes  will long since have been thrown away.
No, I simply wish them to be removed from this place.
My officers will conduct their own enquiry, and I will not hold this district to blame unless I am shown evidence of its involvement.’
The clearance of the staging at the end of the bridge took only a short time, and it was not until they were moving once more that Alexei had a sudden thought.
‘I thought you said you saw one of the children who attacked us, Khan,’ he said.
‘I said I thought so,’ Burun responded.
‘You think I should look for him?’
‘It would seem to make sense.’
‘So it would,’ Burun responded amiably, ‘if I expected to know him again.’
They were descending a flight of stairs towards a broad main street, and because of the narrowness of the staircase Alexei was forced to drop back.
The impression had been conveyed to him, he noted, that Burun had seen one of their attackers — but not closely enough to identify him.
He mistrusted that notion because it was unlike Burun to fail to observe anything accurately.
Apart from that, Alexei was almost certain that Burun had lied.
The audience chamber was bigger than the main hall outside.
It had a wooden floor which had been brushed with gold leaf so that every knot and line of the grain created a ripple in a seeming golden pool.
In the centre of the room there was a raised dais, and it was also roofed with gold.
The Dragon Throne had been brought to the dais after the procession, and Artai was sitting upon it.
Alexei stood a little behind and to the right of Burun.
He knelt and bowed, and then prostrated himself.
The splendour of the room never failed to  unsettle him, and the fact that everyone else was going through the same series of salutations did nothing to make him feel more comfortable.
Burun had rocked back onto his heels.
The gold on the floor reflected his face, distorting it.
Alexei completed his obeisance, then sat up.
The people in the room were all members of Burun's family, or served him.
His sons Jotan, Orcadai and C'zinsit were in a line to his left, and to Alexei's right knelt Jehan and Suragai, with Suragai's Tarvarian son Kadan at his shoulder.
‘Burun Khan, we greet you,’ Artai said.
His voice was high and clear.
‘Lord.’
Burun uncoiled himself in a single elastic stretch of his torso, and he stood up.
‘I salute you.
My family and these here with them who serve me salute you.’
Artai was surveying the men who knelt in line before him.
‘Indeed,’ he said flatly, ‘we see one among them who does not serve you, Khan, or not so far as we are aware.
Alexei Khan, how say you?’
Alexei rose to his feet.
‘Lord, I am your servant,’ he said.
’— And yet we hear that you are now a Merkut also,’ Artai observed tartly.
He stared at Alexei, and the pupils in his amber eyes seemed to expand, then contract again.
Burun laughed softly, and he gestured apparently without embarrassment.
‘Lord Khan, Alexei is betrothed as you have heard to my grand-daughter, and so I consider him a member of my family.
He does not serve me.’
‘Hunh.’
Artai nodded.
‘Then we are content.’
He did not look at Burun but at Alexei as he spoke.
Suddenly he turned.
‘Have you told them why they are assembled here in our presence?’
Burun pretended to look offended.
‘Lord, I would not presume to interpret your will,’ he said.
It was clear from Artai's expression that he wished to show that he did not entirely believe Burun's protest.
‘Very well,’ he said.
‘It is our will — the Will of Heaven — that an embassy be sent to the lands across the Great Sea —’ He waved a hand.
’— Whatever lies to the west, to invite the people there to submit themselves to the protection of our rule.’
Alexei saw that Burun was contemplating the piece of floor between his feet.
There was a moment of silence.
Alexei took a deep breath.
‘Lord Khan,’ he said, ‘I will go.’
There was another silence.
Then Burun raised his head.
‘Lord,’ he said, ‘it is fitting that the ambassador should be your man, and not mine.’
Artai looked down his nose.
‘Is not every man in this land our servant?’ he demanded.
Burun looked amused.
‘Lord, what is the fact, because it is the law, and what is perceived by men, being a matter of their belief, are often different.
I meant only that this is a matter of your will, and ought to be seen by men to be carried out in your name and at your direction.
You know how 1 have supported your election.
Thus it is that some of the Khans may perceive influence where I have exerted none.’
Alexei mastered a stare of disbelief.
‘Then we consent,’ Artai said.
‘Alexei Khan shall go, in our name.
There should be others, however, men of repute in the Khanate, to support him, for he is not of our world.’
For a moment it was as if he was casting around for suitable names, and then suddenly he was looking past Alexei towards Jehan.
‘You, Noyon, shall be among them,’ he said.
Burun's expression did not alter.
‘Lord,’ he said, You honour my house.’
He looked once in Jehan's direction, and if there was a warning in his eyes, Alexei was unable to identity it.
Jehan had not risen.
Now he bowed from the waist.
‘Lord, I obey your will,’ he said simply.
He sat back on his heels, his face expressionless.
‘There will be others.’
Artai glanced at Burun.
‘We shall send to you, Khan, and you shall advise us — but Alexei shall lead them, and it is to him we shall issue our patent.’
Burun bowed.
‘Such details are minor matters,’ he said.
Artai sat back.
‘Yes.’
He stared at Alexei.
‘Ask for whom you wish.
We shall command them.’
Alexei hesitated.
‘Lord, there is one —’
‘Oh?’
Artai's head came up.
‘Name him.’
‘Lord, the son of Siban, whose name has been offered to you as one you may see fit to pardon, as is the custom on this day.’
‘We have no such intention,’ Artai said coldly.
‘Sidacai was taken in treason.
His death warrant is under our hand.’
Alexei did not look towards Burun.
He shrugged as if he had said all that he intended to say, and bowed to Artai.
‘Name another,’ Artai said.
‘Not him.’
Burun stirred.
‘Lord Khan,’ he said, ‘how does it serve you to kill Sidacai?’
‘Sidacai has not been condemned in order that we may be served, but to satisfy the Yasa,’ Artai responded, bridling.
’— And yet maybe his death should serve you,’ Burun said.
No one had ever suggested that Artai was a fool.
He gave Burun a look.
‘It is not Sidacai's death I am being asked for, but his life,’ he said.
Burun gestured as if the matter was of little concern.
‘What it amounts to is that Sidacai is expendable,’ he said.
He spread his hands.
‘Who knows what may be found when the Great Sea has been crossed?
Release Sidacai into Alexei's charge, so that in life or in death he may serve you.’
The argument appeared to provide Artai with a degree of amusement.
After a moment he nodded.
‘Let it be so.’
He looked at Alexei.
‘We give you charge of all the matters which may relate to this our command.
Serve us well, and you shall receive our favour.’
There was no answer to that, and Alexei bowed.
Burun asked, ‘Are we dismissed?’
‘Oh.’
Artai looked as if he was suddenly bored by the whole interlude.
‘Yes.
Go.’
Alexei followed Burun's example, and knelt once more and prostrated himself.
Then he got up and walked out into the antechamber.
He heard Burun heave an enormous sigh.
‘Name of God, that was tedious,’ he said.
Jotan and the others were coming out of the audience chamber now.
Alexei laughed.
‘It would be simpler if you told Artai what you wanted him to say,’ he said.
Burun scowled.
‘Everyone thinks that I rule Artai.
You saw how he imposed his will upon us.’
‘You mean Jehan.’
Alexei nodded.
It had been clear that Artai's decision to name Jehan as a member of the embassy had come as a complete surprise.
‘Artai wants Jehan out of the way,’ Burun said austerely.
‘I think it would please him if he did not return to Kinsai.’
Lines of servants were filing through the door of the audience chamber.
Their hands were empty, and Alexei wondered how many people it took to move Artai from one room of the palace to another.
‘All of  us seem to have been chosen because we are considered expendable,’ he said.
Burun's head came round.
‘Everyone is expendable in the Kha-Khan's service,’ he said after a moment.
There was no state banquet to mark Artai's enthronement, and so it was without surprise that Alexei observed that everyone who was of importance in the Khanate had been invited to dine at Burun's house.
The chimes of bells which stood in every district of the city were being rung as they sat down — both because the ringers had been amply bribed and because they thought it politic to honour Artai and his chief supporter — and a small orchestra of trumpets and tambours had been hired by a steward and was accommodated in the yard, so that Burun's speech of welcome to his guests, as well as their affable replies, were conducted with much opening and shutting of mouths and a deal of dumb show.
The lady betrothed to the newly created Khan of the province of Khitai, her face flushed with suppressed laughter, was also trying to make herself heard.
‘What?’
Alexei shouted.
‘I said,’ screamed Burun's grand-daughter, ‘that 1 pray that they will cease before the gongs are struck for curfew.’
An officer of Burun's household leaned through the window and bellowed, and the musicians' renderings were suddenly muted.
The bells continued their argument, one of the chimes being now somewhat behind the others and lacking its tenor, but gradually they tailed off into silence.
Jehana had completed her remarks while there was still noise to cover her more explicit comments, but other guests had not.
There was an explosion of laughter as someone observed with  considerable accuracy upon the nature of the disturbance, and then the servants, the offending if well-meaning steward crimson-faced at their head, were entering the room with platters and trays to serve the meal.
It was not the only banquet taking place in Kinsai, but it was clearly the one at which the nobility of the Khanate of even the lowest degree had thought it was incumbent upon them to be seen.
Most of the invited guests arrived accompanied by a crowd of hangers-on, and it was already becoming apparent that there was insufficient space at the tables.
The gaps between were filled with people looking for seats, with others exchanging seats, and with some who had simply observed friends in other parts of the room and were on their way from one table to another for the purpose of making conversation.
The incomers were all, Alexei saw, minor members of the court who had no invitations.
The steward, responding to an icy enquiry from Burun, looked flustered.
The servants were being jostled, and one tray of meat had already been spilled.
A tripod which supported a lamp burning scented oil swayed alarmingly, and seeing it Alexei climbed to his feet.
‘My lords!’
His shout cut across every other sound.
‘My lords nearest the door!
The lamps are about to fall on you!’
There was a hasty exodus by about twenty of those who had not waited to question the accuracy of the statement.
A pair of slaves threw themselves against the doors, closing them.
Burun stood up to look, glanced once in Alexei's direction, and then he sat down again, laughing.
It was the third hour of the night watch when the banquet ended.
Outside a heavy mist obscured everything, and the departing Khans and Noyons went  accompanied by lantern bearers and pairs of Merkut guards against the interference of revellers who might forget their manners.
It was apparent that the lack of visibility had altered Jotan's intentions to a quite remarkable degree.
Dismissing all but a single guard who was burdened with a lantern on a pole, he began to lead them by the bridges and passageways which cut across the streets in a way which was arguably more direct and certainly less likely to be barred by persistent celebrants.
Both Jehana and Arkhina were shrouded in their cloaks.
The loan of similar garments had been offered to both Alexei and Jotan; but Alexei had not felt the need of protection from the elements and neither, apparently, had Jotan, although he had borrowed a sword.
The events of the day had tired Alexei beyond belief.
He admired Jotan's detachment, and concluded that it was the lack of direct involvement which made it possible for him to behave as if nothing had occurred which could be the source of concern.
The damp darkness of the night seemed to draw the strength from his body.
He wanted to sleep, and the prospect of a bed, even one which he would be required to occupy without companionship, was so attractive that he missed at first the signs that all was not well.
They were not to speak, Jotan had instructed, lest they distract the lantern-bearer.
Jehana at Alexei's side grasped the sleeve of his coat, and he saw that she carried a hiranu which was similar to his own, save that it was encased in a jewelled sheath and was strapped to the girdle which she now wore over her gown.
The mist was so thick that the only colours were  shades of black and white which were smudged and merged together in wisps of vapour.
Occasionally a light showed silver, faint in one of the streets below, and but for that, and for the sounds as their feet struck the timbers of a bridge, they might have been walking in some open courtyard instead of in narrow alleys raised between the walls of tall buildings.
They had encountered no one, but suddenly Alexei knew without asking that Jotan's hand rested upon the hilt of his borrowed sword.
He loosened his hiranu in its scabbard, and concentrated on moving soundlessly.
An open space between two darkened structures — warehouses, Alexei thought, although he was not sure that their route had taken them across that quarter of the city — appeared out of the mist to their left like the mouth of an open tomb, and Jotan caught Alexei's arm and indicated it.
‘Put out the lamp and wait here.’
The command was given in a voice which did not rise above a whisper.
Alexei nodded.
The trooper with the lamp had already stopped, and at Alexei's signal he opened the lamp and pinched the burning wick between his fingers, extinguishing the light.
Arkhina had moved calmly into the shelter of the high stone wall.
Jehana moved silently to her side, likewise apparently unperturbed by the events which were taking place, and they watched Jotan as he stepped out onto the wooden staging.
He faded back the way they had come.
Alexei thought that it was on the whole foolish to remain where he was while there was an armed trooper to guard the two women.
Just before Jotan vanished completely into the mist, he walked softly out of the inlet between the buildings and followed him.
Jotan walked perhaps thirty paces, and then he halted.
Alexei stopped a short distance behind him.
The years of his isolation on a world where it was often a good idea to appear without warning had taught him how to move silently.
Carried by some freak of the acoustics of the place or by the mist, Jotan's voice said as it seemed to Alexei in his ear, ‘If you move or call out, I shall kill you.’
Where there had been one figure faintly outlined in the frame of the staging there were now two — one large, obviously Jotan, and one much smaller, a child Alexei thought until he saw the muscular build and shortened legs and realised that Jotan had caught a dwarf.
The smaller figure twisted and spat in Jotan's impervious grasp, then broke free briefly.
He ran in Alexei's direction, saw Alexei in his path, and turned and scuttled back the way he had come.
Jotan's hand came out in a roundhouse swing, and the dwarf fell against the wall upon which the staging was supported and slid down, his head lolling.
Before the dwarf had recovered consciousness, Jotan had bound his hands tightly behind his back with a strip of material torn from the hem of his coat.
He searched the recumbent form of his captive roughly and, straightening, tossed a slim package to Alexei.
Alexei had been listening for other footsteps coming along the bridge.
He caught the packet and unfolded the cloth wrapping.
In it were a handful of metal darts and a blowpipe.
‘Burun recognised him in the yard during dinner,’ Jotan said.
‘We were not sure it was you he was trying to kill this morning.
You should have stayed with the women.’
Alexei bit back on a retort.
‘I thought you might  need assistance,’ he said.
‘Was that why you dismissed the escort?
You wanted to tempt him to follow us.’
‘Obviously.’
Jotan pulled the now half-conscious dwarf to his feet.
‘Now that we have him, maybe we can find out who is paying him.
One hopes that it isn't Artai.’
‘You're not serious,’ Alexei said.
‘You think not?’
Jotan looked amused.
‘You underrate us, Alexei.
This morning you thought my father objected to manhandling children.’
He shook his captive.
‘You!
What is your name?’
The dwarf had recovered.
He wriggled in Jotan's hands, swearing softly in Yek, and then in Keraistani and C'zak.
Jotan slid his borrowed sword out of its sheath, and he laid it with precision against the dwarfs throat.
The dwarf fell silent.
‘You will walk before me,’ Jotan said, ‘and you will say nothing.
We are not interested in your opinion of us.
We wish to know only who paid you to try to kill this gentleman.’
‘You will know soon enough,’ the dwarf said.
He had frozen against the touch of the naked blade, but even so there was a line of broken skin which showed red, then was hidden by a wreath of mist.
‘You mean there are others waiting for us,’ Jotan said.
‘But surely you see now that we were expecting you.
My escort is in the street at the end of this staging.
Perhaps your friends are all dead, and then who will pay you?’
‘Not they,’ the dwarf responded calmly, though it was clear that he was nervous of the sword.
‘If they are dead, there will be more for me.’
Jotan moved so that the tip of the sword was under the dwarf's chin, forcing it up.
‘Say you so?
Then your reward must be magnificent indeed, for you to run such risks to gain it.
How much have they promised you?’
‘Enough,’ the dwarf said.
Jotan twitched the sword so that it broke the skin again.
‘My name is Juba,’ the dwarf said quickly.
‘They will pay me three koban.’
‘So.’
Jotan nodded and withdrew the sword, sliding it back into the scabbard.
He hustled the dwarf along the bridge until he had reached the place where Arkhina and Jehana waited with their guard.
‘Three koban is not much for your life.’
Jotan spoke in a conversational tone.
‘What would you do for this lady's girdle?’
He held out his hand to Jehana.
Swiftly she detached the hiranu , then unfastened her girdle and handed it to him.
It was a minor treasure, a thing of gold wire and seed pearls, and even in the damp darkness it glittered.
The dwarf eyed it.
‘They would kill me,’ he said at last.
‘I shall kill you,’ Jotan said, ‘or I shall give my sword to this gentleman whom you were hired to kill, and he will do it.’
Alexei saw Jehana's head come up.
She stared past her father at him.
‘I will tell you,’ the dwarf Juba said.
He spat to one side to clear the blood from his mouth.
The names were those of two lesser Khans.
Jotan raised his eyebrows at Alexei, and Alexei was unable to tell if the answer surprised him.
Jotan released the dwarf into the hands of the trooper.
‘What you say may be true.’
He addressed the dwarf.
‘Now I want proof.’
The dwarf heaved against the restraining grasp of his captor.
‘You said —’
‘I said I would kill you if you did not tell me,’ Jotan said coolly.
‘I offered you this —’ he allowed the girdle to dangle from his fingers’— if you would speak the names of those who hired you.
But how can I be certain that you have kept your part of the bargain?
You will come with us now to my house, and you will remain there until the men you have accused have been taken and questioned.
When your story has been proved, I will set you free, and I will pay you as I have undertaken — but not until then.’
It was a sensible precaution.
Jehana recovered her girdle from her father's hand and reclasped it without comment.
The trooper had the dwarf by a gathered handful of material which was the shoulder of his tunic.
He looked helplessly at the lantern pole in his hand, and Alexei took it from him.
‘Don't light it,’ Jotan said.
He was peering into the gloom ahead.
They began to walk along the staging.
Alexei was amazed that Jotan had seen fit to risk the lives of both his wife and daughter on an escapade such as this, and he wondered if either of them had been warned about what was to happen.
‘Do you think there are others waiting?’ he asked Jotan quietly.
‘It's possible.’
Jotan had one hand on the side rail of the wooden platform, and he was feeling his way forward.
‘Then we ought to go back.’
‘And if they are behind, and not in front?’
Jotan asked.
‘We cannot believe what we have been told, and at least I know where my men are waiting.
This creature was bound to try to follow, to attempt again what he intended this morning.’
He glanced at the dwarf.
‘Alter all, he had three koban to gain by his success.
Is that not so?’
The dwarf agreed.
He was subdued now, and his feet dragged as they approached the end of the bridge.
Confused, Alexei could not understand why Jotan had not sent men ahead along his intended route across the staging to search for ambushers.
Were there so few he felt able to trust?
Suddenly the dwarf was tearing himself wildly out of the trooper's hands, his arms still pinioned, sliding past them towards the darkness behind.
Alexei thrust past Jehana and kicked the dwarfs legs from under him, then stood over him, a foot planted on his chest to prevent him from escaping again.
He looked at Jotan.
‘Was he lying?’
Jotan appeared to consider.
‘I don't think so.
But he certainly doesn't want to walk with us to the end of the bridge.’
Alexei hauled the dwarf to his feet.
‘You were telling the truth?’ he demanded.
‘Your friends are waiting for us?
How did they know what path we would take?’
‘They followed the Khan's escort,’ the dwarf responded sullenly.
‘Let me go.
They will kill me.’
It seemed likely.
‘How many of them are there?’
Alexei shook the dwarf.
‘Tell me.’
‘Many,’ the dwarf said.
‘Release me.
I want none of your reward.’
‘He will need it, however, if he is going to escape,’ Jehana said from Alexei's side.
She unfastened the girdle again and held it out.
Jotan nodded.
He gestured to the trooper, who cut the dwarfs bonds.
The dwarf snatched at the girdle, and he bolted.
Alexei peered ahead at the swirling vapour which shrouded the place where the bridge met the face of another building.
‘How far are we from a descent to the street?’ he asked Jotan.
‘Too far.
Look.
Where the staging touches the wall.’
Within the framework something moved, brushing the mist aside like water.
Two men feeling their way out onto the bridge.
Jehana had her head cocked to one side, listening.
‘There is someone behind us as well,’ she observed calmly.
The sound of footsteps on the wooden floor of the staging was faint but distinct.
Jotan grimaced, and then he turned to their escort.
‘Give the Khan your sword,’ he said.
The trooper complied.
Alexei unsheathed the short sword and tested the weight.
Jotan went to the edge of the staging and peered over.
He gestured to the trooper.
‘Get over the rail and wait on the props.
When the men who are coming towards us have passed, climb back up and run to the place where the staging descends to the street.
You will find your comrades there.
Bring them back with you.’
The trooper gazed past Jotan at Arkhina and Jehana.
He shook his head stubbornly.
‘Khan, my place is here with you —’
‘I don't propose to stand and fight,’ Jotan said brusquely.
‘Do as I tell you.’
The trooper climbed reluctantly over the handrail and then lowered himself onto the supporting props below.
‘We could all hide,’ Arkhina suggested.
There was no hint of apprehension in her tone.
She went to Jotan's side and looked over, then stepped back sharply.
‘Perhaps not,’ she said flatly.
Alexei slid the short sword back into its sheath.
‘The alley?’
He caught Jotan's eye.
‘Yes.’
Jotan looked back the way they had come.
‘I can't hear anyone coming now.’
He began to pace silently along the bridge.
‘They have stopped,’ Jehana said.
The dark mouth of the alleyway between the high buildings loomed suddenly out of the mist at their  side.
‘Do you guard your lady,’ Jotan said to Alexei, ‘and I shall guard mine.’
Alexei glanced at Jehana, and was surprised to see her smile.
He closed his hand on her arm and drew her into the gloom of the passage.
The few doors were bolted or barred.
They passed along the side of one wall, and at the end were faced with a kind of crossroads in the staging, the mist swirling whitely across it.
On the other side, and to left and right, loomed the darkness of fresh tunnels.
Jotan was already turning left.
Alexei still had the pole of the lantern in one hand, and now he forced it through the rail at the side of the bridge, then stripped off his coat and draped it artistically, crowning the lantern with his fur hat.
‘Follow your father and mother,’ he told Jehana.
‘I'm going to delay them.’
He began to unwrap the package which Jotan had taken from the dwarf.
‘I used to puff peas when I was a child,’ Jehana said, and took the blowpipe from him.
‘Look.
They are coming.’
Their pursuers had lit a lantern, the better to see their way, and now two shadowy figures were silhouetted in the alley mouth.
‘Then we should move back,’ Alexei said.
He made her come with him onto the end of the staging down which Jotan and Arkhina had already disappeared.
The mist disturbed by their passing closed around the coat which decorated the lantern pole.
With the faint light coming from the end of the alley catching the gold of the embroidery, it looked like a man trying to climb into the space between the timbers.
Someone stepped on a loose plank in the alley down which they had come from the bridge, and the timber squealed.
A man's outline appeared hesitantly out of the mist, and then the first of their pursuers turned  and whistled softly.
There was an answering whistle, and a second figure came from the alley mouth.
‘Ah!
They are on me!’
Alexei spoke towards the wall, and his voice echoed obligingly across the vault of darkness and rang hollowly off the cornices of the four corners of the buildings which formed the crossroads.
Jehana was fitting a dart into the blowpipe.
A man's shout pierced the mist, and the first pursuer rushed out of the end of the alley and cut with his sword at the hatted shape which he saw dimly ahead of him.
The sword became embedded in the wood of the handrail, and while his attacker was struggling to free it, Alexei stepped up to him and forced the trooper's sword through the protecting mantle of a leather coat and into the flesh beneath.
The assassin screamed and fell.
Alexei pulled the sword out, and he was turning to meet the charge of the second man when Jehana raised the blowpipe to her lips, took a deep breath, and spat.
The second pursuer flung a hand up to his throat.
He gurgled unpleasantly, and then knelt awkwardly on the planking.
His sword clattered out of his hand.
In the mouth of the alley at the end of the tunnel two more shapes starting from the bridge into the darkness hesitated, and then stopped.
Alexei knelt beside the second man, examining him.
He looked up.
‘Name of God, you've killed him.’
‘That was my intention,’ Jehana said irritably.
She came to his side and stared along the alley at the two men who were standing unwarily outlined in the light of a held lantern.
She raised the pipe again and spat hard.
A man's voice cried out in pain and anger, and the light was extinguished.
‘That will make them pause for a while,’ Jehana said, her tone satisfied.
Alexei dragged his coat off what remained of the  lantern pole.
The cut of the assassin's sword had split it from below the shoulder to the hem.
The top of the pole had been severed, and his hat had fallen out of sight into the space below the staging.
He caught Jehana's wrist and dragged her in pursuit of Jotan and Arkhina.
At the end of the tunnel there was another crossroads, and as they entered it Jotan appeared, sword in hand.
He took in the blood still dripping from Alexei's sword, and then his eyes went to the blowpipe in Jehana's hand.
‘You have made them stop and think,’ he said.
‘Good.
There are some open work-spaces here.
See what you can find.’
Arkhina emerged from what appeared to be a dyer's shop.
She carried a long pole which was draped with hanks of haigus wool, and she dropped it across the rails of the staging, then turned back into the gloom of the shop again.
Alexei peered into the deep alcove which formed the work-space in the wall opposite.
‘A candlemaker,’ Jehana said.
She went past him gathering up unsevered clusters of candles which had been hung like fruit above a tank.
The next shop yielded a heap of half-finished wooden pattens, the footwear used by field workers, along with a satchel full of long nails and several hammers.
Jotan was forcing the lock on a pair of massive double doors set in the gable end of the building which fronted the junction of the alleyways.
Inside there was a cart, its body mounted high upon the axle so that it would clear the stagings and pass along the narrow tunnels, and at the back of the enclosure there was a stall in which an aged p'tar browsed at a manger.
‘Here's luck.’
Jotan picked up harness.
He worked the snaffle between the p'tar's huge yellow teeth, then  hauled to bring the animal out of the stall.
The p'tar sat down indignantly.
Alexei searched for the metal-tipped goad which he knew must be somewhere.
It was hanging on the wall, and when he applied it to the p'tar's rump the beast screamed once, as if outraged, and then it trotted sedately out of the stall and allowed itself to be backed between the shafts of the cart.
Jotan raced off into the darkness, and Alexei, Jehana and Arkhina busied themselves around the cart, inventive in the face of necessity.
Jotan returned almost at once.
‘There are at least two men behind us, and there are more in front,’ he said.
‘Damn Burun.
This was his idea.’
He lifted Arkhina into the cart, and then got up beside her.
‘We'll go forward.
Stay at the cart tail, and when we reach the end of the next tunnel, turn right.
There is a stair down to the street there.’
Jehana had thrown off her cloak, and now she took her hiranu and cut a wide swathe from her gown.
‘What are you doing?’
Alexei eyed her long legs without any attempt to disguise his interest.
‘I can't run in a gown,’ she said.
She caught hold of the cart tail as Jotan drove it into the mouth of the tunnel.
Across the shafts Alexei had nailed the dyer's spar, and secured to it were the pattens, and clusters of candles.
Jotan glanced back once, and then he applied the goad energetically to the p'tar's hind quarters.
It bucked and screamed, then charged head down into the blackness of the space between the high walls.
On both sides of the cart the ends of the dyer's spar scraped the stonework.
Halfway down the length of the tunnel a patten caught an advancing man under the chin so that his alarmed cry was cut off short as he was lifted and carried for a distance of several  paces before he fell away.
The wheels of the cart rumbled and crashed over the obstacle, and Alexei jumped smartly to one side to avoid the form which sprawled in his path.
Somewhere ahead a man's voice shouted a question.
A figure popped out of a doorway to Alexei's left, and he cut at it with his sword and ran on.
Someone grasped at the side of the cart as it went past, and Arkhina smashed his fingers with a hammer.
There was a cry, and then the wheels thumped again as they passed across either feet or ankles.
The cart burst out into the open space at the end of the tunnel.
There were men clustered in it, and they ducked in a vain attempt to avoid the sweeping mayhem of the laden spar.
Someone sailed over the side rail of the staging and disappeared without a sound into the open abyss of the mist which swirled beyond.
‘There!’
Alexei began to push Jehana towards a space in the handrail which signified, he guessed, a flight of stairs.
Two men appeared in front of him, and he caught her wrist and jerked her to one side, raising his sword.
Even as he did so, the obstacle was removed because Jotan had dumped the hanks of haigus wool on the men from above so that they became entangled, tripped, and fell cursing.
‘Ha!’
Jotan said.
He jumped out of the cart, lifted Arkhina down, and they ran for the stairway.
There was the half stage of a landing a little below, and the stairs diverged.
They had reached it before Alexei realised that there were more men running into the street below.
The mist scarcely hid them now.
Jotan leaned out over the rail and stared at the movement at the foot of the stairs.
‘Not my men,’ he said.
‘They might be the watch —’
’— Or they might not,’ Alexei finished for him.
‘Can we do anything other than wait to find out?’
Jotan indicated the second staircase, a precipitous exit which turned back from the landing and passed through the wall against which the props for the staging were supported.
‘That leads down to the cisterns,’ he said.
The cisterns were the huge catchment tanks which held the city's water supply.
Jotan was already starting down.
Alexei waited while Arkhina and Jehana climbed out past him, and then he followed.
Inside the wall there was a new blackness, free of mist, and the most persistent sound was the dripping and trickling of myriad streams into the storage below.
‘I hope there is another way out,’ Alexei said.
His voice rang hollowly in the confines of the tunnel to which they had descended.
‘There are several.’
Jotan was feeling his way around one wall.
The stones overhead gleamed with phosphorescence.
Torches were stacked in a niche at the head of the tunnel.
Jotan picked up one and ignited it across a striker embedded in the stonework.
The impregnated faggots flared.
The tunnel sloped downward, and when they emerged from it they halted.
The cisterns stretched away into the distance, a huge lake of fresh water inside a cavern, the roof of which was supported by massive stone pillars in some places and by walls of sheer rock in others.
Alexei guessed that where the supports rose there were the foundations of the buildings above ground.
He had never entered the caverns and tunnels which ran under parts of Kinsai before.
They were the province of the Suristani who maintained the conduits and oversaw the filtration columns.
No one else cared for the place.
They were on a promontory which had been built up with blocks of granite.
There was a short flight of steps at the end.
‘Down there.’
Jotan indicated the steps.
Already there were sounds coming from the tunnel behind them.
Alexei was surprised that Jotan appeared to know where he was going.
Two punts were lashed to rings embedded in the stonework at the foot of the steps.
probably the men who worked in the cisterns used them as a means of travelling from one side of the cavern to the other.
Alexei started to pull on one of the ropes.
‘There are no paddles,’ Jotan said.
‘Give me your sword, and take of your coat.’
He took the sword out of Alexei's hand and jabbed it into the planks at the bottom of the punt, then draped Alexei's coat over it.
‘It's the best we can do,’ he said.
‘Get the women behind that wall.’
The end of the promontory was buttressed, and there was room at the base for several people to hide.
Alexei climbed across stones slippery with moisture and polished by age.
Ahead of him Arkhina gasped as she lost her footing and slid almost to the water's edge.
He turned so that his back was to the sloping granite wall and pulled her up.
Jotan had not yet followed them.
He was busy in the bottom of the second punt, and when he climbed out of it he cut the rope securing the first punt with his sword, and then used his foot to launch it out across the water.
He threw the torch after it, and the faggots hissed as they were extinguished.
The punt sailed out across a stretch of the cistern which was as calm as a pond.
It found an eddy where the outpouring of a supply conduit splashed steadily, and it swung, steadied, and then moved on into the gloom.
Jotan scrambled across the rocks to Alexei's side.
The assassins rushed out of the tunnel, their feet ringing on the stones, emerging onto the promontory in time to catch sight of the punt as it rounded a pillar.
Shouts and curses echoed across the vault, and then they were hurling themselves down the steps.
There were five men, and the punt was small.
Alexei heard a single splash as a loosened rope fell into the water, and then there came the creak of settling timbers.
More splashes followed, and when he peered cautiously around the side of the buttress he saw that the men now occupying the punt were using their hands as paddles to propel themselves away from the promontory wall.
The sounds faded away gradually.
There was a narrow stone path, Alexei now saw, around the base of the promontory beyond the buttress.
He made out the black shape of another tunnel mouth.
Jotan was getting slowly to his feet, offering his hand to Arkhina.
Her face was dirty and her gown stained, and like Jehana she had cut the skirt away at thigh level.
There were no sounds of pursuit now, and only occasional splashing signified that the would-be assassins were searching the expanse of water somewhere behind the first line of pillars.
‘We should be safe enough now,’ Jotan said, although he did not raise his voice.
He nodded at the second tunnel mouth.
‘If I remember correctly, that leads to the square beside the barracks occupied by the Kha-Khan's night guard.’
Alexei glanced across the cistern, but he could see nothing.
It was possible that Jotan was being overconfident, he thought, though there was no sign of the punt full of men.
All at once, from quite far out on the water, there came an outburst of noise — frightened shouts, and a sound as if someone had fallen in.
Jotan's head came round, and he listened briefly, a  satisfied expression on his face.
‘I holed the second punt,’ he said.
He looked at Arkhina, and suddenly they clung to one another and laughed.
‘Such lawlessness cannot be permitted to continue,’ Artai said.
They were in a small audience chamber, and they had been excused the customary prostrations.
‘I don't think it's likely to become a habit,’ Alexei said calmly.
‘They relied on the fact that most of the people would be sleeping off the celebrations.’
In fact Kinsai was noted for the peace and order which existed on its streets — there was order everywhere in the land, and very little real law breaking — and it was amazing that his attackers had been able to persist for so long without interference.
‘Nevertheless,’ Artai said, ‘We have issued our order for the watch to be strengthened.’
The principal function of the watch was to deal with outbreaks of fire, and to ensure the security of property.
A curfew was imposed after nightfall, but it was ill-observed, and almost anyone who had a reasonable excuse was permitted to walk the streets without hindrance.
‘We are particularly concerned with the reasons for the attack upon your person.’
Artai inspected Alexei expressionlessly.
‘The malefactors named to you have not been taken?’
The men named by the dwarf were being sought by Burun's provost, but it was already apparent that they were no longer in Kinsai.
Alexei shook his head.
‘No, Magnificence.’
‘Then their motives remain a matter for question,’ Artai observed.
Jotan stirred at Alexei's side, and he raised his head.
‘Both of them have daughters,’ he commented flatly.
Alexei sat up straight.
‘If they have, Khan, they are not known to me.’
’— Their fathers may believe they are however,’ Artai said smoothly.
‘It is a point worth considering.
Think of your reputation, Alexei.
You are an alien, and so men may believe they are justified in breaking the Yasa to encompass your death.’
The circumstance which offended most of the Yek who heard of it was not the attempt on Alexei's life, but rather the means which had been employed.
A gathering of assassins in a populated area was considered to have endangered life and property.
Innocent citizens might have been injured, or lives lost, and it was this above all which was a source of outrage.
It troubled Alexei that the failed assassination seemed about to be dismissed as an effort at the removal of some imagined stain on family honour, and he wondered if Jotan truly believed the explanation he had offered, or if he was acting at Burun's direction to distract Artai from the truth.
What is the truth?
Why would two men I have never met pay to have me killed?
Burun's analysis of the previous night's events had been scathing, but had provided no answers.
The officer in command of Jotan's escort, whose knowledge of the city was apparently imperfect and who had misunderstood the directions he had been given, had been stripped of his rank, flogged, and turned off.
None of the attackers, all of whom had been of subject races, had survived to be questioned.
A few, it was clear, had made their escape, and two drowned corpses had been recovered from the cisterns.
‘Whatever their reasons,’ Artai said, ‘they shall suffer for it.
Who attacks our servant attacks us also.
We are pleased, Khan, that you have suffered no injury.
Your person is valuable to us, as we have  demonstrated by our regard.’
There was more of the same before Alexei and Jotan were allowed to depart, but further enquiry into the matter was not mentioned, and it was as if Artai had lost interest.
If there were absentees from the gathering of Khans and Noyons which waited sycophantically in the antechamber through which they left the palace, Alexei supposed they were the result rather of an excess of celebration than of flight in the face of possible discovery or inquisition.
Suddenly he realised the single glaring inconsistency in any line of argument which was designed to point to revenge or the settlement of a grudge as a motive for the attempt.
The dwarf had been a mutant, and as such should not have been in Kinsai at all.
Moreover the Yek had a horror of the mutations which were still the occasional result of the patches of radiation which were to be found in places around the continent, and they had laws to prevent the proliferation of mutant types through succeeding generations.
A mutant who survived to become an adult was permitted to live, but he was forbidden to breed to produce more of his kind.
That was the most puzzling aspect of the whole affair, Alexei thought.
No member of the races of the True People would have involved himself in a plan which necessitated the transportation of a mutant into Kinsai.
Even the races which lacked talons — whom Alexei considered human in origin — baulked at contact with mutated species, and as a result mutants tended to live in deserted or out-of-the-way parts of the country, effectively quarantined from the rest of civilisation.
‘If I have offended you,’ Jotan said in a voice which was filled with disarming sincerity, ‘I am sorry for it.’
Alexei gestured to dismiss the apology.
‘You did not speak to give offence, Khan.’
It was the conviction that there was more to the affair than was capable of being explained upon the arrest of the fugitive Khans which now governed the tone of his response.
Suddenly he was determined to unravel the intrigue which he was certain linked many of the events which had occurred since Nogai's death.
He saw that Jotan was watching his expression.
‘I cannot take issue with you over the matter of my past character,’ he said, and smiled, dissembling the truth of his emotions.
The Sunstealer
The argument had been going on for some time.
‘East’ C'zinsit insisted.
‘Look at the chart.
You can see it's shorter.’
Jehan saw Alexei frown.
‘Maybe it is,’ Alexei said.
His finger traced a narrow band of blue shading on the map which was laid out across the table.
‘I'm told it's also the worst stretch of water in the world — storms and an impossible current for more than nine tenths of the year.
The N'pani don't like to sail it, and they live there.’
C'zinsit waved dismissively.
‘The N'pani are inshore sailors,’ he said.
’— And what are we?’
Jehan enquired tartly.
C'zinsit was an uncle of sorts — the half-brother of his father — but he was several years younger, and Jehan had no hesitation in disputing his point of view.
‘You are talking about a sea which has never been crossed in living memory.
There are stories, that is all — tales told by fishermen — and half of those talk about reefs and a coastline in which there is no safe haven.
We aren't sailors.
That's why we crew our ships with Ch'kasians and Suristani.’
C'zinsit glared.
‘Arguing on that basis,’ he said, ‘the whole project is impossible.
The Great Sea route means a journey of more than three thousand verst.
If we can't cross the Sea of Storms, a tenth of the distance, what chance have we of navigating that far?’
‘None, at present,’ Alexei said.
‘Certainly we'll need a better ship than the kind I've seen in Pantai and Losan.’
Jehan had been wondering when somebody was  going to mention that.
The ships plying the primary trade routes which joined the known continents and the outlying islands were all variations of a kind of carrack — a two-masted galleon, round-bottomed and broad-beamed, with lateen sails and elementary steering gear.
The iron-shod leeboards mounted port and starboard counterbalanced the height of the masts, and provided stability in a following sea.
The result was a vessel which was surprisingly fast and manoeuvrable for its size — few were more than twenty drem in length — but they were not designed for an extended sea journey, that was certain.
‘The size and number of your ships depends upon how many men you intend to take,’ Orcadai observed.
Orcadai was C'zinsit's elder brother, and spent most of his time travelling from fief to fief, overseeing the military training of conscripts and inspecting the condition of arms and equipment.
Jehan saw the look on Alexei's face.
In four days of meetings they had managed to decide only the names of the principal members of the embassy.
Jehan was used to the kind of council at which nearly everything was decided before the participants sat down to talk, and he wondered why Alexei was allowing so much disruption and argument.
‘We should go in force,’ C'zinsit said.
‘If the inhabitants are like us, they will respect us only if they see that we are strong.’
C'zinsit had presented the same argument every time the topic was mentioned.
‘We're supposed to be an embassy,’ Jehan pointed out.
‘This isn't a reconnaissance.’
‘It might as well be,’ C'zinsit said.
‘We've had to conquer every verst of territory we have ever gained.
Why should this be different?’
‘The problem is that we know nothing about either  the land or the people,’ Alexei said.
‘If we make assumptions, and they are the wrong assumptions, we will jeopardise the mission.’
He glanced past C'zinsit at Jehan as he spoke, and raised his eyebrows as if seeking comment.
C'zinsit sat back in his chair.
‘If the embassy fails, the responsibility will be yours,’ he said flatly.
‘Why are we here, if you don't care for our advice?’
‘I thought we ought to be agreed,’ Alexei said, and he smiled sourly.
‘It's called democracy where I come from.
I never thought it would work, but I felt we ought to give it a try.’
Everyone looked at him strangely.
‘I heard you speak of democracy to my father once,’ Orcadai said.
‘Everyone has a voice, no one commands, and decisions are taken by the will of the majority.
Even those who dissent are required to act as if they agree once a course of action has been decided upon, and if there is blame, it is shared by all.’
Jehan wrinkled his nose.
‘It's a nice idea,’ he said.
‘But I don't see how anything would ever get done.
Anyway, how would people know who to follow?
A Khan is served by his vassals because he discharges his responsibility to make decisions which are the best for the majority of his people.
If he makes a mistake, he has to rectify it.
If decisions are made by a committee, and they are wrong, they can blame one another, and the people suffer just the same.’
Alexei flushed.
‘That's an over-simplification,’ he said.
‘What democracy means —’ He saw that Jehan and Orcadai were both grinning, and he stopped, then gestured.
‘All right, damn you.
I know what you're going to say.
If we're going to get anything done, somebody has to be in command.
I just wasn't sure that you were ready to follow me, that was all.’
Orcadai spread his hands, and his silver-sheathed talons glittered.
‘Our Lord the’ Kha-Khan has reposed his especial trust and confidence in you, Khan,’he said sweetly.
‘Why should we not?’
‘Our Lord the Kha-Khan is a wilful child,’ C'zinsit said bluntly.
He stood up.
Like Orcadai, he was more N'pani than Yek, and now he stared inscrutably at Alexei.’— But that's beside the point.
Alexei, what my brothers meant to say is that they await your command.
As usual they have the right of it, and they shame me.
Our father thinks you are the best man to carry out the task which is before us, and so you have our support, whatever you decide.’
‘Tell me why you agreed to marry Alexei.’
They were sitting in the garden at the back of Jotan's house.
It was early afternoon, and the height of the wall threw the trees into shadow, and brought a welcome coolness to the paths which wound past slopes filled with ornamental fern.
A stream trickled artificially, and birds were singing.
Jehana was playing with one of the cats, a Suristani with a prehensile tail.
Her fingers running through the ruff of fur around the cat's neck tightened as Jehan spoke, and the cat yowled and it bit playfully at her hand.
‘Oh.
It's time I was married,’ she said at last.
Jehan produced a gasp of laughter.
‘I remember what you said last time you were offered that for a reason.
Now tell me the truth.’
She released the cat.
It sprang down off her lap and prowled off through a flower bed.
The singing of the birds stopped for a moment, and then started again.
‘The Yasa says that a daughter is required to obey the will of her father,’ Jehana said.
’— It also says that a woman may not be given in  marriage without her consent,’ Jehan countered.
‘Besides, it was not our father's will that you marry Alexei.’
‘I am not marrying him.
We are betrothed, that is all.’
‘Hunh.’
Jehan was sitting cross-legged on the grass.
He stared at her.
‘But one thing generally follows after the other, as I am sure you are aware.
The penalty for terminating a betrothal contract without good reason is — I forget what it is —’
’— A heavy fine,’ Jehana said steadily.
‘I will pay it, if it comes to it.
Burun will pay it for me.’
Jehan had been certain before he had asked the question that Jehana did not intend to go through with the match.
She had been independent for too long.
Now he felt disappointment that she was behaving so predictably.
‘Tell me why you agreed to it,’ he said.
She eyed him, and he guessed that she was trying to decide what to say.
If she told the truth, it would be a miracle.
The birds in the trees stopped singing abruptly.
The cat was creeping stealthily through a patch of long grass towards the foot of the largest tree.
Every time it moved it froze, one paw outstretched, not quite touching the ground.
Suddenly it rushed at the tree, leapt onto a low branch, and ran up the trunk.
The birds flew up noisily, circled, and then they came down and settled in another tree not far away.
The cat turned and looked at them, and it pawed the air.
Then it yawned so that its fangs showed.
It stretched out along the branch, its claws out, waiting.
‘What do you think of Alexei?’
Jehan asked.
He watched Jehana's face, trying to gauge her reaction.
She plucked a grass stalk from the ground at her side, then split it lengthwise with her outer talon.
She tossed the pieces aside.
‘He is a man,’ she said.
It was an answer which might mean anything.
Jehan showed his teeth.
‘Which is to say that the idea of being married to him offends you?’
Her head came round sharply.
She examined him, and then shook her head.
‘I did not say that.’
Jehan rubbed the back of his neck with his hand.
‘I remember once when we were children,’ he said, You told me you would never marry.
I never thought you were serious.’
He smiled.
‘Not all men cause their wives to submit to their will you know.’
‘You are an expert on wives of course,’ she responded tartly.
He grinned at her, aware that she was trying to pick a fight so that she could avoid further discussion of the subject.
‘Alexei does not offend you —’ he mused.’
— Or no more than anyone else.
In fact you defend him when 1 suggest it —’
Jehana sniffed.
‘If requiring you not to put words into my mouth is defence —’
‘Oh, I think it is,’ Jehan said gently.
He met her stare, and after a moment her eyes dropped.
‘You have been offered marriage by every eligible family in the Khanate,’ he pointed out.
‘Tell me why you consented to be betrothed to Alexei.’
A bird came down in the topmost branches of the tree in which the cat lay in wait.
The cat looked up, and then it began to work its way upwards, its eyes fixed on its intended prey.
just as it reached the top of the trunk, the bird flew away.
The cat sat up in the branches, and it yowled plaintively.
Jehana looked up.
‘Artai intended to offer me marriage,’ she said suddenly.
Jehan let out a breath.
He nodded understanding.
‘That was a match you could not have refused.’
‘It would have been difficult,’ Jehana agreed austerely.
The understatement was such that Jehan was forced to smile.
A Kha-Khan did not ask; he commanded, and it was left simply for everyone else to obey.
‘I could not have withstood it,’ Jehana said.
‘Of course not.’
Jehan took her hand and smiled at her sympathetically.
They would not have told Alexei everything, of course.
Probably he knew only that Jehana objected to the idea of marrying Artai, and had been told that her family wished to avoid giving offence by rejecting the suit, and so were willing to see her contracted without the preliminary of a courtship.
Jehan pondered the circumstances, and he saw how few alternatives there had been.
‘We should not have elected Artai,’ he said.
Jehana laughed bitterly.
‘We did not elect him,’ she said.
‘It was Nogai's will.’
It was only part of the truth.
Jehan knew that many of the Khans had been won over to support of Artai principally by the knowledge that the probable alternative was civil war, and he shook his head angrily.
‘And what of the next time Artai expresses desire for some lady of his court?’
The cat ran straight down the trunk of the tree.
It sped across the grass and leapt up onto Jehana's lap.
She stroked it absently, ‘They will put someone suitable in his way, I imagine,’ she said.
‘Someone barren, you mean,’ Jehan said disapprovingly.
Her head came round.
‘Of course.’
The point was so obvious that ii scarcely needed to be made.
Idly Jehan wondered how it was possible to ensure that every woman made available to Artai was incapable of childbirth.
Certainly Artai would consider no one who had already been married to  another, whether she had children or not.
He supposed that the Sechem had the knowledge, and made a face.
‘What a mess we have made.’
Jehana shrugged.
‘Argue it with Burun; not with me.
There were several possible replies to that, but Jehan discarded all of them because they were impossible to use without appearing to slight her motives.
The dilemma which faced them with regard to Artai was complex — even given the clear direction of the Yasa — and no one who was in possession of all the facts could be blamed for unwillingness to condemn the course which had been decided upon.
Although Artai was Altun it was also clear — on the basis of a standard which was applied usually only at birth — that he exhibited a variety of mutant characteristics.
Thus his freedom to father children was subject to the law, even though he could not be allowed to know that he was under restriction.
All at once Jehan realised that Jehana had not yet given her reasons for consenting to betrothal with Alexei.
There was little doubt that there were men who were as eligible, whose names would have aroused less comment.
The fact that she had implied that she intended to withdraw from the arrangement as soon as it was convenient did not matter, Jehan thought, unless Alexei's character was to provide the excuse…
Suddenly he understood.
‘Alexei is an alien,’ he said.
‘That is why you accepted him.’
He saw Jehana flush.
She gestured.
‘The others we thought of are all the sons of influential men,’ she said.
‘It would have caused offence when I chose to withdraw.’
’— Whereas Alexei can have no recourse.’
Jehan nodded.
‘I see.
And does he know that you are using him?’
Jehana stared.
‘He has been told simply that I object to marriage with Artai,’ she said.
‘If he believes that I have exhibited any preference for his person above that of the others who have offered for my hand, then he is a fool.’
Whatever else the off Worlder was, Jehan thought, he was not a fool.
Which left him wondering why Alexei had agreed to the proposal at all— for if he knew or even suspected that there was to be no marriage, it was difficult to see where he perceived his advantage to lie.
It was on the tip of Jehan's tongue to suggest that Alexei was allowing himself to be used only because it suited him; but it was clear that discussing the subject was making Jehana unhappy, and so he said nothing, sitting quietly beside her until suddenly she got up and went into the house.
Sidacai had been held in chains while he was a prisoner, and the marks of the manacles were plain upon his wrists.
‘Don't expect me to fall on your neck in gratitude, Merkut,’ he said.
He stood in the middle of the room, surveying Jehan, and the guard who was beside the door eyed him nervously.
Jehan grinned.
He looked at the trooper.
‘Kuchuk, go away.’
The guard opened the door and went outside.
‘Kuchuk.’
Sidacai looked at the hangings of the ceiling.
‘Your grandfather had a standard bearer of that name the year we conquered the Alan.’
‘That's his son,’ Jehan nodded.
‘Hunh.’
Sidacai looked at a chair which had been placed by the window, but he made no move to sit down.
‘That was a good time.
Things were simpler then.’
There was a bowl of fruit on the table.
Jehan selected an apple.
He ran the extended tips of his talons across the golden skin, and the peel fell away.
He caught the peel before it hit the floor and threw it out of the window.
One of the apes that lived among the rooftops of the city scampered down and picked up the peel, then raced back up to his vantage point beside the eaves.
Sidacai eyed the bowl and licked his lips.
‘Am I your prisoner?’ he demanded.
‘No one has told me.’
‘You're in Alexei's charge,’ Jelian said.
He cut the apple into quarters, then ate one.
‘I don't imagine he intends to confine you.’
Sidacai had been delivered to Jotan's house by a small company of the Kha-Khan's guard.
If he had been told nothing about the terms of his release, then probably it was Artai's doing.
Artai was full of petty cruelties, and it would have amused him to allow Sidacai to wonder if he was being taken to his execution.
The mention of the offworlder's name produced a flush of reaction on Sidacai's cheeks.
‘You should not think you have the Merkuts to thank for your freedom,’ Jehan said conversationally.
He impaled another segment of the apple on his talons, and popped it into his mouth.
‘Alexei asked the Kha-Khan for you, otherwise you would be a dead man.’
‘Hunh.’
Sidacai digested the information.
His nose wrinkled.
‘And who persuaded Alexei to ask for me, I wonder.
So tell me why I am here.’
‘Sit down and eat first.’
Jehan waved at the table.
As well as the fruit there was a tray with cups and flasks of wine and k'miss, and a plate of savoury pastries filled with p'tar meat which steamed with an appetising aroma.
The look in Sidacai's eyes was wary.
‘If I accept your hospitality,’ he said, ‘it will not mean that I forfeit my right to kanly.’
Jehan showed his teeth.
‘Declare your feud if it pleases you.
I will meet you whenever and wherever you choose.’
Sidacai had never carried any excess weight, and the period of his imprisonment had stripped the flesh from his bones.
A new scar ran from the line of his jaw down into the collar of his open tunic, and Jehan guessed that Artai had broken the law which forbade the ill-treatment of captives, and he frowned.
There was a noise in the passageway outside, and Jehan saw that Kuchuk had left the door slightly ajar so that he could hear.
He hid a smile.
Sidacai looked at the table again, and suddenly he snorted, and then sat down.
Jehan was confident that he could beat Sidacai if it came to a fight.
In kanly only the winner survived to walk away.
He poured wine into two of the cups and slid one of them across the table so that it was within Sidacai's reach.
He was aware that Sidacai's death at this point would be considered a waste, and so it had been a calculated risk to demonstrate readiness to accept a challenge.
Sidacai had already devoured half of the pastries on the plate.
He picked up a napkin which lay beside the plate and wiped his hands on it.
‘Damn Artai,’ he said.
‘His jailers were certain he intended to have me killed, or they would not have treated me thus.’
Jehan shrugged.
If Sidacai cared to lodge a formal complaint, the jailers would suffer punishment.
probably he would not complain.
Sidacai drank deeply.
‘I am released into Alexei's charge, you say.
Am I then still under sentence?
Tell me.’
Jehan sipped a little of the wine.
He sat back, and stretched out his booted feet.
‘Alexei demanded your pardon,’ he said.
‘Artai has agreed, but there are conditions.’
‘Hah.’
Sidacai laughed harshly.
‘Either I am pardoned, or I am not.’
‘Oh, well.’
Jehan set the cup aside.
There was the width of the table between them, but Sidacai's speed and his ferocity in attack were legend.
‘Your life is no longer forfeit; but it is upon condition that you serve the Kha-Khan on a venture which Alexei is to command.
Your lands and titles will be preserved if you accept.’
’— And if I refuse?’
It was not a serious question, but Jehan lifted a hand and gestured.
‘Banishment, of course.
And since there is no place in the known world which is not the Kha-Khan's domain, you would be an outlaw.’
Sidacai emptied his cup.
He reached out to take the flask, and then suddenly he looked up sharply.
‘It's the Unknown Lands of course.
An embassy?
A reconnaissance?’
‘An embassy of sorts.’
Jehan liked his cup and drank, keeping his eyes all the time on Sidacai's face.
He had known that Sidacai would work out the nature of the venture before he had to be told.
Now that the Khanate was secure, the only challenges lay on the other side of the Great Sea.
‘Hah, I thought so.’
Sidacai nodded.
‘And what do you want with me?’
‘Oh.’
Jehan smiled candidly.
‘You are an available military commander with the right kind of experience.
You're used to leading small numbers of men in difficult conditions.
We can't take a large force — a company at most probably — and so we think your ability will be useful.’
‘I see.’
Sidacai poured more wine.
‘Now piss down my back and tell me it's raining.
I'm considered expendable, naturally, and it would please Artai if I failed to return.’
‘Well,’ Jehan grinned.
‘You always did like strange new places.’
Sidacai pursed his lips.
‘You think you need me,’ he said.
‘Probably you're right.
Very well, I'll go.
But 1 pick my own men, and if we ever have to fight, you obey my word.’
Jehan did not think that Sidacai was in any position to impose conditions, but he sat back in his chair, considering.
‘You pick the men from a pool which we approve,’ he said.
‘As to the rest, we would be stupid to appoint you in command if we intended to ignore your direction, however, you must agree to submit to Alexei, s will in all things which touch upon the aims of our embassy.’
The frown on Sidacai's face indicated that he was testing the wording of the condition for loopholes.
‘I agree,’ he said finally, and stood up.
‘You're going?’
Jehan pretended surprise.
Sidacai looked as if he thought that the question was unnecessary.
‘I've agreed to it, haven't I?
Am I free or not?’
‘Oh, certainly.’
Jehan set his cup aside, amused.
‘I will send to you as soon as we are ready to receive your advice — tomorrow probably.’
‘Good.’
Sidacai strode towards the door.
Then he halted and turned.
‘This does not mean that we are friends,’ he said.
Jehan showed his teeth.
‘I never imagined it.’
He saw Sidacai nod, as if he was satisfied that he had made a point.
Sidacai went out through the door, and Jehan speared another segment of apple and ate it while he considered how far the agreement which he  had obtained from Sidacai could be trusted.
Alexei would think that he had surrendered too many concessions, of course, but he did not understand the Yek mind.
The Sechem was named Parin.
He was a slim, spare man in early middle age, and unusually for a member of the races of the True people he had light-coloured hair — the shade of newly sawn wood, Jehan thought.
His talons were unadorned, though he had eye tattoos which indicated that he was of the clan of Hanjin.
‘Like this,’ Alexei said, and sketched rapidly upon the topmost sheet of a folder full of paper.
The outline of the keel of a vessel began to take shape.
‘You see?
The timbers should be sheathed with copper or tin, to preserve them.’
Parin nodded.
He turned to one of his assistants and conferred with him.
Each of the assistants was accompanied by a scribe.
The scribe indicated a character in the centre of a column of script on the page of an opened book, and the assistant nodded, then stared into the middle distance and began to reel off information.
It was by such means that every aspect of knowledge was recorded, stored, and later retrieved.
An assistant might serve for years as the keeper of a specific book, being required to follow the paths of investigation which were suggested by the information absorbed, until at last connections were made with other disciplines.
Before a youth was apprenticed to the Sechem he was committed to a number of years of study of the Yasa, memorising the codex in its entirety so that he was capable of relating his knowledge of the law to science.
There was a constant exchange of information between Sechem, and the implications of every aspect of a science which was likely to be applied practically were  studied.
The way in which the use of knowledge affected the patterns of life and existence of the people determined whether or not it became adopted.
A Sechem's mind was like a sponge, soaking up information until a connection could be made between apparently unrelated areas of scientific fact.
Often it turned out that there was no practical purpose to which a discovery so obtained could be put, because of the prohibitions imposed by the Yasa; but that did not matter to the Sechem, for whom the pursuit of information was an end in itself.
The release of information by the assistant was too fast for normal ears to follow, but the Sechem were trained to understand and to interpret for one another.
Parin listened for a moment longer, and then he held up a hand.
The assistant fell respectfully silent.
‘Khan, there is nothing in this which is forbidden,’ parin said, turning.
‘A larger vessel, or a smaller, the principles are very much the same.
Also the methods which you have suggested are known to us.
We do not use them only because those we have employed hitherto have been sufficient for our needs.’
That was the principle of the Yasa so far as the practical application of scientific knowledge was concerned.
That which was sufficient for the needs of the people was permitted, but innovation for its own sake, or for the purposes of profit, was contrary to the law.
The definition of public necessity was a comprehensive one, and prevented the too casual adoption of what Jehan had learned from Alexei were thought of elsewhere in the universe as simple technological advances.
He grinned.
‘Bigger ships mean bigger cargoes,’ he said.
‘The small traders will have something to say about that.’
It was as if the Sechem were listening to something no one else in the room could hear.
parin's head was cocked to one side.
Then he straightened and turned.
‘The cost of a vessel such as the Khan has described will be beyond a trader's reach, Noyon, given that men are permitted to make only a profit from an enterprise which may be considered just.
Also a cargo of such a size will be costly to store and to dispose of.
The ships which the traders employ now are the best size for their needs and purpose.
The ship which is built to sail the Great Sea will not upset the balance.’
Jehan had known there would be an answer.
The Sechem were seldom if ever wrong when they agreed thai a method was to be permitted, for very little of what men considered new science was in fact a matter of recent discovery.
All that was important of human knowledge had been handed down — no one knew for certain whence old science had come — and only in interpretation was there ever anything which was novel or innovative.
Sidacai was craning to look over Alexei's shoulder.
‘I know nothing of ships,’ he said, ‘but it seems to me that the vessel that will carry a company of men, and their st'lyan, will be large indeed.’
Alexei nodded.
‘It will be three times the size of the largest carrack which sails the Inner Sea,’ he said.
‘Larger if I can find the wrights with the skills to construct it.’
Jehan grinned at the expressions on the faces of Orcadai and C'zinsit.
Few Yek were happy at sea, and a ship-borne invasion of Y'frike years earlier had come close to failure at one point because the reinforcements delivered to its shores had been so weakened by the effects of their voyage.
Alexei was adding details to his sketch.
There were no masts, Jehan saw, and he wondered how many  would be needed, and how many sails they would carry.
‘A ship such as this will require an improved method of steering,’ Alexei said.
He glanced pointedly in the direction of the Sechem.
‘Also I am concerned about the strength of the winds and currents which we may encounter once we have left the shelter of the land.’
‘As to the matter of steering,’ parin said prosaically, ‘I am content.
The Yasa will not be offended against if the ship is steered not by an oar, but by what the Khan has said is called a rudder, being just another kind of oar which is fixed to the stern of the vessel.
The question of sailing the ship against winds or currents I submit the Khan ought to leave to sailors.
As the Khan knows very well, there are many ways of rigging the sails of a ship.’
The offworlder looked up.
‘I was not talking of sails,’ he said.
‘A sailing ship is at the mercy of the winds, and lacking them goes nowhere.
There are other means of driving a vessel through water.’
There was a moment's silence.
The youngest assistant raised his head, and he looked down his nose at Alexei.
‘The Yasa says —’ he began.
Parin glared, and the assistant went crimson and stopped.
‘The Khan is talking about machines, of course,’ Parin said.
He did not appear to be disturbed by the notion.
‘Of course.’
Alexei sat back in his chair.
He crossed one booted foot over the other, his manner relaxed.
‘You agree that a ship of the size I have indicated is necessary,’ he said.
‘Ships such as the traders use might make such a journey given that the conditions are not adverse.
We do not know what we may encounter, however, and thus our duty requires us to ensure our success by using our knowledge to build a  better ship.
If a ship of an improved design is not a contravention of the Yasa, then surely a means of propulsion which will drive it so that it can overcome the winds and currents is also permissible.’
The Sechem smiled tight little smiles of appreciation at the logic of the argument.
Jehan watched Parin's face, and he wondered what he was going to say.
It was impossible to conduct a real argument with the Sechem because they were above all the interpreters and arbiters of the Yasa, the authority on the law to whom men turned when they were in dispute.
‘It is true that there is no law against machines,’ Parin said at last.
‘just as there is no law against knowledge.
It is the use to which men put both which sometimes breaks the Yasa.’
Jehan nodded, and he saw that others in the room were doing the same.
Alexei appeared untroubled by the rebuff.
‘Tell me the law,’ he said.
Parin stirred as if he did not understand the request.
‘Khan, there is a world of law,’ he said.
’— And the first law of all?’
The offworlder looked at his hands, and then he raised his eyes.
‘Speak it — for I would hear it from your lips.’
Jehan saw where this was leading, and he knew that parin also saw the path down which he was being led.
The Sechem seemed to draw a breath.’
— There shall be but one Lord upon the Earth,’ he said.
’— For thus it is in Heaven.’
Jehan was scarcely aware that he had spoken the words aloud.
The lips of the others had moved also, repeating the litany.
It was the reason behind every effort at conquest, and the justification, if one was required, for their embassy.
‘So.’
Alexei stared at parin and showed his teeth.
It was the first time that Jehan had ever seen a Sechem at a loss for words.
Orcadai opened his mouth to speak, and then closed it again.
He looked around for support, and then gestured.
‘Khan, you argue that unless you are permitted to build the kind of ship you require, the embassy will fail —’ He broke off, shaking his head as if he was at a loss to know how to deal with the notion.
‘I argue that unless such a ship is built, the Yek can never cross the Great Sea or circumnavigate the world,’ Alexei responded.
‘And thus the Will of Heaven will be denied.’
He stared around the room.
‘Come, dispute it with me.
Can you tell me of your knowledge that it is not so?’
The Khanate was encompassed about, as all men knew, by the limitations of the ability of its people to sail the seas.
Yek Khans ruled N'pan to the east, and as far as Suristan and Ch'kasia to the west.
To the south their influence controlled Y'frike and Dr'gasia, though far away N'czuan was ruled by default for part of every year because it was hidden across the Gulf of Mists, which only the men of the islands knew how to sail safely.
Parin's hand lay on an open book — one of the suras of the Yasa — and it was as if he drew reassurance and strength from it.
When he spoke again his tone was dry and unemotional.
‘Khan, your proposition is clever, and your argument is difficult to counter.
How if we draw from the records of our knowledge to find a way to drive this ship of yours without the use of machines?’
It seemed to Jehan as he watched Alexei's face that the offworlder was reflecting inwardly upon the sum of his own knowledge, testing it against his belief in  what was recorded in the books controlled by the Sechem.
Suddenly he opened his eyes wide and he smiled.
‘In such a case I must be satisfied,’ he said blandly.
‘For I am concerned only for the success of our embassy, that the Will of Heaven be served.’
If Parin doubted the truth of the offworlder's statement, he was too polite to show it.
‘We will examine the extent of our knowledge,’ he said.
‘And if we fail —’
‘Steam,’ Alexei said decisively.
‘Engines driven by steam will propel a ship such as I have described, and they are within the ability of the men of this world to build.’
Jehan could not imagine how steam could be used to drive machines, although it was clear that the notion was not new to the Sechem.
Parin nodded, and he signed to his assistants to roll up the books so that they could be packed away in the boxes and chests in which they were stored.
He opened his eyes in darkness.
It was the third hour of the night watch.
Somewhere outside the house a sentry's feet crunched on pebbles.
The familiar sounds brought Jehan to a sense of the place and the time.
His father's house in Kinsai.
Now that he knew where he was the details of the room became familiar, and he knew at once what had wakened him, and strained his ears to hear it again.
Obligingly it came, a long low cry like the call of an animal, or maybe a lost soul howling in the wind.
It was somewhere outside, and Jehan sat up in bed.
He had heard it the first time as a child, in his grandfather's yurt on the Khirgiz, and going to Burun's quarters had found him awake also.
Then Burun had told him that no one other than the true Lord of the Merkuts ever heard the sound.
Jehan knew that he would be unable to go back to  sleep again.
He rose and went next door to find the girl he knew would be sleeping there.
The girl was Alan — slim and dark, with long legs and small breasts.
probably her family had been taken as captives when she was a child, for the conquest of the Alan country had taken place when Jehan was a youth.
The girl herself was free, and had come to the house through the offices of a steward.
Jehan shook her awake.
‘Get up.’
She sat up, rubbing the sleep from her eyes, and then she looked at him archly.
It had not occurred to him that he was naked, but it did not matter in any case what she thought.
He drew her by the wrist off the bed, and went back into his own chamber.
She was wearing a simple shift, and he pulled it up around her waist.
She gave a small shiver, and started to cover herself, but did not.
‘Take it off,’ Jehan said.
He pulled the top of the shift over her head.
She grabbed for it.
‘I don't like to sleep without —’
‘That's too bad,’ he said.
He got onto the bed, holding her, and lay on his side facing her.
‘You see?’
Alexei dusted his hands together, and the dirt rose in tiny clouds.
‘I told you it would work.’
The steam boiler had been set up in a shed at the back of the offworlder's house.
The Sechem were nowhere to be seen, and Jehan wondered if they knew what was going on.
There was no law, strictly speaking, against experimenting, although considering the stage which Alexei's trials had reached, it was clear that he must have been working on this for some time.
The two men who were tending the fire under the boiler were Dr'gasians — squat and bald, with  decorative tattoos which ran across their shoulders and down inside their tunics.
Not a drem of their skin between neck and waist was uncoloured, and the variety of the designs fascinated Jehan every time he looked at them.
‘So you can boil water to make steam,’ he said.
He shrugged.
‘Now show me your miracle.’
Alexei laughed as if he knew that Jehan was being deliberately discouraging.
He gestured to the elder of the two fire tenders, and the man pushed a lever at the side of the boiler away from him, and then pulled it back again.
The boiler was like an upright wooden barrel banded with copper.
On top of it there was a copper funnel, and there were rods coming out of the end of the funnel attached to a wheel.
The rod on the side nearest Jehan rose with a jerk, turning the wheel.
When it had almost reached its zenith, the second rod also moved, so that the motion of the wheel was continued.
The Dr'gasian adjusted another lever delicately, and the motion of the shafts increased in speed.
An opening in a small pipe near the end of the funnel chuffed steam in bursts.
Moving closer, Jehan saw that the ends of the rods were not attached directly to the wheel, but rather to the shaft upon which it was mounted.
The shaft itself was not straight.
Instead there were Kinks in it where the rods joined it, and the ends of the rods were attached to collars which were secured around the kinks.
The second Dr'gasian was applying oil and grease with abandon to the shaft and the collars.
‘The more rods attached to the shaft, the more smoothly the wheel turns,’ Alexei said.
‘Two engines are better than one, of course.’
‘Of course,’ Jehan said, amused.
The of worlder produced a hostile stare, and then suddenly he laughed.
‘I show you something which  could change the face of your world,’ he said, ‘but it does not impress you.’
Jehan made a face.
A machine worked, or it did not.
If it was necessary for some purpose proper to the existence of the people, then there were engineers whose task it was to build and operate it.
Such matters were not the concern of a Khan.
‘It makes a lot of steam,’ he observed critically, ‘and the fire smokes.’
Alexei picked up a cloth from a bench which was laid across a pair of trestles.
He scrubbed energetically at his hands.
Some of the grime had transferred to the front of his tunic, and there was a streak of oil on his face.
‘There are a few disadvantages,’ he said, nodding.
‘The water boils away eventually, and has to be replaced.
It has to be fresh water, which would be a problem at sea.’
Sawn logs had been piled beside the boiler.
One of the machine tenders used a piece of wood to knock down a catch on a door in the base of the copper sheathing around the bottom of the barrel.
A fire burned brightly inside.
The man threw several logs onto it, and then tapped the door shut, shielding his face from the heat of the flames.
‘It eats a lot of fuel,’ Jehan said.
‘Yes.
Coal burns longer than wood, but coal is scarce.’
A chimney led from the side of the boiler away to the end of the shed.
It was belching smoke, and a downdraught caught some of it and blew it back towards them.
Jehan took several paces back and he screwed up his eyes.
‘Name of God,’ Jehan said.
He coughed to clear his throat of the taste of the smoke.
Alexei signalled to one of the engine tenders, and the man fiddled with the levers so that the rods rising and falling at the top of the funnel slowed jerkily and  then stopped.
A cloud of steam shot out of the tube, and the man who was in its path skipped nimbly to one side.
‘It works, at least,’ Alexei said cheerfully.
Jehan rubbed the back of his neck with one hand.
The Yek used wind and water power, but this was clearly independent of both.
He had a sudden vision of the looms which were used to weave cloth being powered by such machines.
One engine would do the work of ten water wheels.
Then he thought of a line of chimneys belching smoke across the country, and of the fuel they would require, and he grimaced.
The offworlder seemed to sense his disapproval.
He glanced back at the boiler.
The Dr'gasians were damping down the fire amid clouds of smoke and steam.
Alexei threw the cloth onto the bench.
He took a pace or two.
‘It's not a very clean form of energy, I agree,’ he said, and he pursed his lips.
‘The problem is that clean power other than from wind or water usually requires the application of the kind of technology which is prohibited by the Yasa.
I can make this engine more efficient — there is a method of recondensing the steam so that it can be re-used — and I can design a firebox which will burn the fuel down to ash.
A flue in the chimney will increase the draught and reduce the smoke.
But I can't think of a way to power an engine aboard ship which doesn't require fire and water.
Fire means heat and smoke, and water gives off steam.’
It sounded too much like an apology.
Jehan stared at the boiler.
‘And yet you say that this is the method which is common on other worlds?’
Now that the smoke and steam had cleared, he could see how much soot and dirt had accumulated.
And yet the thing had been in place for probably no more than a matter of weeks.
Alexei was looking down at the skirts of his coat.
He frowned and brushed at them, but the stains marking them did not disappear.
He looked up.
‘There are stages to technology,’ he said.
‘Primitive machines are followed by others which are more sophisticated; but always there is a progression which starts with steam.’
‘Machines to make machines,’ Jehan observed.
‘I heard your father explain it once.
Maybe that's why our law prevents us from adopting methods more than are sufficient for our needs.’
He saw Alexei frown again.
The Dr'gasians pushed a door at the end of the shed back on its runners.
Now that they stood in the light, Jehan could see that both of them were blackened by grime and oil.
He saw where the smoke had discoloured the facings of his coat, and wrinkled his nose.
‘When I said that this was necessary to allow us to cross the Great Sea,’ Alexei said, ‘I spoke no more than the truth.
If there was a better way, I swear to you I would employ it.’
Jehan shrugged.
Vaguely he wished that he had taken more interest in old science.
The knowledge which was held in trust by the Sechem was available to all.
One had but to ask for the information.
‘Maybe a better way can be found,’ he said.
The offworlder looked doubtful.
‘Maybe,’ he said.
‘But if it cannot, then this is the method we will have to use.’
‘I hear stories of machines which smoke like the dragons in the tales,’ Jotan said.
It was quiet in the courtyard.
Grey stone walls rose about them, and winged roofs surfaced with rose-red tiles caught the sun so that they seemed to be on fire.
Jehan pulled his tunic over his head, and he laid it on the empty stool to his right.
He ran a forefinger across the line of the moustache which he was growing, brushing the hairs horizontally across his lip.
When they were long enough, he intended to curl them and allow them to extend down at the sides of his mouth.
It was an old style — one which men like his grandfather had adopted — but fashions were always changing.
He smiled.
‘Alexei is experimenting,’ he said.
He saw his father frown.
‘Artai has given him too much authority,’ Jotan said.
‘Have there been complaints?’
‘Not yet.’
Jotan's expression suggested that he thought that it was only a matter of time.
‘Tell the Sechem to read a little faster,’ suggested Jehan.
It had been four days since the of worlder had said what he thought would be required, and still parin had not provided his answer.
‘One does not hasten such matters,’ Jotan responded frostily.
He was wearing a variation of court dress — a coat of midnight blue which had no fastenings but which was secured by a sash of the same colour — which indicated that he had spent the morning in council with the civil servants who were charged with overseeing the administration of some aspect of the government.
‘The cost of the venture is set to be high enough, and I can envisage no return which will provide the treasury with recompense.’
Jehan laughed disbelief.
To imply that the Kha-Khan's exchequer was likely to be burdened beyond its ability to support the embassy was nonsense, as they both knew.
The economy of the Khanate was not subject to shortages or even temporary deficiencies, for its operation was controlled by the law.
‘Eventually I suppose the Unknown Lands will  become Khanates,’ Jotan said.
He glanced sideways at Jehan as if he expected a comment.
‘Probably.’
It might be years before the lands on the other side of the Great Sea were secured.
If they were uninhabited, they would be settled of course, but it would be some time before the Kha-Khan's tenth was repaid.
A slave came out into the yard, a broom in his hand.
He stopped when he saw Jotan and Jehan sitting there, and then bowed hastily.
‘Your inclusion as a member of the embassy surprised us all,’ Jotan said.
He ignored the slave.
Jehan stroked his moustache again, and he saw his father's jaw tighten in irritation.
The slave was backing out of the gate let into the high wall which separated the courtyard from the barracks of the Kha-Khan's guard.
Orcadai was conducting an inspection in the barracks, and Jehan had come here to wait upon him.
‘Pay attention to me, damn you,’ Jotan said.
‘I am trying to suggest that since it is clear that Artai wants you out of Kinsai, you ought to think about asking him to award you one of the new Khanates.
If you are far enough away, maybe he will leave you alone.’
Jehan looked back over his shoulder.
‘I would have to conquer it first.’
‘So you would.’
Jotan returned his stare.
‘I don't doubt that it is within your ability.’
The sun had moved so that it was setting on the roof of the building on the western side of the yard.
It looked like a red dome on top of the tiles, and the air around it seemed to waver in a haze of heat.
Jehan closed his eyes against the glare.
In his belt he had a horn container which held a mixture which was supposed to be smeared upon the eyelids under such  conditions to increase the density of the clan tattoo.
He felt lethargic, unable for the moment to move, and turned his head slowly.
‘Is this your idea?’
He looked at his father.
‘Or has my grandfather had second thoughts?’
‘Burun does not understand Artai,’ Jotan said.
He waved a hand.
‘A Kha-Khan is not to be haltered like an unruly st'lyan.
Sooner or later it will occur to him that he has only to command to overthrow us.
He will never be content, so long as he knows that he is in our debt.’
‘Oh, well.
I think he would require more justification than that,’ Jehan said mildly.
Jotan raised his eyebrows in an expression of amazement.
‘You think Artai cares for the law?’ he demanded.
‘Artai cares for the will of Artai, and for little else.’
Jehan said nothing.
He could not remember if his father had always been so wary, but he thought not.
It is rising so high that makes us afraid, he thought, lest we fall or are cast down.
The stool upon which Jotan sat put his back to the sun, and his face was deep in shadow.
‘The provost took Yusagai, you know,’ he said.
‘Oh?’
Jehan looked up in interest.
Yusagai was one of the men named in the attempt to kill Alexei.
He examined the expression on his father's face.
‘Let me guess.
He died, or he was killed.’
Jotan nodded soberly.
‘He was at Pesth.
The men who arrested him were our own, all Merkuts.
They confined him, and in the morning when they went to release him they found him dead.’
‘Killed?’
‘There was no mark on him.’
Jotan turned his head, and he stared away blindly at the wall.
‘I fear it was Artai's doing,’ he said.
‘Who else could have arranged it?’
Jehan did not think that the subterfuge required in order to arrange an assassination was quite Artai's style, but he did not say so.
‘Why should he seek to kill Alexei?’ he asked.
‘It makes no sense.’
‘Alexei is betrothed to Jehana.
Artai desires her,’ Jotan said.
It was true that men had been killed for less reason.
‘If Alexei is killed, the embassy may fail,’ Jehan said, and stared at his father.
‘Maybe you should tell that to Artai.’
They had descended the causeway which wound around the plug of rock upon which Kinsai was built, and now they were close to a stream which ran as a tributary into the D'neistr, the river which flowed north to the Sea of Tears.
The grass was a dense carpet of short green spikes, and the slaves had spread carpets on it.
Burun was sitting on a chest which had been used to carry the food, and his second wife, Kiku, whom men called the Regal Lily, was standing behind him dressing his hair while he admired himself in a hand-held mirror.
Kiku saw thai Jehan was staring at her, and she glared at him.
Jehan grinned back.
Kiku was always pretending that she hated the stares of men, but in reality she was the vainest person alive.
A long  Ch'kassian rug was stretched out beneath Jehan's feet.
He sat down on it, staring around.
His mother and father were walking beside the bank of the stream, talking.
Alexei was under a tree with Kadan and his father, and on a carpet which had been spread with great care on a level piece of grass sat Jehana, ignoring everyone.
Jehan grinned.
Jehana was trying so hard to demonstrate that she did not care for Alexei's attentions that he was sure that she felt attracted to him.
For his part, Alexei treated Jehana with the kind of respect a man might give to an aged relative, polite and always attentive, but there was a careful absence of warmth every time he spoke to her.
‘When Alexei marries Jehana, will she be my sister?’
Kaidu had popped up out of nowhere.
He bounced into Jehan's lap, working his head in under Jehan's arm.
’— A kind of sister,’ Jehan said.
He glanced sideways to see if Jehana had heard Kaidu's question, and saw from her expression that she had.
‘Where is your brother?’
He looked around.
‘Which brother?’
Kaidu craned past Jehan's arm to look at Jehana.
He extended his talons experimentally into the grass, and then withdrew them again.
‘I have several.’
‘Hulagu.’
‘Oh.’
Kaidu wriggled out of Jehan's arms.
He stood up.
‘He is in the water on the other side of the stream, building a dam, but I'm not supposed to tell anyone.’
Jehan grinned.
‘That doesn't surprise me.
Go and tell him to come out, before your mother arrives.
Tell him it is my command, or he won't come.’
The carts in which the other members of the three households were riding had been forced to take a longer route to the spot.
Jehan doubted if Mei Ling would be disturbed by her son's descent into the water, but he thought it well to have attempted to do something, however belated.
Kaidu dashed away.
A slave was serving Jehana with sweet cakes on a tray.
Jehan uncoiled himself and went over.
He scooped up a handful of the cakes, and popped one into his mouth.
The slave was young, female, and pretty, and he smiled at her.
Jehana frowned.
‘Brother, go away.
Your presence offends me.’
The first cart was coming around a bend in the road.
Kadan pointed, and then he started to walk up onto the road with his father.
They strode to meet the carts, and Alexei came out from under the tree.
He walked over to where Jehan stood.
Jehan offered him a cake.
‘Thank you.’
Alexei bit into the cake.
He swallowed the first mouthful, and then examined what was left as if he was not sure what it contained.
Finally he put it in his mouth.
The slave was hovering behind Jehana, unsure whether to go or to stay.
Jehan took the tray of cakes out of her hands, and then he grinned ferociously at her so that she backed hastily away.
Jehan heard Alexei laugh.
Jehana glared at them both.
‘This is unbearable,’ she said.
Burun was combing his moustaches now.
One side was always thinner than the other because he chewed them when he was angry.
Jehan stroked his own moustache with a finger.
He knew that Alexei was staring at Jehana, willing her to deal with him.
‘Lady,’ Alexei said, ‘is my presence such a trial to you?’
Jehana was wearing a long gown of cream-coloured cloth.
There were raw unspun fibres of a darker shade running through the material, and it clung to her.
Her steward walked from the place where the pack animals were tethered, a paper parasol in one hand.
He raised it and stood, trying to place himself so that he could offer Jehana shade from the sun.
Jehan knew that he was in the steward's way, but he saw no good reason to move.
He gave the steward a warning stare.
The steward hesitated, and the parasol in his hand wavered.
Jehana gave a gasp of exasperation, and she stood up.
At once Alexei took her hand.
‘Lady,’ he said.
‘Walk with me.’
She wrenched her hand away.
‘Name of God,’ she said.
‘You are a sorry suitor.’
Jehan chuckled.
‘Alexei has been diverting all his energy towards our venture.
He is out of practice with other pastimes.’
The carts were turning off the road now, and people were climbing down from them.
Jehan saw that Kadan's sister Irina was coming across the grass, and he bowed to her.
Irina inspected him.
Then she gazed past him at Alexei.
‘My brother looks angry,’ she said.
‘He has just been rejected,’ Jehan said.
She looked disbelieving.
‘When I have suitors,’ she said, ‘I will allow no one to remain in my presence who does not please me.’
‘Oh?’
Jehan juggled sweet cakes.
‘Tell me how to please you so that I can court you.’
Irina took one of the cakes out of mid-air.
‘You are too old,’ she said.
‘And in any case we are related.’
‘Only in the second degree,’ Jehan said cheerfully.
She looked down her nose at him.
‘Maybe I shall consider you,’ she said.
‘But it isn't interesting to be courted by someone you know.’
‘Someone you know can't pretend to be other than he is,’ Jehan suggested.
‘Surely that's an advantage?’
Jehana stirred.
‘Men always make up fantasies to tell women when they court them,’ she said.
‘It is only after you are married that you discover their true nature.’
Irina eyed her sagely, and then she glanced at Alexei.
‘If my brother displeases you,’ she said, ‘you should send him away.’
Suragai and Kadan were walking their st'lyan on the grass where the stream curved away out of sight, each of them with one of the twins in the saddle.
The sun was large in the sky because it was the hottest  time of year, and there were no clouds.
A light wind ruffled the leaves of the trees, but it was warm, not cold like the winds of winter.
Jehan glanced at Jehana to see why she had not answered, and he saw that her face was crimson with embarrassment.
He hummed softly to himself, and then winked at Irina.
‘A woman does not marry a man simply because he pleases her,’ Jehana said at last.
She gave Irina a superior smile.
‘When you are older you will understand.’
Irina gazed from Alexei to Jehana, and then back again.
Alexei's expression was anguished, and it was clear that he wished himself elsewhere.
Irina moved between them, taking both their arms.
‘Walk with me,’ she said.
They stared at one another unwillingly above her head, and then Alexei shrugged.
They fell into step together, and went down onto the path which followed the bank of the stream, Jehan laughed softly, and then he sat down in the middle of the carpet to eat the last of the sweet cakes.
They rode back to Kinsai late in the afternoon.
Because Irina did not want to travel in one of the carts, Jehan had taken her up in front of him.
Beside him Jehana rode a mare which had a yellow coat through which fine white hairs ran.
The st'lyan's mane was so white it looked as if it had been bleached.
Even the horn was of a much lighter colour than usual, although it had been gilded with silver.
Wherever Jehana rode, Alexei kept pace with her.
The offworlder's st'lyan was a bay with brilliant black points, and Jehan saw that he had his bow case strapped to his saddle.
‘Why does she behave that way?’
Irina asked.
She was sitting turned in against his chest, and he rode  with one arm around her, supporting her.
‘Who?’
Jehan stared about, pretending he did not know who she meant.
‘Your sister, of course.’
Irina glanced around the curve of his arm.
‘She pretends to pay Alexei no heed; but whenever he is not watching her, she looks to make sure that he will follow when she rides away.’
Jehan grinned.
If Irina had observed Jehana's behaviour, then so had everyone else in the party.
‘Maybe she does not want him to think that she is surrendering herself too easily,’ he suggested.
Irina wrinkled her nose.
‘When I decide to marry a man,’ she said, ‘I will make him attend me everywhere.’
The road wound past fields and passed through a thicket of young trees.
In the undergrowth at the side of the road something moved — a wild pig maybe, Jehan thought, although game this close to the city was unusual.
He saw Jehana ride in after it.
She was a little way from Alexei, and when he saw her riding off the offworlder reined around after her.
The st'lyan crashed through the dried-out ferns, and Jehana yelled jubilantly.
Jehan reined in.
Because of the passage of the st'lyan along the road there was a cloud of dust and it was hard to see anything in the failing red light.
He caught a glimpse of Jehana's mare between the trunks of larger trees, and riding behind her, hard in pursuit, Alexei's bay.
Jehana shouted again, but this time there was a note of alarm in her voice.
Jehan suddenly thought about the possibilities of ambush, and he wheeled around to look for the trooper who was riding escort on this side.
The man was at the far end of a line of slowly moving pack animals, and he had not noticed anything.
Jehan swore softly.
He gathered his reins.
‘Hold on.’
Irina clung to his  neck as Jehan spurred his st'lyan into the patch of low brush.
The animal was a grey, sturdy and broad-chested, stable under almost any conditions, and it did not even check pace as it charged through the young trees which obstructed its path.
Beyond the brush there was a clearing between taller trees.
Jehana's mare was stopped at the far end of it, and Alexei was at her side.
Jehan saw him reach across to catch hold of her reins.
Jehan fumbled for the short sword which he kept tucked between the straps behind his saddle.
He kicked the grey into a gallop, and it thundered across the grass, throwing up torn lichen and humus.
Two figures were crouched at the base of a tree in front of Jehana's mare.
She must have disturbed them, Jehan thought, or they would have lain in the bushes until we passed.
The larger had only one arm, and a head which was the wrong size and shape.
It had an old wound on one exposed shoulder, and the lenses of its eyes showed milky white.
The smaller had legs like long sticks, and where one of the eyes should have been there was nothing — smooth skin without even an indentation.
The good eye glittered with fear and hatred.
‘It is hurt,’ Jehana said.
She was attempting to pull her reins out of Alexei's hands.
Jehan looked past her at Alexei.
The offworlder shrugged, and he made a face.
She knows the law, Jehan thought sadly.
She had come to no harm, but that was beside the point.
A child wandering in the wood might come upon them, and anything might happen.
‘Jehana, ride off,’ he said.
‘We cannot —’
‘I said ride off.’
Jehan rode up beside her, and he leaned out of the saddle and took her reins out of Alexei's hands, then led her mare in a circle back round towards the road.
When he looked back he saw that Alexei was uncasing his bow.
The hum of the bowstring when it came was like the sound of a harp being tuned, and when Jehan glanced back again Alexei was getting down from his bay to recover his arrows.