

7 MANAGERIALISM IN CENTRAL ADMINISTRATION
The inability of the Fulton initiative to produce radical changes was only one of a number of administrative reforms which by 1979 were generally adjudged to have failed.
PESC, PAR and the CPRS had not lived up to initial expectations, and changes in the departmental pattern had failed to produce either significant administrative gains or organizational stability.
Consequently the Thatcher government elected in 1979 turned away from what Pollitt (1984, p. 121) describes as ‘the classic [Machinery of Government]issues’— the macro-structure of departments and policy appraisal and planning mechanisms — towards one concentrating primarily on resource use and constraints.
In this way the logic of Whitehall reform effectively coincided with Thatcherism's emphasis on the use of business techniques within the public sector generally.
As observed in Chapter 1, the Thatcher government's general approach has been to couple the application within the public sector of those private managerial techniques perceived as most conducive to value for money — notably objective setting and performance measurement — with an increasing encouragement to greater consumer responsiveness.
The philosophy underlying this approach has been aptly summarized by Gray and Jenkins (1986, p. 171):
The guiding principles are the pursuit of efficiency, effectiveness and value for money: responsibility is to be decentralised, lower level operatives made aware of and accountable for the costs of their operations, targets are to be established and individuals assessed according to their ability to achieve them.
In brief we are offered a world where bureaucrats (and ministers) are redefined as accountable managers , public sector operations sub-divided into businesses , and the public seen as the customer .
The post-1979 managerial emphasis in central administration was not wholly new: indeed, it started from much the same principle as Fulton — that civil servants needed to adopt a more business-like approach and drew upon a number of Fulton's ideas about departmental organization (see Chapters 1 and 2).
What was new, however, is what Gray and Jenkins (1985, p. 127) call ‘organisational learning’: acting on experience gained from earlier failed attempts at administrative  reform.
For example, whereas Fulton suffered heavily from lack of civil service support, advocates of the new managerialism have emphasized the need to change the Whitehall culture in order to generate reform from within.
In order, moreover, to minimize departmental opposition — which had been instrumental in neutralizing the impact of PAR and the CPRS — departments have been given discretion in determining the pace and nature of managerial change.
In similar vein, recognizing departmental sensitivity about policy territories, the post 1979 initiatives have focused on efficient administration rather than policy.
To quote Gray and Jenkins (1985, p. 165) again: ‘The moves beyond Rayner to the FMI represent attempts to work within the political and organisation system, rather than against it and to couch debate in terms of means rather than ends’.
A further important contextual difference has been provided by ministerial attitudes.
Whereas momentum behind Fulton's reforms dissipated once they faded from ministerial agendas, post-1979 managerialism has derived considerable support from the Thatcher government.
Not only does it draw from what Pollitt (1986a, p. 159) describes as the ‘belief-system of the incoming Conservative government of 1979’— the crusade against bureaucratic waste, belief in the superiority of private sector managerial techniques and drive towards increased value for money — but it shares the same ideological roots as privatization and contracting out.
Indeed, improved managerial efficiency can be seen as the Thatcher government's alternative solution ‘for those parts of the public sector that could not be privatised or subjected to the sanitizing forces of the market’.
This ideological underpinning has been particularly significant, vesting the post-1979 managerialist reforms with what Metcalfe and Richards (1984, 1987) describe as ‘political clout’, a strong measure of personal support from the Prime Minister and her closest advisers.
Despite this political and ideological underpinning it is unlikely that the Thatcher government entered office with any grand strategy for the civil service.
Rather, developments have proceeded incrementally with early initiatives such as the Rayner Scrutiny Programme leading subsequently to the introduction of departmental management information systems and the Financial Management Initiative.
Collectively these three initiatives encompass the main thrust of the post-1979 managerial approach in central government, each of which will now be examined in turn.
The Rayner Scrutiny Programme
In 1979 Mrs Thatcher appointed Sir (now Lord) Derek Rayner, of Marks & spencer , as an adviser on administrative efficiency.
Supported  by a small ‘efficiency unit’— composed of both civil servants and outside consultants — and originally established as part of the Prime Minister's Office, Rayner's job was to stimulate improvements in administrative efficiency within Whitehall.
Subsequently the efficiency unit was relocated in the Management and Personnel Office, but in 1983 — when Sir Robin Ibbs (a former head of the CPRS and executive director of ICI) succeeded Rayner as the Prime Minister's Special Adviser on Efficiency — it was located physically in the Cabinet Office.
Throughout, both Rayner and Ibbs have enjoyed strong prime ministerial backing, ensuring ‘that civil servants (and ministers) in departments continued to take the Efficiency Unit's work seriously’(Metcalfe and Richards, 1987, p. 9).
One of Rayner's first acts was to set in train a series of efficiency scrutinies within Whitehall.
According to Rayner the objectives of the scrutiny programme were:
i)
to examine a specific policy or activity, questioning all aspects of work normally taken for granted;
ii)
to propose solutions to problems and to make recommendations to achieve savings and increase efficiency and effectiveness;
iii)
to implement agreed solutions, or to begin their implementation within 12 months of the start of a scrutiny (Rayner, 1982, para. 2.2).
Although these objectives refer to ‘efficiency’ and ‘effectiveness’, in practice the scrutiny programme has been mainly concerned with the third ‘E’, ‘economy’(for definitions see Chapter l), focusing mainly on cost reduction through streamlining administrative procedures.
As several authoritative inquiries (such as National Audit Office, 1986a, para. 2; Public Accounts Committee, 198–6, para. 8) have observed, few scrutinies — particularly in the period to 1983 — addressed effectiveness issues or those with major policy content.
Basically each efficiency scrutiny encompasses the following five main stages:
1
Setting up a strategy : All departments regularly suggest topics for scrutiny.
Most reviews concern departmental activities, although some have examined cross-departmental work (such as government forms and property management).
2
Investigation : Usually carried out by departmental staff, with reports submitted to the minister within ninety working days.
3
Action plan : Summarizing plans for implementing savings.
To be approved within three months of receipt of report.
4
Implementation : The responsibility of the departmental permanent secretary.
5
Implementation report : Summarizing action, savings and so forth achieved.
Produced within two years of start of scrutiny.
(Making Things Happen , 1985).
As the above indicates, the scrutiny process emphasizes action and implementation within a specified timetable.
The ‘key elements are radical questioning, direct observation, proposals based firmly on factual evidence and a sense of urgency’(ibid.).
According to Bray (1988) the underlying aim is to serve departmental needs.
Indeed, ‘Rayner had no right of entry into departments.
He could investigate by invitation only, and even then only in areas selected by the departments themselves’(quoted in Fry, 1988a, p. 6).
A crucial role in the scrutiny process is assigned to what is described as ‘top management’— the permanent secretary and deputy secretaries ‘acting as the top board of the department’— who are involved at every stage in the process.
Ministers also carry major responsibility, approving scrutiny topics, deciding action plans, and receiving implementation reports.
As Beesley (1983, p. 31) emphasizes, reviews rely ‘heavily on self-examination’ reflecting the belief ‘that Ministers and their officials are better equipped than anyone to examine the use of resources for which they are responsible’.
In the first six years a total of 266 reviews were conducted identifying annual savings of –600m with an additional 67m of one-off savings (Making Things Happen , 1985, p. 9).
Most reviews have identified administrative deficiencies — one scrutiny found it cost 90 to administer 100 of woodland grant — and some have led to major changes (such as the establishment of a non-Defence central purchasing unit: see Government Purchasing: A Review of Government Contract and Procurement Procedures , 1984).
By 1986 total savings were estimated at 950m against scrutiny costs of only 5m (Public Accounts Committee, 1985–6, para. 15).
By any standards these are impressive results.
Nevertheless, while many administrative shortcomings have been identified, the scrutiny technique does have inherent limitations.
Inevitably there is a tendency for departments to select ‘safe’ scrutiny topics and ignore findings they dislike.
The scrutiny approach is also arguably unsuitable where quick decisions are needed or where inefficiency arises from the inability of departmental staff rather than deficient procedures or systems (see Bray, 1988, p. 21).
Critics, moreover, argue that sacrifices in service quality have sometimes been necessary to obtain savings.
Many identified savings, furthermore, have not been realized: of the 600m annual savings identified by 1985, for example, only 295m had actually been implemented.
Of the shortfall, departments had assessed 80m as being unobtainable, and 65m had been rejected for political and other reasons (Making Things Happen , 1985).
Many scrutinies, moreover, are not completed within  the two-year time span, and departments have frequently been criticised for delays in implementation.
Although the scrutiny programme has received most publicity, Rayner also emphasized the need for ‘lasting reforms’ which would help remove the underlying causes of Whitehall inefficiency.
Broadly he identified two categories of reform: those relating to people (designed to produce changes in civil service culture), and those relating to institutions (designed to clarify arrangements for resource management).
While as Collins (1987, p. 14) observes, ‘few, if any of the scrutinies have borne directly on any of these concerns, a surprisingly large number…have led, directly or indirectly, to widespread changes in the management of central government’.
Two scrutinies, in particular, were crucially important: the first in 1979 led to the decision to implement a management information system for ministers (MINIS) in the Department of the Environment (DOE).
The second in 1981, known as the Joubert Study (after the official conducting it), devised a structure which divided the DOE into 120 cost centres as a basis for a financial management system (Collins, 1987, p. 15; Fry, 1984, p. 332).
These two scrutinies led directly to the two other major planks of the Thatcher government's managerial approach within central government; namely, MINIS and the Financial Management Initiative (FMI).
Management information system for ministers (MINIS)
In 1980, following a Rayner scrutiny, MINIS was introduced into the DOE.
Essentially a management tool, MINIS was strongly associated with Michael Heseltine who, as Secretary of State for the Environment, introduced MINIS into the DOE and subsequently, as Defence Secretary, into the Ministry of Defence (MOD).
As he explains (1987, pp. 19–20) the essential objective was to ‘find out what was happening in my department and who was responsible for making it happen, who had set the targets, what the targets were and whether they were being monitored.
Nobody could recall [these questions]being asked before’.
MINIS, at its simplest, represents ‘an…attempt to collect information about a Department's activities and to place responsibility for using this information with the Department's top management, Ministerial and official’(Richards, 1987, p. 26).
It enables departmental ‘top management’ to ascertain within their departments who does what, why and at what cost.
As initially developed in the DOE (Likierman, 1982; Whitbread, 1987) and later in the MOD (Omand, 1983) it involved three main stages:
1
Each section head prepares a statement of activities, staff numbers, achievements, and so forth; developing where possible performance  indicators (such as average time spent on each planning appeal).
2
These statements are considered by ministers and top management.
Section heads can be questioned about performance, objectives and so on.
3
Implementation of ministers' decisions arising from stage 2.
The process above is conducted annually — each cycle in MINIS parlance being known as a ‘round’— enabling performance to be analysed against plans, and information to be updated.
The effect is to bring ‘Ministers into the management structure of the Department’(Whitbread, 1987, p. 95), providing ‘a comprehensive grasp of the activities of the Department, with information-presented in a much more systematic way than was normally available through briefing by officials on particular issues or in response to particular requests’(Likierman, 1982, p. 130).
This, in turn, enables ministers and senior officials to review progress of departmental activities, monitor the effectiveness of policies, and to take resource allocation decisions ‘in accordance with ministerial priorities and objectives’(Bradley, 1983, p. 41).
It also offers a potential for assessing more accurately the effects of projected staffing or expenditure cuts and to identify any mismatch between departmental functions and ministerial objectives.
Significantly, following the introduction of MINIS into the DOE, directorates were reorganized and within four years departmental manpower fell by 15,000 (29 per cent)(Heseltine, 1987, p. 18).
As the government acknowledged (Efficiency and Effectiveness , 1982, para. 27), MINIS provided ministers ‘with a most valuable instrument to assist resource allocation’.
MINIS, it should be stressed, was not totally new.
A number of departments, prior to its introduction into the DOE, possessed systems for obtaining information about departmental activities, although the ‘more rigorous’ and comprehensive analysis offered by MINIS did represent a ‘real departure’(Likierman, 1982, p. 135).
MINIS, moreover, was an ongoing system capable of having refinements added over time.
In its early stages in the DOE, for example, it focused mainly on departmental structure, activities, and administrative expenditure, whilst by 1985–6 the system had been improved to include performance review reports and programme expenditure (Whitbread, 1987, p. 96).
Of course, such arrangements were not introduced without criticism.
Association with expenditure cuts, particularly at the DOE, aroused criticism among lower-level staff and public sector unions.
In the DOE it also tended to overburden top management, producing large amounts of detailed information about costs whilst ignoring both wider policy judgements (which perhaps offer greater scope for savings) and day-to-day political issues (which  usually preoccupy top civil servants and ministers).
Nevertheless, as McGill (1984, p. 25) notes, by the early 1980s MINIS-type arrangements were being seen in the UK public sector as something of a ‘management panacea’, with similar developments occurring beyond Whitehall within, for example, water authorities and local government.
Ultimately the attractiveness of MINIS-type systems to public sector managers lies in the comprehensive picture which they can provide of organizational activities, and also in the potential which they hold for decentralization within departments.
As Metcalfe and Richards (1987, p. 24) observe, departmental decentralization was a key theme to emerge from early Rayner scrutinies, the object being to push responsibility down the departmental hierarchy to where costs were being incurred.
MINIS, when properly developed, could identify and measure the performance of departmental cost centres, and thereby provide a potential for the comprehensive reorganization of departments based upon the principle of decentralization to managerially autonomous accountable units.
by no means a new concept — Fulton had strongly advocated the development of units of accountable management — such arrangements had previously proved difficult to introduce on a widespread scale owing largely to the difficulty of isolating discrete elements of departmental work.
MINIS, however, by dividing departmental work into discrete blocks, and summarizing the costs/objectives/achievements and so on of each, provided the basis for such a reorganization within the DOE.
Following the Joubert Study (see pp. 125) a computerized budget system (MAXIS) was installed into the DOE in 1983 and a network of 120 cost centres established, each controlled by a manager with budgetary responsibility for running costs including staff (Fry, 1984, p. 332;Financial Management in Government Departments , 1983, pp. 50–2).
Final budgets for each centre were then integrated into each MINIS round, and the Treasury and Civil Service Select Committee (1982, vol. 1, p. xi)— perceiving the implications for other departments — recommended the extension of MINIS ‘or its equivalent’ to all main central departments.
Although initially there was considerable opposition in Whitehall to such arrangements (Heseltine, 1987, pp. 22–3), the government was anxious to develop similar systems throughout Whitehall.
Accordingly in 1982 it announced that, while varying systems could be established to reflect differing departmental roles, all departments were to introduce ‘management systems like MINIS’ together with ‘a structure of organization’in which identifiable functions could be assigned to ‘responsibility centres’(Efficiency and Effectiveness , 1982, para. 29 and annex C).
The MINIS and Joubert systems, with due allowance for departmental differences, were to be universalized  throughout Whitehall, and it was this which provided the impetus for the launch of the Financial Management Initiative (FMI) in 1982.
The Financial Management Initiative (FMI)
The FMI, launched in May 1982, has been described by Gray and Jenkins (1986, p. 173; 1985, p. 124) as ‘a general approach rather than a single strategy’, and as ‘an umbrella under which a new management philosophy is being developed’.
It draws not only on the experience of Rayner scrutinies and MINIS, but also on the concept of management accounting (see pp. 11).
All departments were recommended on the launching of the FMI to establish a ‘management accounting system’ to be integrated as far as possible with ‘existing systems for the public expenditure survey, estimates, and appropriation accounts’(Efficiency and Effectiveness , 1982, app. 3).
Officially the aims of the FMI were to promote in each department an organization in which managers at all levels would have:
i
a clear view of their objectives and means to assess and, wherever possible, measure outputs or performance in relation to those objectives;
ii
well-defined responsibility for making the best use of resources including a critical scrutiny of output and value for money; and
iii
the information (particularly about costs), the training and access to expert advice that they need to exercise their responsibilities effectively (ibid., para. 13).
In keeping with these objectives departments were ‘called upon to examine the way they managed all aspects of their programmes and to work out the best pattern of managerial responsibility, financial accounting and control’(ibid., para. 14).
The initiative was coordinated by a specially created unit — comprising both civil servants and management consultants — known as the Financial Management Unit of the Cabinet Office (MPO) and the Treasury, which was replaced in 1985 by the Treasury/Cabinet Office Joint Management Unit.
In accordance with allowance for departmental variations, each department was left to formulate its own plans for implementing the FMI (see Financial Management in Government Departments , 1983 and Progress in Financial Management in Government Departments , 1984), producing a variety of patterns of implementation.
While these variations need to be borne in mind, four distinctive features of the FMI can be identified:
1 TOP MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS
The White Paper launching the FMI (Efficiency and Effectiveness , 1982, para. 15)‘expected’ each department to establish ‘an information system that not only provides higher management with aggregated information needed for estimating and control, but managers at successive levels down the line with the information they need to do their job properly’.
In essence, what was envisaged was the construction of internal management systems around the hierarchical command structures characteristic of government departments (see Chapter 2).
By 1984 every department had reportedly ‘taken steps to introduce a top management system for Ministers and senior managers’, enabling these ‘to review regularly the department's aims, examine its ‘businesses’ and the ‘customers’they serve, set objectives, and establish priorities' (Progress in Financial Management in Government Departments , 1984, p. 3).
Although features varied between departments, most required each identifiable unit to report regularly to ‘top management’ on their structure, activities, and resources consumed.
Initially most systems concentrated on reviewing administrative activities and costs but subsequent refinements enabled them also to review programmes (that is, activities and costs covering a policy objective or a group of related policy objectives).
By 1985 many departments were reportedly using such systems to conduct annual reviews of departmental programmes and administrative work, and feeding results directly into public expenditure and parliamentary estimates exercises (Cabinet Office (MPO) /Treasury (FMU), 1985a, p. 1).
In practice, of course, the development of information systems presents considerable difficulties.
As Plowden (1985, p. 401) observes, ‘almost any information system exploiting modern technology is likely to generate too much information’.
In the DOE, for example, senior officials often became involved in lengthy discussions on minor matters at the expense of strategic discussion and analysis.
Many lower-level managers found MINIS time-consuming and unhelpful, while some also found it difficult to depict their work accurately.
There may also be a tendency, as the Public Accounts Committee (1986–7c, para. 23) has warned, for ‘top management systems…to be regarded as a substitute for FMI, rather than an integral part of it’.
While monitoring and refinements should bring improvements over time, clearly serious difficulties have been experienced with the development and utilization of departmental information systems.
2 STATEMENT OF OBJECTIVES
Underlying the FMI is a belief that better use of resources requires a clearer definition of the objectives of expenditure, and as a first step all  departments were obliged to specify their objectives as a basis for determining priorities and measuring achievement.
On paper all have done so, although in reality most statements of departmental objectives have tended to be rather vague and generalized, describing functions or responsibilities rather than underlying goals or objectives (Financial Management in Government Departments , 1983; Gray and Jenkins, 1985, pp. 84–7).
Departments have also generally found it easier to establish objectives for administrative costs (which account for only 13 per cent of departmental expenditure) than for programme costs (87 per cent of departmental expenditure and, therefore, offering potentially much greater scope for savings)(Public Accounts Committee , 1986–7c, para. 30).
This relative lack of progress, of course, largely reflects the problems of goal-setting in the (generally) non-profit-oriented public sector.
In the absence of profit, objectives are usually more difficult to define, whilst many government departments and public agencies — and many of the programmes they administer — have multiple objectives.
Goal identification, moreover, is often inseparable in Whitehall from questions of policy, which gives rise to frequent conflict both within and between departments.
For these reasons goal-setting by departments has been fraught with problems, creating for those seeking to implement the FMI continual ‘difficulties created by imprecise, broad, policy objectives’(National Audit Office, 1986b, para. 13).
3 DECENTRALIZATION AND DELEGATION
A key feature of the FMI is delegated budgeting, a process requiring each department to ‘examine the scope for breaking its structure down into cost-centres or responsibility-centres to which resource costs can be allocated and for which, where appropriate, measures of output can be devised and monitored’(Efficiency and Effectiveness , 1982, Appendix 3).
The underlying idea is that cost-centre managers should become budget holders responsible for cost management and results, an arrangement contrasting with traditional departmental practice whereby finance and staffing are controlled by specialist establishment and finance divisions.
As Richards (1987, p. 29) observes, such central divisions ‘must be willing to…stand back and let the…[cost centre]manager succeed or fail, according to his or her own lights’.
Budgetary decentralization also has important personnel implications, requiring training initiatives to familiarize line managers with the accounting and other skills required to perform their new responsibilities.
In practice, progress in developing decentralized budgeting has varied considerably between departments.
Although most departments have drawn up plans, many areas of departmental work cannot easily be broken down into discrete cost centres.
Generally the scope  for such arrangements is least in departments dominated by HQ units engaged in policy work, and greatest in those with extensive local networks (such as the DHSS which had developed 800 cost centres by 1984, with individual managers having ‘to bid for their requirements’ and enjoying flexibility to switch funds between budget heads)(Progress in Financial Management in Government Departments , 1984, pp. 62–3).
Where this has happened, middle-level managers, according to Richards (1987, p. 27)‘for the first time in their working lives’ have been able ‘to see a connection between the activity they were authorising and the cost of carrying it out’.
This, coupled with cognate developments such as the dispersion of departmental functions to semi-autonomous agencies, has done much to extend cost consciousness and value-for-money considerations down the management line in accordance with the FMI's underlying principles.
Indeed, in April 1988 civil service manpower targets were dropped and a new regime of running-costs control imposed upon departments.
In future all department running costs will be cash limited with the intention of giving ‘individual civil service managers greater flexibility to make best uses of the resources available to them’(Hansard , H.C., VI, vol. 110, cols 933–4, 18 February 1987).
Nevertheless, while some impact has been made, overall progress has been limited.
Budgetary decentralization not only undermines the primacy of central establishments and finance divisions within departments, but also conflicts with the hierarchical command structure typically found in bureaucratic organizations.
Consequently in some departments the effective delegation of responsibility to lower-level managers has not always been pursued with enthusiasm by senior departmental officials.
Even where decentralized budgeting projects have been introduced, these have often taken the form of pilot projects or trials (Progress in Financial Management in Government Departments , 1984, especially Appendix 2), whilst the authority delegated to budget holders has often been severely constrained (not least by centrally determined manpower ceilings and pay scales).
Problems have also been experienced with providing cost-centre managers with sufficient incentives to manage resources economically, efficiently and effectively.
For such reasons overall progress with budgetary decentralization was described by the public Accounts Committee (1986–7c, paras 34–8) as having been so slow as to threaten ‘the [very]success of the FMI’.
4 PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT
Essentially concerned with a comparative evaluation of inputs and outputs (see Chapter 1), performance measurement has long been recognized as important within Whitehall.
Until the 1980s, however, its development was limited to executive functions where inputs and outputs could be most easily identified and aligned (see Treasury and Civil Service Committee, 1982, vol. 111, Appendix 9).
With the subsequent adoption of top management systems, however, departments acquired enhanced capacity to identify costs, tasks, achievements and so on, and from the outset performance measurement was seen as an integral feature of the FMI, offering a tool for assessing progress with the attainment of departmental objectives and — since the Treasury's multi-departmental review of budgeting (HM Treasury, 1985; 1986a)— for linking cost-centre managers' budgets to output and achievement.
Performance measures are usually most helpful when used for comparisons: for example, between units performing similar tasks, or over time.
Measures can be of efficiency, effectiveness, economy or any other aspect of performance.
Initially under the FMI emphasis was placed upon measuring administrative functions .
Most departments have quantifiable running cost inputs (postage, staff, travel and so on) and outputs (such as payments, collections, caseloads) which can be used to develop performance measures such as accuracy (proportion of errors), timeliness (such as response time), throughput (such as number of cases dealt with) and unit cost (such as average cost per case/client).
Such measures in turn can be used to identify underperformance, set targets, appraise staff and reallocate resources (for examples see H.M.
Treasury 1986b, and 1987).
At a later stage the emphasis was switched from administrative to programme measurement (which — as costs may be spread amongst numerous departmental sections as well as outside agencies such as local authorities or quangos — is usually much more difficult).
In the DTI, for example, resource inputs into financial assistance schemes were measured against outputs (such as jobs created/safeguarded) enabling the cost-effectiveness of the programme to be assessed, and targets set for  future schemes (Progress in Financial Management in Government Departments , 1984, p. 103).
By 1985 according to the Financial Management Unit (Cabinet Office (MPO) /Treasury (FMU), 1985a, p 4)‘most departments [were]developing new (or strengthening existing) arrangements for reviewing programmes systematically each year’, and all departments were being urged to adopt similar procedures.
As a result, by the mid-1980s a wave of performance measures had been adopted.
The 1986 Public Expenditure White Paper, for example, referred to over 1,200 such measures — the majority in Whitehall departments — and by 1987 the figure had increased to 1,810.
Undoubtedly performance measurement was being widely used as a tool for measuring value for money not only in Whitehall but also in outside agencies (such as quangos) involved in implementing departmental programmes (Cabinet Office (MPO) /Treasury (FMU), 1984a).
At the same time problems have been much in evidence.
Assessment is costly in manpower and time, and much government work is difficult to measure: consultancy, inspection, and review activities, for example, pose special problems, while as Beeton (1987, p. 78) observes, ‘by 1986 no department had begun to measure performance of its policy makers, finding the quality and effectiveness of advice too difficult to quantify’.
Moreover, inputs and particularly outputs are often difficult to quantify, and sometimes even to identify.
Too often in the public sector final outputs become reducible to vague and unquantifiable notions of public good, which leads in many cases to the measurement instead of more easily quantified — but possibly misleading-intermediate outputs.
For example an advance factory programme should ideally be measured by additional benefit to a region's economy, but in practice intermediate measures such as jobs created may be used instead (National Audit Office, 1986b, para. 13).
Sometimes performance measures obscure, or even undermine, policy objectives.
A target for reduced hospital waiting lists, for example, may — by reducing hospital stays — actually impair patients' health.
Partly because of such difficulties the development of meaningful and quantifiable output measures has not occurred for many areas of departmental activity.
One Treasury review (1985, p. 19) candidly admitted, ‘What has been achieved so far amounts to an impressive array of intermediate indicators…there are, as yet, relatively few links…between inputs and outputs which show managers how changes in resources and priorities can lead to changes in output…
Performance measures still impact only slightly on resource allocation decisions’.
Certainly the measurement of programme expenditure has lagged far behind that of administrative expenditure (National Audit Office, 1986b, para 12), while ‘little progress’ has also apparently been made with integrating performance measurement with the public expenditure survey and parliamentary supply procedures (Richards, 1987, pp. 28–9)— a development much sought after by the Financial Management Unit.
As Beeton (1987, pp. 88–9) concludes, the government was unable to ‘master a comprehensive range across all their spending programmes.
Particularly striking [was]the failure to find, or agree on, measures or acceptable proxies of final output…
Some measures used [were]ambiguous, misleading or open to manipulation by managers’.
This latter difficulty, possible manipulation by managers, is found with practically all performance indicators, with gaming often being practised both to meet targets and to downgrade aspects of performance not specifically measured.
A further charge is that, being introduced in an era of expenditure restraint, performance measurement has focused largely on measuring, and minimizing, inputs (costs and manpower).
Gray (1986, pp. 11, 16) sees ‘little evidence of genuine assessment beyond the establishment of  a few input indicators’, and suggests that we are witnessing ‘the ascendancy of economy and efficiency over effectiveness and efficacy’.
The emphasis is upon input cost minimization, with wider questions of quality, customer satisfaction, and policy outcomes being largely ignored.
Similarly, Plowden (1985, p. 407) complains that the focus is ‘almost entirely on the costs of governmental activities rather than on their quality’.
How far, he asks (p. 399),
are the relatively simple techniques relating to the facts about costs and outputs — numbers of staff, numbers of applications dealt with capable of being developed to deal with far more complex questions about outcomes: what did this activity actually achieve, in terms of modernizing British industry…improving the nation's health, or educating it for the 21st century?
Pollitt (1986a, pp. 168–9) draws attention to one further problem: namely that performance measurement in the public sector is ‘at root a…political question’.
Performance criteria are often ‘value-laden’ and raise ‘perennially awkward, political question[s]’.
There is also ‘the problem of how to aggregate different judgements of performance’ which presents ‘formidable difficulties of principle and practice’.
In 1985 a Financial Management Unit report (Cabinet Office (MPO) /Treasury (FMU) 1985b, p. 1) admitted that as a policy-analysis tool the FMI left ‘scope for very considerable further improvement’.
It particularly noted the setting of imprecise goals, hidden assumptions underlying policies, and a failure to test the link between policy and impacts on the outside world.
A further point is that departmental officials (and client groups) might feel threatened by the policy implications of performance measurement, as might ‘a Cabinet of ministers committed to a party programme and to ways of winning the next general election’(Lee, 1984, p. 5).
In part, as Gray and Jenkins (1985, p. 165) suggest, these problems are the price paid for departmental acceptance of the FMI.
The effect, however, has been to produce what they describe (1984, p. 425) as ‘managerial myopia’, a fixation with short-term managerial innovation at the expense ‘of that long-term focus which is essential for achieving programme and policy effectiveness’.
Can the FMI realistically be extended to the study of policy effects without alienating those within the administrative and political community-ministers, departmental policy makers, and client groups — whom such developments might threaten?
This (as yet unresolved) dilemma is not only crucial to the FMI's future.
It also raises important questions about the role of civil servants in effecting managerial change, and about the FMI's compatibility with concepts of fundamental importance to public administration.
Implementing the FMI: political clout or cultural change?
The FMI was not intended to be implemented immediately, but was to develop over time, and at a different pace in different departments.
Consequently in the first six years implementation was patchy.
Progress was greater, for example, with developing management systems than with defining objectives, decentralization was developed more readily in field offices than in headquarters and policy divisions, and performance measurement applied more easily to inputs than outputs, and to administrative rather than programme expenditure.
Part of the explanation for this patchy development may lie in what Richards (1987, p. 36) calls the ‘fragmentation of the institutional arrangements within central government for guiding the changes’.
These include, according to Gray (1986, p. 18), ‘the Treasury (in a number of guises), the [former]Management and Personnel Office (especially the Management Efficiency Division), the Efficiency Unit, the Joint Management Unit, and even (in the wings) the National Audit Office’.
Some of these overlap, and their respective roles are a mystery to spending departments.
Nevertheless, progress has been made.
Several studies, for example, suggest that departmental productivity, in so far as it can be measured, has improved significantly in recent years.
The FMI, some claim, is now ‘a question of internal management rather than political initiative’, and future governments will maintain it to secure ‘the best possible value from limited resources’(Peat Marwick, 1986, p. 15).
Johnson,(1985, pp. 428, 432) feels ‘that the priority given to effective and efficient management by the civil service will endure’; and Greenaway (1987, p. 53) sees it as ‘inconceivable…that recent developments in these areas will simply be reversed following a change of Government’.
Even so, a cautionary note must be sounded.
The FMI's emphasis upon managerial efficiency as opposed to policy, and the obstacles political as well as technical-to developing effective performance measures of programme (as opposed to administrative) expenditure, inevitably limits achievable savings.
As Fry (1988a, p. 10) notes, ‘The running costs of government departments…are dwarfed by programme expenditure, the sheer scale of which…make the savings obtained from cash limits, staff reductions, the Rayner scrutinies and the FMI seem relatively unimportant’.
Progress within departments in implementing the FMI, moreover, has sometimes been limited.
For example, in 1987, a Public Accounts Committee report (1986–7c, paras 20, 44) claimed that ‘a major effort’ was needed to speed up implementation of the FMI.
For ‘some’ departments ‘full implementation [was]still many years away’.
The committee was ‘particularly concerned about the relatively slow progress of the Home Office’ and felt that it  would be ‘a long period of years’before systems in the Ministry of Defence could be relied on.
Five years after the FMI's launch, in other words, full implementation was still a long way off and ultimate success was far from assured.
While recognizing the difficulties inherent in implementing the FMI, the slow progress recorded suggests at least some lack of consensus within Whitehall.
Gray and Jenkins (1984, p. 425) point to intraorganizational tensions created by the FMI: for example, between service departments on the one hand and the Treasury (and formerly also the Management and Personnel Office) on the other, with the latter fearing loss of control over departmental expenditure and manpower.
Within departments, too, strains may be caused as establishment and finance responsibilities are decentralized from headquarters to new responsibility centres.
As Fry (1988a, p. 17) observes, without ‘devolved powers’ for managers ‘to decide the terms and conditions…of officials in their cost centre’— powers which central departments and departmental top management have been reluctant to concede —‘the impact of the FMI seems bound to be…relatively restricted’.
Again, FMI developments have aroused tensions among middle- and lower-management grades, not only through fears about jobs and increased central monitoring, but concern also that financial  stringency could impact on staff development and training ‘with longer term consequences for an efficient and effective Civil Service’(Public Accounts Committee, 1986–7c, para. 39).
Tensions may also arise through departmental clients perceiving the FMI as a threat to service provision.
Intra-organizational tensions within Whitehall, in other words, compounded by the concerns of civil service unions and public sector consumers, may have impeded development of consensus about the FMI.
A further obstacle concerns the skills needed to implement the FMI.
As Plowden (1985, p. 407) comments, ‘few ministers know the first thing about running large organisations’ whilst civil servants are generally not trained in financial and management skills.
Since the FMI's launch some attempt has been made to address these problems through courses at the Civil Service College, and more generally through what Tyson (1987, p. 70) describes ‘as a long-term process of personal development and change’(see also Financial Management in Government Departments , 1983, pp. 7–8).
In addition, following the Cassels Report (1983) a Personnel Work Action Programme was launched, key elements of which included more effective staff appraisal and incentives such as merit pay (see Progress in Financial Management in Government Departments , 1984, p. 7;The Times , 26 November 1986, and Fry, 1988a, pp. 13–14).
At lower levels, too, cost-centre managers have been given more flexibility with personnel management providing a greater link between performance and promotion (Thorpe 
Tracey, 1987, pp. 334–5).
Johnson (1985, pp. 424–5) also cites prime ministerial intervention in promoting top civil servants, and the increasing frequency of appointments to senior posts from outside the service (such as Peter Levene recruited from the private sector to head the Defence Procurement Executive in 1985) as evidence of ‘a more active personnel policy’ designed to enhance managerial competence.
While such developments may herald profound changes for the future, their full effects must take time to work through.
The civil service provides its staff with fewer incentives to encourage efficiency than in the private sector (where bonus, commissions, ‘perks’ etc. are often widespread), a position unlikely to be altered much by limited experimentation with merit pay and the like.
Fry (1984, p. 334) claims to detect ‘little obvious sign of…change’ from the traditionally ‘comfortable world of established pay scales…routine career expectations, and security of tenure’.
Indeed, introduced as they have been in a climate of manpower cuts by an allegedly insensitive senior management, the main effects of these developments may be to produce ‘not just disgruntled employees’ but also ‘ineffective organisation’(Plowden, 1985, p. 410).
More fundamentally, cultural changes of the kind envisaged by the FMI's sponsors may not have been forthcoming.
As Richards (1987, p. 27) observes ‘the fundamental, if unstated objective of the [FMI]was to transform the culture of Whitehall, supplementing the primarily administrative values…with other values…directed at managerial effectiveness’.
Some observers suggest that important changes have already occurred.
Cassels (1985, p. 36), for example, feels that the FMI ‘has changed the culture in departments a lot already’, and Johnson (1985, p. 432) that ‘a gradual transformation in ethos’ has occurred which will produce ‘by the end of the century a civil service qualitatively different in decisive respects from that…created by the great reforms of the last century’.
If these observers are correct then the FMI's future development will presumably be secured from within by a civil service committed to bringing about ‘lasting reforms’.
These developments of course(and herein lies the difficulty of gauging progress), may be more apparent than real.
As Pollitt notes (1986a, p. 165)‘a government can force its employees to go through the motions, but it cannot mandate enthusiasm and commitment’.
Metcalfe and Richards (1984, p. 451) also emphasize the ‘impoverished concept of management’ within the service, and its cultural bias towards defensiveness and risk avoidance.
They point also (1987, pp. 18–19) to an entrenched ‘disbelief system’ which includes scepticism about attempted reforms and a belief-far from groundless — that such reforms often fail.
Chapman (1984b, pp. 1–2) points similarly to the downgrading of ‘management’ within ‘the administrative culture of the British Civil Service’, and Howells (1981) to the contrast with  attitudes in the private sector where managerial work generally carries much higher prestige than in Whitehall.
There is also the point that the civil service will continue to require officials who are not primarily good managers but whose ability lies in policy work, drafting papers and sensitivity to ministerial needs.
This, too, must present a barrier to cultural changes of the kind required by the FMI.
While cultural attitudes within the service, under the impact of the FMI, may be changing, Metcalfe and Richards' view (1984, p. 452) is that the initial impact of the FMI probably owes more to ‘political clout…the repeated confirmation of Prime Ministerial backing’ than to genuine cultural change.
If this conclusion is correct then either much more may need to be done to force changes in the underlying culture of Whitehall, or the FMI may be laid ‘to rest as soon as the architect [Mrs Thatcher]is removed’(Gray and Jenkins, 1984, p. 427).
Managerialism and public administration
The managerialist initiatives described above represent an attempt to implant into central government selected managerial practices and cultural attitudes derived from the private sector.
The focus is upon better management and greater resource consciousness, emphases which are undoubtedly valuable in themselves, but which pose fundamental problems given the nature and distinctiveness of the public sector.
In particular there are implications for the policy/ administration dichotomy, equity and accountability (see Chapter 1).
i) THE POLICY/ADMINISTRATION DICHOTOMY
The focus of the efficiency strategy and FMI is premised on the view that ‘maximizing the effectiveness and efficiency of government delivered services’ lies basically, with ‘better management’(Pollitt, 1986a, p. 157).
The emphasis, in other words, is upon good management rather than policy, an approach influenced partly by the need to minimize opposition from policy-conscious Whitehall departments, and partly because in the private sector-from which the managerial approach has largely been adopted — decision-making usually has only a limited policy content.
However, in the public sector, resource management considerations are usually much more difficult to disentangle from policy.
Thus Likierman (1985, p. 18) warns against efforts to mark a divide between ‘policy and implementation’.
It is too simplistic, he suggests, to attempt ‘to put the value-laden issues of politics to one side…and focus on the more limited issues of how to perform tasks more efficiently’.
This point is of more than theoretical significance.
As already  observed, allocating resources in the public sector is often a highly political exercise.
Thus, ‘responsible managers’ seeking value for money under the FMI might find themselves confronting policy issues.
(For example, they may wish to increase staff at a time when government is committed to reducing civil service numbers.)
In government, in other words, ends cannot be divorced from means, nor policy from management.
To quote Lee (1984, p. 5), behind the FMI ‘lie many unanswered questions…
[The]political function [of ministers and departments]cannot be easily translated into the language of financial management’.
ii) EQUITY
The managerial approach also has important implications for the concept of equitable administration.
The idea of decentralization to departmental units of accountable management not only undermines the hierarchical authority structure traditionally used in bureaucracies to enforce equitable application of departmental rules (see p. 26), but its underlying aim, as Gray and Jenkins (1985, p. 157) warn, ‘may be to downgrade…the search for fairness and equity of treatment…since such practices may not be value for money ’, In the private sector, where equity is less important (and in some cases absent), the search for value for money conflicts with no particular value systems, but in the public sector it does.
iii) ACCOUNTABILITY
The concept of accountability — especially external accountability — is also much more pronounced in the public than in the private sector (see p. 9), and the FMI, by delegating responsibilities to line managers and accountable units, conflicts sharply with the traditional pattern of accountability in central administration.
Whereas the convention of ministerial responsibility holds ministers accountable for all departmental work (see Chapter 14), the FMI assigns to departmental cost-centre managers responsibility for securing value for money.
As Lee (1984, p. 5) suggests, ‘on the face of it, the [FMI]should mean that ministers cannot be held responsible for actions taken by their officials under the new delegated responsibilities’.
These developments, it can be argued, far from weakening Whitehall accountability may strengthen it.
The FMI not only provides ministers (through management information systems) with increased knowledge about departmental activities, but also reinforces what Gray and Jenkins (1985, ch. 6) describe as the traditional legal rational code of accountability with a primarily financial code stressing effective and efficient accountability.
There has also, theoretically  at least, been a shift from ministerial to civil service accountability, arguably mirroring the fact that ministers today rarely accept personal responsibility for their officials' mistakes (see Chapter 14).
This development, when seen alongside the now routine questioning of civil servants by ‘Commons select committees (see Chapter 14), presents the possibility of ‘responsible’ departmental managers answering directly to MPs for their stewardship.
As Robinson (1985, p. 42) puts it, ‘the FMI merely adds a new twist to the whole question of…civil servants’ answerability to Parliament'.
Nevertheless, constitutionally, ministerial responsibility is incompatible with the FMI.
While those taking a ‘realistic’ view (believing that the convention no longer applies in true form) do not regard this as a problem, adherents to the ‘traditional’view (mainly academics and some senior civil servants) argue that it is (Robinson et al .,
1987, especially pp. 62–8).
One academic, Jones (ibid., p. 65), argues that, because of the implications for ministerial responsibility, the FMI should be ‘terminated’, while Gray and Jenkins (1985, p. 161) feel that the weakening of the convention, together with increased reliance upon professional codes — such as the values of auditors and accountants — may lead to ‘the disintegration of…accountability itself’.
These views stress the difficulty of harmonizing essentially private sector norms with traditional public sector concepts and constitutional requirements.
Perhaps the likeliest outcome, however, is that little will change.
Metcalfe and Richards (1984, p. 51) suggest that continuing attachment to constitutional norms will make civil servants reluctant to exercise managerial discretion.
Plowden' (1985, p. 400) foresees a similar possibility, that ministers' constitutional responsibility, coupled with sophisticated information systems, will produce increased ministerial intervention, ‘frustrating the intentions to give officials the discretion they need to manage effectively’.
Again, while the idea that officials exercising delegated authority should be directly accountable to Parliament may seem logical, it ignores the political reality of government domination which has traditionally characterized executive/legislative relationships in Britain.
Significantly, the government, when launching the FMI, rejected recommendations of the Treasury and Civil Service Committee (1982) designed to strengthen Parliament's role (for example, by enabling departmental select committees to request the Comptroller and Auditor General to review departmental efficiency and effectiveness).
While, therefore, the FMI might provide a potential for developing greater, or at least different, accountability, it seems unlikely, at least in the short term, to bring significantly increased accountability to Parliament for the work of central administration.
As Gray and Jenkins (1985, p. 165) put it, the FMI ‘might allow a change in the public image of accountability without much affecting its practice’.
Public administration or public management?
At root the managerialist approach assumes that private sector managerial techniques can be smoothly implanted into the public sector.
But is this the case?
Certainly, on the evidence to date, the savings achieved by efficiency scrutinies, the enhanced departmental knowledge available to ministers through information systems, and the increased resource consciousness among civil servants brought about by the FMI, would suggest that the public sector has much to gain by the introduction of managerial techniques originated in the private sector.
What has also emerged, however, is that private sector attitudes and techniques cannot easily be transplanted into central administration.
The policy implications of resource management and the administrative culture of Whitehall, departmental policy interests and the political orientations of ministers, concerns about equity and accountability, and the technical difficulties of effective performance measurement, all stand as obstacles to further progress, obstacles which may not be removed easily in the absence of a powerful central authority to co-ordinate and force the pace of future change.
Of course, some of these difficulties may be surmounted if the structure of Whitehall is itself radically altered, with departmental policy-making effectively separated from executive functions carried out by semi-autonomous agencies as proposed in the 1988 Ibbs Next Steps Report (see Chapter 2).
What perhaps all this suggests is that public administration is more than private management writ public.
The public sector has a political environment, theoretical foundations, an ethos, a culture and a sheer diversity which makes it distinctive from the private sector.
Perhaps, also, civil service culture can only be truly changed by changing the civil service itself, not through retraining and re-educating existing officials, but by wholesale — albeit inevitably long-term — changes in personnel through new recruitment practices and procedures.
Failure to recognize and to allow for this may explain why, even after nine years of Thatcherite ‘political clout’, doubt still exists about the extent of real cultural change within Whitehall and whether ‘lasting reforms’ have, or ever will be, achieved.
8 LOCAL GOVERNMENT: THE ADMINISTRATIVE AND POLITICAL CONTEXT
Administrative complexity
British local government superficially appears straightforward with its neat pattern of elected local authorities.
In practice, however government at the local level is particularly confusing because of the variety of agencies which help to shape and administer local services.
This complex web includes: a) local and regional offices of central government departments, such as the DSS and DOE (see Young 1982); b) non-departmental public bodies usually dealing with a single specialized function, such as health and water authorities; c) decentralized units of public corporations, such as electricity boards; d) innumerable autonomous and semi-autonomous official and quasi-official organizations, each with its part to play in the policy-making process, such as tenants' liaison committees and youth service advisory councils (see Cousins, 1982, 1983); e) elected local government (see Figure 8.2).
Complexity is compounded because of the large number of non-governmental agencies operating locally; these include local political parties, local pressure groups, professional bodies, and industrial and commercial concerns.
All of these can, on occasions, be important elements in local policy-making (Dunleavy and Rhodes, 1987).
The main focus of this chapter is elected local government, but this in itself is organizationally far from simple.
There are 514 principal local authorities in Great Britain: 404 authorities in England, 65 in Scotland and 45 in Wales.
Throughout the ‘shire’ areas of England, the whole of Wales and mainland Scotland there are two tiers of multipurpose local authorities.
Between 1974 and 1986 there had also been two tiers in Greater London and the six metropolitan counties in England, but this position was changed from 1 April 1986, when the upper-tier authorities were abolished.
Their functions were transferred partly to lower-tier authorities, partly to new single-purpose joint authorities and in part to the Secretary of State.
Outside the metropolitan areas, complex vertical relationships (such as those between county councils and district councils) co-exist  alongside horizontal relationships (such as those between different district councils within the same county).
Additionally, there are invariably complicated networks of relationships between different departments within a single local authority.
As Stanyer (1976, ch. 1) reminds us, it is important to see each locality as a miniature political and administrative system in its own right, a point reinforced by the Widdicombe Report (1986, p. 22) when the committee emphasized that ‘some of the commonly held assumptions about local government are valid only in a minority of authorities’.
Generalizing about local government can be hazardous.
Development and structure
Elected local government is big business.
In Great Britain there are some 20,650 district and borough councillors and some 4,100 county, regional and islands councillors.
This averages out at one councillor for every 2,200 members of the population although as Widdicombe (1986, paras 213–16) notes there are major disparities.
In Birmingham, for example, there is one councillor for every 8,600 people.
In Powys, on the other hand, there is one for every 590 people.
These authorities employ some 2.35m staff (1987) and, collectively, they are responsible for providing over fifty different services.
Their scale is demonstrated by the fact that just over 25 per cent of all public sector spending in Britain is accounted for by local authorities.
Indeed, if local authorities were listed in terms of expenditure, 89 authorities would appear amongst the top 500 British companies.
Quite clearly, local government deserves a major place in any study of British public administration.
THE TRADITIONAL PATTERN
The major features of local government in England and Wales were laid down by the 1835 Municipal Corporations Act and by three statutes at the end of the nineteenth century: the Local Government Acts of 1888 and 1894, and the London Government Act, 1899.
These Acts created a comprehensive pattern of local authorities throughout England and Wales providing a wide range of services.
With some modifications the structure lasted until the 1972 Local Government Act ushered in a new pattern of elected local administration which became operative from 1 April 1974, although this was further amended by the 1985 Local Government Act.
Figure 8.1 outlines the structure of local government in England and Wales immediately prior to 1 April 1974.
There were, however, a number of weaknesses in the traditional pattern, notably:
(i)
Outdated structure .
When the local government map was laid down at the end of the nineteenth century, many of the administrative units — for example, Anglo-Saxon shires and medieval boroughs — were already outdated.
During the twentieth century, as the residential pattern of communities changed, the local government structure became increasingly irrational.
(ii)
Disparities of size .
The above factors also produced wide disparities between local authorities of the same type, often producing a mismatch between resources and functions.
In particular, many authorities were too small to provide an efficient standard of service (for example , the smallest housing authority, Tintwistle RDE, had a population of only 1,490).
(iii)
Administrative confusion .
There were nine different types of elected local authority.
In the more built-up areas services were often provided by all-purpose county boroughs; however, in rural areas services were split between the county council and urban/rural district/municipal borough authorities.
County councils, moreover, frequently subdivided their territory for administrative purposes.
Education and social services, for example, were invariably administered from decentralized ‘area’ offices as well as from County Hall.
From the consumer's standpoint, in particular, the ‘old’ system was therefore frequently extremely complex.
(iv)
Fragmentation of responsibility .
In many areas local services were provided by numerous different authorities, which often gave rise to acute co-ordination problems.
Imagine, for example, the difficulties of community-wide planning on Merseyside where there were twenty-three local authorities (excluding parishes).
The pre-April 1974 structure of local government in England and Wales (as at March 1974).
REORGANIZATION
Structural change always needs to be seen in its environmental context.
As society evolved from the end of the nineteenth century, so pressure for local government reorganization increased.
In London, population movement from inner London to the suburbs meant that the old London County Council's administrative network had largely outlived its usefulness and in 1957 the Royal Commission on Local Government in Greater London was established to examine the London conurbation, including the Home Counties.
This reported in 1960 (the Herbert Report), and in 1963 the London Government Act set a broad boundary to the London area and gave shared  responsibility for its local services to the Greater London Council (GLC), and to thirty-two London boroughs and the City of London.
Until its abolition on 31 March 1986 strategic planning functions resided with the top tier (GLC), while more personal services were administered by the boroughs.
In addition, some services were shared under special arrangements (for example , education in inner London was made the responsibility of the Inner London Education Authority which initially consisted of members of the GLC from inner London plus a representative from each of the inner London boroughs), while others continue to be the sole responsibility of special agencies (the Metropolitan Police, for instance , answers directly to the Home Secretary).
In 1990 ILEA is scheduled to be abolished with the relevant boroughs taking the education function back to themselves
In 1966 two separate Royal Commissions were established to investigate local government in England (excluding London) and Scotland.
When the Redcliffe-Maud Commission (on England) reported in 1969 it recommended the abolition of the old structure and the establishment of a new pattern of local authorities.
Its solution, outside the urban conurbations, was unitary multi-purpose authorities (with from 250,000 to 1 m inhabitants).
The existing two-tier system, it recommended, should be replaced by fifty-eight unitary authorities which would cover most of the country, but in three metropolitan areas there was to be a two-tier arrangement with responsibilities divided between a metropolitan county council and large district authorities (along lines similar to those then operating in Greater London).
While the Labour government basically accepted these proposals (see Local Government Reform in England , 1970) the Conservatives, who came to power in 1970, produced alternative ideas which were ultimately incorporated into the 1972 Local Government Act.
The concept of unitary authorities was rejected in favour of a rationalized two-tier system.
The Conservatives argued that the size of authority recommended by Redcliffe-Maud (serving populations between 250,000 and 1 m) was  too large; hence the need for a division of responsibilities between county and districts.
Interestingly, the Wheatley Commission on Scotland also favoured a two-tier system.
Likewise Derek Senior's minority report to the Royal Commission on Local Government in England favoured a two-tier system, although one based on the concept of the city region.
The Conservative government's proposals divided the whole of England and Wales into two major tiers (plus parish councils as a third tier).
The first tier was to be based largely on existing counties; the major changes were destined to take place in the second tier, the district level.
Parish councils (community councils in Wales) made up the third tier which had both minor service and advisory functions at grass-roots level.
THE NEW SYSTEM IN ENGLAND AND WALES
Outside Greater London, a reorganized local government system was created by a series of Acts of Parliament passed during the period 1972–4.
The 1985 and 1988 Local Government Acts further modified structures both inside and outside London (see below), p. 148.
The 1972 Local Government Act abolished the eighty-three county boroughs in England and Wales and reduced the fifty-eight county councils to forty-seven, ranging from populations of 110,000 (Powys) to 1.5m (Hampshire).
Within these counties, 1,250 municipal boroughs, urban and rural district councils were replaced by 333 district councils with populations ranging from 396,000 (Bristol) to 21,500 (Radnor).
In the major urban conurbations six metropolitan counties (Greater Manchester, Merseyside, West Midlands, Tyne and Wear, South Yorkshire and West Yorkshire) were created containing thirty-six metropolitan districts with populations ranging from 158,000 (South Tyneside) to almost 1.1m (Birmingham).
As noted above, however, on 31 March 1986 these six metropolitan counties along with the GLC were abolished and their functions largely relocated to metropolitan district councils (boroughs in London) or to non-directly elected joint boards.
A significant proportion of urban England, therefore, now has only one tier of elected local government.
As a third tier, parish councils have been retained in England (known as community councils in Wales).
There are some 10,204 parish councils in England and 808 community councils in Wales.
Small parishes (with under 200 electors) may instead hold parish meetings which all local electors can attend.
Additionally, in some urban areas neighbourhood councils have been formed but these have no statutory functions and merely provide a sounding board for local opinion.
Figure 8.2 provides a summary of the present pattern of local government in England and Wales.
Local authorities in England and Wales, 1988.
THE NEW SYSTEM IN SCOTLAND
In Scotland ‘modern’ local government was established by Acts of 1889, which created county councils, and 1900, which regularized town government.
At the third tier, parish councils were created in 1894 and charged with administering poor relief.
Just as the development of Scottish local government closely paralleled that in England so, too, its ‘reform’ followed closely on the heels of English and Welsh reorganization.
The (Wheatley) Royal Commission on Local Government in Scotland (1966–9) saw its proposals (1969) largely adopted by the Conservative government in the Local Government (Scotland) Act, 1973, which became effective in May 1975.
As in England, the Scottish Commission identified large numbers of small authorities as a major weakness of the old system.
The ‘new’ pattern saw fewer, larger authorities.
There are now nine regional councils (ranging from Strathclyde with 2.3m inhabitants down to the Borders with 101,000) and fifty-three district councils (ranging from 744,000 in Glasgow to 10,000 in Badenoch and Strathspey).
In addition, three island authorities were given virtually all-purpose status.
At the third-tier level are some 1,350 community councils.
Figure 8.3 presents the contemporary Scottish structure in diagrammatic form.
Local government in Scotland since May 1975.
The post-1974 pattern of local government throughout Britain appears substantially different from that which it replaced.
But to what extent did the changes constitute ‘reform’?
A major objective of the reform movement was the rationalization of geographical areas with the aim of producing more efficient services, yet some very small organizational units still provide crucial services (such as housing, education, social services).
With reorganization, moreover, local government lost some important services to other agencies.
Under the Water Act (1973) the powers hitherto exercised by English and Welsh local authorities in water supply and sewage disposal were transferred to ten new regional water authorities.
Likewise, in 1974 local authority health powers in England and Wales were transferred to newly created, non-elected health authorities (see Chapter 13).
ABOLITION OF THE GLC AND THE ‘MET’ COUNTIES
As noted above there was further structural change in the 1980s.
The 1983 Conservative Party manifesto argued (p. 37) that the six metropolitan county councils and the GLC had ‘been shown to be a wasteful and unnecessary tier of government’.
In a White Paper,Streamlining the Cities (1983), the Conservative government set out its case for further structural change.
The government argued that the six ‘mets’ and the GLC were a superfluous tier of government, very much junior partners to their constituent district (borough) councils in terms of service provision.
Additionally it was maintained that the GLC and the six ‘mets’ had sought an outlet for their energies by developing a general strategic role which had led to conflict with lower-tier authorities (such as on land use planning) and to duplication (such as on economic development).
There was also conflict with central government as authorities assumed a ‘mandate’ on issues such as defence and foreign policy.
With their large rate base and relative remoteness from ratepayers the White Paper argued that they had pursued unrealistic spending policies.
The government anticipated a financial saving of at least –120m a year with abolition, but denied that the change would undermine local democracy.
Indeed, the White Paper maintained that there would, in fact, be enhanced local accountability as the more accessible boroughs and districts would be responsible for a fuller range of services.
After what was often an acrimonious debate the 1985 Local Government Act ultimately emerged.
It abolished the six ‘mets’ and the GLC with effect from 31 March 1986.
These seven authorities had constantly exceeded government expenditure targets and had frequently engaged in ‘socialist’ policies which hardly endeared them to the Thatcher government.
One of the most controversial aspects of the 1985 Act was the way in  which crucially important services hitherto provided by the GLC and the six ‘mets’ were transferred not to elected second-tier authorities but to non-directly elected joint boards.
The major spending services of the Metropolitan counties (police, fire, public transport and probation), which accounted for some 70 per cent of their expenditure, were transferred to such joint boards (notably Fire and Civil Defence Boards, Police Boards, Transport Boards).
These are composed largely of local councillors indirectly appointed by their local authority but not directly elected to these bodies.
Some commentators see such developments as further evidence of the erosion of local democracy.
In London the post-April 1986 picture became particularly complex.
By 1987 there were some seventy-seven successor bodies to the GLC — some statutory such as the Fire, Civil Defence and Waste Disposal boards, but mostly voluntary with boroughs co-operating in groups such as the Greater London Ecology Unit and the London Boroughs Grant Scheme (with leading boroughs operating on an agency basis).
Other former GLC functions went to the Thames Water Authority, Arts Council, Historic Buildings and Monuments Commission, and English Heritage.
Still others went to the Department of Transport and the Department of the Environment.
About a dozen services were transferred to the directly elected London boroughs.
From 1986, when the GLC was abolished, the Inner London Education Authority (ILEA) became a directly elected body although the 1988 Local Government Act abolished ILEA with effect from April 1990, the educational function being transferred to the relevant Inner London boroughs.
It seems clear that, despite the Conservative government's emphasis on decentralization and accountability as objectives of abolition in London, the net result has been an increase in centralization and a reduction of both financial and democratic accountability.
There were seventeen precepting bodies operating in the first year of the new system and a larger number of ad hoc bodies which could levy funds.
This fragmentation following the 1986 restructuring produced a lack of co-ordination and an absence of overall control.
Additionally, of course, such a diverse distribution of services amongst so many bodies is a potential nightmare for the ordinary consumer.
From the ‘street level bureaucracy’ standpoint there appeared to be little sense in the new arrangements and they were frequently viewed as the product of political pragmatism rather than administrative reasoning.
The post-1972 period has thus witnessed important structural changes in British local administration.
But, as Stanyer (1976, p. 55) has observed: ‘It is necessary to understand what a local authority is in legal terms in a particular governmental system only as a prelude to understanding what all local authorities are in behavioural terms’.
The structures created between 1963 and 1988 provided a new administrative   framework for local government but such structures in themselves reveal relatively little about the practice of local administration.
Local government: who does what in England and Wales, 1988.
The functions of local authorities
Local government is both a provider of services to a local authority and an instrument of democratic self-government.
On pp. 154 6 we examine the ‘democratic’ dimension of local government; this section delineates local authority services.
Classification of local government services.
Local authorities can only do what the law explicitly allows; all council powers come from Acts of Parliament.
Indeed, local government itself exists only by courtesy of Parliament and Parliament frequently alters its powers and functions.
Should any local authority provide a service not specifically permitted by Parliament it would be acting illegally, or ultra vires (see Chapter 15).
Nevertheless, despite the advent of ‘contracting out’, local authorities still carry out over fifty functions; indeed, the average British citizen probably has more contact with the state through the services provided by local government than through the outputs of any other level of public administration.
The diversity of services outlined in Figure 8.4 makes any classification somewhat arbitrary.
However, Figure 8.5 offers a useful starting point for discussion.
As this shows, local authorities provide services in five major fields, although with many of them (such as education, housing, social services) other agencies such as government departments,ad hoc authorities and voluntary associations may also play some part in implementation.
Services are not, of course, provided uniformly throughout the country.
Slum clearance, for example, is only a major problem in some areas.
Again, standards of service may vary; beyond the minimum standards which are usually laid down by law there is, in practice, often a wide area of discretion.
Not all functions, moreover, are mandatory upon local authorities; some, like the provision of leisure centres, art galleries and playing fields are permissive (which means the authority has a choice whether or not to provide them).
It is open to any authority, moreover, to promote a private Bill in order to extend its powers.
Although a complex and costly procedure, over the years  many authorities have acquired powers by this means to perform particular functions in their localities: for example, to maintain the external decoration of listed buildings (Kensington and Chelsea), and to operate a municipal bank (Birmingham).
As this latter example suggests, there is also a wide and varied range of trading activities carried out by local authorities (see Chapter 12).
Additionally, since the Local Government Act, 1972 (section 137), local authorities have had general power to spend up to the product of a 2p rate on purposes not specifically authorized by statute.
Consequently, while local authorities in Britain do not have a ‘general competence’ to do whatever they wish in their local areas, the variation in functions and standards between one authority and another may be considerable — to an extent which seemingly belies the simplicity of lists of services such as those contained in Figures 8.4 and 8.5.
For example, there have been a large number of initiatives by local authorities in recent years intended to improve the local economy, many of which have been undertaken under section 137 of the Local Government Act 1972, to incur expenditure which in the authority's opinion is in the interests of their area.
‘Local authorities are playing a part in the promotion of co-operatives, in training schemes, in business advice centres, in the development of new technology and in support for individual firms through rent subsidies, grants and guarantees’(Widdicombe 1986, para. 288).
Neat organization charts simply belie reality.
The Government's White Paper responding to Widdicombe (Department of Environment et al .,
1988) proposes to give councils a new specific power outside S137 (S83 in Scotland) to carry out economic development.
The financial limit for S137/83, currently the product of a 2p rate, will become 5 per head of population for London boroughs and metropolitan districts and 2.50 in areas with two tiers of principal councils.
The powers to vary this by order will remain.
This approximately halves the amount of money available for discretionary spending, even though the White Paper accepts that only twenty-one English councils were spending up to 80 per cent of their S137 limit and two-thirds of S137 spending was an economic development.
Inter-authority relationships
Further complexity in the pattern of service provision stems from the two-tier nature of much of contemporary local government, especially with services (such as planning) where responsibility is shared between districts and counties.
Close liaison between authorities is obviously important in such cases, as well as in those where different authorities provide related services (such as social services and housing).
This  problem is particularly acute in the area of homelessness — a ‘social services’ condition with a housing ‘remedy’(Alexander, 1982b, p. 59).
Of course, co-ordination is invariably more difficult to achieve between organizations than within a single organization.
At reorganization in 1974 the functions of local government were split between four main organizational units — counties, districts, health authorities and water authorities — and relatively sophisticated consultative machinery had to be established in many areas in order to obtain local co-ordinated action.
In practice, however, such arrangements have often tended to cause further confusion (particularly for consumers), as well as to create acrimony between the authorities concerned.
Such acrimony has often been exacerbated, moreover, because of the tendency since the 1974 reorganization for authorities ‘to view the relationship between the tiers as an adversary one’(Alexander, 1982a, p. 65); and also because of the problem of ‘competing mandates’(Alexander, 1982b, p. 54) where authorities at different levels in an area pursuing different policies (and often controlled by different parties) both claim to be acting in the local interest.
One way in which liaison (and confusion) has been institutionalized is by use of agency agreements between authorities.
Section 101 of the Local Government Act, 1972, makes it possible for one authority to appoint another as its agent to carry out its statutory duties — this applies to all functions except education, social services and emergency services.
In practice the major use of such agreements has been in the sphere of highway maintenance and construction, where old county boroughs and large urban districts have  invariably continued to provide the service on behalf of their county council.
They have not infrequently been a source of acrimony between the authorities involved, as well as of wider problems.
As Alexander (1982, p. 30) notes, agency agreements, superimposed ‘on an already complicated allocation’ of local authority functions, have added to the confusion experienced by consumers in service provision and ‘ensured that the processes of public accountability and democratic control would be so convoluted as to raise serious doubts about their effectiveness’.
A further source of friction and confusion is found where authorities have concurrent powers; that is, an equal share in providing services.
The best example is planning, of which the White Paper on Reorganization (Local Government in England , 1971, para. 17) observed: ‘All planning applications should be made to district councils…
Responsibility for broad planning policies and for the development of both structure and local plans must, however, rest with the county councils.
’ In practice these arrangements, like agency agreements, have given rise to confusion and friction, as well as in some cases to delay in determining applications.
Ultimately the position was rationalized by the Local Government, Planning and Land Act, 1980, which restricted  the definition of a ‘county matter’ and specified that all planning applications would be initially handled by district councils.
Liaison between authorities is facilitated by the establishment of forums for different authorities to discuss matters of mutual concern.
Some of these (such as the East Midlands Forum of County Councils) operate on a regional basis, others on a county basis.
Following the 1974 reorganization most counties established county liaison committees representing the county council and all the district councils within it, although these have generally proved ineffective and some have been abandoned.
Inter-district liaison, however, has proved more successful, being facilitated either by specially formed joint consultative committees or through county branches of the Association of District Councils (Alexander, 1982, especially ch. 3).
(The latter association, along with the other two major local authority associations — the Association of Metropolitan Associations and the Association of County Councils — and professional bodies such as SOLACE (Society of Local Authority Chief Executives) also provide opportunities for liaison at national level.)
While forums such as these can take a community-wide approach, they rarely have executive power, being largely bodies for debate and comment.
Councillor bodies are often paralleled at officer level and it is not uncommon to see different outlooks prevail — a further dimension of complexity.
The formal relationships outlined above need to be complemented by an appreciation of informal linkages, such as the sharing of knowledge and experience through the regional branches of professional associations.
Policy networks (such as local government professionals, ‘interested’ councillors, local pressure groups, local/specialist journalists, and so on) are also generally of far more practical importance than is often realized.
Likewise, Rotary, Round Table, and similar organizations can be important integrative tools.
Liaison is often further facilitated by overlapping membership between county and district councils: Widdicombe (1986, vol. 2, Table 4.2) shows that some 13 per cent of all councillors are on two (or more) authorities.
Such structures and networks, however, have generally failed to offset the inherent fragmentation of the post-1986 local government system or the inbuilt suspicions which have accompanied recent reorganizations.
In what is invariably an increasingly highly charged party political arena the goal of co-ordinated local action is often difficult to sustain.
Local politics and democracy
Some observers, like Sharpe (1970), argue that the strongest justification for elected local government is its claim to be an efficient  provider of services.
Because different communities have different needs, the system of government needs to be flexible; local government allegedly provides this by enabling local councillors, drawn from and accountable to the local electorate, to determine local priorities.
While such claims are today being challenged by the proponents of privatization, it is as an efficient provider of services that the claims of local government mainly seem to rest.
Local government, however, is also widely regarded as an instrument of democratic self-government.
The Redcliffe-Maud Commission, for example, was required to have regard to the need ‘to sustain a viable system of local democracy’, the assumption being that it was already democratic.
What, then, are the grounds upon which local government can be said to promote democracy?
THEORIES OF LOCAL DEMOCRACY
Democratic government does not necessarily entail locally elected councils.
Indeed, one strand of continental thinking argues that democracy is essentially concerned with the nation-state and with majority rule, equality and uniformity.
From such a perspective local government is seen as parochial, concerned with inequalities and differences between localities.
This stance, however, contrasts with the traditional British view that local government, enhances democracy, both by providing a vehicle of political education and as a means of increasing the liberty of the citizen by breaking down the power of the centralized state.
This view emphasizes that democracy is not simply concerned with national majority rule, social and political equality, and uniformity of standards but is, rather, an essential means of enabling individuals and local communities to voice their needs.
(For discussion, see Sharpe, 1970; Smith, 1969.)
PARTICIPATION
Participation, it is often held, can be more widely achieved at the local than the national level.
Elected local government enables ‘ordinary’ people to participate in the work of government without the disruption to their careers and domestic life that national office usually involves.
Moving from theory to practice, however, it is clear that public interest in British local government is low, with turnout in local elections much lower than in most European countries.
Only about 40 per cent of the electorate vote in local elections (the turnout in the 1985 English shire county elections, for example, was 41 per cent ) but such a figure can be highly misleading.
Stanyer (1976, pp. 271–2), for example, points out that in 1967 the turnout in Maidstone Rural District was 14.7 per cent while that in Knighton Rural District was 89.6 per cent .
The  dangers of generalizing about ‘apathy’ on the basis of aggregate data can be further highlighted by variation in turnout between different wards in the same authority.
For example, in the 1986 District Council elections turnout in wards in Leicester City ranged from 28 per cent to 61 per cent .
Patterns of participation, even at this minimal level of voting, cannot be divorced from the local social and political environment.
POLITICAL PARTIES
Party politics is now an established part of contemporary local government.
In 1972, before reorganization, only 53 per cent of local authorities were run on party lines.
By 1985 the proportion of councils in party political control had risen to 84 per cent(Widdicombe, 1986, vol. 1, Table 2.1).
The 16 per cent of authorities where Independents are dominant are mostly in the more rural parts of Scotland, England and Wales, but as Widdicombe notes (1986, vol. 1, p. 23)‘the overall figure does perhaps represent a stronger resilience of the Independent tradition in an era of increasing party politicisation than might have been anticipated’.
Partisan local administration has, however, quite clearly arrived in the bulk of British local authorities.
This development is not uncontroversial.
The view is still quite widespread that local government is about local issues and that party politics should not intrude.
However, this view is somewhat idealistic, particularly given the increased size of local authority units following reorganization.
According to Dunsire (1956, p. 87), political parties are the ‘indispensable element in the conversion of local councils into responsible governments’.
Compared with shifting coalitions of Independent councillors, party groupings can make for coherent policy planning and administration.
To some extent, of course, local party politics is simply national party politics writ small-the electorate frequently votes on the basis of non-local factors, something well illustrated in 1982 when the local elections were, as Crewe remarked (The Times , 8 May 1982, p. 2), ‘a referendum’ on the central government's ‘handling of the Falklands crisis’— a far cry from the local population choosing its local decision-makers on the basis of local political issues.
In his study of Wolverhampton, Jones (1969, pp. 348–9) maintained that ‘the parties have enabled individuals to devise a programme of policies and to implement it, and they have presented these programmes to the public in a dramatic and comprehensive way, enabling the public to judge a team of men and measures; thus the accountability of government to the electorate has been strengthened’.
This situation is, of course, only one of an infinite number of models but while it is clearly impossible to generalize about the impact of party  politics, any attempt to understand local public administration without reference to the party-political dimension is doomed to failure.
While public administration in most localities is now firmly entrenched within a party political environment, precise management styles vary considerably.
Two adjacent Labour-controlled authorities for example, may operate quite differently.
Bulpitt (1967) found that in Manchester Labour group discipline was looser than in Salford.
In Rochdale, where the Liberals held the balance of power, there was loose discipline and little formal party organization in the council chamber.
Some contemporary Labour groups have very open decision-making structures; others are dominated by the party leader.
The Conservative party's belief in hierarchy generally gives their leaderships considerable leverage, but again generalization is dangerous.
Research volume 1 of the Widdicombe Report (1986) provides a wealth of information about the extent and nature of party policies in local government.
The government's 1988 White Paper (Department of Environment et al .,
1988) rejected as too extensive Widdicombe's proposal that all principal officers and above be banned from being members of other main councils or being active politically.
The White Paper instead proposed that prohibition would apply to chief executives, chief officers, deputies and others who regularly advise or act on behalf of their councils — a concerted attempt to reduce the impact of ‘twin tracking’ in local politics.
PRESSURE GROUPS
Pressure group activity at the local level is considerable.
Partly because of the diverse interests within local communities but also because of the ineffectiveness in many areas of more institutionalized channels bureaucratic officials, unresponsive councillors, decaying parties, and so on— their role in local politics has tended to increase.
In Birmingham, Newton (1976, chs 3 and 4) identified over 4,000 organized groups and estimated that there were probably about twice that number in total.
Other studies have shown similarly extensive local group activity but in Birmingham, only about one-third were  politically active and most of these (63 per cent) were involved only with a single issue.
Many groups have very specific and limited demands (such as over local amenities) and when the particular issue has been resolved they disband.
Dearlove's study (1973, ch. 8) of Kensington and Chelsea showed that the council's response to groups revolved largely around councillor assessment of them.
Some groups were not favourably received partly because they had little to offer the council but also because they were seen as making ‘unreasonable’ demands on the local authority — that is, demands which did not square with the councillors' own policy predispositions.
Other groups (such as the WRVS and housing associations) were seen as ‘helpful’, since they had something to contribute (cheap welfare provision or extra housing).
Likewise, Newton's ‘established’ groups built up a ‘close set’of relationships with public officials in Birmingham (1976, p. 85), while his poorly established groups found it difficult to gain access to decision-makers and thereby had to resort to demonstrations, petitions and so on which only served to make them even more unacceptable.
The local pressure group world does not provide equal access to all.
Ethnic minority groupings, squatters and welfare rights workers, for example, usually fare badly in comparison with status quo middle-class groups.
Again, though, generalization is dangerous since some ‘radical’ socialist councils may respond favourably to groups challenging traditional norms (see Stoker, 1988).
Equally, of course, as Dearlove (1979, p. 49) emphasizes, the inactivity of a particular section of the local population (such as the National Union of Mineworkers in some mining areas)‘may occur precisely because that interest is built into the very heart of the council itself’.
While pressure-group influence varies over time and from issue to issue, such groupings must now be seen as an integral part of local public administration.
NON-LOCAL INFLUENCES
Dunleavy argues that too frequently local policy-making is explained purely in terms of factors internal to specific localities.
He maintains (1980a, p. 163) that far greater attention should be paid to non-local influences, asserting that ‘local political studies have fundamentally failed to explain the observed regularity of urban policy change across many decentralized authorities’.
In the educational sphere, for example, he points to the uniformity of local education authorities in adopting a tripartite system of secondary education following the 1944 Education Act.
Then, from the late 1960s, most LEAs reorganized on comprehensive lines.
In this and other cited areas (such as the development of high-rise flats and the commercial redevelopment of numerous town centres since the 1950s), central government did more than simply exhort — it provided financial incentives to help secure compliance.
Local authorities do not generally make policy decisions in isolation.
‘In particular, over and above their local roles, councils are located and locate themselves in what may be termed the ‘national local government system’ ' (Dunleavy, 1980a, p. 105).
Local authority associations, national party organizations, public service trade unions, professional bodies and the innumerable journals, conferences and publications help the nationalizing of innovations in local services.
Local public administration clearly needs to be seen in the context of the broader political, social and economic system.
Two points about Dunleavy's framework can usefully be raised:(a) He tends to assume that what applies in the case of high-rise flats or town-centre redevelopment applies in other areas of policy-making;(b) He places a heavy emphasis on the nationalizing of urban policy change, arguing (1980a, p. 98) that within ‘broad limits the decentralised authorities implementing policies have moved in step with a precision that cries out for explanation’.
Surely this is an exaggeration.
It is possible to provide examples of policy patterns (such as provision for the disabled) varying considerably across the country.
Further, the cited examples from education and planning stretch Dunleavy's ‘broad limits’ to breaking point.
Although nationwide policy changes are observable, this should not obscure the fact that there remains considerable variety in the policy and practice of local authorities.
Financing local government
Local government finance is important both economically and politically:economically because about one quarter of all public expenditure is spent by local authorities;politically because the finance available to local government largely determines the level of services which it can provide.
Whilst it is theoretically true at the time of writing that local authorities, through the rates, currently have a source of finance independent of central government, finance which can be spent on any object within their statutory jurisdiction, this is not the whole story.
In reality the picture is far more complex than that.
Understanding local government finance is not easy (see Greenwood, 1988b).
As a starting point, however, it is helpful to make a distinction (although the two do interconnect) between current (or revenue ) finance and capital finance.
CURRENT (OR REVENUE) FINANCE
In 1984/5 local authorities in England incurred a total of 39.6bn revenue account expenditure.
Such expenditure is used to pay for items of a relatively short-term nature (such as wages and postage).
The income to finance that expenditure (41.8bn in 1984/5) was raised from three main sources: 1) rates, 11.3bn (27 per cent); 2) government grants, 16.4bn (39.2 per cent ); 3) charges and miscellaneous 14.1bn (33.8 per cent )(all figures from Travers, 1986.
Tables App. 2, 3 and 7).
While the proportion received from the various sources will obviously vary from authority to authority, virtually all will receive some revenue from all three.
(I) Rates
Local rates have long been a controversial source of local authority income.
They are a form of taxation levied on local property, and are calculated on the basis of the rent at which the property might reasonably be let.
Each year the rating authority fixes a rate in the pound and the occupier is obliged to pay rates at that poundage.
For example, if a property has a rateable value of 100 and the local authority sets its rate at 54.5p the full rates payable would be 54.50p per annum .
The crucial elements, therefore, are rateable value and rate poundage.
Each year local authorities produce estimates of likely expenditure for the coming year.
From this figure they deduct their estimated income from charges and central government grants together with any cash balances available for the purpose.
This leaves a balance which then has to be financed through locally levied rates.
In 1966 rate rebates were introduced for those householders unable to pay the full amount and by 1977/8 rebates went to 15 per cent of all households in England and Wales.
In addition some properties (such as government buildings, agricultural land and buildings, churches) are exempt from rates.
What are the major objections to the rates?
(i)
They are said to be ‘regressive’: they bear most heavily on those with low incomes since the key element is the value of the property not the occupier's ability to pay.
The availability of rebates has, however, gone a long way to meeting this objection.
(ii)
They are said to be unfair.
Rate resources are unevenly distributed among local authorities and are not necessarily related to their different needs.
Government grants, however, can be used to smooth out this unevenness.
(iii)
Their basis (annual rental value) is not adequate.
Calculating a notional rental value is fraught with difficulties; hence, the frequently canvassed alternative of capital values for domestic property rating, or site values, as a basis for payment.
(iv)
Local accountability is undermined as (a) more than half of rate income comes from the non-voting business sector and (b) some electors (such as lodgers, young adults living with parents) do not pay rates.
Of 35m local electors in England and Wales, only 18m are directly liable to pay rates, and rate rebates reduce the number paying the full rates to 12m.
Thus many electors can vote for extra spending knowing the cost will fall elsewhere.
Against these objections must be set the advantages of the rating system: payment is difficult to avoid, income is predictable, and collection is cheap and easy.
Reform of the rating system has long been on the political agenda.
In  1976 the Layfield Report,Local Government Finance , suggested that a local income tax should supplement the rates, although it listed many difficulties associated with such a venture.
However, a government Green Paper,Local Government Finance (1977), issued in response, rejected this suggestion.
In 1981 the Thatcher government issued a further Green Paper,Alternatives to Domestic Rates .
This did not advocate a particular option but commented on specific alternatives (for example, local sales tax, local income tax, poll tax, an assigned share of national taxes) while ruling out others (for example , local duties on petrol, alcohol or tobacco, local vehicle excise duty; charges for licences for sale of alcohol or petrol; and a local payroll tax).
Two years later, however, in a further White Paper,Rates: Proposals for Rate Limitation and Reform of the Rating System (1983), the government recognized that wide consultation had failed to find any consensus for an alternative local tax, and conceded that rates should remain for the foreseeable future as the main source of local government revenue.
However, the issue was not settled and following a rating revaluation in Scotland, which caused much unrest, a further inquiry (the fourth in fifteen years) began, which resulted in the 1986 Green Paper, Paying for Local Government .
This heralded the possibility of major changes, notably:
(i)
A uniform business rate set by government with the proceeds distributed to all local authorities in proportion to the number of adults in their areas;
(ii)
a much simplified grant system;
(iii)
the replacement of domestic rates by a community charge which each authority would set and which would be paid by every adult (not just householders) resident in its area.
(Subsequently, the government proposed exempting the mentally ill and elderly people living in homes and hospitals; and also allowing a discount for students and the less well off; see Paying for Local Government-the Community Charge , 1986.)
These new arrangements will be introduced in one stage in Scotland and Wales, in 1989 and 1990 respectively.
In England there was to have been a four-year transitional period, commencing in 1990, during which the community charge would have been gradually introduced and rates phased out, but the Secretary of State, in response to pressure from his own party, agreed late in 1987 that with the exception of a handful of London boroughs (where some flexibility remains) the community charge should be introduced throughout England in 1990 without any phasing-in period.
These proposals were enshrined in the 1988 Local Government Finance Act.
These changes put forward by the government are extremely  controversial.
In their favour it can be stated that the consultation process which followed the publication of Paying for Local Government showed twice as many people wanting to abolish the rates as wishing to keep them.
The community charge, which received most support as a replacement, would arguably be more fair and enhance local accountability by ensuring that all local electors contributed towards the cost of local services.
However, critics point to the regressive nature of the community charge — apart from specified categories who will receive exemption or discounts (for example, students) everyone in an area will pay the same regardless of income — and the difficulties and expense of administration and collection.
The retention of the business rate, moreover, will perpetuate many of the inherent problems of the rating system, and — in so far as this will be set by Whitehall — will increase the potential for central control of local finances.
In Wilson's view (1986, p. 64) what is proposed does not form the basis ‘for a generally acceptable…durable system’ and ‘there seems no escape from the conclusion that another attempt will have to be made to review these issues and make fresh recommendations’.
If this view is correct the debate about reforming the rating system may continue well beyond the enactment of the Local Government Finance Act, 1988.
(2) Grants
Grants can be paid to support both capital and revenue expenditure, although today capital grants are relatively unimportant.
About a quarter of exchequer support is paid over in the form of specific or supplementary grants .
These are tied to particular services and in most cases reimburse individual authorities for a fixed percentage of their expenditure on the service concerned.
Most important, however, is the rate support grant, which accounts for around 75 per cent of the total grant paid to local authorities and is paid over to individual authorities as a block sum.
It consists of two elements:(i)domestic rate relief , paid to enable authorities to relieve domestic ratepayers of a certain proportion of their rates (currently 18.5p in the);(ii)block grant, intended to supplement an authority's own finances so that, irrespective of individual local needs and resources, it can provide a similar standard of service for a similar rate poundage to other authorities of the same class.
It can be spent on any service(s), as an authority wishes.
Each year following discussions in the Consultative Council on Local Government Finance, central government calculates a) the total amount of revenue spending it will accept for grant purposes (relevant expenditure); and b) the percentage of relevant expenditure to be financed by grant.
After climbing steadily over the years, the percentage supported by government reached a peak in England and Wales of 66.5 per cent in 1975/6.
Subsequently, however, it was reduced as part of central government public expenditure restraint policies and by   
National Rate Support Grant Settlement 1987/8
1987/8 had fallen to 47.5 per cent(46.3 per cent for England; and 66.7 per cent for Wales).
Following these calculations the government deducts the value of specific and supplementary grants (including domestic rate relief grant) and distributes the remainder as block grant (see Table 8.1).
In practice, as ‘over-spending’ authorities lose grant (see pp. 199–200), the amount distributed is less than this.
From 1987/8 this money returns to the Treasury (formerly it went into a national pool for recycling to authorities).
Government grants to local authorities have now been paid for well over a century.
The justification for them is well established: many local government services are required by national legislation, local variations in needs and resources can be equalized by grant adjustments, the impact of the regressive rating system can be reduced, and so on.
Politically, however, their main effect during the twentieth century has been to make local government financially dependent upon the centre.
From the Second World War the percentage of local government income derived from grants increased steadily and although the proportion began to fall during the 1980s (as a result of public expenditure restraint policies) it is still sufficient to provide central government with a powerful instrument for influencing local authorities.
In recent years, moreover, a growing proportion of total grant has been contributed by specific grants (17.6 per cent in England, 1981 /2; 25.6 per cent in 1987/8), which — being tied, unlike block grant, to specific services — leave authorities with less discretion to determine spending priorities.
(3) Charges
Income from charges is derived from fees, rents, tolls, fares, interest, etc.
Obviously, the amounts received by individual authorities vary widely, according to the type and range of chargeable services provided, and the levels at which charges are set.
The latter is in some cases  subject to statutory regulation, in others it is a matter of local discretion.
CAPITAL FINANCE
Capital account expenditure by local authorities (6.9bn in England 1984/5) is usually spent on longer-term items such as the purchase, construction or improvement of land, property, equipment and so forth.
The capital income used to finance that income (7.0bn in 1984/5) can be raised from several sources including 1)capital grants from the government or, occasionally, other bodies (such as the Sports Council); 2)sales of land, property, equipment and so on; and 3)loans .
Both because of the long-term nature of the investments and the large sums involved, most capital expenditure has traditionally been financed through borrowing.
There are, however, central government controls on what councils may borrow, and loan sanctions must usually be obtained from ministers.
Because of tightening central government controls on borrowing, the proportion of local authority capital income derived from borrowing fell sharply during the 1970s and 1980s (from 83.7 per cent in 1974/5 to 48.4 per cent in 1984/5)(all figures for England are calculated from Travers, 1986, tables, App. 4 and 5).
In order to compensate, local authorities increasingly financed capital (expenditure) out of current revenues (rates and charges) and — particularly after 1980 with the Thatcher government's emphasis on council housing and land sales — with capital receipts from disposal of assets.
While revenue contributions inevitably increased burdens upon ratepayers, and asset sales produced a ‘once only’ financial benefit (as well as being politically unpalatable to many, notably Labour-controlled, authorities) this was the perhaps inevitable response of local authorities seeking to free themselves from centrally-imposed borrowing restrictions (as well as the high cost of borrowing after the mid-1970s).
Even so, total local authority borrowing is enormous.
In 1985 local authorities (England and Wales) had a gross loan debt outstanding of 42.3bn and total loan charges for the year serviced from revenue account amounted to 5.03bn (far more than revenue expenditure on major services such as police (3.3bn) and social services (2.98bn).
(Annual Abstract of Statistics , 1987 edn, CSO, tables 16.13, 16.15.)
The level of loan charges, moreover, is largely beyond local government's control, varying according to interest rates.
As debt must be serviced to avoid defaulting on creditors, planned ‘cuts’ in local expenditure particularly in periods of rising interest rates — invariably have to fall on other revenue items, such as salaries, running costs and services.
By the early 1980s the combined effect of several years of high interest rates, tight centrally-imposed borrowing limits and progressive sharp falls in  the level of revenue expenditure borne by block grant, were placing increasingly onerous burdens on ratepayers.
In some areas rate levels were already beyond the limits which were regarded as socially and politically acceptable.
It is in this context that the debate about rating reform, and the controversy surrounding increased central control of local expenditure, should be seen.
9 INSIDE LOCAL GOVERNMENT
The apparently straightforward pattern depicted on formal committee and management charts massively oversimplifies the internal working of local authorities.
At a basic level informal as well as formal relationships must be considered, as must political as well as administrative dimensions.
Widdicombe (1986, vol. 1, table 2.1) revealed that in 1985 the proportion of councils in party political control had risen to 84 per cent, hence in ‘many, perhaps most…councils the party group’ which rarely figures on organization charts —‘has become the focus of political decision’(Alexander, 1982a, p. 97).
This chapter looks inside local government at internal authority organization, at officer councillor relationships and at the distribution of power inside the town hall.
Formal structures
While the administrative style of local authorities varies enormously all conduct their work through: a) meetings of the council, consisting of all elected members; and b) committees and sub-committees consisting of small groups of members whose numbers and designations differ from authority to authority.
(Some committees also include non-councillors; notably police committees, one-third of whose members are drawn from non-elected local magistrates.)
Some committees focus on single services (such as housing or education) and are frequently called vertical committees; others, usually known as horizontal committees, deal with a single aspect of all services (such as personnel, finance).
The trend in recent years has been towards establishing more horizontal committees in the interests of greater internal co-ordination.
Even so, the committee system — where political control of policy and administration for each service is vested collectively in a group of councillors — offers a sharp contrast with the ministerial system in central administration.
As Alexander (1982a, p. 121) puts it, ‘the committee system of decision-making which predominates in British local government makes no provision for a political executive, either individual or collective’.
The committee system generally ensures detailed coverage of council business.
Different items can be dealt with concurrently in different committees and the relative informality of proceedings  encourages frank discussion by councillors and officers alike.
Indeed, by enabling them to work together in committee — often over many years — the system facilitates contact between officers and councillors.
Likewise, because committees usually contain members of different parties with different degrees of seniority and influence, contact is also facilitated between councillors of different political standing and party affiliation.
One danger, however, is that committee loyalties might become too strong, causing members to become isolationist or even antagonistic to other service areas, thereby making an integrated authority-wide approach more difficult to obtain.
Just as committee systems vary between authorities, so too do departmental patterns.
As in central government, the functional principle of allocation (see Chapter 2) is widely used, with departments having responsibility for particular services (education, housing, social services, and so forth); however, in local government allocation by process is also quite widespread, with departments of engineers or architects, for example , providing specialist services throughout their authority.
Although invariably fewer, smaller, and less multifunctional than central governmental departments, the differences are relative and problems of co-ordination both within and between departments are nevertheless frequently found within local authorities.
While formal management and committee structures require study, informal relationships are also crucially important.
At the local level, where departments are often housed in the same buildings, and where officers and councillors — as well as prominent local interest group officials, journalists, council ‘clients’(headmasters, businessmen, builders, and so on)— live in the same locality, the informal dimension is especially important and should not be obscured by undue emphasis on formal hierarchies.
Corporate planning
The fragmentation of council functions between different departments and committees produced in many authorities prior to the 1970s ‘a loose confederation of disparate activities’ which, in the view of the Maud Committee on the Management of Local Government (Maud Report, 1967, vol. 1), dispersed ‘responsibilities and scatter[ed] the taking of decisions’.
In some of the larger authorities, the committee found (vol. 5) that there were thirty or more committees and forty or more sub-committees, while in local government generally ‘there [was]hardly any systematic attempt at committee level to…coordinate policy as a whole’.
Sometimes finance committees exerted some degree of co-ordination but they were usually ill-equipped for the task, being primarily concerned with financial implications.
Consequently,
Maud recommended each authority to establish ‘a management board’ of between five and nine members to co-ordinate council work.
Committees would only be deliberative , making recommendations to the management board, which would perform functions similar to those of the Cabinet in central government.
The Maud Report provoked considerable hostility, particularly on the grounds of dividing councillors into first-class members (sitting on the management board) and second-class (backbench) members.
Not a single authority implemented Maud's ‘Cabinet style’ solution in its entirety; nevertheless, many streamlined their committee structures and some even established policy co-ordinating committees.
More generally, Maud generated a climate for greater integration, something which became particularly appropriate during the preparations for reorganization when two major committees (Bains for England and Wales, and Paterson for Scotland) were established to advise on management structures for the new local authorities.
The Bains Report (1972) and its Scottish equivalent, the Paterson Report (1973), both recommended a corporate approach to internal council management and policy-making.
At councillor level a Policy and Resources Committee was proposed to prioritize resources, coordinate policy, and control programme implementation throughout the authority.
To assist with these tasks each policy and resources committee was recommended to have four sub-committees: finance, land, personnel, and performance review.
At officer level there was to be a chief executive (in place of the former town clerk) whose role was to advise the Policy and Resources Committee and head a small management team (consisting mainly of chief departmental officers) which would prepare plans and programmes as well as co-ordinate policy implementation.
Bains also favoured committees based on broad programme areas and ‘serviced by several different departments and disciplines’ in place of the ‘traditional separatist structures’(Haynes, 1980, p. 54) whereby each service committee had tended to be associated with the appropriate functional department and its principal officer.
In the post-Bains era corporate structures have been widely adopted.
According to Greenwood et al .
(1980, p. 50), 95 per cent of authorities established policy committees and 98 per cent appointed chief executives and management teams.
Nevertheless, whether corporate planning has become a reality is a separate issue.
Powerful programme committees, and influential members serving on them, have sometimes been reluctant to defer to policy committees (particularly as many councillors still cling to the traditional view that co-ordination is the role of the full council).
Similarly, there has often been a reluctance by specialist departmental officers to accept the decisions of non-specialist chief executives and  management teams.
Consequently it has sometimes been difficult for the new patterns to establish themselves in the face of combined resistance from programme committees, established departments, and professional senior officers.
It also needs to be recognized that in some authorities — particularly small district councils where there are fewer personnel, resources and programmes — much co-ordinating work occurs informally and the elaborate corporate structures advocated by Bains are perhaps less appropriate.
Managerialist attitudes have also had an impact, with a few authorities (particularly on the radical right) preferring a managing director model, which downgrades corporate management and has sometimes undermined Bains-type arrangements even where they formally continue in existence.
Changes in attitude conducive to the development of a corporate approach would have been difficult to effect at any time.
During the post-reorganization climate of economic and financial stringency, however, where departmental and committee defences rise easily, it has been especially difficult.
Consequently, while corporate structures have developed apace since reorganization, it is questionable whether the corporate ethos has become deeply rooted.
Indeed, a few authorities have retreated from corporate structures-management teams have been disbanded and some chief executives dismissed.
The reason normally given is economy but the real cause is frequently a reassertion of anti-corporate attitudes.
The Widdicombe Report (1986, pp. 142–5), arguing from the standpoint that the ‘need for a more corporate approach to the officer structure had strengthened rather than weakened’ since Bains, recommended that all local authorities should be statutorily required to appoint a Chief Executive with considerably enhanced powers.
Other factors, of course, contribute to the difficulty of effecting a corporate approach.
Statutory obligations inhibit what is structurally possible; for example, non-metropolitan county councils must have education and social services committees.
There is also a fragmentary approach by central government to local authorities.
As the Central Policy Review Staff (1977, p. 22) noted, most circulars ‘relate to a single service and are drafted and circulated by the single department responsible’.
Corporate planning must also be seen in the context of party politics.
While decisions in a formal sense are taken corporately by, or on behalf of, the full council, in many authorities decisions are taken in practice on party lines.
Indeed, in its White Paper response to the Widdicombe Report (Department of Environment et al .,
1988) the government agreed in principle that officers' terms of service should be altered to allow them to attend party group meetings, subject to procedural safeguards.
This largely reflected the fact that in a significant minority of authorities — about 11 per cent— one-party policy and resources (or similar) committees are found, whilst in 64 per cent an informal ‘inner circle’ of the majority leadership meets regularly, usually in the presence of officers (Widdicombe, 1986, paras 5.56; 5.57).
Such arrangements perhaps offer the closest local government parallel to the Cabinet system enabling majority party leaders to formulate policy with the advice of officers.
Formally, however, most policy and resources committees are politically representative which coupled with access by press and public — often prevents frank discussion by controlling group members of planning, prioritization, and co-ordination in politically sensitive fields.
As a result, policy and resources committee proceedings have in many authorities become either duplicates of, or substitutes for, the work of the full council and the function of policy co-ordination has shifted to the party political groups, or to the chief executive and management team, or…both' (Alexander, 1982a, p. 91).
The 1988 White Paper Department of Environment et al .,
1988) also asserts that membership of decision-taking committees should reflect proportionately the political composition of the full council.
This provision will be implemented by law, not standing orders, and will effectively see the end of one-party committees in the vast majority of local authorities.
The government also agrees that there should be a ban on co-option with voting rights to decision-taking committees, but this will not apply to magistrates appointed to police committees, church representatives on education committees, or local committees managing specific council facilities.
Councils will be allowed to appoint non-voting advisers to committees who must have relevant expertise or experience and not be disqualified from council membership — except in the case of teachers on education or library committees.
It should be stressed that a local authority's corporate planning is only one variable in securing efficient management within a local community.
There are a range of bodies other than local councils responsible for the provision of local services which, coupled with the tiered nature of much of elected local government, makes a community-wide approach to management almost impossible.
Developing inter-governmental as well as inter-authority networks is crucial if real co-ordination of local services is to be effected.
While an authority's management style is usually affected by environmental factors there always remains an element of choice.
There can never be a purely mechanistic relationship between an organization and its environment.
Party political factors, professionalism and the dispositions of key personalities all usually have some bearing on internal management structures.
The advocates of ‘rational administration’ remain just one voice amongst many.
Councillors
SOCIAL CHARACTERISTICS
While councillors are representative of their local communities they are certainly not socially representative of the population.
Widdicombe (1986, vol. 2), found 81 per cent of councillors were male and only 19 per cent female; the report showed that 59 per cent of councillors came from three socio-economic groups (professional, employers and managers, intermediate non-manual) who contribute 23 per cent of the population.
Some 22 per cent of councillors had a degree or equivalent qualification compared to only 5 per cent of the general population.
The majority of councillors were aged 45 or over with none under 24, the oldest being 85.
As these figures suggest, councillors are predominantly male, middle-aged, and middle-class to a far greater extent than the population as a whole.
To a large extent this social unrepresentativeness reflects some of the structural inequalities of contemporary society.
For example, the constraints of women's lifestyles and their domestic and family responsibilities often mean that they are effectively discriminated against in terms of availability for election and service.
Similarly, the pattern of afternoon meetings, still found in many authorities, discourages certain sections of the community, including all those with ‘normal’ working hours and, again, women with family responsibilities, from offering themselves as candidates.
Council work is currently essentially unpaid and the heavy workload involved makes service less attractive for people with young families, who are also building careers.
Widdicombe found that councillors spent,on average , seventy-four hours per month on council duties.
Party leaders and committee chairmen spent a good deal more.
The middle-class skills — such as public speaking — required to be an effective councillor may also discourage many manual workers.
It must nevertheless be stressed that the figure above is an average; individual localities often have distinctive patterns, and many Labour dominated authorities do have a high proportion of working-class councillors.
Do the trends revealed above have any significance for the outputs and conduct of local government?
In one sense it can be argued that generalizations are of little use.
Councillors are not a homogeneous, undifferentiated grouping; their interests, outlooks and backgrounds vary enormously.
There are disagreements between councillors of the same party just as there are disagreements between those of opposing parties.
Such disagreements may stem from a variety of causes: ideological perspectives, ward and area considerations, seniority (old v. young), status (chairmen/spokesmen v. backbenchers), committee  and pressure-group loyalties, or simply politicking or ‘bloody mindedness’.
As Newton (1979, p. 112) observes, there are also varying ability levels.
While some of the ‘ordinary members’ may accurately be depicted as ignorant and unintelligent, ‘council leaders are more usually of a much higher calibre’.
Increasingly, moreover, in the larger authorities council leaders and key committee chairmen effectively work full time — a development given some impetus by the introduction of Special Responsibility Allowances (SRAs) for senior councillors in 1980 (Skelcher, 1983; Widdicombe 1986, vol. 2).
Compositional trends, however, should not be dismissed too easily.
As Byrne (1986, p. 127) asks, ‘does the lack of women councillors explain the apparent inadequacy of nursery provision, while there is an arguably ample supply of municipal golfing facilities?’
Social elitism, it is frequently asserted, effectively squeezes out working-class interests.
Indeed Dearlove (1979, p. 245) maintains that part of the case for reorganizing local government in 1972 and creating larger units was ‘to make local government more functional for dominant interests’(that is, less accessible to working-class representation).
Social elitism, however, needs to be distinguished from political elitism: Labour and Conservative councillors on a local authority could easily have relatively similar (and relatively elitist) social backgrounds but very different political priorities.
The political/ideological dimension is perhaps a more crucial factor than social background in determining policy priorities, although the two can never be entirely disentangled.
Perhaps, ultimately, the issue is this: there is nothing amiss with manual workers (or any other grouping) being councillors, provided they can control their officers.
If they cannot, councillors develop policy only in so far as the bureaucracy permits.
Training for new councillors might, in this context, be a useful resource but, as Greenwood and Wilson (1987a and 1987b) show, most training is lamentably inadequate, not least because chief officers and senior councillors are often unenthusiastic about new councillors being too well briefed.
Payment for councillors might also persuade more working-class representatives to come forward.
Indeed, the attendance allowance system has made it possible for councillors from a broader social range to serve on local authorities but this is far removed from receiving a salary.
REPRESENTATIONAL ROLES
The literature often focuses excessively upon officer-councillor relationships, thereby overlooking the very different roles which councillors themselves adopt.
As Jennings (1982, p. 67) has observed, most councillors are backbenchers, not policy-makers, and about the only vital service they see themselves doing is casework for their  constituents.
This generalization, however, needs refining.
Jones (1973, pp. 135–46) provides a useful quantification of roles, arguing that three broad categories are identifiable:(i) 75 per cent are mainly concerned with representing ward and constituents' interests;(ii) 5 per cent serve as general policymakers;(iii) 20 per cent serve as policymakers in specific service areas.
Newton (1976, ch. 6) offers an even more detailed classification of councillors, based on his study of Birmingham:
(i)
parochials — whose world is largely bounded by the ward, individual constituents and their problems (15 per cent of sample were in this group);
(ii)
people's agents — similar to the above, but for this group ideology is more important.
They see themselves as protecting citizens' interests rather than as delegates (18 per cent);
(iii)
policy advocates — a preference for policy matters on a city-wide not a ward perspective.
Strong ideological orientations (24 per cent)
(iv)
policy brokers — similar to policy advocates but essentially moderates, compromisers and bargainers (20 per cent)
(v)
policy spokesmen — concerned with broad policy matters but also seeing themselves as delegates.
By speaking on behalf of their constituents they occasionally thereby disagree with aspects of party policy (8 per cent).
Such classifications inevitably simplify reality, but it is clear that different members may hold very different views about the role of local councillors.
PARTY GROUPS
The Widdicombe Report (1986, para. 6.57) showed that 85 per cent of councillors are elected in the name of a political party.
In some authorities this party dominance has been reflected in formal structures by the formulation of one-party committees or sub-committees, although this remains the exception rather than the rule (Widdicombe, 1986, vol. 1, p. 34).
More usually formal committees have remained politically representative, with the main focus of organized party activity being reflected in party groups.
Groups are now an integral part of most local authorities although operational styles vary enormously.
Overall, 4 per cent of groups meet weekly, 38 per cent every two to four weeks, and 58 per cent less often.
Labour groups meet significantly more frequently than Conservative groups (Widdicombe, 1986, para. 6.59).
In authorities where there are party groups it is  almost universal practice for the group to meet before meetings of full council and for group decisions to be binding on members at full council meetings, although there is often (but not always) a more relaxed attitude to voting discipline in committees (see Widdicombe, 1986, vol. 1, tables 2.3–2.6).
Although party politics, particularly in urban areas, has long been a feature of local government, its extension after 1974 — mainly a product of the larger authority areas created by reorganization — has helped to transform the operating style of many authorities.
Today many decisions are taken in private party meetings, only very occasionally with officers in attendance and then normally only for specific items.
Even so it is possible to exaggerate the  contribution of party groups to the policy-making process.
Alexander (1982a, p. 198), for example, argues that this ‘is more often than not reactive rather than initiative.
Except where the controlling group comes to power with a programme worked out in detail, the relationship between professional expertise and political organisation will ensure that much of the business of the authority will be generated by officers’.
In conformity with this view Green (1981, p. 62) saw Newcastle's ruling Labour group as ‘a receiving shop, serving to legitimate decisions taken elsewhere’.
Neither Jones (1969) in his study of Wolverhampton, nor Bulpitt (1967) in his analysis of a number of north-west Labour parties, could find evidence of party groups undertaking a successful policy formulation role.
On the other hand Wiseman (1963) found a highly influential Labour group in Leeds City Council.
It is clearly a mistake to generalize from a few examples.
Every party group is unique, not only in terms of composition but also in its conventions and working practices.
For example, while most meet in the absence of officers, Widdicombe (1986, paras 6.173–77) found that the chief executive ‘always’ attended in I per cent of authorities and was present occasionally in 27 per cent .
Again, in 72 per cent of cases non-councillors attend group meetings and in 11 per cent these may include council employees who are also party members.
The Government's 1988 White Paper (Department of Environment et al .,
1988) backed Widdicombe's call that national political parties should ensure that only councillors vote at party group meetings and a public list of all attending is made available.
In some groups backbenchers may be largely unimportant; in others they may be able to play a decisive role in promoting policy initiatives.
Davies (1979 and 1981), in a study of Wandsworth, describes how a small number of newly elected backbench councillors in the controlling Labour group crucially developed a whole range of new planning and industrial policies.
They persuaded party leaders and the party group to adopt the initiative and subsequently took an important role in the process of implementation.
Clearly group decisions can be  decisive in some authorities and on some issues.
As Stoker and Wilson note (1986, p. 292) while ‘over many issues and for much of the time the group may simply endorse decisions taken elsewhere, at the very least senior councillors and officers must be careful not to offend the core political values and commitments of backbenchers’.
Officers
Unlike civil servants, local authority employees are not part of a single unified service: each council employs its own staff.
Altogether, in 1987 some 2.35m people were employed by English, Welsh and Scottish local authorities, engaged in a range of occupations from architects, engineers and accountants to labourers, dustmen and park attendants.
Although local authorities have considerable discretion in staffing matters, some officers must statutorily be appointed.
For example, non-metropolitan counties and metropolitan districts are required to appoint chief education officers and directors of social services.
Traditionally, local authority employees are categorized into officers (20 per cent of all employees: professional, technical and clerical staff) and servants (50 per cent, incorporating manual workers such as cleaners and road labourers).
Additionally, some 30 per cent of local authority employees (teachers, firemen and police) form a third category.
It is, however, the first category, officers, who form what is known as the local government service: it is these who have most contact with councillors and who perform primary policy advisory and managerial roles.
As with civil servants, officers in local government have both a managerial role — being responsible for the efficient running of their department- and a policy-advisory function.
However, unlike their counterparts in central government, where top civil servants are usually generalists, chief officers in local government are normally specialists.
Generally at the head of each department is a chief officer with appropriate technical qualifications who advises councillors and implements policy in fields relating to his specialism.
In local government it is extremely difficult for a non-specialist to reach chief officer status.
As Poole (1978, p. 43) observes, the local government administrator typically works ‘as a subordinate of the specialist, relieving him of those tasks which have not called for specialist experience and qualifications’.
In one other respect, too, local government officers offer a contrast with central government.
While they are politically neutral they are not anonymous; they may speak in public at committee and other meetings, and often acquire public prominence within their locality.
The distinctiveness of localities and the relative freedom which  authorities now enjoy in staffing means that generalizations are dangerous.
Nevertheless, specialist officers invariably have loyalties to their profession as well as to their employing authority and this further weakens the concept of a unified service.
It can also lead to narrowness in that staff may have technical and specialist information in a single field but little concern or understanding about the work of other departments.
Narrowness not only increases co-ordination difficulties between departments but is not conducive to corporate planning.
Specialists, moreover, often build their careers by moving from one authority to another rather than by climbing within one authority.
This, at times, can cause instability within an authority, although, equally, mobility can bring new ideas.
The mobility of specialists, moreover, needs to be seen against the ‘localist’ orientations of councillors and administrators.
Since Bains an increasing amount of chief officers' time has been devoted to liaison with other departmental heads to formulate corporate strategies.
In this context working relationships are extremely important.
Whatever management structures are created in the interest of co-ordination, ‘personality’ remains an important variable.
While academic literature is full of material on officer-councillor relationships, relatively little is known about relationships between departmental chiefs within the same authority, but these, obviously, can be of crucial significance.
Chief officers also liaise with other administrative units operating in the locality (such as the field offices of central government departments along with health and water authorities) and there are also important linkages with other councils, members of the public, and local pressure groups (such as ratepayers' action groups, local trade union branches, tenants' associations).
The work of a senior local government officer is, therefore, far broader than the confines of a single department or even a single local authority.
The government's 1988 White Paper in response to Widdicombe rejected Widdicombe's central recommendation of a powerful chief executive with statutory powers and protection to ensure the council's legal probity and managerial effectiveness.
Instead the government called for each council to appoint an officer responsible for reviewing the propriety and legality of council business who would be under statutory duty to report if an action or decision was likely to be improper or unlawful.
It also called for an officer to be designated as responsible for advising on management of council services (Department of Environment,et al .,
1988).
It appears that the Widdicombe recommendation to give statutory powers to chief executives was rejected because most chief executives did not want them and politicians were cautious of such powers in the hands of one officer (see Local Government Chronicle , 29July 1988, pp. 8, 9).
Officer-councillor relationships
VARYING PERSPECTIVES
One particularly crucial relationship at local authority level is that between officers and councillors, but there is no uniform pattern.
Relationships vary between as well as within local authorities.
There are also varying relationships between different policy fields.
Chief Constables, for example, are n a different position from other chief officers by holding executive authority in their own right (and not derived from councillors), an arrangement which lies at the heart of suggestions that the police are less accountable for their actions than other local-authority employees (Oliver, 1987).
Relationships in a single policy area also vary over time according to the issues and personalities involved.
One must, therefore, beware of generalizations.
As Newton (1976, p. 147) notes, the literature ‘includes case studies of powerful officers, and powerless ones, as well as the conclusion that it all depends on the department’.
Two distinctive themes have, however, been dominant in recent years:(i) the ‘formal’ stance, that councillors make policy and officers simply implement it;(ii) the ‘dictatorship of the official’thesis which holds that officials, with their technical expertise, are dominant in policy formulation.
Such dichotomous standpoints are, however, somewhat misleading since both groups are involved in policy formulation.
As Collins, Hinings and Walsh note (1978, p. 34), ‘The evidence of the various case studies in local government leads not to the question of whether officers or members control but rather in what ways both are involved in the process of developing and administering policy ?’
FORMAL AND INFORMAL RELATIONSHIPS
Recent studies have suggested that the ‘formal’ stance outlined above is largely redundant, although the reassertion of political control, particularly by the ‘new urban left’, perhaps suggests that it would be premature to ignore it totally.
Given the technical, specialist nature of much contemporary local government activity, officers are clearly often very important.
Yet, as Newton (1976, p. 148) reminds us, while the ‘dictatorship of the official’ thesis has ‘a certain commonsense plausibility…it has very little empirical evidence to support it…because little research has been done on the subject’.
At a formal level the council and its committees meet, with officers in attendance, to consider reports prepared by officers usually incorporating recommendations for action, but precise working relationships vary enormously.
In some authorities officers intervene in discussions at will whereas in others more formal rules apply.
At an informal level officers and  councillors meet frequently at civic functions, receptions and so forth as well as before and after official meetings, and this too, serves to blur the formal relationship between them.
OFFICER-COUNCILLOR RESOURCES
(i)
The professionalism of officers provides a level of technical expertise which councillors frequently lack.
Nevertheless, councillors, through lengthy service on committees, may acquire considerable knowledge of certain subject areas.
Many councillors, moreover, are builders, businessmen, transport workers, accountants and so forth who may have appropriate specialist knowledge.
Councillors can also be advantaged by their knowledge of local circumstances and because the mobility of senior officers often exceeds that of senior councillors.
Indeed in many authorities permanence may be characteristic more of councillors and committee chairmen than the nominally ‘permanent’ officials who advise them.
(ii)
The officers' control of information is particularly important.
Officers collect and present material both to committees and to the whole council.
There are obvious dangers of distortion, omission or misrepresentation, not necessarily for sinister reasons but more likely because of subconscious or professional bias.
Moreover, as Gyford notes (1976, p. 45), ‘officers may also be able to participate in…decision taking by suggesting the appropriate wording of resolutions or amendments and…by…drafting’ minutes of meetings.
Nevertheless, councillors do have access (via pressure groups, the media, party research departments and so on) to alternative sources of information which can, in certain circumstances, enable them to challenge officers successfully.
Likewise, the accumulated experience of councillors in specific functional areas, coupled with their local knowledge, means that, on occasions, they are a force to be reckoned with.
(iii)
Considerable influence accrues to officers in implementing council policy .
Typically, councillors are part-time and serve on only a few committees.
They therefore rarely see ‘the complete picture’ and tend to lose track of an issue once discussion of it has been concluded.
Usually they have few opportunities to check that their instructions are being pursued and almost none to supervise their execution at first hand.
On key issues, or those with important constituency ‘angles’, assiduous councillors will take every opportunity to ascertain progress.
On less important issues, however, not only councillors but sometimes whole committees may ‘lose track’ of implementation, particularly in  larger authorities where there are frequently many pressing problems.
Consequently, not only may inadvertent delay or failure to implement decisions go undetected but officers may attempt to ‘amend’ or ‘shelve’decisions which they dislike (see Greenwood and Wilson, 1982).
CHIEF OFFICER — CHAIRMAN RELATIONSHIPS
The most crucial relationship is that between committee chairman and chief officer.
This in many ways resembles the minister-civil service relationship (see Chapter 5) with the chairman performing a quasi-ministerial role.
The specialism of chief officers and the part-time nature of council service, however, makes the chairman's role arguably more difficult than that of ministers.
On the other hand, policymaking is relatively less complex at the local level, and in many authorities a committee chairman may have acquired considerable specialist knowledge by holding the chairmanship — or serving on the committee concerned-for many years.
Frequently, at pre-committee ‘agenda meetings’ the chief officer goes through recommendations pointing out difficulties and likely contentious items.
A close working relationship is crucial if policy is to develop smoothly and clearly.
Informal linkages often develop because of the frequency of their meetings and the closeness of their working relationship, something fraught both with dangers and opportunities (see Elcock, 1986, ch. 4).
In Birmingham, Lambeth and Croydon the relationship between officers and councillors certainly appears to have been more equal than the ‘dictatorship of the official’ thesis would suggest.
As we have seen, councillors sometimes do have resources (such as experience or local knowledge) to call upon when they confront experts.
These resources are not, by any means, negligible and ‘they are least negligible for the members who generally fill the most important positions’(Newton, 1976, p. 164).
One change which, if implemented, could increase the influence of councillors, would be some form of payment.
As already observed, many councils have members who are effectively full-time (pensioners, housewives, and so forth).
Since 1974 councillors have been entitled to claim an attendance allowance for approved duties (up to a maximum 16.70 per day in 1987).
The average payment made in 1985 was 852 although this obviously concealed considerable variations.
Almost all who commented to the Widdicombe Committee regarded the remuneration of councillors as ‘unsatisfactory both in terms of the basis of payment and the level of payment’(Widdicombe 1986, para. 6.94) and the Committee recommended a basic flat-rate payment and a special responsibility allowance.
Both should vary, it argued, according to the size of authority, with the flat rate ranging from  1,500 p.a. in the smallest to 4,000 p.a. in the largest authorities (Widdicombe, 1986, para. 6.113).
In its 1988 White Paper in response to Widdicombe (Department of Environment et al .,
1988) the government agreed that attendance and financial-loss allowances should be replaced by a basic flat-rate allowance, but not at rates proposed by Widdicombe.
Total expenditure on the scheme should not exceed current expenditure on allowances.
Additionally, the new flat rate should vary by types of authority, not by population.
Whether such sums are sufficient to enable councillors to spend more time becoming more involved in local policy-making is open to question especially given the ‘career building’ problem outlined earlier.
The 1980 Local Government Planning and Land Act gave local authorities the power to pay ‘special responsibility allowances’(SRAs) to their leading members (usually party leaders and committee chairmen).
Widdicombe (1986, para. 6.92) showed that only 43 per cent of local authorities paid special responsibility allowances.
The average payment was 518 p.a.,(1,402 for leaders, 572 for opposition leaders and 501 for committee chairmen).
Widdicombe proposed (para. 6.109) that SRAs should continue but that local authorities should not have the discretion to opt out.
Each local authority, it was suggested, should statutorily be required to draw up a scheme for the disbursement of special responsibility allowances.
This should specify the amounts payable for particular posts and all councillors holding posts stipulated in the scheme should be entitled to claim the amount specified.
The principle seems to be that those people exercising substantial responsibility in local government should be paid accordingly.
In this context neither the attendance allowances nor the SRAs are sufficiently realistic.
A CHANGING ROLE FOR CHIEF OFFICERS: PROFESSIONAL ADVISORS OR PROFESSIONAL BUREAUCRATS?
The relationship between officers and councillors, like that between ministers and civil servants, is of crucial importance.
However, whereas civil servants work exclusively for ministers- and are not usually available to assist the opposition or backbench MPs — local government officers, in keeping with the corporate nature of council decision-making, serve the council as a whole.
Constitutionally chief officers are not responsible to the ruling group or committee chairmen, but to the whole council which they are obliged to keep informed of facts, law and all other considerations relevant to decision-making.
As such they will normally give advice to individual councillors and parties, as well as the full council and committees.
In practice, of course, these constitutional norms fit uneasily  alongside the realities of political life, especially in those authorities divided on party lines.
As Laffin and Young (1985) observe, the break up of the post-war consensus, coupled with the passing of the earlier period of growth and the increased politicization of local government, has made the officer's professional stance increasingly difficult to sustain.
A majority group inevitably feels, politically if not constitutionally, that it has prior claim on officer advice and loyalty, and a right to expect that professional judgements should be subordinated to party policy.
In some of the more highly politicized authorities ‘an unhealthy atmosphere of suspicion’ has developed, with some officers — even some chief executives —‘being labelled as political appointees’(Widdicombe, 1986, para. 6.191).
Even in ‘hung’ councils, where no party has control, senior officers, as Greenwood and Wilson (1986, p. 5) observe, ‘find it difficult to avoid being drawn into the political process’.
Compromises and deals have to be hatched and officers become the main repository of the views and demands of competing factions.
The position may be complicated still further in cases where an officer of one authority is a councillor in another.
In recent years the officers' freedom to divorce professional judgement from political calculation has, in many authorities, diminished sharply, and today's chief officers are increasingly coming ‘to see their role as less than that of a neutral professional or technocrat and more that of a bureaucratic politician’(Laffin and Young, 1985, p. 51).
The Widdicombe Committee's response (1986, ch. 6) to these developments was firmly to assert the need for officers to remain neutral and to serve the council collectively.
While accepting that officers must adapt to political reality — by, for example, being prepared when invited to attend party groups subject to certain safeguards — it rejected any move towards a ‘spoils system’ in local government, and recommended that principal officers should be prohibited from engaging in political activity, including standing for council office.
At the same time it recommended enhanced powers for chief executives to arbitrate in sensitive political matters: for example, applying the rules for party balance on committees, determining whether an individual council has a need to inspect a document or attend a meeting, and deciding which chief officers should attend party group meetings.
Significantly, however, it also recommended safeguards against the dismissal of chief officers including a proposal to prevent dismissal of a chief executive except on the vote of two-thirds of council membership.
As noted earlier, Widdicombe's proposals for a far more powerful chief executive were rejected by the government's 1988 White Paper (Department of Environment et al .,
1988).
Additionally, only the most senior officers in an authority (not all principal officers and above as Widdicombe proposed) will be banned from being members of other  main councils or being active politically.
Prohibition will apply to chief executives, chief officers, deputies and others who regularly advise or act on behalf of their councils.
The government estimates that at least 10,000 people will be prohibited from political activity — such individuals will also be prevented from speaking or writing on controversial issues unless the council deems it part of their job.
Employees of joint boards and joint committees will, if the White Paper is implemented, be allowed to be councillors in constituent authorities provided they are not nominated for board or committee membership, or are prohibited by their job.
Council employees will be restricted to twenty-six days' paid leave for duties as councillors.
Political advisers on the rates will not be allowed despite the committee's recommendation they should be available to all party groups.
Despite the changes outlined in the 1988 White Paper, chief officers in many authorities remain likely to experience continuing tensions between the professional requirements of neutrality and the political demands of councillors.
As Laffin and Young (1985, p. 59) conclude, ‘it is quite clear that chief officers are going to have to live with an increasingly uncertain and tempestuous political environment and any new ground rules will be of limited value’.
A FALSE DICHOTOMY?
To what extent is it realistic to see local political relationships in officer-council terms?
One of the underlying themes of corporate planning is the notion of partnership between officers and councillors.
Elected members and officers are now increasingly working together on council activities.
As Collins et al .,
(1978, p. 42) observe, what frequently happens is that ‘a joint councillor-officer elite arises, often in a very visible form, as the major power centre of the local authority’.
According to this school of thought there is neither the domination of an officer nor a member elite but rather the domination of an officer-member elite (see Saunders, 1980) but this joint-elite model can be criticized because it often assumes that, important as leading officers and councillors are, they have a monopoly of decision-making influence.
In other words, this model excludes from consideration the influences on policy-making which come from outside this officer–councillor elite (Wilson, 1988).
Any realistic model should incorporate more elements than simply the relative importance of leading officers and councillors, otherwise a distorted and simplistic picture of power inside local authorities will emerge.
Too often the literature gives the impression of leading councillors and officers being a united, cohesive group.
In practice, relationships are frequently characterized by tensions and conflicts.
Politicians do frequently reject plans presented to them by officers.
Additionally, it is  important to recognize that there are various other influences upon policy-making within the town hall.
On occasion the ruling party group as a whole , not just its leading councillors, can be crucial in decision-making (Stoker and Wilson, 1986).
Likewise tensions between departments and within specific departments can have important effects on policy.
In a ‘hung council’ deals hammered out between rival party groups can often have either a direct or indirect effect on local policy-making.
It is, therefore, necessary to move beyond the narrow officer-councillor confines and recognize that the internal world of local authorities is highly complex and diverse.
The above approach to the distribution of power inside local authorities leaves out of account the increasing influence of central government departments upon local authorities in crucial areas, notably finance (see Dunleavy and Rhodes, 1987).
Nevertheless, even given the increasing constraints imposed by the centre upon local authorities (see Chapter 10) it is still important to recognize that the centre only narrows the scope of decision-making — it does not determine it.
Internal administrative routines and power relationships affect local policy processes by modifying and mediating external influences, and they can also provide an independent dynamic of their own.
Perhaps local politics needs to be seen as a series of shifting alliances, varying over time and from issue to issue.
To distinguish too sharply between officers and councillors is frequently to distort reality (Laffin and Young, 1985; Laffin, 1986).
Senior elected and non-elected personnel might be dominant in some authorities on some issues but this is only one possible alliance; second-tier officers and party activists might combine effectively in other policy areas — the permutations are infinite.
While networks and alliances vary enormously, one conclusion is clear: there is far more to local authority decision-making than simply the officer-councillor dimension.
10 CENTRAL-LOCAL GOVERNMENT RELATIONSHIPS
Although local authorities are accountable to the local electorate, their powers and a significant proportion of their finance are derived ultimately from Parliament (which in practice is invariably dominated by government).
For local councillors this sometimes presents a stark dilemma: whether to put first the perceived interests of local people, or the directives and requests of central government.
Central-local relations, in fact, are crucial to understanding the way local government works and to recognizing its role within the wider administrative system.
Unfortunately the relationship is far from simple, being characterized, according to Rhodes (1981, p. 28), by ‘ambiguity, confusion and complexity’.
Relationships vary over time, from authority to authority and from service to service.
At one level, the scale of central intervention in local authorities can be measured; between 1979 and 1988 some fifty Bills having a direct effect on local government were laid before Parliament.
Some see such intervention as heralding the end of elected local government but, as Goldsmith (1986, p. xiv) observes: ‘Britain has not become a totally centralized state, nor is central government's control over local authorities’ activities yet total…
British local authorities still retain considerable discretion over the way in which they run their services and the level of service they provide'.
Central direction has increased since 1979 but local authorities are far more than simply field agents of central government departments.
There is a diversity and vitality that makes the study of central-local government relationships particularly fascinating.
This chapter begins by examining three analytical models and discusses their usefulness as tools for analysis.
Formal relationships are then examined, followed by a discussion of what happens in practice.
There is an account of the changing nature of central-local relations in the 1980s and, finally, some radical literature is examined and alternative analytical perspectives presented.
Analytical models
Until relatively recently central-local relationships were viewed rather simplistically in legal, institutional and financial terms.
This approach  not only ignored wider political and administrative factors but, as Regan (1983, p. 45) observes, was too limiting: it was unable to encompass the ‘variability, ambiguity, complexity and reciprocity’ that subsequent studies have suggested obtain in central-local relations.
Broadly speaking, three major models which attempt to offer insights into central-local relations can be identified, and these are discussed below.
THE AGENCY MODEL
This model sees local authorities as having a subordinate relationship to central government with little or no discretion in the task of implementing national policies.
This was the traditional view which held sway for many years.
Local authorities were subject not only to central government-initiated legislative changes, but financially were seen as increasingly dependent on central government grants.
As late as 1966 W. A. Robson wrote: ‘Local authorities have become subservient to the central government, mainly but not entirely because of their excessive dependence on central grants’(p. 149).
While Robson's view is, today, largely rejected by academic observers, the agency model is still widely adhered to by many practitioners at local level — both councillors and officers — who in the second half of the 1980s see central controls inhibiting their freedom to act in what they regard as the local interest.
The difficulty with the agency model is that it produces a somewhat ‘blinkered’ analysis of what is a highly complex relationship.
While local government, like all public authorities, is subject to Parliament, its relationship with government is not purely legalistic; political and administrative factors are also involved.
Likewise, the proportion of local government revenue income derived from central government has fluctuated sharply.
Between 1958/9 and 1979/80 it rose sharply (in England from 36.1 per cent to 48.5 per cent), but this did not automatically mean more central control, any more than the subsequent fall by 1984/5 to 39.2 per cent meant increased local freedom (all figures from Travers, 1986, table app. 7).
There is, furthermore, substantial empirical evidence of variations in local policy outputs.
In some areas the agency model holds good (for example, county councils serve as agents of the Department of Transport in constructing motorways and trunk roads) but in general it conveys an exaggerated picture of central domination, particularly as there is a great deal of evidence of continued local discretion in service provision.
Several studies, for example, show that policy outputs vary from authority to authority in a manner which is not simply related to differing resources or needs.
According to Boaden (1971), party control clearly affects   expenditure patterns.
He found that Labour councils spent more on education and built more council houses than Conservative councils.
Labour councils also paid higher subsidies in the housing field than other councils, irrespective of needs or resource availability.
Conservative councils, by contrast, spent more on police than Labour.
Alt (1971, p. 60) has likewise shown that before Health Service reorganization in 1974 there was a ‘consistent, positive and generally significant correlation between Labour representation and spending on local health services’.
Davies (1968 and 1972) develops similar themes in the context of social services.
Likewise, Duke and Edgell (1981), in a study of two northern cities, demonstrate the importance of local political control with reference to spending cuts.
Variations in Expenditure in Greater Manchester, 1987/88 ()
Distinguishing between a multiplicity of variables in accounting for policy variations is, of course, a hazardous exercise, but despite the methodological difficulties it seems clear that a simple agency model, with local authorities implementing national policies with little or no discretion, is far from accurate.
Table 10.1 illustrates this with reference to revenue expenditure on basic services by the ten district councils in the Greater Manchester area in 1987/8.
Similar variations  are evident on a national scale.
For example, in 1987/8 Bexley planned to spend 408 per head of its population on education while East Sussex budgeted only 213 (Source:Local Government Comparative Statistics 1988, CIPFA, 1988).
Case studies also reveal evidence of local discretion in other respects.
In numerous policy areas (such as smoke control, comprehensive education, selling council houses) central government has often been frustrated by local authorities.
Dearlove (1973, p. 20), for example, observed that the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea frequently ignored or resisted central government ‘advice and direction’.
He concluded: ‘The impact of central government upon day-to-day decisions of local authorities often depends on local responsiveness, and the preparedness of local authorities to accept advice or guidance’.
Distinctiveness, albeit within a framework established by the centre, appears to be an unmistakable feature of local policy-making.
THE PARTNERSHIP MODEL
A second model, often regarded as the ‘ideal’ at the local level, sees authorities as more or less co-equal partners of central government in providing services.
Traditional writers — noting the increased central constraints upon local government which have undoubtedly occurred during the twentieth century — often depicted a move from an earlier period of partnership to one of agent.
In fact, the partnership model, as Regan (1983, p. 46) puts it, ‘is so loose as to be almost vacuous’.
He continues:
Only in a formal constitutional sense are the government departments and the local authorities equal.
In the sense of working together on common tasks partnership is a banal truism — of course both central and local government are involved in education, housing, transport, social services etc. but having said that there is little else one can say under the umbrella of partnership.
For Regan, then, the partnership model is too imprecise to be a useful analytical tool; hence the need for an alternative insight.
THE POWER-DEPENDENCE MODEL
This model postulates that both central departments and local authorities have resources which each can use against the other and against other organizations.
In a sense this is a sophisticated variant of the partnership model, in that dependence is reciprocal.
However, the relationship is far more complex and varied than that postulated by the  partnership model.
Resources other than the legal/constitutional and financial are built into the model: for example, political, informational and implementational resources.
While there are likely to be inequalities in the distribution of the resources, these are not necessarily cumulative.
Rhodes (1979, pp. 29–31) observes:
The fact that a local authority or a central department lacks one resource does not mean that it lacks others.
One resource could be substituted for another.
For example, a central department lacking the constitutional/legal resources to prevent (or encourage) a specific local initiative can attempt to get its way by withholding (or supplying) financial resources.
Conversely, a local authority which has been refused financial resources can attempt to reverse this state of affairs by embarrassing the central department.
Press and television reports on the adverse consequences of the centre's decision may lead to the decision being reconsidered.
In this model power is seen in relative terms, hinging upon a process of bargaining and exchange.
The power-dependence model undoubtedly offers a useful analytical tool for exploring central-local relationships.
It reveals clearly that neither central nor local government should be seen as monolithic blocs and that the relationship varies according to the agencies, personnel, policy areas and goals involved.
For all its sophistication, however, it fails to place central-local relationships in the wider political and economic setting.
The focus is upon inter-organizational relationships, and changing political and economic circumstances receive insufficient emphasis.
As Dunsire (1982, p. 21) has written, ‘the bargaining network model has been made to look a little shop-soiled…
See how fiscal crisis and a streak of Thatcherite obduracy fills one's mind again with the ‘reality’ of the power of the state, when a government chooses to use it'.
In further reflection on his own model Rhodes (1986, p. 28) moves away from a concern with inter-organizational analysis to a focus upon policy communities.
He argues that the very phrase ‘central-local relationships’ suggests a bias towards the analysis of institutional relationships.
Such analysis, Rhodes maintains, ‘does not always provide an adequate account of policy systems…
Intergovernmental theory with its emphasis on fragmentation, professionalisation and policy network is more appropriate’.
Dissatisfaction with the models outlined above has led Chandler (1988a, p. 185) to put forward what he calls the stewardship model.
He regards the stewardship metaphor as useful in the sense that a steward is delegated considerable authority by his master to order his estates.
Chandler observes that the steward will on occasions consult with his  employer on how best he should manage his estate and may often wish to suggest new policies or point out deficiencies in existing strategies.
Chandler continues (p. 186):
A capable landlord will listen to the advice of his expert manager and may often be persuaded by his arguments.
The master, nevertheless, will always retain the power either to accept or reject the advice.
Should the steward fail to obey these orders he will be compelled to change his conduct or, like the councillors of Lambeth, Liverpool and Clay Cross, be removed from office.
The central-local relationship is dynamic and multi-dimensional, and no one model seems capable of portraying it in its entirety.
Of course, analysing any relationship depends upon the angle from which it is viewed.
Saunders (1982, p. 55) illustrates this with reference to a Conservative government committed to a monetarist economic strategy.
For the government, he writes,
the problem is how to develop and enforce policies involving cuts in services and reductions in the public sector workforce in the face of local resistance and antagonism on the part of Labour local authorities, public sector unions, organised groups of consumers of state services, and so on.
From the point of view of local Labour controlled councils, on the other hand, the problem is how best to counter central government policies and directives in order to fulfil election pledges and principled commitments to a ‘no cuts/no redundancies’ platform.
The ‘top-down’ view of central-local relationships can be very different from the ‘bottom-up’view; both perspectives require recognition.
The formal framework
This section examines formal relationships between central government and local authorities, an essential prerequisite to the analysis of actual working relationships on pp. 194–98.
LEGISLATION
The sovereignty of Parliament means that it can create, abolish or amend the powers of local authorities as it determines.
For example, the 1985 Local Government Act abolished the GLC and the six metropolitan counties with effect from I April 1986 and the 1988 Local Government Act abolished ILEA with effect from 1990.
While legislation  is, therefore, an obvious means of central control of local authorities, statute also serves to restrict the role of central government, as the Tameside dispute (1976) demonstrated.
Following reorganization the Labour-controlled Tameside Metropolitan District made arrangements for the introduction of comprehensive education, but in May 1976, shortly before the changeover was scheduled, the Conservatives won control of the local authority and they were pledged to retain some grammar schools.
In June 1976 the Labour Secretary of State for Education and Science issued Tameside a directive to proceed with comprehensive reorganization on the grounds that to do otherwise at such a late stage would be unreasonable.
This intervention was under Section 68 of the Education Act, 1944, which states that when a local authority is deemed by the minister to be acting unreasonably, intervention by the minister is appropriate.
Tameside resisted, and when the matter came before the courts the House of Lords determined that the minister's decision was invalid, holding that there was no basis upon which the Secretary of State could say that Tameside was acting unreasonably.
Legislation, as this case suggests, is not simply an instrument of central control; it can also protect local authorities against central direction which is not backed by statutory powers.
Goldsmith (1986, p. xv) observes that concern with legislation as a means of controlling central-local government relations and the parallel use of the courts to enforce government intentions has been a feature of post-1979 Conservative governments.
‘This rather formal approach contrasts neatly with the more informal approach generally adopted by central governments in their relations with local authorities in the years up to 1979’.
There is, perhaps, something of a different operating style to the pre-1979 era.
CIRCULARS
Circulars, issued by government departments to appropriate local authorities, are a major instrument of central-local communications.
(In the year ending April 1981, according to the DOE, 1,873 circulars and similar communications were issued to local authorities; however, in the following year the figure was only 592.)
Although they are often cited as an instrument of central control, their effectiveness is difficult to determine because individual local authorities- and sometimes even different departments within the same authority — react differently to them.
Indeed, many circulars do not contain central directives, and do not have statutory force, being issued simply for guidance and advice.
Moreover, as Richardson and Jordan (1979, p. 107) observe, circulars often follow exhaustive discussion ‘in the labyrinth of central/local consultative machinery’.
Consequently, it can be misleading to see  circulars as evidence of central departments attempting to regulate local authorities.
JUDICIAL CONTROL
Local authorities have no powers except those conferred upon them by statute, and when they take action which is not sanctioned by the law they are said to be acting ultra vires (beyond the powers).
Any councillors (or others) who support expenditure on ultra vires acts resulting in loss may be made financially responsible.
They might also be banned from holding public office for a period determined by the courts.
Ultra vires is obviously a restrictive doctrine (although local authorities are permitted to raise a 2p rate to finance functions not specifically authorized by statute).
Its effect is to expose to restraining action in the courts any local authority activity not backed by statutory authority.
One controversial instance of this occurred in 1981 when the Greater London Council's ‘Fare's Fair’ policy — which introduced heavy subsidization of London Transport fares from the rates — was declared illegal by the House of Lords.
In January 1983, however, the High Court ruled that the GLC had power to launch a similar plan designed to reduce London Transport fares by 25 per cent.
As this example suggests the use of the courts is highly controversial: the 1981 decision led to accusations that an ‘undemocratic’ court ruling had substituted the views of judges for those of councillors whose policies had been endorsed by the local electorate.
Grant (1986, p. 203) argues that the spillover into the courts of cases such as that cited above is ‘the direct and inevitable product of the worsening state of central-local relations’.
DEFAULT POWERS
These powers, granting a minister default powers over local authorities which, in his view, fail to provide a satisfactory service, are very rarely used.
A minister may temporarily remove a particular service from a local authority and administer it himself (or authorize someone else to act) if he is dissatisfied with a local authority's performance.
Two cases, Clay Cross (1972) and Norwich (1981–2), are particularly interesting: here, as with the GLC ‘Fare's Fair’ issue, the party-political dimension was very much in evidence.
(i) Clay Cross (1972)
This dispute arose when the Labour-controlled Clay Cross Urban District Council refused to operate provisions in the Housing Finance Act, 1972, requiring council house rents to be raised to the ‘fair rent’ level defined by the Act.
The Conservative government ultimately appointed a Housing Commissioner to take over responsibility for the housing function but in 1974 the local authority ceased to exist as a result of local government reorganization.
Eleven Clay Cross councillors were surcharged for the money which would have been obtained had the Act been implemented and they were also disqualified from holding public office for a period.
In practice, however, the commissioner found it difficult to operate because of non-cooperation by the council: the use of default powers may be clear in statute but implementation can be more problematic.
Rhodes (1981, p. 17) observes that ‘although central government has an impressive list of controls at its disposal they constitute only a potential for control’.
(ii) Norwich (1981–2)
One important default power is that contained in the Housing Act, 1980, which can be brought into effect whenever the minister considers that tenants are having difficulty in exercising their right to buy a council property ‘effectively and expeditiously’.
In December 1981 the Secretary of State for the Environment threatened to activate these default powers in Norwich, where the Labour-controlled city council had sold only 250 properties in the first year of the Act.
The minister's position was ultimately upheld by the Court of Appeal in February 1982.
In his judgment Lord Denning suggested that if Norwich would ‘get a move on’ in processing applications to buy there might be no need for the minister to act.
This in fact happened.
Norwich agreed to take on an extra twelve staff and to clear the backlog of applications.
DEPARTMENTAL INSPECTORS
The use of inspectors as a form of central supervision goes back to the Poor Law reform of 1834.
Basically only four local authority services are subject to oversight by inspectors: education, child care, police and fire.
While such inspectors are usually required to satisfy their departments that local services are provided efficiently and that minimum standards are being met, their role has increasingly been educative rather than coercive.
As Stanyer (1976, p. 223) observes, they ‘both educate and learn…and…can carry knowledge of best practice directly from one authority to another’.
APPELLATE FUNCTIONS OF MINISTERS
Some statutes require local authorities to submit schemes or orders to the relevant minister for approval (for example, structure plans) or confirmation (for example , compulsory purchase orders).
Likewise, ministers exercise various appellate functions in adjudicating between citizens and local authorities (such as appeals against a local authority's refusal of planning permission).
Despite the quasi-judicial character of the process it is likely that his appellate functions serve to ‘heighten a minister's perception of his supervisory role’(Boynton, 1982, p. 205).
FINANCE
Central government attempts to control local authorities by: a) carefully regulating the amount of money which they can spend locally, and b) scrutinizing the way in which money is actually spent.
The increasing dependence of local government on financial support from the centre has already been noted, and through a variety of devices central government now restricts local-authority revenue and capital expenditure (see pp. 198–205).
Although empirical research (for example, Boaden, 1971) suggests ‘that the financial relationship has [not]decreased the decision-making autonomy of individual authorities, it is generally believed in local government that it has led to increased, and increasing control over local government as a whole ’(Alexander 1982a, p. 148).
This section, however, only examines the scrutiny of local-authority expenditure.
Traditionally, government-appointed district auditors have been responsible for examining most local authority accounts.
The Local Government Act, 1972, allowed local authorities to choose between district auditors and private auditors (who needed to be approved by the secretary of state) but the Local Government Finance Act, 1982, removed an authority's right to choose its own auditor.
The Act also established an Audit Commission for Local Authorities in England and Wales which became operational in 1983.
Auditors are no longer employed by the Secretary of State, although the commission itself is appointed by the Secretary of State after consultation with local authority associations and professional accountancy bodies, and he is empowered to issue directions which the commission must observe.
The commission has responsibility for appointing auditors for local authorities using either the District Auditor service or auditors from the private sector.
Widely seen as part of the Thatcher government's policy of ‘privatization’, the 1982 Act effectively allows specific private auditors to be imposed upon local government.
It also requires auditors to satisfy themselves that the local authority concerned ‘has made proper arrangements for securing economy, efficiency and effectiveness in its use of resources’.
Once the proposals in the 1988 post-Widdicombe White Paper (Department of Environment et al .,
1988) are implemented councils will be required to circulate auditors' reports to all members and make them public.
Far from being the lap-dog of central government, however, the Audit Commission has often flexed its muscles against the centre as well as against local authorities.
Its 1986 report on community care, for example, criticized not only under-funding but the pattern of organizational fragmentation and confusion that began in central departments and worked its way down.
Likewise in the area of council housing the commission (1986) pointed to the crises of management and finance resulting partly from central government's tighter restrictions on capital expenditure (Gray and Jenkins, 1987, pp. 312–13).
The Audit Commission can, therefore, be something of a two-edged sword in the context of central-local relationships.
Working relationships
The formal legal framework of central-local relations needs to be set against actual working relationships.
These relationships are extremely complex and varied.
Griffith (1966), for example, showed that government departments varied enormously in the extent to which they sought to exercise control over local authorities.
However, three major types of relationship could be identified:
1
laissez-faire — in 1966 Griffith cited the Ministry of Health as a department which exercised minimum intervention.
2
regulatory — ensuring that minimum standards of service provision are maintained and occasionally enforcing national policies on local authorities (for example, the Home Office);
3
promotional — here the central department either persuades or forces local authorities to adopt and implement national policies (for example, the DES).
Developing this theme further, Regan (1977, p. 34) shows that there can also be markedly different outlooks in different parts of the same government department — for example, the ‘DES is not as promotional in the youth service as in primary education’.
This further reinforces the view that central government is not a monolith.
As Rhodes (1981p. 18) observes, ‘it is misleading to talk of central control.
Rather there are different types and degrees of control exerted by the various constituent units of central government’.
This point has been reinforced further by the findings of Goldsmith and Newton (1986) who show that, while the Thatcher government has been very directive towards local authorities on council house sales, by contrast it hardly involves itself in matters of environmental health (a reflection of the much lower priority the Thatcher government gives to this policy area).
‘Consequently, local authorities have somewhat greater discretion  in the environmental health area than they do in relation to council house sales’(p. 103).
In 1977, in similar vein, a report by the Central Policy Review Staff (1977) highlighted the great complexity which existed in channels of communication between central government departments and local authorities.
It showed that central government departments, in making and implementing policies, acted largely in isolation from each other and conducted their relationships with local authorities accordingly.
The CPRS recommended that central government should deal with local authorities more on an interdepartmental programme basis than on a separate service-by-service basis.
Regan has argued that there is an even more fundamental quality to be added to the variability, ambiguity, confusion and complexity outlined above, namely reciprocity .
He remarks (1983, p. 45) that Friend, Power and Yewlett (1974) in their study on the expansion of Droitwich ‘revealed government departments and local authorities closely involved on a common task.
The process was marked by negotiation and bargaining and in these circumstances the hierarchical central-local relationship broke down and constraints were imposed mutually on all sides’.
It is clearly naive to talk in general terms about ‘central government control’ over local authorities, or indeed to generalize about the relationship at all.
As Rhodes (1981, p. 27) observes, in future ‘the starting point must be the complexity of interactions and the constraints imposed thereby on both levels of government’.
LOCAL AUTHORITY ASSOCIATIONS AND PROFESSIONAL BODIES
Griffith (1966, p. 23) suggests that:
Any description of central and local public authorities in Britain would be incomplete without some mention of the role of the local authority associations.
It is difficult to exaggerate their importance in influencing legislation, government policies and administration and in acting as coordinators and channels of local authority opinion.
In 1973 three major local authority associations were established: the Association of County Councils (ACC), the Association of Metropolitan Authorities (AMA) and the Association of District Councils (ADE).
The extensive consultation which takes place between central government and these associations should not be seen as a generous concession by government but as ‘the inevitable response in a situation where the centre lacks detailed control.
The associations act as filters, ranking matters according to importance, aggregating individual cases  so that wider implications can be recognised’(Richardson and Jordan, 1979, pp. 105–6).
All three associations are firmly divided along party-political lines (Isaac-Henry, 1984); there is thus no single united voice of local government which further reduces local government's impact upon Whitehall.
Nevertheless, against this backcloth, the associations have regular and detailed consultation with government departments, both formal and informal.
It is the associations rather than individual local authorities which are invariably the point of contact between centre and localities.
There is also a range of specialist bodies which similarly represent aspects of local government at national level — for example, the Society of Local Authority Chief Executives (SOLACE).
Others, like the Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accounting (CIPFA), are professional associations with large numbers of members at officer level within local government (and sometimes also within central government as well).
Such professional links also cross the public/ private sector divide.
Policy statements which emanate from government departments are often, in practice, the product of prior consultation and negotiation between the centre and one or more of the many associations — not least the professional bodies, which on occasions serve to ‘unite’ civil servants and local authority employees.
One effect of this, of course, as Goldsmith and Newton (1986, p. 103) observe, is that each policy arena involves different networks (or policy communities) of central and local actors.
They show, for example, how the full range of local authority associations, together with such professional bodies as SOLACE or CIPFA, have been deeply involved in financial matters but that their involvement is less apparent in other policy areas such as fire, education, housing and transport which are marked by their own configuration of interests (such as the Institute of Housing Managers) all of which have their own style of central-local relations.
Indeed Goldsmith and Newton (1986, p. 104) argue that there is a sense in which ‘the phrase central-local government relations is a misnomer; what the term really refers to is a set of London-based relations between central government and the national local government community.
What seems clear from the above analysis is that local authorities operate within a wider political system incorporating a range of national organizations and institutions, all of which can have a direct effect upon local government.
Political parties, professional associations and local authority associations are frequently the major actors in what is often referred to as the ‘national local government system’(see Rhodes 1988).
Such networks are extremely complex and diverse but interrelationships between central government agencies and the  localities via the above organizations need to be acknowledged in any realistic model of central-local relationships.
Chandler, however,(1988a, p. 186) provides a timely reminder when he concludes that it ‘is a frequent but pathetic fallacy in political analysis to believe that power necessarily accrues to those who habitually walk with the great’.
THE CONSULTATIVE COUNCIL ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT FINANCE (CCLGF)
In some instances formal committees and similar bodies are established to provide a mechanism for the exchange of information and views between central government and the various interests within the national local government community.
One such body, formed in 1975, is the Consultative Council on Local Government Finance (CCLGF).
However, as Alexander (1982a, p. 158) observes, ‘The creation of this body was announced’ in a way which ‘suggested that the council was intended more to facilitate central control of the economy than to increase local government's capacity to protect its position and to maximise its influence on the government and on individual departments’.
The CCLGF meets six or seven times a year and is chaired by the Secretary of State for the Environment.
Meetings are attended by ministers and senior officials from the DOE, Treasury and other interested departments, along with elected members and officers of the local authority associations.
Although it has no formal terms of reference, its discussions principally concern grants and expenditure levels.
According to Binder (1982, p. 36)‘the great significance of financial issues in the central/local relationship has led to the CCLGF attaining a predominant status in the hierarchy of Central Government/Local Authority consultation bodies’.
CCLGF business is first discussed in a body known as the Official Steering Group (OSG) which consists of senior officials of the associations and their advisers on the one side, and of senior government officials on the other:
Ostensibly the main purpose of the OSG is to filter out and deal with items of lesser importance and to clarify issues for the ‘political’ side.
Of course, in practice, matters of substance can be dealt with in the technical setting.
A second tier of officers' groups have specialised remits and report to the Consultative Council through the OSG (Richardson and Jordan, 1979, p. 108).
Furthermore, as Binder (1982, p. 38) notes, discussions of CCLGF issues between leading association members and ministers often take place on a party political level outside the formal council.
On some  issues such discussions ‘have had a very substantial influence on government policy — indeed an influence far in excess of that of the CCLGF’.
The development of the CCLGF has been mirrored in other policy fields (such as housing) by the creation of similar consultative bodies together with various working parties, specialist groups and so forth.
Such channels provide important mechanisms for the exchange of information and influence and, together with the predominance of the associations in the central-local consultative process, have possibly resulted in a reduction of direct discussions on policy between individual local authorities and individual central departments.
While bodies like the CCLGF may ‘not greatly’ have ‘increased the power of local government’(Alexander, 1982a, p. 163) they enable local authorities (increasingly through their association representatives) to obtain access to, and collaborate with, departmental ministers and officials.
Whatever the centre's theoretical potential for power might be, in practice the realities of policy formulation demand some collaboration between both levels of government.
Changing relationships: the 1980s
During the 1970s and 1980s overt tensions in central-local relationships became increasingly evident.
One of the roots of the problem was the sharp cutback of financial resources provided by the centre, but this needs to be seen alongside the emergence of strongly ideological politics at both central and local levels.
The Thatcher government came to power in 1979 deeply suspicious of the size of the public sector and the levels of public expenditure.
Local authorities (especially ‘high-spending’ Labour-controlled councils) were prime targets, particularly since local government accounted for a quarter of public expenditure in 1979/80.
Consequently the period after 1979 witnessed a number of major developments with important repercussions for central-local relations.
This section focuses on three of these: a) the Local Government, Planning and Land Act, 1980; b) the Local Government Finance Act, 1982; c) the Rates Act, .1984.
THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT, PLANNING AND LAND ACT, 1980
Prior to this Act the traditional approach of central government had been to view local expenditure in global terms; hence, as long as local government spending as a whole remained on target, individual authorities spending above the norm were not penalized.
The 1980  Act, however, which introduced the block grant (see p. 162), allowed the government to assess how much each authority needs to spend and to allocate grant in terms of how far those assessments were breached.
As Greenwood (1982, p. 259) noted, ‘The Conservative Government's attempts to extract deeper cuts from higher rather than the lower spending authorities represent a movement away’ from the former ‘philosophy’.
This new ‘philosophy’, enshrined in the 1980 Act, was to lead to increasing central-local tensions during the 1980s as central government sought to impose, and reinforce where necessary, controls over the expenditure of individual local authorities.
Under the former ‘rate support grant’(RSG) arrangement, as a local authority increased its expenditure, government grant met a constant percentage of the additional expenditure.
Since 1981, however, as an authority's total spending rises above a standard level, set by central government for each individual authority, the proportion of additional expenditure met by the centre drops, thereby placing a heavier burden on local rates and deterring increased expenditure.
Each authority is set a ‘grant related expenditure assessment’(GREA) based on computation by the Department of the Environment of how much each authority needs to spend to achieve a common level of services with other authorities of the same type.
Expenditure above the GREA level results in a reduction of block grant, with a ‘steepening’ effect built in above a certain threshold to penalize the high spenders.
As Rhodes (1984, p. 270) comments, following the 1980 Act ‘for the first time…central government has direct (rather than indirect) controls over the levels of expenditure of the individual local authority’.
Soon after the introduction of GREAs the government recognized a danger that some authorities might use them as targets, with the consequence that some authorities spending below their GREAs might be encouraged to spend more, while those spending far above them might find the task of cutting back to GREA level too difficult.
Fearing that this might produce an aggregate increase in local government spending the government responded by introducing a second expenditure-control mechanism known as targets.
based on inflation increases and previous authority expenditure patterns, each authority was set a volume expenditure target by the Department of the Environment.
Authorities exceeding their target incurred a penalty which involved loss of grant for each additional pound of expenditure per head of population above target.
Essentially the GREA and target mechanisms were two separate systems.
The former assessed need to spend by an authority as a basis for calculating entitlement to block grant; the latter was a system of expenditure controls based around the progressive removal of grant above the ‘target’ expenditure level set for each authority.
The effect, however, was that authorities had to live with both a GREA and a  target and authorities spending above their target suffered a penalty even if their expenditure was within the GREA figure.
The superimposition of targets and penalties upon the GREA-based block-grant mechanism made the system very complex, whilst the uncertainties engendered by fluctuations in targets, penalties, GREAs and the like inhibited financial planning and encouraged a tendency for authorities to protect themselves by building up reserves (Audit Commission, 1984b; Comptroller and Auditor General, 1985).
Because quite modest increases in spending above target were also liable to result in considerable amounts of lost grant the system was also very unpopular among authorities, especially in the Conservative dominated shires where penalties fell with particular severity.
In order to meet some of these criticisms  penalties and targets were abolished in 1986.
However, the same block grant system was retained, and the GREA formulae tightened to produce at the local level deductions of grant for all levels of expenditure .
The practical effect of this for most authorities is that grant decreases as spending rises and vice versa, with some authorities spending so far above GREA that they receive no block grant whatsoever.
Indeed in some cases, where needs and resource assessments (upon which GREAs are calculated) are particularly severe, authorities lose all grant entitlement even before their expenditure reaches GREA.
As the government's own Green Paper,Paying for Local Government , acknowledges (p. 33), the block-grant system remains ‘highly complex and difficult to understand…it distorts and obscures the relationship between changes in expenditure and changes in local taxes’.
In 1986, as part of its wider proposals for the reform of local government finance, the government declared its intention to introduce a new grant system.
In essence it proposes to replace block grant by a new needs grant (based on a simplified GREA) and a standard grant (consisting of a fixed sum per adult).
Specific grants will also be reviewed.
Such an arrangement, if introduced, will not only simplify the grant system but should also be more neutral in effect (by neither penalizing nor rewarding authorities for expenditure above or below GREA — see Wilson, 1986, p. 52).
However, the new GREAs, as well as the level of standard grant, will continue to be determined by central government.
After the repeated attempts by central government in the 1980s to control local authority spending through grant manipulations, local government anxieties are hardly likely to be quelled by the new proposals.
The 1980 Act also considerably tightened central controls upon capital expenditure .
Government approvals now mainly apply to programmes rather than individual projects and relate to only one year at a time.
Local authorities receive allocations for capital expenditure under five blocks: housing, education, transport, personal social  services and other services.
Allocations can be transferred between authorities and, to a limited extent (currently 10 per cent), between years.
They can also be supplemented by capital receipts and trading profits.
Authorities can also switch expenditure between services to a greater extent than hitherto, as virement (transfer) between blocks is permitted.
These new found freedoms, however, are somewhat illusory.
The main effect of the 1980 Act has been to reinforce earlier borrowing controls by expenditure controls, thereby bringing ‘all capital spending [by local authorities]within the scope of control’(Travers, 1986, p. 142).
Allocations relate not only to borrowing but also to expenditure (that is, loan sanction is given in line with expenditure allocations) and are determined nationally to meet government public expenditure targets.
Individual authorities overspending their allocations are likely to suffer consequent reductions in subsequent years; indeed, those deliberately overspending supplemented allocations can be prevented from letting new contracts by ministerial order.
As, moreover, deficiencies have appeared in the capital control mechanisms, so refinements have been introduced.
Thus as the sale of council houses in the early 1980s produced sizeable capital receipts, and led to substantial capital ‘overspending’, the proportion which could be used to supplement capital receipts was reduced (standing at 20 per cent by 1987).
As with attempts to control revenue, these capital controls were widely unpopular in local government, and authoritatively criticized as uncertain, inefficient and wasteful (Audit Commission, 1985b).
While by 1986 the government itself conceded some of these criticisms, it flatly rejected calls for the abolition of capital controls and put forward proposals which, if introduced, seem likely to maintain these for the foreseeable future (Paying for Local Government , ch. 6).
THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT FINANCE ACT, 1982
This measure strengthened still further the expenditure controls over local authorities imposed by the 1980 Local Government, Planning and Land Act.
It contained two main provisions.
First, it legitimized retrospectively the grant penalties associated with targets set in 1981/2 and 1982/3 and set out the context in which expenditure guidance or targets could be issued in future years.
Secondly, it prohibited local authorities from levying supplementary rates.
This latter provision effectively requires rate precepts to be made or issued for complete financial years.
Although intended to further curtail local government expenditure — by requiring authorities to meet any unforeseen expenditure from existing budgets — the effect may well have been to persuade local authorities to set high initial rates (to provide adequate balances to meet unexpected contingencies or loss of income).
However, as 
Greenwood (1982, p. 263) emphasizes, the Act also enables the Secretary of State to withdraw ‘grant during the middle of the financial year from any authority which in his view is overspending’.
He adds, ‘it is difficult to escape the conclusion that the government has taken power:(a) to set for each authority what is to be regarded as the ‘needed’ level of spending,(b) to enforce that level of spending by manipulation of grant'.
To avoid the prospect of local authorities, whose rate fund becomes overdrawn within a year, from ‘going bankrupt’, the Act provides that authorities concerned may be given permission to borrow temporarily on revenue account, but only on such terms as the Secretary of State may impose.
THE RATES ACT, 1984
Despite the 1980 and 1982 Acts local government in 1983/4 was still, according to government estimates, overspending by 770m.
In a White Paper (Rates: Proposals for Rate Limitation and the Reform of the Rating System , 1983) blame for this was placed mainly on excessive spending by a small number of authorities, which the government proposed to curtail by a new control mechanism: rate-capping.
The White Paper's proposals were broadly enshrined in the Rates Act, 1984, which empowers the Secretary of State for Environment:(i) to limit the rates of named authorities (selective rate-capping)(authorities spending less than 10m, or below their GREA, are excluded from the selective scheme);(ii) to cap the rates of all local authorities in England and Wales subject to an affirmative resolution of both Houses of Parliament.
(In Scotland, the Secretary of State already possessed similar, although not identical, powers to control local authority expenditure under the Local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions)(Scotland) Act, 1981.)
The 1984 Rates Act also requires councils to consult with representatives of ‘commercial and industrial’ ratepayers before setting a rate, a measure reflecting the government's concern about the impact of rates upon business costs.
In 1985/6 the selective powers were used to cap the rates of eighteen councils; in 1987/8, twenty councils were rate-capped (plus ILEA and nineteen joint boards created following the abolition of the GLC and the metropolitan county councils).
Although clear criteria for selection must be laid down (for example, expenditure 20 per cent above GREA and 4 per cent above 1984/5 target) almost all selected councils have been Labour-controlled.
Machinery does exist for selected authorities to appeal to the Secretary of State, and in 1986/7 several rate-capped councils appealed for and obtained redetermined spending levels.
This followed assurances that no authority seeking a redetermination should suffer a reduced spending level, fear of which had prevented any of the selected authorities from appealing in the first year of operation.
The Rates Act has been widely interpreted as a threat to local-government independence.
Byrne (1986, p. 299) sees it as a  constitutional change such that‘central government, in relation to local government has come to resemble the Big Brother of George Orwell's Nineteen Eighty Four ’, while Newton and Karran (1985, ch. 8) compare it to ‘Knee-Capping Local Government’.
In the long term, they argue (p. 121)‘the constitutional issues’ outweigh ‘the disorganisation of local finances, and the breakdown of central-local relations…
The British system of government…was already highly centralised in 1979, and subsequent legislation has produced a quantum jump towards a more powerful and centralised state’.
In the past individual authorities could always escape centrally imposed financial constraints by raising extra income from the rates without penalty (so long as it was prepared to risk the ‘political’ reaction from local ratepayers).
That option, however, has now largely been closed.
Whilst the general power to cap the rates of all authorities has not yet been used, the switch in emphasis from concern with local government spending to local authority spending has nevertheless been marked.
Almost all the selected authorities (despite loud protests) set legal rates within the limits set by ministers; and councillors in Lambeth — who delayed setting a rate to try and avoid compliance-were subsequently surcharged by the district auditor and disqualified as councillors.
A similar fate befell councillors in Liverpool who, although not rate-capped at the time, delayed setting a rate on the grounds that they would otherwise have to make large spending cuts or impose rate rises (contrary to the ruling Labour group's manifesto commitments) to maintain expenditure within the block-grant regime (Parkinson, 1985; Travers, 1986, especially 164–77).
Both in Lambeth and Liverpool councillors were seeking to exploit a legal loophole — the absence of any statutory date for setting a rate-subsequently removed by the Local Government Act 1986 (which requires a legal rate to be set by 1 April).
Elsewhere councillors were seemingly unwilling to risk illegality.
Although local government generally remained firmly opposed to the principle of rate limitation, few concessions were wrung from the government, and non-compliance petered out.
Nevertheless, while the government might successfully have enacted and implemented its rate-capping proposals, this was not achieved without considerable political cost.
All the local authority associations (including those with a Conservative majority) opposed rate-capping in principle, the local government press, and the media generally were hostile, while the Bill's passage through Parliament led to strenuous opposition from senior Conservative MPs and sizeable backbench revolts in some votes.
These political costs, moreover, produced only marginal gains in terms of local government expenditure control.
The exemption from the selective scheme of authorities  spending less than GREA or 10m — a provision intended to reduce political opposition from the Conservative-dominated shire districts removed an estimated 309 of the 333 English and Welsh non-metropolitan district councils from the scheme at the outset.
Ministerial reassurances that the selective scheme would only encompass between about twelve and twenty authorities, and that the general scheme was a reserve power which ministers hoped never to use, served — although not written into the Bill — further to limit politically the scope of the measure.
The combined effect of these concessions was virtually to remove from threat of rate-capping all but about 20 (4.4 per cent) of the 456 principal local authorities then existing in England and Wales.
Clearly, so long as ministerial assurances are honoured, rate-capping can deliver only very limited reductions in total local authority expenditure.
Other constraints have also, in practice, limited the impact of rate-capping.
As Travers (1986, p. 168) notes, the government had to set rate limits high enough to prevent legal challenges that income was insufficient to meet statutory obligations.
It also had to keep the numbers of capped authorities to manageable proportions to prevent civil servants from being overloaded by the administrative burden of determining — and redetermining in the event of appeal — rate levels under the selective scheme.
There were also political complications, in so far as the government wished to avoid criteria for rate-capping which might include Conservative-controlled authorities.
(In the event one Conservative authority, Portsmouth, was rate-capped in 1985/6.)
For all these reasons the apparently draconian central powers contained in the 1984 Rates Act had a surprisingly limited effect in terms not only of the numbers of authorities rate-capped but also in terms of the capping limits actually imposed.
According to Travers (1986, pp. 164–77) many of the rate limits were ‘relatively generous’, ‘no significant inroads’ were made into the spending of selected councils and some were able even to make ‘a large rate increase’.
A number of authorities also resorted to creative accountancy — technical accounting adjustments which maximize financial benefits in the authority's favour-as a means of ‘spending above the rate-capping spending level’.
For similar reasons, even in Scotland, where the Scottish Office had power to control the rates in all authorities, ‘rate-capping produced few selective cuts in spending’(Dunleavy and Rhodes, 1988, p. 123).
Not only did rate-capping legislation have relatively little impact on spending patterns in selected authorities, it is questionable even whether overall local government spending was actually reduced.
As Dunleavy and Rhodes (1988, p. 123) observe, ‘high-spending’ authorities not rate-capped tended to increase rates in order to build reserves against possible rate-capping in the future; hence, ‘it is difficult to say whether selective rate-capping has marginally decreased total local  government taxation…or substantially increased it (by encouraging many more councils to raise (taxes) as an insurance’.
What is clear however, is that rate-capping failed to produce the curbs in local spending which the government desired and in 1987 the Department of Environment, armed with the full battery of post-1979 legislation, had to concede that English local authorities were on course to exceed government expenditure targets by at least 500m (The Times 28 October 1987).
Indeed, at almost every turn, as central government has imposed new financial controls, local authorities have discovered loopholes and managed largely to avoid the intended consequences.
Observing the statute book alone might appear to depict a massive reinforcement of the agency model of central-local financial relationships but practical outcomes are perhaps more suggestive of power-dependency.
What, of course, the failure to achieve the desired curbs in local spending did produce was an inevitable increase in the burden upon the ratepayer.
As the percentage of revenue income derived from grant fell (from 46.7 per cent in England in 1976/7 to 39.2 per cent in 1984/5) so the percentage borne by local ratepayers increased (from 23 per cent to 27 per cent).
This, in turn, focused attention upon the anomalies of the rating system (see p. 160–62) and increased pressure for the wholesale reform of local government finance.
Of course, the climate of central-local government relationships in which these reforms were unveiled was hardly propitious.
Shifting the burden from taxpayers to ratepayers, and introducing a plethora of complex and continually changing central financial controls, inevitably soured relationships even where party political and ideological differences did not intrude.
While the Thatcher government has had a major policy aim of controlling public expenditure and has used the block-grant regime and rate-capping to that end, centrally imposed financial controls not only infringe the rights of elected councillors to determine local spending needs and priorities but also undermine accountability to local ratepayers.
What from the central perspective might be seen as an instrument of public expenditure control, from the local level might be seen as a threat to the fabric of local government itself.
Consequently the ‘bitter rancour’ and ‘strident tension’which Greenwood (1982 p. 254) characterized as underlying central local government relationships has, if anything, intensified as the decade has progressed.
The local state?
On pp. 184–89 several ‘models’ of central-local relations were discussed.
There are, however, alternative approaches.
One such is provided in recent Marxist literature.
In her study of Lambeth, Cockburn (1977) provides one of the best known examples of this perspective which assumes that local government is simply one arm of the capitalist state, providing the conditions for continued capital accumulation and the maintenance of social order.
In other words, a general theory of the capitalist state is applied with little modification to what has become known as the ‘local state’.
Saunders (1981), however, suggests that this approach is inadequate.
He argues that the ‘local state’ is not simply the national state writ small, and that a general theory of the state cannot be applied to the local level.
He criticizes Cockburn's as ‘a surprisingly crass agency model’ which reduces local government to a mere agent of central government.
In Saunders's view, the ‘local state’ cannot simply be reduced to a functioning part of a national capitalist state, for within certain constraints ‘non-capitalist interests can win at the local level in a way that is becoming increasingly difficult at national level’(pp. 4, 11).
In 1983, for example, there were ‘radical’ authorities of the ‘Left’(such as the GLC), as well as of the ‘Right’(such as Wandsworth), which operated with particular local distinctiveness.
As a basis for understanding ‘the current crisis of central-local relations in Britain' (p. 10) Saunders offers an alternative analytical framework encompassing four main dimensions: organizational, economic, political, and ideological.
Each dimension can be observed from both the central and local perspective.
From the perspective of a right-wing central government these four dimensions can be seen thus:
1
the organizational problem of how to impose central controls against the demand for local self-determination, especially on the part of radical Labour councils claiming a mandate for opposing government policies;
2
the economic problem of how to enforce reductions in local social consumption expenditure;
3
the political problem of how to reconcile local democratic accountability with the pursuit of a long-term economic strategy;
4
the ideological problem of how to break down popular expectations regarding social provisions which became established during the postwar years of Keynesian consensus politics.
From the perspective of radical Labour councils (seeking to oppose Conservative central government cuts) Saunders puts forward the same four dimensions:
1
the organizational problem of how to fight central government policies through local authorities which are subordinate to central departments;
2
the economic problem of how to finance and defend services while at the same time transforming their character in a socialist direction;
3
the political problem of how to mobilize alliances among different consumption sectors and between these and class-based producer movements;
4
the ideological problem of how to assert the principle of need in the face of central government's desire to trim welfare services.
Saunders's analysis of central-local relations goes beyond the interorganizational focus of the power-dependence model.
Rightly, he stresses economic, political and ideological dimensions as well as‘top-down’ and ‘bottom-up’perspectives.
His approach is particularly helpful in understanding the relationship between central governments and local authorities which are opposed on political and ideological grounds.
It is less helpful, however, where there is little or no political or ideological distinctiveness — in technical fields, for example, or where there is sustained political consensus between individual authorities and the centre.
Perhaps, as Dunleavy (1980b, p. 131) suggests, future research into central-local relations needs to adopt a variety of analytical perspectives.
Organizational issues are only one dimension of inter-governmental relations.
Overview and prospects
R. Rhodes,(1984, p. 355), observing the increased assertiveness of the Thatcher government, has characterized the changes in relationship between central and local government during the 1970s as shifting from bargaining through incorporation to direction and centralization in the 1980s.
However, direction and centralization, as Dunleavy and Rhodes (1987, p. 26) warn, is not synonymous with control, as is well illustrated in the financial sphere where interventions have often been met by the development of evasion strategies by local authorities.
In practice ‘the degree of control has been limited: intentions and achievements have diverged markedly’.
Even if its intentions have not always been realized, the second half of the 1980s has nevertheless witnessed renewed determination by central government to exercise greater direction over local authorities.
The 1986 Local Government Act, for example, limited the ability of local authorities to spend money on publicity, while the 1988 Local Government Act imposed further restrictions professedly designed to stop the use of rates for party political propaganda.
The 1988 Local Government Act also sought to extend the privatization or contracting-out of local authority services by empowering the Secretary of State to specify by regulation local services which must be put out to  tender.
Services initially specified included refuse collection, cleaning buildings, street sweeping, school meals and catering, and ground and vehicle maintenance.
Under the Act the Secretary of State can differentiate between authorities in drawing up the timetable for tendering and has powers to extend tendering to other services.
First contracts are scheduled to start in April 1989.
This measure effectively makes competitive tendering compulsory for designated services, replacing the former (largely discretionary) powers which had been used by relatively few authorities in specific areas (Ascher, 1987, especially ch. 7; Stoker, 1988).
These enactments, particularly when seen alongside pledges in the Conservative Party's 1987 general election manifesto (and subsequently presented to Parliament) to allow schools and council tenants to ‘opt out’ of local authority control, would seem to envisage a diminished role for elected local government.
Indeed the abolition of the GLC and metropolitan county councils, coupled with the recent development in inner-city areas of enterprise zones, city task forces and urban development corporations, has already meant in some localities a reduced role for elected councils in local service provision.
Nevertheless, despite these trends, local government retains a substantial political and administrative role in Britain, and central-local relationships remain in a continuous state of flux.
As Shell (1987, p. 295) observes, ‘Because Britain lacks a codified constitution, the relationship between central and local government is nowhere precisely defined’.
And whilst in a formal sense local authorities are entirely subordinate to Parliament, in practice working relationships are tremendously diverse.
In 1981 Sharpe (p. 5) pointed to an ‘unresolved tension’ in central local relationships arising from the ambiguous status of local government, which is subordinate to Parliament, but at the same time ‘has the potential for independent power’through being elected and by having the capacity to raise at least some of its revenue by local taxation.
Political, economic and social priorities can vary enormously between central government and local authorities, as well as between local authorities themselves, and over time.
Interestingly, in the light of increasing central ‘controls’ during the late 1970s and the 1980s, Alexander (1982b, p. ix), in what could be interpreted as a swing back towards an agency model approach, argues that there has been a ‘decline in the autonomy and independence of local government…[which]constitutes a threat to the nature of our democracy and to the sensitivity and effectiveness of our public services’.
Clearly, however, the infinite number of variables prohibits the formulation of any ‘rule of thumb’; complexity and ambiguity remain the order of the day, hence the inappropriateness of generalizations.
11 QUASI-GOVERNMENT
Introduction
The term ‘quasi-government’ refers to both the government-created and semi-private organizations which are both distinct from, but usually relate to, either central departments or local authorities.
As a field of study quasi-government is both complex and confusing, being partly public and partly private, voluntary or commercial.
So great is the number and variety of organizations included within it that generalizations, definitions and classifications are fraught with difficulties.
Even terminology is a problem.
The organizations comprising quasi-government are referred to by a variety of terms: ‘fringe bodies’, ‘non-departmental public bodies’.
‘semi-autonomous authorities’ and ‘quangos’, to name but a few.
The latter term, usually an acronym for ‘quasi-autonomous non-governmental organization’, has now entered popular usage, indicating the interest which quasi-government has recently begun to attract.
The word ‘quango’, however, is essentially an umbrella beneath which a tremendous variety of organizations shelter.
Compare, for example, a local association for the disabled, the Apple and Pear Development Council, the UK Atomic Energy Authority, and the Arts Council of Great Britain — all are ‘quangos’ but their diversity in terms of finance, organization, objectives and accountability is enormous.
Generalizing about ‘quangos’ can be hazardous — even their origins are remarkably diverse as Barker (1982, pp. 7–8) observes:
Many are statutory, under an Act itself (for example, Manpower Services Commission or Health and Safety Commission)…
The founding instrument may be a royal charter (BBC or the research councils); a Treasury Minute (University Grants Committee); the articles of a non-profit company (National Consumer Council); or, more humbly, but apparently almost as effectively, a mere Answer in the House, a memorandum from the Minister to himself, a wave of the hand, or whatever else may signify a decision to establish a new body (Schools Council, Technician and Business Education Councils and that unusual ‘central–local government voluntary’ body, the  Women's Royal Voluntary Service).
The problem of discussing quasi-government is further complicated, as Doig (1979, p. 311) notes, ‘by the fact that there is no one characteristic, or lack of characteristic, that distinguishes quangos or non-departmental  public bodies from other organisations in the structure of government’.
Nevertheless, most, if not all, of the organizations concerned carry out their work at arm's length from central government departments and/or local authorities.
Indeed, quasi-government is sometimes presented as part of a public/private continuum: from government (G), such as central departments; through quasi-governmental organizations (QG), such as nationalized industries; to quasi-non-governmental organizations (QNG), such as the National Research Development Organization; to non-government (NG), such as private companies (see Hague, Mackenzie and Barker, 1975).
This is obviously a simplified and inevitably imprecise scheme but it is helpful in placing quasi-government within the broader administrative and political context.
While the rationale for the arm's length approach, as well as the length of the arm, varies widely from organization to organization, the desire to distance important areas of public administration from direct political control has been a major factor in the twentieth-century growth of quasi-government.
Of course, where politicians are denied control, they cannot normally be expected to assume accountability, thus undermining the principle that public administration should be publicly accountable.
As Sir Norman Chester (1979, p. 54) has observed:
The growth of fringe bodies is a retreat from the simple democratic principle evolved in the nineteenth century that those who perform a public duty should be fully responsible to an electorate — by way either of a minister responsible to Parliament or of a locally elected council.
The essence of the fringe body is that it is not so responsible for some or all of its actions.
Numbers and types of quangos
In 1987 there were, according to official figures (Cabinet Office, 1987, p. iv) some 1,643 Non-Departmental Public Bodies (NDPBs) operating in Britain, spending between them 9,100m and employing 148,700 staff.
Although in 1979, when the Conservative election manifesto pledged a purge on quangos, the number had been much larger (2,167 bodies, employing 217,000 staff) quangos are clearly far from dead.
Indeed, although there were fifteen fewer quangos overall than in the previous year, the twelve months ending April 1987 still saw sixty-six new bodies set up, the Ministry of Agriculture leading the way with twenty-eight.
Nevertheless, while quangos have clearly survived the first two Thatcher administrations, a precise head count is less easy than official  figures might suggest.
Indeed there remains much disagreement about precisely (or even roughly) how many organizations exist within the field of quasi-government.
This is partly because of the difficulty in deciding where boundaries should be drawn, a difficulty which has increased in recent years with the development of new organizational forms (such as‘hived-off’ agencies) and with the increasing interpenetration of the public and private sectors.
As Hood (1979, p. 9) asks, ‘Does one include advisory committees as ‘government bodies’?
Contracting firms?
Grant-aided bodies?
Firms in which public money is invested?’
Quasi-government is a grey area between not only government departments and local authorities, but also frequently between the public and the private sectors.
Another analytical difficulty is that organizational units are often not clear-cut.
For example, it is always problematic whether or not to count Scottish and Welsh divisions of an agency as separate units or as part of a single organization.
Because of these various difficulties a count of quangos is beset with problems.
In 1978 the Civil Service Department reported that there were 252 non-departmental public bodies, compared with 196 in 1971, 103 in 1959 and only ten before 1900 (Bowen, 1978).
The definition the CSD used for its survey was: ‘organisations which have been set up or adopted by Departments and provided with funds to perform some function which the Government wish to have performed but which it did not wish to be the direct responsibility of a Minister or Department’.
The CSD survey excluded non-permanent bodies, advisory committees and working parties.
Other sources, using broader definitions, produce far higher figures.
For example, Anderson lists almost 1,000 official organizations, many of them advisory and consultative (cited in Hood, 1979, p. 8).
Philip Holland (1979) produced a list of 3,068 quangos but this was because he defined a quango as an official body to which ministers appoint directly members other than civil servants.
He thereby included hundreds of advisory committees and hundreds of judicial tribunals and many more bodies with no governmental function at all(several public schools, for example ).
The Outer Circle Policy Unit (1979a) included 603 bodies in its list, having excluded departmental advisory committees and organizations whose function was primarily Judicial.
‘Head counts’ of quangos are the more difficult because, as Hood (1979, pp. 9–10) observes, ‘the ‘heads’involved are of enormously differing size and importance — on a scale more like the difference between the head of an ant and an elephant than the difference between one human head and another'.
Quangos, in fact, are analogous to pressure groups; both involve tiny, relatively insignificant groupings, as well as massive and extremely powerful organizations.
Indeed quangos are frequently the target of pressure group activity, and may  at times themselves behave like pressure groups exerting pressure on other parts of the government machine.
The volume and variety of quangos also make any attempt at meaningful classification difficult.
However, the Pliatzky Report (1980, pp. 1–2) delineated three distinctive types — executive bodies, advisory bodies, and tribunals — which offers a useful basis for categorization.
In 1987 the Cabinet Office (1987, p. iv) identified within each of these categories the following numbers:
1
Executive bodies: 396
2
Advisory bodies: 1057
3
Tribunals: 64
The number of quangos in this classification, large though it is, nevertheless excludes important areas of quasi-government.
It ignores, for example, the ‘innumerable autonomous and semi-autonomous, official and quasi-official organizations, each with its own part to play in the policy-making process’ of local government (Cousins, 1982, p. 152).
It also excludes various administrative agencies connected with the National Health Service and the nationalized industries.
The size, diversity, and importance of quasi-government is vast; one is dealing with a genus rather than a species.
All that can really be said with certainty is that quasi-governmental bodies generally operate in narrower, more specific areas than government departments or local authorities.
Inevitably, any classification of such bodies must be arbitrary; clear boundaries between quasi-government and more orthodox areas of public administration cannot always be drawn.
For presentational purposes, however, this chapter will follow Pliatzky and focus upon the major forms of quasi-government at national level, namely,executive and advisory non-departmental public bodies .
The other major form of non-departmental body,the public corporation, will be discussed in Chapter 12 within the wider context of the nationalized industries.
Health and water authorities , while part of quasi-government, have a strong regional network, and are discussed in Chapter 13 along with other forms of regional administration.
Administrative tribunals , although included within Pliatzky's survey, are most appropriately considered alongside other channels of redress, and are therefore dealt with in detail in Chapter 15.
Space does not allow consideration of quasi-government at the local level (for details of which see Cousins, 1982 and 1983; Rhodes, 1988).
Non-departmental public bodies: rationale
Quasi-government is not new although its scale is new.
The Crown Agents, for example, date from the mid-nineteenth century, the  Development Commission was set up in 1909 and the Horserace Totalisator Board (the Tote) goes back to 1928.
As Hood notes, however, they came into ‘high fashion in the 1940s and again in the 1960s when the Fulton Committee endorsed the idea of government growth outside Whitehall by ‘hiving-off’ units from civil service departments to non-departmental bodies' (1981, p. 100).
Pliatzky (1980, pp. 2–3) presents the rationale for non-departmental bodies in the following terms.
EXECUTIVE BODIES
These include the Hops Marketing Board and the Nature Conservancy Council, for example, and are justified with the argument that certain functions can best be carried out at arm's length from central government:
(i)
because the work is of an executive nature which does not require ministers to be involved in day-to-day management;
(ii)
because the work is more effectively carried out by a single-purpose organization rather than by a government department with a wide range of functions;
(iii)
to involve people from outside government in the direction of the organization; and
(iv)
to put the performance of particular functions outside direct party political control.
ADVISORY BODIES
These include the China Clay Council and the Advisory Committee on Pesticides, for example.
The major reasons for advisory committees (incorporating outside representation) are:
(i)
that the department's own staff are unable to provide the necessary advice by themselves, and
(ii)
that it may be desirable to enlist participation by outside interests in order to develop publicly acceptable proposals.
Control and accountability
These two concepts (see Chapter 1) are central to any discussion of quasi-government:
CONTROL
The arm's length approach usually associated with quangos means that normal departmental patterns of ministerial control do not apply.
Indeed, a minister may even ‘expressly desire to keep out of the affairs of quangos within the ambit of his department, arguing that to behave otherwise is merely to frustrate the whole purpose of this way of organising public services’(Johnson, 1979, p. 389).
On day-to-day matters most ministers and departments ‘maintain an arm's-length relationship’ from the organization which they sponsor, although considerable pressure may be brought to bear upon them on ‘broader policy and resource’matters (Johnson, 1982, p. 213).
The precise way in which many quangos are controlled is difficult to determine.
Obtaining even basic information can be problematical.
For example, while annual reports usually name the chairman and board members they do not always reveal their salaries.
Likewise the breakdown of expenses between board members and staff, and between different types of expenses, is relatively detailed in some cases but not in others.
A further problem is that the governing authority of quangos often consists of a board or council.
Often the only paid member is the chairman, suggesting that he may really be in charge.
However, generalizations are dangerous: some chairmen are only part-time and some councils are large while others are small and highly specialized.
While the staff running some are technical specialists, this is far from universal.
Sometimes the relationship with the parent department is close; sometimes it is not.
The permutations are infinite.
ACCOUNTABILITY
Three aspects of the accountability of non-departmental bodies require consideration:
(i) Relations with ministers
With non-departmental bodies, as Johnson (1982, p. 213) observes, ‘accountability of Ministers’ must remain ‘attenuated’, for ‘otherwise there would be little point in having this form of administrative organisation’.
Usually ministers are formally answerable to Parliament only for discharging their own responsibilities relating to sponsored bodies (such as in terms of broad policy and general oversight), while responsibility for efficiency and day-to-day matters normally rests with the organizations' own management.
In practice, however, the precise boundaries of ministerial responsibility are often difficult to define.
Not only is the borderline between ministers' policy and oversight responsibilities, and those of boards for efficiency and day-to-day administration, often blurred, but in practice there is considerable variation in relationships between ministers and boards.
(The Public Accounts Committee (1986–7a, para. 32), for example, contrasted the Welsh Office's ‘arm's length and detached’ attitude to ‘sponsorship’of NDPBs, with the Environment Department's  ‘involved, positive and disciplined’approach).
In any event the sheer volume and variety of bodies under departmental sponsorship often makes ministerial responsibility something of a myth.
In recent years the size and complexity of departmental work has seriously eroded the concept of ministerial responsibility even for their own departments (Chapter 14).
How much more tenuous must it therefore be for non-departmental bodies operating at arm's length from ministers, and which ‘for most of the time…rub along without much awareness of the Minister and his officials’(Johnson, 1982, p. 213).
(ii) Relations with Parliament
Because non-departmental bodies operate at arm's length from government, and ministers are not constitutionally responsible to Parliament for all of their work, accountability to Parliament is limited.
Johnson (1982, p. 213) observes that MPs ‘may attempt ingeniously to get at the activities of governmental bodies through the questioning of Ministers, but…it is not something attempted very regularly and, when it is, the attack focuses on policy and resources rather than on particular decisions’.
The dilemma, he adds, is that ‘reinforcement of the parliamentary accountability of these organisations would also entail a strengthening of ministerial control over them’, so destroying the arm's length relationship with all its attendant advantages.
Nevertheless, some important instruments of accountability to Parliament can be identified, although most apply to some quangos and not all.
For example, some come within the jurisdiction of the Ombudsman (Chapter 15), some have their accounts audited by the Comptroller and Auditor General and reported to the Public Accounts Committee (Chapter 14), some present annual reports to Parliament, and so on .
In fact, no general pattern is discernible, except that almost all stop short of full accountability to Parliament.
In 1979, however accountability was strengthened with the advent of the fourteen new Commons select committees, each of which has power to examine the expenditure, administration and policy of the main government departments ‘and associated public bodies’.
While this represents an important development in Parliament's powers of scrutiny, non-departmental bodies account for only a small part of the work of these committees which are quite unable to exercise anything like detailed oversight.
(iii) Relations with the courts
The legal accountability of quangos also poses considerable difficulty.
Because their legal status and powers are confused, judicial control of their activities lacks coherence.
For example, remedies available against one body may not be available against another; procedures or standards  applied by one quango may be legally sound but if utilized by another they may not, and so on .
In Johnson's view (1982, p. 215), ‘The confusions affecting legal accountability and the availability of enforceable remedies are one of the most serious aspects of the haphazard development of governmental bodies’.
While accountability problems are found throughout British public administration, with non-departmental bodies they are particularly acute.
Clearly, orthodox ministerial responsibility could not be extended to them without undermining the arm's length principle.
Several changes short of this, however, have been proposed: requiring greater disclosure of information; extending jurisdiction of the Comptroller and Auditor General and Public Accounts Committee to more bodies; and clarifying the authority, powers and legal status of all such organizations (see, for example, Outer Circle Policy Unit, 1979a; and Pliatzky Report, 1980, pp. 18–23).
Changes of this kind would standardize and strengthen accountability without destroying the arm's length arrangement.
In view of the importance and extent of quasi-government they perhaps deserve serious consideration.
In 1981 a tentative move in this direction occurred with the publication of a government guide (Non-Departmental Public Bodies: A Guide for Departments ) laying down ground rules on the future nature of quangos and their relationships with departments.
A revised edition of this document was produced in 1985 (Cabinet Office (MPO) /Treasury, 1985c) which reflected developments in policy and practice since the 1981 edition, particularly the government's drive to strengthen financial management.
Departments are now obliged to review from time to time the bodies they sponsor, and have received instructions that — whatever the precise degree of independence — the minister is answerable to Parliament for whether the body is working efficiently and economically.
They have also since 1984 been brought within the framework of the Financial Management Initiative (see Chapter 7; Cabinet Office (MPO) /Treasury (FMU), 1984a).
Greater financial accountability, particularly for bodies utilizing government funds at a level of 50 per cent or more, was also envisaged and the establishment of new non-departmental bodies would, it was promised, involve negotiating more hurdles than hitherto.
Not surprisingly, the financial position of fringe bodies is almost infinitely varied.
Some are funded by grants-in-aid (such as the Training Agency); some by statutory levy (such as the Horserace Betting Levy Board); some by annual grant (such as the Health Education Council); some by departmental vote (such as the Central Council for Education and Training in Social Work); some by drawing on the National Loan Fund (such as New Town Corporations); and some by charges for services (such as the Agricultural Marketing Boards)(Rhodes, 1988, p. 129).
In each of these financial relationships  the government has considerable power.
Despite the diversity, therefore, central direction is marked.
Patronage
Considerable concern about non-departmental bodies has focused on patronage — the number of appointments in the gift of ministers.
Promotion by merit rather than political influence has long characterized the British civil service, but outside the civil service ministers still exercise considerable patronage.
In November 1978, for example, ‘seventeen ministers had within their gift over 8,000 paid appointments and 25,000 unpaid ones at a total cost of 5m. a year’(Outer Circle Policy Unit, 1979a, p. 47).
One department alone was responsible for nearly 1,000 appointments.
Parliamentary influence over these appointments is minimal, the matter being almost entirely one of ministerial discretion.
Party political factors are frequently to the fore; indeed, ‘many people…have claimed to perceive a resurgence of eighteenth-century jobbery’(Hood, 1978, p. 40).
Whether or not patronage is used in a party political manner, the non-departmental sector nevertheless ‘affords the opportunity for government by co-option rather than by election or by merit appointment’(Hood, 1978, p. 41).
Additionally, once a person is appointed, not only need the minister never account for the choice, but the likelihood is that he or she will never have to justify it on performance grounds.
The Outer Circle Policy Unit study (1979a, p. 48) emphasized three major areas for concern about appointments of this kind:
(i)
efficiency — does patronage result in the best available people being appointed?
(ii)
power — does patronage give ministers too much power to influence supposedly independent organizations?
(iii)
privilege — does it enable elite groups to dominate patronage jobs?
Although these are legitimate grounds for unease, solutions are far from straightforward because of the diversity of quangos.
Some appointments could be on a representative basis where there are sectional interests, but in other cases the wider public interest would need to be safeguarded.
Holland and Fallon (1978, p. 25) argue that several reforms are necessary
(i)
nomination should be much more open, with ministers more accountable to Parliament for each appointment;
(ii)
the number of paid public appointments that can be held by a single individual should be limited;
(iii)
all full-time paid appointments should be advertised and the appointment confirmed by a relevant parliamentary committee;
(iv)
appointments on solely political grounds should cease.
In summary, any reforms to the system of ministerial patronage should aim to reduce secrecy, encourage competition, control the power of ministers, introduce accountability for appointments made, and provide for assessment of performance.
It is important, however, not to underplay the political dimension of patronage; it offers a means of securing the co-operation of key pressure groups and ensuring party discipline-hence ministerial ‘resistance’ to drastic pruning.
Exit non-departmental public bodies?
The Conservative government elected in 1979 promised a drastic purge of quasi-governmental organizations as part of its wider strategy of reducing public expenditure.
Immediately following the 1980 Pliatzky Report the government decided to reduce: a) the number of executive bodies by thirty; b) the number of advisory bodies by 211; c) the number of individual tribunals by six.
In December 1980 the government announced that a further 192 non-departmental bodies were to be wound up by 1983, bringing the total savings up to about 23m a year by 1983.
In February 1982 the Prime Minister announced a third round of cuts: the abolition of 112 executive non-departmental bodies and 500 advisory ones.
Philip Holland, MP, observed: ‘That nearly one-quarter of the executive quangos and nearly one-third of the very large number of advisory bodies, as defined by Pliatzky and inherited by this Government, are scheduled for abolition after only 2½ years is a quite remarkable achievement by any standards’(Daily Telegraph, 11 March 1982).
By November 1984 the Prime Minister reported that 700 bodies had either been wound up or had their expenditure reduced, giving a total saving of 118m per year (see Hood, 1988, p. 89 for further elaboration on alleged reductions).
However, as Table 11.1 shows, spending on fringe bodies still remains high.
In 1986–7, for example, a single executive body, the Manpower Services Commission, spent 3,129.1m (see Cabinet Office, 1987, p. 14).
Why has the promised purge of quangos proved so difficult to achieve?
According to Rhodes (1988, p. 130) one main reason is that the Thatcher government has developed quangos as a convenient vehicle for bypassing what it perceived (particularly in urban areas) as a hostile and recalcitrant local government system.
Quangos have provided a   means of developing an administrative network at grass roots level without the uncertainty (and possible political hostility) associated with provision by elected local authorities.
At the local level recent years have seen considerable central intervention via ‘fringe’ agencies.
As Dunleavy and Rhodes (1987, p. 23) argue, the government ‘has presided over the proliferation of single-function quasi-government agencies’.
Recent years have seen the establishment of ‘enterprise zones’, Urban Development Corporations and a range of similar organizations, operating at local level but bypassing inner-city councils.
Non-Departmental Public Bodies 1979–87
In similar vein the abolition of the metropolitan county councils and the Greater London Council in 1986 also ‘produced a whole new crop of non-departmental bodies’(Dunleavy and Rhodes, 1987, p. 23).
(A precursor was the London Regional Transport Board established in 1984, when London Transport was removed from the GLC.)
The new bodies created to provide services in the former GLC and metropolitan county areas include numerous joint boards of councillors or QUELGOs (quasi-elected local government organizations).
Consisting mainly of councillors indirectly elected by district councils in the locality such bodies are now responsible in these areas for fire, waste disposal services, and many other functions.
In London responsibility for around two-thirds of GLC spending, and in the former metropolitan county areas about half, was transferred to non-departmental bodies or central departments (Dunleavy and Rhodes, 1987, p. 23).
Non-departmental public bodies are far from dead!
Quangos, clearly, have been advantageous to government in allowing  elected local authorities to be bypassed (and in some cases even replaced altogether).
Indeed it is possible, at the time of writing, to foresee major expansion of quango-type bodies for similar reasons at national level.
The ‘agencies’ proposed in the Ibbs Next Steps Report (see Chapter 2), for example, are seen as an alternative to government departments for the delivery of a wide range of executive functions in line with the Thatcher government's emphasis on ‘value for money’.
Significantly, they seem likely to bear many of the problems (such as accountability) already associated with non-departmental public bodies, as well as many of the hallmarks: the delegation of functions to specialist agencies, broad policy determined by government; and an arm's length relationship with departments.
How far these proposals will reach fruition remains to be seen, but one thing is clear: as Hood (1981, pp. 120–1) argues, non-departmental bodies are too useful for politicians to abolish them too readily.
There are, he adds, at least four potential political uses which make them unlikely to disappear:
(i)
government will presumably always need bodies from which it can distance itself in sensitive areas;
(ii)
there will presumably always be value in having temporary organizations outside the permanent government service that can be scrapped when chances permit;
(iii)
the use of such bodies as an administrative means of bypassing other public organizations, along with the patronage dimension, continues to attract politicians;(iv) advisory committees are useful as political ‘window dressing’.
For these reasons, if for no others, quangos seem unlikely to become extinct.
Conclusions
Non-departmental public bodies have, for the most part, restricted authority, a limited arsenal of political resources, and a lack of independent finance.
They do, however, have organizational and informational resources aplenty (Rhodes, 1988, p. 171).
Although essentially concerned with adapting centrally determined policy to local circumstances, and interfacing with relevant consumers, the professional expertise embedded in such bodies nevertheless provides opportunities to shape decision-making in some areas of public policy.
Non-departmental public bodies have arisen to no pattern or plan.
They display a variety of structures, powers, modes of finance, methods of selection, degrees of discretion and types of staff.
The main problems they pose are the excessive patronage they confer on the  politicians and officials who establish them and make appointments to them, ‘their frustration of the implementation of public policies, their financial irresponsibility and their erosion of democratic accountability and control’(Jones, 1982a, p. 924).
Jones further argues that if central government believes it cannot or should not perform a particular public function, ‘it would be better if it decentralised not to technocratic quangos but to directly elected local governments’.
Less radically, Johnson (1979, pp. 393–4) argues that some order could be introduced into chaos by the creation of a Standing Advisory Commission on Administrative Organization (another quango?).
This would conduct a continuing survey of administrative structures with two purposes in mind: a) to produce information and thereby increase openness; b) to carry out inquiries and offer advice to central government and other public authorities.
Whatever the merits of such reform proposals it is a mistake to see quangos as wholly self-contained.
As Hood (1979, p. 20) points out, government agencies are increasingly operating ‘in multiple and dense networks of cross-cutting territorial, functional and hierarchical relationships, and within an overall context of…government by grants and by indirect administration rather than by the older pattern of directly hired bureaucrats at the centre’.
Inter-organizational and inter-agency relationships have become increasingly complex; quangos (with their organizational and informational resources) are only part of this complex administrative and political environment — an environment which the operations of quangos themselves influence (see Moore and Booth, 1987).
In recent years the discrediting of quangos has become a popular political pastime.
According to Dunsire (1982, p. 15), ‘quango-hunting’ has since 1979 ‘become a Conservative blood-sport, under the illusion that they are nothing but wasteful ‘empire-building’'.
In practice, however, quangos often deal with specialized tasks in a way which both central government departments and local authorities would find difficult.
They are also incredibly diverse; there is little justification for derogatory generalizations.
Without denying the accountability/ control/patronage problems which accompany this form of governmental organization, the survival of the species suggests that governments themselves see a continuing role for non-departmental public bodies, particularly when faced with politically hostile local authorities and bureaucratically organized government departments which may frustrate central government policy priorities.
As Hill (1983, p. 124) observes, the ‘attacks on Quangos have obscured, rather than illuminated, the serious issue of how ministerial patronage might be replaced by alternative selection procedures, and how these bodies might be made more accountable, without losing that very semi-independence which was a major reason for establishing them in the first place’.