

Strike violence
The 1984–5 coal dispute was one of the most bitterly contested strikes in British industrial relations history, involving violent industrial confrontation on picket lines in the North of England, the Midlands, Scotland and South Wales.
The most notorious confrontation took place around a coking plant at Orgreave, near Sheffield.
From 23 May, when the first brick smashed through a lorry windscreen, to the final cataclysmic encounter almost four weeks later on 18 June, the violence rose in a series of tidal waves.
Thanks to television…the nation had an armchair view of the violence: uprooted telegraph poles, rolling down the hill towards the police cordon; a workmen's hut dragged into the road and going up in petrol-fed flames; a lone policeman with his truncheon repeatedly laying into a recumbent miner; the wall of riot shields parting like the Red Sea as groups of police, in black one-piece suits and NATO helmets, dashed into the crowded pickets while a senior officer, with loud-hailer, encouraged them to ‘take prisoners’.
(Wilsher et al., 1985:88)
Mounted police officers, long, wooden batons in hand, cantered off to join in the chase.
Many pickets fled; others stayed to fight.
Men with blood streaming from their head wounds stood defiantly hurling stones.
A police rider fell from a horse stunned by a half-brick.
Constables with small, round, Perspex shields, like latter-day gladiators, engaged in hand-to-hand combat with miners.
Helmeted ambulancemen loaded casualties into an armoured Land Rover, bought for the purpose from the army.
Smoke from a burning barricade further up the hill hung in the air.
Often only the absence of sabres and bullets differentiated it from full-scale war.
(Wilsher et al., 1985:89)
One year beforehand at Warrington in Cheshire, and 3 years after at Wapping in North London, violent clashes occurred on picket lines involving print workers.
Why had such disputes reverted to a pattern of disorder more reminiscent of the nineteenth than twentieth century?
Geary (1985) has examined the historical pattern of industrial confrontation in Great Britain, looking for the distinctive features of periods marked by high or low levels of disorder.
We begin this chapter with a discussion and critique of his model of the changing nature of industrial confrontation from 1893 to 1985.
In the second and third sections, we concentrate on our contemporary example, an extended case study of public disorder during the 1984–5 coal dispute.
We set out the political context of the strike (second section), before analysing the most notorious mass picket of the dispute, the ‘Battle of Orgreave’.
American labour-management relations have shown similar patterns.
From the 1870s to the 1930s, violence was ‘pervasive and intense’(Graham and Gurr, 1969), but has been less common since the Second World War, with notable exceptions, such as the major coal-mining strikes of 1977 and 1981.
The fourth section is devoted to an overview of American ‘labor violence’ from the 1870s to the 1980s (Taft and Ross, 1969; Thieblot and Haggard, 1983).
A final section evaluates a recent Canadian explanation of ‘Why strikes turn violent’(Grant and Wallace, 1991), discussing its relationship to the flashpoints model.
STRIKE VIOLENCE IN GREAT BRITAIN, 1883–1985
Between the late-nineteenth century and the 1980s, there was a progressive decline in the occurrence of industrial confrontation only for it to dramatically reappear between 1983 and 1985.
According to Geary (1985) this history went through five distinct phases, each characterised by its own dominant form of disorder by strikers and preferred type of control tactic by the police or military.
The first of these periods (from the late nineteenth to early twentieth century) usually involved confrontations between stone-throwing strikers and armed troops, who would sometimes resort to gunfire to restore order.
This period is exemplified by the Featherstone shootings of 1893, where troops opened fire on a group of miners involved in a lock-out, leaving two dead and fourteen wounded.
In the second phase (1910–14), baton-wielding police sought to protect strikebreakers from the wrath of pickets.
This was, in Geary's terminology, a pivotal period, in which the responsibility for controlling public-order situations passed, backwards and forward, between central government and  local employer-magistrates.
Although the military were used more sparingly than in period one — the government intervened to prevent their use in the South Wales coal dispute of 1910, for example— they were despatched to South Wales during the national railway strike of 1911, when fears of imminent revolution were rife.
Between 1915 and 1945 (period three), picketing was largely non-violent.
Any disorder that occurred, as in the General Strike of 1926, was directly due to provocation by the police and Specials (volunteer constables), involving repressive baton charges.
Such tactics were carried out and sanctioned in a ‘political atmosphere of panic’.
During period four (1946 to 1980), violence between pickets and police was quite rare.
Geary points out that, by this stage, picket-line behaviour had evolved into a ritualised pushing and shoving.
Perhaps the most famous cases of this period were the confrontations at the Saltley coal depot in Birmingham during the 1972 national coal dispute, at the Grunwick film processing laboratory in London in 1977 and outside the Hadfields private steel works during the 1980 national steel dispute.
According to Geary,
the picketing at Saltley — often presented as a extreme example of industrial violence — consisted of large numbers of strikers pushing against smaller numbers of police.
Such behaviour is hardly the ultimate manifestation of anarchy that it is often depicted to be.
(Geary, 1985:78)
At Grunwick, elbows and boots were used, especially when snatch squads entered the crowd to make arrests, but ‘the general pattern of picketing was one of relatively non-violent pushing and shoving’(ibid.:86).
Although the media coverage of Hadfields suggested a violent encounter between police and pickets, even on the most serious day of violence, 12 March when seventy-five arrests were made, the confrontation was relatively tame (ibid.:90–1).
The last of the five periods identified by Geary is the 1980s, when industrial confrontation reverted to a more violent form.
The first indication of this change occurred in 1983 during the closed-shop dispute between the National Graphical Association (NGA) and the Messenger Group of Newspapers, owned by Mr Eddie Shah.
The largest mass picket of the dispute, 4,000 people, assembled outside the company's Warrington print works on 30 November to make its ritual attempt to block the route of newspaper delivery vans.
Previously, picketing had taken the form of pushing and shoving on both sides, but the confiscation of union banners and the pickets' public address system by the police led to the throwing of  stones and bottles by strikers.
This was the prelude to an aggressive baton charge by police in full riot gear which resulted in seventy-three arrests (Geary, 1985:135).
This willingness by police and pickets to engage in violent confrontation was dramatically revealed during the 1984–5 coal dispute.
Geary attempts to explain both the long-term trend away from violence and the sudden return to it in terms of three socio-political developments: the increasing constitutionalisation of trade unions and the police, the growing impact of the media and the progressive democratisation of civil liberties.
The constitutionalisation of the trade unions and the police refers to the former's growing commitment to procedural settlements and closer political alliance to the Labour Party, and to the latter's growing independence from local political control.
Unions are more wary of the need to avoid jeopardising the Labour Party's (and their own) interests by engaging in violence, and therefore are more apt to exert control over their members.
Correspondingly, the police have become gradually more independent of local capitalist interests.
The Home Office directs the police, rather than(as used to be the case before the First World War) local magistrates, many of whom were owners of local industries, with a vested interest in the breaking of strikes.
Geary maintains that both the police and trade unions are committed to carrying public opinion.
A second factor, the growth of the media, is said to have made both sides wary of possible bad publicity resulting from violence.
The media are held to have played a key educational and civilising role — by keeping people better informed of the issues involved in industrial disputes and of the ‘proper’ way to conduct them.
The third factor has been the democratisation of civil liberties.
The monitoring and criticism of police conduct on picket lines by such independent organisations as the National Council for Civil Liberties has served to highlight, and therefore moderate, misbehaviour, especially by the police.
Geary explains the return to tactical violence in the 1 980s partly in terms of the police's tougher and more sophisticated approach to public disorder induced by the inner-city disturbances of 1981, though he attributes much of the unusually high level of violence in the miners' strike to certain exceptional characteristics of the dispute:
It seems that several unique features — the lack of wholehearted support from other unions, the marked absence of internal unity, the militant leadership, the sheer length of the stoppage — prevented the constraints  on violence which had proved so effective in the past from being fully operative.
(Geary, 1985:147)
The success of the police strategy — involving roadblocks and the central co-ordination of riot-trained support units — caused the pickets to rely increasingly on stoning tactics.
This was the prelude to a spiral of conflict.
Picketline disorder eventually spilled over into mining communities, which became the sites of major disturbances.
Though impressively coherent, Geary's model is open to three important criticisms.
First, as will be demonstrated below, he tends to underplay the severity of the violence which occurred at places like Grunwick and Hadfields during a period supposedly devoid of such conflict.
Second, he clearly misunderstands the media's role in relation to industrial disorder.
Typically, media coverage refers only superficially (and usually disparagingly) to the issues involved in a dispute and, far from moderating police aggression, tends to justify hostility towards the pickets.
Ultimately, Geary's general argument is politically superficial Jefferson, 1990).
His explanation should have been more sensitive to the interplay between local and national democratic influences on the policing of industrial disputes.
Greater emphasis should also have been placed on the economic context in which disputes occur and on the state of political consensus — primarily, whether the trade unions are accepted in a ‘partnership’ role with the state, or are defined as problematic to its objectives (Ragin et al , 1982:243).
By briefly reconsidering the major industrial disputes covered by Geary's final two periods, it will be shown how it is more advisable to explain the characteristics of the key industrial confrontations of the period in terms of the specific audiences influencing police behaviour.
This overview will serve the related function of showing the gradual development during the 1970s and early 1 980s of a climate of opinion, antithetical to trade unions in general and mass picketing in particular, which was conducive to the repressive police tactics deployed during the coal dispute.
THE CONTEXT OF THE COAL DISPUTE
Political antecedents
Geary is undoubtedly correct to highlight the mutual restraint shown by the police and pickets at Saltley.
At the peak moment of the 6-day picket of the coke works, 800 police officers found themselves containing 15,000  pickets.
The depot was closed by the police in the interests of public safety.
However, as Scraton points out,
That one incident was taken as the moment when the predicted breakdown in law and order, the full-blown crisis in industrial relations, had arrived.
It symbolized the potential power and solidarity of the unions and demonstrated that collective action on a large scale could close workplaces.
It was also clear from the Saltley Gates confrontation that the police, regardless of their offensive tactics, were not capable of handling well-organized mass pickets.
(Scraton, 1985a:143)
This panic stimulated a reconstruction of government mechanisms for responding to mass picketing.
First, central government set up the Civil Contingencies Unit (CCU), a formal institution based in the cabinet office whose brief was to monitor and respond to industrial disputes in key industries.
Second, a greater emphasis was placed on the provision of mutual aid between police forces, an operation to be co-ordinated from the National Reporting Centre (NRC) at Scotland Yard.
In February 1974, there was a second national miners' strike.
The Prime Minister, Ted Heath, called a general election, based on the slogan, ‘Who runs the country?’.
The Tories lost the election, misjudging the mood of the electorate.
The spectre of Saltley haunted the right of the Conservative Party for another decade.
The Tories' period of opposition was partly spent contemplating a future showdown with the miners.
The Ridley Report (cf The Economist , 27 May 1978) was the blueprint for a possible strategy.
It advised a future Conservative cabinet to:(i) build up stocks of coal at power stations;(ii) plan contingency coal imports;(iii) introduce dual oil and coal-fired burning in power stations;(iv) cut the social security entitlements of strikers; and finally,(v) set up mobile police squads to deal with flying pickets and obtain sufficient numbers of ‘reliable’ non-union drivers to cross picket lines.
The next major episode of industrial conflict took place at the Grunwick film-processing factory in London, where workers — a high proportion of them Asian women — were demanding the right to unionise.
If anything, Geary underestimates the ferocity of the encounters between pickets and the police.
According to Dromey and Taylor, it was clear from first day that the police:
intended to interpret the law rigidly and arrest en masse those who did not instantly obey their dictates, however unlawful….
Forty pickets were arrested within minutes as the police emptied out of their coaches  and were ordered to pile into the pickets, hem them in either side of the factory gate and arrest anyone who stepped off the pavement.
(Dromey and Taylor, 1978:110)
Jefferson and Grimshaw show how the police control of the mass picket reflected the relative influence of several ‘audiences’:
On this occasion…the police saw their legal-democratic duty quite clearly: in their terms, it was to maintain the rights of all parties to the dispute — those of Grunwick's boss to continue production with his remaining labour force, of pedestrians and road-users to ‘perambulate freely’, of the pickets to peacefully make their protest, and of the community as a whole to be protected from scenes of public disorder.
Their occupational duty, as they saw it, was equally clear-sufficient numbers and mobile reserves for the trouble spots.
But given the lengthiness of the dispute, the demands of other policework, and the regularity of ‘trouble’, the ‘permanent’ mobile reserve, the SPG, became a routine feature of the policing of Grunwick, and especially the confrontational aspects.
(Jefferson and Grimshaw, 1984:108)
The media projected a view that the pickets were primarily responsible for the violence at Grunwick, adding to the clamour to curb mass picketing.
The so-called Winter of Discontent (1978–9) generated even more anti-trade-union sentiment, especially as Labour's attempt to establish a 5 per cent pay norm led to strikes by lorry drivers and the low paid and produced television scenes of ‘mountains’ of uncollected refuse (Scraton, 1985b).
Partly as a consequence, the Tories were returned to power under Margaret Thatcher in 1979.
Their first real test by the unions was the 12-week national steel strike, commencing January 1980.
Mass picketing was focused on the Hadfields private steel works in Sheffield.
Regarded as a routine industrial dispute, without sinister political connotations (Kahn et al., 1983), the picketing was seldom violent, very much conforming to Geary's push-and-shove model.
Moreover, the policing of the picket line was organised and controlled by local police officers according to a ‘hearts and minds’ philosophy: the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire sensibly recognised that almost every family in Sheffield had connections with the steelworkers and was keen to ensure that the police did not alienate themselves from the wider community.
The police therefore adopted a highly discretionary approach, often choosing to overlook technical infringements in the interest of public order.
Such tactics pre-empted violent  resistance even when occasional arrests had to be made (Waddington et al., 1989:76–7).
During a 4-week lull in activity outside Hadfields, there was a mass picket on 22 February on the Isle of Sheppey in Kent.
Events at this picket were to shape the character of the next major mass picket of Hadfields on 12 March.
The pickets travelling to Kent were met by unbridled hostility from local people, orchestrated by local newspapers.
Handbills appeared, depicting Lord Kitchener admonishing local people, ‘Your Island Needs You!’ and signs in shop windows declared: ‘No pickets served’(Docherty, 1983:198).
Pickets' coaches were stopped en route and searched by the police.
On the picket line itself, the conduct of Metropolitan police officers prompted accusations of brutality (ibid.:199).
This was a different experience of picketing.
Support for the strike was also waning.
Pickets turned up at Hadfields on 12 March seeking a confrontation.
The police anticipated trouble and had drafted in reinforcements from neighbouring forces.
Pickets charged them and there was hand-to-hand fighting.
Clearly all basis of accommodation had collapsed and seventy-five arrests were made.
Hadfields was largely peaceful but attitudes had hardened on both sides.
The mass picket helped justify such subsequent developments as more mobile squads of police, greater mutual aid between forces and the introduction of the Employment Act 1980 which outlawed secondary picketing and allowed the police to determine the maximum size of the picket.
The 1980–1 riots also suggested a need for improvements in police training and equipment, which were first evident in the Warrington Messenger dispute of 1983.
Ostensibly a dispute concerning the protection of a closed-shop arrangement and an attempt to resist the introduction of new technology, it is clear that the strike was symptomatic of Eddie Shah's (the newspaper proprietor's) intention to strike a blow against trade-union power.
Government ministers portrayed him ‘not only as a champion of the law but a defender of the rights of workers not to unionise’(Scraton, 1985b:158).
In anticipation of two large mass pickets on 29 and 30 of November, designed to block the distribution of the newspaper, the Home Secretary is said to have personally intervened to make sure that the police had sufficient personnel to guarantee normal distribution (Gennard, 1984:16).
Specialist police squads were brought in from outside constabularies, and their containment tactics included the deployment of ‘snatch squads’ and the indiscriminate batoning of pickets (Scraton, 1985b:158).
Hain (1986:131) is convinced that: ‘The police, publicly urged on by the Prime  Minister and Home Secretary, were determined to break the strike by preventing the mass picketing.’
The speed of the Home Secretary's intervention and the rapid deployment of riot-trained officers between forces ‘announced the arrival of a national police response to ‘civil disorder’ ' (Scraton, 1985a:149).
This was to be seen with more telling effect in the coal dispute which started some 6 months later.
The immediate context
The immediate political context was framed by the central issue of the strike itself: the National Union of Mineworkers' (NUM's) opposition to pit closures and their implications for the loss of jobs and the demise of mining communities.
The trigger for the strike was the closure of the Cortonwood mine in South Yorkshire.
The NUM responded with an ‘area by area’ strategy, obviating the need for a national ballot.
When moderate areas, principally Nottinghamshire, failed to comply, Yorkshire miners tried to bring them into line by picketing their pits.
The year-long strike eventually resulted in defeat for the NUM, due, not least, to the police success in enabling working miners to continue to enter pits and strikebreakers to return to work.
Police tactics deployed during the strike included roadblocks designed to prevent miners from reaching picket lines.
On one occasion, ‘action likely to cause a breach of the peace’ was invoked by Kent police successfully to turn miners back at the Dartford tunnel, over 100 miles from their intended destination.
On the picket lines themselves, the police made uncompromising use of the discretion available to them under public-order law.
Minor offences, e.g. stepping off a pavement or shouting ‘scab’ activities generally tolerated in industrial disputes — were sometimes used as the pretext for an arrest.
In addition, long-forgotten statutes, e.g. ‘watching and besetting’, were conveniently resurrected; bail conditions were used to deter picketing; and there were widespread allegations of the use of covert surveillance and police agents provocateurs .
The Association of Chief Police Officers (ACPO) claimed that the NRC was merely a convenient device for guaranteeing effective mutual aid for overstretched forces.
An alternative view was expressed that the NRC were under the direct influence of the Home Office, thus undermining any form of independence previously enjoyed by Chief Constables (Scraton, 1985a).
The notion of police audiences provides a useful basis on which to explain why this policy was adopted.
Taking the influence of occupational audiences first, it is reasonable to assume that rank-and-file preference  would be to avoid ‘another Saltley’.
Senior ACPO members, notably its president Charles McLachlan, the Chief Constable of the Nottinghamshire Constabulary, also prioritised the right to work over the right to picket.
Therefore, there was strong pressure on chief constables to adopt a hard-line approach from within their own institution.
The legal influences on police policy were formidable.
The Home Secretary wrote to and held regular briefing sessions with Chief Constables, leaving them in no doubt as to what he expected of them (Uglow, 1988).
Once the police roadblock strategy had been implemented, it received the immediate endorsement of the Attorney General, whilst their hard-line approach to picket-line misconduct was sanctioned by severe court sentencing of offenders.
Democratic audiences had to consent to this approach.
A virulent ideological onslaught was waged against the miners by an unsympathetic media and a large cross-section of politicians.
For the whole of its duration, the strike, which was instigated without a ballot, was condemned as illegitimate and unconstitutional.
The NUM's leaders were branded as subversive and the ‘right to work’ held as absolute.
Violent conduct by miners was condemned; that by police justified as defensive or reactive.
Any opponents of the policing strategy (e.g. pro-NUM police committees) were dismissed as partisan.
The creation of an ideological climate conducive to the harshest possible policing of the strike culminated in the Prime Minister, Margaret Thatcher's, ‘enemy within' speech, which equated the pickets with IRA terrorism and ‘subversive’ local governments (Scraton, 1985a).
The net result was a political atmosphere ‘in which it became impossible for the police as a whole to avoid a distortion of priorities and for individual police officers it became more and more difficult to disentangle fact from prejudice in assessing those whom they were sent to police’(McCabe and Wallington, 1988:134–5).
PUBLIC DISORDER DURING THE COAL DISPUTE: THE ‘BATTLE OF ORGREAVE’
We are now in a position to examine the implications of the prevailing ideological climate for the policing of public-order situations during the coal dispute.
This process is achieved by looking at our principal case study, the Battle of Orgreave.
The mass picketing of Orgreave — a tactic used to discourage the British Steel Corporation (BSC) from increasing its daily supplies of coke to its Scunthorpe steel works above a quota already agreed with the miners’ and steel workers' unions — was initially characterised by good-humoured pushing and shoving on both sides.
The first major flashpoint occurred when Arthur Scargill entered the premises on Sunday 27 May, to invoke the solidarity of steel union officials.
When he re-emerged, a crowd gathered round him.
The police chose this moment to charge at and disperse the pickets from the entrance to the plant and the NUM President was bundled to the floor.
Outraged by the police action, Scargill appeared on news bulletins later that day, calling for reinforcements to turn up and emulate the closure of Saltley.
There was no delivery of coke on the following day but, on Tuesday 29 May, thousands of pickets plus police from eleven forces descended on the plant.
From the outset, the police demonstrated a consistently uncompromising attitude.
One crowd of pickets was prevented from getting within half a mile of the gates by lines of police officers, while a second group, who had managed to assemble earlier opposite the gates, was charged by police horses and dog handlers.
When the convoys of coke lorries arrived, any attempt at picketing was rendered ineffectual: whenever serious pushing was exerted against police lines, snatch squads were instantly deployed.
Sensing the futility of their actions, some miners threw stones.
This was answered by the production of full-length riot shields and, as the throwing intensified, mounted horses with baton-wielding riders were sent in.
On the following day, Arthur Scargill was arrested for obstructing the highway.
Up until then, the number of pickets present had been small.
Predictably, however, Scargill's arrest brought scores more miners into the area.
Disorder escalated as on the previous day.
From 7 to 17 June, the NUM kept only a token picket on Orgreave.
However, on 18 June, a secretly organised mass picket caught the police momentarily off guard.
Scores of pickets brushed past the greatly reduced police presence to enter the coking plant, which had to be cleared by police.
Later, on the picket line, there was a minor confrontation accompanying the arrival of morning convoy during which a police riot shield was captured and symbolically set alight.
No further hostilities occurred until the late afternoon.
Then, a group of youths rolled a tractor tyre towards the police line.
Some officers broke ranks and were met with a volley of stones.
At this point, police on horseback and riot officers carrying riot shields chased pickets across fields and railway lines into the village and through gardens.
When the police regrouped with the intention of holding a railway bridge, pickets constructed blazing barricades out of the remnants of scrapped cars, telegraph poles and a portakabin to prevent a second advance.
The relevant explanatory variables are listed in Table 5.1.
The patent absence of police-picket accommodation at all times may be partially explained in terms of a communication context characterised by a steady   accumulation of negative encounters between the police and NUM, a complete lack of liaison between South Yorkshire police and the organisers of the mass picket, frequent resort to tactics of surprise and NUM leaders steadfastly resisting media pressure to disavow picket-line violence involving their own rank and file.
Key situational factors were also important.
Prominent amongst these were a rapid turnover of police and strikers, leaving them little time for situational adjustment, and a corresponding lack of discipline, organisation and effective command structure on both sides.
The miners and the police share occupational cultures in which solidarity and toughness were highly valued.
Each side was therefore unwilling to give ground and ready to support or go to the aid of their colleagues.
At the interactional level, the immediate precipitants of the conflict were a succession of undisciplined, uncompromising actions.
However, it would be misleading to divorce such activities from the prevailing structural relationship between the state and NUM, and the political context of the strike:
Orgreave was not seen as a local picket during an industrial dispute but a trial of strength in a politically charged struggle.
The way it was policed and who policed it was similarly defined by national rather than local considerations.
The conflict between the South Yorkshire police and the area NUM had been transformed into a confrontation between the state and the ‘enemy within’.
(Waddington et al., 1989:92)
STRIKE VIOLENCE IN AMERICA, 1870–1984
A general overview
It is common for serious disorder associated with British trade disputes to be referred to as ‘American-style violence’.
This is not without good reason.
Taft and Ross (1969:221) point out that ‘The United States has had the bloodiest and most violent labor history of any industrial nation in the world.’
According to their analysis of American industrial confrontations from the 1870s to the 1960s, violence has been most severe on those occasions when employers have tried to ‘break’ existing unions, or deny recognition to newly forming ones.
With few exceptions, labor violence was the result of isolated and usually unplanned acts on a picket line, or occurred on a prohibited parade or demonstration protesting employer obduracy or police brutality.
It might also start by attempts to prevent the transportation of strikebreakers or goods, and a clash would follow police intervention.
Where the employer refused to deal with the union, the possibility of eventual violence was always high.
The desire of the American worker for union representation took place in the teeth of employer opposition that was able to impose heavy sanctions for union activity.
(Taft and Ross, 1969:291–2)
As with the changing character of British industrial conflict, American ‘labor violence’ has undergone a series of transitions since the late-nineteenth century.
Between 1873 and 1878, for example, the hesitant growth of American trade unionism was dramatically set back by a 5-year economic depression.
During this time, trade-union membership declined by five-sixths to 50,000.
The employers saw this as an opportunity to ensure the complete destruction of trade unionism and, between 1877 and 1922, set out to achieve this aim.
Acting both singly and through employer associations, they engaged in frequent lockouts, hired spies to ferret out union sympathizers, circulated the names of such sympathizers to fellow employers through so-called black-lists, summarily discharged labor ‘agitators’, and engaged the services of strikebreakers on a widespread scale.
(Sloane and Witney, 1985:62)
Griffin et al.(1986:148) emphasise how the employers' tactics varied in their subtlety.
Sometimes they resorted to ‘divide and conquer’ strategies (e.g. hiring immigrant labour to undercut white wages), they deskilled workers to reduce their craft monopoly, used sympathetic newspapers and journals to disseminate anti-union propaganda and successfully lobbied politicians.
Some 200,000 agents provocateurs were used in 1928 alone, and the militia was called in to break strikes on 500 occasions between 1875 and 1910.
Despite the controversy it often provoked, military intervention in labor conflicts was common from 1875 to 1925.
Military forces, usually state militia, were frequently called upon during that period to preserve law and order in violent strike situations.
In theory the militia's role was to keep peace, but in fact the military often used force, sometimes wantonly, to break strikes.
During the great railroad strike of 1877, for example, 45,000 militiamen were called up in eleven states and more than 100 strikers were killed and several hundred were wounded.
In fact, between 1877 and 1892, at least 30 percent of the militia's active duty assignments involved strikes.
(Jacobs, 1982:163–4)
This situation was due to an imbalance in the law which permitted employers to reject union recognition and employ strikebreakers (Taft and Ross, 1969:230).
The 1890s and early 1900s saw a series of bitter conflicts associated with drives for union recognition.
Between 1902 and 1904, some 200 people were killed and over 2,000 injured as a result of industrial conflict (Thieblot and Haggard, 1983:15).
This was perhaps the most  violent 2-year period in American industrial-relations history.
However, the most infamous of all confrontations occurred in 1914, the year of the ‘Ludlow Massacre’, when thirty-five militia opened fire on a tent colony of 8,000–10,000 members of mining families recently evicted from their homes during a union-recognition strike.
Three men and a boy were shot dead and, when tents were set ablaze, two women and eleven children who had hidden in an underground cellar, were suffocated by smoke.
Later, three prisoners, including a strike leader, were shot dead ‘while attempting to escape’.
Outraged by this action, the miners, supported by the Colorado labour movement, took up arms and raided local mines.
After 10 days of gun battles, Federal troops were called out to quell the violence.
Including the twenty-one killed at Ludlow, the episode accounted for over fifty deaths.
The union was unsuccessful in gaining recognition: ‘The Ludlow war, one of the more tragic episodes in labor's history, failed to dissolve the adamantine opposition to unionism, which had become a fixed and immovable article of faith among many of the great industries of the United States’(Taft and Ross, 1969:256).
The war years (1914–18) were marked by attitudes of mutual restraint and government intervention on behalf of the military effort.
These attitudes were soon lifted as peacetime dawned.
There were protracted coal disputes (1919–21) as the United Mineworkers of America (UMW) sought to organise non-union counties in West Virginia.
In May 1920, there was a gun battle between miners and company guards in Mingo County, caused by the eviction of workers from company houses.
Ten people were shot dead (seven of them guards).
In the post-war depression years of 1923–32 there was a 25 per cent loss of union membership and a corresponding decline in industrial violence.
The presidential election of Franklin Roosevelt in November 1932 coincided with the promise of a New Deal for the American working class.
This was the stimulus for a new wave of conflict primarily concerned with union recognition and the right to belong to a union.
Between 1933 and 1937, a body of sympathetic legislation was enacted, notably, the National Industrial Recovery Act 1933 and the National Labor Relations Act 1935, giving trade unions the right to organise and bargain collectively, and compelling employers to bargain in good faith.
The latter piece of legislation, the so-called Wagner Act, further established penalties for employers seeking to prevent unions from organising freely and set up a new federal agency, the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) to ensure its provisions were enforced (Wallace et al., 1988).
None the less, the employers were intent on fierce resistance.
Half of  the 4,650 strikes in 1937 (involving two million workers) were over union recognition.
The newly formed NLRB was successful in spotlighting a variety of anti-union methods encouraged by well-known corporations.
These were the years of the infamous ‘American Plan’, which advocated the use of blacklists, spies, injunctions and propaganda, and the ‘Mohawk Valley Formula’ which urged employers to use the police to break up meetings and organise vigilante groups to protect strikebreakers (Fox Piven and Cloward, 1977:120).
The work of the NLRB and the publicity generated by civil liberties groups helped to turn the tide against industrial violence:
By 1940, the period of violence was over and unionism had won acceptance.
There were several reasons: most immediate, perhaps, was the need for uninterrupted production as war orders from Europe mounted; secondly, the large size of the corporations and the new degree of union strength made it difficult to recruit the many thousands of strikebreakers for full-scale industrial warfare; third, government pressures put the corporations on the defensive; and finally, the entry of the United States into the war created a need for national unity.
(Bell, 1954:246)
High inflation in 1946 heralded a strike wave of unprecedented proportions: over 4.5 million workers went on strike and more working days were lost than at any time since 1927 (Wallace et al., 1988:8).
This was the backdrop to a rising tide of anti-trade-union sentiment and pressure by the media and employers culminating in the passing of the Labor-Management Relations Act 1947 (the Taft-Hartley Act), which purported to recreate a more equitable balance of power between unions and management by prohibiting certain unfair practices by the former and providing specific rules for handling large strike which, in the president's view, constituted national emergencies.
Section 8(b) (1)(A) of the 1947 Act gave the National Labor Relations Board the necessary power to proceed against union tactics involving ‘violence, intimidation and reprisal or threats’.
The Board's overriding concern was to deprive employees found guilty of such acts of their reinstatement rights.
The Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act 1959 (the Landrum-Griffin Act) imposed added restrictions on picketing, strikes and boycotts and limited the union leaders' control over union funds and other administrative matters.
According to Taft and Ross, the object of this legislation was the ‘substitution of orderly procedures for trials of combat’(Taft and Ross, 1969:287).
The cumulative effect of successive legislative acts has been,
on the one hand to provide a platform for asserting labor's right to contend on an equal footing with capital but, on the other hand, to limit the very capacity to engage in militant confrontation.
The price of legitimate access to the political arena is tactical moderation.
(Wallace et al., 1988:23)
Many American academics now look upon strike violence as an occasional, rather than endemic, feature of American industry (Rubenstein, 1989:322).
This view is not shared by Thieblot and Haggard.
They maintain that,
Far from being an interesting but irrelevant aspect of collective labor relations, such violence and bloodshed continue to the present day.
In many industries, a strike in 1984 is almost as likely to result in fatalities, injuries, or destruction of property as it would have been in 1934 or even 1904.
(Thieblot and Haggard, 1983:3)
Their study, based on newspaper accounts across the 6-year period, 1975–81, refers to 2,598 incidents of violence; 49 deaths; 2,732 instances of damage to vehicles (including tyre damage); the use of 20 tons of TNT explosive; 182 attacks on buildings or property; and finally, 133 cases where homes were shot at, firebombed or vandalised.
Obviously, these authors are including the threat or application of violence by, or against individuals, whereas this book refers to collective confrontations of a distinctively public nature.
Nevertheless, several of their assertions provide useful talking points.
According to their data, the United Mineworkers of America is the ‘most violent’ of the larger American trade unions, with 7.36 incidents per 10,000 members during the period studied, compared with an average of 1.2 for twenty major unions with memberships of over 100,000.
The authors also devote a chapter to describing the UMW's violent conduct during strikes in 1977 and 1981.
Given its comparative relevance to the British coal dispute, it is essential that we examine this conduct in more detail.
Strike violence involving the UMW
In order to understand the UMW's tactics, one must first realise that the coal industry has a centralised bargaining structure.
Since 1950, contracts have been negotiated at 3-yearly intervals between the Bituminous Coal Operators Association (BCOA) and the UMW.
There has been a ritualised tendency, in the event of a failure to agree a contract, for union mines to  close until settlement is achieved.
Non-union mines are then persuaded by pickets to close down (technically illegally) to improve the strike's effectiveness.
Every negotiation from 1968 to 1981 resulted in strikes (Navarro, 1983:214).
The sticking point in the national strike of 1977 was the union's right to stage wildcat strikes between contracts, which had reached a very high level in 1975 and 1976.
The strike started in December 1977.
It was called under very unfavourable conditions for the UMW.
There was a low US energy dependence on coal (only 18–20 per cent); several months' stockpiles of coal were held by key consumers; UMW-dominated mines held a low share of the total number of national contracts (around 52 per cent , compared with 67 per cent in 1974); there was a growing influence on the markets of western strip mines (which tended to be non-union organised by the International Union of Operating Engineers) who would not be sympathetic; and finally, the petroleum crisis of the early 1970s had prompted the re-opening of many smaller mines (6,100 operating units in 1969 to 7,000 in 1977) which were non-union.
Thus,
To win the strike on their terms, the unionists would have to shut down not only the union mines, but also the non-union ones — at least in the East where the manpower was available to do it.
But their efforts were likely to be resisted by an increasingly strong non-union segment.
(Thieblot and Haggard, 1983:99–100)
The UMW's primary targets of attention were some 1,800 non-union mines and a host of independent transportation companies.
Within 2 days of the start, an explosion had wrecked a drilling machine at a small non-union mine.
By the time the Taft-Hartley Act was invoked ninety-five days later, there would be a total of two killings, two assaults, thirty-five bombings, the taking of one hostage, and seventy-one other ‘disruptions’ involving such things as sabotage of railroads, gunfire directed against people, trains, and motor vehicles, property damage, and other incidents of violence serious enough to be noted by the Department of Justice.
(Thieblot and Haggard, 1983:101)
In 1981, the union's position was even weaker: UMW mines accounted for only 44 per cent of national coal production; again, there were large stockpiles of coal; and generally, there was a more conservative, anti-union climate:
The political winds had also been blowing from a different and more  conservative direction.
In the event of trouble, many of the non-union operators now would have easier access — in some cases for the first time — to the political system and its protective police arm.
(Thieblot and Haggard, 1983:112)
In Virginia, for example, large patrols of state police were deployed, restraining collective violence, but encouraging cat-and-mouse tactics by the UMW, whereby
Groups of strikers assembled and disbanded, led their trooper escorts on pointless all-night drives in caravans, painted broom handles to resemble gun barrels and pointed them out of windows, and generally tried to confuse the authorities with multiple feints and parries.
(Thieblot and Haggard, 1983:117)
Thieblot and Haggard do not provide a systematic analysis of the reasons for the supposedly violence-prone nature of the UMW, or indeed, for the differing characteristics of the 1977 and 1981 disputes.
They present a general argument which sees violence as resulting from a widespread reluctance by the legal authorities to invoke potentially effective legislation, and tacitly to endorse such misbehaviour by passing it off as ‘picket-line horseplay’ or exuberance.
Nevertheless, these authors do list those characteristics of the ‘strike setting’ which they consider most conducive to violence (Thieblot and Haggard, 1983:10–11).
Thus the probability of violence is high where: the industry is fragmented into a large number of firms; workers of the strike-hit firm are well-paid, but easily replaced (notably under conditions of high unemployment); union leaders condone the use of violence; the strike issues relate to matters of ‘union security’ rather than pay; and institutions like the police and media implicitly condone violence.
Thieblot and Haggard emphasise that these observations are made only on the basis of ‘preliminary analysis’ and do not offer any empirical validation.
Notably absent from this taxonomy is any reference to the socio-political context — somewhat of a surprise given their reference to the changing direction of the ‘political winds’ in the 1981 coal strike.
This variable, and others approximating to those listed by Thieblot and Haggard, are included in a recently formulated model by Canadian researchers.
Certain of the variables included in this model augment the flashpoints approach to industrial confrontation.
It is therefore essential that we study it in close detail.
A CANADIAN MODEL OF STRIKE VIOLENCE
Using official strike dab from Ontario for the period 1958–1967, Grant and Wallace (1991) conclude that strike violence is a function of the following variables:(i) the legislative environment,(ii) the sociopolitical context,(iii) the distribution of skills among the workforce (and its corresponding degree of participation in the strike), and (iv) the strategies employed by the strikers and their employers.
Referring to variations in the legislative environment, Grant and Wallace explain that, under the Canadian industrial relations system, strike may only legally occur after a compulsory waiting period has expired and a conciliation board has met to discuss the difference between workers and employers.
According to Grant and Wallace, this technicality helps determine whether strikes turn violent.
There tends to be more division between workers where the strike may be defined as ‘illegal’; employers are likewise more apt to continue production and employ strikebreakers; and trade unions are more likely to elicit more public condemnation and encounter ‘more vigorous state repression’ when they deliberately flout the law (ibid.:1125).
In emphasising the significance of the ‘socio-political context’, Grant and Wallace point out that the existence of a pro-labour climate is likely to encourage high levels of violence.
This is because a ‘friendly’ government is less likely to suppress violent conduct by its voters.
Alternatively, violence is likely to decline during election years, when trade unionists are careful to protect ‘their’ party's image.
High unemployment is singled out as a second, key socio-political variable: depressed labour markets mean that replacement workers are available, and this could lead to confrontations as they try to cross picket lines.
The issues over which strikes are fought also fall into the category of relevant political variables.
Strikes over ideological issues (e.g. union recognition and conditions of work) are liable to be more violent than bread-and-butter issues like wages and hours of work.
The latter tend to be less emotive and are more amenable to compromise.
The ‘skill mix’ of the workforce may have a bearing on the conduct of the strike, since skilled workers tend to have a more harmonious relationship with the employer, and their relatively favoured position in the labour market usually enables them to achieve their demands without having to resort to violence.
By contrast, semi-skilled and unskilled workers may have to employ more militant (i.e. potentially violent) tactics.
Since they are more easily replaced, the employer is more likely to use strikebreakers against them.
Differences of value-orientation may be manifested in  contrasting levels of commitment and readiness to cross picket lines.
The prospect of violence is greatest where there is a roughly equal division of support for and against the strike.
Finally, the strike strategies adopted by employers and workers will influence whether or not violence occurs.
An employer's determination to maintain plant operations (possibly via the use of strikebreakers) and stare down the opposition through a protracted strike carries a high risk of violence.
While the mobilisation of large numbers of pickets may be advantageous to the union's cause, it also invites problems of disorganisation and indiscipline.
DISCUSSION
The studies of Thieblot and Haggard, and Grant and Wallace provide a useful checklist of those features of a ‘strike setting’ which make it particularly conducive to disorder.
This checklist encompasses a range of relevant variables, such as the influence of particular forms of legislation, the condition of the economy, the principal features of the industry, its product and employees, and the central issues of the strike itself.
Such variables are too specific to industrial relations to be included in the flashpoints model of public disorder.
As such, they help to complement and enhance our understanding of strike violence; though, as the Orgreave case study demonstrates, the flashpoints model provides an adequate general basis for analysing picket-line disorder.
Certain key variables highlighted by Grant and Wallace correspond to those factors considered especially crucial by the flashpoints model.
For example, each model sees the amount of legitimacy conferred upon a dispute as influencing the way it is handled by the police; and there is similar agreement that deep-seated ‘ideological issues’ are more commonly associated with disorder than more mundane ‘material issues’.
There is more room for disagreement with Grant and Wallace's assertion that a pro-labour climate is most conducive to strike violence, principally because workers may feel that such behaviour will be tolerated under a supportive regime.
The British experience of the past two decades suggests a positive correlation between the anti-union sentiments and activities of government and picket-line disorder.
There may be a methodological basis for this disagreement.
Grant and Wallace establish the relationship between strike violence and pro-labour climates on the oversimplified basis of a correlation between the incidence and severity of disorder and the percentage of Liberal seats in the Canadian parliament.
As the all-party condemnation of mass picketing in Britain in the 1980s  demonstrated, few politicians will express public support for militant trade-union tactics, and even those supporters of the labour movement may be reserved or critical in their attitudes.
Taken together, the historical and contemporary British and American examples reviewed above suggest that the way trade unions are perceived by society and responded to by the state are key factors in the genesis of industrial confrontation.
Picket-line relations have been most tranquil in those periods of British and American history characterised by ‘consensus politics’— where trade unions have been accepted into the polity (the government and those who are able to influence its policies) as legitimate ‘members’, rather than excluded as ‘challengers’(cf. Ragin et al., 1982:241).
By contrast, collective violence has been most prevalent and virulent during historical periods when trade unionism has been stigmatised as threatening or inimical to the interests and well-being of society.
Under such circumstances, permissive legal structures have enabled governments or private employers to resort to strike-breaking tactics involving the police or military to prevent or undermine trade union organisation.
Thus violence was sustained at a high level by American capitals ‘first great offensive against labor’ from the late-nineteenth century to the 1920s.
In Britain, conflict was most severe prior to the First World War, when the power to call out the police and troops lay in the hands of local employer/magistrate, and occasions like the General Strike of 1926 when fears of a worker revolution were aroused.
Since the mid-1960s, the post-war consensus politics of British society have virtually been abandoned: trade unions can no longer presume to have a partnership role and have increasingly been perceived as problematic to the national interest.
The primacy of the individual's ‘right to work’ has been upheld as sacrosanct, to be defended at all cost against the ‘tyranny of the mass picket’.
Such was the message which right-wing politicians and the British press delivered to the police from 1983 and beyond.
The ‘space’ which once existed for police and pickets to negotiate a mutually acceptable code of picket-line conduct has been closed off, as the miners and striking print workers discovered to their cost.
The British coal dispute of 1984–5 had more in common with the American ‘labor struggles’ of the early twentieth century than the post-reform era UMW strikes of 1977 and 1981.
Force, not compromise, was the key political watchword, and disorder the inevitable result.
Football hooliganism
THE HEYSEL TRAGEDY
The summer of 1985 was described by one prominent football historian as ‘the lowest ebb in the fortunes of British football’(Walvin, 1986:6).
Two major disasters, costing ninety-four lives, provoked an unprecedented public outcry and led to a series of punitive measures against British clubs and their supporters.
First there was the Bradford City fire.
This occurred at an end-of-season game where a large crowd was gathered to celebrate the team's promotion to the second division.
Fire broke out in an old, litter-strewn stand which soon became a death trap in which fifty-six people perished.
Within a few weeks of this tragedy, on 29 May 1985, further disaster struck at the European Cup Final between Italy's Juventus and England's Liverpool at Brussels' Heysel Stadium.
This happened when Juventus fans were chased out of an enclosure dominated by English supporters and, in the ensuing panic and rush to escape, a stadium wall collapsed, producing an appalling crush of bodies in which thirty-eight people (mostly Italian) died and 400 more were injured.
The resulting Committee of Inquiry (Popplewell, 1986), highlighted the problematic nature of crowd-control arrangements for the final (notably the failure to ensure the effective segregation of rival supporters and the inadequate numbers of gendarmerie), and weaknesses in the physical structure of the stadium.
The Committee refuted suggestions that the British National Front had deliberately provoked the disorder, but indicated that large numbers of spectators had consumed too much alcohol.
They emphasised as their ‘final and most important lesson…that if hooligans did not behave like hooligans at football matches there would be no such risk of injury’(ibid.:8).
Following massive international condemnation, an indefinite ban was imposed on all English clubs playing in Europe.
As Walvin (1986:9) explains, ‘The country which had developed and then exported the game found itself ostracised and reviled in the world's footballing fraternity.’
The Heysel tragedy was but the latest incident in a catalogue of infamy which had dogged the British game, both home and abroad, for as long as people could remember (ibid.).
In April 1989, hundreds of Liverpool fans were crushed to death on the terraces of Sheffield's Hillsborough Stadium before the FA Cup semi-final between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.
There was initial speculation that hooligan behaviour had contributed to the disaster, but an official inquiry by Lord Justice Taylor (Taylor, 1989) blamed police crowd-management tactics.
The Hillsborough disaster seemed to encourage a period of self-reflection and greater public sympathy for the beleaguered game of soccer.
The ban on British clubs was lifted (except for Liverpool).
There were hopeful indications of a possible decline in hooliganism both inside and outside the ground.
However, ‘riots’ before and after the Leeds United match at Bournemouth in May 1990, which resulted in 120 arrests, suggested that football hooliganism had far from disappeared and that there was still no basis for complacency.
This chapter describes and analyses soccer spectator violence, both domestically and when British teams play abroad.
The chapter begins by characterising the different forms of football hooliganism, and makes broad generalisations about the type of people who are most commonly involved.
Preliminary insights are then developed by studying explanations of disorder (or the lack of it) at American soccer and baseball matches, and of sports riots in general.
Particular emphasis is placed at this point on the distinction between issue-oriented and issueless riots, the latter tending to occur in the absence of any justificatory rationale (Marx, 1972).
This distinction provides a useful basis for a review and evaluation of specific theoretical approaches to football hooliganism.
THE NATURE OF FOOTBALL HOOLIGANISM
Before discussing possible explanations of football hooliganism, it is necessary to clarify the different forms of behaviour incorporated within this term, where these activities typically occur, and what kinds of people most commonly engage in them.
According to Melnick (1986:1–2), ‘The forms of misbehaviour commonly associated with football hooliganism include physical assaults on opposing fans and police, pitch invasions, throwing missiles, verbal abuse, vandalism, drunkenness, theft and possession of an offensive weapon.’
Such activities can vary in severity.
For example, ‘assaults on opposing fans’ could refer to a fist fight between two rival supporters or a massive chase involving hundreds of people.
Similarly, ‘throwing missiles’ embraces a number of possible behaviours ranging from the hurling of an orange to the lobbing of petrol bombs (Dunning et al., 1986).
The nature and prevalence of soccer spectator disorder has undergone a number of historical transformations.
The incidence of crowd misbehaviour reached a high point before the First World War, fell between the two World Wars, and continued to fall until the late-1950s, since when it continued to increase quite rapidly (Dunning et al., 1982; 1984).
Most contemporary forms of disorder have been evident since the inception of professional soccer in the 1870s.
‘However, the balance between the different forms has tended to vary.
More particularly, attacks on players and match officials were predominant before the First World War, whilst fights between opposing fan groups are predominant today’(Dunning, 1990:76).
There is clear evidence that both the pervasiveness and seriousness of soccer violence have been exaggerated: ‘The plain fact is, the great majority of spectators who attend football matches are unlikely to ever witness an instance of personal assault let alone be the victim of one’(Melnick, 1986:9).
This is chiefly because the hard-core hooligan element attached to one soccer club is only likely to be interested in a confrontation with the opposition's elite hooligan crew.
It is misleading to imagine that soccer violence most frequently occurs inside the football ground.
This may once have been the case.
As recently as the 1970s, for example, great kudos was attached to ‘infiltrating’ the section of end terracing behind the goals where opposing fans were gathered.
However, this tactic has been abandoned due to improved police surveillance and the greater likelihood of being caught.
Consequently, football hooliganism is more likely to occur wherever rival fans meet — i.e. in shopping centres, public houses, inside railway stations, on roads and rail, and motorway service stations (Dunning et al., 1986).
The hooligan fans are mostly white, working-class males aged 17–20.
(Though there are substantial deviations from this profile which we shall refer to below.)
Often, the groups of fans most dedicated to hooligan behaviour are organised into hard-core ‘fighting crews’(e.g. the Leeds United ‘Service Crew’, Manchester United's ‘Red Devils’, West Ham's ‘Inter City Crew’, Chelsea's ‘Anti-Personnel Firm’, Arsenal's ‘Gooners’, Millwall's ‘Bushwackers’, Tottenham's ‘The Spurs Yids’ and, in Scotland, Aberdeen's ‘Soccer Casuals’).
Several studies emphasise that, far from being marginally interested in  the game, hooligan supporters tend to be among the most committed and knowledgeable of fans (Dunning et al., 1986).
It is equally undeniable that they derive great pleasure from physical confrontations with rival groups of supporters and go to great lengths to evade the authorities and make such confrontations possible.
Such fans tend not to travel on the regular ‘soccer special’ bus coaches and trains, preferring to use scheduled public transport.
Contrary to the popular stereotype, they take care to dress smartly, according to current youth fashions.
Each of these devices improves the chances of escaping police surveillance (cf.
Observer , 2 June 1985).
Other popular myths also fail to withstand close scrutiny.
While there is no doubt that fascist organisations like the National Front have attempted to recruit members from the ranks of football hooligans, there is little to connect them with violence in the game (Popplewell, 1986:59).
Dunning and co-workers (1986) further point out that there is little proof that soccer violence is caused by the excessive drinking of alcohol: many hooligans seldom drink prior to the match to keep a ‘clear head’ for any aggression which might take place.
Common sense also suggests that there are many people who drink before attending sporting contests but do not become involved in fighting.
While violence on the field of play may generate tension and even trigger violence, one must probe a little deeper to discover the underlying social roots of the problem.
AMERICAN SPECTATOR VIOLENCE
It is possible that some basis for explaining British football hooliganism may be found in appropriate studies of American sports-related disorder.
Though violence sometimes occurs at American sporting contests, it is seldom of a comparable scale and intensity to the football hooliganism which so often takes place in Britain, West Germany, the Netherlands and Latin America (Guttmann, 1986; Smith, 1983).
Lewis (1982) calculates that there were 312 sports-related ‘riots’ in the USA between 1962 and 1970.
The seriousness of these riots varied in range, from object throwing and fist fights involving a handful of fans, to pitch invasions and damage to property involving several hundred participants.
Nevertheless, the figures indicate that 97 (31 per cent) of the riots occurred at baseball matches and 66 (21 per cent ) at American football games, with basketball (17 per cent ) and hockey (12.5 per cent ) recording the next highest frequencies.
Overall, the figures offer qualified support for Guttmann's assertion that spectator violence is class-related (1986:164).
In contrast to the British game, American soccer is watched by a more middle-class audience of both  sexes, and is practically devoid of violence.
Against this, the largely ‘blue-collar’ sport of baseball is often affected by crowd disorder.
It is worth pausing to look at the degree of crowd disorder associated with these sports and the possible reasons for such profiles.
British and American soccer violence compared
Football spectator violence is virtually absent from American society.
The contrast with the British situation seems largely explicable in terms of the differing degrees of fan involvement in the sport, the class and gender composition of the crowd and the way the sport is packaged and approached as a form of entertainment.
Roadburg (1980) provides a checklist of the key historical, ecological and social factors distinguishing British soccer as a spectator sport from its American counterpart.
One important distinction is that British soccer fans tend to have a much greater sense of commitment to, and identification with, both the game itself and their favoured soccer team than American soccer spectators.
As Roadburg points out, ‘the average British soccer fan is more able than his (sic) North American counterpart to identify with the game as a product of his heritage and culture’(Roadburg, 1980:269).
There is a partisanship and collective involvement, heightened by the segregation of opposing fans (most notably behind each goal) which is absent from the American game.
In the USA, loyalty is more likely to be spread across a variety of different sports and support for any one team is liable to be tenuous.
Away supporters are seldom, if ever, present and the crowd has less solidarity: the match-day involvement is more privatised, starting off with a family ‘tailgate party’(an informal car-park meal) before each spectator strolls to his or her seat.
By contrast, most British supporters walk the last part of the way to the stadium and derive a greater sense of excitement, anticipation and being part of a crowd.
Guttmann (1986:10) reports that 74 per cent of North American Soccer League spectators are college-educated, and 45 per cent are women.
Whilst Roadburg may underestimate the size of the middle-class and female components of the British soccer crowd, he is correct to emphasise that the terraces are chiefly made up of working-class males and that, of this group, it is the youth segment which most often engages in violence.
Roadburg surmises that adolescent gang violence against persons and property is common to both societies, but that soccer acts as a vehicle of expression for deprived or disaffected youth in Britain in a way which is not possible in America.
Roadburg seems to be suggesting that certain characteristics of the  British fans' involvement in the game (partisanship, segregation, collective identity and pre-match build-up) give rise to a greater degree of passionate commitment (and enhanced potential for disorder) than in the American equivalent.
He gives equal emphasis to the possibility that such characteristics make the game an ideal vehicle for aggressive confrontations between rival groups of young males.
As we shall see in a later section, these views are consistent with the current thinking of several British theorists on soccer spectator violence.
Violence at baseball matches
As Fimrite points out, the popular, working-class sport of baseball has a disorderly tradition.
The baseball fan at the beginning of the century — free of the possibly inhibiting influence of women spectators and close enough to the playing field in those tiny ball parks to take immediate action against erring players or umpires — was, by all accounts, an abysmal churl.
(Fimrite, 1976:204)
In the intervening decades, there was ‘a general trend toward spectator civility’(Talamini, 1987:66), only for aspects of disorder to creep back into the sport by the 1970s.
A catalogue of disorderly incidents have occurred at baseball matches in the last two decades.
Players, umpires and rival fans have found themselves being physically attacked by objects as varied as flashlight batteries and souvenir baseball bats (Edwards and Rackages, 1977; Fimrite, 1976; Talamini, 1987).
During the past two decades there have also been a number of disorderly sequels to championship victories.
For example, when Detroit triumphed over the San Diego Padres in the 1984 World Seriff,
A riot reigned for two and a half hours after the last game ended.
The crowds burned one police car, destroyed five others, threw bottles at helmeted police, torched an overturned taxi, and ripped sod from the playing field at Tiger Stadium.
(Talamini, 1987:67)
Popular wisdom suggests that baseball crowd violence is due to a combination of the macho tendencies of 20- to 30-year-old males, fuelled by the heavy consumption of beer.
The growth of baseball ‘rowdyism’ in the late-nineteenth century has been an inverse function of diminishing female attendance at the game (Guttmann, 1986:114–15).
Crowd-control measures have focused on the limitation or prohibition of alcohol, and the  installation of special family enclosures, usually patrolled by extra security personnel (ibid.).
Fimrite (1976:204) disputes that alcohol is to blame for the apparent upsurge of violence in the 1970s.
As he says, ‘there has been beer in the ball parks for years’.
He posits that some of the changing trends in baseball violence are due to the increased commercialisation of the sport.
From the early part of this century,
the ball parks grew larger and the players, seen from a greater distance, grew smaller, less familiar, less vulnerable.
From afar, they looked like heroes, and for at least 30 years or more there was a general trend toward spectator conformity.
The ball diamond was a sanctuary not to be broken into by philistines.
Then, too, there was no television to tantalize the show-offs.
(Fimrite, 1976:204)
In recent years, the affective bond between players and fans has weakened.
Increasingly, stars are accused of disloyalty to the hometown team for ‘callously’ seeking transfers to teams in higher leagues; or perceived as just ‘another member of the Establishment’for spending too much time haggling over pay and fringe benefits.
There has consequently developed ‘an alienation of affections between fan and athlete’.
This, and the growing trend in American society to express displeasure more vociferously and outspokenly than in the past, is said to lie at the root of recent player-directed violence (ibid.:204–5).
It is evident from the above profile that baseball spectator disorder tends not to involve fighting between opposing groups of disorder.
Rather, it typically involves acts of aggression towards players and officials, or over-exuberant celebratory activity including the vandalism of property.
As such, it does little to help explain the fighting behaviour of British hooligans.
GENERAL MODELS OF SPECTATOR DISORDER
How far, then, do general models of spectator disorder inform our understanding of hooligan behaviour?
There are several such approaches in the American literature.
Some researchers emphasise the potentially arousing effect of watching aggressive contact sports (Goldstein and Arms, 1971; Harrell, 1981; Russell, 1983).
However, the futility of this approach becomes apparent if we compare the levels of disorder at soccer, boxing and ice-hockey events.
Soccer is the least violent sport of the three, but the one most synonymous with crowd disorder (Pilz, 1988:168–9).
A second category of explanations employ functionalist approaches to the study of spectator disorder.
Smith (1976), for example, adopts Smelser's framework of analysis (see Chapter 1) as a basis for understanding football hooliganism.
Structural conduciveness , as applied here, deals with those features of a situation which predispose it to disorder.
Here Smith (1976) includes ‘natural rivalries’ between spectators, based on nation, region, religion, ethnicity, etc.; the absence of channels for expressing grievances, as in industrially underdeveloped or politically undemocratic societies; the possibility of communication among the aggrieved (e.g. the ‘cheek-to-jowl congestion at soccer stadia’or the dissemination of rumour or hostile beliefs via the media); and the ‘accessibility of objects of attack’, such as referees or unsegregated soccer fans.
As Smith points out, ‘Conditions of conduciveness merely make the hostile outburst possible.
The existence of a strain, conflict, deprivation or ambiguity, usually accompanied by stereotyped beliefs assigning responsibility for evils to other groups, is the second structural determinant’(ibid.:206).
To illustrate this point, he refers to the Honduras-EI Salvador ‘soccer war’ of 1969 in which a series of hotly contested border disputes provided the context for three riotous soccer matches in the World Cup qualifying rounds.
The growth and spread of a hostile belief is necessary to give meaning to the structural strain, possibly by assigning responsibility and designating a certain response as appropriate.
‘Prior to and during the three game Honduras-EI Salvador series, for example, the press reported charges of ‘mistreatment’ of Honduras fans at the hands of El Salvadoreans and accusations of ‘brutality’directed at players on both teams.’
(ibid.).
Precipitating incidents , such as rough play or disputed refereeing decisions, have the effect of narrowing hostile beliefs into ‘specific antipathies’.
It is at this stage that the mobilisation of participants for action begins.
Often, the behaviour of one spectator may (however unwittingly) serve as a model for others.
From then on, the shape and extent of the ensuing disorder will depend on the prior organisation of the crowd, the ecology (or lay-out) of the stadium, and the response of the police.
Smith favours the view that decisive policing will most effectively quell the rioting, but concedes that premature intervention may well generate uncontrollable panic.
An alternative functionalist approach has been attempted by Edwards and Rackages (1977).
These authors see the spectating of sporting events as functional for society.
During times of economic and political stability, on-the-field sports violence allows for tension release, through vicarious identification with the aggressor.
This helps the sports spectator to cope  with the frustrations and disappointments of everyday life (‘particularly those of instrumental relevance’) and helps reaffirm his/her commitment to society's values.
However, under conditions of social instability where the individual's deteriorating ‘life circumstances’ generate acute feelings of anxiety, sport may be incapable of providing adequate relief.
Thus there is a potential that ‘processesor relationships in the general society may transform on-the-field episodes of violent or non-violent sport into a catalyst precipitating violent collective behavior by spectators themselves’(ibid.:13).
Aside from the obvious problems associated with structural-functionalist approaches of this nature — chiefly the dubious assumption that violent behaviour is aberrant or irrational (Pearton, 1986:77)— each of these studies has serious limitations.
Smith's application of Smelser's model is forced to rely on an assortment of different examples and there is little sense of how well it applies to separate case studies.
The model contributes little to our understanding of why ‘hooliganism’ is synonymous with soccer, why it is more prevalent at certain times in history than others, and why it is predominantly a male, lower-working-class phenomenon.
Edwards and Rackages base their approach on the highly questionable premise that spectator violence is merely a playing out of tensions external to sport itself.
Going by their logic, we would expect to see riotous behaviour by stressed small business owners and financial investors at rugby union or American football matches.
But neither of these is common.
They fail to consider that the fans' cultural and historical relationship to a particular sport may be significant.
Even more damaging to their theory is the fact that sports spectator disorder is not always synonymous with economic problems.
Finally, it would have difficulties explaining the disorder accompanying championship victory, referred to above.
The need to differentiate between different types of riot and the contrasting meanings involved for the participants is recognised by Smith (1983).
Borrowing from the ideas of Marx (1972), Smith makes the basic distinction between issue-oriented riots and issueless riots.
The former typically involve some sort of ‘legitimating belief, i.e. ‘a belief, attitude, grievance, ideology, or definition of the situation held by riot participants that directly ties the riot to some problem in the social structure and justifies or explains (their) behaviour, at least to themselves (Smith, 1983:146).
By contrast, issueless riots are not usually underpinned by such legitimating belief: ‘Protest and demands for social change are not significant elements in the genesis of the issueless riot, nor does the issueless riot tend to result in changes in people's life conditions’(ibid.).
Smith then makes a finer distinction between four types of issue-oriented   riots (demonstration, confrontation, entry and defeat riots) and two forms of issueless riots (victory and time-out).
As Table 6.1 shows, there is a high degree of correlation between his typology of sports-crowd riots and the five types of violent sports disorder nominated by Mann and Pearce (1978).
Among the most relevant of these categories to the present discussion  are Smith's time-out riots, and Mann and Pearce's outlawry disorders.
The latter (where sports events provide groups of spectators with an opportunity to act out their violent tendencies) could easily relate to the behaviour of fighting crews.
Similarly, Smith maintains that:
Much of what is called soccer hooliganism smacks strongly of time-out behaviour.
Most of the scholarly literature on the subject suggests that hooligans are as much motivated by the desire for fun, excitement, and peer status as they are by ethnic, regional, or other animosities.
The latter seem more of a pretext for trouble than a cause of it.
(Smith, 1983:152)
Vamplew (1979:2f) states that, of the five types of disorder classified by Mann and Pearce, ‘all but remonstrance can be found at soccer grounds in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, though the majority of incidents appear to have been of the frustration or confrontation varieties’.
However, most contemporary football hooliganism corresponds to the outlawry of time-out forms manifested in fights between opposing fans and creating mayhem during trips abroad.
Thus the principal task of theories which specifically address modem football hooliganism is to account for these dominant forms of behaviour.
ACADEMIC EXPLANATIONS OF FOOTBALL HOOLIGANISM
Theoretical explanations of soccer spectator violence occupy four distinct categories.
First, there is the early Marxist approach of Ian Taylor which emphasises that hooligan behaviour is a symbolic attempt by working-class fans to restore some control over a game which they feel increasingly alienated from.
Second, there is the ethogenic approach of Peter Marsh and his colleagues which sees soccer spectator violence as a ritual expression of masculine aggression.
A third explanation, the ordered segmentation approach of Eric Dunning and his co-workers, highlights the significance of lower-working-class gang structures and early socialisation as the key to understanding the patterns of aggression displayed by football hooligans.
A final group of approaches see football spectator disorder as a way of compensating for the loss of community caused by post-war industrial and urban development.
We begin by looking at one of the seminal theories of soccer spectator disorder, the Marxist approach of Ian Taylor.
Taylor's subcultural approach
Taylor's (1971a; 1971b) Marxist approach sees contemporary spectator violence as a consequence of the increasing loss of control experienced by working-class football supporters over a game which they previously regarded as theirs.
His central premise is that most English football clubs were established by working-class occupational groups.
For example, Sheffield United were founded by a group of cutlers (hence, their nickname, the ‘Blades’), while West Ham United (the ‘Irons’) were formed by workers at the Thames Iron Foundry.
Though these clubs grew and become more formalised, supporters were still able to maintain an illusion of participation in the team's affairs.
This was because players invariably came from the local community and, by meeting fans in pubs, clubs and at civic functions, somehow seemed accountable to them.
Similarly, managers and directors appeared to share an equivalent value orientation to the fans and were more receptive to their opinions.
Supporters could perceive themselves as part of ‘a collective and democratically-structured enterprise’.
The main reason why working-class youths did not invade the pitch in the 1930s was because the ground was theirs and the playing area was sacred (Taylor, 1971a).
Modern changes in the game — specifically its bourgeoisification and internationalisation — are held to have undermined this illusion of participatory democracy.
By bourgeoisification, Taylor is referring to the increasing emphasis within the game on comfort and entertainment manifested in such developments as the reconstruction of grounds as commercial stadia (with covered stands, seats and floodlights), the payment of large transfer fees and the freedom of contract for players which enabled them to command large salaries.
Internationalisation refers to the incursion of English soccer into European competitions.
Set against these developments, soccer hooliganism may be interpreted as ‘attempts by certain sections of the class to assert some inarticulate, but keenly experienced sense of control over the game that was theirs’(Taylor, 1971a:163).
According to Taylor it is the working-class element of the crowd, and not football's new, middle-class supporters, who have the most developed knowledge of, and commitment to, the club (i.e. they possess a true ‘soccer consciousness’).
For this ‘subcultural rump’,
To induce a goalkeeper by distraction to kick into touch is to win a symbolic victory which may affect the result and one side's league position.
Whereas to invade a pitch when a goal is disallowed may be felt magically as a way of reversing the referee's decision.
And in the most final sense of all, to be arrested while fighting opposing supporters may  be felt as a way of conveying to the management by means of some psychic process the nature of the ‘really genuine supporter’, and the character of his identification.
(Taylor, 1971b:369)
There is general agreement that Taylor has oversimplified the traditional relationship which once existed between working-class supporters and their clubs.
Whannel (1979) doubts, for example, whether soccer clubs ever were participatory democracies.
He points out that, of the sixty-six English clubs founded in the nineteenth century, forty were limited companies before 1900, and there were a further nineteen by 1914.
Dunning's and his co-workers' (1984) historical survey of Football Association minutes and reports contained in the Leicester Mercury also provides evidence of pitch invasions and other forms of crowd disorder as early as the 1890s.
These outbreaks were typically spontaneous and unpremeditated; there is no evidence of a football resistance movement in action.
A further weakness of the theory is that it does not explain why so much hooligan activity is based on fan rivalries within the working class; nor can it deal with Wagg's (1984:198) observation that ‘the most notable attempts by a club's following to prevent it parting with a popular player or manager have usually been initiated by middle-class people’.
In a later subsection, we shall see how Taylor has since reformulated his approach to soccer hooliganism.
For the time being, we move on to the second of our theoretical perspectives, the ethogenic approach.
The ethogenic approach
The ethogenic approach looks upon football hooliganism as a ritualised expression of aggression, resulting from a need to demonstrate dominance and masculinity (Marsh et al., 1978).
According to this conception, disorder is rule-governed: much of the ‘aggro’ which occurs is largely symbolic, comprising a relatively harmless repertoire of threats, stares, denigratory chants and gestures (cf.
Marsh, 1975:9).
Comfortingly, almost, Marsh and colleagues (1978) explain that aggro seldom results in serious injury.
This is because those involved tend to be aware of the unwritten set of rules which determine when it is legitimate to attack and when to desist.
Aggro is likely to be considered appropriate in situations where opposing fans attempt a territorial invasion of their rivals' ‘end’; where one hooligan fan stares at, or adopts a threatening posture towards an opponent, or calls him a demasculatory name, such as‘cunt’, ‘wanker’, or ‘poofta’.
Alternatively, some types of incident on the  field of play — notably the scoring of a goal, foul play by a member of the opposing team or a bad refereeing decision — may also serve as instigatory cues.
A different set of rules then operate to impose limitations on the expression of aggro.
Generally speaking, such rules specify that violence should cease when honour has been satisfied.
A ‘smack in the mouth’ will usually be sufficient, especially if the opponent then backs down or buttons his lip.
In situations involving large numbers on both sides, honour will be satisfied by ‘running’ the opposition supporters (i.e. causing them to flee).
Life on the ‘end’ offers the actual or aspiring hooligan an alternative career as part of the ‘Rowdies’: ‘This ‘career structure’gives some young people a sense of individual achievement within a semi-formal setting opportunities denied to them in most other institutions' (Marsh, 1976:348).
The ‘Rowdies’ are the regular hooligans who routinely chant and denigrate the opposition.
Next come the older ‘Town Boys’ who are content to rest on their laurels and do not usually become involved in the aggro.
Of all those present, the ‘Aggro Leader’ enjoys most status, for he is the one who most commonly leads the sorties into the opposition (though his behaviour stays strictly within the rules).
This cannot be said of the ‘Nutter’, whose conduct is the exception which proves the rules.
The fact that other fans recognise his behaviour as deplorable and ‘beyond the pale’ is seen as proof that most fans have a tacit knowledge of the rules of disorder.
According to Marsh and his colleagues (1978) police intervention is often welcomed by the hooligans in so far as their presence provides a safety valve and prevents the aggro from going too far.
However, rules of propriety also apply to police conduct.
Should they use what is regarded as excessive or unnecessary force, they, too, might well become the targets of aggression.
The ethogenic approach is open to two major criticisms.
First, it makes no attempt to explain the class-specific nature of football hooliganism.
And second, the theory grossly underestimates the severity of some forms of spectator violence.
Witness Harrison's description of the Cardiff v .
Manchester United match in 1974:
At about 2.15, someone from the Cardiff side threw the first stone, then the bricks started flying: if they couldn't get at each other on land, then they could always fight a missile war and there was plenty of ammo flying around: the workmen who put the fence in had not swept up the chunks of broken concrete around the supports.
Swathes opened up in the crowds on either side as they saw the brickbats coming.
I saw three people hit in the face, one above the eye, one in the ear, one on the  nose, blood streaming down them.
Great cheers went up when a hit was scored, or when the police dragged someone out on the opposite side.
(Harrison, 1974:602)
Since the 1980s, football hooligans have displayed a callous cunning and organisation.
Pickering (1985:473) points out that members of West Ham United's Inter City Firm once settled an old grudge against Millwall's Bushwackers by throwing a rival hooligan under a passing train and stabbing another before leaving their personalised calling card: ‘Nothing personal.
The Inter City Firm.’
On another occasion, it was the turn of Millwall fans to pursue coaches carrying Bristol City supporters across London.
The police had prohibited any confrontation at the game, so the Bushwackers tracked their intended quarry in their cars, communicating with each other on CB-radio (Observer , 2 June 1985).
The ordered-segmentation approach
The ordered-segmentation approach shares the Marxist view that hooligans come predominantly from the lower-working class (Dunning et al., 1986; 1988).
Arrest statistics show an over-representation of people from a small number of working-class estates noted for their toughness and vandalism (Williams et al., 1984).
In order to explain this demographic effect, Dunning and co-workers borrow the concept of ordered segmentation, developed by the American sociologist, Gerald Suttles.
This concept focuses on the idea that masculine gang structures, based on age-grading, sex segregation and territorial identification, are a particular characteristic of lower-working-class communities.
Though keen rivals, such gangs have a propensity to combine against a common enemy.
In football terms, this implies that little ‘segments’ of working-class communities, which are normally in opposition, may combine in the name of the local football club to confront the common threat posed by opposition supporters.
At a superseding level of conflict, northern fans (from, say, Manchester and Liverpool), may fight side by side against the visiting fans of a southern team (e.g. Arsenal).
Taken to its logical conclusion, it is possible that the same three groups of supporters may combine to ‘represent’ England in an overseas confrontation with continental supporters (Williams et al., 1984).
For Dunning and colleagues, the aggressive predisposition of these youths is linked to a socialisation process known as the sociogenesis of masculine aggression .
From a very early age, lower-working-class boys  engage in rough, exclusively masculine forms of play, free of adult supervision.
Unlike middle-class children, they are seldom exposed to a parental emphasis on self-control; instead, there is an accent on physical punishment, and aggressive tendencies are further reinforced by the regular occurrence of intra- and inter-family feuds.
In this environment, toughness is valued by both sexes and, as the boys grow into youths, the status and prestige they are unable to achieve via education and employment is derived from their ability to fight (Dunning, 1990:76).
As stated previously, Dunning and colleagues (1984) show how football crowd violence had a low level of incidence in the post-war years, but rose in frequency from the mid-sixties on.
This is partly attributable to the increased opportunity for away travel which has increased the contact between rival groups of supporters.
However, Dunning and colleagues see the chief reason as the gradual acceptance by increasing numbers of working-class people of middle-class norms of behaviour.
From 1914 to the early 1960s, such factors as growing affluence, better education, the rising influence of trade unions and greater female participation in the workforce fostered a ‘civilising’ process.
However, not all sections were ‘incorporated’ in this way: ‘whilst the ‘respectable’sections of the working class have increased in size, the gap between them and the dwindling lower-working class, including the sections who remain ‘rough’, has widened' (ibid.:237–8).
The fact that youths from this category have been drawn increasingly to football since the 1960s is put down to possibilities offered for violence, as revealed by the mass media.
It was in the early 1960s that, parallel to its growing emphasis on the ‘disturbing activities’ of working-class youth, the media also began to focus on minor incidents of soccer crowd violence.
This may have been due to the fact that preparations for hosting the 1966 World Cup Finals were under way and there were fears that, as the English game came under greater international scrutiny, football hooliganism could damage the nation's prestige.
It was soon realised that media reporting of crowd disorder boosted the sales of newspapers — a matter of importance in an increasingly competitive industry.
Very soon, soccer grounds became ‘advertised’ as somewhere where a good fight was guaranteed, hence their appeal to the ‘rough’sections of society.
Alarmed by this influx, many ‘respectable’ fans vacated their regular places on the end terraces and congregated in the stands.
The resulting division of the ‘home’ and ‘away’ends thus became an established feature of the game.
As media coverage persisted and grew even more sensational, ‘league tables’ developed based on reputations for toughness.
Here the masculine ethos of the game and its implications for the reputation of working-class communities becomes relevant.
Given the large crowds, moreover, professional soccer provides a context where it is relatively easy to escape detection and arrest, and last but not least, a group of outsiders, the opposing team and its fans, comes regularly into the home territory where they are perceived as invaders and targets for attack.
A corollary is that these fans derive pleasurable excitement from going on away trips and invading the territories of opposing fans.
They are engaged in a kind of war game and one of their principal aims is to move with impunity in the sections of stadia favoured by home fans like themselves and to establish momentary control over the city centre pubs and other areas favoured by their home counterparts.
It is also their aim to fight and establish physical dominance over their rivals or at least to make them run away.
(Dunning, 1990:77)
Dunning and colleagues do not pretend that football hooligans are drawn exclusively from the lower working class, or that all lower-working-class adolescents and young adults use the game as a context for fighting.
They merely suggest that younger elements of the ‘rough’ working class are ‘the most central and persistent offenders in the more serious forms of football hooliganism’(Dunning et al., 1988:213).
The same authors fail to provide an entirely convincing explanation of why non-working-class hooligans (the so-called ‘soccer casuals’) are attracted to the violence.
They can only suggest that their involvement may be due to such personal circumstances as geographical proximity to ‘rougher’ areas, conflict with parents or school authorities or an opportunity to act out racist tendencies.
‘They may even become match-day ‘organizers’ or ‘planners’.
However, they are not, typically, regular fighters.
nor are they in our experience typically involved in the fighting end of the more seriously violent incidents' (ibid.:214–15).
A participant observation study of Sheffield United fans, purporting to show that hooligan supporters come from a variety of social backgrounds (Armstrong and Harris, 1991) has been justifiably criticised by Dunning and colleagues (1991) for its methodological shortcomings and contradictory presentation of evidence.
Nevertheless, anecdotal evidence suggests that Dunning and colleagues may have overstated the extent to which hooligans originate from the lower working class.
Chelsea's Anti-Personnel Firm mainly come from affluent London suburbs, places like Croydon, Harlow, Slough, and new towns like  Bracknell and Milton Keynes.
They are from upper-working-class, semi-affluent backgrounds, the Demi-Semis .
Loyalty to urban football clubs stems from when their parents used to live in inner-city areas.
Support for the old team increases, rather than decreases, when the families move out.
‘It's my roots.
Know what I mean?’
(Observer , 2 June 1985)
As we are about to discover, this evidence is more consistent with the next body of explanations to be considered in this section — those which emphasise the loss of working-class community as their key explanatory variable.
The magical recovery of community
A third group of academic theories locate the origins of contemporary football hooliganism in the post-war demise of working-class communities.
These writers have put ‘football hooliganism’, and developments among working-class youth generally, into the broader context of the social history of Britain since 1945 — in which the breaking up of traditional working-class communities, industrial decline, rising unemployment and periodic panics about unruly youth have all been pre-eminent.
Common to much of the literature has been a notion…that these kids — and many others like them — have been trying to ‘recover magically’ territory, both physical and cultural, that they have lost and to appropriate in the same way territory that has never been theirs.
(Wagg, 1984:204)
With the gradual decline of established occupations and trades went massive rehousing and the breakdown of community and neighbourhood ties.
With the onset of greater affluence and associated higher wages, came the privatisation and commercialisation of leisure.
The wages for many teenage and low-paid workers rose correspondingly.
These developments led to a changing relationship between many sections of the working class and the game they were once so slavishly loyal towards.
For the latest generation of skilled working-class adults and their families, leisure became more privatised: pubs and clubs were no longer a source of attraction unless they catered for couples and promised an evening of entertainment.
Likewise, football was to be consumed like any other consumer product — only if it offered the prospect of excitement — often as a TV spectacle in the comfort of one's own home.
Working-class youths now had a new range of ‘industries’— notably popular music and clothing — to cater for their needs.
However, for one section of youth, the lower-working-class ‘roughs’, living on housing estates and high-rise flats, for whom the prospect of unemployment was added to the possibility of boring, unskilled work, ‘only the football ground remained — stark, dirty, exposed to the elements — as a traditional gathering place for working-class lads’(Wagg, 1984:206–7).
For such people, the haven of the soccer ground offered a venue for new coalitions and a rejuvenated sense of community.
As Robins' and Cohen's (1978) study of Arsenal supporters shows, great importance was attached to the defending or taking of ends.
But the significance of this terrace solidarity went much further than this.
It is as if , for these youngsters, the space they share on the North Bank is a way of magically retrieving the sense of group solidarity and identification that  once went along with living in a traditional working-class neighbourhood.
(Robins and Cohen, 1978:137)
According to them, the subsequent involvement of skinhead supporters contributed to the notoriety of the ends.
Yet the skinheads neither created nor were created by the ‘end’.
What it gave them was a visible stage, a public platform — and what they gave back to the ‘end’ was a sense of itself, a common life-style.
The skinhead phenomenon rallied the mass of young supporters on the terraces, and brought more kids in.
(Robins and Cohen, 1978:139)
A slightly different slant is provided by Clarke (1978), who maintains that, in developing their earliest relationship to the game, young working-class fans brought with them traditional soccer/shop-floor values, such as partisanship, toughness, masculinity and collectivism.
The working-class youth had inherited a traditional way of watching a match,
seeing it not as a game between two teams but between his team and the opposition, a position which not only gave him a particular involvement, but also particular rights of commentary and criticism on the team, the management and the club.
(Clarke, 1978:43)
Recent changes in adult leisure behaviour meant that youths were less likely to be accompanied to the game by older male relatives who had previously ‘educated’ them in terms of the appropriate way to behave.
Thus previous restraints on terrace behaviour no longer operated.
The young, working-class fan had inherited the tradition without some of the controls on behaviour that accompanied it (ibid.:51–2).
Equally important were post-war developments in the game of football.
The post-war period had witnessed the growing professionalisation of the sport.
This was partly a reference to how the game was played: its new emphasis on the professional foul, dossiers on opposition players, new fitness training methods and greater tactical awareness.
Equally important, however, was the increasing commercialisation of the game via extra seating, bars, restaurants, social clubs and executive boxes.
Alongside this professionalisation was a parallel emphasis on the spectacularisation of football — i.e. an attempt to make it more attractive and eye-catching via such devices as pre-match and half-time entertainment and the regular televising of match highlights.
For Clarke, football hooliganism developed at the intersection of these trends: the fans have now taken the traditional values of toughness, masculinity, local identity, collective action and partisanship and made them part of the game's new, more spectacularised style.
The collective chanting of slogans and songs, the taking of ends and the solidaristic expressions of violence are merely the ‘old ways’ manifested in an unrestrained and more spectacular form.
Holt (1989) puts forward a synthesis of these ideas.
For him, the breakdown of working-class communities has meant that the traditional means by which men taught their relatives and apprentices how to hold their drink, and how not to allow occasional street brawls to get hopelessly out of hand, have disappeared.
Since the 1950s the old solidarities of working-class culture have disappeared.
So too have many of the communities themselves.
Networks of neighbours have been broken up by rehousing.
Sons are far less likely to follow their fathers or other male relatives into the same occupations or places of work.
Football since the 1950s has come to provide a kind of surrogate community for the young; the club defines their identity and the ‘end’ is their territory, even if they have moved out to the high-rise blocks miles away.
(Holt, 1989:337)
Holt is not surprised that many football hooligans come, not from lower-working-class housing estates, but from the affluent suburbs and new towns away from the major conurbations: ‘When a group have lost their old territory in which their traditions were established, football provides a  symbolic substitute for the young in the heart of the old community’(ibid.:339).
Taylor (1982; 1989) has recently recast his views on soccer hooliganism, bringing them closer to other approaches described in this section.
His most recent work finds him distinguishing between two separate ‘fractions’ of the dislocated working class who have become involved in soccer violence as a result of the peculiar material circumstances affecting their daily lives.
Taylor's starting point is the assertion that Britain has the ‘worst educated’ youth population of any advanced society.
The under-resourced state system produces cohorts of unqualified, unemployed or underemployed youths whose ‘conditions of existence’ are characterised by a moral, cultural and experiential shallowness.
For one section of youth, the ‘upwardly mobile, individualistic fraction of the (male) British working class’— epitomised by young dockers and construction workers — the restructuring of British industry over the past twenty years has produced relative prosperity.
Despite their lack of formal education and training, they can afford to travel to overseas matches where their crude moral values are reflected in ‘nationalistic aggression’ towards foreign fans.
A second, more troublesome fraction exists at the lowest end of the working class.
This consists of a less affluent underclass of young males who, unlike previous generations, cannot rely on the prospect of a steady job and membership of a well-integrated occupational community to nourish their sense of security and esteem.
Involvement in hooligan activity plays a significant part in their lives — by providing its own mechanism of recognition and reward.
Critics of this theoretical approach emphasise that spectator violence existed before the First World War.
It therefore seems unreasonable to see it as a result of the fragmentation of working-class communities (Dunning et al , 1984).
Moreover, there is documentary evidence that adolescents have always attended the game without the supervision of adults.
Dunning and colleagues conclude that authors like Clarke are guilty of romanticising working-class history, ‘attributing to it a degree of family, inter-age-group and neighbourhood solidarity it has probably never possessed’(ibid.:237).
DISCUSSION
Contemporary British football hooliganism most commonly takes the form of fighting behaviour between rival groups of fans.
Though the American literature on spectator disorder generally contributes few useful insights, Smith's distinction between issue-oriented and issueless riots helps to highlight the crucial difference between hooligan behaviour and the other forms of public disorder referred to in previous chapters.
Whereas the disorder associated with violent demonstrations, riots or industrial confrontation tends to focus on the defence or assertion of ‘rights’ which are perceived as being violated or denied, football hooliganism is an issueless form of activity, pursued primarily for pleasure and excitement, and to achieve the status and respect of one's peers.
The flashpoints model is therefore inapplicable to this form of disorder and other explanations are therefore necessary.
Each of the theoretical approaches outlined above is vulnerable to specific criticisms.
Nevertheless, it is possible to combine the most feasible aspects of a number of these theories into a reasonably coherent explanation of football hooliganism.
This explanation may be summarised as follows:
1
Football hooliganism is largely engaged in by young males whose position in society leaves them culturally and materially deprived.
They tend to receive an unsatisfactory education, harbour poor employment prospects and have few ways of creating a positive self-concept.
2
Hooligans tend to come from social backgrounds where masculine aggression is highly valued.
They live in (or their parents once came from) lower-working-class neighbourhoods which use toughness and fighting prowess as a criterion of status and respect.
3
Post-war urban development has meant that occupational communities no longer exist to provide readily available jobs and cater for the social needs of adolescent males.
Aggressive tendencies on the part of young men are no longer held in check by the moderating influence of older males.
4
Membership of fighting crews provides a ‘surrogate community’ and offers a career structure for earning status and esteem.
5
The game of soccer is an ideal vehicle for acts of collective aggression, guaranteeing encounters between rival groups of supporters and providing emotive issues which serve as rallying points for aggressive behaviour.
6
The mass media have helped increase the prevalence of football hooliganism since the 1960s by advertising soccer grounds as places where fighting was likely to occur, and then by creating and enhancing the notoriety of particular groups of fans.
Several of the above points appear to be endorsed by Pearson's cogent account of what makes the hooligan tick:
In a singing community of his peers he comes alive and discovers a sense of membership which is denied him elsewhere: all the more reason to embrace the slightly devilish and glamorous identity which is thrown at you by ‘them’ and sing along, ‘We are the famous football hooligans!’
(Pearson, 1979:215)
Dunning and his co-workers are undoubtedly justified in maintaining that football hooliganism was prevalent in society long before the post-war decline of community life; and that it was common for young males to attend football matches without adult supervision before the 1960s.
While these observations undoubtedly discredit Clarke's theory, Holt's position remains intact.
His analysis emphasises that, as with the other forms of disorder considered in this book, soccer spectator disorder requires a conjunctural explanation.
Football hooliganism may well be older than the present century
But the specific forms of hooliganism are new; football crowds were not segregated by age before the 1960s; youth did not congregate around parts of football clubs as their territory — they had a larger territory and community which they shared with their older male relatives.
When there were fights at football matches there was no dramatic media coverage.
All of these features have combined to create the contemporary problem; hooliganism exemplifies to perfection the difficulty of disentangling what is new from what is old in social history.
(Holt, 1989:343)
The ‘Troubles’ in Northern Ireland
This chapter sits uncomfortably in a book about public disorder.
Some might argue that it would be more appropriate to treat the recent ‘Troubles’ in Northern Ireland (from 1968 to the present) as an example of guerrilla or civil warfare.
One reason for including them here is that the bombings and assassinations of today are the legacy of the civil disturbances of the 1960s.
As such, the escalating conflict in Northern Ireland offers a useful paradigm for predicting whether a similar process of escalation might feasibly occur on the British mainland.
A second reason is to show how recent British security developments are based on precedents set during the containment of the Irish conflict.
The chapter begins by examining the historical roots of the present Troubles.
It then traces the development of the conflict from the seminal activities of the Catholic civil rights protest of 1968 to the introduction of the British Army in 1972.
A third section documents and analyses the increasingly repressive role played by the security forces and the corresponding violence employed by insurgent civilian paramilitary organisations.
Finally, the chapter evaluates the likelihood of recent patterns of conflict in Northern Ireland being reproduced elsewhere in Britain, and briefly explains how the security approach developed in the ‘orange state’ has served as a model for British police practices.
A TROUBLED PAST
The present Troubles in Northern Ireland are the most recent manifestation of a centuries-old history of conflict.
Between the twelfth and seventeenth centuries, a succession of English monarchs made a series of expansionist forays into the neighbouring country of Ireland.
As early as Al) 1250, Norman leaders had subjugated most of Ireland's Gaelic population.
Fifty years of guerrilla-style rebellion by the Gaels gradually reduced  the amount of territory controlled by the invaders to a small enclave around Dublin, known as the Pale.
There settlers established the earliest English plantation in Ireland.
Further attempts by the English to extend their presence in Ireland were successfully resisted.
A fierce uprising in 1534 was suppressed by Henry VIII, who declared himself King of Ireland in 1541.
England was a Protestant country, while the Gaels were almost exclusively Catholic.
The Church of Ireland was formed in 1560 to convert the Irish to Protestantism.
These and other English ways were resisted.
In 1579, when the Gaels attempted to forge an alliance with Spain, the English slaughtered thousands of Irish people, destroying their crops and livestock.
As a result, the English jurisdiction over Ireland extended across Leinster, Munster and Connacht, leaving only the remote and troublesome province of Ulster as an unsubdued Gaelic stronghold.
However, by 1607, the last of the Ulster chieftains had either been routed or driven into exile and, in six of the nine counties, English and Scottish settlers arrived to consolidate colonial rule and the English monarchy.
By 1640, 100,000 planters had arrived in Ireland when the native population numbered only one million inhabitants.
In 1641, the Gaels rebelled again, this time against their most immediate oppressors, the Protestant planters.
Further uprisings occurred until 1649 when Oliver Cromwell, fresh from his victory in the English Civil War, brutally put down the recalcitrant Gaels.
Many Catholics were banished to the west and south of their country.
Some twenty-six of the thirty-two counties of Ireland were subsumed by the English government, with large sections of land being awarded in payment to those who had fought and financed the war.
More conflict followed the arrival of the deposed Catholic King, James II, in Ireland in 1689.
The exiled monarch rallied an Irish Catholic army to do battle against his usurper from the English throne, the Dutch Protestant prince, William of Orange.
James besieged the Ulster city of Derry, but its 35,000 Protestant inhabitants successfully defended it, due largely to the leadership and example of the ‘Apprentice Boys’.
One year later, William arrived with his army in Ireland and proceeded to defeat James's Irish troops and their French allies at the River Boyne near Drogheda.
These victories at Derry and the Boyne have hallowed places in Protestant folklore.
Following James's defeat, more Catholic land was confiscated, leaving them with a mere 14 per cent share of Irish territory.
Then, harsh Penal Laws were introduced, forbidding Catholics from entering public employment, voting in local or parliamentary elections, openly practising their  religion and carrying firearms.
The law also abolished the principle of primogeniture (the direct passing on of land to the first-born son), save for those cases where the eldest male was prepared to embrace Protestantism.
Unless this occurred, the land was divided equally amongst all the male heirs, reducing the size of Catholic plots.
The end of the eighteenth century saw the development of the United Irishmen movement, a body (including many prominent northern Protestants) committed to greater equality for Catholics.
Unwilling to allow legal reforms like the Catholic Relief Act 1793 (which repealed some aspects of the Penal Laws) to appease them, the movement rose up in rebellion in 1798.
The rebellion was crushed by the British Government, which then passed an Act of Union in 1801, abolishing the Dublin parliament and integrating Ireland with the UK.
The Irish — politically and militarily outmanoeuvred — were allocated 100 of the 660 seats at Westminster.
Restrictions on trade were lifted but, due to the expropriation of Irish wealth, only Ulster — and Belfast in particular— was able to flourish under the Union.
This growth and industrial expansion of Belfast, and a corresponding famine in the south, facilitated a dramatic rise in the city's Catholic population (from 6 per cent in 1800 to over 30 per cent in 1861).
However, because the Catholics had little share in the city's wealth creation, they continued to identify with the nationalist tendencies of the southern Irish majority.
In the 1885 British election, the nationalist Home Rule Party won eighty-five seats at Westminster (including seventeen out of thirty-three in Ulster).
Finding themselves holding the balance of power in parliament, they managed to introduce the Home Rule Bill of 1886.
This, and a second bill in 1893, were both defeated.
However, a third bill was passed in 1914, but not implemented due to the outbreak of the First World War.
Protestant Unionists had begun to respond to this threat to their supremacy by organising a private army, the Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF), said to have had the backing of the Conservative Party and the British military establishment.
In the south, recruiting began for the Irish National Volunteers.
When war broke out with Germany, many UVF members and National Volunteers joined the armed forces.
However, some remnants of the latter (the Citizen Army and Sinn Fein Volunteers) seized Dublin in 1916 and proclaimed it an Irish republic.
This ‘Easter uprising’ was soon put down, its leaders rounded up and shot.
The 1918 General Election heralded the political ascendancy of Sinn Fein(the Gaelic for ‘ourselves alone’).
The party won seventy-three out of 105 available Irish seats, thus ousting the United Irish League (the old  Home Rule Party) as the major Irish political force.
(Though, of the thirty-seven Ulster constituencies, the Unionists won twenty-two.)
Sinn Fein 's success was built around the pledge that, if elected, they would refuse to take up their seats in Westminster and set up a separate Irish parliament instead.
True to their word, Sinn Fein 's newly elected MPs soon convened the first meeting in Dublin of Dail Eireann and declared their independence.
Thereafter, a civil war was waged between the re-formed Irish Volunteers (soon to be known as the IRA) and the Royal Irish Constabulary (RIC).
Originally fought out in the south and west of Ireland, hostilities then shifted to the north which became the focal point of paramilitary gun battles and sectarian rioting.
The Government of Ireland Act came into effect in May 1921.
As a result, two elections were held: one in the six counties of the north, and another for the Home Rule parliament in the south.
In the north, there was an 89 per cent turn-out which resulted in forty seats for the Unionists to six each for Sinn Fein and the Nationalist parties.
Consequently, on 22 June 1921, the King officially opened the new parliament and Northern Ireland was born.
This partition of Ireland into the twenty-six counties of the Irish Free State and the six counties of Northern Ireland has endured to this day.
(In 1949, following the Free State's secession from the British Commonwealth, the Irish Republic was formed.)
Within a year of partition, the Constabulary Act (NI) 1922 was passed, which provided for the formation of the Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC).
This was a predominantly Protestant force which soon came to be regarded as repressive and bigoted by the Catholic minority.
The ‘B Specials’(a part-time force of largely Protestant volunteers) were retained to work alongside the RUC whenever necessary.
Police powers in Northern Ireland were virtually unlimited.
The Civil Authorities (Special Powers) Act 1922 enabled the security forces to search and arrest arbitrarily, to detain suspects for up to 48 hours for the sole purpose of interrogation and to break up assemblies of three or more persons on the grounds that their presence might lead to a breach of the peace.
Under authority invested in the Minister for Home Affairs, the Act also provided for internment without trial, the imposition of curfews, the serving of exclusion orders against named persons, the prohibition and distribution of certain forms of literature, the banning of various associations and the death penalty for causing or attempting to cause an explosion likely to lead to injury.
As Walsh (1984:328) emphasis, the Special Powers Act remained unmodified until 1972.
‘The history of its application  throughout this period suggests that its more important function was to suppress all forms of challenge, whether peaceful or violent, to the hegemony of its unionist sponsors.’
The creation of the new state was seen as illegitimate by large sections of the southern population and by Catholics in the north.
The contested nature of this political arrangement was evident in skirmishes with the IRA in the 1920s, around the Second World War and in an extended campaign, lasting approximately from 1956 to 1962.
The present Troubles have been the most bitter and prolonged in recent Irish history.
Though an inexorable development of the centuries-old political struggle, we shall see how the present violence ‘was born of the denial of civil rights to the Roman Catholic minority.
The conflict itself has given birth to new violations of human rights, which have, in turn, been the impetus for further fighting’(Hewitt, 1982:153).
THE BASIS OF CONFLICT
In Ulster, some two-thirds of the population are Protestant (the Loyalist, or pro-British section of the country), while the remaining one-third is Catholic (Nationalist), defining itself as Irish.
The present wave of Troubles has its basis in the Catholic grievances about discriminatory practices which have operated against them ever since the state's inception (cf.
Darby, 1983).
To begin with, Catholics objected to religious discrimination reflected in the unfair allocation of jobs, housing and industrial investment.
A second serious cause of complaint concerned the heavy restrictions on the local election franchise which was not available to lodgers, sub-tenants and children under 21 living with their parents.
This cut out a quarter of people otherwise eligible to vote, the majority of whom were Catholics.
Moreover, the Representation of the People Bill 1946 entitled limited companies to up to six votes in local elections, depending on their rateable value.
This, too, operated to the advantage of Protestants.
A similar complaint surrounded the deliberate manipulation of ward boundaries (i.e. ‘gerrymandering’) to ensure the greatest possible representation of Protestant local politicians.
Finally, there was popular Catholic resistance to the implementation of the Civil Authorities (Special Powers) Act, and resentment at the retention of the B Specials, who were seen as drawn from, and biased towards, the Unionists.
This is insufficient to explain why radical protest suddenly became so salient in the late 1960s.
Part of the answer lies in the growth of an Irish Civil Rights movement, stimulated, in turn, by the emergence of a larger, better-educated Catholic middle class, less willing to accept a status of inferiority and blatant discrimination than earlier generations.
Two other political factors were pivotal.
First, there was the accession to power in Britain of the Labour Party, some of whom were sympathetic to the idea of ‘sensible reform’(Bew et al., 1979).
Second, there was growing Catholic disaffection from the moderate policies of the Catholic National Party.
The attitude of the Catholic working class was crucially important, not least because:
while everywhere else (including the Protestant community) the unskilled section of the working class was diminishing as a proportion of the work-force, in the Catholic community it was actually increasing.
No less than a quarter of the non-agricultural work-force was consigned to the residuum of unskilled labour, excluded not only from political life but also from social rewards.
This sector constituted an immense reservoir of opposition to Unionism and indifference to moderation.
(Bew et al., 1979:170–1)
The Civil Rights movement was given a major thrust forward by the ‘Caledon squatting incident’(20 June 1968).
This episode concerned activities in a small village located in the Dungannon Rural District.
There a local Northern Ireland MP occupied a council house in protest at the eviction of a Catholic family and reallocation of their house to a Protestant woman who did not rate as a priority for rehousing.
The incident received widespread television and press publicity, and prompted a civil rights march on 24 August from Coalisland to Dungannon.
The march, the first ever organised by the Northern Ireland Civil Rights Association (NICRA), involved 2,500 protesters and was peaceful from start to finish.
This was not true, however, of a similar march in Londonderry 2 months later.
THE LONDONDERRY MARCH AND THE ESCALATION OF VIOLENCE
The Londonderry march of 5 October 1968 was proposed, and initially only supported, by Londonderry left-wing and pro-Republican activists.
NICRA had been concerned about the potential for violence which arose when the Apprentice Boys of Derry gave notice of their intention to stage an ‘Annual Initiation Ceremony’ to coincide with the demonstration.
However, they agreed at the last moment to participate.
On 3 October, the Minister of Home Affairs prohibited all processions occurring within the city's walls, but the march took place as planned.
The influential Cameron Report, which traces the development of  conflict in Northern Ireland from June 1968 to May 1969 (see page 149), acknowledges that NICRA had no intention of staging a disorderly protest.
On the other hand,
The extremists of the left were anxious to ensure that there was a violent ‘confrontation’ with the police, and to organise opposition in the city on class lines.
Since these extremists had been principally responsible for the detailed organisation of the march it is not surprising that there were no serious plans to control it, or to ensure that it went off peacefully.
The chief marshal notified to the police appears to have been inexperienced and relatively ineffective.
(Cameron, 1969:27–8)
There were two related problems: first, the organisers greatly over-estimated the size of march (putting the likely turn-out at 5,000 when it was closer to 2,000); and second, the stewards included serving IRA members.
The Report makes it plain that the police ‘certainly expected trouble’.
They regarded NICRA as a ‘Nationalistic’ movement and saw the march as being ‘effectively in the hands of a small group of left-wing and Republican extremists in Londonderry’(ibid.:26).
Usually, only sixty officers were available but, on this occasion, 130 men had been assembled (ibid.:28).
It may also have been significant that the local County Inspector was on leave and that the County Inspector in charge of the RUC's Special Branch supervised the operation.
From the outset of the march, the demonstrators observed a different route to that notified to the police.
As they set off to cross a bridge already cordoned off as a prohibited area, the police hurriedly re-formed in front of them.
Two MPs at the apex of the march were batoned, apparently without instruction from the senior officer.
There was great confusion and indignation as the marchers were forced to halt.
A senior NICRA member appealed to the crowd to eschew violence, but could not be heard above the din.
Thirty more minutes elapsed without any further progress before she and several others appealed to the crowd to disperse.
At this stage, some demonstrators (reputedly, members of ‘Young Socialist Alliance’) threw placards and stones at the police.
Police were instructed to draw their batons and move in to disperse the marchers.
However, far from responding in an organised manner, ‘the police broke ranks and used their batons indiscriminately’(ibid.:29).
A second group of police assembled behind the marchers, effectively hemming them in.
Water cannons were then introduced and turned on marchers and innocent bystanders alike (ibid.).
The crowd was eventually scattered but, later that evening, the police  tried forcibly to remove a political banner at the city centre's War Memorial.
Some protagonists (said to be non-marchers) were chased into the Catholic Bogside area of the city, where barricades were erected, a number of petrol bombs were thrown, and some looting took place.
A group of stone-throwers were rapidly dispersed when members of the Reserve Force drove landrovers into them.
The resulting television and press publicity proved harmful to the authorities.
On 9 October, students at Queen's University, Belfast, set up the People's Democracy (PD) group, ‘a loose activist body committed to civil rights reforms, but with a tough Young Socialist hard core’(Farrell, 1980:247).
This movement was the instigator of a series of civil rights marches across the north, many of which provoked violence by Protestant counter-demonstrations.
Derry, in particular, seemed to be in a state of constant turmoil as marchers broke the government's ban on processions several times a day.
Something clearly had to be done.
On 22 November 1968, the Prime Minister, Terence O'Neill outlined an ameliorative package of reforms which, in amongst its other measures, encouraged local authorities to devise a points system for the allocation of housing; abolished the company vote for local elections; and repealed parts of the Special Powers Act.
However, as Farrell explains,
It was too little too late.
It was enough to outrage the Loyalists without satisfying the Civil Rights movement at all.
The whole campaign began to centre around ‘One man, One Vote’— effectively who controlled the gerrymandered councils.
O'Neill wouldn't concede it — it would have split the Unionist Party.
The Civil Rights movement wouldn't be satisfied without it.
(Farrell, 1980:248)
Consequently, there were a series of marches across Northern Ireland.
The most significant of these was the 4-day march from Belfast to Londonderry, starting on 1 January 1969.
This march was modelled on the famous Selma-Montgomery march of the American Civil Rights campaign.
As anticipated, it was systematically harassed by Loyalists.
(Subsequently, the RUC was accused of leading the marchers into an ambush consisting of stone-throwing, cudgel-wielding assailants, many of them off-duty B Specials.)
The march eventually reached its destination but, on the same night, barricades were erected against an RUC raid on the Bogside.
A pattern had now been established:
Protestants were ready to counter any organized Catholic action with  violence to ‘nip in the bud’ the violence of rebels.
Protestant violent action against Civil Rights marches was seen by Catholics as a threat to their communities.
They reacted to the Protestant violence with defensive counter-violence which was in turn interpreted by Protestants as a confirmation of their belief that the Civil Rights movement was a front organization for an armed Catholic rebellion.
(Easthope, 1976:417)
The resounding election victory of 21-year-old Bernadette Devlin, a student member of PD who stood as an anti-Unionist candidate, in the Mid-Ulster by-election on 17 April, was taken as affirmation of the minority's support for Civil Rights movement.
Confronted with this reality, O'Neill conceded the principle of ‘one man, one vote’, and the full parliamentary party voted it in on 22 April.
That night, two major water pipes were blown up, depriving Belfast of its water supplies.
This was allegedly perpetrated by Protestants intent on panicking the Unionist Party into bringing O'Neill down.
If this was their intention, they succeeded — by precipitating his resignation.
The election of O'Neill's successor, Major James Chichester-Clark, resolved nothing.
The Catholics, with their new-found self-confidence, were not prepared to accept unjust second-class citizenship, while Unionists were unwilling to relinquish generations of privilege and supremacy.
Things came to a head at the Apprentice Boys' parade in Derry on 12 August.
The parade was scheduled to proceed through the city and skirt round the walls overlooking the Bogside.
The march — an annual commemoration of the siege of Derry — was a provocative symbol of Protestant mastery.
It was stoned as it reached the Bogside; Catholics clashed with the RUC; and the Bogside Defence Association erected barricades.
Petrol bombs were thrown when the RUC drove armoured vehicles at the barricades.
CS gas was fired for the first time in Northern Ireland.
This was the prelude to 3 days and nights of conflict.
Several authors agree that the Bogside riot represented the symbolic defence of community (Easthope, 1976; Scarman, 1972).
Barricades were erected at the precise boundary of the two religious communities in an area of no-man's-land between a Catholic cathedral and a Protestant church, both rumoured to be threatened by attack.
Bayley and Loizos observe that:
very little fighting in Derry was of the hand to hand nature.
Generally in Ulster violence was directed against symbols rather than persons the burning of an Orange Order assembly hall, police stations, or post offices.
For example, people of the ‘wrong community’ in mixed  neighbourhoods were told to leave their houses, which were then burned; the people were then usually allowed to escape.
(Bayley and Loizos, 1969:278)
They had no desire to progress beyond their barricades: ‘Their whole rationale was that they were fighting a defensive battle for the protection of their community against arbitrary attack’(ibid.).
On 14 August, as sympathetic rioting flared up in other Ulster towns and cities, notably the Falls area of Belfast, the B Specials were brought in to replace the RUC on the edge of the Bogside.
However, in the early evening, British troops moved into Derry, and negotiations between the British commander and representatives of the Bogside Defence Association resulted in the withdrawal of B Specials.
The Catholics were euphoric at this outcome:
The Bogsiders felt that they had won — not only because they had kept the RUC out of their area but because they had forced the British Army to intervene.
They sensed vaguely that direct British intervention re-opened the whole constitutional question.
(Farrell, 1980:262)
THE SPIRAL OF REPRESSION
A brief truce followed the arrival of the British Army, but publication of two major government reports led to a resumption of the conflict.
On 12 September 1969, the Cameron Commission (referred to on pages 14–6) reported its findings.
The Commission validated the Civil Rights movement's complaints about gerrymandering and discrimination, pointed to evidence of violence and indiscipline among RUC officers, and noted the partisan attitudes and behaviour of the B Specials.
The Hunt Report, published on 10 October, recommended the disbandment of the B Specials and the disarming of the RUC.
The report also recommended the replacement of the B Specials by an Ulster Defence Regiment (UDR), to consist of a locally raised militia.
This last proposal especially outraged the Loyalist communities who, apparently,
failed to understand that the UDR would also be charged with policing the border and the countryside and would, in fact, be somewhat more efficient in its vigilance against a dreaded IRA invasion.
All that the loyalists knew was that their very own Special Constabulary was going to be dismantled and that this had been one of NICRA's long-standing  demands.
The Hunt report was thus seen on the Shankill as a craven cave-in to Fenian rioters.
It had to be repudiated before its terms of surrender could take effect.
(Kelley, 1988:123)
On the night of 11 October, a day after Hunt's publication, Protestants gathered on the Shankill Road to attack the Catholic Unity Flats, threw stones and bottles at the British troops who were thwarting their advance, overturned cars and set them ablaze, and, unprecedentedly, directed gunfire at the RUC.
This fire was returned by police and army personnel.
The Catholics, too, organised and armed themselves in anticipation of a Protestant backlash or about-turn by the security forces.
Having played little part in the August riots (epitomised by the derisory slogan, ‘IRA — I Ran Away’), old IRA men came out of retirement (Rose, 1972) and ‘there was a steady stream of recruits from young men who had seen houses and streets burnt down by Loyalist mobs and who'd been unable to prevent them’(Farrell, 1980:267).
Such action widened the growing split between those Republicans (notably the Provisional IRA and Provisional Sinn Fein) who felt that military action was the key to Ireland's liberation, and those, like the official IRA and Sinn Fein , who considered that political means were still preferable (Hannigan, 1985).
The Army's preference to appear neutral was severely undermined by its role during the Loyalist marching season of 1970.
An Orange parade on 31 March was the prelude to 4 days of conflict between Catholics and the British Army in Ballymurphy.
Perceiving the Army as a protective cover for Loyalism, Catholics attacked the march as it went past the Cloned and Ballymurphy areas.
British soldiers saturated the latter area with CS gas before taking up occupation.
Catholics threw petrol bombs, provoking the British Commander to warn television audiences that future petrol bombers would be shot dead.
Escalation was relentless.
On 1 July 1970, the Criminal Justice (Temporary Provisions) Bill was rushed through Stormont.
This provided for a mandatory 6-month prison sentence for anyone found guilty of rioting.
Two days later, the Army raided a house in the Lower Falls where they found a collection of arms.
This action provoked another major riot.
Again, the Army flooded the area with CS gas.
Temporarily withdrawing in an attempt to draw out the IRA, they returned to occupy the area for a further 36 hours (Farrell, 1980:273).
A curfew was maintained and soldiers allegedly smashed down doors and destroyed furniture whilst conducting searches.
Not just illegal, it was also counter-productive, fuelling further resentment among Catholic families (McCauley, 1989:143).
The IRA responded with a bombing campaign directed at business and commerce.
From April to June 1971, there were 134 such bombings.
The Army was immediately authorised to shoot ‘with effect’ at anyone acting suspiciously.
This was followed, in August, by the blanket banning of all marches and the sudden implementation of an ‘intermentpolicy’(McGuffin, 1973).
On 9 August, 349 arrests were made as the military swooped to round up serving and former IRA activists.
However, due to poor intelligence and a tip-off to the IRA, most victims were civil rights agitators, not IRA supporters (White, 1989).
In the 4 days of violent rioting which followed, twenty-two people were killed, nineteen of them civilians.
The Catholic population was further incensed by revelations that a dozen internees had been beaten and subjected to sensory deprivation techniques while being interrogated.
These ‘five techniques’(requiring prisoners to wear hoods over their heads unless they were separated from other inmates or being interrogated, having them stand spreadeagled against a wall for up to 43 hours, depriving them of sleep, subjecting them to electronic noise and beating them) were subsequently condemned as ‘torture’ by the European Rights Commission (Hewitt, 1982:157–8).
The repression of the IRA continued unabated: 650 prisoners were interned by the end of November.
Many of these were transferred to an internment camp at Long Kesh near Lisburn.
In October, two women were shot dead by the Army for touring the Lower Falls with a siren, warning inhabitants of imminent raids.
The ‘Provos’ responded with an urban guerrilla offensive, consisting of attacks on the Army, RUC and Protestant civilians.
As Farrell (1980:287) explains, ‘Internment had turned a campaign of pinpricks into an all-out war.’
Things came to a head on 30 January 1971 when a NICRA march in Derry, rendered illegal by Faulkner's blanket banning of all marches the previous August, found its exit from the ghetto blocked by British soldiers, including the Parachute Regiment.
The Army and RUC had previously decided that, while the demonstration was too big to be prevented, it should none the less be confined to the ghetto.
Thus finding their exit blocked, most of the marchers respected the barriers.
Others began jeering and eventually threw bottles and stones.
The Army moved in with a water cannon and tear gas, forcing the marchers into hasty retreat.
But then, suddenly and without any warning, the army opened fire.
Panicked marchers and onlookers ran for cover.
They threw themselves down on the street or took shelter behind cars and in doorways.
Still the shooting continued — methodical, aimed, deliberate.
People were  being hit with live lead bullets and were screaming for help.
A priest ran out into the road and knelt beside a body which had shined the street red.
A couple of men waved white handkerchief frantically above their heads as they walked gingerly to where other forms were lying, deadly still.
When the firing stopped, 13 Catholic had been killed and 29 wounded, one of whom would die several weeks later.
Several of the original 13 dead were teenagers.
It was Bloody Sunday in the Maiden City.
(Kelley, 1988:163)
Official accounts of the shootings emphasised that soldiers responded to heavy IRA nail bombing and gunfire, suggesting that a major battle had taken place.
This version was contradicted by British press reporters who personally witnessed the killings (see p. 173).
‘Bloody Sunday’ provoked a retaliatory campaign of violence by the Provos.
This, in turn, prompted a political intervention.
In March 1972, the Conservative government suspended Stormont (the Northern Ireland Parliament) and assumed direct rule of the province.
Following the failure of militarisation and a sequence of abortive attempts at political reform, the British reverted in the mid-1970s to a policy based the ‘primacy of the police’.
This policy involved the ‘normalisation’ of citizen-authority relations in Ulster, i.e. an attempt to ‘portray the six counties as a ‘normal’part of the UK which needed civil policing rather than military invasion' (McCauley, 1989:144).
Henceforward the RUC would play the dominant security role with the Army gradually being phased out.
To facilitate this change, the Special Powers Act was superseded by two new pieces of legislation, the Northern Ireland (Emergency Provisions) Act, introduced in 1973 and revised in 1978, and the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act 1974.
In Walsh's view,
This legislation is designed not only to counteract the violence by harsh, emergency measures, but also to undermine the political nature of the violence by characterising it as mere criminality; the hope being that it will diminish the level of public support for those involved.
(Walsh, 1984:335)
However, this process ‘has produced its own sequel of human rights violations’(Hewitt, 1982:158).
To begin with, the Emergency Provisions Act (EPA), established special ‘Diplock Courts’ where ‘scheduled’or ‘terrorist’offences (murder, or attempted murder, and explosive-related) are tried by a single judge in the absence of a jury.
Other provisions  ‘abolished the prohibition on hearsay evidence and rendered admissible as evidence ‘confession’ statements which, although involuntary, had not actually been obtained by torture, inhuman or degrading treatment, threats or inducements' (ibid.).
Section 11 of the Act authorises police officers to arrest anyone they suspect of being or having been involved in terrorist activity.
It is unnecessary for the suspicion to be reasonable; nor must the person be suspected of having committed an offence.
Once arrested, a person may be detained for up to 3 days without knowing what he/she is alleged to have done.
Another category of arrest is established under section 12.
In this case the initial suspicion must be reasonable, whereupon the person may be held for up to 7 days.
The Army has similar powers of arrest under section 14 of the Act, but detention may only last for up to 4 hours.
Walsh maintains that,
In practice, these powers are interpreted as authorising arrest for general questioning.
They are primarily used for screening purposes, intelligence gathering, surveillance and harassment.
As many as 90 per cent of the persons arrested under these powers are released without charge after having been detained for anything from four hours to seven days.
For many individuals the experience is repeated several times a year, thereby constituting a serious infringement of their personal liberty, disrupting the lives of their families, often preventing them from complying with requirements for obtaining welfare benefits and effectively making them unemployable.
(Walsh, 1984:336)
In addition to the aforementioned powers, police and Army personnel may stop and conduct random street searches on pedestrians or motorists for possession of unlawful munitions or transmitters.
On the appropriate authority of a senior officer, security personnel may enter a person's home for similar purposes.
They can stop people, without prior basis of suspicion, ask them for personal details or question them about their knowledge of recent terrorist incidents.
Another centrepiece of the government's emergency legislation is the Prevention of Terrorism Act 1974 (redrawn in 1976 and 1984), passed in the wake of the Birmingham pub bombings of November 1974, in which twenty-one people died as a result of two bomb blasts.
The Act enables the authorities to detain anyone ‘'reasonably’ suspected of being involved in the commission, preparation or instigation of acts of terrorism' (Hewitt, 1982:166) for up to 7 days, and to take out exclusion orders banning British and Irish citizens from leaving or entering Great Britain or Northern  Ireland on the grounds that they have been, or intend to become, involved in acts of terrorism.
The individual is never informed of what it is he (sic) is alleged to have done to give rise to the suspicion; nor, indeed, is it necessary that he be convicted of any offence.
The Secretary of State acts as judge, jury, prosecution and defence.
(Walsh, 1984:340)
A further controversial aspect of Westminster's normalisation programme was the abolition of the ‘special category’ status previously afforded to those convicted of scheduled offences.
Such people were based in separate areas of the prison, wore civilian clothes rather than prison uniforms and organised their daily activities independently of prison routines.
These privileges were a recognition of their ‘prisoner of war’ status.
Special category status was withdrawn on 1 March 1976.
In 1977, groups of Republican prisoners begun to campaign for its return by refusing to wear prison clothes or do prison work.
Such protesters were refused alternative clothing and lost any remission of their sentence.
A year later, the protest took a new form: the ‘dirty protest’ involved prisoners refusing to exercise or use toilet facilities.
Many prisoners spread their cell walls with their own excreta.
In 1980, the protest developed into a series of hunger strikes.
One of the strikers, Bobby Sands, was overwhelmingly elected as an MP in the Fermanagh and Tyrone by-election.
Sands died soon after his election, and was one of ten strikers to die in this way (Beresford, 1987; Collins, 1986).
There were riots in Belfast and Derry following Sands' death.
During one night of rioting, two youths were run over by Army landrovers.
The two drivers were later charged with dangerous driving, but it was widely suspected that they had been acting on orders.
Despite such setbacks to the normalisation policy, the RUC has continued to fulfil the security role vacated by the Army.
Indeed, the RUC has become a well-organised paramilitary force with a range of repressive powers.
AU RUC officers are trained in riot control and counter-insurgency techniques.
Military-trained rapid strike units, known as Headquarters Mobile Support Units and Divisional Mobile Support Units, were introduced in the early 1980s.
Partly composed of ex-British soldiers, these units place a priority on ‘speed, firepower and aggression’(Weitzer, 1985:48).
Brewer and co-workers (1988) report that, in 1981 alone, 30,000 rounds of plastic bullets were fired, compared with 55,000 in the 5 years  up to 1975.
Since 1974, over a dozen deaths have resulted from such shootings.
Freedom of association and expression have been two further casualties of the government's emergency powers.
The Public Order (Northern Ireland) Act 1981 makes it necessary for organisers to give the police 5 days' notice of a march for it to be considered legal.
Senior officers may also impose such conditions as a change of route or starting time in the interests of public order.
The Secretary of State may also prohibit any march in any area, or impose a blanket ban on all marches or a particular category of marches, for a period of 12 months.
These powers were employed with telling effect on a series of ‘H-block’ marches, when hundreds of people were arrested and convicted for taking part in prohibited marches or not observing the 5-day rule.
The Northern Ireland conflict has become progressively more covert in nature.
The RUC has the largest computerised surveillance system in the UK.
Strategically located road blocks are used to enforce systematic searches of traffic, and vehicle registration numbers are fed back to central control for checking.
Listening devices are used, sometimes involving the technique of monitoring conversations via vibrations made on window panes (Hillyard, 1985:180).
Cameras are secretly located in public places and helicopters monitor selected areas with video equipment, day and night (ibid.).
Recent insurgency campaigns have been correspondingly covert:
The targeting of the security forces by Republican paramilitaries is reflected in a rise in the number of members of the security forces killed as a proportion of total deaths.
For example, deaths of members of the security forces were 54 per cent of total fatalities in 1985, compared to only 18 per cent in 1976.
As a result of the policy of police primacy, an increasing proportion of these have been members of the RUC and RUC Reserve.
(Brewer et al., 1988:69)
Against this, there have been a series of controversial allegations against special police units engaged in covert action.
The most notorious of those centred on an incident in December 1982 when two unarmed members of the Republican paramilitary organisation, the Irish National Liberation Army (INLA), were shot dead after police officers had stopped their car on the edge of Armagh.
This, and similar incidents, caused speculation that the RUC was operating a ‘shoot to kill’ policy.
An inquiry was authorised to look into these incidents, but when its chairperson, John Stalker, the Deputy Chief Constable of Greater Manchester Police, was suddenly  removed over allegations about his previous conduct as a police officer, it led to speculation that a cover-up was taking place to avoid implicating senior RUC officers in covert and probably illegal operations (ibid.:70).
Covert operations now extend well beyond Northern Ireland and the British mainland.
On 6 March 1988, three IRA members were shot dead in Gibraltar by plain-clothed British Special Air Service (SAS) officers.
The IRA men parked a car believed to be containing a bomb near to a place where soldiers from the Royal Anglian Regiment usually assembled before the changing of their guard.
A ministerial statement issued after the killings claimed that, on parking the car, the three moved off toward the Spanish border where they were challenged by the security forces.
Here they behaved in such a way as to convince the ASS officers that their lives and those of others were under threat, hence the decision to fire.
Subsequently, Thames Television's current affairs programme,This Week , broadcast a feature, called ‘Death on the Rock’(ITV, 28 April 1988), in which witnesses came forward to cast doubt on the official version of events.
The Spanish police also maintained that they had kept the suspected terrorists' movements under close surveillance and maintained a constant flow of information on them to British officials in Gibraltar.
If true, this would have implied either that the police had knowingly allowed a car that they thought was full of explosives to drive into and around the island, or that they were aware throughout the operation that the car was not dangerous.
(Ewing and Gearty, 1990:237)
At the inquest on the killings, one of the witnesses interviewed on This Week retracted his evidence.
After initial indecision, the inquest jury delivered a verdict of lawful killing.
The British government saw this as a vindication both of the SAS killings and its own version of events.
However, two major civil and human rights organisations, the NCCL and Amnesty International, were critical of the way the inquest was conducted (ibid.:239–40).
Weitzer (1987) argues that the RUC is now trapped inside a ‘legitimacy vacuum’.
On the one hand, the force is immensely distrusted by large sections of the Catholic community who still see it as an ‘armed wing of unionism’, propping up an illegitimate regime.
Yet, on the other hand, the RUC now faces increasing hostility on the part of the Protestant population.
As recently as 1985, there had been signs of greater even-handedness on the part of the RUC, reflected in more frequent prosecutions of Protestants for ‘insurgency offences’.
A key catalyst of this development was the signing of the Anglo-Irish Agreement in November 1985 which  awarded the Irish government a greater consultative role in Northern Irish affairs.
The signing of the agreement led to the immediate withdrawal, resignation, and subsequent reselection of fourteen Unionist MPs.
There then followed a General Strike in March 1986, which brought the province to a standstill, a series of sectarian killings and a succession of riotous demonstrations involving confrontation between Protestants and the RUC.
Ulster's Protestants look upon the RUC's changing role as a form of betrayal, a shocking revelation that it is not, after all, a ‘Protestant force’ dedicated to Loyalism.
On the contrary, ‘From their point of view the RUC is now being used as a political force to impose the Anglo-Irish Agreement on an unwilling majority in the province’(Weitzer, 1987:93).
Consequently, RUC officers have been subjected to public degradation ceremonies, and there have been threats and physical attacks on themselves and their families, forcing some of them to relocate.
Loyalist protesters have shouted ‘SS-RUC’ and ‘Dublin's lap dogs’, whilst some elected MPs have exhorted RUC men to resign or mutiny and warned them of the possible consequences of their ‘disloyalty’(ibid.).
The policing of Northern Ireland therefore stands at a tense crossroads.
DISCUSSION
The escalating conflict in Northern Ireland is not simply a function of deprivation and discrimination (Hewitt, 1981; Kovalcheck, 1987), but a political response to increasing state repression.
Recent research by White (1989) confirms that it was internment, in particular, which galvanised young, working-class Catholics into adopting political violence.
The introduction of this policy coincided with an upsurge in ‘terrorist’ activity (Brewer et al., 1988; Peroff and Hewitt, 1980).
There are important clues that, for the British police, ‘Northern Ireland has served as a valuable laboratory, offering important lessons for the control of labour protest and racial unrest at home — some ‘compensation’ for Britain's losses in the provinces' (Weitzer, 1985:41).
Hillyard (1985) perceives direct parallels between the behaviour of the legal authorities in Northern Ireland and techniques used in the 1984–5 coal dispute.
Aside from obvious similarities in police riot-control manoeuvres, there was a widespread tendency to use roadblocks, a systematic abuse of the statutory powers of arrest and overlaps in interrogation and intelligence methods.
As we shall see in Chapter 9, there are broad similarities between provisions embodied in the Northern Ireland emergency powers legislation and the British Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 and the Public Order Act  1986.
Collectively, these statutes enable the police to stop and search suspects and ask for personal details, to enter forcibly and search private properties, to detain suspects for questioning for up to 72 hours and to use as much discretion as they require to impose bans or conditions on marches or assemblies.
Commenting on the provisions of the 1984 Act, Walsh envisages that:
They will produce a criminal law enforcement system for Britain which is very unlike that currently prevailing there, but very similar to that to which Northern Ireland has become accustomed.
It is not difficult to imagine the exercise of these powers in the inner city areas of Britain producing the same reaction as they provoke in the riot-tom areas of Belfast and Derry.
The next step will be to adopt more of the North's repressive emergency measures in order to contain the violence.
Bit by bit the ignorance of, and lack of respect for, civil liberties and human rights, prevalent for so long in Northern Ireland, will be transported to Britain.
(Walsh, 1984:345)
Walsh's concern for the future of civil liberties is undoubtedly well-founded, but his prediction that the experience of Belfast or Derry might soon be shared by other British inner-city areas may be unduly pessimistic.
The Irish Troubles are recent, but their political roots are centuries old.
While the grievances held by British blacks are undoubtedly profound, in many ways equivalent to those of Northern Ireland's Catholics, their political objectives are modest by comparison, certainly not extending to the  overthrowal of the state.
The continuing problems of Northern Ireland demonstrate the futility of responding to a deeply ingrained political problem with a law-and-order response.
As Weitzer maintains,
The police have been thrust into the resulting vacuum.
The solution is not to revert to Army control once again, but rather somehow to achieve a lasting political settlement that denies both insurgents and the paramilitary police their raison d'etre .
(Weitzer, 1985:53)
The key lesson of this case study is that order cannot be coercively imposed, and that some form of political consensus is necessary if escalation is to be avoided.
How to create a constitutional forum for political discussion involving, amongst others, the paramilitary organisations, is as yet an insoluble problem.
The refusal of successive Conservative governments under Margaret Thatcher and John Major to engage in dialogue  with the political supporters of paramilitarism makes it difficult to see how such an objective may be achieved.
(Talks instigated in April 1991 by the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, Peter Brooke, brought together representatives of accredited Unionist and Nationalist parties, but excluded Sinn Fein, due to their unwillingness to denounce violence.)
For the moment, it remains inarguable that
any new constitutional arrangement must provide what the 1920 Government of Ireland Act tragically failed to achieve: tough guarantees of basic rights for the minority as well as for the majority community, together with accessible and representative institutions to enforce them.
(Hewitt, 1982:170)
Media representations of public disorder
Previous chapters have emphasised how the mass media may contribute indirectly to the potential for public disorder, first, by helping to create an ideological climate which justifies and encourages the use of repressive control tactics against dissenting groups; and second, by ‘sensitising’ the police and public to the possibility that disorder might occur.
In this chapter, we look in closer detail at the media's relationship to public disorder.
In particular, we consider such crucial questions as: what are the characteristic images and explanations of public disorder presented by the media, and why do they take their conventional form?
Do the media meet their own criteria of objectivity and balance in such representations, and do they reasonably address the underlying grievances of participants?
Are we correct to assume that media coverage helps to excuse or justify police aggression?
Does it encourage a ‘copycat’ effect, or generate the potential for further disorder in other, less obvious ways?
These issues are addressed in relation to media coverage of disorderly episodes referred to in earlier chapters.
Thus we look, in turn, at how particular examples of political dissent, urban riots, strike violence, football hooliganism and the conflict in Northern Ireland have been represented by the media.
Due to an apparently smaller American literature on this subject, discussion of US news coverage is solely confined to representations of the 1960s riots.
POLITICAL DISSENT
We begin by looking at examples of media coverage of disorderly political dissent, notably Halloran's and his co-workers' (1970) seminal study of the press and television reporting of the anti-Vietnam War march in London on 27 October 1968.
Based on research carried out by a team from  Leicester University, this study, and subsequent articles arising from it (e.g. Murdock, 1981), analysed the pre- and post-event media coverage.
Analysis of the pre-demonstration news coverage shows how the press and broadcast media referred obsessively to the potential for violence.
Detectives were said to have uncovered a plot by ‘militant extremists’ to use the march as a pretext for attacking buildings and police officers.
Violence was predicted on the basis of disorder at demonstrations in Paris and Chicago earlier in the year.
as if to support this prediction, some newspapers underlined that American and French students were planning to take part, and noted that certain organisers were not English and therefore ‘outside the consensus’(ibid.:210–11).
Far from treating the demonstration as a serious political event, the media portrayed the demonstration as little more than a ‘performance’, speculating about the possible fashion wear of the participants.
The protest was therefore emptied of serious political content.
Post-demonstration coverage also marginalised the political content, focusing, instead, on the activities of the violent minority.
This coverage was epitomised by a photograph of a demonstrator appearing to kick a policeman in the head, featured on the front pages of seven out of the ten newspapers analysed.
The preoccupation with violence was taken to absurd lengths in discussions of why disorder failed to reach its anticipated level.
Newspapers agreed that this was primarily due to the customary restraint of the British police and British demonstrators' traditional aversion to violence.
Halloran's and his co-workers' explanation of why the media coverage took this form emphasises the importance of news values.
News coverage is ‘event-oriented’ and therefore unconcerned with the political issues at state.
There is a need to make the news as intelligible as possible to the readership, hence the familiar notion of a militant conspiracy, and analogies with recent political events.
Finally, the commercial imperative to make media coverage as entertaining and marketable as possible ensures a priority on the dramatic, violent and spectacular.
The Leicester team noted how, despite the massive publicity the demonstration attracted, it was prevented from registering a significant political statement.
Sensing how this might have harmful repercussions, Halloran and co-workers asked: ‘How long will peaceful demonstrators seeking a new mode of expression be content to demonstrate peacefully when whatever they do is likely to get the negative treatment?’(ibid.:317).
Other studies suggest that media representations may sometimes be deliberately constructed to achieve a favourable impression of police violence against a politically ‘threatening’ group.
This was evident in press  coverage of the activities of women protesters outside the American air base at Greenham Common.
For example, on 12 December 1982, 35,000 women arrived to ‘Blockade the Base’.
On the first day of the blockade, policing was low-key.
But, on the second day, the police mounted a paramilitary-style operation to clear the entrance forcibly.
The Greenham women complained of police brutality but, as Johnson points out, ‘The press portrayed the blockading women as screaming harridans, contrasting us with what they had presented as the nice, well-meaning middle-class mothers and grandmothers the day before’(Johnson, 1989:167).
For the next 2 years, the press systematically attacked the women's political motives, their hygiene standards and their sexual identity (Young, 1990).
Then, on 11 December 1983, a large number of Greenham women attempted to pull down the perimeter fence.
Police intervention provoked allegations of brutality, but media coverage focused on the few police injuries, underemphasised the extent of police aggression and exaggerated the women's part in the violence.
Soldiers from the base struck at our hands with metal rods while Thames Valley police twisted and karate-chopped fingers and wrists, pulled us from the fence by our necks and flung us into ditches and trees.
Mounted police rode their horses straight into crowds of demonstrators.
When one woman tried to remove barbed wire from the path of a police horse she feared would get hurt, her photograph became the basis for a frenzied attack which ran the headline, ‘Horse Whipped With Barbed Wire’.
Police acknowledgement that this hadn't actually happened was delayed until after the press coverage.
Headlines screamed of this fabricated outrage and ignored the many injuries, including broken bones, that women had suffered.
Johnson, 1989:168)
THE AMERICAN RIOTS OF THE 1960s
American news coverage of the 1960s riots first came under academic scrutiny in the aftermath of the Watts riot, where it was generally felt that media reporting had exacerbated the conflict.
‘The media were accused of giving excessive publicity to the more intransigent blacks, of reporting inflammatory incidents, of provoking violence by their very presence, and, in one instance, of actually encouraging a rioter to throw a brick’(Paletz and Dunn, 1969:328).
Baker and Ball (1969:105–6) also believe that television pictures of the  riot conveyed helpful information about police movements to arsonists and looters, and blame some elements of the press for discriminating harmful and unsubstantiated rumour, e.g. that the rioting was orchestrated by muslims.
The most comprehensive study of US media coverage of the riots was carried out by the famous Kerner Commission (Kerner, 1968), which examined the style and content of television and newspaper reports for 1967.
The Commission found that the coverage of this period was generally calm, factual and restrained.
Far from emphasising violent confrontation and looting activity, both media focused on the steps being taken to quell the immediate rioting or the most effective ways of dealing with future disorder.
In a more critical vein, the Commission observed: ‘All media reported rumours that had no basis in fact.
Some newsmen staged riot events for the cameras’(ibid.:202).
The media, it felt, were over-dependent on ‘beleaguered government officials’ for estimates of the size and severity of the riots.
These estimates were invariably exaggerated.
While recognising that coverage of one riot tended to encourage rioting elsewhere (‘the principle of cumulative effect’), the Commission dismissed this as possible grounds for censorship:
Once a disturbance occurs, the word will spread independently of newspapers and television.
To attempt to ignore these events or portray them as something other than what they are can only diminish confidence in the media and increase the effectiveness of those who monger rumors and the fears of those who listen.
(Kerner, 1968:202)
The Kerner Commission also criticised the media for creating an impression that the riots were confrontations between black and white civilians, as opposed to attacks on white-owned property in Negro areas.
Coverage failed to highlight the wrongful arrests of blacks or excessive use of force by the police; nor did it adequately convey the extent of pro-social activity engaged in by black ‘counter-rioters’, such as helping the wounded or assisting the emergency services.
There was no serious attempt to examine the rioters' underlying grievances — seen as a symptom of the media's customary neglect of the social problems experienced by black Americans.
Black respondents interviewed as part of the investigation ‘noted a pronounced discrepancy between what they saw in the riots and what television broadcast’(ibid.:207).
The media were widely distrusted as agents of the white power  structure, too willing to accept the accounts of white officials in preference to accredited black representatives.
Similar themes have subsequently been explored by other American researchers.
Knopf (1975) objects to the way that the press often used rumour and innuendo as the basis of ‘hard reporting’.
She refers, for example, to an issue of the Baltimore Sun which showed a picture of an unidentified motorcyclist, a gun strapped to his back.
The caption read: ‘QUIET, BUT….
An unidentified motorcycle rider, armed with a rifle and carrying a belt of ammunition, was among those in the heart of York, Pa., Negro district late last night.
The area was quiet for the first time in six days’(Knopf, 1975:257).
The obvious implication was that the individual was a dangerous sniper when, in reality, he was a 16-year-old boy off hunting groundhogs.
Knopf is also critical of the media's tendency to characterise disorders as ‘meaningless, purposeless, senseless (and) irrational’.
Referring to press coverage of riots following the death of Dr Martin Luther King, Jnr in 1968, she observes that,
No attempt is made to place the violence in a social context.
The reference to the assassination of Dr King is perfunctory, with only a passing mention of his funeral and a few shouts about his death.
Value-laden words receive unusual emphasis.
The participants are ‘marauders’, not men; they ‘rove’ instead of run; they move in ‘gangs’, not groups; they engage in ‘vandalism’, not simply violence.
(Knopf, 1975:262)
Singer (1970) explored the argument that television coverage encourages subsequent riot participation.
He asked 499 people arrested during the Detroit riot of 1967 to recall how they had reacted to television pictures of previous US riots.
Almost half the respondents said they experienced feelings of disapproval, sadness or disgust; only 26 per cent had felt anger or resentment towards the white authorities or pleasure that rioting was taking place.
Singer then asked respondents to say how they first heard about the Detroit riot, and what details they were initially given.
He discovered that 48 per cent of them first heard about the riot from another person, 27 per cent by direct observation and only 26 per cent from media coverage.
The information received typically referred only to the riot's location, and not specific incidents.
These findings suggest that media coverage did not play an influential role in encouraging people to participate in the Detroit riot.
A case study reported by Paletz and his co-workers (Paletz and Dunn, 1969; Paletz and Entman, 1981) emphasises that not all American newspapers  were guilty of sensationalist reporting.
Some, like the Winston-Salem Journal , were deliberately restrained.
While other local newspapers produced exaggerated and error-ridden coverage of a small North Carolina riot, the Journal was careful to define the precise location of the riot, and reassure its readers that most of the city remained unaffected.
All rumours were thoroughly checked and omitted if unverified.
In attempting to defuse possible inter-racial antagonism, the Journal rarely mentioned that most of the 500 rioters were black.
‘The paper did not, of course, blur the issue completely; it was perfectly clear that most of the rioters were Negroes.
But the Journal stressed that those involved were ‘hoodlums’, atypical of the Winston-Salem Negro' (Paletz and Dunn, 1969:337).
The Journal's editorial policy pre-dates the codes of conduct subsequently adopted by many American radio and television stations (Kueneman and Wright, 1975).
However, Paletz and his colleagues remain critical of the journalists' over-reliance on official sources of information about the riot (i.e. the mayor and chief of police) which helped to frame the event as the successful police suppression of a naked spree of lawlessness.
There was no attempt to empathise with the rioters or to communicate their grievances.
Indeed, ‘by handling the event as a police-crime story, not a political one’, the Journal's coverage ‘probably reduced the political power of already inefficacious poor people’(Paletz and Entman, 1981:117).
THE BRITISH RIOTS OF THE 1980s
Tumber's (1982) analysis of television news coverage of the British inner-city riots of 1981 reveals many similarities with corresponding American coverage of the 1960s.
A content analysis of BBC and ITV broadcasts between 4 and 16 July showed that ‘Riot Equipment’ was the most frequently referred-to theme of the news broadcasts.
A rank ordering of the thirty-four most popular themes revealed that ‘Rioters’ destruction of property', ‘Causes’, ‘Looting, theft’, ‘Race’and ‘Rioters’violence against people' were the next most-common items.
‘Police violence’ was recorded in thirty-fourth place, being referred to only once.
Interviews with riot participants indicated bitterness at the media's failure to highlight prior police-community relations: ‘They do not show people being stopped and searched in their cars, in their homes and whilst waiting at bus stops’, one interviewee complained.
‘Nothing has been shown about what was going in Brixton before April.
The public did not, therefore, understand what was going on or why there was trouble’(ibid.:13).
Tumber generally praised media personnel for adopting a responsible  attitude in their reporting.
Occasionally, these standards lapsed, as when an ITV News At Ten headline asked, ‘Was Someone Directing The Riots?’, a piece of pure speculation based (like Knopfs Baltimore example) on a brief clip of an unidentified motor scooter rider and passenger.
Senior police officers and media professionals interviewed by Tumber felt that broadcast pictures of violence, looting and destruction in progress helped prevent the dissemination of dangerous or malicious rumour.
Both the police and rioters agreed that rioting was not encouraged by the ‘advertising’ effect of television pictures.
‘The speed with which some of the incidents flared up suggests, in fact, that the kids were not sitting indoors, but that they were already out there on the streets — often bored, resentful and waiting for trouble’(ibid.:46).
An interesting contrast has been observed in the way that separate British riots were reported.
In commenting on the media coverage of the Brixton riot of April 1981, Gordon and Rosenburg (1989:18) point out that ‘the editorial responses of most papers as distinct from their news coverage, while condemning the violence, seemed to show some awareness of the underlying causes of the rioting’.
However, when the Toxteth disturbance took place only 3 months later, the media response was couched, almost universally, in a ‘law and order’ rhetoric, emphasising the wantonness and criminality of the violence, and demanding coercive measures to deal with it (Sumner, 1982).
Murdock (1984:78) accounts for the general character of press and television coverage of the Toxteth riot in terms of‘the routine business of news production and the practical and commercial pressures which shape it’.
Thus priority is given to the statements of senior police and politicians, partly because they are more readily available and willing to be contacted than rioters or their grass-roots representatives; and partly because they are more able to deliver quotable material — an invaluable resource when strict deadlines must be met.
Similarly, for safety's sake, photographers are obliged to stand behind police lines.
Hence the impression given is of a ‘thin blue line’ being attacked by a vicious and threatening mob.
As with coverage of political events, there is a need to ensure intelligibility (which is achieved by evoking stereotypical explanations, such as the role of agitators or ‘hooligan youth’) and excitement (hence the fixation on the dramatic and spectacular).
However, Murdock's account does not explain the variation in the reporting of the Brixton and Toxteth riots referred to above.
Wren-Lewis's (1981/1982) analysis of television news coverage of these riots enables us to understand this contrast.
He points out that the reporting of the Brixton riot was marked by a discursive struggle between the  ‘law-and-order discourse’ and a ‘contra-discourse’, which sought to demystify ‘the hitherto unproblematic position of the police’, by emphasising the possibility that police harassment and brutality lay at the root of the disorder.
Subsequent riots were represented almost unequivocally in terms of the ‘law and order discourse’.
Wren-Lewes explains that this was because, as successive riots occurred, television's preference for scenes of violence and destruction created an impression of unyielding crisis and chaos.
There was simply not the time or space to enter into the detailed sort of discussion which accompanied the Brixton riot.
In addition, the progressively violent and pandemonious reality suggested by television's own reports created the very conditions in which a law-and-order rhetoric could flourish virtually unchallenged.
Once established in this way, the law-and-order discourse acquired a lasting pre-eminence.
By the mid-1980s, rioting, like the Handsworth and Broadwater Farm disorders of 1985, was being reported as a manifestation of ‘criminality, pure and simple’(Gordon and Rosenburg, 1989:20).
Some national newspapers portrayed the Handsworth riot as an inter-racial conflict, with Afro-Caribbean youths supposedly attacking both whites and Asians.
These reports suppressed the fact that more whites than blacks were arrested during the disturbance, and hardly mentioned that police-community relations had recently deteriorated.
The notion of outside agitators (including Libyan agents provocateurs ) was prevalent in reports of the Broadwater Farm disorder (Benyon and Solomos, 1987).
Coverage of this riot made no serious attempt to identify its underlying causes (ibid.).
MASS PICKETING: THE ‘BATTLE OF ORGREAVE’
In turning to media representations of industrial confrontation, we focus, once again, on the 1984–5 coal dispute.
Green is one of several authors who maintain that media coverage of the strike attempted to denigrate and undermine the miners’ case against the government.
The vilification of Arthur Scargill, the unbalanced emphasis on picket-line violence and intimidation, the failure to explain issues at the heart of the strike, the criminalization of striking miners, the unquestioned assumptions of police neutrality and the fundamental contradiction between the reality experienced by striking communities and the distorted presentation of that reality through the mass media — these  were the key components of the media's ideological policing of the strike.
(Green, 1990:157)
Part of this ‘ideological policing’ involved the use of particular forms of imagery and discourse to condemn the use of violence by the strikers while justifying police aggression.
This section demonstrates how, in its choice of language, film-editing techniques and subtle juxtaposition of images and commentary, television news delivered an entirely misleading and politically biased representation of the Battle of Orgreave on 18 June 1984.
The following discussion draws on analysis of the BBC 1 Nine O'Clock News and ITN's News At Ten bulletins by Cumberbatch et al (1986), Jones (1991) and Masterman (1985).
The discussion focuses primarily on Jones's study of how the two main channels described first the instigation, then the escalation of the disorder.
A final subsection consolidates the analysis by emphasising a number of points raised by the other authors.
The instigation of disorder
The BBC's Nine O'Clock News was obviously the first to describe the episode.
According to its narrator, John Thorne,
The strikers' blockade of Orgreave was a precisely planned operation, but the police responded, sending in riot squad reinforcements to match the 5,000 or more pickets, and that was the trigger for some of the worst violence of this lengthy dispute.
It reached a peak as miners surged in against the riot shields.
Policemen hit out with truncheons under a barrage of stones and missiles.
Mass picketing had turned to rioting.
The police didn't give any ground and on the front line they handed out as much physical punishment as they received.
Eventually, the senior officer ordered in the mounted police.
Thorne's report establishes that it was the miners who ‘called’ the confrontation.
Theirs, we are told, was ‘a precisely planned operation’.
The police merely ‘responded’ to this challenge, ‘matching’the picket numbers.
The commentary clearly implies that the police aggression was justified: ‘hitting out’ with truncheons is excusable, given the ‘barrage of stones and missiles’they were subjected to.
That the police ‘didn't give any ground’ suggests controlled restraint, while the disclosure that they ‘handed out as much physical punishment as they received’indicates that they did not use excessive force.
The reference to ‘Eventually’ in the last sentence implies  that it was only after a commendable period of restraint that horses were ordered in.
The ITN coverage of this phase differed in several key respects.
Their news reporter, Phil Roman, began by explaining how,
As the last of the lorries went in, the trouble started.
Pickets charged straight into the police riot shields.
In seconds, a pack of police, twenty deep, was fighting a shower of stones to hold the pickets back.
The first cavalry charge came a few minutes later and it clearly worried the pickets.
(Film shows pickets scattering across field.)
Where the BBC commentary suggests that the ‘mere presence’ of police officers was the trigger for the violence, Roman acknowledges that the arrival of the lorries — not naked hostility towards the police — was the pretext for disorder.
In this way, the miners' action appears less vindictive.
However, the ITN account emphasises that the decision to introduce the police horses was not taken lightly, but as the result of accumulating pressure (‘police, twenty deep…fighting a shower of stones’).
Finally, in a classic piece of understatement, viewers are informed that the cavalry charge ‘clearly worried the pickets’.
The escalation of disorder
The BBC offered the following account of how the confrontation developed:
A gap opened in the ranks and the horses galloped in.
The horses are the most feared weapon in the police armoury on the picket line and they are very effective.
But it's the riot squads that follow up to make the arrests and today, on the fields of battle around Orgreave, the police were involved in some of the most vicious hand-to-hand fighting of the entire miners' dispute.
(Film sequence of two policemen swinging at, though apparently not hitting, pickets; picket taking a flying kick at a policeman.)
The attacks on policemen were horrific but the riot squads gave no quarter, using their batons liberally.
It was a miracle no-one was killed, said one police commander.
At all times, the police were in control and there were over one hundred arrests as the fighting ebbed and flowed.
There is a marked contrast here between the description of violence by the pickets (‘The attacks on policemen were horrific’) and corresponding police aggression (they ‘gave no quarter’; they were ‘in control at all times’).
The linguistic transformation known as object deletion is used to ensure that  instances of police aggression are rendered more palatable.
Thus we are told that ‘horses galloped in, but not who they were attacking; and though the police ‘used their batons liberally’, it is not revealed who they were used against.
In each case, the object of the police action has been intentionally deleted.
A number of euphemisms also help to underemphasise the severity of police violence.
The revelation that they ‘gave no quarter’ helps to soften the fact that the police were beating people with their truncheons.
References to the fact that the horses were ‘very effective’ or that the police ‘used their batons liberally’further disguise the extent of police aggression.
Finally, the simple assertion that the fighting ‘ebbed and flowed’ creates a misleading impression that it was a fair and equal contest.
ITN's commentary unfolded thus:
More police reinforcements — this time taking advantage of the confusion caused by the police horses.
As the horses came back, pickets threw half-bricks at them.
Then they started on the front line of police.
Some of the pickets had wrenched riot shields away from the police.
When they started to gather for another push, the second wave of mounted police went in, scattering the pickets right across the field.
Tension built up.
The Assistant Chief Constable warned the pickets to stop throwing missiles and disperse.
They didn't.
More reinforcements — this time with short shields and truncheons.
After two hours, the police were tired of being pushed and pelted with house bricks.
The pickets knew what to expect: they'd been warned it could turn nasty, and it did.
(Film sequence of riot police following horses in pursuit of miners; policeman repeatedly striking crouching picket about the head; miner taking flying kick at same policeman; officer hitting different picket on head with baton as he is leading him behind police lines.)
Here there is a greater emphasis on the police violence.
The ITN sequence of film shows a close-up shot of a miner being systematically beaten about the head by a policeman which, as we shall see later, was deliberately excluded from the BBC version.
Nevertheless, the unmistakable impression created is that the police violence was justified: they were ‘tired of being pushed and pelted with house bricks’ for 2 hours.
Euphemistic references to police aggression are also apparent in the ITN account, as in ‘it could turn nasty, and it did’, where the agent and object of the violence (i.e. who did what to whom) remain unspecified.
Other instances of police violence (e.g. the batoning incident) are not accompanied by spoken commentary, as if the reporter is reluctant to condemn such action.
The ITN version suggests that the pickets are still largely to  blame for the violence, but the police contribution to disorder is given more emphasis than in the BBC's bulletin.
Other points
Jones concentrated her analysis only on the late-evening news broadcasts.
A complementary study by Masterman (1985) demonstrates that the BBC 9 o'clock news coverage had been modified since earlier evening bulletins due to a ‘crisis of credibility’ between its earlier 6 o'clock news broadcast and corresponding ITV accounts.
Masterman's systematic comparison of the two narratives indicates how some aspects of commentary were modified to reduce evidence of bias revealed by comparisons with ITN's almost simultaneous broadcast.
However, these modifications were only superficial.
‘Though additional references to aggressive police tactics had been woven into the text, there was no explicit condemnation (or even mild disapproval) of police action, and no acknowledgement that unnecessary police violence was the central issue at stake’(ibid.:106).
The BBC had edited out at least one police atrocity.
As we saw earlier, ITN coverage showed an incident in which one miner took a flying kick at a policeman who was beating a fellow-picket around the head.
The BBC coverage excludes the truncheon blow, but includes the flying kick:
Close comparison of BBC and ITN footage shows that the BBC film has in shot the man who was most severely beaten by the police, but that the film has been cut at precisely the point when the policeman begins to set about him with his truncheon .
What we cut away to are miners' retaliatory attempts to help their colleagues.
But because the BBC film has not shown any examples of police violence, these de-contextualised images can only signify unprovoked violence by pickets.
(Masterman, 1985:103, emphasis in original)
A further indictment of editing practice was provided by BBC 2's Brass Tacks programme of 30 November 1985.
This programme included extracts from the police's own video of the day's events.
The video clearly emphasised that the heightening of tension and resulting hostility was caused, not by stone throwing as the news media suggested, but by the tactical introduction of the mounted police (Cumberbatch et al., 1986).
These examples lend weight to Masterman's assertion that ‘news presentation is an ideological construction, rather than a matter of unproblematic reporting’(Masterman, 1985:106).
Television news personnel feel duty-bound, in times of social and political crisis, to project a pro-establishment view of industrial conflict.
In Masterman's view, the Battle  of Orgreave stands as a salutary reminder that ‘what is omitted from television's agenda cannot easily enter the general consciousness and that the control of information, whether it takes a brutal or sophisticated form, is the very cornerstone of political power’(ibid.:108).
FOOTBALL HOOLIGANISM
British and Canadian press responses to the Heysel Stadium tragedy are considered by Young (1986), who notes how newspapers on both sides of the Atlantic ran the story for a whole month, dwarfing coverage of the Bangladesh cyclone which resulted in many thousands of deaths.
Young maintains that, ‘As horrendous as the results of Heysel were, the lurid impact- and circulation-oriented headlines suggested an event much worse’(ibid.:260).
‘The Killing Field’ was the macabre headline chosen by three newspapers.
The most frequently cited media explanations for the Heysel disturbance were the influence of alcohol, the involvement of the National Front, the ineptitude or cowardliness of the Belgian security forces and the hooligan mentality of the Liverpool supporters.
This final category of explanation typically included references to the irrational, bestial and militaristic behaviour of the British fans.
There was no counterbalancing emphasis on the aggressive and provocative activities of the rival Juventus supporters (which were apparent in the live television coverage of the game), or the fact that there were confrontations between Belgian police and Italian supporters prior to the game.
The references to the bestiality and irrationality of the Liverpool supporters are typical of the themes used by sports reporters to systematically denigrate football hooligans.
Whannel (1979) identifies four such themes which commonly depict the hooligans as: ‘mindless/senseless’, ‘maniacs/lunatics’, ‘foul/sub-human’ and a ‘minority/so-called supporters’.
Whannel believes that the main reason why this terminology has taken such an enduring grip is that it is being used to serve the commercial interests of Football League and club officials as part of a hidden agenda to attract a new type of football audience (the ‘family audience’) and thereby solve the game's economic crisis.
According to this perspective, the demand for all-seater stadia and accompanying leisure and commercial facilities — ceaselessly promulgated as a method of curbing hooliganism is part of a thinly veiled plan to replace soccer's traditional working-class audience with middle-class consumers.
According to a similar perspective, adopted by authors like Hall (1978) and Taylor (1987), the growing media focus on hooliganism since the  1960s may be seen as a political device to help justify a more authoritarian state response to all forms of social dissidence.
Lloyd (1989:261) takes a similar position.
She argues that, before the Public Order Act 1986 was passed, ‘it was the moral panic surrounding football hooliganism which the government used in its publicity for the new law.
The opposition vainly argued that football violence could not be lumped together with political unrest and industrial disputes’.
NORTHERN IRELAND
The media's political role is especially ubiquitous in their reporting of Northern Ireland.
Before the Army became involved, media accounts often referred to the political background to the conflict and were sympathetic towards the Civil Rights movement (Hillyard, 1982).
By 1975, this had all changed: reports, features and editorials now concentrated on protecting the Army's image and portraying the IRA as ‘criminals or mindless psychopaths often manipulated by Godfathers behind the scenes’(ibid.:39).
In addition to banning, delaying or censoring news and current affairs reports (ibid.), the British government and military officials have used a variety of sanctions, notably cutting journalists off from authoritative sources of information, to ensure that recalcitrant individuals and institutions are brought back into line (Aleut, 1978:153).
In practice, such measures are seldom necessary: most journalists seem aware of their tacit responsibility to toe the approved ideological line (Schlesinger, 1978:225).
The way that these forms of social control can be mobilised is illustrated by newspaper coverage of the events of Bloody Sunday, 30 January 1972 (see Chapter 5).
According to Curtis, ‘the British media fudged the events, suppressed investigations and  blazened forth the idea that the British army had been ‘cleared’ of guilt’(Curtis, 1984:40).
Eye-witness accounts by British journalists told of the unprovoked and apparently indiscriminate shooting of civilians by British soldiers.
According to Simon Winchester of The Guardian ,
Paratroopers piled out of their vehicles, many ran forward to make arrests, but others rushed to the street corners.
It was these men, perhaps 20 in all, who opened fire with their rifles.
I saw three men fall to the ground.
One was still obviously alive, with blood pumping from his leg.
The others, both apparently in their teens, seemed dead….
Then people could be seen moving forward in Fahan Street, their  hands above their heads.
One man was carrying a white handkerchief.
Gunfire was directed even at them and they fled or fell to the ground.
(quoted in Curtis, 1984:40)
The Times reporter also quoted a British General urging his men to ‘Go on the paras, go and get them’, and said that the lower ranks appeared to him to be relishing their work and perceiving the Bogsiders as ‘legitimate targets’(ibid.:41).
But there was no general media outcry.
The Times and Guardian reports contrasted with those of other papers.
Timely interventions by senior Army officers had already established the ‘official view’ that the paratroops had fired only at clearly identifiable targets, and only when they came under heavy fire from gunmen, and nail and petrol bombers (Curtis, 1984:41–2).
Despite the evidence to the contrary, most of Monday morning's newspapers subscribed to the Army's version.
Even the Guardian's own headline seemed reluctant to blame the soldiers: ‘13 killed as paratroops break riot: ‘Soldiers were returning Derry sniper fire,’ says Army' (ibid.:43), and the paper's editorial distanced itself from Winchester's account:
As yet it is too soon to be sure of what happened.
The army has an intolerably difficult task in Ireland.
At times it is bound to act firmly, even severely.
Whether individual soldiers misjudged their situation yesterday, or were themselves too directly threatened, cannot yet be known.
(Curtis, 1984:44)
The authorities' ‘second diversionary thrust’ involved the setting up of a Tribunal of Inquiry under Lord Widgery.
This move hindered subsequent investigation into Bloody Sunday and nullified further criticism of the Army — largely because the government's Press Office appealed for the suspension of any media coverage which might prejudice the Tribunal's findings.
This, and a veiled threat of prosecution, was enough to deter the publication of a Sunday Times article and the broadcasting of a Thames Television programme which were both detrimental to the Army's case.
The Widgery Report was published in April.
Though critical of the fact that four civilians had been shot dead without conceivable justification, the document generally endorsed the Army's version of events and, in the press view, completely exonerated the paratroops (Curtis, 1984:50).
In the autumn of 1988, the British government made its most overt attempt to date to silence its Republican opponents.
On 19 October 1988, the then Home Secretary, Douglas Hurd, issued notices to the Independent Broadcasting Authority (IBA) and BBC, requiring them, under the Broadcasting  Act 1981, to refrain from broadcasting any words spoken on behalf of, or in support of , a ‘proscribed organisation’, excluding anything said in the course of parliamentary proceedings, or in the run up to a parliamentary, European parliamentary or local election.
The government justified the imposition of this censorship on the grounds that the appearance on television of ‘supporters of violence’ might frighten offend, or provide sustenance and support for terrorists themselves.
Ewing and Gearty are not impressed by such reasons.
They argue that it is misguided to pretend that these proscribed organisations (like Sinn Fein) either do not exist or do not carry massive popular support.
Rather than face up to the horrendous alienation implied by such strong electoral support for Sinn Fein, the Government has closed its eyes and now compels the population to do the same.
Such blindness distorts truth; such political irresponsibility stores up trouble for the future.
(Ewing and Gearty, 1990:246)
DISCUSSION
The role of the media in public disorder has been found to be consistent across different historical periods, geographical locations and types of disorder.
An ideal type of their operation is offered in Figure 8.1.
An important caveat to such generalisations is that the category of the ‘mass media’ contains a variety of means and forms of communication.
The treatment of public disorder in a serious documentary on a public television service is likely to have different preoccupations from the main news bulletin on the same channel.
Newspapers, in turn, differ considerably in layout, audience and political slant.
Nevertheless, analyses of media coverage of disorder have consistently found more similarities than differences in media coverage.
Thus the processes identified in the diagram will be evident in the majority of media outlets, the exceptions being few and far between.
To describe how the media cover disorder is not in itself an explanation of why they should adopt this approach.
Those who regard the media as little more than an arm of the capitalist state (Miliband, 1969) will be content with a structural or conspiratorial explanation, emphasising the institutional dependence and ideological role of the media.
Cohen and Young (1981) call this the ‘manipulative model’ and rightly insist that the problem of explanation is more complicated.
Broadly speaking, we can identify four sets of pressures which serve to disable the media from meeting their own criteria of objectivity and balance   in the coverage of public disorder.
The first set consists of institutional and professional definitions of what constitutes news.
As the classic formulation of Galtung and Ruge (1981) demonstrates, news is a cultural construct.
It must fit the institutional demands for the production of news on a regular cycle within predetermined categories and established formats.
Thus lead news stories are concerned with the immediate and dramatic, with effects  rather than causes, with surface appearances rather than underlying processes.
The operation of news values constitutes the second set of pressures.
Topics and events are selected as headline news according to their newsworthiness.
Hence the emphasis on the dramatic, unexpected and negative, the measurement of the significance of negative events in terms of damage to people and property.
Here, too, are sedimented conventions of presentation: the need to personalise the issue by interviewing hapless victims, to make comparisons with other events classified as similar in kind and, most obviously in the case of television, to be attracted to that which can be pictured and distracted from that which cannot.
All this drives the media towards a largely predictable way of selecting and presenting events: what Tuchman (1974) has called ‘routinising the unexpected’.
Another aspect of routinisation reveals a third set of factors: the need for authoritative opinion.
In a constitutional democracy, there are individuals whose status or office gives them the automatic right to be heard.
Though other accounts may be sought and presented, those in authority occupy a privileged position in what has been called the ‘hierarchy of credibility’(Becker, 1972).
They occupy the role of primary definers (Hall et al , 1978) whose interpretation of events immediately sets the agenda within which alternative versions must be cast.
Thus the reactions of politicians, police and employers have a different weight to those of demonstrators, rioters or strikers.
Thus, by virtue of institutional demands, occupational conventions and perceived political legitimacy, the media as a whole are predisposed to adopt a style of coverage which will pay scant regard to analysis of the causes of protest or the grievances of protesters.
Where there is room for manoeuvre is in the way the media seek to locate the political significance of disorderly protest.
Here the media enter into a directly ideological role, since they are explaining to us what these events mean.
This need to ‘define the situation’ is the fourth set of pressures.
At its most rampant in the conservative popular press, the view is likely to be taken that the protesters — the violent minority by their acts, the majority by their association — have moved outside the realm of politics and into the area of criminal activity.
More sophisticated versions argue or imply that there can be no excuse for their actions, that they have lost whatever case they had by their conduct.
More crudely, they are written off as a rampaging mob, victim to primitive urges or the machinations of conspirators.
At this point, dehumanising language is evoked and inhuman measures of repression advocated.
Not all the media choose or are able to indulge in such ideological vilification.
Laws and conventions constrain the broadcast media, who may  nevertheless reproduce the voices of those who can adopt such a stance.
Especially in times of political crisis, the need to delegitimate the form of protest and thus the cause itself may lead the media to slant its coverage towards a version which justifies its own ideological view.
Hence the police are assumed to be in the right, capable only of restrained reaction to provocation.
If need be, the words and pictures of reporters can be adjusted to fit this version of events.
Only at this point is a conspiratorial interpretation of the role of the media justified.
Since, as we have argued, disorder is frequently motivated by the failure to find any other effective voice, media coverage merely perpetuates the problem.
By condemning the disorderly symptoms of social conflict and neglecting its causes, the media implicitly endorse further repressive measures.
This exacerbates the possibility of further disorder as more protest is aroused by the loss of civil liberties.
Too many contemporary social problems are conveniently attributed to the media but, in the case of public disorder, some blame is clearly justified.
Contemporary policing and its democratic control
Since the inner-city disturbances of 1981, public order policing in Britain has become discernibly more authoritarian and paramilitarised (Jefferson, 1990; Uglow, 1988).
This chapter considers these developments, arguing that they have an obvious potential to amplify, rather than reduce, the tendency to public disorder, and assessing their implications for the erosion of civil liberties.
The chapter begins by analysing changes which have occurred in the American style of policing since their riots of the 1960s.
This overview, culminating in a recent case study of American police practices, offers a reasonable basis for predicting future British trends.
A second section then analyses the corresponding drift towards a more repressive style of policing in this country.
It also examines a recent case study of a British police operation which exemplifies current trends.
The third section moves on to investigate the nature and effectiveness of British and American mechanisms for exercising democratic control over the police (i.e. influencing their policies and making them answerable for their behaviour).
Three such mechanisms are evaluated: community policing arrangements, police complaints procedures and formal systems of accountability.
AMERICAN POLICING TRENDS
General developments
We begin by examining American policing trends over the last 25 years.
Fearful of any repetition of the urban riots, the American government took several measures in the late 1960s to strengthen its control capabilities.
According to Button (1989:297), it was the Detroit riot of July 1967 which ‘marked a turning point in federal policy towards local law enforcement  because this upheaval clearly demonstrated the inability of local and state forces to contain disorders’.
Prior to this riot, the Johnson administration's strategy had been to try and eradicate the possibility of further disorder by tackling the chronic social problems highlighted by the riots.
One of its key policies was to activate an improvement of police-black relations.
A series of conferences were staged for local officials and police personnel from America's 136 largest cities.
The Justice Department's Community Relations Service was enlarged to co-ordinate federal programmes aimed at reducing inner-city social problems.
With the continuation of the disorders into 1968, the administration shifted its emphasis — to that of riot control.
New legislation was enacted in the form of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act 1968, which established a national police-training centre and provided financial assistance to local police forces to strengthen their riot control capabilities.
Most US cities upgraded their riot technology, invested more in training and developed contingency plans for dealing with major disorder.
Special ‘riot squads’ emerged throughout the USA.
By 1968, 15,000 men had been trained for handling civil disorder.
The US military and intelligence agencies were correspondingly expanded.
The greater emphasis on law-enforcement techniques pushed American urban conflict towards a new phase of ‘political or conspiratorial violence’(Janowitz, 1969:332).
Between 1968 and 1970, there were numerous violent incidents involving shootouts between the police and members of the Black Panthers organisation.
Subsequently, another radical organisation, the Black Liberation Army (BLA) adopted such tactics as ambushing police in the ghetto and bombing police stations.
It was during this phase of conflict between the police and black radicals that,
With more than 1,000 plainclothes agents, the army gathered information on approximately 18,000 American civilians between 1967 and 1969 in its efforts to assemble data for city and other public agencies preparing for domestic upheaval.
Shortly after the election of Richard Nixon to the presidency, and his appointment of a ‘law and order’ attorney general, the FBI was authorized to engage in electronic surveillance of, and to direct counterintelligence activities toward, black militants and their organizations as way of preventing ghetto violence.
(Button, 1989:298)
These, and other militaristic tactics, hastened the decline of organisations like the Panthers and BLA.
Twenty-four black militant organisations were subjected to ‘tax surveillance’ as part of International Revenue Service  (IRS) harassment, and FBI agents placed bogus documents into the hands of Panther members which led them to suspect each other of being police informants (McAdam and Moore, 1989:281).
The monitoring of political dissidents was routine during the 1960s (Brodeur, 1983).
Sophisticated surveillance techniques were used to control crowds at the 1968 Chicago Democratic Convention (see Chapter 2).
Here police monitoring of the large crowds was facilitated by ‘sophisticated radio equipment supplied by the Army, hot lines to the White House and the Pentagon, and an 8 by 12-foot map of the city, complete with a zoom-lens television camera for closeups, that could show where every police officer and other security force was located at all times’(Farber, 1988:159).
This type of technology now exists in all major American cities.
Many city-centre streets are monitored by 24-hour surveillance cameras capable of ‘seeing’ through apartment windows.
New York City has a computerised riot control room which uses closed-circuit television cameras to relay detailed information about the movement of riot participants (Manwaring-White, 1983:90–1).
The police capacity to respond to public disorder has greatly improved since the riots.
The National Guard is still available on a standby basis.
Organised at state level, the Guard is composed of part-timers who undergo a statutory period of training with the regular Army.
During the riots, the Guard was criticised for being panicky and uncoordinated (Brewer et al , 1988:117).
Now it has been rendered virtually obsolete by the introduction of quasi-military squads of police officers known as SWAT (Special Weapons and Tactics) units.
Such units are specially trained and equipped to deal with a variety of situations, like bomb disposal, undercover surveillance, releasing hostages, riots and disasters.
Consisting of permanent teams of officers, SWAT units and other similar agencies now exist throughout the USA.
For example, Massachusetts has its own STOP (Special Tactics and Operations Unit).
Since the 1980 Miami riot, the Metro Dade Police Department has deployed a specialist ‘field force’ in response to public disorder.
Consisting of a platoon of police officers and sergeants, led by a lieutenant, the ‘field force’ is formed by six squads — one sergeant and seven officers per squad.
The remainder form the Commander's executive squad; provide for specialized ‘chemical agent’ responses; man a ‘prison wagon’; and provide vehicle security.
(McKenzie and Gallagher, 1989:169)
Squad members are equipped with body armour, jump suits, shotguns, smoke  canisters , chemical agent launchers and CS gas.
They are specially  trained in crowd-control techniques and were effective in suppressing outbreaks of disorder in the early 1980s (ibid.).
A case study: operation ‘Hammer’
A heavily militarised style of policing has been deployed recently as part of a moral panic surrounding youth gang violence connected to the trafficking of rock cocaine (‘crack’) in the Watts area of Los Angeles.
Here the ‘virtual extinction’ of job opportunities for young black males, and competition with immigrant workers in the employment sector allied to discriminatory attitudes among employees, has ‘incubated [a]counter-economy of youth crime and drug dealing’(Davis, 1988:49).
It was the accidental shooting of a woman outside a theatre in an affluent part of the city which initially generated a media and political outcry.
Black community representatives in Watts were among those calling for a decisive police response.
The LAPD chief, Daryl Gates, responded to this outcry by authorising a series of ‘anti-gang sweeps’, known as the Gang Related Active Trafficker Suppression programme (GRATS).
Nine sweeps, each involving three hundred officers, were carried out in February and March 1988.
These resulted in 1,500 arrests and the impounding of 500 cars.
However, on Good Friday, gang members shot randomly into a street-corner crowd in South Central, killing a 19-year-old woman, and operation ‘Hammer’ was mobilised to finally snuff out the problem.
In the space of one single weekend, elite tactical squads, joined by a special anti-drug taskforce and 1,000 extra-duty officers, rounded up scores of Watts teenagers.
Kids were humiliatingly forced to ‘kiss the sidewalk’ or spreadeagle against police cruisers while officers checked their names against computerized files of gang members.
1,453 were arrested and processed in mobile booking offices, mostly for petty offences like delinquent traffic tickets or curfew violations.
Hundreds more, uncharged, had their names entered on the LAPD gang roster for future surveillance.
(Davis, 1988:37)
As Davis points out, these tactics and the lack of public opposition to them, have ominous implications for the future of civil liberties:
Those who applaud the Hammer as a necessary evil today will be urging some form of youth internment as a necessary evil tomorrow.
The logic of civil libertarians has never been more compelling: the rights taken away from gang members will be rights denied all minority youth; the  walls put around gangs will imprison whole communities; the police state once expanded will not easily be contracted.
(Davis, 1988:59)
BRITISH POLICING TRENDS
As in America, important developments have occurred in the following areas of public order policing: public surveillance, crowd-control training and technology and the extension of legal powers.
These changes are separately analysed.
Public surveillance
Finch (1989:290–1) asserts that there has been a progressive growth in the routine surveillance of political ‘subversives’ over the past decade.
In her view, techniques developed in Northern Ireland have become more apparent on the British mainland.
Policing at all levels now recognises the need to accumulate and maintain ‘low-level intelligence’ which may be used to anticipate or pre-empt disorder.
Finch points out that the job description of some Scottish police officers requires them to enlist the co-operation of at least one person in every street who is willing and able to pass on useful information.
According to her, Neighbourhood Watch schemes have been encouraged with similar objectives in mind (ibid.: 295–6).
In the early 1980s, the Metropolitan police installed Divisional Information Officers to monitor the rise and fall of ‘tension indicators’(e.g. violence or abuse towards police officers, increasing numbers of complaints against the police and a decline in public co-operation) in specially targeted local communities and report their findings to the Central Information Unit within the Metropolitan Public Order Branch (Lloyd, 1989:273–4).
These indicators are used to identify ‘riot prone’ areas in London (ibid.).
The problem with using them is that they may produce a self-fulfilling prophecy.
Small incidents may be over-reacted to in the strong anticipation of trouble, rendering it more likely that confrontation will actually occur.
The surveillance of targeted individuals, organisations or localities may also be achieved via access to computer information.
For example, the Police National Computer (PNC) has a Suspect and Stolen Vehicles file which lists cars seen at demonstrations or owned by people who the police simply wish to keep an eye on, as well as vehicles suspected of being stolen or belonging to criminals (Manwaring-White, 1983:58–9).
Pounder (1985:76) argues that preliminary information of this nature will encourage  officers to place less emphasis on their own personal discretion and more emphasis on the background ‘history’ of the people involved.
In 1980, the Post Office Engineering Union alerted the general public to the increased prevalence of telephone tapping.
The police allegedly ‘listened in’ to conversations involving members of CND and were similarly active during the national steel and coal disputes (Docherty, 1983; Finch, 1989).
Infiltration by Special Branch officers posing as miners is said to have occurred during the coal dispute (McCabe and Wallington, 1988:145).
There have been several instances in the late 1980s of undercover operations leading to the rounding up of soccer hooligan offenders (Fielding, 1991:218).
Video cameras were used regularly in the late 1980s for crowd surveillance at soccer grounds, and as a method of enforcing post-match arrests (Uglow, 1988:95).
London demonstrations are routinely monitored by sixty cameras placed at symbolic locations, enabling an area of 200 square miles to be covered by the Scotland Yard operations room.
In addition, the police sometimes deploy ‘Heli-teles’— remote-control TV cameras with a wide-angle lens for scanning and a zoom-lens for focusing in — for use in helicopters.
The resolution of these cameras is good enough to pick out number plates or the faces of individual demonstrators.
Colour pictures monitored in a control room enable instructions to be relayed to police on the spot (ibid.:68–9).
Police riot training and technology
As early as 1978, one-third of all Metropolitan police officers received riot training (BSSRS, 1985:78).
This force now has the most sophisticated riot-training facilities in the United Kingdom, with special training centres at Greenwich and Hounslow.
The latter has its own ‘small town’ where riot simulations are carried out (Lloyd, 1989:270).
These arrangements are increasingly being adopted by other forces, all of which put their special units and Police Support Units through public order training.
Crowd-control training is complemented by courses on community and race relations.
But a Home Office study by Southgate (1982b) reported that officers saw little value in such training: they quickly forgot the content and saw it as no substitute for direct experience or the advice of senior colleagues.
Northam (1988) points out how the Metropolitan police have responded with ‘considerable imagination’ to the apathy and cynicism of lower ranks by putting them through courses designed to combat sexism, racism and what he calls the John Wayne machismo ‘canteen culture’.
The main problem is that they are then required to undergo training in  paramilitary riot control at Hounslow under the tuition of superfit instructors who convey a militaristic image.
Following the Lewisham disorders of 1977, perspex riot shields were introduced as standard police issue (BSSRS, 1985).
After the 1981 riots, improvements were made in the fireproofing of shields and garments and police officers were routinely provided with riot boilersuits (Lloyd, 1989).
In addition to these defensive provisions, forces were also provided with a range of offensive technology.
By November 1982, twenty-two of the forty-three forces had stocks of plastic bullets, and thirty had supplies of CS gas.
CS gas was used, against Home Office regulations, during the 1981 Toxteth riot, but has not been used since.
Similarly, the use of plastic bullets was authorised by the Metropolitan Police Commissioner, Sir Kenneth Newman, during the Broadwater Farm disturbance of 1985.
Here, too, weapons were not used, though, afterwards Sir Kenneth put the people of London ‘on notice’ that plastic bullets and CS gas would be used in the event of future disorder (ibid.:267).
Recent technological developments have enhanced the possibility of fatal shootings.
In April 1990, a week after the poll tax disorder, the Sunday Times Insight team revealed secret ACPO plans to deploy SAS-trained police marksmen in situations where rioters were thought to possess guns (Sunday Times , 8 April 1990).
A ‘Doomsday scenario’, outlined in the Association's Tactical Options Manual, provides for units of officers, equipped with Heckler and Koch machine guns, to be driven into riot situations by armoured landrovers.
In May 1991, it was disclosed that the Metropolitan police area was to be permanently patrolled by special units, known as ARVs (armed response vehicles).
These units would consist of three specially trained officers, driving around in Rover 827s, with each unit armed with two self-loading carbines and three handguns.
Eight such units were envisaged, and it was anticipated that between three and five would be on the streets at any given time (The Guardian , 10 May 1991).
As with the Doomsday scenario, this further militarisation of the police occurred without public debate or accountability.
Extended police powers
Provisions embodied in recent legislation, notably the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE) and the Public Order Act 1986,
represent a quantum leap in police powers, reinforcing the view that  the British state is becoming increasingly authoritarian.
The public order legislation will mean that the police, besides being charged with the duty to keep the peace, will be enabled to mediate the already constrained ability to engage in protest and dissent on a much wider front
.
(Brewer et al , 1988:31)
In so far as they encourage greater police intervention on picket lines or at demonstrations, and enable them to impose their authority on many aspects of community life, the 1984 and 1986 Acts have profound implications for the possibility of disorder.
The PACE enables the police to stop and search any person whom they reasonably suspect of possessing stolen goods, an offensive weapon or items to be used in connection with a burglary or theft.
The person may be detained for as long as is ‘reasonably practicable’ to carry out such a search.
Reasonable force may be used against anyone who is uncooperative, and anyone failing to give their name and address when asked is liable to be arrested.
The Act also empowers the police to set up roadblocks to discover whether vehicles contain anyone who has witnessed, committed or is about to commit a serious crime.
Other provisions enable police officers to enter private property forcibly without a search warrant if they deem such action necessary to prevent a breach of the peace, reach someone who has committed an arrestable offence or search for evidence of an offence by someone they have already arrested.
Subject to obtaining a magistrate's warrant, police officers may also enter premises forcibly to look for evidence of a serious arrestable offence (ranging from murder and rape to any act which has led or might lead to public disorder, or, vaguer still, acts which might interfere with the effective administration of justice).
Under the Act, persons may be detained for questioning at a police station, without charge, for 36 hours on the police's own authority, and for a further 60 hours subject to successful application for a magistrate's order.
It is evident, even from this brief review of the Act, that its overall effect has been to legitimise and encourage numerous police practices (e.g. stop and search, roadblocks, forcible entry) which have consistently alienated and antagonised large sections of society — notably, black communities and trade-unionists — and had the accumulated effect of generating public disorder.
Similar antagonism is likely to be produced by the use of police discretion allowed under the Public Order Act 1986.
Several features of the Act which were designed to reduce the possibility of public disorder seem more likely to promote its occurrence.
This is most evident in those provisions relating to the policing of static assemblies and marches and processions.
The Act states that, in the case of marches and processions, organisers must give written notice, 6 clear days beforehand, of the date, starting time and route of the march, together with their own names and addresses.
The police can use their discretion to impose prior conditions on the march, such as when it occurs, its route and numerical strength.
They may also prohibit certain activities, such as the carrying of banners or the chanting of particular slogans.
These prior conditions may be determined by a chief constable or his deputy, or someone of equivalent rank in the Metropolitan police.
Once the march is in progress, the police may impose further conditions as they see fit (e.g. deciding to alter the route).
Here conditions may be set by the most senior officer present.
The grounds on which such conditions may be imposed include police perceptions that disorder might otherwise occur, that there exists the possibility of damage to people or property or that the march is likely to intimidate people, or interfere with or disrupt the life of the community.
Organisers failing to give notice or not complying with conditions risk arrest, conviction, possible 3 months' sentence or, 400 fine.
Participants who break any conditions are liable to arrest, conviction or a, 400 fine.
The Act retains the power of a Chief Constable or his/her deputy to ban a march under the 1936 Public Order Act.
Here the Chief applies to his Local Authority, who then seek the appropriate permission from the Home Secretary.
(The Metropolitan Police Commissioner applies directly to the Home Office.)
It is an offence to organise, or participate in, a banned march or procession.
The provisions related to public assemblies vary slightly from those for marches and processions.
A public assembly is defined as a gathering of twenty or more people in a place which is wholly or partially open to the air (e.g. a mass meeting, picket, demonstration or pop festival).
Advance notice is not required in these cases.
However, as with marches and processions, the police have the power to impose conditions on the location, duration and size of the assembly on similar grounds to those which apply to marches.
Equivalent penalties apply to anyone failing to observe these conditions.
As Lloyd points out, ‘In effect it is now up to the police to exercise their political judgement about our freedom to demonstrate’(1989:260).
This is bound to result in frequent problems.
Frustration will inevitably arise on any march or at any static assembly where participants believe that the police are imposing unnecessary or unreasonable conditions, rendering the protest ineffectual.
There is nothing to guarantee that police conditions will be adequately conveyed or heard before or during the march.
Events at the anti-poll tax rally showed how confusion and indignation can easily occur when police instructions are inaudible.
Given their virtually unlimited  powers to dictate what a dissenting group may or may not be allowed to do, there is a danger that police will prove less willing to negotiate arrangements with protest organisers, preferring to impose conditions as the law allows.
Obviously, this would be a fragile basis on which to reach a ‘contract with the crowd’.
A case study: operation ‘Kingfisher’
If the prospect of British ‘bobbies’ behaving like their LAPD counterparts seems too remote to be taken seriously, we might do well to consider the events of 29 September 1989 when 400 police officers carried out a drug raid on the Broadwater Farm Estate.
Operation ‘Kingfisher’ followed 2 months of planning, including the 3-week undercover surveillance of a launderette, reckoned to be the focus of drug-dealing activity.
At 5 p.m. — the time established as the peak of illegal activity — 200 officers and a complement of specially invited newspaper reporters and television crews moved in.
Teams of officers arrived on the scene in unmarked furniture vans.
Under the protection of bullet-proof vests and riot gear, they used axes and sledgehammers to break down doors before seizing twenty-four prisoners and a large haul of cannabis.
Afterwards, police distributed 2,500 copies of a letter explaining their actions to local residents.
Community leaders were fully debriefed.
Newspaper reports on the following day contained complaints of excessive behaviour by the police: some people claimed that doors throughout several blocks of flats had been unnecessarily destroyed.
A community leader had to be removed from the area under police escort when it was alleged that she had been used as a police informer.
The raid represented a convergence of the policing trends referred to in this chapter: the use of covert surveillance, including low-level intelligence; hard, paramilitary tactics and the enabling legislation to enforce them.
We may have witnessed the ‘moment’ of the ‘technocop’(BSSRS, 1985).
It therefore becomes imperative to ask: what are the existing mechanisms of democratic control over the police, and how effective are they?
DEMOCRATIC CONTROL MECHANISMS
The answers to these questions are considered by examining the nature and effectiveness of three methods of exerting democratic influence over police policy and behaviour: community-policing arrangements, the police complaints system and the relationship between police and elected representatives (the formal accountability system).
Community-policing arrangements
Community policing is based on the principle of a working partnership between the police and local community.
It is the revitalising of the whole tradition of policing by consent by increasing the level of trust by the community in its police, by fostering a deeper understanding by the police of community problems and community needs.
To achieve these ends, police seek to liaise and work with other agencies, consult their public, and stimulate the self-policing capacities of communities themselves.
In so doing, police provide initiatives and leadership, draw interested parties together, and tailor their policing to neighbourhood needs.
(Pope, 1985:104)
This philosophy was massively endorsed by the Scarman Report (Scarman, 1981), which advocated the setting up of community liaison procedures and the use of ‘beat’ officers as the principal ways of ensuring greater trust and co-operation between the police and their public.
The Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 made it a legal requirement for Police Authorities to maintain consultative arrangements on behalf of the local community.
Though the Act did not specify what form the consultation should take, Home Office guidelines were issued recommending the establishment of police consultative committees.
These committees have some common features: membership includes representatives from the police, the police authority, constituent councils, and voluntary, statutory and community groups; meetings are held regularly and records kept; each has some sort of constitution; and the proceedings are generally publicly available.
(Brogden et al., 1988:175)
The objectives of these committees are to facilitate an exchange of views between the police and the wider community on issues of local concern; to help resolve conflict between the police and dissenting sections of the community; to encourage self-help and crime prevention activities; and to educate or inform the public regarding everyday police matters (Morgan, 1989).
The evidence suggests that community policing has not been the panacea that Lord Scarman envisaged.
Critics of consultative committees dismiss them as ineffectual talking shops, dominated by the ‘concerned and worthy’ middle classes and excluding those members of dispossessed  minorities on the receiving end of police policies (Brogden et al., 1988:176).
There are clear signs that many sections of the general public welcome the presence of home-beat officers (Shapland and Vagg, 1988; Waddington et al., 1990).
In a study carried out by Morris and Heal (1981), residents felt ‘more secure and confident’ following the introduction of beat officers.
Proponents of community policing often feel dismayed at the recklessness with which carefully cultivated relationships are undermined by the authorisation of ‘fire brigade’ tactics at the first suggestion of disorder.
Community policing continues to be afforded low priority and prestige within the police force, where it is generally characterised as ‘social work’ or not ‘real’policing (Fielding, 1991:170).
As Stephens points out, the ‘capture culture’, with its in-built preference for tough, reactive policing, still dominates the force.
In the meantime, ‘community policing has not developed into a partnership between police and public in the fight against crime.
It has remained dominated by the police and operates on the police's terms (Stephens, 1988:113).
Community-policing arrangements have not fared much better in the United States.
American officers tend to downgrade community policing as ‘unmanly’ or ‘unimportant’.
Since it was first introduced in the late 1960s, it has been resisted or treated with indifference by all ranks.
Community officers are castigated as ‘social workers’ or ‘Nigger lovers’, and community relations departments branded as ‘Commie Relations’units.
According to most officers, its only value lies in ‘selling the police’ to the public (Brewer et al., 1988:126; Riley, 1974:191).
Wintersmith (1974:71–7) evaluated the effectiveness of three American approaches to police-community relations (PCR).
The first approach involved despatching specially selected officers into ‘alienated neighbourhoods’ and having them operate from ‘storefront’mini-police stations, where they sometimes worked in teams, helping and advising marginal sections of society, like drug addicts and delinquent children.
According to Wintersmith, these officers helped to foster an atmosphere of mutual trust and co-operation.
However, the less-committed remainder of their colleagues accused them of ‘selling out the department’ and the resulting tension forced the community police officers to resign (ibid.:74).
The second approach to PCR — establishing citizens' committees (or neighbourhood-council forums)— proved equally ineffective.
‘For the most part, the closest the citizens ever came to confronting the police on specific issues was when an occasional individual dominated the entire meeting to register a personal grievance.
Those who participated were essentially propolice’(ibid.:72).
The third approach, ‘police-community  attitudinal change’, attempted to change officers' attitudes to minority groups via a series of lectures, encounter groups and sensitivity training.
This was impatiently rejected by police officers, who saw the methods involved as an attempt to subvert their authority and effectiveness (ibid.:75).
Police complaints procedures
The police complaints procedure provides a formal mechanism for citizens to lodge complaints about instances of police misconduct.
It is the Chief Constable's responsibility to see that these complaints are properly investigated and result in disciplinary action where appropriate.
The findings of these investigations, together with the Chief Constable's proposed course of action, are passed on to a key monitoring and supervisory body, the Police Complaints Authority (PCA), which may, if it has reason to be dissatisfied, overturn the Chief Constable's decision.
The PCA was established in April 1985 under the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984.
It was designed as a more effective replacement for the Police Complaints Board (PCB) which the public appeared to have lost faith in due to the fact that few complaints were ever substantiated, and that all investigations were carried out by the police themselves.
The 1984 Act sought to make the system more independent of the police by giving the Police Complaints Authority more involvement in the running of ‘major’ investigations involving death, serious injury, assault, conspiracy and matters of public concern (including the policing of public disorder).
Under the 1984 Act, the PCA is empowered to:(i) choose, or veto the choice, of investigating officers, supervise their inquiries, and receive their final report;(ii) monitor the speed and efficiency of the investigation and issue a statement to the Chief Constable saying whether it was satisfactorily carried out;(iii) receive a Chief Constable's decision on what action he intends to take as a result of an investigation and, if need be, overturn the decision (either by preferring disciplinary charges or, if it believes an offence has been committed, referring the case to the Director of Public Prosecutions).
In the latter case, the PCA may still choose to bring disciplinary charges even if the DPP decides there are insufficient grounds for prosecution.
The outcomes of successive PCA investigations of episodes of public disorder have cast serious doubts about its independence and effectiveness.
A brief summary of the PCA investigation of complaints about police tactics used to clear demonstrators from the steps of Manchester University's Students' Union building during a visit by the then Home Secretary, Leon Britain, in March 1985 highlights the origins of this concern.
The severity of these tactics (cf.
Manchester City Council, 1986) prompted thirty-three specific individual complaints and seventy-one general complaints related to police misconduct.
The subsequent 15-month investigation was carried out by officers from the Avon and Somerset Constabulary.
These officers were accused by complainants of failing to remain impartial, of adopting hostile and dismissive attitudes towards them and of using complainants' own statements as evidence against them in court.
It was further alleged that some complainants were shadowed, intimidated and, even, assaulted while going about their daily affairs (Out of Court , BBC 2, 4 March 1987).
The investigation resulted in criminal charges against three police officers (two for perjury and one for assault) but the PCA found insufficient evidence to substantiate the remaining complaints.
The authority had intended to publish a full summary of its findings but was prevented from doing so by the DPP who felt that it would prejudice the trials of the three officers.
However, sections of the press saw this as an attempt to suppress the investigation's key finding: that police insensitivity and mismanagement was largely to blame for the evening's confrontation (cf.
Observer , 1 March 1987).
Increasing numbers of potential complainants now prefer to take civil actions against the police (Emerson, 1989:26).
An ITN cameraman injured during a police charge at Wapping received an undisclosed out-of-court settlement from the Metropolitan Police after a High Court damages claim (The Guardian , 25 January 1989).
Such people seem to have grasped the key distinction that:
The consequence of winning a civil action is compensation in money whereas if a complaint is upheld, you receive nothing beyond the satisfaction of knowing there is a chance that the officer(s) in question will be disciplined or, just possibly, prosecuted.
(Thornhill, 1989:345)
Debates over the possibility of using civilians to investigate complaints against British police officers often contain references to the ineffectiveness of American Civilian Review Boards (Cohen, 1985:262).
It is indisputable that such obstacles as poor financing and staffing, and sustained police opposition have made them practically unworkable: ‘typically the pressure of police unions and the operation of political manipulation has resulted in these Boards becoming inoperative edifices to the democratic principle, or at best fairly toothless bureaucracies’(McKenzie and Gallagher, 1989:109).
Where they survive, Review Boards tend to lack true independence  from the police and seldom break down the barriers of police secrecy and their refusal to co-operate (Cohen, 1985:262).
Formal police accountability mechanisms
Police accountability is the constitutional mechanism which makes the police answerable for their actions.
The present institutional structure is based on regulations contained in the 1964 Police Act.
Under the Act, the British police force is divided into forty-three separate constabularies.
In London, the Metropolitan police force is accountable solely to the Home Secretary.
The City of London Police (who are responsible only for a square mile at the centre of London) are controlled by a committee of elected councillors.
The remaining police forces come under the joint supervision of partially elected police authorities, the chief constable and the Home Secretary.
Police forces outside of London receive 51 per cent of their funding from the Home Office and the other 49 per cent from local government via a levy on the rates.
Most of the Metropolitan Police's bill is paid by the Home Office because of its many ‘national’ police services.
The roles and responsibilities of each member of the tripartite system are prescribed by the 1964 Act.
The Local Police Authority (made up of twelve elected councillors and six appointed magistrates) is responsible for maintaining an adequate police force (i.e. in terms of finance, equipment, accommodation and personnel), and making arrangements for local consultation.
Members may call for a report on policing matters from the chief constable; and can appoint, discipline and fire senior officers.
All of these are subject, however, to the Home Secretary's approval.
The chief constable is responsible for the direction and control of the force.
He (there are no female chief constables) is, technically at least, the ‘sole determinant’ of police policy.
He has a statutory obligation to submit an annual report to his local authority and may be asked (but need not necessarily deliver) a report on any aspect of police policy required by the authority.
The Home Secretary is legally required to promote the efficiency of the police.
She/he may withhold the central grant to any force deemed inefficient by the Home Office Inspectorate.
The minister may also call for the retirement of a chief constable.
She/he may direct a chief officer to provide mutual aid to another force and, in the event of any disagreement, determine the relative allocation of costs between an aided and aiding authority.
In practice, the LPA may offer advice to the chief constable on matters  of policy, but he is under no legal obligation to accept it.
It is virtually impossible for a Police Authority to obtain a report from a chief constable contrary to his wishes.
The latter may simply reply that he does not feel it is in the  public's interest, or that the Police Authority does not strictly require it to effectively carry out its duties.
By contrast, in addition to the possibility of withholding the central grant, the Home Secretary may use other avenues of influence:
The Home Office informs local forces of its views by advisory circulars of which there are about 100 a year.
These circulars, though advisory in name, are essentially mandatory.
They are frequently the result of liaison between the Home Office and Acpo.
Although Chief Constables cavil occasionally they treat circulars as commands.
But they are not the result of any form of democratic consultation and LPAs are given no right to see them, even though the policy advanced might directly impinge on their financial responsibilities.
Nor is there any means for Parliament to discuss these circulars.
(Uglow, 1988:130)
Thus, as Brewer et al (1988:16) point out, the tripartite structure is actually a bipartite system of control.
The policing of the coal dispute provided a clear illustration of this point (Uglow, 1988).
Reiner's (1989) interviews with thirty-nine chief constables in England and Wales revealed that most regarded their authority as ‘useful sounding boards’, but were prepared to go against their recommendations if it suited them.
Conversely, Home Office guidelines were only exceptionally ignored since ‘They were seen as having a legitimacy stemming from the fact of representing the authoritative interpretation of the law by the elected government of the day’(ibid.:211).
Chief officers continue to oppose any reform of the present system.
As listening-posts attuned to balancing all shades of community opinion, they see themselves as more representative than formally elected representatives, who may represent a merely temporary or apparent majority.
In any event, they claim both a legal and moral mandate to act according to their ‘consciences’, tempered as these are by professional experience and wide public consultation.
(Reiner, 1989:208–9)
The American system of police accountability bears no relationship to its British tripartite structure.
In America, the majority of urban police departments are headed by a chief of police, selected and appointed by the elected local mayor.
Less frequently, the chief may be appointed by a city  or county manager, or an administrator, appointed by local councillors (cf.
McKenzie and Gallagher, 1989).
In theory, accountability is exercised when constituents take the mayor's policing record into account in local elections.
But this system is inevitably prejudicial against minority sections of the community.
The close relationship between police chiefs and elected mayors in American cities makes it difficult for the former not to curry favour with what is perceived as the ‘majority view’ within his (sic) jurisdiction….
The police chief fears that his appointment could be terminated if he carries out policies that impinge directly on the interests of the mayor's political supporters: electoral considerations and impartial policing thus make awkward bedfellows.
(Brewer et al., 1988:116)
Nevertheless, some of the tension which existed between the police and black communities in the 1960s appears to have been relieved by an increase in the number of elected black politicians and their moderating influence on police policy: ‘The growth of elected and appointed black people in the political system means that racialist and violent police behaviour comes to be more and more criticised and highlighted’(Kilson, 1987:59).
Alongside this, the US Supreme Court has expanded citizens' rights to sue police departments or their chief for officer misconduct.
The individual officer is rarely held personally liable for his or her actions: damages are paid by the city, while legal costs are met by the union.
However, such procedures are expensive, encouraging police departments to exercise more discipline over rank-and-file officers (Sherman, 1983:227).
These political and legal developments have encouraged a pronounced shift of emphasis: from a law enforcement conception of policing, which ‘views enforcement of the law as an end in itself, regardless of its consequences for the social order’ to a peace-keeping conception which ‘views law enforcement as a means towards an end: the highest possible level of public safety, order and preservation of life and property’(Sherman, 1983:230).
Sherman believes that, as a result of these changes, police are more likely to talk their way out of a potentially disorderly situation than they were in the 1960s (ibid.:231).
This peace-keeping conception of policing is less likely to apply where democratic influence is too weak to restrain a police chiefs commitment to a law-enforcement conception.
This is illustrated by the controversy surrounding a highly publicised racial assault by members of the LAPD on a black motorist on 3 March 1991.
Here a national outcry was provoked  when fifteen white police officers either stood by and watched or personally took part in the systematic assault of a black man whom they had stopped after a car chase.
The officers struck or kicked the motorist, Rodney King, more than fifty times, causing serious head, leg and abdominal injuries.
Unknown to them, the whole incident was videotaped by an amateur photographer and pictures were subsequently broadcast on nationwide television (The Guardian , 22 March 1991).
This prompted civil rights organisations and black politicians to demand the resignation of the chief of the Los Angeles Police Department, Daryl Gates.
Then, on Tuesday, 2 April, the city's black mayor, Tom Bradley, publicly stated that he had asked Gates to resign from his job.
Gates refused to tender his resignation on the grounds that his 8,300 members were depending on him to provide strong leadership in a difficult situation (The Guardian , 4 April 1991).
The problem confronting Bradley was that Los Angeles operates according to a structure of authority in which power is devolved between the mayor, the city council and tenured civil servants.
City laws therefore prevented the mayor from firing his chief.
Bradley's personally appointed police commission suspended Gates from office, only for the city council to return him to duty via the courts.
By May 1991, the issue had not been legally resolved.
In the meantime, a political representative of the city's black population was asking, ‘What if the people of South Central realize that they cannot remove Daryl Gates?’
It was an outcome which, she ominously predicted, ‘could be very dangerous’(Newsweek , 20 May 1991).
DISCUSSION
This chapter has provided overwhelming support for Northam's assertion that police paramilitarism is now a fact of British life:
Almost every major city in Britain has a police force armed with plastic bullets, CS gas and live firearms, and trained to use them to put down disturbances.
Its policemen and policewomen have undergone a rigorous course of crowd control techniques modelled on the riot squads used throughout the British colonies.
The men who walk our streets as community bobbies today are equipped and ready to take them by force tomorrow.
(Northam, 1988:130–1)
Developments in police-control techniques have been accompanied by a major extension of police powers which encourage their intervention, not only on marches, at demonstrations and mass pickets, but in the everyday  affairs of the community.
The recent provision of mobile, armed response units in the Metropolitan area, and police activities like Operation ‘Kingfisher’ suggest that Los Angeles-style ‘street sweeps’are an alarming possibility.
Not that current democratic safeguards could offer much protection.
All are ineffectual.
Community liaison committees tend to steer clear of contentious issues, and the agenda is usually set by the police.
The police complaints procedure remains a ‘watchdog without teeth’(Emerson, 1989).
Finally, the tripartite system of accountability is ‘amenable to a high degree of central influence and control’, but operates as a bipartite structure with ‘occasional genuflections towards the local authority’(Uglow, 1988:130).
Who knows how close the rest of Britain came to resembling Northern Ireland when plastic bullets were introduced at Broadwater Farm, but not used due to a decrease in the violence.
Had the situation been different and plastic bullets had been fired, the longer-term consequence would have been to have moved the police significantly towards the position where the use of baton rounds was perceived by them as an appropriate method of crowd dispersal during large-scale civil disturbance.
Such decisions, however, are taken by the police; the public has no direct say.
Indeed, when a police authority has instructed its local constabulary not to purchase stockpiles of baton rounds nor to undertake training in their use, the Home Office has stepped in to circumvent this instruction by allowing police forces to hold such devices on permanent loan.
(Stephens, 1988:85)
Britain urgently requires a mechanism for influencing the policies and behaviour of its police.
American democratic and legal structures strong enough to restrain police behaviour have produced a reduction of public disorder.
The precise form of the structures required to ensure more effective police accountability in this country is one of several policy recommendations to be outlined in the concluding chapter.