

The failure of Conservative criminology under Thatcher
In this chapter we will consider the impact of the Conservative's law and order policies on the crime rates themselves.
We begin with a brief look at the official figures, since, whatever the shortcomings of these statistics, and no matter how distorted a picture of ‘real’ crime they portray, they do nevertheless have real effects, since they are used, for example, in political debate and inform, at least partially, the public's perception of the crime problem.
The 1980s has seen the victimisation, or crime, survey become a major growth industry in the UK.
The spotlight they have cast on ‘real’ levels of crime and its impact are important new factors in the criminological debate.
Our discussion of such surveys both at the national and local level lead us on to examine the impact of crime on women and ethnic minorities, and to a broader consideration of how these groups are treated by the criminal justice system.
Finally, noting the prominence of assertions to the contrary, by Conservative speakers, we will conclude this chapter by looking at the relationship between crime and unemployment.
MORE POLICE AND MORE CRIME
We have noted changes in procedural legislation, as well as changes in the actual nature of policing in previous chapters.
The increase in police powers and the subsequent curtailment in civil liberties, rest on the Conservative Party's alarm over the increase in crime.
But have these expanded powers and the concomitant increase in punitiveness had the desired effect upon crime?
Between May 1979 and March 1988 the number of police officers increased 11 per cent(from 111,493 to 124,080).
The number of serving police officers per 1,000 population had increased by 20 per cent during the 1970s (Burrows and Tarling 1987, p.230) and the increase continued during the Thatcher decade.
By 1988–89 there were 3.89 officers per 1,000 population in the Metropolitan Police District, while the average outside London  was 2.18 (CIPFA 1990).
Civilian workers employed by the police went up by 12 per cent between 1979 and 1988 (34,630 to 41,800).
Police salaries adjusted for inflation went up from 983 million in 1979 when the Conservatives came to power, to 2,378 million by 1987, a rise of some 47 per cent in real terms.
By 1988–89 they had reached 3,825 million, with police manpower increased by 16,000 officers.
Total police expenditure (operational expenditure including salary costs, buildings, equipment, increased 64 per cent in real terms by 1987,(1,178 million to 3,163 million).
Add to the enlarged programme of prison building, the feeding and housing of more and more convicted prisoners, the costs of the exploding remand population, and expenditure on the justice system presents a stark contrast with the swingeing cutbacks of other areas in the public sector.
It is the highly publicised rise in crime, and the Government's exploitation of the fear that it produces, which has justified increased expenditure since 1979 on the police, at a time of cutbacks on other sections of the public sector, such as health, income maintenance schemes, education and housing.
Has this increase in manpower and resources been effective?
Has the Conservatives' emphasis on strong policing and punishment succeeded where the supposedly soft approach of the Labour Party had failed?
Not according to Downes and Young (1987), who found that in the post-war period, the rate of increase of crime under the Conservatives was, on average, twice that under Labour.
As we have seen, the Conservative Party made much, prior to the ‘79 General Election, of the increase in crime during time in office of the 1974–79 Labour Government.
While we shall comment further below on the use of such officially constructed statistics, which may reflect,inter alia , changing public attitudes to reporting crime, police practice in recording crime or changing priorities concerning crime seriousness, as well as changes in underlying crime levels, we may be excused some ironic enjoyment in examining the patterns in these figures during the Thatcher decade.
Between 1979 and 1988 the total number of indictable offences known to the police (ignoring offences of criminal damage of value 20 or less) increased by just under 50 per cent(the 1988 total was in fact 4.5 per cent down on the previous year).
According to Criminal Statistics for England and Wales 1988, during these 9 years of Conservative law and order, violent offences increased by 66.5 per cent, robbery by 151.2 per cent , burglary by 50.3 per cent , theft by 37.3 per cent and fraud and forgery by 13.4 per cent .
Increases in the 1990 crime rate were to be even worse.
The figures for the first quarter of 1990 showed an increase of 15 per cent on the corresponding period of 1989, the largest rise in crime since records began in 1857.
But the statistics for the second quarter, announced just before the October Conference of the Conservative Party, were even more damaging to the Government showing a rise of 17 per cent on 1989.
Indeed these figures made even sorrier reading for  the Conservatives when one realised that demographic shifts were working in the Government's favour.
Historically, the major group of offenders are 14- to 20-year-old males and these peaked as a proportion of the population in 1982 at 6.77 per cent(of the total population over the age of 10) before declining to 5.99 per cent in 1988.
Taylor (1987) points out that in the United States during the 1980s, the Reagan Administration, pursuing similar policies to those of the Conservatives, presided over a decline in crime and asks why the United Kingdom was different.
He sees part of the answer in the massive recession suffered by the British economy at that time, a point to which we shall return below.
Steffensmeier and Harer (1987) have argued that at least part of this decline in the US may be attributed to demographic factors i.e. to a declining number of young males.
Clearly the same did not occur in the UK; the increased propensity to offend more than counterbalanced the decline in the high-offender groups in the population (Liddelow 1990).
While it is difficult to draw any definite conclusions from such bald statistics on recorded crime, they clearly posed a major embarrassment for a Government pledged to reduce the crime rate.
What is clear, as we shall see below from both victimisation studies and official statistics, is that the crime rate had not decreased under the Conservatives and Home Office projections for the 1990s suggested that the increase was likely to continue.
The forecasts were for a 28 per cent increase between 1983 and 1993 (although the demographic shifts noted above may reduce this), and indeed by 1989 the increase was already 19 per cent.
These figures provide political ammunition to chief police officers arguing for more resources, although this is clearly a double-edged sword since the figures could be interpreted as showing the police being unable to do much about crime levels.
One problem with statistics of recorded crime is that they are functions both of police administrative practices and of the public's propensity to report offences.
Changes in either or both will produce changes in recorded crime trends.
For example, since 1972 the General Household Survey (GHS) has, at irregular intervals carried questions on household burglaries.
Over the period 1972–87 Mayhew et al .
(1989), combining GHS and British Crime Survey (BCS) figures, suggest that household burglary rose by 17 per cent while police figures showed an increase nearly 8 times more -127 per cent.
This discrepancy in trends was greater for the earlier years of this period between 1983 and 1987 ‘there is no statistically sound evidence that the trends diverge’(Mayhew et al .
1989, p.20).
Mayhew et al .
follow Lewis and Mo (1986) in arguing that the discrepancy may be due to a greater rise in the serious burglaries which involve insurance claims, and hence are more likely to be reported, especially given the increase in the number of personal telephones and the higher levels of home ownership.
Alternatively, the public may simply have become more sensitised to crime, through media and press  reports or the Government's crime prevention publicity, and so believing crime to be on the increase they are more likely to report offences leading to a rise in recorded crime which will lead to further media attention and so on in a ‘deviancy amplification spiral’.
Other changes in reporting may be due to shifts in public perceptions of police attitudes towards specific crimes.
Sexual offences and particularly rape may fall into this category.
We will look at other methods of assessing the level and effects of crime in a moment, but we note here that both survey-based estimates and police statistics show increasing levels of crime, the differences are of degree not direction.
A second question to ask when considering the effectiveness of the increased powers and resources commanded by the police since 1979 is have they become more successful at clearing up crime.
Again from Criminal Statistics (1988) we see that there has been an increase in the number of offences cleared up by the police, between 1979 and 1988 of 27.3 per cent(from 980,700 to 1,248,900).
However, if we look at clear-up rates, those cleared up as a percentage of the total number of recorded offences we find that a 15 per cent decline from 41 per cent in 1979 to 35 per cent in 1988.
Moreover, looking at total dear-up rates flatters the police, since it includes crimes which, by their very nature, are usually cleared up as soon as they are reported.
For example, fraud and forgery usually only come to light when an organisation discovers the offender.
Similarly shops will often only report shoplifting when they have apprehended the culprit.
As Burrows and Tarling (1987) note, the major offence categories of burglary, robbery and criminal damage all have relatively low clear-up rates (29 per cent, 23 per cent and 24 per cent , respectively in 1988).
However, there are more fundamental problems with clear-up rates.
A crime may be recorded as cleared by the police for a variety of reasons: where an individual has been charged or summonsed for the offence (whether or not they are found guilty!); where an individual admits an offence and receives a formal caution from a senior police officer; where an individual convicted of an offence asks, before sentence for other offences to be ‘taken into consideration’(TICs); where forces officially take ‘no further action’ and the offence is written off.
This may occur for various reasons; the suspect may have died or be below the age of criminal responsibility, the victim may not wish to press charges or a witness may be unwilling, or unable, to give evidence or a person already in detention after conviction admits to further offences.
Following revelations in the Observer ,(Nick Davies' ‘Crime, the great cop out’, 13.7.86, p.1) and ‘More policemen confirm crime figures scandal’(Observer 20.7.86, p.6), which suggested that the clear-up rate, in Kent and elsewhere was inaccurate and sometimes fabricated, Gill (1987) challenged the use of the clear-up rate as an assessment of police effectiveness.
He looked  at the crime figures reported by the Merseyside police, where the increase in clear-up rates could be shown to be related to the number of prison visits by police officers.
These visits were extremely fruitful sources of confessions to hitherto unsolved crimes which subsequently were classified NPA, and hence cleared up.
They were drastically reduced in 1985–86 because of overtime cuts forced upon the police by the local police authority as one of the ways of responding to the budgetary impact of rate capping.
The consequent decrease in clear-up rates was almost entirely due to a drop in NFA numbers.
A second interesting example of how police practice affects crime figures is given by Farrington, and Dowds (1985).
In a study of Nottinghamshire, Leicestershire and Staffordshire police, they found that 25 per cent of all crimes discovered in Notts came from admission by those in custody, while in Leicestershire and Staffordshire the figures were 4 per cent and 8 per cent respectively.
The apparent higher crime rate in Notts was almost entirely due to this factor and the Notts police ‘s greater tendency to record trivial offences.
A further quirk in the Notts approach to gathering statistics is that until 1982 they counted as TIC those offences offered to the court but denied by the offenders!
If changes in detected crime levels need to be monitored with some scepticism, the real rate of crime is also problematic because of unrecorded crime.
As well as distortions to the official figures produced by police recording practice, there are a variety of reasons why victims of crime often do not report offences.
They may consider them too trivial or feel that the police would be able to offer little assistance.
The offences may occur within the family or between acquaintances and to report them may be socially disruptive.
Alternatively, and this applies particularly to domestic offences, the victim may feel that the police are unwilling to take the matter seriously.
Certain groups of individuals — ethnic minorities, homosexuals, young people — may also be suspicious of the attitudes of the police towards them.
For all these, and other reasons, official crime figures will underestimate the true figure.
In attempts to obtain alternative estimates of crime levels but also to gain information on various topics such as fear of crime, attitudes to the police, public views on punishment and impact of crime, the last decade has seen the proliferation of the crime survey in Britain.
The major impetus for this work have been the national surveys carried out by the Home Office, the British Crime Surveys of 1982, 1984 and 1988.
These have been followed by a number of local area surveys usually commissioned by Labour-controlled councils and usually focusing on inner city areas.
The most quoted are the two Islington surveys carried out in 1985 and 1988 and the Merseyside survey of 1984.
Crime surveys attempt to bypass the problems of police statistics noted above, by asking a sample of respondents about their experiences  of crime, both reported and unreported, to obtain a more accurate picture of crime levels.
They are not without their own problems of course.
Young (1988) has, for example, noted that for local and national crime surveys, the response rate (the proportion of individuals chosen for inclusion in a survey who actually complete a questionnaire) has never been above 80 per cent .
Young points out that this means the victimisation of over 20 per cent of respondents is still unknown and that such a large proportion could easily skew findings from the surveys.
He argues that this number:
probably includes a disproportionate number of transients, of lower working class people hostile to officials with clipboards attempting to ask them about their lives, and those most frightened to answer.
(Young 1988)
The 1988 BCS estimates of crime levels show that in 1987 the amount of under-reporting of crime varied substantially between types of crime.
For example, only 10 per cent of vandalism and 12 per cent of theft from the person were estimated to be reported, while for burglary, the estimated percentage was 41 per cent and for motor vehicle theft 86 per cent (Mayhew et al .
1989, p. 10).
Overall the survey suggested 37 per cent of offences were reported.
The problem of the ‘dark’ figure of crime, the ‘real’crime level, which is so much greater than the official statistics for recorded crime, seems to indicate a far more serious problem than previously acknowledged.
However, the picture which Home Office researchers have used the successive surveys to portray is one where the majority of unreported crime is of a trivial nature.
They have attempted to use the survey figures to counteract fear of crime.
They have argued that most crime is petty and that the increase in recorded crime is more to do with the public's decreased tolerance than anything else:
The real message of the BCS is that it calls into question assumptions about crime upon which people's concern is founded.
It emphasises the petty nature of most law breaking — a point which also emerges from Criminal Statistics but is often overlooked….
Of the offences uncovered by the BCS only a tiny proportion were crimes of serious violence, and very few were serious property offences such as burglary or car theft.
The vast majority were, for example, petty thefts, acts of vandalism, and minor assaults.
A corollary of this is that the risks which people face of being victims of serious crime are remarkably small.
(Hough and Mayhew 1983, p.33)
The British Crime Surveys (BCS) were set up at least partly because of official scepticism over police statistics, and in an attempt to counteract the portrayal in parts of the media of crime rates soaring out of control.
It is a  liberal questioning of criminal statistics collected and collated by the police themselves.
As we noted above, the latest 1988 BCS indicates, that indeed, crime is not rising as steeply as police statistics imply.
The BCS suggested that in fact the prospect of suffering from sexual assault, robbery or burglary was unlikely when considering the country as a whole.
For example, the 1982 survey reported that:
a ‘statistically average’ person aged 16 or over can expect: a robbery once every five centuries (not attempts), an assault resulting in injury (even if slight) once every century, the family car to be taken by joyriders once every 60 years, a burglary in the home once every 40 years.
(Hough and Mayhew 1983, p. 15)
Furthermore, the BCS distinguished between the fear of crime, i.e. people's fear of being victimised, and concern with crime, people's more general anxiety about crime which did not have to do with personal Ask.
Basically, fear of crime, it is argued, is out of proportion with the actual probability of being a victim.
Maxfield (1987) in looking at the fear of crime, found that this profoundly affected a minority of people's lives.
We obtain a national picture of crime and people's attitudes towards it from the three BCS, but for their critics these surveys have emphasised this national picture at the expense of the inner cities, which suffered more than their fair share of crime.
Furthermore, while quotes like those above have an immediate impact they ignore the variations in the patterns of victimisation due to age, race and gender.
These considerations led to the awareness of the need for local crime surveys which focused on the crime problems of smaller geographical areas and their impact upon specific sub-groups of the population.
For example, Kinsey (1985) states that:
It appears that on Merseyside personal crimes are only marginally more common than in England and Wales generally.
In relation to offences involving personal violence there would appear to be little evidence from the survey to substantiate claims that Merseyside is an exceptionally violent area In relation to household crimes, however, the rate in Merseyside is substantially higher and in the case of burglary three times higher than the national average.
(Kinsey 1985, p.5)
Perhaps more importantly the Merseyside Crime Survey (MCS) showed clearly that the impact of crime fell disproportionately on the elderly and the poor:
While men and women under 30 are most often the victims of crime, the impact is greatest upon those over 50.
However personal and household  crime in Merseyside appears from the survey to be most pervasive in the poorest areas of the count: there is more of it and the effect is most severe.
There can be no doubt that both in terms of the quantity and impact of the crimes examined the poor suffer more than the wealthy.
The problems appear critical for the 20 per cent of the Merseyside population living in the poorest council housing and especially in the district of Knowsley where 48 per cent of the population (six times the national average) live in such areas.
(Kinsey 1985, p. 16) and again:
Throughout the whole of Merseyside crime is seen as a major social problem but, as has been seen, it is in the poor areas where the victimisation rates are highest, the impact of crime is greatest and the anxiety most intense.
Merseysiders in general worry a lot about crime but those under the greatest social and economic pressure also suffer most from crime: they worry more, perhaps too much, but they do have the most to worry about.
(Kinsey 1985, p.24)
This focus upon the real impact of crime upon the poor, women and ethnic minorities is also an important part of the left realist approach to criminology.
The realists have undertaken several crime surveys for London councils and have placed great emphasis on the need to look at the pattern of victimisation of the oppressed, claiming that:
If you add to the concern for blacks as victims a concern for the working class, for the poor, for the vulnerable and for women, you have an understanding of the realist approach today.
(Jones et al .
1986, p.1)
The Islington Crime Survey (ICS) of 1985 was the first study to focus solely on an inner city area According to the Department of the Environment Islington is the seventh most deprived area of England and the fifth worst area where housing is concerned.
In order to ensure reasonable numbers of respondents from ethnic minority groups the survey oversampled from them using an ‘ethnic minority booster sample,’ a device which the 1988 BCS also adopted.
They found that even within Islington there were wide differences in offence rates.
For burglary, for example, the area with the highest risk of this crime, Mildmay, the rate is eight and one half times as high as that for the area with the lowest Ask.
Young people, black people and men were more at risk from burglary, particularly if they lived in the Mildmay area For theft from the person, women are in general more at risk than men, blacks are more  likely to be victimised than whites and the risk of victimisation decreases with age.
The ICS gives a detailed picture of the incidence of assault in the area.
During the period covered by the survey there were an estimated 11,878 incidents which respondents considered to be assault.
Figure 2.8 in Jones et al .
(1986) shows that only an estimated 6 per cent of such offences were reported to the police.
An estimated 22 per cent of all assaults were domestic, 7 per cent were racist and 3.5 per cent police assaults.
The authors note:
Younger people are on average thirteen times as likely to be assaulted as people in the over 45 years of age category.
Black people on average are almost twice as likely as other people to be victims of assault and women are almost twice as likely again as men to be assaulted.
(Jones et al .
1986, p.65)
The differences between the ICS, an the one hand, and the BCS and official statistics on the other, in the treatment of domestic violence and sexual assault will be returned to later.
The second ICS was carried out during 1989.
It found that in the 3 years since the first survey, crime had moved from third place to the top of people ‘s list of problems affecting their neighbourhood.
Furthermore, the respondent's confidence in the ability of the police to deal with problem had declined.
It reinforced the image of women under siege.
Taking all age groups it estimated that 74 per cent of women stayed in very or fairly often.
Kinsey (1985) found a similar story in Merseyside:
The picture which has emerged is one of people of the inner city especially the women — living under curfew.
While, as has been seen, the actual chances of victimisation are less than many people believe, nonetheless, in Granby, for example, three quarters of those interviewed believe there are real Asks for women who go out at night and half said they often or always avoid going out after dark.
(Kinsey 1985, p.23)
We turn in the next section to consider in more detail the effect of crime upon women.
OFFENCES AGAINST WOMEN
We argued earlier that the crime surveys commissioned by Labour Local Authorities in areas such as Islington, Merseyside, and Hammersmith and Fulham attempted to put the findings of the BCS into an inner city context.
One aspect of this was to focus on the experiences of particular groups: the poor, women and ethnic minorities.
In the words of Kinsey et al .
(1986)‘It needs emphasizing that crime and fear of crime hit working class women  more than any other major section of society.’
In particular, these local surveys suggested that the fear that young women had concerning sexual assault was quite justified.
Jones,et al .
(1986) found that in Islington during the period covered there were about 1200 cases of sexual assault.
Of these only 21 per cent were reported to the police and only an estimated 9 per cent were recorded in the criminal statistics.
Young females are 18 times more likely to be sexually assaulted than those over 45.
Class shows itself in the fact that women who are council tenants are three times more likely to be sexually assaulted, than those who are owner-occupiers.
The 1982 and 1984 BCS between them only uncovered two cases of attempted rape and 17 and 18 sexual assaults respectively (Jones et al .
1986, p.69).
R. Hall (1985) suggested this under-reporting is perhaps partly because the BCS used some male interviewers.
This was not supported by the results of the ICS, whose authors claim that their male interviewers actually uncovered more cases of sexual assault than did female interviewers.
What was undoubtedly important, however, was that the ICS briefed and trained its interviewers to deal with the part of the questionnaire which dealt with sexual offences, and indeed when a case was uncovered by a male interviewer he always offered a follow-up interview conducted by a woman.
These were usually declined (Jones et al .
1985, p.71).
A survey by Living Magazine (14.8.89) which questioned 1,000 women, found that one-third had received obscene phone calls in the last year, 20 per cent of this group more than once, yet only 26 per cent had told the police, 13 per cent had been interfered with and 87 per cent of these kept silent; 9 per cent had suffered indecent exposure and 92 per cent failed to report this.
Of the sample 49 per cent felt that being pestered by men was inevitable.
The rise in recorded sexual offences (Criminal Statistics 1988) is usually explained as an artefact of more sensitive and sophisticated police recording procedures and improved victim treatment, rather than a real underlying change, but hard evidence to support this is not clear.
A major problem is still undoubtedly  women's negative attitudes towards the police stemming from their historically well-founded fears that the police do little in cases of domestic violence, and are unsympathetic to sexual offences.
The local surveys have also emphasised the impact of domestic violence on women.
As Walklate points out:
incorporating an understanding of domestic violence, in particular, begins to alter somewhat the influence of gender as variable in the patterning of victimization as compared with BCS findings.
(Walklate 1989, p.37)
Domestic violence against women probably has the greatest number of unreported offences.
In the United States the FBI believes it is probably ten  times more underreported than rape (quoted in Smith 1989).
The 1982 BCS found that 10 per cent of assault victims were women who has been attacked by present or previous husbands or boyfriends (Hough and Mayhew 1983).
The 1984 survey estimated just over 200,000 incidents of domestic assault in England and Wales in 1983.
It found in 12.5 per cent of assaults and crimes of violence the respondent reported the involvement of family, lover or ex-lovers.
Hough and Mayhew (1988) regard these figures as underestimates and Worrall and Pease ‘s (1986) re-analysis of the BCS data which looked at all crimes, and attempted crimes, involving contact and where the victim could identify whether or not they knew the offender, found that women were much more likely to say that they knew the offender well and that the offender was a spouse in nearly 40 per cent of cases.
The ICS showed, that while, as we have seen, domestic violence was a considerable problem, comprising an estimated 22 per cent of all assaults in the borough, it was one usually not taken very seriously by the police.
The London Strategy Policy Unit (1986) suggests that this estimate would mean an annual figure of over three quarters of a million for London as a whole.
The Metropolitan Police as a whole receive over 1,000 calls concerned with domestic violence from women each week (Cowell,et al .
1986).
As well as being victims of crime women also suffer from the effects of fear of crime.
We noted above the MCS findings of self-imposed curfew by many women in Merseyside.
The ICS paints a similar picture:
‘women generally, and particularly older and black women, feel it is necessary to restrict their behaviour and avoid certain situations as a precaution against crime.
In this sense, the Islington Crime Survey helps to illustrate that a ‘curfew on women’ appears to be implicitly operative .
(Jones et al .,
1986, p. 169; italics in original)
RACE AND CRIME
One of the hidden agendas in the crime statistics issues has already been raised in our examination of the phenomenon of mugging.
We have seen how the issue of race was first raised in the 1982 Metropolitan Police statistics which recorded the race of both victim and assailant in London.
The emphasis in ‘black crime’ has focused on youth, and consequently it is black youth that have been portrayed as folk devils who make the streets unsafe.
Tuck and Southgate (1981) had found that 50 per cent of offenders reported by black victims were black, which reflects American data on intra-racial violent crime.
Matthews (1987) using American Bureau of Justice figures for 1987, found that in America there is considerable variability in class and racial distribution of offender victim relations for different types  of crime, compounded by age and gender and geographical location (see also O'Brien 1987).
However for crime in general:
‘approximately ¾ of whites are victimised by whites, while on the whole over 80 per cent of blacks are victimised by blacks.
However robbery, rape and assault are predominantly intra-racial for white offenders in America, but significantly inter-racial for black offenders.
(Matthews 1987, p.389)
The British picture is different; rapes, robbery and assault are predominantly intra-racial as far as can be analysed, except for racial attacks on blacks.
Young and Lea note that:
a young black male (aged between twelve and fifteen) is twenty-two times more likely to have a violent crime committed against him than an elderly white woman (over 65) and seven times more likely to have something stolen from him.
(Young and Lea 1984, p.26)
The 1988 BCS argues that Asians and Afro-Caribbeans were more likely to become the victims of crime but that this is:
largely explained by social and demographic factors, particularly the areas in which they live.
(Mayhew et al .
1989, p.50)
However, even discounting geographical reasons, ‘ethnic minority risks still tend to be higher’ with Asians more vulnerable to mugging and vandalism.
Of the ethnic minority population, 10.8 per cent had been the victims of assault as opposed to 5.5 per cent of whites.
Furthermore, Asians were more likely to be victimised by strangers, 27 per cent of the incidents involving groups of four or more offenders unknown to them.
Perhaps not surprisingly given this, they believed that crime against them was racially motivated.
Afro-Caribbeans were more likely to know the offender well and were more likely than Asians or whites to be victimised by other Afro-Asians.
The 1988 BCS also found that 70 per cent of personal property thefts happened at work, and that those in risk of assault were in entertainment, catering, nursing, welfare and security personnel.
Locality, class, race and gender are central in serious crime happening to a person.
We have seen that Asians and Afro-Caribbeans are likely to be assaulted more than whites (Asians twice as much as whites), and whilst we have statistics where white victims are ‘mugged’ by black assailants (a small part of robbery figures), we have no figures for street robbery, rape or racial assaults on black people by whites.
We know about black people as victims, but not about white people as perpetrators of crimes against black people.
We do have evidence that the first generation of Afro-Caribbean immigrants was exceptionally law abiding.
We have indications that black people have, over the past 30 years, become more present in the criminal statistics than the previous generation, reaching a level with, and in some categories, exceeding the indigenous population.
They certainly receive more custodial sentences than would normally be predicted from their presence in the population.
In the matter of stop-and-search powers and cautioning decisions there is evidence suggesting that a disproportionate amount of black young males are stopped by the police.
Black juveniles are more likely to be prosecuted and less likely to be cautioned than white juveniles.
Stephens and Willis (1979) noted that the chances of black youths being arrested for ‘other violent theft’ or ‘being a suspected person’were 14 and 15 times higher, respectively, than those of young white persons.
They argued that the apparent over-representation of black youth in the criminal statistics may be that youth is such a large part of the black population.
In 1971 the Runnymede Trust noted that 90 per cent of black Britons were under 15 years of age.
It is normal, then, to expect a high representation of black youth in youthful crime statistics.
The impoverished areas that black Britons settle in means that young people are far more at risk both in terms of levels of offending, and in terms of police surveillance.
Pitts (1986) notes that there is massive over-representation (up to 60 per cent of the inmate population) of black youth in remand and assessment centres (see also Fludger 1981).
He quotes Kettle (1982) who argued that according to the Home Office, 50 per cent of the population of Ashford remand centre were black, and for Brixton and Aylesbury prisons, remand prisoners were between 25 per cent and 35 per cent black.
This was true for Rochester, Dover and Hewell Grange Borstal and Balantyre House detention centre.
The implication is:
that as we move down the age range, so the proportion of young black inmates confined in custodial or child care institutions increases.
(Kettle 1982)
This has to be seen in the context that the fastest growing section of the penal population is the 15–25-year-old age group, and indeed the Young Offenders White Paper 1980, and the CJA 1982 are responses to this.
Indeed, nowhere is the problem of overcrowding in prison more acute than in this age group.
Several factors are involved in the process of black youth through the criminal justice system.
Taylor (1982) showed that in the Crown Court, black defendants are two or three times more likely to receive a custodial sentence.
The sentence is not related to the offence so much as whether the defendant is homeless, jobless, or has been the subject of a care order, and this is more likely to have happened to black youth.
Consequently, sentences for black  youth tend to move up tariff (receive too severe a sentence for the offence) in the criminal justice system too early on.
Where supervision orders to the probation service would normally have been made for the offence, we find that because of homelessness and unemployment, black youths tend to be remanded in custody, or given custodial sentences.
Pitts (1986) found that few black juveniles find their way to the IT schemes, or to day centres.
Instead, there has been a pressure for community homes for education for young black people who have been made the subject of care orders because of their offending.
Many of these institutions will keep their black intake down to 20 per cent.
There are consequently a large number of young black people in remand, observation and assessment centres.
Given that the CJA 1982 gave magistrates the powers of Youth Custody sentences of up to a year, and that these sentences increased by 67 per cent in the first year of its operation, it is hardly surprising that Taylor (1982) found that 43 per cent of black youth defendants opted for crown court trials.
It is further worth noting that the lack of confidence in the police by black people is now reaching other parts of the criminal justice system, notably the courts.
The Court of Appeal on 9 August 1989 found that a trial judge has no power to empanel a multiracial jury, even if he believes to do so would be right in the particular circumstances of the case.
A jury is believed to be selected randomly from the population, but for example, in a study of 326 juries in Birmingham from 1975–77, only 0.7 per cent of jurors were black, whilst the census suggested one should expect between 10 and 15 times that number.
A defence cannot challenge the composition of the whole panel on the ground of an inadequate number of the relevant racial group.
This must extend Taylor's (1982) findings of the suspicion by black defendants of magistrates courts, being extended now to crown courts.
Black defendants are three times more likely to receive a custodial sentence than whites.
This sentence Taylor found, does not reflect the seriousness of the offence, but correlates with homelessness, joblessness, and whether the defendant was subject of a care order.
Structural inequality affects the process of criminal justice, because black defendants lack material and structural support systems which would normally keep them out of prison.
Pitts (1986) quotes Midland Probation Service figures which indicate that the second highest category of offence resulting in arrest for young blacks are those arising from confrontation with the police, offences he notes, which occur after the police arrive.
Landau (1981) suggested that (before its repeal)‘sus’(arrest for being a suspected person) was the biggest difference in arrest rates between races, and that the police thought black youth more antagonistic to them, and they were 50 per cent more likely to be referred to the juvenile bureau.
Hence black youth is subject to closer surveillance and control by the police, a form of policing more likely to generate further  offences and more likely to be diverted to the juvenile bureau.
Willis (1983) found that black males aged between 16 and 24 were stopped ten times more than average (although prosecuted in the same proportion as white juveniles).
Landau and Nathan (1983) found that in the juvenile bureau of six London boroughs white juveniles were significantly more cautioned than black, including juveniles with previous convictions.
Pratt (1980) showed for Lambeth that young black men between 10 and 18 are the most likely perpetrators, but also the most likely victims of street crime.
The Policy Studies Institute (PSI)(Smith and Gray 1983) study of police and people in London found that the proportion stopped by the Metropolitan Police were 63 per cent of Afro-Caribbeans, 44 per cent for whites and 18 per cent for Asians, and that of those arrested 17 per cent were Afro-Caribbean.
The first figures published by the Home Office (Home Office 1986) indicated that of prisoners, 8 per cent of men and 12 per cent of women were Afro-Caribbean, yet these groups make up only 1 per cent and 2 per cent of the population in general(see also Walker 1987).
In 1983, the Metropolitan Police had claimed that 13 per cent of defendants were black (Home Office 1984).
Relatively, more black people were held in secure prisons.
Walker (1988), in a study which looked at the race of young males disposed of by the courts in London in 1983, found that of those prosecuted, more blacks had their case dismissed without trial due to insufficient evidence, suggesting according to Walker, that either ‘…the police more readily prosecute black people’, or that ‘the court requires more convincing evidence for black  defendants ’(Walker 1988, p.459).
Furthermore a higher proportion of blacks were acquitted after trial, which again suggests insufficient evidence.
Additionally, a slightly higher proportion of blacks were sentenced in adult rather than juvenile magistrates courts and of these a higher proportion of blacks were tried in the crown courts.
Of those sentenced in the crown courts proportionately more black defendants received a custodial sentence.
The situation does not appear to have altered dramatically since then.
The Home Office Statistical Bulletin 6/89 (Home Office 1989c) found black defendants were more likely to be remanded in custody than white defendants, yet a higher proportion were subsequently acquitted.
Compared to their numbers in the general population, black men are 8 times, and black women 6 times over-represented in the prison population.
An examination of magistrates courts revealed that for the under-21 population, black youth on average received 12 months imprisonment, whilst white youth only 9 months for similar offences.
The NACRO Briefing (1989a) which provides a useful review of research into racism in the criminal justice system found that there:
is strong evidence that black people are unfairly treated by the criminal justice system.
(NACRO 1989a, p. 14)
Commenting on the numbers from ethnic minorities in prison, Vivien Stern, the director of NACRO went straight to the point when she suggested:
these figures do not show that black people are more prone crime, but they do suggest that black people who offend are more likely to go to prison.
(Daily Telegraph 13.6.88)
Of the 48,609 people in prison in September 1989, 9173 (18.9 per cent) were from ethnic minorities, rising from 6000 in 1985 (Lord Errars in a written answer to House of Lords question 3 March 1990, quoted in NACRO News Digest May 1990).
Of the 36,496 sentenced male prisoners on the same date, 3,629 (9.9 per cent) were Afro-Caribbean, 1,059 (2.9 per cent ) were Indian, Pakistani or  Bangladeshi and 667 (1.8 per cent ) of Chinese, Arab or mixed origins (ibid).
For all types of custody the proportion of all ethnic minorities in the prison population was higher than in the general population.
Black prisoners had fewer previous convictions than white prisoners sentenced for the same type of offence and were less likely to be granted bail.
Black youth were more likely to be prosecuted and less likely to be cautioned than white youth.
A study of juvenile sentencing in Hackney between 1984–86 (Tipler 1986) found that blacks were twice as likely to receive custodial sentences as whites for similar offences.
An analysis of custodial sentences passed on juveniles in North London in 1985–86 (Green et al .
1987) found that black youth received longer sentences and that the black Afro-Caribbean youths given custodial sentences had fewer previous convictions than their white counterparts.
A Home Office study (HO 1/89) which looked at probationers in 1984 found that of some 110,000 people on probation, only 4 per cent were black, 2 per cent were Asian and 1 per cent were ‘other’.
Gilroy (1987) has taken issue with the common reading of criminal statistics and black people.
He points out that most ignore the astonishing number of racist attacks which are part of the everyday life of black people in many of the inner city areas, and that the police in such areas are notoriously selective in their surveillance of black people.
The police, in common with other members of the white population, he argues, see black British life as characterised by pathological family relations and generational conflict.
Black crime is presented as biological culturalism in Conservative thought, and as a cultural problem in by the left, who speak of deprivation and restricted opportunity.
This, Gilroy argues, overlooks the multiracial character of what occurred in the 1981 and 1985 youth riots, and relegates British urban street crime to an Afro-Caribbean deviation.
Gilroy points out  that rising street crime has been used as a justification for increased police militarisation, and blames this rise on the deviant activities of a minority of black youth.
An annual symbol of this relationship is the policing of the Notting Hill Carnival.
However, it is the continued surveillance, the feeling of lack of police protection from organised and spontaneous racist attacks upon black persons and property that have led to the breakdown in police/black community relations.
It is not that police statistics are misleading on recorded crime, but they need to be considered in the context of the BCS and the local crime surveys.
They need to be compared to the evidence of such documents such as the Institute of Race Relations ‘Policing against Black People’ with its accounts of police harassment, assault and deaths in custody, and the Anti-Fascist journal Searchlight's files on racial assaults on black people by the civilian population.
Gilroy reminds us that black political protest in the streets and urban crime have very successfully become fused in the public eye.
The black population has been under police surveillance for a long time.
Sivanandan (1982) noted that in 1975, for example, the Metropolitan Special Patrol Group stopped and interrogated 14,000 people on the streets.
Lea (1986), in a discussion of police racism, suggests that a common theory of apologists for the police force is the ‘bad apple’ approach which views the problem as one of individual officers being bigoted.
This can tie into the occupational or ‘canteen culture’ explanation of police racism, which in the words of the Policy Studies Institute (Smith and Gray 1983) suggests that racialist talk:
helps to reinforce the security and solidarity of the group against a clearly perceived external threat.
(Smith and Gray 1983, p. 127)
This view puts the dynamic of police racism in the norms and values through which the police define their roles and legitimate their activities.
However, Lea points out that for writers like Gilroy racism is embodied in the conscious policies and practices of the police as an institution and that it is difficult to argue that the police are de-politicising black struggles, and criminalising them, when some of them, such as the Spaghetti House siege, used crime to obtain political funds, and hence the police responded to the event as crime.
However, what this assumes is that the police never make decisions to de-politicise crime, which they plainly do in their endeavour to argue that many assaults by whites upon black are not racist in their intent, merely matters of public order.
By positing the issue of black crime as a central feature of law and order, the black community becomes viewed as a potentially violent and lawless group.
The large proportion of law-abiding black people, for example, black  health and social services workers, becomes subsumed under an association of black people and deviance.
Certain crimes become symbols of the ethnicity of those who carry them out.
Black communities become sites of struggle, defended on the one hand by black youth, and attacked on the other by the police, determined to prevent ‘no-go’ areas as in Northern Ireland.
What can be seen is that the attempt to correlate black youth and crime is a latent but definite element in the law and order debate.
Its complexity makes it the rock upon which the left realist argument has foundered.
Left realism is not intentionally racist, but it has been responded to as such, because of the complex element of police racism.
What has been left out of the argument is that racism is tragically too common to black people.
For example, in some districts in Central London, black children have to be escorted to school to defend them from assault; white estates have deliberately driven out black tenants.
Racism like this is not faced by whites, and is only too everyday for black people in a highly xenophobic society, and this has terrible effects on their everyday lives.
UNEMPLOYMENT AND CRIME: A DIGRESSION
We believe unemployment to be among the causes of ill-health, mortality, crime and civil disorder.
(House of Lords Select Committee on Unemployment, May 1982)
In a sense we do not really need to ask the question ‘Does unemployment cause crime?’ or ‘Do the under-privileged offend more than privileged.’
The debate about whether unemployment, poverty and deprivation are causally related to crime is perhaps less interesting than the observation which we discussed more fully elsewhere that crime, and in particular, street crime, becomes highlighted during times of economic crisis.
While agreeing with, if not the language, the sentiments of Taylor that:
Crime in general is not, therefore, a product of worklessness but a product of the way in which a capitalist mode of production sets man against man and ‘systematically’ prioritizes individual self interest as rational social practice.
But especially in conditions of capitalist crisis, it is only the street crime of the poor which is identified as a danger to the social order.
(Taylor 1982, p. 10)
Nevertheless, with the prominence given again and again to assertions that unemployment and crime are unrelated we must, at least briefly, review the arguments.
The orthodox sociological position, which may be derived from various different theoretical perspectives, is that rising unemployment leads to more crime.
This proposition has been the subject of much empirical debate, but at present there seems no overwhelming consensus as to its veracity.
Reviews of the existing work may be found in Box and Hale (1986) and, at more length, in Box (1987, Chapter Five).
More recent studies using British data do, however, support the argument.
In work which addresses the impact of the  Women's Liberation Movement on female crime rates, Box and Hale (1984) found that increases in the rate of female unemployment were significantly related to increases in the rate of conviction for violent crime (assault and wounding), theft, handling stolen goods and fraud.
Farrington et al .,
(1986), from the Cambridge Study in Delinquent Development, showed that members of the cohort of London youth being studied were more likely to commit offences when out of work than when employed.
Sampson and Wooldredge (1987), made elegant use of the data from the 1982 British Crime Survey and found that the probability of burglary victimisation and household theft victimisation increased with the rate of local unemployment.
When personal thefts and larcenies were considered, unemployment was statistically insignificant.
However, when the personal thefts were restricted to those which occurred within 15 minutes' walk of the victim's home, unemployment was again a statistically significant factor.
This study goes at least some way towards overcoming the problems of other work discussed by Box and Hale (1986, pp. 74–5), in that it relies on self-reported victimisation rather than police figures on recorded crime, and it controls for other socio-demographic variables.
In work using cross-section data for England and Wales, Pyle (1987, 1989) argues that the deterrence effect of the Conservative's policy of increased expenditure on the police and tougher sentences for convicted criminals has been swamped by the massive increases in unemployment during their period of government.
Pyle (1982) examined age-specific groups, unemployment and recorded property offences for the year 1975.
The results, he believed, ‘support the view that increases in unemployment are likely to significantly increase recorded property crime rates (most notably robberies)’(p.15).
Carr-Hill and Stern (1979) are usually quoted as providing clear evidence that unemployment and crime are not related.
Their work, which combines census data with other cross-section information for the 3 years 1961, 1966 and 1971, uses econometric techniques to estimate an interdependent model of crime rates and police activity.
However, Hakim (1982) re-analysed the data and found that ‘the results…confirm the association between crime and  unemployment, and suggest it has been increasing over time’(p.453).
The reason for the conflicting conclusions is, Hakim suggests, because:
a careful reading of this study (Carr-Hill and Stern) shows that the authors never carried out the test in question…but instead test the contribution of unemployment to explaining the number of police per capita in each area.
In effect the authors reject the hypothesis about unemployment contributing to crime on theoretical (or subjective) grounds, but they imply that they tested it fully.
However, they are unable to sidestep the results that show that areas with a high proportion of young men aged 15–24 years and a high proportion of the working class have significantly higher crime rates — and both these groups have the highest levels of unemployment experiences.
(Hakim 1982: 452)
Lord Scarman (1981), in providing the social background to the Brixton disorders of 10–12 April 1981, was at pains to point out that deprivations do not justify attacks on the police or excuse such disorders.
But at no stage did he deny that these conditions are part of the explanation.
Indeed, amongst the deprivations he lists, unemployment figures prominently.
It stood at 13 per cent in Brixton in early 1981 and ‘for black people, the percentage is estimated to be higher (around 25 per cent)’.
Furthermore, young blacks were even more affected, for ‘unemployment among black males under 19 has been estimated at 55 percent’.
(Scarman 1981: p.27).
Indeed, the view that unemployment and crime are related has not always been anathema to the Tories.
In 1976 in the Conservative Monthly News Lord Whitelaw was clearly of the opinion that ‘Undoubtedly, economic mismanagement…where it leads to high levels of unemployment, especially amongst young people, also contributes considerably to increasing the number of those tempted into a criminal life.
’ Less convincingly, perhaps, he continued: ‘The only real remedy for this situation is a vigorous pursuit of Conservative economic and social policies.’
Nor does the view represent the position of some police spokespersons.
For example, at the Police Federation's Annual Conference in 1987 the leader of the constables' section told delegates that:
Decrepit housing, poorly designed estates and unemployment make our job that much more difficult, in that people become more despondent.
(Independent 20.5. 1987)
Earlier, in 1984, Metropolitan Police Commissioner Cree had linked youth unemployment with the increase in crime and drug addiction in the London Borough of Southwark.
In a letter to Harriet Harman MP, reported in the Guardian , he wrote:
I do not think there is any doubt that high unemployment is related to high crime rates in certain parts of the borough.
What is even more disturbing is the proven connection between unemployment, crime and the purchase and sale of illegal drugs, both the hard and soft varieties.
(Guardian 24.3.84)
We would not wish the preceding argument to be read as suggesting that unemployment is the only independent variable which affects crime.
Such a view would clearly be banal.
Indeed, work published by the Home Office (Field 1990) suggests that other indicators may capture the effect of economic conditions better than unemployment.
In a sophisticated analysis of the variation of crime rates, Field found that, for property crimes in particular, personal consumption was an important correlate.
When spending power goes up relatively quickly the long-term growth in property crime slows down.
When personal consumption becomes static or declines, property crime rates take off:
In England and Wales the relationship has held throughout the 20th century, and has been particularly strong in the last twenty years….
A similar association between property crime and consumption may be demonstrated for the United States, Japan and France.
(Field 1990, p.5)
For crimes of sex and violence, but not domestic violence, he found the opposite effect.
Violence was the only crime for which he found any link with unemployment.
Domestic violence like property offences tended to increase when times were hard.
The importance of this work is that it puts economic factors firmly back on the agenda as explanations of crime.
Clearly it flies against the conventional wisdom of the Conservative Government who, as we have already seen, prefer to blame slack parental control or moral fibre.
Indeed, at the Home Office Press Conference held to discuss the catastrophic crime figures for April to June 1990, John Patten attempted to distance himself from the research by asking if Field was the member of his staff ‘who wore an earring’(Guardian 27.10.90) before stating that the work was exploratory and could not be regarded as definitive.
We conclude by noting that Young (1987), in a paper which attacks the one-sided partiality of much criminological theory, is rightly critical of what he calls the adversarial positivism which characterises the debate over unemployment and crime.
He argues that crime is likely to increase when one or more of the following conditions predominate:
When State deterrence is less effective.
Where informal social control is reduced.
Where State and/or public definitions of crime become less tolerant.
When the number of those motivated to offend increases.
When the number of victims and targets increases.
We would suggest that in times of economic crisis and recession several of these conditions are indeed likely to predominate and that in fact they did during the 1980s in the UK.
This is not the same as arguing that unemployment will always, inevitably and inexorably, produce more crime.
In a society which took seriously its responsibility for the economic and social welfare of all its members this might not happen.
But in a society where the official rate of unemployment doubled between 1979 and 1981, from 5.3 per cent to 10.4 per cent and reached over 3.5 million or nearly 15 per cent during 1986, where the Government, in the name of the market, is committed to weakening the ability of workers to defend their jobs, where the Government, in its desire to break what it sees as the ‘dependency culture’, has systematically set about dismantling the welfare provisions which protected the poorest and weakest in society, where the Government, as part of its programme to establish a new thrusting entrepreneurial society, has encouraged a widening of differentials in income and wealth, we would expect the societal tensions produced to be expressed in, among other things, rising levels of crime.
Fraud
White collars and grey areas
As the Sundance Kid said to Butch Cassidy, as they were being hotly pursued by a posse of Pinkerton detectives ‘If they paid me to stop raiding banks, what they paid them to stop me robbing banks, I'd stop robbing banks.’
(Box 1987, p.201)
Conservative criminology concentrates on crimes committed by those it considers members of the dangerous classes, those who are seen as part, either of the criminal underworld, or of the lumpenproletariat .
Thus offences such as the traditional petty or grand crimes, welfare swindles, theft by young males, burglary and street crime (in itself a rather vague term) dominate both popular and academic conservative discourses on criminality.
A complaint made by radical criminology against its conservative counterpart is that it has ignored upper-world crime: fraud, corporate crime and white-collar crime.
Care must be taken not to confuse corporate crime, crime committed by or on behalf of businesses, with white-collar crime, which refers to the occupational status of the perpetrators and may often be directed against businesses.
Whilst the issue of ‘crimes of the powerful’, to use Pearce's (1976) evocative phrase, is now often portrayed as a left-wing cliche, this does not make it any the less a problem.
An ideology of greed and selfishness, passed off as self-sufficiency, and of untrammelled individual aspirations passed off as ambition, cannot fail to have an effect upon upper-world crime.
Several notorious cases, involving either fraud or neglect of health and safety legislation have, however, forced a usually reluctant conservative criminology to face the issues of corporate crime.
These crimes can be seen as natural extensions of an ideology where the urge to individualise success and profit is the preferred avenue of advancement.
In this book space prevents us from paying more than cursory attention to the whole area of upper-world crime.
We feel this important, however, to counterbalance the view of crime, promoted by the Conservative Party, and accepted by some on the left, as being nothing more than violence, mugging and burglary.
Obviously, fraud is a somewhat grey area, in the sense that it covers a spectrum of activities ranging from wilful bare-faced swindles to sharp business practices involving dubious accountancy.
It may, for example, involve liquidation fraud, where a company voluntarily goes into liquidation to avoid its responsibilities.
Encouraged by the spirit of the enterprise culture this was so prevalent by 1985 that the Insolvency Act of 1985 was set up to control liquidation fraudsters, and mainly involved asset stripping.
One problem with analysing fraud is that the official statistics do not record the class or occupation of the offender, nor the detail of the offence.
This means that an offence categorised as fraud, can include company crimes, minor embezzlements and major swindles, ranging from small-time scams on the street to sophisticated computer fraud.
Approximately 50 years ago, the Metropolitan Police Fraud Squad was set up to deal with the then growing incidence of company fraud.
Twenty years later saw the creation of provincial fraud squads.
By the 1960s fraud became to be recognised as a major criminal problem, but the fraud squads were hampered by small staffing levels, and their access to an unofficial nucleus of specialist fraud lawyers was slow to develop.
In 1961 recorded fraud cases numbered 39,651 of a total of 806,900 crimes, and by 1986 this had increased by 210 per cent to 122,802 of 3,857,400 by 1986.
Total recorded figures on these offences have increased by 378 per cent, but in 1981 fraud was 4.9 per cent of total crime, and in 1986 3.18 per cent of the total.
It is worth emphasising again the ‘dark’ statistics of unreported crime, which is particularly relevant here where it has been estimated that 70 per cent of computer crime is unreported, because of the fear of loss of public confidence in the financial institutions concerned.
In 1985 company fraud was calculated to cost 3 billion a year, with half of British companies being affected.
Levi's survey (Levi 1986) put the figure at 1 billion losses, with recorded offences rising annually at 5 per cent, and the Confederate of British Industry estimates that computer crime runs at an annual figure of 25 to 30 million.
Levi (1987) found that commercial fraud recorded by the London fraud squads represented nearly three times the total cost of all property crimes in London, and that 40 per cent of companies in the survey reported at least one fraud costing over 50,000.
WHITE-COLLAR CRIME, FRAUD AND ITS CONTROL
Corporate crime
Because of the more visible appearance, combined with several major scandals, of corporate crime, it is an area which the Thatcher Government has been forced to address.
There are two aspects to corporate crime, firstly  commercial crime, including fraud, and secondly a spin-off from criminal activities, the laundering of money by organised crime, in particular that involving drugs.
The 1984 PACE Act, the 1987 Criminal Justice Act (which set up the Serious Fraud Office) and the Criminal Justice Act of 1988 all contained measures which strengthened legal powers to investigate fraud.
The setting up of the Serious Fraud Office was an important development, as were the increased powers of the Department of Trade and Industry under the Financial Services Act 1986 and the Companies Act 1985.
The political context of this is well discussed in Levi (1987, Chapters 4 and 5) who argues that with the proposed deregulation of our prime export earner, the insurance, money and securities market, Britain has to be seen by prospective investors to have the power to eliminate financial fraud.
By 1986 employment in the financial service industries had increased by one-fifth since 1979, and income by one-third, in contrast to the manufacturing and construction industries where employment was down by one-quarter, whilst wages increased only one-seventh.
Another area of major concern to the police and the judiciary is drug smuggling and the methods used to deal with the huge profits it generates.
Previously the law was such that punishment by fines and imprisonment left the capital and income of the traffickers untouched.
Consequently, this was curbed by an attack on the laundering of money earned by drug dealers, through banks, corporate ownership and securities transactions.
Under the provisions of PACE, the police now have powers to search for evidence prior to charging a suspect.
This includes obtaining access through a judge, prior to charging a suspect, to bank accounts and other documentary evidence.
Indeed, where the bank or other party refuses to co-operate and the offence is serious, or is likely to lead to substantial financial gain or loss to any person, the same act allows the police to search for evidence which has the intention of furthering a criminal purpose, and in such cases this provision overrides legal privilege.
However as Levi points out, different official agencies use these powers in a manner which is related to the level of tolerance they expect from the media and politicians.
DSS officials are far more vigorous in handling suspect benefit claimants than is the Inland Revenue in dealing with suspected tax evasion.
The agencies dealing with business and corporate elites tend to employ a more co-operative mode than those dealing with the poor.
Drug profits have also been affected by provisions in the Drug Trafficking Offences Act 1986 (Section 24), which makes assisting drug trafficking an offence, and also provides immunity from breach of contract where it is disclosed to the police that funds or investments are derived from drug trafficking.
Great consternation was felt in banking circles, who felt they could be implicated, and less draconian measures to deal with the matter were  brought in under the CJA 1988, which allows the waiving of civil liabilities if banks inform the police of suspicions of fraud or drug trafficking in good faith.
For Levi this is an indicator that:
the state is extending its intelligence-gathering capabilities into the upper world as well as the under world and the lumpenproletariat.
(Levi 1989, p.194)
There have been some dramatic prosecutions of commercial fraud, or what may be seen as criminal negligence.
This includes the senior members of Morgan Grenfell, Johnson Matthey Bankers, Guinness, Lloyds and Barlow Clowes, all apparent bastions of the establishment of the City of London.
The catalogue of suspect financial deals in the 1980s included such cause celebres as the Fayed brothers, takeover of the House of Fraser, and the sale of the Rover Group to British Aerospace.
Perhaps the most infamous example of the new buccaneering spirit abroad in British boardrooms was the Guinness affair.
Whilst the zealous pursuit of the villains in the case is trumpeted as an indication of the Establishment's hard line on corporate criminality, it should be remembered that the conspiracy was only discovered as a result of the work of the US Securities and Exchange Commission during their investigation of the Wall Street insider dealer Ivan Boesky.
The trial during the summer of 1990 of four wealthy and supposedly respectable members of the business and financial community revealed the extent of boardroom greed.
In order to support the Guinness share price during its takeover of the Distillers Group criminal acts of theft, false accountancy and conspiracy were committed.
The pay-offs were enormous.
Gerald Ronson's Heron Group received 5 million for its illegal support of the shares whilst Anthony Barnes and Sir Jack Lyons each had 3 million paid into private Swiss bank accounts.
Against these sums the sentences imposed on the defendants appear modest when compared to less successful white-collar criminals.
During 1990 the Appeal Court upheld prison sentences of 6 years for a confidence trickster who raised barely 1000, 7 years for a man who obtained 36,000 using fraudulent cheques, and 12 years for a Post Office employee who defrauded his employer of 136,000 (Guardian 29.8.90).
When dismissing Mr Ronson's appeal against his 5 million fine the judge commented that:
Although it would seem an enormous sum to ordinary people it was a comparatively run-of-the mill sum to Mr. Ronson.
(The Times 3.10.90)
During the original trial Ronson's defence counsel emphasised his client's integrity on several occasions, a fact which the trial judge found difficult to reconcile with his criminal behaviour concluding it must have ‘been a moment of greed’.
Surprisingly, for a man of such integrity, Mr Ronson  appealed against the fine on the grounds that his wealth was only 10.7 million, an amount which the judge dismissed derisively as ‘an artificial evaluation done for the purposes of sentencing’.
Whatever one's opinions of their sentences there is no doubt that the defendants received much gentler treatment than less distinguished offenders.
Ernest Saunders' organised media campaign, which included regular Fess briefings, would surely have brought ordinary criminals before the judge for contempt.
Again the response to the violent forging through the press and public outside the court by the accused's ‘minders’ had they been the heavies of more traditional villains is open to speculation.
The crimes of the respectable are viewed more sympathetically than those of miscreants from humbler backgrounds.
In the same week as the verdicts in the Guinness trial the Department of Trade and Industry published a report into the Lloyds' insurance market which suggested that big frauds were almost impossible to prevent:
We recognise that when a number of intelligent and ingenious individuals in the most senior positions, but bereft of commercial morality and intent on personal gain, set out together to rob and to deceive, it is extremely difficult to ensure they will be deterred or exposed, before much damage is caused.
(Department of Trade and Industry 1990)
This conclusion underlines yet again that there are wicked people, whereas a more structural analysis of this would perhaps see the behaviour as a logical extension of the search for profits.
In the words of the Guardian :
The Government investigations paint a picture of decadent fraud flourishing in a climate of lax controls dating back to the 19th century and policed by professional advisors who paid insufficient attention to the task at hand.
(Guardian 1.9.90)
The report is a remarkable admission that despite tightening of Lloyds' regulations such frauds will continue.
The subjects of the investigation, the Alexander Howden and PCW frauds, together involved more than $100 million of investors' money.
The offences only came to light because of an attempt to inflate profits at Alexander Howden, which was discovered by the American company Alexander and Alexander after it bought the company.
The report accepted that, without this, the frauds would not have come to light and that there were probably other, undetected, offences.
Although criminal proceedings were brought in the Alexander Howden case, no prosecutions have followed the PCW affair where $50 million was siphoned away from Lloyds' investors, and related underwriting losses were estimated  at 230 million.
The scam involved a series of bogus re-insurance deals and the DTI inspectors found:
no mitigating circumstances to excuse a condone the systematic, dishonest and cynical plunder of the Names' (investors') premium over such a period of time and on such a scale.
(Department of Trade and Industry 1990)
The Guinness case and the PCW affair are hardly calculated to inspire confidence in the notion of self-regulation for the financial and commercial world.
In both cases the information which led to the discovery of wrongdoing came from outside the UK.
Indeed one commentator has gone so far as to describe the DTI's performance in these cases coupled with its sloppiness in the Barlow Clowes affair and failure to press prosecution over the House of Fraser takeover as ‘part of a lengthy and dishonourable supine tradition’(Alex Brummer,Guardian , 28.8.90).
Nor are the problems confined to the  rarefied atmosphere of corporate boardrooms.
In August 1990, the Securities Association, the self-regulatory body covering share dealers and advisers, acted for the first time against a broker found guilty of ‘churning’ his clients' portfolios.
This involves brokers generating income by constantly and needlessly buying and selling investments for their clients in order to collect the heavy commissions which accrue.
It is virtually impossible to prove because guilty brokers tend to ‘churn’ the portfolios of inexperienced clients.
The Security Association suggests that the responsibility for monitoring this swindle lies with the clients:
There is no cut-off point above which ‘churning’ may be considered to be unacceptable, so clients have to watch their portfolios carefully.
(Money Guardian 1.9.90)
It is not only in the world of high finance that fraud has occurred.
Conservative economic policy ironically has created social conditions which have led to increased crime amongst the middle as well as working classes.
The Association of British Insurers reported in September 1990 an annual increase in business fire insurance claims of 25 per cent.
A sizeable proportion of these cases were suspected arson and were related to increased business failure because of high interest rates.
We can see that the Government law and order policy has been irrelevant to all crime, including upper-world crime, and indeed that its social and economic policy has caused the crime rate to rise.
Box (1987) argues that crimes committed by corporations, businesses and professions are likely to increase in times of economic recession although he admits that the evidence is less strong than for ‘conventional’ crimes (see Chapter Four).
The anti-collective, individualistic morality of the pursuit of money in the enterprise culture has led to a belief by some speculators that they can take risks which are criminal.
This is either with other people's money, or with the lives and safety of the employees.
Profit has been seen as more pursuable than collective concern for others.
TAX EVASION AND WELFARE FRAUD
There are 30 — 40 times more prosecutions for social security frauds than for tax offences.
The Department of Social Security (DSS) considers 250 to be the amount at which prosecution becomes cost-effective.
In contrast, few criminal proceedings are brought for lack of compliance or evasion in the tax world.
The Inland Revenue does not need to prosecute because they have powers to exert penalties similar to a fine, and basically they want to get the money back.
Levi (1987) argues that the caution exercised by the Inland Revenue is in marked contrast to the enthusiasm of the DSS, a view shared by Uglow (1988b) and Cook,(1989).
Obviously the way in which powers are used by different agencies, such as the Inland Revenue, DSS or the police, depend largely to the support they feel they will receive from the media, the Government and the public.
A major and highly publicised target has been the welfare ‘scroungers’, whether these are young people allegedly on the ‘Costa del Dole ‘, looking for seasonal casual work in seaside towns, or those who are claiming while working.
‘Welfare scroungers’ perform an important ideological function as symbols for those who the Welfare State has encouraged to exploit the system rather than fend for themselves.
‘Scroungers’ expect something for nothing from the Welfare State, rather than offering a fair day's work for a fair day's pay.
As such they are seen as antithetical to the work ethic which has been such an integral part of Thatcherite political rhetoric.
Young claimants who refuse demeaning or underpaid work necessarily fall into this group.
They are often dealt with by a system which attempts to get them off benefit, rather than prosecute.
It is often difficult to differentiate those who deliberately commit fraud from those who are confused in their claims.
Welfare fraud is an ideologically emotional topic, because it is usually expressed in terms of aggregated amounts (Uglow 1988b).
(5200 over 24 months sounds far worse than 50 per week.
One traditionally impoverished group — women — have become more represented in this offence than elsewhere in criminal statistics.
Explained, no doubt, by Conservatives not by their drive to break the ‘dependency culture ‘, whatever the human cost, or the low levels of pay for women workers, but moral inadequacy which has led to the breakdown of families and the high incidence of single mothers.
The person who is suspected of welfare fraud is more likely to be detected, prosecuted, convicted and to receive a custodial sentence than those involved in a wide range of other forms of non-violent property offences, including fraud and tax evasion (Uglow 1988b).
Welfare fraud squads have increased for example from 800 to 1,500 in the last few years, and in 1983 the regional fraud teams (10 groups of 9) were developed, saving, it was argued in 1987, 55 million.
Dispatch riders, hotel workers, mini cab drivers and building trade workers were targeted (Guardian , 1.6.88).
Throughout the 1980s there were drives to recruit more specialist fraud staff.
By 1985 there were 1,512 specialist fraud officers in benefits offices, as well as another 112 officers working in the specialist claims control (SCC).
The techniques were criticised, and the SCC system was replaced by regional benefit fraud teams, in 1986, when another 600 fraud staff were recruited.
On 1 June 1988 the Department of Employment (DoE) reported that during 1987–88 DoE staff had made 396,200 investigations, leading to 80,000 people withdrawing their claims to benefit (Unemployment Bulletin 1988) saving 55 million in the year.
Behind this announcement is the political point emphasised in the February 1988 White Paper, the short-and-long term unemployed who are ‘respectable’ must be differentiated from the sign on and work ‘unrespectable’.
The same report re-announced the prosecutions of specific groups (street traders, casual workers, mini cab drivers and despatch riders in London, the South Coast, Birmingham and Scotland) with the suggestion that a larger number of claimants are involved than those who come to the courts.
However, in 1987–88 only 3,960 prosecutions occurred, or 1 per cent of the total of 396,200 investigations, or 5 per cent of the total of 80,000 withdrawals from the register, and less than 0.1 per cent of the 4,390,200 claims for that year.
An investigation is considered successful if the claimant signs off within 2 weeks of being contacted by an investigation officer, but it is hard to differentiate these from those who would have signed off anyway.
The estimated savings are based on the claimant being 22 weeks off the register, but again some stay off for a year, and some return much sooner.
The savings figure, then, is highly speculative, but it is certainly good publicity for the department.
During the same period the numbers of Inland Revenue staff were declining, by some 20 per cent to 68,000 in 1987.
There are several specialist groups for business, subcontractors, large-scale tax avoidance and transfer of assets overseas.
The Keith Report (1983) estimated losses due to tax evasion at 7 per cent of the Gross Domestic Product, around 15 billion, and tax loss at 4 billion, roughly 15 times the amount of welfare abuse.
Interestingly, the close scrutiny of tax returns is less likely than detailed examination of supplementary benefit (now income support) claims, which of course is much simpler.
The number of social security prosecutions has declined, having halved by 1984.
There is an attempt often to stop illegal claiming, rather than prosecute.
Prosecutions occur, as we noted above when overpayment exceeds 250.
This should be compared with Customs and Excise policy to prosecute for VAT fraud when the amount exceeds 75,000 (Uglow 1988b).
There were 9,487 prosecutions for welfare fraud in 1987–88, of which about 28 per cent were conducted by the police.
Again prosecution is clearly aimed at the undeserving poor.
Because nearly everyone pays taxes but not everyone claims welfare, there is a feeling that tax evasion is fair game.
The Inland Revenue attempts to maximise revenue, and are prepared to negotiate terms with tax offenders.
Tax fraud work brings in 1.6 billion p.a but the criminal justice system is seldom used (472 in 1987).
The case against the comedian Ken Dodd in August 1989, and the earlier conviction of the former champion jockey Lester Piggott, highlighted the different public attitudes towards welfare and tax fraud.
After a long deliberation by the jury, Mr Dodd was cleared of wilfully avoiding tax on the considerable sums of money he had hidden, but had to pay large amounts of tax considered owing, as well as legal costs.
The affair seemed only to add to his status as folk hero.
The conviction rate for social security offences is approximately 95 per cent, mostly guilty pleas.
For other frauds the rate is about 77 per cent.
Again with welfare fraud, the appeal court has refused to recognise there must be dishonesty or intent to defraud (Barrass v Reeve (1980)).
Welfare convictions attract longer sentences than other summary offences (Uglow 1988b).
However, when tax cases do reach the courts convicted tax dodgers, such as Lester Piggott, receive relatively severe sentences even in comparison with welfare fraud convictions.
The sums involved, however, are much higher, and, as we noted, the prosecutions less likely.
The disparity is in the prosecution policies, not the sentencing (McEwan 1980).
HEALTH AND SAFETY REGULATIONS: ‘SAFETY STANDARDS ARE BEING DICTATED BY ACCOUNTANTS’
A series of disasters involving public safety travelling or spectating at sports stadiums have occurred since 1985.
In each case there were criticisms that each could have been prevented by better safety measures and checking.
At the Bradford football stadium disaster on 11 May 1985, 56 fans were killed when a stand burnt down.
The Popplewell report into the disaster concluded that it could easily have been prevented.
It found that the Health and Safety Executive, West Yorkshire County Council, the Fire Brigade and Bradford City football club were all aware of the fire hazard caused by years of accumulated rubbish, yet nothing was done to eliminate it.
A second major disaster at a football game occurred on 15 April 1989 at Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield, when 95 football fans were killed and 175  badly injured, when they were unable to escape from overcrowded terracing because of the perimeter fencing.
The Taylor report found some responsibility for the tragedy lay with the stadium's management, some with the fans and some with the South Yorkshire police, and suggested that senior officers had been dubious witnesses.
It specifically blamed the failure of police control.
Senior officers did not even visit the ground before approving the ground control plan, and the club was criticised for lack of rescue and medical equipment, and inadequate signposting to steer any latecomers away from full terraces.
The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, Peter Wright, offered to resign, but this was refused by the South Yorkshire Police Authority.
The West Midlands Force were instructed to investigate the South Yorkshire Police, ironically, at a time when their own Serious Crimes Squad was the subject of an investigation.
There have been a number of tragedies involving the travelling public.
At Manchester Airport on 25 August 1985, a British Airtours charter jet crashed as it prepared for take-off.
The inquiry said economic pressures for more seating had impeded escape from the aircraft, and among its recommendations was to change the materials used in the construction of seats — 48 of the 55 dead were killed by smoke and toxic gases.
On 21 December 1989, at Lockerbie all 259 passengers and crew on a Pan Am jumbo going to New York were killed by a bomb.
This was Britain's worst air tragedy, and whilst this cannot be classified as an accident in the usual sense of the word, there were calls for greater airport security, and considerable concern over whether a warning that an attack would be made on an American airliner had not been passed onto the public because a drop in seat sales would occur.
On 8 January 1989, at Kegworth, 47 people were killed when a British Midland 737 crashed while attempting an emergency landing.
More than 1,500 people died in civilian air crashes throughout the world, little more than average for the decade.
Pilots have complained that airlines force them to work long hours, new jets are being grounded or sent back to the manufacturers for modification, and the government has been attacked for a series of embarrassing lapses at major airports.
In an increasingly competitive climate, airlines and manufacturers are under pressure to put profit ahead of safety.
Official statistics indicate that the potentially dangerous near misses involving civil and military aircraft has increased from 80 in 1979 to 92 in 1988, but the risk has declined, because of the increase in volume of civil traffic.
Britain's congested airline traffic has increased since 1979 from 180,000 to 655,000 per annum.
Bill Brett, general secretary of the Institution of Professional Civil Servants, which includes air traffic controllers and transport safety inspectors declared his concern over the cuts in the safety inspectorate over the recent years, and growing pressure on overworked air traffic controllers coping with increased traffic.
He suggested:
Public transport is less safe than it was.
It is the burden of a non regulatory government which is only interested in the private sector.
(Guardian 22.8.89)
Rail accidents were plentiful.
Four people were killed when a train plunged into a flooded Welsh river on 19 October 1987, at Glanrhyd.
British Rail (BR) accepted responsibility, and the inquest jury returned a verdict of unlawful killing.
The Welsh Water Authority issued a Red 2 flood warning, and BR's Swindon control centre telexed Swansea that it would be ‘probably imprudent’ to allow the train's departure.
One hour later it crashed into the river.
At King's Cross on 18 November 1988, 31 people were killed when a fire rapidly spread through the Underground ticket hall.
The Fennell inquiry said London Underground senior management had ‘narrow horizons and a dangerous, blinkered self-sufficiency’, being unwilling to take outside advice.
Safety officers (described as voices in the wilderness) had for years reported poor electrical wiring in escalator rooms, but no action was taken.
Staff were unsupervised, untrained and ill-equipped to deal with fire.
It argued that outbreaks of fire in Underground stations were seen as inevitable by management, which monitored strictly financial matters, rather than safety.
At Clapham on 12 December 1988, 35 people were killed in a triple train crash.
An inquiry heard that the disaster was ‘wholly avoidable’, and BR was criticised for failing to check that proper safety measures were carried out.
Technicians were criticised for defective workmanship on vital signalling equipment, lack of checks on work and lack of proper testing.
A factor in this was excessive overtime with many signalmen working 7 days a week for a month.
A working culture which allows excessive overtime encourages sub-standard work, and poor inspection.
The Director of Public Prosecutions decided that there was insufficient evidence to prosecute BR for manslaughter or any other offence, even though the inquiry concluded that working standards and supervision had slipped to unacceptable and dangerous levels.
Management had ‘failed abysmally to ensure work was of the proper standard’.
At Purley on 4 March 1989, five people were killed and 87 injured after a crash, and a BR internal inquiry blamed the train driver for going through a red light.
On 6 March 1989, at Glasgow, two people were killed and 40 injured when two suburban trains collided.
BR suggested human error in handling signal warning systems, and the number of train drivers passing red lights had doubled to 800 a year since 1979.
Again the picture seems to be slack maintenance, 60-hour working weeks, overcrowded trains (BR's response to this is to increase fares to cut passenger traffic) and cutting corners  to meet financial targets.
Laurie Harris, of the National Union of Railwaymen has said:
The pendulum has swung away from safety to economics.
Safety standards are being dictated by accountants.
A report by John Brown, Engineering and Constructors, leaked by Time Out Magazine (28.8.89) suggested 126 fire risks at Tottenham Court Road tube station.
At 19 of the locations, flames could not be put out easily, if at all, because of poor access to hoses.
Rush hour crowding was a serious hazard, and the station was 39 per cent understaffed.
An internal document found faults on BR's 47 million new resignalling project between Liverpool Street and Colchester (Guardian 29.8.89).
A picture emerges of declining Government support of a previously nationalised industry under privatisation which has led to intense pressure to reduce overheads and manpower with steadily deteriorating safety standards.
Accidents also occurred on the water.
On 6 March 1987, the ironically named P & o ferry Herald of Free Enterprise capsized with the loss of 188 lives, as a result of leaving the bow doors open.
It appeared that in order to cut time and costs it had become customary to close the doors after the ferries were sailing.
In this case the bosun responsible was asleep.
The Sheen inquiry found that the ferry company was ‘infected with sloppiness from top to bottom’.
The master, chief officer and assistant boatswain were directly responsible for ‘errors of omission’ which led to the disaster.
Underlying cardinal faults were the management who failed to consider safety on the vessels and did not listen to masters' complaints.
The Zeebrugge tragedy led to the prosecution of individual members of the crew of the vessel, and the board of the company concerned for unlawful killing, although they were eventually acquitted on the direction of the trial judge.
The National Union of Seamen declared a strike after the tragedy, one of the major concerns being over health and safety practice and legislation at sea.
On 20 August 1989, the pleasure craft Marchioness was struck in the early hours of the morning on the Thames by the 2,000 ton dredger Bowbelle with the loss of 57 passengers and crew.
The adequacy of the safety regulations, which allowed lighter craft to use the same bridge arches as heavy vessels was criticised, and immediate changes in regulations were brought.
The inquiry is still under consideration.
Mrs Thatcher saw this as the tragic side of a prosperous Britain, pointing out on the BBC news on 20 August 1989 when visiting the wreck, that people had more money nowadays, and seemed to be going out and enjoying themselves, which was why so many people were on board.
Seven coastguard stations have been closed since 1979, leaving 21 stations to cover 6,000 miles of coast.
The demand on these has increased, with  11,132 people being aided in 1988, as opposed to 8,867 in 1987 (26 per cent).
Michael Portillo, then Transport Minister, admitted in December 1989 that coastguards made up less than 1 per cent of his departmental budget, but 49 per cent of all overtime.
There are no regulations which limit the hours ships' crews work, unlike land transport workers.
Derek Bond (Guardian 22.8.89), assistant general secretary of the sea officers union UMAST, pointed out that adequate rest periods for crews is a mere recommendation which cannot be enforced.
The only way to compete with Third World and eastern bloc ships seems to be to cut back on crew rest hours and leave.
Since the Spirit of Free Enterprise disaster, the conditions on the ferries has got worse.
(Guardian 22.8.89)
Mandatory safety checks have been increased, without an increase in resources.
The Department of Transport regulates shipping safety, but UMAST and the NUS would prefer the Health and Safety Executive to do this.
Jack Kinahan, spokesman for the NUS said:
All these regulations are seen as impediments and burdens on the industry.
That generates an attitude of formal control, instead of the day by day probing and checking that should be  practised .
The concern over the difficulty of finding out how many passengers were on board the Thames pleasure craft was a repeat of the problem which occurred when the Zeebrugge ferry overturned.
After that for ferries, but not other classes of vessel, boarding passes were introduced.
That these were not just accidents which inevitably happen in modern travel and industry, was pointed out by the director general of the British Safety Council, James Tye:
Many of the accidents were foreseen, there had been warnings about fires in Tubes, how quickly ferries sank, and the hazards at football grounds.
Nothing was done until after these disasters.
Safety depends on good procedures, good management and sufficient inspectors to carry it out.
It is no use putting these accidents down to acts of God.
Why does God always pick on badly managed places with sloppy practices?
(Guardian 22.8.89)
However, the change in safety regulations and the harder line taken is not sufficient compensation for the curtailing and running down of health and safety inspections, nor the differences in health and safety regulations which exist between companies operating on land, and those, such as contractors on off-shore oil rigs who are at sea.
HEALTH AND SAFETY IN INDUSTRY
The catalogue of disasters affecting travel and sports industries has been mirrored by a steady rise in the accident rate in work places.
The general standard of work place health and safety regulation has declined, partially because there are insufficient inspectors to maintain regular safety checks.
In a report to the London Hazards Centre, Michael Meacher, then Shadow Employment Secretary, was quoted as saying of the Conservatives:
This government has cut factory inspectors by nearly 20% while at the same time increasing DHSS fraud inspectors by 160%.
(Hazards 88)
A mere 792 factory inspectors exist to protect 16 million workers in 400,000 work places and agriculture has had its inspectors reduced from 190 in 1979 to 156 in 1988 (Guardian 16.11.88).
Whilst accidents are increasing, health and safety inspectors have been cut by 20 per cent.
The Health and Safety Executive (HSE), is currently receiving more Government support in order to attempt to prevent the increase in accidents, although the time between factory visits can be up to 5 years.
A leaked report (Guardian 27.4.90) concluded that the factory inspectorate was understaffed, with a 16 per cent shortage in the numbers of inspectors, low in morale and almost 4 years behind in its work.
The Government, however, is considering removing trade-union officials from the commission controlling the HSE before 1992, when the single European market becomes operable.
Construction is a notorious trouble concerning safety.
The HSE (Labour Research 1988b) analysed the deaths of 739 people killed in the construction industry between 1981–85.
There was an average of two deaths a week, of which 517 could have been prevented.
In 70 per cent of the cases positive action by management could have saved lives, and over 10 years the basic causes of death have not changed.
Experienced workers are just as likely to be killed as trainees.
The Channel Tunnel project led to the deaths of nine workers between mid-1988 and August 1990.
Seven of these were on the British side, where the contractors were fined 50,000 in March 1990 after the fifth death.
The injury rate on the tunnel site is 4.7 per cent of the workforce compared to a construction industry average of 1.8 per cent.
Men working on the site complained of pressure to cut corners to save time on the delayed project.
A safety audit in 1990 by Health and Safety Executive Inspectors pointed to:
an underlying weakness in safety management, particularly in leadership and administration, giving rise to an inadequate safety culture.
(Reported in the Guardian 13.7.90)
Between 1980 and 1985, 28 young people died and over 1,000 were seriously injured whilst working on Manpower Services Commission (MSC) programmes (Labour Research 1986).
The post-war period of improvement in the annual death toll at work has, in recent years, come to an end.
In 1985 there was a distinct rise in children killed whilst working.
The Low Pay Unit found that the annual death and fatal accident averages rose from 59 per 100,000 in 1985 to 142 per 100,000 by March 1989.
There were in addition 2,735 minor accidents involving Youth Training Scheme (YTS) participants in 1988–89.
Despite Government counter-claims that this increase is due to 1986 changes in definitions of accidents from minor to major and fatal categories, all the increases cannot be accounted for by the redefinition.
Ministers claim that accident rates on YTS are better than for the rest of the working population in that age group.
However, what actually has happened is that accidents for the 16–19-age-working groups have increased, so the comparison is hardly reassuring (Guardian 19.8.89).
The 1989 Employment Act now removes laws protecting 18-year-olds from long hours and shift work, so that there is more likelihood of industrial accidents.
Firms employing less than 100 people have higher death and injury rates than bigger ones.
During 1987 blitzes by the HSE of over 1,000 prohibition notices, which can only be served where there is a risk of ‘serious personal injury’ were issued, but led to only 25 prosecutions.
The issues of health and safety have been taken up by trade unions in the P & o ferries dispute, and the transport strikes of 1989.
A contributory factor in the Kings Cross Underground disaster was the lack of staff training staff in fire-hazard emergencies, and the low standard of cleaning due to cutbacks.
An earlier report by the Chief HMI of Factories commented that the sad record of death and injury in the quarrying industry showed no sign of reducing (July 1987).
Labour Research (1988a) suggested that the strict mining safety laws would have to be weakened if the coal industry were to be privatised.
Interestingly, after September 1987 factory and mines inspectors were forbidden to speak to the press on pain of disciplinary action.
However, John Howard, an official of their union commented as early as November 1985 that the HMI of Mines feared that the proposed new mining legislation would reduce the power of the HMI whilst raising the power of the colliery manager, who could decide what is ‘reasonably practicable’(Labour Research 1988a).
The reduction in the mining workforce (over half since 1979), has led to extra pressures on those miners remaining.
Mining and quarrying are still the most dangerous industries to work in, and in 1985 mining deaths and major industries were over five times the rate for other industries, including construction.
New technology has increased dust and noise levels, and  current dust levels suggest that one in 20 miners may develop lung damage after a lifetime's exposure, and four-fifths according to a British Coal survey in 1983 were exposed to damaging levels of noise.
Further risks are the increase in diesel fumes, back injuries, dermatitis and stress-related problems — all increasing in coal mines.
One spin-off of the miners' strike has been management's disappointment (see House of Commons Energy Committee, January 1988; comments by Sir Robert Haslam, Chairman of British Coal) with pit deputies responsible for health and safety, who are members of NACODS.
Haslam had hoped to recruit them to management, but was surprised and disappointed in their industrial action, and in March 1988, British Coal trained 100 members of the United Democratic Mineworkers to do NACOD jobs, alarmed by the militancy of NACOD.
This was in line with the Government's legislation aimed at preventing militancy in trade unions.
It should also be pointed out that white-collar industries have suffered from privatisation.
Up to 1980 the sick leave for industrial accidents declined considerably at British Telecom (BT), but from 1981 as a run-up to privatisation, BT introduced more competition into its working methods.
The accident rate rose notably from that time (Labour Research, 1987b)— a rate not helped by BT's cut in its safety officers which started in 1985.
On 6 July there was an explosion of the North Sea Piper Alpha oil rig which claimed 167 lives.
The inquiry was told fire fighting equipment was ‘virtually useless’ for 4 months before the disaster.
Several safety audits had been carried out after an earlier explosion in 1984, but Occidental, the owners, never released the findings.
A lack of life jackets and portable fire extinguisher in the emergency muster area, and the role of the rig's support ship during the rescue operation were criticised.
One problem is that offshore oil and gas industries have a number of bodies making regulations, but the principal inspectorate is the Department of Energy, which also has an interest in maximising production.
As with the shipping industry, this is seen as a conflict of interest.
In 1988 eight inspectors were responsible for the safety of 123 installations in the North Sea, including annual inspections, investigations of accidents and criminal prosecutions.
The unofficial strike of oil-rig workers in 1990 had as one of its major aims an improvement in safety.
A key demand was the transfer of responsibility from the Department of Energy to the Health and Safety Executive.
The general reduction in health and safety standards and inspection comes from Government cutbacks, and commercial pressure in an economy which favours profit maximisation and privatisation.
Judith Church, Health and Safety Officer of the Manufacturing, Science and Finance Union summed up the government's attitude to health and safety as:
We have a get rich quick philosophy where everything is geared to maximum profits.
If companies had to say how many died and were injured in their service each year, it might give the life and death of workers a higher priority.
POLLUTION
It is not just workers in industry whose health and lives are put at risk by criminal acts.
The pharmaceutical industry has a record of putting the consumer at risk of which the Thalidomide and Opren cases are the most famous.
The general public are also in danger from industrial pollution.
For example, in August 1989 there was concern over the amount of dangerous industrial waste brought to Britain for disposal from other countries.
As a result of exposure by Greenpeace, vessels were refused entry by harbourmasters and port managers.
The Labour Party environmental spokesperson argued (Evening Standard 9.8.89) that 800,000 tons of industrial waste were annually brought to Britain to be disposed of.
The same month saw growing concern over the water industry, subsequently privatised, because of the dangerously high level of nitrates and other chemicals being found in the water in some areas.
Britain has, however, constantly obstructed European Commission proposals to reduce atmospheric and water pollution, involving acid rain, control of emissions from large combustion plants, dumping of sewage sludge, disposal of titanium dioxide, and the entry of fertilisers into the water supply, according to Stanley Clinton Davis, EC Commissioner for the Environment (Labour Party News , April 1989).
According to the House of Commons Environment Committee our waste control regulations are a ‘shambles’, and nothing has been done about nitrates and excessive use of pesticides and fertilizers as requested by the EC.
Of the 426 chemicals cleared for use in farming, 166 are known to cause, or are suspected of links with cancer, birth defects, genetic mutations and allergies.
Forty-three per cent of fruit and vegetables in the UK have detectable pesticide residues.
Exemptions have been sought for EC standards concerning drinking and bathing water, whilst privatisation is implemented.
Britain disposes of toxic waste at sea-something forbidden in most other EC countries.
The reason for the reluctance to act on these issues, is of course, that they would be expensive and consequently affect the competitiveness of British capital.
MINIMUM-WAGE POLICY VIOLATIONS
The Wages Act of 1986 (WA) received the Royal Assent together with the  Social Security Act in July 1986.
Under the WA, young workers under 21 were removed from Wages Council protection.
Young people in service industries, garment industries, catering and shops, no longer have legal minimum rights covering wages and holidays.
Adults lose special rates for specific jobs, shift pay, holiday pay and unsocial hours pay.
There is one basic hourly rate with a limited number of hours and a single overtime rate.
Employees will no longer be able to opt out of cashless pay systems.
Wages inspectors (who police Britain's minimum-wage system), have been cut by 40 per cent.
Wages inspectors cover nearly half a million firms, mostly small and non-unionised, with a workforce of some two and a half million.
The inspectorate in 1990 could only visit, according to the Low Pay Review, some 7 per cent of firms, which averages out at a visit every 14 years.
One-third of inspections are a telephone call or a questionnaire, and the 1988 underpayment statistics suggested that 34.6 per cent of firms were underpaying their staff, and of the 9,000 firms involved only two were prosecuted.
The Government argued that as the Wages Act removes rights to paid holidays, additional rates for weekend and shift work, as well as 550,000 young people losing their rights to minimum wages, these cuts are justified.
This leaves each ‘outdoor’ inspector overseeing the wages of 31,000 workers in over 5,000 firms each year, as well as an additional 2,000 enquiries.
In the North of England, nearly half of firms visited were found to be illegally underpaying workers.
We can now see that the law and order issue cannot be divorced from the rest of the Conservative Government's policies during the Thatcher years.
In the field of welfare law, for example, the 1988 Social Security Act (SSA) upholds labour discipline, whilst developing the tradition of lesser eligibility.
The 1980 Social Security Act had made the abdication of one's duty to support one's dependants a criminal offence.
It altered the position of sponsored relatives for black people.
Sponsors could now be liable to criminal charges if their sponsored relatives had ‘recourse to public funds’.
Welfare benefits paid to strikers' families, who are, of course, not on strike but certainly impoverished, were to be docked 12 on the assumption they were in receipt of strike pay.
The 1988 SSA keeps benefits low and subsidises low wages.
If a claimant leaves his or her job ‘voluntarily’ benefit is withheld for up to 6 months.
The YTS scheme has forced young people into low-paid, and often dangerous work schemes, without significantly improving their employment possibilities after the 2-year term.
If they refuse to join one of the schemes, they lose their benefits.
Long-term unemployed claimants who work for ‘Benefit Plus’ receive benefits plus a top-up award for involvement on a job creation scheme, similar to the American Workfare projects.
CONCLUSION
This, then, is the other side to the Conservative notions of law and order.
Encouragement has been given to individualism, free enterprise and the pursuit of profit.
The struggle for intellectual domination has been supported by the use of think tanks such as the Institute of Economic Affairs, the Centre for Policy Studies and the Adam Smith Institute.
These have given an appearance of academic and scientific credibility to radical Conservative policies.
They have become involved in the hegemonic struggle by setting the agenda for political debate.
Formally independent of the Government, they have been able to raise contentious issues under the guise of kite-flying exercises without compromising individual politicians.
Intellectually central in moving privatisation into the centre-stage of policy making, and in the introduction of market economies in health and welfare they have added credibility to the enterprise culture.
The dismantling of the welfare infrastructure and the encouragement of the pursuit of profit has at times taken on the mantle of a moral endeavour.
While corporate crime might not be officially approved, the climate in 1991 certainly has encouraged the bending of rules and a cavalier attitude to the law amongst entrepreneurs.
The ideology of the enterprise culture through society has penetrated to a considerable degree to the young who grew up under Thatcher —‘Thatcher's children’.
A 1989 MORI Poll conducted by the BBC and The Independent newspaper argued that the ideology of Thatcherism was reaching its target of the young.
Fifteen to 28 year olds were significantly keener than their elders on private enterprise, sceptical about trade unions and a substantial minority hoped to own their own business.
Privatisation was particularly valued by the young, whether it be prisons, motorways, transport or care of the elderly.
Young males in particular were keener on high pay and promotion than older people, and less concerned with security or job satisfaction.
They preferred to negotiate their own pay and conditions, rather than leave this to trade unions.
Young working-class as much as middle-class respondents wanted home ownership, private pensions, meals out and foreign holidays.
Fish and chips, council housing, State pensions and holidays at home were out for all the young.
One-quarter of the sample wanted more ideologically luxurious goods, such as exotic fruit, stocks and shares, private education for their children, expensive cars and second homes.
Their only fears were nuclear war and  AIDS .
Given the ideological success of the enterprise culture, it is hardly surprising that the Thatcherite package has been bought, although, interestingly, more by young men than young women.
Of young women 66 per cent thought Britain was heading in the wrong direction, and that major changes were needed, and only 28 per cent felt things were all right the way they were.
This is the cultural background  against which fraud has been carried out.
The ideological success of Thatcherism is that it has been adopted by many young people for the values which direct their life style.
The Government, in order to attack the notion of the Welfare State, has held it responsible for encouraging dependency, idleness and the break-up of families.
The culture of dependency has to be replaced by the enterprise culture.
The work of Murray (1984) who attacked welfare scroungers in the United States has influenced the policies of the British Government.
There has been an attack on organised trade-union resistance, on marginalised groups, on young people, especially young black people in the name of a pragmatic economic programme.
Liberty has been sacrificed for convenience, the appeal to the rising crime rate as an ideological weapon against progressive teachers and liberal social workers has strengthened the Government's hand.
The only area in which this strategy is likely to come unstuck is health, where even radical supporters of Thatcherite policies have recognised that the sick cannot be held responsible for their illness.
Private insurance schemes clearly do not wish to become involved with either the mentally ill or the chronically sick.
They cannot be written off like other marginalised groups.
The enterprise culture has, however, led to an individualism which has encouraged fraud, materialism and contempt for collective support and social responsibility.
In this chapter we have tried to give some idea of the impact of the Conservatives' economic and social policies upon those crimes which do not fit into their own view of criminality.
By stressing superiority of the competitive as opposed to the collaborative, the individual as against the collective, the private as compared to the public and by elevating profitability to at times the sole criterion of success, they have created an economic framework where the survival of the fittest has in many cases come to mean the survival of those who are best at avoiding controls on their activities without being caught.
Workers, clients and the general public have all been victims in this laissez faire environment.
By allowing, in the interests of economic profitability, the financial institutions to regulate themselves, by weakening, in order to keep down industry's costs, the power of the agencies who are meant to control health and safety and pollution, the Conservatives again have revealed the ideological basis to their law and order position.
Inside the crisis and the crisis inside
Prisons, punishment and Conservative criminology
On 1 April 1990 prisoners took over the Strangeways Prison, Manchester in what was to become the most prolonged protest against inhuman and degrading conditions in penal institutions.
It was to be 24 days before the last hard-core  protesters gave themselves up.
The protest sparked off disturbances in 20 other prison establishments and spotlighted yet again the overcrowding in British Prisons.
The immediate response of the Government was to set up a committee of inquiry under Lord Justice Woolf to examine the events and the underlying causes.
One can only assume the Government had not read the steady stream of reports from both the Chief Inspector of Prisons and various prison boards of visitors during the 1980s.
The 1990 disturbances were only the latest in a series of eruptions — in 1986,1988 and 1989, which led to injuries and damage to prison buildings and equipment.
The Woolf inquiry was the fourth such in 5 years.
We may anticipate its conclusions on the basis of its predecessors.
Prisons are overcrowded with two or three inmates to a cell designed for one not uncommon.
Most prisoners are confined to their cells for long periods of time.
Sanitation is totally inadequate with the dehumanising practice of ‘slopping out’ still widespread.
Prison visits are too short and the facilities available for them are inadequate.
The general picture is of a barbaric degrading system in which the only real surprise is that violence does not break out more often.
In this chapter we will attempt to examine some of the reasons for the continued use of custodial sentences.
But we shall see as well that the Conservative belief, for both retributive and deterrent purposes, in punishment by incarceration, has at least had to acknowledge economic realities.
The vast expense of the prison system has led to the development of various non-custodial alternatives.
Punishment in the community has become the other side of Conservative penal policy.
The problem is to persuade both their supporters, and the judiciary and magistracy, that it is not an easy alternative, that the guilty will still suffer, the Government is not becoming soft on crime.
PRISON OVERCROWDING
To comprehend the scale of the problem facing British prisons some statistics are necessary.
In 1989 the average prison population for England and Wales stood at 48,600, a drop of some 3 per cent(1,350) over 1988.
This was the first fall since 1973 and was due predominantly to reductions in the numbers of remand prisoners, due to the success of the probation service's bail information schemes, and sentenced young offenders, partly due to the stricter criteria for custodial sentences for young people required by the 1988 Criminal Justice Act, and partly to the drawing up and implementation of ‘action plans’ for community plans by the probation service.
For adult offenders the picture showed little change from previous years and indeed the number of sentenced adult male prisoners had increased.
‘Certified normal accommodation’(CNA), the official figures for the number of prisoners which the system can officially cater for without overcrowding, allowed for 45,268 prisoners.
This was an increase of 2,700 over 1987 but little change (+18) from the previous year.
While a welcome improvement it still meant a gap of 3,332 between CNA and average population.
Worst hit were local prisons whose population on 30 June 1988, for example, exceeded CNA by 54 per cent (NACRO Briefing 1989c).
The Government had to deal with this as a matter of urgency, but had to maintain its hard line on law and order.
In July 1988, the Home Secretary announced an increase in the remission period, from one-third to one-half for prisoners serving short sentences.
This reduced the prison population by over 3,000, and without it the figure would have been 53,000.
The 1990 Home Office projections forecast that the average daily prison population would rise to between 61,700 and 62,600 by 1998 (Home Office 1990c).
This was slightly less than earlier forecasts to which the Government had responded by announcing a major prison-building programme.
Even with these forecasts, the programme is the largest undertaken this century.
It provides for the construction of 24 new prisons and, with extensions to existing prisons, for the provision of over 21,000 extra prison places by 1995.
In 1990 the average capital cost per place in those prisons under construction, or where work was shortly due to start was 117,000.
One reason for the increase in the prison population during the 1980s was the rise in the number of remand prisoners awaiting trial or sentence.
The average waiting time for trial at Crown Court was 56 days in 1989, and in that year remand prisoners made up just over one-fifth of the average prison population.
Incarceration has increased as a form of punishment.
In 1988 the courts imprisoned 20 per cent of adult men convicted, and 7 per cent of adult women, compared with 16 per cent of men and 3 per cent of women in 1976 (Criminal Statistics 1988).
We will discuss the trends in sentencing practice  in more detail below.
Less than one-fifth of offenders imprisoned during 1988 had committed an offence involving sexual or physical violence (Prison Statistics 1988).
Reconviction figures for prisoners released in 1985 suggest that 55 per cent of men and 34 per cent of women are reconvicted within 2 years.
Given that the average cost of a keeping a person in prison is 288 per week (a staggering 14,976 per annum), the cost-effectiveness and efficacy of imprisonment is questionable.
We need only to compare this to the average annual cost in 1986–87 of probation orders (900), community service orders (520), attendance sentence orders (117) or even places in probation hostels (7, 174) to see why the Treasury is in danger of becoming a radical advocate of decarceration!
(Probation Statistics 1987, quoted in NACRO Briefing 1989b.)
Expenditure on the prison service has also risen considerably.
Between 1978–79 and 1989 the budget for the penal system has risen 36 per cent in real terms (156 per cent in cash terms), with overtime pay for prison officers rising 137 per cent between 1979 and 1985.
Staff in the prison service has been increased, but the conditions of service, and the overcrowding have led to militant action by prison officers.
As Fitzgerald and Sim (1982) suggested, one reason for the instability of the prison system in the 1970s and 1980s was the militancy of the rank-and-file prison officers in conflict with their own union, the Home Office, prison governors and the prisoners themselves.
Since 1985, there has been action in several prisons over several demands, but perennially the amount of overtime that has to be worked.
In May 1985, Leon Brittan, then Home Secretary, was booed despite his figures saying that prison officer ranks had increased since 1979 by one-fifth, and that the budget for the Prison Service had risen 85 per cent.
The poor conditions within prison led to several conflicts between prisoners and prison officers.
This occurred at a time when the militancy of rank-and-file officers increased.
In 1985, officers took action at Bedford, Parkhurst, and Wormwood Scrubs.
Several incidents of violence became public.
In April and June 1985, 316 prisoners and 135 prisoners respectively, were injured (Guardian , August 10 1985), and in June a demonstration occurred at Holloway by 43 women protesting about brutality inflicted upon a fellow prisoner.
In April 1985, at Gartree — a long-term maximum security prison — there was a sit-in by prisoners, and in June of that year another at Parkhurst, Isle of Wight.
In September the staff at Albany, another maximum security prison, voted to keep prisoners in their cells, after a confrontation between staff and prisoners.
Prisoners were also involved in legal initiatives involving their civil rights.
They challenged the Home Secretary's 1983 policies which effectively abolished parole for certain categories of prisoners, but did win the right, with the assistance of the European Commission for Human Rights to be legally represented at prison disciplinary hearings.
A number of support groups were involved: Radical Alternatives to Prison; National Prisoners' Movement (PROP); Women in Prison; Inquest and the Prison Reform Trust.
The isolation of prisoners and their rights became less severe.
The problems which had arisen for the Government were the rising prison population, and the cost of imprisonment.
The solution suggested by the State to overcrowding in prison has been to expand the prison building programme (a suggested 16 new prisons), whilst simultaneously exploring non-custodial alternatives.
As early as 1973, community service orders had been introduced so that offenders could work in the community for up to 240 hours.
However, this has been used mainly for those whose crimes would not have sent them to prison anyway.
Alternatives to custody are more likely to pull into the system, new populations rather than reduce incarcerated ones.
We shall explore this further in the next chapter.
Prison security has become an issue, especially since the troubles in Northern Ireland, and it is worth noting that the 1983 report of the Chief Inspector of Prisons suggested that the lessons of the 38-prisoner-escape from the Maze could be applied to England and Wales.
Internal security has been strengthened by the use of MUFTI (Minimum Use of Force Tactical Intervention Squad) and the increased training of prison officers in riot control.
Segregation and control units have been used for difficult prisoners, especially in  women's prisons.
New prisons are likely to be made up of self-contained units holding 50–100 prisoners, with cells opening into a central area for staff observation.
Obviously, the prison building programme is based on the fear that violent crime particularly, is out of control.
Murders of policemen, child murders, and terrorism are seen as escalating, but of course these are far from the common run of prisoners — 95 per cent of crimes are relatively trivial offences against property.
Box and Hale (1982) located the prison building programme in a wider political context.
They saw the growth of unemployment, related as it was to a deepening economic crisis, as being accompanied by growing state coercion.
This was reflected in the rate and length of imprisonment:
This increased use of imprisonment is not a direct response to any rise in crime, but is an ideologically motivated response to the perceived threat of crime posed by the swelling population of economically marginalised persons.
(Box and Hale 1982, p.22)
They also indicate that for every 1,000 increase in youth unemployment, 23 additional males are incarcerated, even when the effects of crime rates and court workload are controlled for.
Sentencing policies, as a result of law and  order campaigns mean the prisoners are younger and more likely to be black.
These campaigns are not concerned to control serious crime.
Rather they are more concerned to instil discipline, directly and indirectly on those people who are no longer controlled by the soft discipline machine at work, and who might become growingly resentful that they are being made to pay the price of the economic recession.
(Box 1987, p.119)
As Box argues:
Not only have the total numbers and percentage of the population increased, but within this group the economically disadvantaged figure prominently.
(Box 1987, p.12)
As Box reminds us, and as we discussed in Chapter Five, the arrest rate is higher for young blacks (Stevens and Willis 1979) and these cannot be accounted for entirely by differences in criminal activity.
Black British youth tend to be charged for offences ‘easy to prove’, and appear before ‘tough minded’ magistrates (Cain and Sadigh 1982).
As Box puts it:
These disparities are bound to percolate through and produce a blacker prison population.
(Box 1987, p. 15)
Prisoners are male, and disproportionately young — a quarter of the prison population being under 21, whereas 15–20-year-olds make up only 10 per cent of the British population.
Prisoners have also become younger in their age profile.
By 1984 under-21s were 28 per cent of the prison population.
The prison system in England and Wales, then, is creaking and close to collapse.
During 1988 in a desperate attempt to ameliorate the problem in the short term, the Government opened unused Army camps as temporary prisons.
After the destruction of Strangeways prison and the dispute with the POA over conditions this option was again on the agenda in 1990.
Successive Governments, of both left and right, have failed to make any impact upon the excessive use of imprisonment as a means of punishment by the judiciary.
To understand the reasons for this we need to look at penal policy in a wider economic and social framework.
THE POLITICAL ECONOMY, PUNISHMENT AND IMPRISONMENT
Box and Hale (1982, 1985, 1986) and Hale (1989ab) have examined the relationship between unemployment and imprisonment since the end of the  Second World War.
The general conclusion of these analyses was that unemployment and imprisonment were related, in the sense that, after controlling statistically for the level of crime and numbers convicted, an increase in the level of unemployment led, on average, to an increase in the numbers incarcerated.
This needs to be seen in the context of recent trends in punishment in England and Wales, and in particular the proportionate use of imprisonment, probation and fines.
For statistical reasons, they used data from England and Wales only, leaving the separate judicial systems of Northern Ireland and Scotland, while acknowledging the experimental use of control techniques in Northern Ireland, and the softening up of public opinion prior to their introduction to the mainland.
Hale (1989b) argues that the long-term trend of a decrease in the proportionate use of imprisonment and a corresponding increase in the use of fines has been reversed.
Since 1974, and particularly since 1979, the use of imprisonment has been increasing relatively as well as absolutely.
There may be similar trends in imprisonment in other advanced capitalist societies which face similar economic and social problems to Britain.
However, as Downes (1982) shows, this is not inevitable.
Between 1950 and 1975 both Britain and Holland had similar increases in crime levels, but whilst the prison population in England and Wales doubled, in the Netherlands it more than halved.
Hence societies with similar modes of production can respond differently to imprisonment.
Rusche and Kirchheimer (1939) consider the relationship of changes in punishment and modes of production.
They argue that every system of production tends to discover and use punishments corresponding to its productive relationships — a classical Marxist approach.
When labour surpluses became a general phenomenon, and with declining profitability, there was fiscal pressure in the nineteenth century to reduce the size of the prison population.
In the relatively short period of time prior to the Industrial Revolution the function of the prison can be seen as related directly to the needs of the economy, in that labour was forced to work on specific projects to overcome labour shortages.
The prison served as a means of ensuring a supply of labour.
Since then there has been less of a general shortage of labour, but rather a shortfall in skilled, rather than unskilled labour.
Since the late nineteenth century, the problem has been one of a surplus of labour.
Quinney (1977) and Jankovic (1977) have argued that prison acts as a way of reducing the size of the reserve army of labour.
This is a rather simplistic argument.
It assumes that it is actually the unemployed who are being imprisoned, and, furthermore, is clearly untenable when faced with data which show the numbers unemployed in England and Wales many times greater than the numbers imprisoned.
This deterministic approach suffers by seeing the prison as existing to remove people from circulation, rather than its ideological function of social control.
Crises, of which high levels of unemployment are one manifestation, involve the totality of capitalist social relations.
The solution to these crises is a complex economic, political and ideological process.
As Braithwaite puts it:
during a period of economic crisis the hegemony of capitalist ideology fosters a search for alternatives to the failure of the system as an explanation for the crisis.
An explanation which makes eminent sense to everyone is to blame the victims of the crisis for the crisis.
(Braithwaite 1981)
While rejecting the mechanistic connection of Quinney and Jankovic, one can argue that in times of economic crisis, typified by rising levels of unemployment, imprisonment does serve an important social control function as a constant reminder to those not in work of the consequences of stepping out of line.
This approach, however, is open to charges of functionalism and presumes a conspiracy between judiciary and government.
Evidence for an association between unemployment and imprisonment has, however, been presented in, various studies from different countries (Braithwaite 1980; Inverarity and Grattet 1987; Inverarity and McCarthy 1988; Montgomery 1985; Laffargue and Godefroy 1987) and has been most strongly supported by time series data analysed using some variant of least squares regression.
The advantage of this method is that it is a multivariate technique which allows an analysis of the relationship between unemployment and imprisonment to be examined after controlling for other factors such as crime levels, numbers of convictions, and age structure of the population, which might affect the rate of incarceration.
The results of Box and Hale show that for post-war England and Wales, unemployment and imprisonment were positively related even after allowing for variations in other factors.
However, the disadvantage is that the use of regression analysis seduces its users into a causality which may not always be appropriate.
It would not follow that the recent decline in unemployment rates in England and Wales would lead to reductions in the numbers imprisoned after taking crime rates into account.
Unemployment is one indicator of underlying economic problems, and how a state chooses to deal with a crisis will have important implications for its social policies in general, and of course this includes policies on imprisonment.
Overall, however, the work done by Box and Hale for England and Wales suggests that after controlling for other relevant variables, rising levels of unemployment have been associated with the increased use of imprisonment.
The relationship  between unemployment and imprisonment has persisted throughout the post-war period, intensifying since 1974 (Hale 1989b).
TRENDS IN THE USE OF PUNISHMENT IN ENGLAND AND WALES
In September 1986, the prison population of the United Kingdom was, in absolute numbers, the highest of the member states of the Council of Europe — 53,971 or 95.3 per 100,000 of the population.
Only Austria with 102.5 per 100,000 and Turkey with 102.3 had higher proportions of their populations in prison.
By 1988, the United Kingdom had risen to top position in both absolute and relative terms.
In September of that year 55,457 people or 97.4 per 100,000 of the population were imprisoned.
This compares with relative figures of 95.6 for Turkey, 84.9 for West Germany, 75.8 for Spain, 44.0 for Greece and 40.0 for the Netherlands (NACRO Briefing 1990a, Council of Europe 1989).
A similar picture emerges when prison admissions are considered, with the United Kingdom in 1987 imprisoning 347.9 people per 100,000, the highest for any major member state of the Council.
The average size of the sentenced prison population has been increasing steadily since the Second World War.
In 1948 it was 19,765 and by 1988, 38,500 — of which 1,286 were female.
Crime rates have risen even more dramatically over the same period: from 522,684 indictable crimes recorded by the police in 1948, to 1,407,774 in 1968, and by 1988 to 3,715,800.
It does not follow that increases in crime accompanied by increased numbers of convictions necessarily entails more people being incarcerated.
If we wish to discuss changes in punishment it is perhaps more helpful to look at the percentage of those found guilty receiving different types of sentence.
Until 1974 in England and Wales the probability of receiving a custodial sentence upon conviction had been declining steadily.
Bottoms (1983) examines data from 1938, 1959 and 1980 and shows that for all adult indictable offenders the percentage of custodial sentences drops from 33.3 in 1938 to 29.1 in 1959 to 14.8 in 1980.
The penalty which had the greatest proportional increase over this period was the fine, roughly doubling in its proportionate use from 27 per cent to 53 per cent while probation also declined from 15 per cent of all sentences to 7 per cent(Bottoms 1983; see Table 7.1).
Since Bottoms wrote his essay however, this trend has gone into reverse, as he himself reports in a later work (Bottoms 1987), and as can be seen from the figures given in Table 7.1 (updated from Bottoms (1987) using Criminal Statistics (1988)).
The downward trend in the proportionate use of imprisonment which had begun in the early 1950s halted in the mid-1970s, In fact the turning point can be located quite clearly in 1974.
In that year the proportion of convicted adult males given a custodial sentence had reached a low of 15 per cent.
Subsequently this figure began to increase steadily and by 1988, the latest year for which figures are available, it was 20 per cent.
(The corresponding figures for adult females were 2 per cent and 7 per cent and again 1974 marked the low point in the proportionate use of imprisonment.)
Over the same period there was an accompanying shift away from the use of fines.
By 1974 they were used in 56 per cent of guilty cases for adult males but subsequently their proportionate use declined and by 1988 the figure was 42 per cent.
In other words between 1974 and 1988 there had been a 25 per cent reduction in the proportionate use of fines and a corresponding 25 per cent increase in the proportionate use of imprisonment.
What is also clear from Table 7.1 is that these changes were most pronounced after 1979.
Since 1974 not only have the absolute numbers being sent to prison increased but the courts have become more punitive in the sense that they are sending a higher proportion of those convicted to prison.
Since their election victory in 1979 the Tories have followed a two-pronged penal policy.
While exhorting the judiciary to use custodial sentences only for the really wicked, who commit serious offences, they have refused to compromise the supposed independence of the judiciary by interfering directly in the judicial process.
Instead, they have on the one hand embarked upon the biggest programme of prison building this century, whilst on the other searching for alternative punishments to prison.
In the 1989 statement on Government expenditure they announced that the Home Office was to receive yet another increase in money to enable it to build two extra prisons, to set up 30 day centres for parole on probation, to recruit 300 more police officers in provincial forces, to employ an additional 1,300 civilians in the police forces and to make the Immigration and Nationality Department more efficient.
The day centres are clearly part of a campaign to make probation a ‘tougher’ option for the courts.
The two new prisons were in addition to the eight new ones opened since 1985 and another 18 at various stages of completion.
They will bring the total of new places available by 1991 to 10,000 and the programme will provide 20,000 new places in all by the mid-1990s.
Prior to the announcement of the additional two it had been estimated that the total capital cost of the 26 new prisons would be 870 million at an average cost per place of 69,200.
The Government has also increased the manpower in the prison service.
Between 1982 and 1987 the average annual numbers of prison officers have increased by around 12 per cent per annum.
The long-term trend has been to reduce the number of inmates per officer.
Forty years ago there were about six inmates for each officer.
In 1986–87 there were approximately two and a half inmates to one officer.
The principle of least eligibility, not withstanding the massive prison building programme, seems to operating with some vengeance.
We noted earlier that in 1989 the certified normal occupation (CNA) of the prison system had reached 45,286.
The average prison population of 48,600 thus represented an average overcrowding of 8 per cent.
The situation is particularly acute in remand centres and local prisons.
There are 28 local prisons in England and Wales housing over one-third of the prison population.
They are used to hold the least dangerous categories of prisoner, including those waiting to be tried or sentenced (remand prisoners), fine defaulters, those serving short sentences and prisoners awaiting reallocation to training prisons.
Table 7.2 shows the extent of overcrowding in the ten worst local prisons in March 1990.
The average overcrowding in male local prisons in  1989 was 29 per cent.
Many of the prisoners are locked up in their cells for most of the 24 hours in the day.
The problem of remand prisoners, is particularly acute.
On 28 February 199010,228 prisoners were awaiting trial or sentence in penal establishments.
This constituted 22 per cent of the total prison population.
In addition, more remand prisoners were held in police or court cells.
If 1988 is any guideline only 60 per cent of these remand prisoners will eventually receive custodial sentences.
Perhaps the simplest way to conclude this section is to quote the words of Her Majesty's Chief Inspector of Prisons who wrote in his annual report for 1986:
The physical conditions in which many prisoners had to live continued, therefore, in many cases, to border on the intolerable.
For remand prisoners in particular, whose numbers increased sharply during the year, conditions were particularly poor.
Overcrowding, coupled with the lack of in-cell sanitation and the sharing of limited and inadequate facilities on landings, represented much human misery.
Many inmates in the local prisons spent almost all day locked up, two or three men to a cell intended for one, with no integral sanitation and little to do.
IDEOLOGY, IMPRISONMENT AND RECESSION
Melossi (1985) discusses how social discourses change with the various stages of what he calls the political business cycle.
In the upswing this discourse is characterized by energy and hectic frenzy.
As he notes they are ‘not a time for punishment’.
Melossi discusses the ‘roaring twenties’ and notes that ‘an attitude of leniency, indulgence and experimentation with newer methods and reforms permeated the whole society’.
His description could well apply to the 1960s in the UK, with the proviso perhaps that social  changes lagged behind the business cycle somewhat.
The sixties, however, certainly marked the end of the era of post-war austerity and a time when the belief that the State could solve most economic problems was strong.
It was a period when the newly (re) found sense of idealism and hope led to great expectations of the rehabilitative force of prison and its alternatives.
Hudson (1984,1987) has catalogued how the reforming penal language of the 1960s became replaced with that of justice and punishment during the 1970s.
Here we will consider the reasons for this change in language and consider how Melossi ‘s ‘vocabulary of motives’ helps us to understand changes in England and Wales since 1974.
For Melossi it's the discourses which count:
For this reason in the downswing of the cycle, the sources for an increase in severity of punishment should not be sought either in specific ‘economic’ functions, such as the control of an increasing mass of the unemployed, or in specific motives of individual agents of social control, such as the common belief that unemployment causes crime.
Although such motives can be found in individuals, they, like the punishment rate itself, are associated with the general ‘moral climate’ that develops in hard times.
(Melossi 1985, p. 183)
Melossi contends that earlier attempts by Box and Hale to use an argument based upon the ‘unintended consequences of purposive social action’ are limited.
In this section we will consider review this argument and develop it using the work of Box (1987).
We believe that the argument is strengthened by linking it to Melossi's ‘discursive chain of discourse’ and by showing how this discourse changed in the 1970s.
The climate which developed in this period in Britain was one in which the prejudices of the judiciary were reinforced by a media campaign supportive of the Tory Party's ideas on moral decay and over-dependence upon the state.
It is no coincidence that 1974, the year in England and Wales which saw the end of the decline the proportionate use of imprisonment, and the beginning of a major economic crisis during which the numbers of male unemployed more than doubled by 1976 and increased by a factor of 5 by 1984, also marked the beginning of the end of the welfarist consensus.
As we discussed on p.5 the Labour Party responded to the economic crisis with a programme of public expenditure cuts.
At the same time it launched an ideological offensive launched to justify this approach to solving the crisis.
This offensive had other faces and one of the major targets of the media was the power of the unions which had been used to protect, more or less successfully, the interests of the workers and to maintain the Welfare State.
The celebrations surrounding the 25th anniversary of the accession of the  Queen were used as means of playing down class differences and uniting the country around slogans like ‘coats off for Britain’.
At the same time a campaign against welfare scroungers was launched to make unemployment financially and socially undesirable.
Law and order became increasingly to be used as symbol for the moral and economic decay of the country and this was reinforced by the use of the latent racism of the working class in the publicity given to muggers which was presented at least implicitly as a black crime (see Hall et al .
1978).
The popular press was also to play the racist card in attacks on the social security system with lurid reports of Asian families staying in luxury hotels on welfare payments.
Perhaps most crucial, however, was the transformation of trade unionists from harmless cart-horses into mindless, vicious thugs.
The problem for the Labour Party, of course, was that playing this propaganda card was always likely to backfire since its natural constituency should have been the very groups it was attacking.
The Tory Party meanwhile had no such problems.
As we saw in Chapter Three it was able to give voice to the fears of many concerning the supposed breakdown in moral standards, they equated economic decline with moral weakness and established hegemonic control by focusing on the breakdown of law and order.
The Tory Party had a clear mission which was to break the power of the unions, and the way that it did this was by using the law.
It successfully portrayed itself as having the solution to Britain's economic problems which it saw as being due to excessive State intervention in every sphere, and to the  dependence mentality which this produced.
It committed itself, as we have seen, to a radical restructuring of the British economy at the expense of the working class, and integral to this programme was an attack upon trade-union ‘power’ and the dismantling of the welfare-state.
Union power had to be broken, and this was achieved by linking it with the breakdown in law and order.
By implication, the Labour Party was seen as supporting unions, and thus having no respect for the rule of law.
The period prior to the 1979 election was one of acute crisis-Callaghan's ‘winter of discontent’, economic chaos, and a general feeling of malaise.
The Conservatives successfully mounted a campaign which linked welfare scroungers, individualism, anti-collectivism, breaking the dependency culture and replacing it with the enterprise culture, trade unionists as criminals, moral decline, the need for personal responsibility and personal discipline.
The collectivist welfarist society was presented as being a central part of the moral decline.
The social security scrounger, seriously curtailed in the restructuring of income support systems in 1988, joined industrial pickets, single-parent families, youths and gays in the Tory gallery of folk devils.
Taylor (1987) argued that the Tories were aided in this by:
organisations of people carrying out crucial authority functions, within the English bourgeois state, in particular local magistrates, local police chiefs, police federation representatives and senior traditional schoolmasters.
(Taylor 1987, p.312)
In the early years of the 1970s each of these groups was involved through their professional organisations in a campaign against what they saw as the damaging consequences of the 1960s liberalism.
The Magistrates Association mounted a successful campaign against the 1969 Children and Young Persons Act which sought to replace courtroom hearings for young people with ‘welfare dispositions’.
The National Association of Schoolmasters (NAS) concentrated upon attacking the comprehensive school system and importantly, was involved in public campaigns around the level of violence in schools (Taylor op. cit.).
The violent, dangerous and delinquent youth of the magistrates and NAS were also present in the statements of individual Chief Constables and representatives of the Police Federation who articulated publicly their own theories on the causes of crime in a manner which would have been thought unthinkable a few years previously.
We have discussed this in more detail in Chapter Three where we saw how the parameters of this debate as set out in these campaigns were seized upon by the Tory Party with little or no response from the Labour Party who seemed unable to cope with the authoritarian drift.
‘Law and order’, ‘respect for the law’, ‘moral degeneracy’, ‘the burgeoning crime levels’ became the catch phrases of the moment.
What was needed, of course, was a return to discipline both at work and in society.
Since industrial anarchy was nothing other than the other side of the coin of the rapidly rising crime levels, both would be defeated by tough measures which would restore to the citizen a feeling of security and freedom.
Furthermore, the Welfare State had encouraged moral decline and negated individual responsibility for individual actions.
The growing army of unemployed was the consequence of years of trade-union power and restrictive practices and the first step in the restructuring of the economy would be to criminalise many of the traditional weapons used by the working class to defend their interests.
The most disturbing threat to our freedom and security is the growing disrespect for the rule of law.
In government as in opposition Labour have undermined it.
(Conservative Party Manifesto 1979)
The number of crimes in England and Wales is nearly half as much again as it was in 1973.
The next Conservative Government will spend more on fighting crime even while we economise elsewhere.
(Conservative Party Manifesto 1979)
The Conservatives won the 1979 election at least in part on a law and order programme.
An Independent Television News Research survey reported on election night after the closure of the polls indicated that 23 per cent of voters who switched allegiance did so on law and order and that 22 per cent were concerned with the role of trade unions.
As Clarke and Taylor (1980) and Clarke et al .
(1982) show, the coverage of the Law and Order issue by the media was dominated by the agenda set out by the Tory Party aided by the magistracy, the NAS and certain sections of the police.
We find, then, in the discourses of crucial sectors of the bourgeoisie in this period precisely that change in the general moral climate described by Melossi:
in periods of economic decline, a ‘discursive chain' of punitiveness and severity spreads across society.
(Melossi 1985, p. 183)
Central to their economic strategy was a commitment to reduce public expenditure (except for the law and order budget) and the breaking of the power of the trade unions.
The two were of course linked.
Strong trade unions, especially in the public sector, had successfully resisted attacks on the Welfare State in the past, and so needed to be defeated if the Tories’ solution to what they saw as the major problem — inflation — were to be successful.
At the same time the huge increases in unemployment, which were the corollary of the expenditure cuts and non-interventionist market-oriented economic policy, undermined the resistance and the strength of the unions.
It was within this ideological framework which was always present but as outlined above became to be more and more publicly articulated by the Tories prior to 1979 that the operations of the justice system in England and Wales need to be considered.
The Courts have responded to perceived growing crime rates during this period by increasing the use of prison sentences and reducing the use of non-supervisory sentences such as fines or unconditional discharges.
The outcome has been the imposition of more sentences at the higher end of the punishment tariff over and above the changes in the volume of crime.
As Box and Hale (1982,1985,1986) have argued, this response is not merely a mechanical response due to the increased workload but is due to a sufficiently large proportion of judges and magistrates responding to deteriorating economic conditions by resorting more frequently to the use of imprisonment.
This is made easier by the shift  in the ideological climate discussed earlier, since to be too soft on those convicted would be to prolong the permissive trend which had led to the high crime levels and the chronic economic problems.
The judiciary and magistrates are of course drawn predominantly from the middle and upper classes (see Box 1987, p. 134–135) and as such can be expected to reflect the beliefs and prejudices of their class.
Their natural constituency is ‘conservative’ and especially the preservation of private property.
Consequently, rises in the level of unemployment are likely to be a source of deep anxiety to them since they believe that the unemployed are weak and amoral and therefore more likely to be criminal.
Add to this their desire to protect private property and to end the moral decline which has crippled the country and a potent brew is produced.
As Box argues, when this is combined with:
the ‘knowledge’ that ‘crime is getting worse’and that ‘fear of crime’is becoming a major social problem — messages that politicians, via the media, communicate — then the judiciary are bound to become more sensitised to the dangers that lurk in high levels of unemployment.
(Box 1987: 135)
And so they are bound to respond in a more punitive manner.
Hence we do not need to argue that the judiciary are in any sense part of a gigantic conspiracy; they merely act according to their beliefs which inevitably reflect their class interests.
Furthermore, as Box succinctly puts it:
given the ‘Constitutional Independence’(but political reliability) of the judiciary, there will be no concerted effort to prevent or curtail the steady drift towards more frequent use of severe penal sanctions whenever many judges and magistrates react to their perceptions of growing or potential disruption resulting from the upsurge in the volume of unemployment and an intensification of class conflict in general.
(ibid, pp.135–136)
TOO MUCH LAW AND ORDER?
THE PROBLEM — OVERCROWDED PRISONS: THE SOLUTION — PUNISHMENT IN THE COMMUNITY?
The proponents of a Conservative approach to criminology in the United Kingdom are faced with the contradictions inherent in the Manifesto pledges of the 1979 Election.
They have to deal with not only a still increasing level of crime, but also, because of a judiciary which shares their belief in the efficacy of toughness and hence is over-enthusiastic in the use of custodial sentences, the consequent overcrowding and appalling conditions of prisons.
As we noted earlier the Conservative Government has followed two major policies in an attempt to deal with this penal crisis: firstly, simply to build more prisons; and secondly, to reduce the numbers receiving custodial sentences.
Integral to the second policy is the need to extend custody into the community.
In this concluding section we will examine this strategy in more detail.
Successive governments have stressed that imprisonment should be used only as a last resort yet, as we have seen, its use increased during the 1980s.
The recent history of Government attempts to reduce the prison population is a history of ‘tinkering’.
Each Home Secretary has in turn drawn back from taking the most obvious and practical steps with the excuse that they cannot legislate for the judiciary — its independence is inviolable:
It is not for the Home Secretary, government or the House to lay down to the courts how many people they send to prison.
It is our job to provide places for them.
(Douglas Hurd,Hansard , 5 November 1987, Column 1055)
The judiciary can be encouraged, exhorted, informed, reasoned with, but it can never be instructed.
The result has been that major reforms are completely avoided and every minor reform is weakened or sabotaged.
The principle of judicial independence i– so prized by judges that Lord Lane, the Lord Chief Justice, has refused even to meet Home Secretaries to discuss sentencing policies.
The nearest the Government came to bringing the judges and magistrates ‘within the disciplines of efficiency and cost effectiveness’(Guardian 1.10.90), was to circulate to all courts details of the full costs of their sentencing decisions.
The Magistrates Association's immediate response was that its members already had this information and would continue to pass the sentence they considered appropriate to the offence.
For a more extensive discussion of earlier failures to reduce the prison population see Box and Hale (1986).
In the late 1980s the Government began yet another attempt to reduce prison overcrowding.
In line with its notions of community crime prevention it saw the way forward to be shifting the emphasis from custodial institutions to punishment in the community.
To do this it had to gain the support, both of the judiciary and the public, for its new measures.
It began an attempt to do this in several policy documents.
The 1988 Green Paper (Home Office 1988b) announced its concern over the numbers of offenders sentenced to custody.
It stated that the Government's intention was to increase court and public confidence in the effectiveness of community-based penalties.
It argued that these were not soft options but properly applied would be tough penalties which aided the battle to reduce crime.
The paper emphasised the diversion of offenders from custody, noting the success of intermediate treatment programmes and the increased use of cautions for juveniles.
A  major theme was that of reparation; offenders would recompense the community, and where possible, the individual victim for their crimes.
More use was to be made of day centres and community service.
The guilty offender's freedom was still to be curtailed but outside of institutions.
Drug and alcohol abuse were raised as issues which, because of their connection with crime, needed to be part of a programme for offenders.
To pacify the law and order lobby, a distinct difference was recognised, between property offences (95 per cent of all crime), viewed as amenable to punishment in the community, and crimes of violence which need to be punished more severely in order to protect the public.
The role of the probation service became clear when the Home Office published, in 1988c,Tackling Offending — An Action Plan ', a document setting out how these proposals could be put into practice.
It suggested that probation services took the lead in drawing up local initiatives for young adult offenders at risk of custodial sentences.
The probation service was seen as central to organising punishment in the community.
Tracking, curfews, electronic monitoring and weekend restrictions were suggested for use with new supervision and restriction orders.
In the early stages after sentencing, supervision would be strict, and because of this would have an effect upon the probation officers' traditional, caring function, emphasising instead a more custodial role.
One problem recognised in the paper is the question of whether the magistracy and judiciary would be prepared to substitute this form of sentence for those previously receiving a custodial sentence.
What has tended to happen historically, with earlier attempts to provide alternatives to custody, is that instead of moving offenders currently receiving a sentence of imprisonment down-tariff, in this case to some form of punishment in the community, down-tariff offenders — those who formerly were dealt with by a fine or conditional discharge — have been given the new sentence.
The sentencers have used the new powers, not to reduce the numbers being sent to prison, but as a way of substituting a tougher penalty for petty offenders.
The original motivation for the new measures — to reduce the prison intake — thus has been thwarted.
The implication of shifting the role of the probation officer from the rehabilitative ideal of ‘befriending the prisoner’ to being more centrally involved in punishment, surveillance and control means that:
the new order would contain additional elements of control which some members of the probation service might perceive as inimical to their approach to working with offenders.
(Home Office 1988b, p. 17) but should this happen, the probation service could:
contract with other services, and private and voluntary organisations to obtain some of the components of punishment in the community.
(ibid)
The probation service would supervise the order, ‘but would not itself be responsible for providing all the elements’.
The role of a multi-agency, market-oriented provision emerges.
The implied threat to anon-co-operating probation service is that a new organisation could be created:
to take responsibility for the arrangements for punishment in the community and providing services through contracts with other organisations.
(ibid, p. 18)
Overcrowding in custody is to be prevented by extending control to community custody, using a mixture of existing and contracted services.
The main disadvantages emphasised are not humanistic or rehabilitative objections, but financial ones.
A new service would have to be funded by the Exchequer, not local government using existing services.
In response, the probation service agreed to set up Intensive Probation Programmes, and in April 1989 national standards were announced for community service orders:
Their purpose is to ensure that community service orders are tough and demanding; that they are managed consistently and with discipline and thus that the public and sentencers can have confidence in them.
(Home Office, 1990b).
The 1989 Audit Commission report on the probation service noted considerable variations in hours of attendance required at day centres, in breach of procedures for failure to attend the centres, in the frequency of visits offenders received whilst on probation and in unit costs.
These would have to be standardised, but with some local flexibility according to the offence.
In 1990, David Waddington, the then Home Secretary, presented proposals which included reducing standard sentence remission from two-thirds to half the initial sentence.
This ‘hard line strategy’ reveals yet again the contradictions inherent in the Conservatives' law and order policy.
The move argued against the notion of reducing custodial sentences, clearly signalling to the judiciary a more cavalier attitude to the problems of prison overcrowding.
These recommendations are part of the 1990 Government White Paper (Home Office 1990a), which claimed to set out a coherent, legislative framework for sentencing, matching punishment to the seriousness of the crime, and making the distinction between violent and non-violent crime.
A hard line was to be maintained for violent and sexual offences with provisions for longer sentences, and Crown Courts were to be given the powers to  impose heavier sentences than the individual offence justified, to persistent offenders deemed to be a public risk.
A sharp distinction was made between these crimes and property crimes which could be subject to a community focused punishment, involving a mixture of community service, probation, and curfews.
A major theme of the paper was that punishment should fit the crime not the criminal, that vandals, thieves, and burglars should not be jailed for persistent offending.
The White Paper placed great emphasis on probation reports, to which attention would have to be paid before a custodial sentence is recommended.
Increased use of financial penalties were also advocated.
In addition to the changes in remission it was proposed to allow parole to be removed for prisoners serving over 4 years if it was felt that their release would put the public at risk.
A post-imprisonment supervision was to be introduced for those serving more than one year, and wider powers given to the courts to make parents take responsibility for their children's offences.
The White Paper recognised that since 1981 the number of juveniles under 17 given custodial sentences, had fallen by more than 50 per cent, and there is no evidence that the reduction in custodial sentences has increased juvenile crime (174,000 known juvenile offenders was reduced to 119,000 in 1988).
Females under 18 years of age were recommended as particularly suitable for non-custodial sentences, and attention was drawn to the strengthening of supervision orders for juveniles in the Children's Act of 1989.
A new youth court was proposed to deal with the 14–16-year-old group-the largest group of juvenile offenders — whilst under-14-year-olds were to be dealt with increasingly by non-court procedures.
The White Paper put forward punishment in the community as an attempt to reduce custodial sentencing and to save on expenditure.
The probation service and voluntary agencies were to be funded to provide an alternative form of punishment for the less serious offender.
In line with the Green Paper which preceded it, it advocated an increased use of curfew orders, day centres, community service, bail hostels, electronic monitoring, financial penalties, and combinations of financial penalties, and community punishment.
The success of the Criminal Justice Bill stemming from the White Paper ultimately depends on the judiciary and the magistracy changing their sentencing strategies.
This can happen, as local initiatives with magistrates have shown but the prognosis for major change on a national level is, judging from the history of earlier attempts, gloomy.
This will require the Court of Appeal to extend its work on guideline sentences to more relatively minor crimes.
This is a gamble, and there are indications that the Court of Appeal may refuse, seeing this as political interference with the judiciary.
There were already signs of the difficulties ahead in May 1990 when it was reported that  in order to avert a row with judges and magistrates the Home Secretary was contemplating watering down the principle that punishment should fit the crime not the criminal.
Given that:
Judges, magistrates and justices' clerks believe they must keep custody as a deterrent against frequent offenders and ‘to give society a rest’.
(Guardian 25.6.90)
Mr Waddington was apparently considering allowing them to take into account the need to protect the public from even quite minor offences.
This attempted compromise will not help the Government in persuading the probation service to alter its traditional role and manage punishment in the community.
A major argument put forward by the Home Office was that the proposed tougher community punishments would be an alternative to custody for persistent petty offenders.
Harry Fletcher, the Assistant General Secretary of the National Association of Probation Officers (NAPO), commented that the move was:
fudging the principle, and the result will be a flawed strategy which will increase the prison population.
(Guardian 25.6.90) since he now feared, that as with previous alternatives to custody, the new measures would be used instead for people who would previously have avoided jail.
Financially, the programme depends on savings gained from reducing the prison population.
Consequently, if the judiciary fail to reduce their proclivities or custodial sentences, and hence the savings fail to materialise, the alternative system will be under great strain.
At the same time as the White Paper the Government published a Green Paper (Home Office 1990b) on the reorganization of the probation service.
This argued it was necessary to create a ‘new model probation officer’ with less emphasis on social work, but with the right balance between care and control.
Probation should in no sense be seen as a soft option by the judiciary.
The Green Paper considered in detail how the working practices of probation officers would have to change, reminding the probation service that it is a criminal justice agency, in obvious anticipation opposition from NAPO.
The paper emphasised the need to protect the public from serious offenders punished in the community, and noted that crime prevention initiatives with offenders: ‘involves firm and constructive work’.
These moves will also mean that the probation service has to stop seeing itself as the exclusive provider of services and facilities: it is suggested that other voluntary or private sectors may make better provision.
Assessment, rather like the Griffiths report for community care and health is to become as to plan and manage suitable programmes for  offenders.
Planning, social inquiry reports and enforcing court orders are to be the future task of probation, with an emphasis on the new task of the management and organisation of time, resources and workloads.
Funding is to be centralised and Home Office policy on contracting out is to be followed.
Some local areas will be amalgamated to improve their economics and management.
The Green Paper makes clear the future direction of probation, through comments on the training of probation officers.
It takes note of the Coleman Report (1989), which recommends removing Home Office sponsorship from sub-standard courses.
Davies (1989) sees these as being those courses which pay insufficient attention to practical probation issues, such as resource management, penology, criminology, criminal law, principles of sentencing and other issues.
The emphasis is clearly on the probation officer as part of the criminal justice system with a managerial role in supervising punishment.
Implicit in the Green Paper is the notion that generic social work principles are not paramount, and that probation courses will be brought to heel over their curriculum and orientation.
The training of probation officers could continue and be included in the Certificate of Qualification in Social Work and the Diploma in Social Work courses, but if these do not measure up to required standards, they will be replaced with anew training syllabus put out to tender in the educational market place.
A new more punitive role is envisaged for the probation service, which is threatened by being replaced by a new executive service.
Faced with the financial consequences of its commitment to a hard law and order policy the Government has attempted a conjuring trick.
It has proposed a community-based programme of punishment but in order to sell this to both the judiciary and its supporters it has constructed around it a rhetoric of toughness.
Question marks are already being raised over its proposed new measures.
NAPO believes that rather than reducing the jail population the prison numbers will rise.
It argues that the stricter probation conditions proposed will lead to more breaches of the orders, and at present a large proportion of those who breach go straight to prison.
The history of previous attempts to reduce the prison population by introducing alternative punishments suggest that NAPO is likely to be proved right.
Is Conservative criminology here to stay?
CONSERVATIVE CRIMINOLOGY, IDEOLOGY AND THE STATE
As we have seen, conservative criminology is distinctly linked to other conservative social policy.
The problem with New Right Conservatism is that it has to claim to be reducing the influence of the State in the field of welfare, health, income support and education, but has to maintain the strong State in the arena of law and order.
Mrs Thatcher saw State control as central to socialism:
Communism is the left foot of socialism, and Fascism is the right foot, using socialism in the sense that it is total regimentation and control by the state.
(The Times , 29.8.77)
A major part of the Conservative agenda has been to undermine socialism and develop a contemporary form of laissez-faire market economics, to move Britain from a culture of dependency to the enterprise culture.
This has had to be done in the context of a strong State — a State which will keep the streets safe, preserve the ‘British’ way of life, and protect property.
The belief has grown that somewhere in the urban jungles, there lurk the dangerous classes who will, if not closely surveyed and controlled, challenge the peace of the streets.
Without a strong State, this underclass will erupt into fragmented resistance, indicated in social disorder.
In a strange way, this is a truth believed in by both the left and right criminology, as well as in British society at large.
There is a classical thread running through sociology which wants to argue (see for example, Giddens 1973; Rex and Tomlinson 1979) for the existence of an underclass, composed of underemployed, unskilled people — a significant number of them black.
This lumpenproletariat has fared badly, hit by the increasing market competitiveness for jobs, housing, education and  hence, decent incomes and good health.
For Rex and Tomlinson, black people have become ‘a separate under-privileged class’(Rex and Tomlinson 1979, p. 275).
This group's inferior class position is linked to their families' origins as immigrants, and is compounded by poor incomes and racism.
We see that the origins of racism lie embedded within the relations of capital, and are reinforced by institutions which historically regulated the flow of black labour.
Hence immigration, and that attitudinal spin-off from immigration, the view that black people are all ‘immigrants’.
The sectional interests of the white working class and trade unions all indicate that divisive and sectional class interests are not just cultural phenomena.
Sivanandan (1982) engages in a dialogue with racist ideology, by seeing the relationship between racism and capitalism as essentially instrumental.
Racial struggle is linked to class struggle, and racism fractures both the political superstructure and economic base.
Field (1989), in his discussion of the underclass, leaves out the racial dimension and emphasises the economic aspects.
He produces evidence to show how the poor have fallen behind the better-off sections of the British class system.
The better off have, in many ways, forgotten the underclasses, yet they live indirectly off their misery.
This group or sub-class has been detached from the rest of the British population, and is composed of the longer-term unemployed, single parents and elderly pensioners.
It suffers from current economic policy, with the holding down and restructuring of welfare benefits in the context of rising inflation.
Whilst Field does not emphasise an ethnic dimension to this underclass, it is clear that public fears are focused not on the elderly, sick or female, but on the young, especially young men — and particularly young black men.
Most sociological writing on the underclass has suggested that it has a potential for what Giddens calls ‘hostile outbursts’— that is, riots or mass violence and public disorder.
This is a view shared by the general public, and by politicians.
Scruton (1984) has argued that freedom for conservatives is only possible when subordinated to an organisation or arrangement which defines the individual's aim.
The value of individual liberty is not absolute, but is subject to the authority of established government.
People need congenial government:
It is through an ideal of authority that the conservative experiences the political world.
(Scruton 1984, p.19)
This is why social consciousness in the form of patriotism, for example, is important to Scruton.
It also helps us understand the ethnocentric and ruling-class view of much conservative criminology.
Nationalism is not only acknowledged, but is a virtue.
Even the National Front are only an extension  of a marked allegiance to patriotism, authority and the Government.
Scruton offers us an articulate perspective on the attractions of conservatism for those who, fearing social change and the future, try to hold firmly onto the past.
For all its brave talk of radicalism, the New Right depends emotionally on the attractions of the familiar and the known, constructing a romantic view of a mythical past to bolster up its attack on collectivism.
Legal change becomes prioritised and justified through expediency; opposition becomes reduced — an irritation to the smooth flow of economic policy.
We begin to see why, as Scraton and Chadwick (1987) remind us, sexism, racism and class hatred are so deeply institutionalised in the British State.
They allow the marginalisation of identifiable groups, who are the product of a surplus population suffering the enforced unemployment necessary to stabilise the long recessions of capitalism.
As sections of the working class become sectionalised, so their reputations become criminalised.
Scraton and Chadwick correctly identify the politics of marginalisation as an integral part of the operation of criminal justice, just as Hall et al .
(1978) showed us it was part of policing the crisis.
The politics of marginalisation are essential in the smooth operating of a set of social and economic policies intended to reform radically a welfare state, maintain unemployment and to deal with the consequences that therefore manifest themselves in social problems such as public disorder, addictions, inner city riots and rebellious fractions of communities.
This means that a necessary emphasis has to be made on respectability, hard work, thrift and respect for law, so that marginalisation can become extended into criminalisation.
Sir Kenneth Newman, then Commissioner of the Metropolitan Police commented:
Throughout London there are locations where unemployed youth — often black youth — congregate; where the sale and purchase of drugs, the exchange of stolen property and illegal drinking and gaming is not uncommon.
The youths regard these locations as their territory.
Police are viewed as intruders, the symbol of authority — largely white authority in a society that is responsible for all their grievances about unemployment, prejudice and discrimination.
They equate closely with the criminal rookeries of Dickensian London.
(Newman, 1983 ‘Policing London: post Scarman’.
The 1983 Sir George Bean Memorial Lecture 24.10.83.)
Black youth, then, assumes symbolic importance by being equated with the inability of the police to maintain public order, a feature which encourages law breaking elsewhere and reinforces the phenomenon of urban decay.
We may bring some theoretical light on this by considering discussions of ideological formations in a culture of authoritarianism populism, called  ‘Thatcherism’.
For the Conservative Government to maintain any level of legitimation in ideological or cultural spheres, they have had to construct a definition of common sense which reinforces their definition of the social order.
The cultural and ideological influence of the Conservative government since 1979 has been considerable, articulated most clearly in the utterances of Mrs Thatcher.
Discursive themes such as nation, self-help, respectability, have been constructed and related to class subjectivity.
Hall (1988), in particular, has argued that the power of that brand of New-Right Conservatism known as Thatcherism consists largely of the skilful way in which it has disconnected a number of themes — self-help, anti-statism, public order, anti-trade unionism, nationalism, share ownership — from the basically bourgeois discourse in which they have been traditionally lodged.
They have then been re-articulated into a discourse of popular common sense and respectability.
Thatcherism's new discourse has had consequent effects on the construction of subjectivity and consciousness.
This common sense has affected not only Conservatism's traditional adherents, but has had an effect upon that Conservatism latent in working-class respectability.
To develop hegemonic gain the Conservative Party has constructed itself as the party which will bring prosperity, reconstruct traditional values, end dependency, encourage work and oppose the threats of progressiveness, ethnic groups and cultures, and ‘loony left’ policies in local government.
Hence law and order, the maintenance and control of the dangerous classes and the preservation of public order have been ideologically central to its construction of consensual support.
Where this fails, a legitimation crisis occurs.
On the level of ideology the Conservative Government has attempted to tackle not only a crisis of legitimation but also of motivation.
This has been done by an emphasis on individualism, self-help, hard work and thrift, whilst at the same time there has been an attack on collectivism and socialism as repressive and  unworldly values.
Gramsci (1978) has suggested:
The methodological criterion on which our own study must be based is the following; that the supremacy of a social group manifests itself in two ways, as ‘domination’ and as ‘intellectual and moral leadership’.
(Gramsci 1978, p.57)
He argues that in the historical process of conflict and compromises, one fundamental class emerges as dominant and directive, not only in the economic sphere, but also in the moral and intellectual spheres.
The State is the unifier and arbitrator of differing interests and conflicts.
Hegemony evolves in an extensive but temporary form, equilibrium is only relative.
When hegemony begins to come apart, the dominant class resorts to coercion, leading to a ‘crisis of authority’.
However, it is through popular beliefs that the mass of the people and the leading groups in society connect.
Ideas are material forces for Gramsci, and hence consciousness is not spontaneous but structured in certain ways, which correspond to the general structure of society.
For Gramsci:
Philosophy cannot be separated from the history of philosophy, nor can culture from the history of culture….
One's conception of the world is a response to certain specific problems posed by reality, which are quite specific and ‘original’ in their immediate relevance.
(Gramsci 1978, p.424)
Common sense is central for Gramsci, pervasive yet unsystematic.
It has a basis in popular experience, but unlike philosophy does not present a unified conception of the world:
Every social stratum has its own ‘common sense’ and its own ‘good sense’which are basically the most widespread conception of life and man….
‘Common sense’ is the folklore of philosophy, and is always halfway between folklore properly speaking and the philosophy, science and economics of the specialists.
(Gramsci 1978, p.326)
We can see then, that as conscious subjects, we may draw upon common sense as explanation, and that there is a struggle for the definition of this vis-a-vis the State.
The force of law is that it becomes part of common sense, and makes ‘common sense’ prescriptions about public order, theft and hard work.
The State then operates as an educational function, as Gramsci suggests, in this case, to educate us as to the worthy and the unworthy, the deserving and the undeserving.
For Gramsci, law reflects economic relations, and it is eternally and generally a weapon of class domination, a classical Marxist position.
However, the link with common sense is put well by his biographer, Fiori:
Gramsci's originality as a Marxist lay partly in his conception of the nature of bourgeois rule (and indeed of any previous established social order), in his argument that the system's real strength does not lie in the violence of the ruling class, or the coercive power of its state apparatus, but in the acceptance by the ruled of a ‘conception of the world’ which belongs to the rulers.
The philosophy of the ruling class passes through a whole tissue of complex vulgarizations to merge as a ‘common sense’ that is the philosophy of the masses, who accept the morality, customs, the institutionalised rules of behaviour of the society they live in.
(Fiori 1970, p.238) The law for Gramsci exists both in political society or the State, and civil society — private organisations outside the State.
The State exercises coercion, but civil society performs the function of maintaining hegemony, or domination by consent.
The legal apparatus operates coercively to maintain hegemony, particularly in periods of political and ideological crisis.
Law educates and adapts the mass of the people to the goals of civil society, defined through ruling class, notions of morality and custom.
The general function of law — that is the dynamic of the legal system or the ‘juridical problems’ as Gramsci called it — is to render the ruling group homogeneous:
creating a social conformism which is useful to the ruling groups' line of development.
(Gramsci 1971)
For Gramsci law unifies fractions of the ruling class, as well as concealing the reality of the social structures for the masses.
Ideological mystification obtained through legal devices has to be won so that political propaganda, political party speeches, definitions of marginalised and criminalised groups such as militant trade unionists and black youth, are vital in the construction of conformity and mystifying legal enactments.
Hegemony has to be won and is central to maintaining the status quo in legal enactment.
The State teaches us how to view the world:
In reality, the state must be conceived of as an ‘educator’, in as much as it tends precisely to create a new type of civilisation….
The law is the repressive and negative aspect of the entire, positive, civilising activity undertaken by the state.
The ‘prize given’ activities of individuals and groups must be also incorporated in the conception of the law.
(Gramsci 1971, p.247)
The practice of politicians and intellectuals is central to understanding law as a key apparatus maintaining hegemony.
Hunt (1976, pp.178–187) has developed some of these ideas in his consideration of law as an instrument of ideological domination, which legitimises and mystifies class rule.
The effectiveness of such a legal system depends upon its ability to express the rights, powers and interests of subordinate classes.
Sumner (1979), makes the point that law depends upon its ideological encapsulation of a consensus constructed outside itself, in other economic, political and cultural practices.
Any legal system has to have an ideological base which represents an ideological alliance between the ruling class and other classes and class fractions.
Progressive legislation is fought for and gained by organised resistance, often on a class base, though this may be concealed.
However, the problem with law is that it can be radically re-ordered through political  institutions.
Its relationship with justice varies considerably from State to State, depending on the degree of coercion necessary.
For Sumner, law embodies the appearance of reality produced by social relations, so that, for example , an employment contract appears as a consensual contract between equals (a point also made by Hunt), but it also embodies those appearances as they have been seen and interpreted by classes and groups who make laws.
An employment contract not only individualises what is essentially a class relation, but it individualises it in such a way that it expresses the dominance of the employers and their ideological grasp of the apparent relations between individuals.
The ideological grasp of the employees is subordinated and does not appear in the legal document which ensues.
Whilst the examples used come from civil law, we can see that the ideological grasp of those subject to criminal law is removed totally, because ‘common sense’ would not allow it a voice.
One could not maintain the criminal justice system otherwise.
That is not to say that miscarriage of justice, or reform of criminal law does not occur.
This can be expressed through disputes between high-bourgeois individuals, themselves acceptable to the legal system as with the Guildford Four, who, partly as a result of international pressure, had highly placed clerics and members of the judiciary supporting their release.
Alternatively, it can be the result of a public campaign, as with the repeal of the ‘sus’ law which was repealed because of public pressure, but allowed public order to be maintained through other laws.
Law can be seen as a public ideological front, which conceals the workings of a social formation, Sumner (1979) reminds us.
This reveals law as a politically constructed, ideologically formulated institution, which has an educative process.
Gramsci (1978) has pointed out that once a mode of production is established, with corresponding modes of political and cultural discourse, then law is developed to regulate that particular social formation.
Legalisation and legal process respond to social problems, and are not unilaterally constructed.
At different levels and in a very real sense, it is ‘the law of the land’.
The Conservative Government has won important victories in ideological consent.
It has had to rewrite aspects of law and order in order to gain support for its economic policies.
It has played on the fears of rising crime, unsafe streets, unemployed youth, in order to develop common-sense notions of criminal justice.
This has not occurred in a simplistic or deterministic manner, as can be seen from the retention of the abolition of the death penalty.
However, as a Party it has managed to project itself as the supporter of law and order, and simultaneously to construct the parties of opposition as the supporters of disorder, misrule and irresponsibility.
The differing strata of the working class have shifted in their forms of work, in the divisions created by long-term unemployment, by generational differences, and by ethnic  composition.
Because of this, culture and identification have also shifted in terms of the sites in which subjectivity is constructed.
Many forms of political resistance and consciousness, feminist, gay, ecological and pacifist, have developed outside of party politics, and have developed analyses and strategies which go beyond traditional class politics.
Class is only one site in which subjectivity is constructed.
Opposition to conservatism has relied too much on traditional class subjectivity, only recently reading its divisions and movement.
The strategies for the modernisation of the British economy has meant that strategies to undergo this, operate as modes of both economic and social regulation.
Hence, there is a necessary attempt, in order to bring in economic regulation, to construct a conservative recomposition of social and moral life.
This is why the themes current in Conservative criminology are so important.
This is not to deny the force of economistic elements in capitalism, but to indicate how certain ideological and moral themes assist in the maintenance of economic control.
Hence the extent to which Conservative criminology is here to stay depends on more than mere changes of political parties.
It is closely related to the regulation of a particular form of social formation and is intimately linked with political and economic forces, and the consequent social problems which emerge.
In order to gain any consensual alliance in the area of law and order a State has to take note of the emerging social formations, class fractions, cultures and consciousnesses of a multi-ethnic, gender-conscious society.
It has to respond to the emerging consciousness of the black community, gay people, feminists by marginalising them and delegitimating their claims.
By making such groups irrelevant, the State can write off the progressive movements of the last 20 years.
We have seen in this account the rise and legitimation of Conservative criminology for a government elected on a law and order issue.
What has become a matter of concern is that as society becomes more complex, and as the common coin of politics moves away from socialism — and indeed social democracy — it becomes important to preserve and develop those rights which have come to be considered fundamental.
Those rights which have been established, need to be defended, and therefore access to effective legal resource is indispensable.
Without this, the rule of law becomes supplanted by the law of power.
It is essential for the powerless and the poor to have access to as large a range of legal services and skills as those at the disposal of the authorities.
The Critical Lawyers Group has suggested the establishment of a Public Law Project which would provide assistance in matters relating to public law to people who have little or no access to such assistance, due to their social disadvantage or lack of income.
Britain has been considered to have fundamental, but uncodified rights.
These include fair and open government, ready access to justice, as well as expectations about a  home, an adequate income, a full education and employment.
However, as there is a shift away from the concept of the State as a provider, and more towards the private sector making provision on a market basis, there arises an alteration in the balance of social power.
The Public Law Project is seen by radical lawyers as essential in being able to offer a range of legal skills to the disadvantaged.
This pays particular attention to the body of law which has attempted to redress abuse of power by central and local government, and other organisations.
The Public Law Project would undertake specialist legal work in relation to public and administrative law, including legislation and public policy.
The aim would be to provide specialist research, advice and information, to agencies on the ‘front line’ and to provide legal services to the disadvantaged in public law issues.
In some ways this move is paralleled by the development of Charter 88, set up in November 1988 on the anniversary of the revolution of 1688.
It aims at bringing about a Bill of Rights, a fair electoral system, proper devolution and a written constitution that ensures government is subject to the rule of law.
This was a response to a widespread belief that the concept of an unwritten constitution could mean the erosion of civil liberties.
Scotland is governed like a province, Northern Ireland is a colony and the Government has eroded such traditional civil liberties, such as habeas corpus, peaceful assembly, the freedom of information and expression, trade-union membership, freedom of movement and freedom of local government.
An important ideological feature here is that the erosion of freedom in each of these areas is seen as an individual issue, systematically lessening the sum of these curtailments of freedom.
The issue central to the analysis of Charter 88 is that:
Being unwritten, the constitution also encourages a piecemeal approach to politics; an approach that gives little protection against a determined, authoritarian state.
The Charter considers that civil rights, because of their unformulated nature, are conditional upon the goodwill of the Government and the compassion of bureaucracy.
It calls for a new constitutional settlement which enshrines civil rights in a Bill of Rights, and places the executive under the power of a democratically renewed Parliament, and all State agencies under the rule of law.
It wants the independence of a reformed judiciary, and the provision of legal remedies for all abuse of power by the state and its officials.
Given the move towards a common European community with common citizenship and agreed rights, this is a well-selected moment to press for this radical reform.
This suggestion was, not surprisingly, refused by Mrs Thatcher, who, despite the fact that her Government used the guillotine in Parliament to  ensure a jury can no longer have a say in the public interest, as they had in the trial of Clive Ponting, declared in a written reply to Baroness Ewart Biggs, that:
The government consider that our present constitutional arrangements continue to serve us well and that the citizen of this country enjoys the greatest degree of liberty that is compatible with the rights of others and the vital interests of the State….
Some of the most oppressive states in the world have written constitutions.
However, whether Mrs Thatcher meant by ‘us’, the British, the Government, or whether she was using again the royal ‘we’, is not clear.
What is clear is that current constitutional arrangements do suit an authoritarian government well.
Such a state can manipulate ideologically and legally the vagaries and anomalies of an unwritten constitution.
The Charter has considerable social democratic support (as Ken Livingstone pointed out,Tribune , 13.1.89), but this is mainly directed at its hint of a Lib-Lab alliance.
The British constitution, by being unwritten, lacks fundamental protection for its citizens.
For example, it lacks a law such as the American Fifth Amendment, which protects a defendant being compelled to ‘be a witness against himself.
That means that the British Government could, as it did in September 1988, simply decree that the courts can take a negative view of any defendant who chooses not to co-operate with the police, or take the stand in his or her own defence, as in the changes in the right to silence rules.
There is no Sixth Amendment guaranteeing the right to ‘a speedy and public trial, by an impartial jury’, which would have prevented the trials without jury which have existed in Northern Ireland since the 1970s.
When considering the right to silence it is salutary to examine the case of Clintom McCurbin who, in October 1988, died while being arrested in a Next clothes shop on a case of alleged credit card fraud.
McCurbin died of asphyxiation from pressure applied to the neck, but the police who arrested him said that they thought he was faking as he struggled for life.
The coroner's jury brought in death by misadventure, on advice by the coroner.
Detective Chief Superintendent Cole, the final witness at the inquest, said he was unable to interview the two arresting constables, as they had been advised by their solicitors not to answer questions.
In contrast, when, in the same month, three terrorists were charged with conspiracy to murder Tom King, former Secretary for Northern Ireland, armed not with weapons but with a magazine article on sniping, it was announced in mid-trial that significant changes were to be made to a suspect's right to silence.
All three were sentenced to 25 years, although Martina Shanahan had served 200 days virtually of solitary confinement at Risley whilst on remand and was said to be losing her mind by the time the trial began.
Subsequently, the three were to be released on the grounds that the statements of King and others had prejudiced their case.
Interestingly,The Times reported at the time that not enough professional people served on juries, and that manual workers and the unemployed did not ‘represent a cross section of society’ made up by juries.
Letters followed from various retired judges and lawyers agreeing that juries performed better when they were ‘middle aged, middle class and male’.
Whilst the Charter can be regarded with suspicion because of its association with political pacts, and therefore a drift to centrist politics, it does nevertheless raise important issues about legislative reform.
It could stop the erosion of rights catalogued throughout this book, and for this reason such a document needs to be considered seriously by the socialist opposition in Britain, and not written off as mere attempts at electoral reform when instead it should be developing a radical heart along democratic socialist lines.
What is illustrated by these attempts to introduce a written constitution an unlikely event in modem times — is that there is considerable concern over the ambiguities and lack of clear codification in an unwritten constitution.
A determined and authoritarian State can prepare ideologically the ground for repressive legislation by constructing certain forms of criminal personality and behaviour as necessarily outside of reason, and outside of ordinary law.
We have seen that this can be used to monitor communities seen as rebellious and ‘un-British’, be they black or Irish, non-familial groups such as gay communities, militant trade unionists, alleged terrorists, the poor, single parents and the unemployed.
Once defined as unrespectable or dangerous, they are subject to legal prosecution, often by semi-legal and dubious methods.
The danger is that this form of prosecution and monitoring becomes accepted by the parties of opposition as realistic.
The difficult thing is to defend those who are unpopular or and-social defendants.
This is to confuse their civil rights with their activities.
Once the feeling arises that a strict law and order has to be maintained defined by the Government, deviant and oppositional groups become no longer worthy of fair trial and due procedures of justice.
One theme which has occurred throughout this book, is that law and order, and indeed Conservative criminology, has developed in response to social anxieties felt by ‘respectable’ elements of British society about a Britain which has difficulties in coming to terms with its position in a changing world.
It is no longer possible to maintain a Little England attitude in the new European community.
Contemporary Britain is a multi-ethnic, multi-racial, culturally diverse society.
It is no longer dominated by established tradition, or established religious beliefs; it has new populations with new sets of consciousness.
In order to gain hegemonic support, the Conservative Government had to establish a  moral position which sought to comfort those sections of the British electorate concerned about the changing political and moral climate.
In its economic sphere, commercial interests needed to emphasise consumerism, which meant the developments of new leisure interests, life styles, and the liberalisation of sexuality.
Even a cursory examination of television advertising styles reveals young people, usually male, depicted in styles which are not the traditional collective uniforms of the youth cultures of the 1970s, but mixed to combine street style with street creditability.
The individualised young men and women in the advertisements are single, and hence available, but could be any class, even classless.
Their occupation is not clear (they might even be unemployed) but they are linked by consumerism and by success.
The young men struggle alone through dark urban streets, radiating glamour and style, the message is clear you are never alone with a flexible friend.
However, this necessarily locks out the unemployed, who are the dark side of this culture.
Against the changing world envisaged by the consumer oriented enterprise, there are the new poor, the new urban beggars.
Consequently, there is a nostalgia for traditional values, and it is to the socially threatened lower middle class, and to the respectable working class that the Conservative Party has made a moral appeal.
It has to counteract its won message of self-centred pursuit of affluence, the enterprising go-getting individual, so central to its enterprise culture, by positing the safe world of clear, responsible morality.
We have seen since the early 1980s appeals to the family, attacks on the ‘moaning Minnies’ and ‘whingers’who cannot make it, and counteractions to permissiveness.
Since recessive threats to the money markets occurred in the ‘big bangs’ of the 1980s, the enterprise culture has shown it can remove jobs as quickly as it creates them.
It is vulnerable to wider world economic forces, and stability is then to be found in respectable family life and firmly grounded morality.
Pressure groups have arisen against permissiveness, single-action campaigns against abortion, homosexuality and ‘loose’ sexuality.
Outrage has been expressed against crime, trade-union activities and public disorder, often linked with outrages concerning terrorism in popular rhetoric.
The moral terrain of the right has taken a strong line with football hooliganism, under-age drinking, heroin addiction, welfare scroungers, young criminals and the unemployed and homeless youth.
Even the school curriculum has been closely scrutinised in its national form.
English Christianity is preferred to multi-ethnic religion and British heroes of history, not the interpretation of political events, are emphasised.
We can see that the economic aims of Thatcherism have been contradictory to its moral postures.
What these moral stances have done successfully, is to define the Labour Party as progressive, which has become synonymous with irresponsibility and permissiveness.
This is particularly emphasised in  progressive municipal boroughs, whose opposition is written off as the insanity of the ‘loony left’, to the extent that the Labour Party itself seems nervous of suggesting anything socialist or progressive for fear of losing the middle ground.
Traditional political concerns such as class war, or class exploitation have become muted.
Obviously the ideological appeal to Thatcherism is across a broad spectrum of social locations.
Taylor (1987) has interestingly suggested that the key roles played by organisations in the law and order debate, were those with crucial authority functions within the British State.
These include magistrates, police chiefs, police federation representatives and senior traditional schoolteachers.
Noticeably absent from this list are senior members of social services departments.
Drawn from a more liberal tradition, they are seen as part of the permissive professions who encourage the delinquent and the feckless.
They are perceived as unlikely to take an authoritarian line, yet they have remained politically uncritical of Government policy, during the attacks on their departments made by the media during the child abuse, and transnational adoption controversies.
Never once have they suggested that cuts and understaffing have tragic consequences, a view put forward by their colleagues in the health professions.
The groups mentioned by Taylor, he suggests, were concerned with the falling legitimacy of moral authority in Britain.
It was to this group that the moral and cultural rhetoric of the right was addressed.
This rhetoric was offered to make sense of a changing society, which by the mid-1980s resulted from Conservative economic policy.
Its appeal was, however, beyond this group, but it offered the prioritisation of authority, patriotism and family values.
Obviously this contained its own contradictions; the patriotism of the football hooligan had to be tempered by the authority of the law.
The central theme of Conservative morality and order was that of public order.
The streets and public spaces had to be seen to be safe, from both criminals and demonstrates.
Traditional values had to be re-established, and it is this which may be the heritage of Conservative law and order.
While we have charted the moves away from the more strident outpourings of the 1979 campaign, within the Conservatives' law and order strategy over the last decade, it should not be assumed that they will not revert to this rhetoric if the need arises.
Lagging in the opinion-poll ratings in the early months of 1990 they seized upon the Anti-Poll Tax campaign as a means of once more attacking the Labour Party.
After the demonstration against the Poll Tax on 30 March 1990, the Home Secretary accused Labour MPs of exhorting people to break the law.
In the House of Commons he responded to Tony Benn's comment that ‘despair and a sense of social injustice have often lain at the roots of civil disturbance’, by suggesting that Mr Benn was  selective about which laws people ought to obey and went on to provide another explanation:
I think one can identify quite easily the cause of this violence: sheer wickedness.
(Guardian 4.4.90)
However, this attempt to once more equate opposition to their policies with criminality, and hence deflect attention from the real issues, was thwarted somewhat by the Strangeways riot the next day.
CONCLUSION
In this book we have tried to indicate the ways in which a law and order policy informed by a conservative criminology emerged before and since Mrs Thatcher came to power in Britain in 1979.
In order to pursue its economic policies, the Conservatives had to construct an ideological climate which justified its unpicking of the Welfare State.
This it did by demanding a return to the family and Victorian values.
Yet it replaced the philanthropic and rehabilitative ideas the Victorians had towards the ‘dangerous classes’ with the notion of evil individuals.
Conservative criminology is part of the ideological background of economic liberalism.
A moral climate has been created in which collective responsibility has become unfashionable.
Instead, we have the enterprise society where profit at any cost has become the holy grail.
Ironically, with its determined attempt to restructure the British economy at the expense of the working class, and by taking such a hard line on scroungers and loungers, the Conservative Government has created the very social conditions which have led to the intensification of the very crime wave it was elected to end.
To retain its hegemonic dominance it criminalised the inner city uprisings of disenchanted youth, marginalised the youth of the black communities and removed trade-union struggles from the field of civil law to the arena of public disorder.
When expedient justification for a more centralised and militaristic policing was required British citizens were presented with the spectre of Northern Ireland, the colony over the water, its ‘special case’ justifying its separate code of judicial practice.
Under Conservative rule civil liberty became seriously eroded.
Any support, whether financial or political for those outside the enterprise culture — the poor, the homeless, the unemployed — has been written off as the unrealistic and dangerous machinations of the ‘loony left’.
We have seen the ways in which a law and order policy, informed by a Conservative criminology, constructs oppositional subjects to the State against which it then acts.
The ideological and political levels are closely related to the economic.
Ultimately, the legal system in this form of social  structure defends the economic planning of the State.
Market forces remain free because of public imagery about the feckless, the idle and the deviant.
The great danger is that this will not be reconstructed when there is a change from an authoritarian State to one more committed to socialism or social democracy.
Having lost the ideological battle for being the party of law and order, will the next Labour Government want to show that it, too, can take a firm line over public order, fraud, social monitoring and industrial militancy.
The aims of the Conservative discourse, we have argued, have been to develop a law and order society.
This was the only area in which a strong State was encouraged.
Taking as its bench mark the fears and anxieties of the lower middle classes, discipline and thrift were encouraged, safe streets promised and firm action taken against militants, trade unionists, terrorists and other folk devils.
As we have seen, this approach became less dominant in the second half of the 1980s, although it is still there as a card to be played should political problems necessitate it.
We need look no further than the police handling of the Poll Tax demonstrators in March 1990 and the subsequent attempt by the then Home Secretary to turn this into an issue of law and order.
This occurred at a time when the Government support in the opinion polls was at one of its lowest ebbs and seemed a desperate attempt to create an atmosphere in which opposition to the Poll Tax became synonymous with criminality.
Nevertheless by the mid-1980s there was a move away from the idea that the strong State and its criminal justice institutions could stop crime to an emphasis on the need to involve the active citizen.
The iron hand of the Conservative administration's first 5 years gave way to sermons on personal responsibility.
This served two purposes.
Firstly, it allowed the Government a potential escape route from the escalating costs of its apparently futile tough tactics.
Secondly, it allowed them to make virtue out of a necessity by pushing law and order once more ideologically centre-stage as another area where the individual could do more than the State.
Crime prevention has becomes the responsibility of the private citizen.
This has taken either a commercial form, for example, the encouragement of better security for private housing, or a voluntary form, such as neighbourhood-watch schemes.
The basis of morality and law-abiding behaviour has become the family and it follows that parents must be made responsible for their children's  misdemeanours .
A major sub-theme is privatisation, seen in the plans to put electronic surveillance out to tender, and the running of certain penal institutions such as bail hostels by private firms.
After the Strangeways disturbances the problem of prison overcrowding became more immediate and the need to encourage more use of community-based punishments more urgent.
The tensions between toughness and value for money persisted, however, and against a background of large increases in the crime figures, David  Waddington faced, in October 1990, the annual ordeal for Home Secretaries of addressing the Conservative Party Conference.
He received a standing ovation for his comments on retribution from violent offenders, on his personal belief in the deterrent effect of capital punishment and for his promise that ‘life imprisonment in the worst cases will mean life’.
Changes in the parole system were promised so that serious offenders would serve a longer proportion of their time in jail.
He also announced in the same speech the Government's first considered response to Strangeways; they would introduce a new offence of prison mutiny with a maximum penalty of 10 years.
He commented on the riot:
It was a disgraceful affair and over the past few years there have been far too many riots in our prisons.
We have all had enough.
(The Times 11.10.90)
His speech was redolent with phrases designed to warm the hearts of the rank and file.
He pledged to ‘sweep the drunken louts off the streets’.
He announced that courts would be given powers to bind parents over for the good behaviour of their children so that they could be ‘brought face to face with their neglect’.
In line with the wide-spread Conservative emphasis on family virtues the central message of the speech was that the starting point of the fight against crime was the family.
The importance of punishment in the community was restated but in such a way that electronic tagging was seen as a tough option.
The Home Secretary was not about to be seen as going soft on the petty criminal.
No word was given, however, on how the Government's social policies had worsened the plight of the poorest families already suffering under the economic consequences of Conservative rule.
No discussion was initiated on how the climate of rampant economic individualism might have coloured the moral climate of society.
No considered view was offered on the underlying problems of prison conditions that had triggered the riots.
The speech underlined the fact that the self-proclaimed party of law and order, despite 11 years of holding the reins of power and massive investment in the criminal justice system had no long-term solutions to the problems.