

Chapter I
The Early Novels: A Prologue to Experiment
‘Flying reputations can be dangerous’(Brooke-Rose 1977a:132)
The direction the English novel was to take in the post-war era was the subject of much discussion in the late 1950s when Christine Brooke-Rose began her career as a novelist.
But while her novels of this period —The Languages of Love (1957),The Sycamore Tree ,(1958),The Dear Deceit ,(1960), and The Middlemen (1961)— are in many respects typical products of their generation, they raise a number of issues which it was not possible to articulate within the parameters of the contemporary debate.
The novels enjoyed a limited success, but because most novelists were concerned at the time to redefine the relation of the individual to society in terms of changing values, it was all too easy for readers to focus on the social dimension of Brooke-Rose's fiction and to overlook those aspects which can in retrospect be seen to prefigure the problems and techniques of her later work.
This was possible mainly because the capacity for viewing personal identity in terms of language and ‘languages’, which was to become the hallmark of her work from the 1960s onward, is integrated in the early novels into a realist narrative mode.
Thus despite the fact that they exhibit an increasing frustration with the novelistic discourse of the period, her first four novels did not succeed in significantly altering fictional convention.
They are, for the most part, light entertainments enlivened by mysterious foreigners, odd situations and an abundance of documentary detail deftly manipulated to appear at once familiar and slightly absurd or ominous.
The familiarity of their London setting accounted, perhaps, both for their easy assimilation into the literary world and for their contemporary readers' lack of genuine interest in the more esoteric themes they raise.
Reviewers eagerly praised the mild satire of their own territory, delighting in the wit with which Brooke-Rose vividly portrayed its types.
Like a novel about the television industry described in The Middlemen , her early works fall easily into the category of ‘professional joke novels, the lid off the law’(110).
But her characters are just a bit too typical in their social habits, their tastes and their personal dilemmas.
Indeed, when Bernard Bergonzi complains of the uniformity of the novels he is obliged as a reviewer to read, he gives as a sample situation a scenario that could well be based on The Languages of Love : ‘a very sensitive, rather neurotic girl, living in an Earls Court bedsitter and having sexual difficulties’(1979:24).
One of Brooke-Rose's reviewers pin-points the problem: ‘I have the feeling that young married intellectual Chelsea…has been rather overworked, simply because so many of its inhabitants write novels’(Quigly 1958:86).
Despite exotic characters and racy plots, the basic social context of Brooke-Rose's early work was too familiar for it to be deemed truly original.
Yet this is not to say that her contemporaries completely misread her first four novels, nor that they misjudged their merits.
With hindsight it is easy to see in an author's uneven early work the later masterpieces struggling to get out, and it is especially tempting to do this with an author such as Christine Brooke-Rose whose fiction underwent such a dramatic change between 1961 and 1964.
But it would be an oversimplification to argue that her chosen ‘content’ simply did not find an adequate ‘form’until the mid-1960s.
A more likely explanation is that Brooke-Rose was flattered by her own wit and allowed it to determine her style of narration.
In 1977 she published an autobiographical sketch entitled ‘Self-Confrontation and the Writer’ in which she posits her authorial identity as a separate person whom she calls ‘John’.
She criticizes John for having accepted too readily the standards of the day and for having adapted too easily to the social and literary context in which he found himself:
The rat race.
The mousetrap in the House of Fame or Fiction.
John is eager to please.
John is also easy to please.
John is built by the House.
Flying reputations can be dangerous.
…John and I, flattered at first by the sweet smell of success, had to get out of it, into another language, forgotten in the House of Fame but happy ever after in the House of Fiction.
(1977a:132)
‘Flying planes can be dangerous’ is the type-sentence of semantic ambiguity because it can yield both a passive and an active interpretation, and here a variation is used to demonstrate the danger of paying too much attention to public opinion.
The writer may seem to be actively creating, whereas in fact he or she is being passively fashioned by the public's desires, ‘built by the House’ of fame.
There is no ambiguity, however, about the distinction between the ‘House of Fame’ and the ‘House of Fiction’.
Brooke-Rose's division of fiction into two classes reflects a tendency prevalent among those writing about the 1950s to group its novelists into two categories.
Stephen Spender divides writers into ‘contemporaries’ and ‘moderns’(1962:555); Malcolm Bradbury distinguishes between the main current of fiction and peripheral but nevertheless important work by people like Samuel Beckett, Malcolm Lowry, William Golding, and Lawrence Durrell (1973); and Iris Murdoch draws a distinction between the ‘journalistic’and the ‘crystalline’which delineates similar categories.
(1961:27).
Each such polarization invariably reflects the values of the writers who impose it, but there is a wide consensus among critics who have written about the literature of the period that the majority of it is unambitious, anti-experimental and somewhat lacking in originality.
Even those such as David Lodge and Malcolm Bradbury who argue against this blanket judgment do not attempt to depict the decade as one of great creative achievement.
They readjust the picture to admit a counter-current of more radical authors or point to the less dramatic use of ‘experimental’ and ‘modernist’techniques in the novels of mainstream fiction (Bradbury 1973:177–7, 1977:18–20, 1987:106–11; Lodge 1971:9–34).
Certainly the fifties was remarkable for the self-assuredness with which writers defended what they saw as a fresh start for English literature, and for the equally unanimous revision this view underwent not ten years later.
There was a strong sense at the time that the novel needed an agenda.
The label ‘Angry Young Men’, a term originally used to describe John Osborne's Look Back in Anger , was extended to the first novels of Kingsley Amis, John Wain, and Colin Wilson.
Soon it came to include John Braine, David Storey, Alan Sillitoe, William Cooper, Stan Barstow, and even, for some, Iris Murdoch.
The experience of these writers was seen as emblematic of the increased social mobility that characterized post-war Britain.
Their fiction was considered significant because it succeeded in expressing this new experience.
While it was generally recognized that the new novelists drew a great deal on their eighteenth and nineteenth century predecessors, this was regarded not as a fault but, on the contrary, all the more reason for admitting them as new bearers of the old standard (Hansford Johnson 1949:235–3, Wilson 1958:viii).
The sense of reaction against pre-war social institutions was strong.
In the absence of a moral or social common ground which writers could assume with their audience, the hero as existentialist outsider proved a useful way of taking a critical stand without explicitly defending any given system or ideology.
Angus Wilson's Hemlock and After (1952), John Wain's Hurry On Down (1953), Kingsley Amis's Lucky Jim (1954), Iris Murdoch's Under the Net (1954), John Braine's Room at the Top (1957), Alan Sillitoe's Saturday Night and Sunday Morning (1958), and David Storey's This Sporting Life (1960) are all first novels in which a lone male protagonist tries to find a means of accommodating himself to a society whose main institutions he views with suspicion.
The consequent soul-searching often includes as much self-mockery as it does social criticism, and for this reason it is not subversive.
On the one hand it is evident that the old order is collapsing of its own accord, so any attempt to subvert it would be pointless; and on the other, none of these authors portrays a main character secure enough in his own moral beliefs to propose them as a new global framework.
This meant that while criticism was encouraged — often in the form of parody or satire -, innovation was kept to a minimum.
The strength of the critical consensus that reigned in the mid-fifties was undoubtedly one of the reasons why Brooke-Rose's first novels took the form they did.
The pressure to please must have been especially strong for women writers who, if they wrote novels of ideas, were in danger of either being rejected as over-cerebral or having the intellectual content of their work ignored.
Women writers are less likely to identify with the existential plight of the lone male, but even so, a willingness to conform to the narrative conventions of realism is evident in the fiction of a number of writers who are now viewed as innovative.
Doris Lessing, for example, began publishing in the 1950s, but did not question the appropriateness of the realist mode to her conceptual concerns until the 1960s.
Other women writers were read in such a way as to assimilate them to reigning categories.
Ivy Compton-Burnett, whose elegantly minimal and stylized dialogue has similarities with the narrative technique of Nathalie Sarraute, was appreciated in the 1950s primarily for her wit in portraying the viciousness of social interaction rather than for the techniques she employed.
Both these phenomena come into play in Brooke-Rose's case.
It is indicative of the pressure to conform to gender-coded standards that The Dear Deceit , the most serious and most personal of her first four novels, has as its protagonist a lone male suffering from an identity crisis over his patronym.
In the other three novels frothy dialogue and sparkling wit tend to overshadow the deeper philosophical issues at stake.
John Hall describes the early novels as:
competent enough vignettes of the witty, intelligent circles in which one might expect to discover Miss Iris Murdoch, and their end result was not far removed from the sum of of [sic ]the parts of Miss Murdoch's own elegant conundrums.
One could not help feeling that the authoress was an awfully clever gel, insofar as she could manipulate quite adequately the basic framework of the nineteenth-century novel of manners.
(1976:183)
Iris Murdoch's fiction represents perhaps what Christine Brooke-Rose was aiming at, not in philosophical or even aesthetic terms, but as narratives which combine readability and lively story-telling with intellectual themes.
Brooke-Rose used her facility for light, clever story-telling as a sort of sugar-coating with which to induce readers to swallow her less palatable conceptual material, but in most cases the pill was never digested because readers were accustomed to ‘serious’ novels being concerned with morality.
Unlike many of the writers of the period, Brooke-Rose is not overly preoccupied by morality in her early fiction.
For a period in the 1950s she flirted with Roman Catholicism, and whether her Catholic point of view made her see moral issues exclusively within a religious framework, or whether she simply did not share the same experience as English-born-and-raised writers who faced the dissolution of their class system is difficult to judge.
Nevertheless, this is a point on which her novels defy easy assimilation to those of Iris Murdoch or Angus Wilson, with whom she has also been compared.
The lightness and wit of Brooke-Rose's novels do, however, invite comparison with those of Muriel Spark.
Like Brooke-Rose, Spark began writing fiction as a form of therapy after a period of psychological strain (Stanford 1963:62).
Both writers are primarily interested in the ontological and epistemological questions raised by the Catholic view of God, and both found in nervous tension a justification for modest technical experimentation as well as a tool for exploring aspects of reality which would otherwise have been difficult to treat outside the context of philosophical discourse.
Brooke-Rose's first four novels also share with Spark's work an effort to integrate intellectual pursuits with questions of self-definition.
Integration proves problematic in Brooke-Rose's novels; there is a growing sense of the impossibility of conveying ideas through a unified realist character without seriously jeopardizing his or her psychological autonomy and integrity.
This is indicative of a more general dissatisfaction with the conventions of the realist novel which takes character as its focal point, and Brooke-Rose's disenchantment with realism began to be apparent in other ways as well.
The Dear Deceit represents a questioning of the causal logic of narrative and the literary heritage which provided both her and her readers with a whole set of ready-made narrative assumptions.
The Middlemen , for its part, denounces the incestuous and parasitical world of literary journalism in terms that far exceed gentle mockery.
The project of integration with which Brooke-Rose began provided sufficient material for ‘four average, competent novels’(Brooke-Rose 1977a:134), but it also led to a frustration with available formal strategies which prepared the way for the radical change in direction her oeuvre was to take with Out in 1964.
The following discussion will trace the development of this dissatisfaction.
The early novels will be analysed in relation both to Brooke-Rose's conceptual concerns during this period and to the fictional conventions through which she chose to figure them.
1.1 The Languages of Love: The Word Made Fresh.
The Languages of Love seeks in Catholicism a solution to the problem of linguistic, psychological, and intellectual dividedness.
The goal on each of these three planes is unity, and, appropriately, the novel takes as its framework the multi-layered but harmonious structure of medieval allegory.
The manipulation and decontextualization of language is presented as a temptation to be overcome but a necessary step on the way to achieving mastery of the ‘languages’ of intellect and spirit.
Thus, despite its ultimate rejection of the playful linguistic transgressions so characteristic of Brooke-Rose's later fiction, her first novel inaugurates the underlying discursive vision of her entire oeuvre : intellect and psyche are understood in terms of the various conceptual ‘languages’ that pertain to them, and personal identity is established as a product of their interaction.
The conflict between actively fashioning language and allowing oneself to be constructed by conventional systems is provisionally resolved by valorizing submissiveness as Christian humility, but present are the basic elements of a dilemma which is to remain with Brooke-Rose for several decades.
The novel is a tale of apprenticeship about a young woman called Julia who, like her creator, has just completed a Ph.D.
in medieval studies and is living in London.
Julia is trying to discover who she is and what she is cut out to do.
She faces two choices, one personal and the other professional.
On the personal front she has to choose between her one-time fiancé Paul whom she loves but cannot marry because he is Catholic and she is divorced, and Bernard, a fellow philologist who attracts her physically but is selfish, emotionally dishonest, and married.
Julia also has to decide between a scholarly career as a university lecturer and that of a ‘lady novelist’.
In both cases the choice is between the serious but dull (when seeing Paul she had been completing her thesis on religious poetry) and the creative but frivolous (she collaborates with Bernard on a book about adultery in medieval literature).
In the end she opts for the serious, renounces carnal love, and decides to become a Catholic.
Ironically, by writing the novel Christine Brooke-Rose pursued the opposite route and made her début as a ‘lady novelist’.
Yet neither her choice nor Julia's is as one-sided as it seems.
Brooke-Rose resumed her scholarly work when she finished the novel, and Julia realizes in the end that while the ‘frivolous’ path precludes the ‘serious’, the latter can provide a means of channelling her creative energies.
Likewise, her divinely inspired love can be extended to both Paul and Bernard.
What is initially posed as a choice between two mutually exclusive alternatives becomes that between the exclusion of serious values and the inclusion of the best of both worlds.
This development is framed in the context of discursive initiation: Julia's education in natural languages is paralleled and supplemented by an éducation sentimentale in ‘languages’ of a higher order.
The novel closes with a recognition of linguistic competence: ‘Julia had learnt the languages of love’(239), and it is significant that these ‘languages’ are plural.
In the penultimate scene Julia and Paul decide that the summer during which the action of the novel has taken place has been like ‘an allegorical dream-vision’(212).
As in medieval allegory, multiple layers of meaning correspond to the novel's multiple languages.
The novel charts an apprenticeship in ‘languages’ on each of three levels: philological, romantic, and religious.
On each level alternatives are transformed into compatible aspects of an all-inclusive Christian discourse which absorbs differences into a higher unity.
When it first appeared,The Languages of Love was generally read as a satire of London literary and academic circles, but it was criticized by reviewers for not being satiric enough (Cranston 1957:90, Allen 1957:470).
Others attacked it for not being sufficiently realistic (TLS 1957:629, Fuller 1957:62), and one concluded that ‘Miss Brooke-Rose was in two minds about the novel she intended to write’(Allen 1957:469).
As the medieval allegory is not among the categories into which reviewers are accustomed to fitting witty first novels by women, it is not surprising that the multi-level approach should have been attributed to indecisiveness on the part of its author.
At the start of the novel Julia sees philology as a lifeless and uncreative pursuit.
When she complains of the drudgery of studying sound changes, Bernard hints that she does not really have what it takes to be a scholar.
Her main problem in both academic and social contexts is that she is not sure enough of herself to be able to assert her point of view in an idiom which is both personal and appropriate.
Her position with regard to the discourse of Catholicism is likewise that of an outsider.
When she argues with the canon law, Paul explains that ‘Religion isn't something one needs….
Nor is love.
They simply are ’, but he gives up trying to make her understand because they don't ‘talk the same language’(43).
Both philology and Catholicism are here presented as ‘languages’ which Julia is unable to master because she wants to question them and change them rather than accept their inherent systematicity.
To overcome her insecurity she resorts to escapist fantasy and linguistically transgressive wit.
In her viva her examiner asks her if she does not think that ‘dipthongisation in fourteenth century Kentish may have been optional’, and her immediate reaction is that ‘The question made no sense at all’.
In fact her resistance to the ‘sense’ of the question is due to the fact that she understands it first in the context of legal discourse: ‘She had a brief glimpse of a mediaeval bureaucrat…issuing a proclamation: ‘From 23.59 on the 16th April 1340, dipthongisation will be optional in the County of Kent’' (5).
This opening sequence establishes a paradigm of fictionalization that operates throughout Brooke-Rose's work: a fictional situation is generated out of a semantic slip caused by switching from one discourse to another on the strength of a word or a phrase.
In her later novels Brooke-Rose uses techniques such as these to integrate different discourses, but in The Languages of Love linguistic transgression signals a lack of honesty and integrity.
Julia uses wit as a means of deflecting the topic of conversation away from serious issues by shifting the referent of a scholarly discussion to the more immediate social situation:
‘Of course,’ he was saying, ‘there was no future in the Indo-European period.’
‘And yet,’ she replied, refusing to be serious, ‘here we are.
(31)
Punning is the occult logic of language best left aside by those concerned to grasp its evolution.
As Jonathan Culler points out, the pun is to the synchronic dimension of language what etymology is to the diachronic dimension (1988:2), and Julia plays on this parallel by confusing the two.
She quips to Bernard: ‘I find the change of meaning much more interesting….
It has changed and not changed: hatred is after all most annoying and cognisance is a very quaint affair’(14).
Bernard is fond of punning as well, but whereas Julia uses her verbal skill to compensate for her discursive incompetence in philology, Bernard uses his in order to evade emotional seriousness.
Because his refusal to be sincere about his feelings toward her leads her further away from her own values, she begins to resent the way in which he constantly gives her the linguistic slip: ‘Concepts which still meant much to her, by which she had once lived, were swerved aside with a smart epigram, a pun, a quotation, a dirty story’(170).
Bernard's emotional dishonesty is seen in terms of his ability to split language, which is a product of his psychological duplicity:
[Julia:]‘You can skit over anything, can't you?’
His eyes flickered as he looked at her, and she knew he was searching his mind for a joke.
‘Don't worry, I skit ever so phrenic.’
She winced.…
his own humour was mere flippancy, emphasising the very division within himself which he condemned in others.
(146–7)
Puns and similar manoeuvres trivialize the serious and instil in Julia a sense of linguistic mauvaise foi .
She watches her values slowly being eroded, and she describes the process of moral degradation in terms of language: ‘You find yourself giving in on little things, twisting words and meanings, always trying to be one-up on whoever you're with, and then suddenly you give in on something else, much bigger’(131–2).
In religious terms punning is indicative of sin: the covert substitution of one meaning for another by a linguistic sleight of hand is practised by Milton's Adam and Eve after the Fall, indicating that they have sundered the prelapsarian unity of divine order.
But even in her fallen state, Julia recognizes that there is another, morally superior form of linguistic play which combines creative vitality with genuine understanding: ‘The true humour of life, Julia thought, should illuminate, not shut out, its essential melancholy, its macabre elements, and its fleeting moments of unbelievable elation’(147).
She experiences this unbelievable elation for the first time during a discussion of phonetic laws with Professor Jarvis-Andersen.
Julia admits that she resents linguistic laws just as she resents the canon law of the Church: ‘I'm interested in language as a process, not a thing or an essence.
Phonetic laws are useful, I know, but they aren't fixed laws, like the laws of nature’(66).
The professor replies that in reality language ‘is in a constant state of flux, there are no real boundaries or unified communities, and mingling continues through supra-political or social bonds’(67).
This view of language brings philology to life for Julia; she suddenly sees its object as the product of individual creativity.
The spontaneity of metaphoric innovation in the speech of the professor's children leads her to the revelation that words once thought of as ‘the bare bones of language’ are actually alive with flesh.
She rises to a metaphoric euphoria and discovers her vocation:
Even phonology seemed worth while now, whispering the sounds of time into the very material that poets used, the vowels jealously mutating, angrily fracturing as consonant groups shifted to their conditioned cues in wild adenoidal ecstasies.
The flesh and bones of words rose again to the salvation of their etymologies.
And the job he was telling her about seemed interesting and desirable.
(69)
This experience prefigures Julia's recognition at the end of the novel that the laws of the Church are also a way of describing spiritual harmony.
The path to salvation is eventually shown her by the unwitting Messiah figure Hussein, an East African poet who speaks in metaphors and proverbs.
He has been forced to leave England and to abandon Georgina, the woman he loves.
Hussein tells Julia, ‘I have waited for my boat five weeks.
And every day of those five weeks has been a knife slowly twisting in a wound.
It is not better now’(205).
His honest suffering reveals to her the nobility of selfless love and the truth of language which is metaphoric yet direct.
Shortly after this episode Julia decides to become a Catholic.
She makes peace with Paul, accepts a job as a lecturer in philology and finally succeeds in establishing genuine communication with Bernard.
She realizes that she is as yet too selfish to be truly creative and puts off her artistic endeavours for the time being so that she can first learn the more humble task of interpretation.
She recognizes the fact that she loves both Paul and Bernard, but transposes this love onto the plane of the sacred and finds herself released from sexual desire.
The pun as a rhetorical motif of both dialogue and narrative gives way to utterances with multiple layers of meaning: I'm sorry, I'm very sorry.’
She sat up and repeated it, hypnotised by the double meaning' (221); Bless you, Georgina,’ said Julia, with at least three different levels of meaning in her tone' (232).
Harmony reigns over disparity in this new world vision, and a multi-faceted language has been found in which to express it.
In many ways the plot of The Languages of Love is similar to that of Iris Murdoch's The Bell (1958).
In both novels the heroine undertakes a search for her identity that requires her to navigate between the attractions of two men who represent two different attitudes to life.
In the end the woman chooses to renounce both men and sets out on her own path.
But in terms of technique,The Languages of Love resembles Murdoch's first novel,Under the Net (1954), in which learned discourses are interpolated by means of dialogue.
Brooke-Rose's attempt to integrate the creative and the scholarly seems, as one reviewer remarks, ‘a shade voulu ’(Wyndham 1957:491), a problem which haunts Murdoch's work as well.
The questions raised by conceptual material are discussed by the main characters and illustrated in their actions, but in neither case do they affect the plot structure itself which marks a return to formal strategies of the past:Under the Net to the picaresque tradition, and The Languages of Love to the paradigmatic plot of fall and salvation in which rhetorical devices remain subservient to the basic three-tiered design of Christian allegory.
In Brooke-Rose's later work this relationship is reversed as linguistic felicities are allowed to pierce through the layers of the harmonious hierarchical structure of narrative ontology; rather than replacing pun with metaphor, Brooke-Rose transforms the one into the other.
In ‘Self-Confrontation and the Writer’ she describes her life as a series of ‘splits’, and the allegorical mapping of language to identity hinted at in The Languages of Love is elaborated:
John is a whole language.
He has as many selves as he has utterances, virtual or realized, as many selves as there are words in his lexicon, even in the dictionary of his potential language, with each word its aetimology, its phoneyetic fragility and its semiantic sea changes, each word its infinite contiguities and its tall spokes of paradismatic possibilities.
(1977a:129)
The creative vitality that Julia seeks in the ‘dry bones of language’ is here achieved through textual manipulation of the type she rejects as indicative of a fallen state.
Its salvation twenty years later attests to the dramatic shift in Brooke-Rose's values, her style, and her approach to narrative problems, but her propensity to see personal identity and social interaction in terms of language is nevertheless firmly established in her first novel.
1.2 The Sycamore Tree: Reality and the Character of Realism.
What The Languages of Love phrases in terms of language,The Sycamore Tree (1958) figures in ontological terms.
The problem of split identity is exacerbated, and again the goal of the main characters is to find a way of healing the divisions between intellect and psyche.
Catholicism is presented as a potential remedy, but the philosophy of indeterminacy appears for the first time in this novel as a rival discourse.
Though Catholicism is championed in the end, it is no longer portrayed as having the power to protect one from the extremes of madness and sin.
Doubt as to the efficacy of religion as a solution to fragmentation is implicit in the novel's ambiguous ending.
This is paralleled on the technical plane by a sabotage of the verisimilitude on which realism is predicated.
The novel launches a covert attack against the ontology of the fictional character which becomes less the representation of an individual in search of his or her ‘true’ personality than an agent for conveying impulses or ideas beyond conscious control.
The hero, Gael Jackson, is a novelist and philosophy don at Oxford who specializes in theories of perception.
He lives in Chelsea with his wife Nina, a fashion columnist and devout mother of three.
The story opens with Gael facing a libel suit for his latest novel in which he has unwittingly described the literary hack Howard Cutting.
The basic situation of The Sycamore Tree is the same as that of The Languages of Love .
Nina adores her saintly husband but lusts after the sordid Howard.
In both novels the solution to the problem the heroine faces is harmony through love, yet the outcome is considerably less satisfying in The Sycamore Tree because it entails renunciation of life itself.
While Nina has the same protean tendencies as Julia, they are exaggerated to the point where they become dangerous.
Like Julia, Nina is eager to please and dissipates her personality in those around her.
When she does finally succumb to Howard's advances, her identity crumbles into its component parts.
She is vulgar and crude with Howard, soft and kittenish with Gael, ‘She had, in fact, become two persons’(153).
Unable to suppress his anger any longer, Gael lectures her on adultery's ‘disintegrating splitting effect on the inner personality’(219).
Nina eventually has a nervous breakdown, but after a brief stay in hospital she returns to Gael.
Marital harmony is provisionally achieved when Nina resolves to behave, and Gael forgives her.
The novel is brought to its dramatic conclusion by the playing out of yet another case of split identity.
Howard's wife is having an affair with an exiled Hungarian student called Zoltan Torday who is writing a book on the adamantly nationalist Hungarian poet Arpad Szendrey.
Zoltan meets Gael by ‘coincidence’, recognizes in him a fellow soul, and seeks Gael out when his problems become too much for him.
He reveals that in fact he is Szendrey, but that he has had to change his name in order to escape persecution by the Communists.
He had given up writing poetry and had been living the duplicitous life of a critic deciphering his own works, but when he fell in love with Howard's wife Elizabeth his former self was reawakened and he ceased to believe in his own existence.
Gael sympathizes, for he experiences similar losses of personality, yet he can do little to protect Zoltan.
A number of unlikely events orchestrated through telepathy lead to the dénouement in which Zoltan shoots and fatally wounds Nina, then kills himself as well.
Before Nina dies she and Gael again make peace, she repents her sins, and Gael vows to rewrite his novel.
The critical consensus about The Sycamore Tree was that it is good when it is light and witty but that it ‘sinks under a mass of elaboration’(Allen 1958:500), and that Brooke-Rose's effort to add depth to her characters succeeded only in getting them ‘thoroughly bogged down’(TLS 1958:557).
Brooke-Rose was generally thought to have overdone the serious aspect of her tale to the detriment of its comic potential.
The discontent voiced by reviewers appears to focus on the implausibility of the novel's plot and on the incongruity of the unsettling elements in it.
This tension may have caused its failure in the eyes of contemporary readers, but it is also the sign of a change which was taking place in Brooke-Rose's attitude toward fiction.
Like the novel we read, Gael's novel of the same name is a ‘philosophic fantasy’(9), but it appears to be even less realistic than its real-life double; it is described as a disquisition on the nature of reality with characters that flit in and out of existence.
The sycamore tree of the title is a reference to a version of the famous limerick by Ronald Knox which encapsulates George Berkeley's immaterialism.
Gael, who is not religious, holds only with the first half of the double limerick according to which existence depends on being the object of another's perception.
For him the tree is therefore a symbol of ontological indeterminacy.
Gael's highly ‘unrealistic’ belief accords with his tenuous grasp on the reality of his own existence.
But as both Howard and Nina inform us, the Latin name for the tree is acer pseudo-platanus , meaning ‘pseudo plane tree’.
On her death-bed the Catholic Nina contrasts its illegitimacy with the ‘real’ sycamore in the Bible.
For Nina this is symbolic of the ‘pseudo’ or illusory nature of life on earth, as compared to the reality of the sacred realm beyond.
The intermittent, flickering reality that obsesses Gael is, from the Catholic perspective, itself but a delusion.
Gael is the ‘good’ character, and Nina the weak, struggling, sinning one.
Yet, as in Graham Greene's Brighton Rock , the fallen Catholic is in the end somehow right, and the virtuous atheist less so, for if Gael's concept of the soul represents a higher spiritual plane and poetic vision, it also is coupled with neurosis, prescience, and telepathic powers which verge on the absurd.
The ability to communicate extra-sensorily can be seen as a sort of literary emblem of that which is fundamentally beyond expression.
Gael develops this line of thought; he believes that ‘the perceiving self — that basic identity which philosophers have defined as a mere sequence of impressions accumulated by memory — is in fact the human soul, not the mind’(212).
Yet when this principle is realized in the literal terms of premonitions and mental telepathy, he baulks and feels that he must be going mad.
The graphic illustration of these concepts reveals that in fact they entail a spiritual agency which he refuses to accept, and this is the inner contradiction in his professed theory of reality.
Gael believes in a Christian ontology but rejects its necessary corollary, God.
Though his theories of perception ‘made him slip so easily into a feeling that nothing around him existed, or alternatively that he did not exist in anything around him’(66), he dismisses his own supernatural powers as coincidence until they become too overwhelming to be ignored.
In a sense his experience supports his theory, but also mocks it, for the ability to perceive what is happening in London when you are in Oxford is not true spiritual knowledge.
It is a parodic version of perception through the soul, a form of pseudo-knowledge.
True knowledge and true understanding, it is implied, can only come from a divine source.
As in Muriel Spark's The Comforters (1957), telepathic experiences are employed in The Sycamore Tree to figure a divine presence with a sense of humour, and like Spark, Brooke-Rose breaches the conventions of realism in order to demonstrate a Christian doctrine.
Gael has rejected God as a guarantor of reality, but he is being used, despite himself, as an oracular figure through whom the knowledge of other characters may be conveyed.
The use of characters as oracles for beliefs they do not themselves espouse in effect divides the character's identity from his or her narrative function.
Hussein in The Languages of Love is a Muslim, yet it is he who reveals to Julia the beauty of genuine love expressed in honest language which leads her to convert to Catholicism.
Gael is even more forcibly spoken through, and he himself does not regain his lapsed faith.
Similarly, the narrator's persistent burrowing into the unarticulated zones of her characters' stores of knowledge about themselves indicates a certain disregard for their psychological integrity, a hollowing out of their ‘roundness’.
They begin to become mouthpieces for an outside force, be it divine will, the necessities of plot, or authorial comment.
In this sense they are revealed to have only intermittent existence.
As Nina remarks, this is a condition which afflicts Gael's novel as well, and since it has the same title as the novel we read, comparison is inevitable.
Brooke-Rose's novel implicitly presents itself as a ‘pseudo’ or partial version of the ‘reality’beyond.
But the mapping of this fictional-real opposition onto the worldly-divine dichotomy raises a number of questions as to the status and role of fictional constructs, given that we have access here and now to this world alone.
Only in later novels does Brooke-Rose draw out the implications of this parallel (i.e. the ‘fictionality’ or ‘constructedness’of lived experience), but by pushing the possibility of psychological and ontological wholeness into ever more distant territory in The Sycamore Tree , she demonstrates a growing scepticism with regard to the possibility of achieving it.
In narrative terms this is reflected as a disregard for verisimilitude and the use of characters as discursive instances through which a number of different discourses can be made to pass rather than as representations of discrete individuals.
It is symptomatic of this subtle shift that at the end of The Sycamore Tree the Catholic dies, whereas the novelist lives to rewrite his text.
The simulacrum within a simulacrum is what survives, though its status as a ‘pseudo’ reality has been recognized.
The same could be said of Brooke-Rose's attitude toward fiction.
The pretence of representing lived reality begins its slow death at this point in her oeuvre .
From here on her novels become increasingly aware of their own status as constructs or models through which ‘reality’ is necessarily mediated.
1.3 The Dear Deceit: Truth and Narrative.
In The Dear Deceit (1960) the dichotomy between truth and fiction hinted at in The Sycamore Tree is brought to the fore, and the possibility of reaching a pre-discursive reality is relinquished once and for all.
An increased consciousness of conceptual systems as necessary fictions accompanies a growing awareness of the conventions of narrative.
By subverting the causal, linear logic of the traditional story, the novel emphasizes the fictionality inherent in any attempt to present the individual as a coherent whole.
In many respects The Dear Deceit is a summing up of Brooke-Rose's first two novels.
It combines the transgression of narrative convention that begins to be manifest in The Sycamore Tree with a variation on the technique of recontextualization through linguistic slips employed in The Languages of Love .
The main question the novel poses is how we know, remember or invent the past.
Philip Hayley, the main character of the novel, undertakes an excavation of the life of his charlatan father, around whose numerous exploits that the plot revolves.
Alfred Northbrook Hayley was a self-dramatizing, duplicitous thief who spent his life trying to convince people of his importance by adopting a series of false identities.
When Philip tries to unravel truth from fiction, the task proves too much for him.
In the end he realizes that the only way truly to understand his father is to become him; he presents the evidence he has collected as a reconstruction of his father's actions, thought processes, and emotions.
But in order not to repeat his father's duplicity he uses self-consciousness and temporal manipulation to keep the artificiality of this procedure in view.
The tale the novel recounts is told backwards: after the first two chapters, each successive episode takes place further in the past.
Philip's project is both a search for the truth and an act of self-distortion, a ‘sane insanity, that wilful entering into some reality other than one's own, by way of learning, searching, inventing, dreaming and becoming’(40).
Philip claims that this is a domain as yet unexplored by psychoanalysis, and he suggests that possibly this is just as well: ‘Some call it truth, some creation, some fiction, history, memory or mere jingling of bells.
Perhaps all these are one, beyond analysis’(40).
This ‘sane insanity’ through which one enters into someone's personality — intentionally splitting oneself into both searching, inventing subject and the object of the search — is posed as the very condition of narration.
But narration is seen in The Dear Deceit as the original and persistent obstacle to ‘truth’ because the process of constructing a story inevitably leads to falsification.
Philip meditates on the narrative representation of action: ‘Strange how the reality of the past comes to our mind most immediately as fiction.
Some even say that all our knowledge of the past is fiction’(29).
This is both the ‘dear deceit’ which goes back centuries and the curse peculiar to modern-day society.
In an article published in 1959 on what she calls ‘signpost language’, Christine Brooke-Rose points out that the ‘language’ of film is composed of clichés which are the product of the technical exigencies of the medium.
She gives the following example:
A man is lying on his bed, smoking.
Or he can't sleep and lights up nervously.
On the bedside table is an ashtray with several cigarettes stubbed out almost unsmoked.
After a few quick puffs the man turns and stubs out this cigarette too, three-quarters wasted.
Then he gets up and paces the room.
(1959a:45)
Her comment is that this scene demonstrates the underlying dishonesty of the cliché:
…the cliché is not necessarily just something banal, in the sense that it occurs frequently, though it is that too: a cliché is a convenient falsification.
…The whole scene is in fact a kind of shorthand, since the film cannot take ten real minutes to show someone smoking a cigarette to the last, which is the more natural behaviour of a worried man trying to think out a problem.
…But of course realism can't be that realistic.
The wasteful smoker is part of film terminology, it says ‘he is worried — action will follow’.
(45)
The danger is that the convenient falsification will begin to manipulate reality:
If something completely or partly false, however innocuous, can be shown as real for so many years, then anything false can be shown as real, and be believed….
I wouldn't be surprised to learn that many people do now smoke only a quarter of their cigarettes on the bed when worried, simply because they have seen it so often in films.
(46)
Brooke-Rose complains that this type of facile cliché has invaded the novel as well, and that though ‘younger writers are fed up , and want to ‘go straight’ ' this is no longer possible because ‘the currency has been devalued’(48).
Through novels, films, and the press ‘signpost language’ exerts a determining effect on our minds.
It provides paradigms of action and role models through which we interpret ‘real life’.
The Dear Deceit explores the consequences of our immersion in this type of fictional convention.
Philip becomes aware of the process through which we invent our own identities based on the fictional paradigms at our disposal.
Our application of these ready-made stories and stereotypes to our lives may not be particularly apt, but the web of intertextual concepts which forms the substrata of our experience nevertheless plays an inescapable role in our lives.
Though he professes scorn for the outmoded quaintness of things Victorian, Philip's conception of life is modelled largely on the Victorian novel and its Edwardian successors.
He says that when he first learned that his father had been in prison he expected the crime to be something on a grand scale, something melodramatic, like murder, something novelistic, like ruining in bankruptcy thousands of trusting small investors, as the Town & County Bank had done in Cranford , or Mr. Frothingham in The Whirlpool or Ponderovo [sic ]in Tono -Bungay .
(29)
His narrative expectations are, of course, frustrated, but they demonstrate the source of the norms ingrained in his mind.
In all three of these novels the ‘crimes’ are those committed by basically good people who, through no real fault of their own (other than the speculative instinct that is the mainstay of the capitalist system), have been caught up in bank failures for which they valiantly accept responsibility.
Hayley's crimes are petty and dishonourable, a contrast which reveals the falsity of the narrative assumptions Philip makes.
Since Philip realizes that it will be impossible to do away with the artifice of narration if he wants to present the results of his search, he decides instead to make the artifice obvious.
In this way he forces the reader to go through the same process of retrospective illumination that he himself has undergone.
Despite reviewers' complaints to the contrary, the structure of the novel does not preclude suspense entirely; rather it shifts the object of suspense from the result to the cause.
We trace Alfred's life back in order to find the origin of his dishonesty, but along the way we come across many peculiar situations before we know what brought them about.
There is a curious phenomenon of hermeneutic delay: much of what we read consists either of illumination of the enigmas of a preceding chapter, or new enigmas.
The consequence of this is that we are constantly hypothesizing about the possible significance of each event, and often discovering that we are wrong.
The novel's early readers were understandably annoyed at having their narrative expectations constantly thwarted.
They attacked the regressive structure as ‘disconcerting and tiring’(TLS 1960:673), and called it a misuse of the author's talents (Hartley 1961:74).
But in fact Brooke-Rose was learning to re-use her talents to new ends, one of which was precisely the readerly frustration that reviewers complained of.
As readers, we too imagine causes and motivations which are based on analogies we draw with other novels and other narratives.
It is continually suggested to us, however, that ‘reality’ is not in fact like novels we have read, that it is mundane and pitiful.
We are kept reading by the promise of an original sin or trauma that will justify — either in psychological or moral terms — the very existence of the story, but stripped of the successive identities he has built up over the years, Philip's father is revealed as no more than an insecure, over-imaginative little boy.
We then realize that there is no dramatic originary event or ‘cause’ which would lend significance to all that has preceded it.
Our desire to discover one is in the end all that is revealed.
Though our passive acceptance of causal logic and narrative clichés is the novel's main target, it also plays with the related theme of linguistic laziness.
Philip implicitly dismisses the value of his own reflections on the ugliness of modern London with off-hand self-ironizing comments which imply that he too is a product of the intellectual dissipation he criticizes: ‘Life, I said with startling originality as I stepped out of the bus in my mackintosh, is like that’(307).
Philip is ironic also about his tendency to think in terms of‘higher’ literature, and he discredits the validity of a quotation from Eliot, when it comes into his mind, simply on the grounds that he has been too corrupted by contemporary culture for anything that occurs to him spontaneously to have lasting value:
There was some later affidavit of my mother's, which gave her date of birth, Geneva 1893, the date of her marriage in 1919, the date of his death in 1934.
At once I waved away the unjustly famous quotation which sprang with great obviousness to my mind.
When lines of poetry spring spontaneously to the mind of a lawyer, I thought, they have surely ceased to be true.
Life holds more than birth, copulation and death.
(31)
It is doubly ironic that Philip's sense of intellectual and spiritual degradation is in fact very like Eliot's, and his life risks being as impoverished and as meaningless as Sweeney's minimalist ‘brass tacks’ scenario.
Allusions to other texts frequently undergo this same process of depreciation.
From the title onward, quotations are abundant in the novel, yet they are often either inappropriate or irrelevant.
A superficial similarity, such as the occurrence of an individual word, will trigger a literary reference which has no bearing on the situation at hand.
Alfred's lawyer twists allusions in this way:
It was indeed a sad thing that in these days when the Church had enough enemies outside it should divide itself into hostile forces, because, he added aptly, forgetting the original subject of the quotation, a house divided against itself could not stand.
(260)
An exchange between two monks includes a similarly ironic misquotation:
‘He ain't got no more vocation in him than a blind sparrow, that's what.’
‘Fear not therefore: better are ye than many sparrows,’ Brother Cuthbert quoted pointlessly. (245)
People's propensity to misjudge the context of a reference is an indication of their willingness to assimilate the situations they encounter to paradigms of thought and action with which they are familiar, however misleading or falsifying this process of assimilation might be.
Like the ‘language’ of narrative, the ‘language’of literature serves as a source of stereotypes and models which provide ready-made explanations and prevent people from analysing the specificity of the world around them.
In the 1960s and 1970s Brooke-Rose rediscovered the recycling of our cultural heritage condemned in The Dear Deceit as a form of parodic interrogation.
Like the pun in The Languages of Love and the concept of a variable reality in The Sycamore Tree , a discursive practice that is devalued and stigmatized in this novel is later used as a tool for exploring the practices and attitudes it represents.
What is in the early novels seen as a lower-order truth or a fallen state is saved, or at least salvaged, as the very possibility of any higher order truth becomes increasingly remote.
Though the technique employed in The Dear Deceit represents a laying-bare of traditional narrative devices without offering an alternative approach, it sets the stage for the more radical break with the conventions of realism which Brooke-Rose's fiction demonstrated four years later.
1.4 The Middlemen: Splits with(in) Convention.
The Languages of Love ,The Sycamore Tree , and The Dear Deceit all portray characters who are defined by their roles as interpreters or carriers of information.
In each case the fact of being spoken through entails a splitting of identity and a threat to psychological stability.
In The Middlemen (1961) this mediatory role is magnified so as to become the primary focus of the novel.
The individual psyche is irrevocably shattered by being exteriorized in two separate people: the cool, cerebral psychoanalyst Serena, and her passionate, turbulent twin sister Stella.
The schema is evident also on a formal level in the breakdown of traditional narrative techniques.
Brooke-Rose's evident exasperation with her chosen genre is manifest in the exaggeration of convention to the point of parody.
This discursive attack is paralleled by a scathing social critique.
Subtitled ‘A Satire’, the novel is a bitter, pessimistic work in which the ominous subcurrents of Brooke-Rose's earlier novels are seen in their most threatening light, and the gradual disintegration to which she had subjected the traditional realist novel in her three previous works is brought to an explosive climax.
The Middlemen focuses on Serena and the ‘sprawling ant-heap of middlemen’(5) that swarms around her.
Like Evelyn Waugh's pre-war novels, it collects a large cast of lightly-drawn characters, many of whom have appeared in Brooke-Rose's earlier fiction.
The novel opens with the combustion of seven housewives who have fallen victim to the latent flammability of the most recent invention of United Volcanic Industries (manufacturers of synthetic fabrics from volcanic ash).
The efforts of Rusty Conway, Chief Public Relations Officer at U.V.I., to minimize the publicity caused by this event get him entangled in the competing empires of television and the press.
A loosely constructed plot evolves fitfully around the activities of Rusty, Serena, her husband Rupert, and Stella.
Serena is torn between her sisterly love and her annoyance with Stella's aggressive insecurity.
The two have an argument and vow never to speak to each other again, whereupon Serena leaves for a holiday with Rupert on a volcanic island in the Aegean to which Rusty and his wife have recently been transferred.
While visiting the local volcano, Serena is profoundly upset by the sight of hardened lava fields around a bubbling centre, and this causes her to have a nervous breakdown.
The next day they are all killed when the volcano erupts unexpectedly.
The novel ends with Stella,en route to a new job and ignorant of her sister's death, flicking absent-mindedly through a news magazine featuring the tragedy.
The novel was not well received.
It was condemned for its ‘two-dimensional characters’(Mayne 1961:316), lack of ‘moral passion’(Bergonzi 1961:297), lack of profundity (Price 1961:332), ‘misanthropic spleen’, and smugness (Hope 1961:1486).
In many respects these are accurate characterizations.
The Middlemen is uneven and less well-written than Brooke-Rose's earlier novels.
Light satire of people's habits contrasts sharply with the severe social criticism with which the text is larded.
Narratorial frustration is evident in the disjointed structure of the novel which focuses briefly on a number of subcultures of professional London without bothering to link them in more than a cursory manner.
The realist technique of localizing narratorial comment in the subconscious of a character is also frequently exaggerated.
The novel opens with a page-long diatribe about the age of middlemen which appears to be the opinion of a third-person narrator but is subsequently identified as ‘disloyal thoughts…not precisely verbalised as they turmoiled through the hazily discontented soul of Rusty Conway’(5–6).
The obvious artificiality of this device is jarring, and the half-hearted attempt to ‘subjectify’ a large chunk of sociological analysis soon gives way to more overt narratorial commentary in the same vein.
The impression received is that Brooke-Rose had simply given up trying to integrate the conceptual content of her novel with its story.
The didactic message of The Middlemen is presented in two long passages which together represent an attack on the phenomenon of ‘middlemanship’.
The gist of the argument is that, once a relatively restricted and disreputable segment of society, the ‘class’ of middlemen has grown proportionally larger until now ‘We are all middlemen, selling to others something we do not own, something we have not made’(5).
When the principal exemplars of this class are dramatically eliminated the message is clear: middlemanship destroys from within, and the act of passing something on without truly changing or improving it is psychologically nullifying.
There is an evident parallel between Brooke-Rose's vitriolic attack on this social system and her disenchantment with the realist novel.
The realist novel plays the role of ‘middleman’ by passing on a world-view which is as ‘faithful’as possible to perceived reality, but is in fact a clichéd falsification.
There appears to be no other solution than either to conform to the system or to destroy it.
If The Middlemen nominally conforms to the generic conventions of satire, it symbolically destroys the type of world in which these conventions are operative.
The central relationship in the novel between Serena and Stella is emblematic of the contrast between adaptation to convention and rebellion.
As her name indicates, Serena prides herself on being under control.
She claims to have understood and resolved all her own hidden desires, and she spends her life doing so for others: she is a ‘modern middleman between body and soul, a perfect salesman of the unconscious to the conscious’(33).
Like the wares of other middlemen, there is something synthetic and not quite genuine about her product, for it enables people to survive within a basically debilitating system.
Her patients receive ‘fresh personalities, refashioned at least to fit the coming decade, if not perhaps exactly in the style intended by the original designer’(33).
The only aspect of Serena's life that is beyond her control is her sister Stella.
Stella is a wild card both in the deepest recesses of Serena's own mind and in the domain of middlemen, for Stella is the only character in the novel who is exempt from this status: ‘Stella was in effect her own middleman, alone in the world, selling her personality, and very badly’(30).
She represents the turbulence that Serena is unable to eliminate from her life, the residue of chaos that Serena cannot refashion to fit her world.
Whereas Serena is concerned to domesticate her problems, Stella consciously strives to exaggerate her own eccentricity, yet her resilience and the regularity of her yo-yo-like existence testify to an underlying solidity.
She is the life force of the novel which survives the destruction which the world of middlemen brings upon itself.
But for all their differences, Stella and Serena are the two halves of a basically unsatisfactory character.
When Serena reads an article on the plane to Greece about a pair of Siamese twins, one of whom dies, she realizes that she and Stella are like Siamese twins joined at the psyche (40).
The same thoughts pass through their minds and they are both aware of their deep ties to each other.
When Serena dies, leaving Stella behind, it is as if the dominance of control and stability has come to an end.
What is left is not an altogether agreeable person.
Stella is self-dramatizing like Alfred Hayley, frivolous and insecure like Nina Jackson, and her company is more distasteful than that of any previously encountered character in Brooke-Rose's fiction.
She is the inverted product of a world against which she is continually defining herself, Brooke-Rose's final, desperate attempt to present a ‘character’ in the traditional realist sense.
With The Middlemen Christine Brooke-Rose effectively eradicates the London literary scene from her work.
In so doing she destroys the principle of control that kept her novels within the bounds of the generic traditions of British fiction.
When Serena's hidden emotions break through the surface of her calm, it is as if the collective unconscious of an entire society were erupting.
The novel's apocalyptic ending takes on a universal dimension by being implicitly compared to a nuclear holocaust.
Rusty, who has done some research on the island, assures his companions that the volcano is safe.
He explains that the last eruption was a slow drawn-out affair lasting six years ‘just like the last war’(207).
Just like the next war, the new eruption is sudden and its effects immediate.
The Middlemen can thus be seen as both an acid criticism of British society and a purge of Brooke-Rose's oeuvre .
By killing off the stable element of the fictional character, she abandons a realist notion of the individual identity and the narrative norms which subtend it, freeing the way for a concept of subjectivity and a form of writing in which these factors do not come into play.
There are, however, hints in The Middlemen of the modes of narration which are to replace what is so brutally disposed of at the end of the tale.
Rusty Conway becomes one of Serena's patients because he has had a spell of extreme absent-mindedness which made him incapable of carrying out his work.
Shortly before the fateful journey to Greece he begins to be overcome once again by the same sensation.
He is unable to concentrate on forms and reports because the words he reads undergo illicit manipulations that, like the pun, involve slippage and linguistic re-synthesis:
For some weeks now, Rusty had been in that peculiarly unreal state when words leap out from pages, voices or one's own thoughts, and rudely rattle their bones about, or shove their meanings under one's nose like exhibitionists until the meanings themselves vanish in a dance of death.
Cinderella mutated from rinsedella to rinse-a-leader and denser-liar, nitron became non-try, even trianon, U.V.I. kept changing into I-view-you, and synthetic fibre had long completed its various transitions from fetid cider to fist ethic neighbour and finally to thigh fetish sabre, where it looked like getting stuck for quite some time.
(178)
The linguistic acrobatics these words perform in Rusty's mind and the various interpretations which might be attributed to the results are of less consequence in and of themselves than the fact that this performance demonstrates verbal operations of a logic other than that attributed to the rational mind.
We see the seeds of alternative patterns of thought also in The Sycamore Tree when Nina temporarily loses her mind:
I must get a grip on my mind.
I must…my mind…
I dropped it…somewhere…slipping…my mind is a slipped disc, a dropped womb…
I must…get a grip…
I lost something…
I dropped it outside…in the street…walking…on the Embankment…
I dropped it in the river — flowing…flowing back…under the bridge…the Bar…daddy…he's gone…he's in disgrace, debarred.
Debarred from the bar…no…debarred from a barmaid…mummy…he's gone…he lost something…(221)
The images that go through Alfred Hayley's mind in the minutes before he dies follow similar patterns, but in all three cases the discursive deviation is localized and explained within the novel as a product of the suspension of reason.
While the transgression of narrative conventions manifest in Brooke-Rose's first four novels indicate a frustration with realist fiction, realism demonstrates a remarkable capacity for assimilating such deviations.
It is only through the radical reconception of language use prefigured here that she is able truly to break with the traditional novel.
There is no doubt that the transformation in style and approach which took place with Out in 1964 represents a fundamental reconception of the novel on Brooke-Rose's part, but the technical and conceptual development which took place over the course of her early fiction points the way to the change to come.
The gradual breakdown of personal identity and the growing dissatisfaction with the conventions of realist fiction which are the most striking features of her first four works laid the ground for a thorough overhaul of fictional technique.
What were at the time perceived as the faults of these novels can in retrospect be read as indications of the inadequacy of contemporary narrative models to Brooke-Rose's needs as a writer.
Chapter II
Out, Such, and Between: Metaphor and the Languages of Knowledge
‘there are moments when I feel I'm on the frontier of something and I must twist language in some way to pass the frontier’(Brooke-Rose 1990e:31)
As I suggested in chapter one, Christine Brooke-Rose's first four novels constitute a conceptual prologue to her later work, but because they fail to break with the assumptions of the conventional novel, they are unable adequately to articulate the relation of individual identity to language.
In the novels which followed, manipulation of language is discovered to be the key to the integration of intellect and psyche which is unsuccessfully sought throughout her early fiction.
The main concern of Out (1964),Such (1966), and Between (1968) is the process whereby the subject constructs his or her identity in and through the language of specialized discourses, and the way in which he or she acts on those discourses to make them ‘run here and there again'.
Metaphor is the dominant structuring mechanism of the novels, stylized transcription of consciousness their fictional mode.
Unlike the straightforward narrative approach of Brooke-Rose's earlier work, this new technique allows the discourses of knowledge to be integrated into the language of the text at the level of syntax and lexis.
The focusing device of this chapter will be the role of metaphor in the novels as a strategy for bringing specialized discourses to bear on the consciousness of the fictional character and for ‘mobilizing’ the discourses themselves.
Before undertaking an analysis of the novels, it will therefore be necessary to investigate in more detail what is meant by the term ‘metaphor’.
I shall examine its status in relation both to Brooke-Rose's own formulation of the ‘grammar’ of poetic metaphor and to several other current conceptions of the figure.
Brooke-Rose sees in all her novels starting with Out ‘the same principle of interweaving [that]can create metaphors or unexpected meaning’(1988a:137).
Though she tries to ‘wrap this linguistic experimentation in some sort of narrative situation — a minimal mimetic plot’, her real purpose is ‘to explode human discourse’(137).
She accomplishes this linguistic manipulation or ‘explosion’ by combining words in such a way as to make them ‘activate’one another.
In an interview she gave in 1974 she explained that the goal of her fiction was to re-activate the language of conceptual knowledge through metaphor:
language is capable of far more subtle ways of metaphoric expression than the stock grammatical ways.
…You use the same phrase in a new context and embedded in that new context it acquires a completely different meaning.
What I like doing, what interests me particularly, is the fusion of different discourses.
(1976k:3)
Metaphor operates in her fiction as a structural principle; it provides the means of bringing two or more disparate fields of knowledge into a relation which organizes thoughts and events.
In her doctoral dissertation and later in A Grammar of Metaphor , Brooke-Rose studies the mechanics of metaphoric interaction from a grammatical point of view.
She develops a typology according to the different parts of speech, and her analyses reveal a marked preference for the verb metaphor.
Of all grammatical types, the verb metaphor displays the greatest amount of interanimation.
It ‘is more dynamic, not in the sense that it expresses movement (which a noun can also express) but because it creates more activity between the words of the sentence in which it is used’(1955a:75).
The verb metaphor is further characterized by the fact that it has no direct link to its proper term, but acts on the noun of which it is the predicate; in the case of the transitive verb it can also act on its direct and indirect objects.
She borrows Geoffrey of Vinsauf's example ‘the meadows laugh’, and comments that while ‘laugh’ may be interpreted as ‘are full of flowers’, this interpretation ‘is not stated, nor is it necessary to guess it….
The picture of the meadows laughing is immediate’(1958a:208).
In A Grammar of Metaphor she is at pains to show that in English poetry the relation of the verb metaphor to its proper term is weak and less important than its relation to its subject and objects: ‘when a verb is metaphoric, its adaptability to the noun is so great that its relationship to it is direct, and much stronger than its relationship to the action it is ‘replacing’ ' (1958a:209).
The consequence of this immediacy is a greater degree of autonomy for the figure:
The verb metaphor is accepted as a complete action in direct relation to the object to which it is applied, while the noun metaphor tends to be divided within itself into proper and figurative terms.
It is chiefly the noun metaphor which has caused philosophers and estheticians to worry so greatly about the relationship of these two terms and the basis on which they are compared.
(1955a:77)
As she observes in this passage, her approach contests traditional assumptions about metaphor, assumptions that have often gone unquestioned by more recent theorists of rhetoric.
First, it demonstrates that the majority of types of metaphor (if not a statistical majority of metaphorical utterances) do not operate on the basis of replacement, but contain both ‘proper’ and ‘metaphoric’terms in praesentia (1958a:23–5).
Second, it stresses the importance of the immediate context of the poem over the distinction between ‘metaphoric’ and ‘proper’, in that it analyses the pre-referential dynamic of the metaphoric process.
Finally, it shows that a given term may, as in the case of the verb, engage simultaneously in a number of different metaphoric relations.
Like Brooke-Rose, Jacques Derrida (1972b:277–8) and Paul Ricoeur (1975:19–24) trace the bias toward noun-based views of metaphor back to Aristotle's classification, but neither investigates the implications of an alternative view based on a different part of speech.
It must be noted, however, that Brooke-Rose's own conception of metaphor is not tied fast to rigorous distinctions between the parts of speech, and that grammatical categories often get blurred in her discussions.
She is concerned less with syntactic definitions than with the role a word plays in the metaphoric process.
She states in an initial survey of the various theories of metaphor that those of most philosophers are of little interest to her because they treat metaphor from the point of view of its semantic content, ignoring the way it functions linguistically (1955a:45, 1958a:15).
While this is no longer true today, her grammatical analysis of metaphor is highly original, and its implications have yet to be fully recognized.
It is nevertheless worth examining some more recent theories to see if they can suggest ways in which the implications of Brooke-Rose's approach might be applied to novelistic texts.
Recent thinking on metaphor has been greatly influenced by Nietzsche who recognized that the process of dividing up experience into discrete domains was one of ‘coagulation’(1979:86), the construction of a discursive system on the ‘running water’(85) of metaphor.
According to this view, conceptualization necessarily involves a dissimulation both of the differences between perceptual stimuli and of the metaphoric nature of knowledge itself.
This is then a double process of immobilization which can only be remobilized by art.
Rhetoricians ancient and modern have noted that the word ‘metaphor’ comes from the Greek word metaphorein , meaning to transfer or to carry over, and the idea of transport or mobilization inherent in its original meaning has played a significant role in the conceptual evolution of the figure.
As Genette remarks in the title essay of Figures , all figural language opens up a topos ; it adds a dimension to discourse, turning a line into a space (1966:210).
The work of metaphor then involves the transfer of meaning across that space, from one site to another.
Meaning, as the most simple and most common conception has it, is displaced from one word onto another.
This model has long since been embellished, however, by the Anglo-American followers of I. A. Richards.
For Richards, metaphor involves ‘a transaction between contexts’(1936:94) in which meaning is ‘smuggled in’(1925:240) from one semantic domain to another by a ‘vehicle’(1936:96).
There is something ‘semi-surreptitious’(1925:240) about this process, as if the boundaries of semantic propriety were somehow being violated.
Metaphor is no mere tourist in a foreign land, it is a bootlegger.
Paul de Man is even more explicit in his formulation of this notion:
We have no way of defining, of policing, the boundaries that separate the name of one entity from the name of another; tropes are not just travellers, they tend to be smugglers and probably smugglers of stolen goods at that.
(1979:17)
It is no coincidence that, as Barthes reminds us, rhetoric was born of a property dispute (1970a:90).
The establishment of proper boundaries is clearly at issue in the use of linguistic structures that have the capacity to found a noman's land between proper meanings and bounded territories, creating a zone of ambiguity.
For Nelson Goodman a single instance of contraband becomes a mass invasion.
Goodman describes metaphor as ‘no mere distribution of family goods but…an expedition abroad.
A whole set of alternative labels, a whole apparatus of organization, takes over a new territory’(1969:73).
Here an innocent ‘expedition’ suddenly becomes a conquest from one sentence to the next.
Like the theories Brooke-Rose criticizes in 1958, this view conceives of metaphor in terms of semantic property to be fought over and captured.
Max Black's influential ‘interaction’ theory builds on Richards's ideas and depicts metaphor as a complex operation in which one semantic field ‘organizes’another, acting as a ‘screen’or a ‘network of lines’(1962:41) which ‘filters and transforms’(42) in order to project onto the proper term an entire ‘system of ‘associated commonplaces’' (41).
It seems that this dynamic view is closer to what Brooke-Rose has in mind when she describes her use of metaphor in the novels as recontextualization through the fusion of discourses.
In his discussion of the metaphor ‘man is a wolf’, Black describes the work of metaphor in discursive terms: ‘Any human traits that can without undue strain be talked about in ‘wolf-language’ will be rendered prominent, and any that cannot will be pushed into the background' (41).
He even hints that there may be a reciprocal relationship between the metaphoric and proper components of his schema.
Though he does not develop the notion, he admits that if the metaphor ‘man is a wolf’ restructures the attributes of ‘man’to bring out his lupine characteristics, it also ‘makes the wolf seem more human than he otherwise would’(44).
But while Black's argument for the reciprocity of metaphor is of great interest, it is not clear how seriously we are meant to take it.
The primary force at work is clearly the one-way effect of lupinization.
The value of Black's theory lies in the fact that it allows for a conception of metaphor as the interaction between two discourses, but like Goodman's concept of imperial appropriation, it has overtones of subjugation.
One might wonder why metaphor so often demands that its work be described in terms of colonization and occupation, and what it is about an initial transportation of meaning that turns it into a conquest or a coercive restructuring.
Perhaps the answer lies in the duplicity of metaphor's ancient role as an element in the art of both pleasing and public persuasion.
Although largely neglected today, this latter function is unashamedly manipulative.
Coercion may well be an inherent part of the metaphoric process, but we may nevertheless ask whether it might not be possible to imagine a different type of metaphor, one that was truly interactive in a positive sense.
The recent trend toward cognitive approaches to metaphor provides a means of formalizing such a conception.
The work of Eva Kittay is particularly helpful in this respect.
Kittay offers a ‘perspectival’ theory that expands upon Black's ‘interaction’view.
The importance of Kittay's formulation lies in her wide definition of the type of linguistic unit that can be labelled metaphoric.
Metaphor has traditionally been taken to be a one-word device, or at most a figure of several words strung together, whereas Brooke-Rose's analyses concentrate instead on metaphor's work at the level of the phrase or sentence.
Black too extends its necessary semantic field to the unit of the sentence, claiming that the semantic force of a metaphor can only be measured with regard to its context.
Kittay agrees with his argument but questions the validity of stopping with the sentence which, as a semantic unit, is as arbitrary as any other.
For her, any unit of discourse can be used as the ‘frame’ of a metaphor, the only constraint being that the corresponding metaphoric ‘focus’must be a unit at a level beneath that of the frame.
Thus if the frame is a sentence, the focus can be a single word, if the frame is a larger unit of text, the focus can be a sentence (1987:64–8).
With Brooke-Rose's use of metaphor in mind, we can extend this logic and hypothesize that if the frame were an entire discursive system, the focus could be one discourse within that system.
Though this notion of what I shall be calling ‘discursive metaphor’ may seem itself to be metaphoric, it is, as we shall see, a justified extension of the standard definition, as it accounts for the distinct use of figurality in Brooke-Rose's fiction.
While Kittay's theory has the advantage that it allows metaphor to be seen as operating according to the same basic principles regardless of the size of the discursive unit in question, Brooke-Rose's own examination of the mechanisms of the verb metaphor suggest a view that minimizes dependence on an implicit ‘proper’ term outside the text and emphasizes the metaphoric interactions between the terms themselves.
According to this view the space opened by figural language is not that between metaphoric and proper terms, but that between two or more equally figural terms, which, in Brooke-Rose's case, are two or more discourses.
Furthermore, if we take seriously Black's claim that his specimen metaphor ‘man is a wolf’ serves at once to render man wolf-like and to humanize wolves, a reversible metaphor could be imagined at the level of a word, a sentence, or a discourse in which each term was engaged in a metaphoric interaction with one or a number of other terms, organizing them, structuring them and in turn being structured by them.
This is a situation in which multi-directional migration supersedes conquest as the mode in which metaphor is best understood.
The possibilities of employing one discourse as a metaphor for another are first explored in Out .
Out reveals the coercive aspect of the colonizing use of metaphor and stages subversive counter-strategies which undermine this use.
Such focuses on a use of discursive metaphor which represents an alternative to the coercive model manifest in Out .
Finally in Between the multiple, reversible metaphor is put into play.
In all three novels the construction of personal identity is intimately associated with metaphor's work at the level of discourse.
Each novel presents a main character in a situation in which he or she is in some way alienated.
In Out and Such this alienation is psychological and social, while in Between it is the cultural alienation of being in a foreign country.
In each case the experience of being wrenched out of the familiar instigates an identity crisis which results in a series of ‘rebirths’ as the protagonist grapples with the problem of selfhood and strives to construct some form of coherent identity out of the scraps of other peoples' languages which penetrate his or her consciousness.
In using Brooke-Rose's discussion of poetic metaphor as the basis for an analysis of how this figure works in novels she wrote in the 1960s, I am not suggesting that there is a necessary relation, historical or logical, between them.
I am simply arguing that Brooke-Rose's analyses point toward her later use of what she herself describes as ‘metaphor’ at the level of discourse.
A Grammar of Metaphor does not, by itself, constitute a theory of metaphor, and I have therefore had to rely on theories developed by philosophers and literary critics, while indicating where these fail to account for the aspects of Brooke-Rose's writing that seem most interesting.
I have tried to show that these are the very points at which her own analyses of the figure prove useful.
2.1 Out: Coercion and Subversion.
Christine Brooke-Rose describes her use of metaphor as a literalization (1976k:3).
This may seem confusing if it is not made clear what she means by ‘literal’.
She explains in a recent description of her fiction that ‘any specialist discourse when transposed into a non-specialist context or, if you prefer, when understood literally, can turn into metaphor’(1988a:129).
According to this definition, literalization is a metaphoric mapping of what Barthes calls an ‘acratic’ or specialized discourse onto an ‘encratic’or universal one.
Barthes is careful to point out that though the encratic discourse posits itself as natural, in fact this is an illusion, a necessary camouflage of its own systematicity (1984:128–9).
Only if it is made strange or different do we see it for what it really is.
Out is a prime example of this technique.
In revealing the coercive nature of the discursive mechanisms of a fictitious future society, it illuminates the relationship between a dominant metaphor and the individual language-user.
Brooke-Rose here succeeds in solving the problems encountered in her earlier novels with the integration of ‘form’ and ‘content’by demonstrating that metaphor is a powerful cognitive tool with specific social uses.
Out takes place at an unspecified time several decades after the unexplained but presumably cataclysmic event known as the ‘displacement’.
The anonymous, pronoun-less protagonist is a ‘colourless’ man who divides his time between the shack where he lives with his wife and the Labour Exchange where he goes in search of employment.
During the course of the novel we witness the progressive worsening of his psychological and physical condition.
He works for a time as a gardener on the estate of the rich Mrs Mgulu, and later as a construction worker in her house.
But because of his deteriorating health, he is unable to keep any of these jobs long, and throughout much of the novel he is confined to his shack where his wife cares for him.
As in Orwell's 1984 , a geopolitical realignment has segmented the earth into previously non-existent countries: Afro-Eurasia, Sino-America, and Chinese Europe.
The names of the new countries reflect a reversal in race roles which has taken place since the ‘displacement’.
The colourless races have a tendency to succumb to ‘the malady’ which afflicts the protagonist.
This is a sickness akin to radiation poisoning which causes a high rate of ‘chemical mutation’ and makes the colourless an unreliable source of labour.
The Melanesian races are immune to ‘the malady’ and have therefore grown powerful.
The technological innovations which have developed as a result of society's need to adapt to new conditions have been accompanied by a new epistemology.
The ‘displacement’ has been both a demographic and a cognitive recentring, a ‘displacement from cause to effect’(117/119,118/120,172/174).
As part of this cognitive revolution, psychoanalytic machines called ‘psychoscopes’ have been invented to generate ‘biograms’, ‘the extracted absolute of your unconscious patterns throughout your life…telescoped in time into one line that shows your harmonious rhythm, your up and down tendencies’(147/149).
The biogram renders human memory obsolete, for it ‘telescopes’ the old-fashioned diachronic conception of identity into a fixed form accessible in the present.
Memory has become restricted and suffers from cultural prohibition.
While it is admitted that the past exists, the quest for origins or causes is considered a symptom of disease.
The motto of the new era is ‘diagnosis prognosticates aetiology’, a phrase which is repeated by members of the ruling races in such varied contexts that it becomes evident that no one really bothers to think about it.
It functions as a ‘master metaphor’, the encapsulation of an ideology which structures all domains of thought:
[doctor:]—…diagnosis merely prognosticates aetiology…
The rule is universal in all fields.
It is a scientific law.
[protagonist:]— An article of faith.
— Until disproved.
In the meantime, we are content to know how the thing functions.
— What thing?— Anything.
Society.
Life.
The universe.
God.
The unconscious.
A land-reclaimer. (167/169)
As described by one character, this catch-all phrase is ‘a short way of saying that they don't claim to find either the ultimate cause or the ultimate cure, but they do know exactly how it functions, and can prescribe accordingly’(149/151).
The phrase has been taken from the acratic discourse of medicine and literalized, universalized as an encratic discourse or system of belief.
This discourse is, in a very real sense, an instrument of observation, an organizing tool, or as Out would have it, a ‘conventional weapon’(61/63,74/76,128/130,184/186,196/198).
In ‘Dynamic Gradients’ Brooke-Rose remarks: ‘it has become a truism that, in submicroscopic terms, the object observed is affected by the instrument observing it — part of the famous principle of uncertainty’(1965a:93).
Indeed, ‘diagnosis prognosticates aetiology’ is a rephrasing of this ‘truism’in scientific jargon.
But what appears to be an admission of radical subjectivity can, as Out demonstrates, also lead to subjugation, for if the power of observation to alter its object is harnessed for the benefit of those in possession of the tools of observation, these tools become weapons of cognitive control.
When the protagonist goes for ‘psychoscopy’, we are given an illustration in concrete terms of how the diagnostic tools of this society condition their object:
I am your doctor, father, God.
I build you up.
I know everything about you.
Your profile is coming up very clearly indeed on the oscillograph, and the profile provokes its own continuation, did you know that, the profile moulds you as it oscillates?
Diagnosis provokes its own cause, did you know that?
To put it more succinctly, diagnosis prognosticates aetiology. (136–8/138–9)
The discourse of ‘diagnosis’ represents a coercive use of metaphor in that its aim is to replicate itself faithfully in the conceptual idiolect of all people.
But in the minds of the sick it suffers a mutation: the lens becomes a prism, it refracts and splinters the uniform vision of the ideal interracial society.
Occupied by its clichés, its principles, and its strategies, the sick mind of the central colourless figure unwittingly deploys subversive discursive counter-strategies that turn these ‘conventional weapons’ back on themselves and expose them for what they are.
In the Nietzschean view, only art has the power to reawaken dead metaphors and to shake the rigid structures of abstraction, or as Brooke-Rose would have it, to make discourses ‘run here and there again'.
It is thus appropriate that she should begin her enterprise in Out with an investigation of that originary metaphor described by Nietzsche, the act of perception.
The opening paragraph of the novel poses the problem of the animate and the inanimate in terms of mobility:
A fly straddles another fly on the faded denim stretched over the knee.
Sooner or later, the knee will have to make a move, but now it is immobilised by the two flies, the lower of which is so still that it seems dead.
The fly on top is on the contrary quite agitated, jerking tremendously, then convulsively, putting out its left foreleg to whip, or maybe to stroke some sort of reaction out of the fly beneath, which, however, remains so still that it seems dead.
(9/11)
This image of copulation serves as a linguistic act of ‘insemination’ which initiates a period of gestation and provokes a reference to giving birth toward the end of the chapter.
In an imagined interview at the Labour Exchange, the protagonist claims that he has only been ‘spasmodically in labour’, then immediately corrects himself by rephrasing the slip as ‘employed intermittently’(19/21).
If traditional metaphor brings together two semantic fields by means of a similarity of signifieds, then the pun does the same by virtue of a homonymy or similarity of signifiers.
Discursive ‘slips’ such as this create metaphors which play on the identity of signifiers to highlight the multiplicity of signification and its discourse-dependence.
They serve as prisms or refracting lenses which multiply meaning.
Semantic mobility of this type is the crime that has caused artists to be banished from the society portrayed in Out (149–50/151–2), for the stability of a discourse depends on both its univocality and its universality.
The possibility that a word might have a different meaning in another context threatens to relativize the ‘master metaphor’ on which this society is grounded.
As the novel progresses, the central consciousness is increasingly alienated from the institutions which seek to maintain him under their control, and his own discourse becomes more and more transgressive.
Whereas the descriptions of the opening chapter are confined to what can be seen from within his shack, visual perspectives increase in variety and number when he ventures out of doors.
This brings into play the logical faculties of discrimination and selection which assimilate perceptual stimuli to previously encountered images on the basis of structural analogy.
Yet contrary to what one might expect, the capacity for assimilation is not accompanied by a discursive restriction.
It leads instead to a proliferation of metaphoric links between objects: the bark of a fig tree is described as looking like ‘a thigh of creased denim’, ‘a system of parallel highways’ and ‘neural cells’(26/28).
A double row of plane trees forms a ‘network of bare branches [that]functions in depth, a corridor of cobwebs full of traps for flies, woven by a giant spider’(21/23).
This image is then used to put in doubt the very existence of its counterpart in the previous chapter:
Unless perhaps a certain period has already elapsed since that episode, if indeed it occurred.
The flies may have been a product of the fine network that functions in depth, in which case they will certainly have got caught in the cobwebs. (21/23)
The metaphor of the spider has here replaced that of the flies, engulfed it in its web.
The web or network of images spun by the protagonist's discourse has subsumed all past images to its present.
The past becomes a projected image created retrospectively at every moment, just as a ‘biogram’ is ‘the abstracted absolute of your conscious patterns throughout your life’.
The spider's web is clearly a pernicious weapon; like the network of branches out of which it grows, it frames and structures all that falls within its domain.
The status of the metaphoric strategies employed by the character is ambiguous.
They are at once a replication of and a threat to the unitary governing structures of the society in which he lives.
This ambiguity is played out in psychological terms as the simultaneous desire and inability to conform to the demands of the master discourse.
Mobility is repeatedly linked in Out to hypertrophy of the imagination which, like a prism, refracts the ‘colourless’ light of the protagonist's civic identity into the protean kaleidoscopic images of his fantasy selves by means of the ‘coloured’language of metaphor.
These fantasy selves are figured as disintegrating reflections (52–5/54–7) or cathartic identifications with objects and people in the world around him (61/63,100/102,104–5/106–7).
The metaphoric proliferation accompanying psychological fragmentation is combated by the repeated invocation of analytic apparatuses that would determine the ontological status of objects perceived and events experienced, but the result is a garbled composite of philosophical jargon:
To live the gesture in immobility is to evoke and therefore to have observed the gesture.
But imagination is not an imaged projection of observed phenomena.
Sometimes it is sufficient to imagine an episode for the episode to occur, and that is the terrifying thing, though not necessarily in that precise form.
The first failure is the beginning of the first lesson.
Learning presupposes great holes in knowledge.
(173/175)
Immobility is linked to the desire for stable identity, to certain knowledge, to fixed images, and to the various clichés of the discourses of authority.
But attempts to fix or stabilize knowledge by means of an array of scientific instruments fail as well, for these instruments generate new metaphors by mixing the concrete with the abstract:
The white veins in the pink marble tremble and nod, they sway and stretch out to catch the excited atoms.
An oscillograph might perhaps reveal whether the hammering which now drives its high-pitched ring of metal on metal into the neural cells also drives into the memory of the conversation, memory being a function, not a place.
An electroencelograph might perhaps separate the components of the conversation into the elements of silence, reality and unreality.
(100/102)
If we consider Out with respect to the conception of metaphor examined above, the desperate sputterings of the main character can be seen as active or ‘verbal’ in their metaphoric function: his discourse mobilizes and metaphorizes all others and has only tenuous links with any reality outside its field of operation.
As he falls further and further ‘out’ of society these links become increasingly strained.
Perception gradually yields territory to fantasy and hallucination as the protagonist's faculty for reality-testing breaks down and doubt increases.
In his weakened state he is unable to control his own metaphors, to keep the various terminologies he deploys distinct.
They act on him and impair his ability to distinguish between thought and perception, between concepts and objects.
Again polysemy serves to join the two.
Aetiology as the philosophical investigation of causality and aetiology as the study of the origin of diseases provides a link between philosophy and physiology.
Symptoms of disease are then ‘embodied’ as a cancerous proliferation of the cognitive faculty which invents aetiologies for its own condition:
The imagination increases in size progressively and usually painlessly until it fills most of the abdomen.
(64/66)
At the moment, the fantasies are under control.
Sooner or later, however, they will pervade the blood-stream and increase at a striking rate, paralysing the skull with tumorous growths (66/68).
It inevitably strikes the reader of Out that the main character enters periodically into what in many respects resembles schizophrenia.
Freud describes schizophrenia as a narcissistic disorder in which the capacity for reality-testing breaks down and the patient hallucinates frequently.
His or her speech is characterized by a tendency to treat words like concrete things and to engage in what Freud calls ‘organ-speech’(1915:204).
Gilles Deleuze describes ‘organ-speech’ as a result of the materialization of language which is then perceived as infiltrating the body.
Organ-ization is accompanied by asemia, as language is reduced to sounds and seen as excrement (1969:107).
Jakobson and Lübbe-Grothues note that the speech of schizophrenics is characterized by the tendency to omit the pronoun ‘I’ as well as a fear of responsibility for independent affirmation or denial which results in ambiguous statements (1980:135).
This corresponds to what Deleuze terms ‘schizo-logic’ in which contradictory propositions are accepted simultaneously.
All these symptoms are displayed by the central consciousness in Out : a breakdown of reality-testing, the concretization of words, organ-speech, omission of the first person pronoun, the proliferation of contradictions, and perception of language as pure sound and as excrement.
Nevertheless, it would perhaps be unjustified to label him ‘schizophrenic’.
The most we can claim is that his social situation and his physical deterioration induces in him a condition that approximates the classical clinical picture given of schizophrenia.
Robert Rogers comments on what is commonly held to be the widespread use of metaphor among schizophrenics.
While he does not deny that they often speak in a manner that ‘normal’ people regard as metaphoric, he points out that poets are aware of the metaphoric nature of their linguistic productions, whereas schizophrenics are not; they use what Rogers calls ‘unlabelled metaphor’(1978:42).
In Out Christine Brooke-Rose makes use of the schizophrenic's unwitting deployment of figurative language as a psychological motivation for her use of it.
The significance of this technique is that it allows the novelist to incorporate metaphor at the level of what is narrated (fabula ), not merely at the level of narration (sjuzet ), as is more commonly the case.
Brooke-Rose does not impose metaphors on the thematic material she employs in Out , rather she chooses to work with material that is already metaphoric.
This use of the naturally occurring metaphor in the speech of schizophrenics is a limit case of the more general phenomenon of metaphor as a thought process.
Schizophrenic speech provides a metaphor for metaphor, and it is in this sense that its use in Out may be understood, not as a valorization of the psychotic condition but as a literalization of the figure.
In addition to its formal dimension, this use of metaphor also has a political function.
The protagonist makes efforts to salvage his crumbling psyche by identifying with the languages of authority.
At one point he faints, and as he slowly regains consciousness he imagines that he is being ordered to ‘merge’ through ‘osmosis’(109/111).
For those who refuse or are unable to conform to discursive conditioning, the message is unequivocal:
The physical stuff of the universe wraps up the earth with knowledge and communication, and the earth shrinks, and those who do not partake of the great secret growth are eliminated and shrivel away under the physical stuff that is knowledge and communication and wraps the earth with love, for nothing less than symbiosis will do.
(178/180)
The colourless are incapable of ‘symbiosis’ and participation in the communication that ‘wraps the earth with love’, for they are incapable of ‘radiating energy’.
Despite the rhetoric of the multi-racial society ‘Exalting all colours to the detriment of none’(123/125), it would appear that the weak are doomed.
In the closing pages of A Rhetoric of the Unreal Brooke-Rose discusses the mystico-technological dream of Teillard de Chardin, Marshall McLuhan, and others whom, following Ihab Hassan (1975), she designates as ‘new gnostics’.
Their vision of ‘the planet being as it were wrapped in telepathic or electronic thought of more and more brains working away’ seems to her ‘dangerously like the pollution that may stifle it’and ‘essentially an elitist dream’(1981:388).
She asks why these dreams should ‘be given the supreme power of enveloping the planet (conquering the world), when neither those dreams nor man have shown the slightest capacity for solving the world's real problems, only a brilliant capacity for displacing them’(389).
In the light of these remarks,Out may be read as a dystopic version of a ‘global village’ in which the technology that ‘wraps the earth’has disambiguated and simplified life for the privileged, who then use the founding truth of their colonial system as a weapon against the underprivileged.
This weapon is a coercive metaphor or conceptual structuring lens which carves up the world according to its needs and either conditions or eradicates colourless inhabitants by subjecting them to ‘diagnosis’ or excluding them from ‘symbiosis’in a perpetual present.
Out extends to breaking-point the possibilities of classical empiricist philosophy, and the ultimate failure of this philosophy leads to the full-scale paradigm shift dramatized in the novel.
In a society which has fully internalized the consequences of the Einsteinian revolution and its off-shoots, an epistemology based on the postulates of classical scientific models is unable to cope with social structures formed according to this new way of thinking.
The single perspective of an individual subject proves inadequate to the task of processing the sensory data that flood his consciousness.
In terms of narrative technique, breakdown is manifested through the gradual dissolution of framing devices and ambiguity as to the ontological status of the objects of description.
In psychological terms this conforms to the classical description of schizophrenia.
In all three respects — philosophical, narrative, and psychological — the novel highlights the failure of traditional conventions and modes of thought by contrasting them with a grotesque parody of the social and discursive consequences of modern scientific theory.
This must not be read, however, as a nostalgic plea for a return to the age of classical epistemology.
It is a warning that any science which claims to be authoritative has the potential for being used as a discourse of domination.
Metaphor in Out is used in two distinct ways: on the one hand, the medical theory ‘diagnosis prognosticates aetiology’ is extended coercively to other domains of thought; on the other hand, the mind's capacity for variation and mutation leads the main character to produce creative metaphors which distort, subvert, and ‘mobilize’the language of authority.
In this latter attempt to turn the coercive action of metaphor back on itself lies the seed of the type of metaphor developed in Such .
2.2 Such: Disrupting Accepted Modes of Thought.
Whereas in Out a single dominant ideology acts as a structuring device on a wide variety of discourses in the society portrayed, in Such two discourses are selected and their interaction is staged within the mind of the protagonist.
Such thus represents a focusing or narrowing of the type of metaphoric relation developed in Out .
In Such the discourse of astrophysics is used to subvert that of classical psychoanalysis.
Astrophysics is concerned with bodies of cosmic proportions, but it is also involved with the smallest of particles, those postulated by quantum mechanics.
Specifically, astrophysics studies the origin of the universe through analysis of the characteristics of subatomic particles of light, matter, and energy.
Thus while Out dramatizes the consequences of the principle of relativity for the observation of effects,Such turns instead to the exploration of the origins of identity in terms of contemporary theories of cosmic birth.
The concepts of astrophysics are mapped onto the human psyche in such a way as to contest the assumptions which depth psychology has popularized.
Such begins with the voice in the first-person describing the process of climbing out of his coffin into an unknown world of orbits and ellipses.
He meets a character who describes herself as a ‘girl-spy’.
When he insists that they must have names, she agrees to call him ‘Someone’ and allows him to call her ‘Something’.
Something carries on her arm five offspring, variously described as planets, moons, and cylinders.
Someone adopts two of these creatures and urges that they too be named.
Accordingly, the five bodies are baptized with the names of famous Blues songs: ‘Dippermouth’, ‘Gut Bucket’, ‘Potato Head’, ‘Tin Roof’, and ‘Really’.
Upon receiving names they fly off into orbit, and return one by one during the course of the first part of the novel to be given ‘rebirth’ by Someone.
We eventually learn that Someone is a psychiatrist called Larry who works for a group of astrophysicists at a scientific research laboratory.
While undergoing an operation his heart has stopped, but he has come back to life after having been declared dead and deposited in a coffin.
The opening of the novel is then the story of his ‘death’: the time between ‘dying’ and coming back to full consciousness, a period of uncertain length, but possibly covering two years or more.
The adventures of Someone, Something and their five children are a hallucination experienced by Larry while his body is at a low level of psychic energy.
Something is his unconscious, and the planets or children are aspects of his life that return to him as he slowly readjusts to reality.
During his convalescence one of Larry's colleagues, Professor Head, explains to him the basic principles of astrophysics, and it gradually becomes clear that the intra-personal death story is also a metaphoric transposition of the laws of astrophysics onto the dreaming or hallucinating mind.
Someone and Something take on the attributes of cosmic bodies.
They have ‘meridians’ instead of arms, as well as‘atmospheric densities’which bend laws, and they emit light.
The lost ‘geometries of the psyche’ that govern their existence are intertwined with the materialized properties of discourse.
They take a trip in a ‘means of communication’ to the limits of language at the ultra-violet end of the verbal spectrum, and Someone is fuelled by the ‘internal combustion’of words (22/218,51/247).
Larry's return to life is recounted most extensively in the second part of the novel.
Since his operation he has become emotionally distant from his family and friends.
He is not well enough to return to his previous job, and his wife eventually leaves him.
A number of journalists try to exploit then novelty of his ‘death and amazing recovery’; other people who try to help him find him difficult to relate to.
He claims not to remember anything of his ‘death’, but various events in the death story recur in his second life: he confuses the five moon-children he fathers with his real children, and he speaks of people as though they were cosmic bodies.
He also has a new-found ability to ‘read’ people.
His eyes resemble dish-telescopes that seem to look right through his friends, and he sees the psychic energy people emit as an astrophysicist's radio-telescope ‘sees’ sounds bounced off distant galaxies.
Like the protagonist in Out , Larry interprets his own identity through the discourses that organize his experience.
Nothing can be taken ‘as such’ in this novel; it is always read through the screen of metaphoric focus.
But the question of the hierarchy between the two discourses involved in the metaphoric relation takes on a new light in Such .
Domination is not a matter of coercion by a social system, but of the distorting action of one discourse on another in the mind of the protagonist.
The discourse of astrophysics dominates as an organizing metaphor in the first part of the novel where it structures Someone's identity.
In the second part, Larry internalizes the discursive metaphor and deploys it in order to describe psychological phenomena.
In this second part he discusses his identity in terms of quantum mechanics.
After grappling over the course of the novel with his essential nature and that of those around him, he finally renounces his quest for a fixed meaning, a completed story:
— Larry, everyone deserves the attention of definiteness.
— Even if they prefer the uncertainty principle?
— They only pretend to prefer it.
While they have to.
You used to say that.
Someone would come along and find a unified theory that would do away with indeterminate interpretations, you'd say, and revert to causality.
I thought perhaps you might.
— I thought so too.
In psychic terms at least.
But I didn't.
In the meantime we do the best we can, some of us preferring to pretend causality exists, and others, others preferring to prefer its absence.
(191/387)
Causality is here contrasted with indeterminacy: either one pretends that the origin of psychological peculiarities is known and that it has the force of explanation, as in classical psychoanalysis, or one chooses to relinquish this concept and to see identity as a matter of discontinuity and flux.
Cautiously opting for the latter view, Larry bends the laws of astrophysics to construct a theory of subjectivity through the metaphoric lens of the uncertainty principle:
I think I believe that every particle of ourselves, whether combined with those of others in normal electrovalence to make up this or that slice of us, or whether bombarded by those of others until this or that human element mutates into some other, every particle of ourselves returns.
So that it has, in that sense, identity.
But you can never quite identify it at any given moment.
(191–2/387–8)
According to this theory, people are composed of discrete quanta that exist only in combination with those of others.
When the mechanics of causality have been forsaken, identity can never be known or measured, it can only be postulated and experienced.
Furthermore, an individual is at each moment only a partial manifestation of an identity revealed over time, what physicists call a ‘sum over histories’.
As a consequence of this underlying indeterminacy, names change, words are broken, and the laws of social interaction perpetually altered.
As his theory suggests, Larry has lost faith in traditional psychiatry.
If the discourse of psychoanalysis is read in the light of the uncertainty principle, it becomes evident that a reconstruction or aetiology of a patient's illness is impossible, for, like the ‘biogram’ in Out , the analytic process itself would alter the unconscious memories and phantasies that constitute traces of the origin of an illness.
Furthermore, Larry describes the matter that constitutes the density of his and other people's psyches as ‘resistance’(49/245), and in effect the density and opacity of his mind is also a permanent barrier to a clear understanding of his experiences, both past and present.
Someone has an ‘excrescent scar’(8/204) on his belly which mutates into a camera lens, an ‘eye gashed’(25/221) and a ‘birthmark’(54/250).
In Freudian terms these would be clear symbols of the fear of castration, but the laws of classical psychoanalytic interpretation are bent and broken in Such , and if anything it is the concept of the castration complex itself that is mutilated by its subjection to the laws of physics.
The scar, trace of an origin, is lost.
Professor Head makes this quite clear in the contrast he makes between Larry's former profession and his own:
We tap the silent telephones of outer space, we bounce our questions on the galaxies which answer out of aeons.
But they give no names, no explanations, only infinities of calculations.
You on the other hand give names to the complex geometries of the soul, you explain perhaps, but do you heal, within spacetime I mean.
These maps represent something, certainly, but not the ultimate mystery of the first creation that has gone for ever with its scar inside one huge unstable atom.
(75/271)
Analysis will not enable Larry to access the causes of the emotions and fears he ‘reads’ in the maps of people's minds any more than physicists will be able to ‘discover’the origin of the universe.
In his own attempt to ‘map’ the origins of life onto the individual psyche, Freud came to an unsettling conclusion.
Beyond the Pleasure Principle (1920) elaborates a theory of the death drive that very much resembles the concept of entropy used by physicists.
All life, he claims, strives in its forward movement to return to the quiescence from which it arose, a state it achieves finally in death.
If it is at this point that Freud's theory exceeds itself and is forced beyond the realm of the verifiable into that of speculation, this is also the point at which Such picks up the Freudian way of thinking.
Larry sees people as things, as emissions of particles and waves which his wife explains as radioactive decay:
I have come to the conclusion that you see radiation, Larry, and radiation consists after all of decay, degradation so that you see the death that lies inherent in all living existence.
(107/303)
Larry accepts this explanation and links it with his vague memories of the death world.
He cannot reconstruct his death, but its consequences are still felt:
I remember nothing but opaqueness.
Or something perhaps…moving through space forwards but back at the same time, as if I consisted of anti-matter for ever cancelled out…as if in all our words and gestures, acts and attitudes we effected some sort of parallel penetration into whatever had originated them, their primeval atom, with built-in unstableness. (107–108/303–4)
During the death story Tin Roof tells Someone that they don't ‘move in time’(133/329), but when he comes back to life, Larry feels as if he ‘live[s] backwards’(104/300) and hears conversations ‘in waves that run backwards through time’(103/299).
He believes that he has ‘lost something vital and positive’(146/342) in coming back to life, and wishes to ‘die again' (104/300), for he feels like a White Dwarf, or degenerate star that is very dense but not very bright.
Freud's theory of the death wish finds a parallel in the schizophrenic experiences described by R. D. Laing, whose work had a significant impact on a number of novelists of the period (see section 6.2 below).
Laing rejected classical psychoanalysis just as quantum theory rejected classical physics.
He believed that clinical descriptions of neuroses do not take into account the inner experiences of the patient which may be valid and even illuminating.
Larry would agree.
During his death he takes a series of trips in different vehicles: the airplane-like ‘vehicle of communication’, a boat, a car, a horse-drawn buggy and finally the cranial spaceship from which he is ultimately ejected back into life.
In an article originally published in 1964, Laing describes similar voyages into ‘inner space’ often recounted by people who have been diagnosed as schizophrenics.
He characterizes the phenomenon as follows:
This journey is experienced as going further ‘in’, as going back through one's personal life, in and back and through and beyond into the experience of all mankind, of the primal man, of Adam and perhaps even further into the being of animals, vegetables and minerals.
(1967:104)
A sense of loss of identity causes the voyager to project what he or she encounters so as to perceive it as an external phenomenon, and also to introject elements of the familiar world in order to recreate a recognizable context.
If Larry's death is understood as an inner voyage of the type described by Laing, a voyage occasioned by the physical trauma of a heart attack, many of the puzzling aspects of the novel begin to make more sense.
The metaphoric transposition of characteristics of outer space onto inner space can be seen as a characteristic attempt to give known form to that which is unfamiliar.
The name ‘Someone’ that the protagonist is given during his death indicates his loss of social identity: he is no one in particular but all people, for his nuclear death family constitutes the ‘primeval atom’.
This unusual situation provides a motivation for bringing together the extreme poles of our everyday understanding of space and time: the most outer and the most inner, the first and the last.
As in Out , schizophrenic discourse operates as a metaphoric tool that allows the novel to focus, like its concrete counterpart the radio telescope, on the limits of our spatio-temporal universe.
But while in Out schizophrenic discourse is an indication of psychological breakdown, in Such it represents, in Laing's terms, a breakthrough.
Though Larry does not ultimately succeed in reintegrating himself into the world, his efforts to come to terms with the consequences of his experience in the death world of his hallucination indicate a potential mode of interpersonal relation that would provide the basis for a more ‘sane’ existence.
Psychological alienation provides Such with a narrative pretext for bringing the theories of post-Einsteinian science to bear on the way we conceive of ourselves as individuals in relation to other people.
This is accomplished by metaphorically fitting the discourse of astrophysics on to that of psychology.
The ‘laws’ of the latter are altered as a consequence, and their validity as laws is challenged by their interaction with the uncertainties implicit in astrophysics.
The use of metaphor to unsettle a discourse which has widespread authority in our culture demonstrates that metaphor need not necessarily play a coercive role, that it can serve an interrogatory function as well.
This extension of the role of metaphor leads the way for the development of multiple, reversible discursive metaphor which is manifest in Between .
2.3 Between: The Multiple, Reversible Metaphor.
In contrast to the main characters of Out and Such , the anonymous protagonist of Between appears to be relatively well adapted to the world in which she lives and travels.
This is the world of airplanes, hotels, multinational conferences and multilingual small-talk, a spinning jumble of infinite variations on the same models.
She uses reversible metaphor to perform an integrative operation on this material, bringing it together in a mobile yet highly structured whole that turns around a small number of common patterns.
Between achieves a balance between the mobility and indeterminacy inherent in the postulates of our post-Einsteinian age and the rigid conventions toward which mass culture tends.
It does not provide a resolution of the conflict in either psychological or social terms, but because of the aesthetic coherence of the novel, the problem itself is stated more forcefully than it is in either of the two previous works.
In the traditional realist novel the plot provides a principle of organization, while symbolic structures are fitted in around this frame.
But like Out and Such ,Between takes as its principle of organization a network of associations formed in the verbal consciousness of the protagonist.
This structure is not ‘literary’ in the sense of being above and beyond the mundane, or at a higher aesthetic level than that achieved by the characters implicated in it.
Rather, as in Out and Such , the structure of the novel reflects the means by which the day-to-day world is apprehended.
The metaphoric juxtaposition of incongruous thematic material is motivated by the exigencies of the main character's job as a simultaneous interpreter.
She speaks several languages and partakes of many specialized vocabularies in the context of her daily existence.
Although none of the words she utters professionally is her own, fragments of the lectures she translates at conferences constantly invade her thoughts.
She is, in her professional capacity, the site of convergence of many discourses but the generator of none.
In her private life material from conference lectures is combined with the pop-culture mythology of advertisements, phrase-book dialogues, and other public texts in a number of languages to generate a network of images that is in turn linked to semi-conscious obsessions and childhood memories.
The story-line of Between is far from straightforward, but it is logically relatively unambiguous.
As in Out and Such , free direct speech interspersed with actual and remembered dialogue is the primary mode of the novel, but unlike the two previous works,Between renders the observations and fantasies of a sane mind in a familiar world.
The protagonist has a French mother and a German father.
She was brought up in France just before the Second World War, but as an adolescent she was sent to spend a year with relatives in Germany where she was forced to remain when fighting broke out.
During the war she worked as a translator, and at the time of the action of the novel she has taken up this trade again recently.
Though punctuated by frequent flash-backs to the period before, during and just after the war, temporal progression in the present is clearly marked by the development of two narrative lines which weave their ways in and out of the novel.
The first is the saga of the protagonist's marriage annulment, involving several hearings, frequent trips to Rome, and a good deal of frustration.
The second revolves around a series of love-letters written in Medieval French.
It is eventually discovered that they are from the ageing Frenchman Bertrand.
The protagonist laughs at the letters at first and refuses to answer them, but eventually her curiosity is piqued and she engages in a prolonged correspondence with her admirer.
This ends abruptly when the two finally meet and discover that ‘fornication by airmail’ is more enjoyable than the real thing.
While there is little ambiguity as to what ‘happens’ in the novel, the temporal perspective from which events are recounted is not well defined.
Events do not succeed each other in time, instead reversible metaphor is used to inaugurate shifts between scenes, none of which is more ‘proper’ or ‘metaphoric’than any other.
This process is illustrated in the following passage which switches from hotel room to airport on the basis of a structural analogy:
…the black and red patterned blanket folded over with the top sheet to form two parallel white borders from which the planes move slowly off, rise suddenly and vanish or come in out of the low grey cloud….(10–11/404–5)
The novel begins and ends with the description of a commercial airplane interior, to which it often returns.
It is possible that the entire text is a combination of description and recollection from the perspective of a single flight, in which case it takes place over the course of a few hours, the time it takes to read it.
Equally, the airplane interiors described could all be different, though they look alike, and in fact the novel could span ten years or more.
This devaluation of the temporal aspect of the story through temporal ambiguity serves to displace logical emphasis from chronological continuity onto other structural patterns.
The metaphoric networks that bind together thematic sequences are organized by two underlying figures: enclosure and penetration.
Enclosure is manifest in many forms; it is at once the womb-like interior of airplane, the surface of the body, the frame of a window, the border between countries, and the boundary between discourses.
In short, enclosure comes to signify insularity and the maintenance of distinct divisions between things.
It is associated with the Catholic Church, the institution of marriage, loyalty to the fatherland, and belief in general.
The protagonist also feels the need to insulate herself emotionally, a form of protectionism which bears a problematic resemblance to the cultural chauvinism and xenophobia she witnesses during the war.
The tendency toward enclosure and fixed meanings is thus political and personal, as well as discursive.
The contrary tendency towards transgression, inter-penetration, invasion, and the erosion of emotional walls of defence is manifested most explicitly as polyglossia and the multilingual play of words.
This mixing of linguistic and cultural codes is frequently linked to the sexual act: ‘as if words fraternised silently beneath the syntax, finding each other funny and delicious in a Misch-Masch of tender fornication’(53/447).
Illicit relations with the enemy during war-time echo also in the recurrent phrase ‘the languages fraternise behind their own façades’(55/449; variations: 53/447,123/517,148/542,154/548).
‘Fraternization’ then becomes a catch-word for describing the work of the reversible metaphor which plays havoc with entrenched political power relations by transgressing personal, cultural, and national frontiers.
The ‘fraternization’ of disparate discourses provides a point of transfer between narrative compartments and metaphoric networks that are logically, temporally, or thematically distant.
These transition-metaphors operate at several discursive levels.
They can hinge on words that have more than one meaning or more than one usage, words that rhyme or sound similar, common thematic elements, or common symbolic associations.
The passages that follow illustrate the mechanics of this type of metaphor.
In the first example a transition is accomplished when a single word pivots on its axis of signification during the course of a sentence:
The words prevent any true EXCHANGE caught in the late afternoon sun. (5/399)
The word ‘EXCHANGE’ transposes the intellectual exchange of ideas into a commercial context while at the same time ‘highlighting’the signifier, the letters on the sign of a bureau de change.
One definition is exchanged for another, semantic currency is taken from one discursive economy and converted into the currency of another.
But this interruption also blocks the passage of ideas by shifting emphasis away from the signified.
The polysemic capacity of the signifier is what, in effect, prevents the passage of meaning.
Throughout the novel no idea exists in isolation.
During the process of ‘translation’, the signifier inevitably intercepts the signified and draws each word into a network of other concepts.
Like the discursive ‘slips’ discussed with reference to Out , the word ‘EXCHANGE’partakes simultaneously of two non-commensurate discourses.
It thus fulfils the affirmative function of transmission and the negative function of prevention, both of which are designated semantically.
Polysemy again operates as an agent of transition between contexts in the following sentence in which a customs declaration becomes a declaration of love:
Have you anything to declare such as love desire ambition or a glimpse that in this air-conditioning and other circumstantial emptiness freedom has its sudden attractions as the body floats in willing suspension of responsibility to anyone.
(28/422)
Even after migration between discursive realms has been effected, the juridical flavour of the customs declaration is not completely relinquished.
It haunts the remainder of the passage.
The phrase ‘circumstantial emptiness’ echoes ‘circumstantial evidence’, and ‘freedom’is linked to the ‘suspension of responsibility’experienced when the body ‘floats’inside an airplane, suspended between borders, ideologies and romantic involvements.
The discourse of authority represented by customs is outwitted when the text escapes into the domain of personal relations through a semantic back-door in the word ‘declaration’.
But the evasion is not completely successful, for the authorities have semantic outposts in other words as well.
In these examples descriptions of exchange and the crossing of frontiers illustrate the move from one discursive domain to another, showing how such actions can be made to function as textual manoeuvres and figure the metaphoric strategies of the imagination.
It is clear that power relations and territorial rights (personal and otherwise) are implicated in this process.
As in Out , the invasions operated by metaphor both subvert authority and threaten personal security.
But Between portrays a successful navigation between the desire to transgress and the need for the stability provided by insularity.
Unlike the characters in the two previous novels, the protagonist emerges safe and sound from her semiotic entanglements.
As we have seen, metaphoric reversibility is figured in the text thematically as the condition of being suspended between ideologies, languages and countries, or as the act of crossing from one to another.
This is one's situation in an airplane, for instance, and in linguistic terms it is a state of verbal anarchy, the condition under which languages ‘fraternize’.
Politically, between-ness ‘help[s] to abolish the frontiers of misunderstanding with frequent changes of partners loyalties convictions, free and easily stepping over the old boundaries’(43/437).
But sexual and intellectual promiscuity — the frequent substitution of one partner, idea or belief for another — involves a constant deferral of meaning that leads inevitably to a distrust of language and an uneasiness with regard to self-definition.
It is significant that, as Brooke-Rose elsewhere notes (1981:413), the verb ‘to be’ is never used in Between .
This calls into question the concept of ‘ontological recognition’ which provides, according to one speaker whose paper the protagonist translates, a means for the individual of achieving reintegration and ‘totality’(112/506).
But the absence is in fact only a dissimulation, for etymologically the word ‘between’ is a fusion of ‘be’and ‘two’.
The condition of ‘between-ness’ is then one of doubling which is at the origin of ‘fraternization’and transgression.
The body is repeatedly described as floating between two states and harbouring contradictory feelings simultaneously.
Nothing is simply or singly, to be is to be between ideas, beliefs, cultures, and discourses.
The images and symbols that are used in Between to demonstrate the mechanics of the imagination do not pretend to be original; they are self-consciously mined in the cultural history of the West.
Brooke-Rose attempts rather to use old material in new ways.
By means of juxtaposition and carefully-wrought connections, she fuses the cognitive processes of metaphoric structuration and epistemological organization.
What ‘happens’ is linked in the protagonist's mind to the networks of her imagination.
The latter become the ‘mensonge vital’ of fantasy and fiction that provides her with a means of coping in a hostile world.
Between demonstrates how a multiplicity of different discursive systems intertwine to form the substrata of an individual mind which plays them off against each other, combines them and uses them to generate the repertory of stories that determine how she ‘reads’ the world in which she lives.
By focusing the conception of metaphor Brooke-Rose developed in the 1950s on Out ,Such , and Between , I have demonstrated how these novels elaborate the implications of what she herself recognized then as metaphor's chief virtue: its ability to animate and to mobilize the structures on which it works.
Her use of metaphor is based on the ‘poetic’ technique of repetition and variation of the same elements in an ever-expanding cosmos of contexts.
In Out the proliferation of various permutations of the same material is a reaction against the coercive use of metaphor, but it eventually leads to psycho-discursive disintegration as the central consciousness loses control over his own faculties of thought and reason.
In Such an alternative world is proposed, a world of indeterminacy which allows for variation and flux, with a theory of identity to match it.
But though this world informs the real world, it does not have the power to change it, for Larry is unsuccessful in convincing others of the validity of his theory.
Finally in Between a balance is struck between the proliferation of metaphor on the one hand, and fixed semantic boundaries on the other, and it is in the more formally controlled context of this novel that discursive metaphor achieves the full realization of its potential as an agent of linguistic and conceptual refraction.
Out ,Such , and Between represent the first steps in Christine Brooke-Rose's ongoing exploration of the complex relations between subjectivity and the discursive matrix in which it is embedded.
This has led her beyond the sciences, but the philosophical and literary implications of her involvement with the theories of Heisenberg and others have left a lasting mark on her work.
In seeking to develop a technique that would be compatible with the findings of modern physics, she demonstrates the relevance of even the most abstract of concepts to our understanding of ourselves and our relation to others through language.
She also succeeds in integrating conceptual and psychological material in such a way as to portray individual experience without turning the fictional character into a mere conduit for information.
The technique of discursive metaphor allows the individual to be depicted as both passively spoken through by language and actively involved in the discursive process of identity-construction.
This conception of subjectivity paves the way for the contestation in Brooke-Rose's later fiction of the hierarchical relations implicit in the conceptions of discursive identity by which we live.
Chapter III
Between, Thru, and Amalgamemnon: Gender and the Discourses of the Human Sciences
‘Plus vaut encore de ne parler que par équivoques, allusions, sous-entendus’(Irigaray 1974:178)
Christine Brooke-Rose's growing interest in structuralist linguistics is evident in her novels of the 1960s in the use of creative juxtaposition and other devices which depend for their effect on the relations between elements rather than on the elements ‘as such’.
In Out and Such one discourse is brought to bear on another through metaphor; in Between ,Thru , and Amalgamemnon the same type of metaphor is used to bring a number of discourses together in an increasingly interrogative conjunction.
In these novels Brooke-Rose exploits the rhetorical force of the metaphoric technique by employing it to explore, among other things, gender stereotypes as they are manifest in specialized discourses.
The three novels exhibit a growing confidence in a central female persona's attitude toward her use of language.
In Between the protagonist confronts the jargons of a number of fields from a female perspective.
Though the result is often parodic, she is a conveyer, not an active producer of these jargons.
In Thru the discourses of literary theory are manipulated in part by a female voice, but active questioning of their status and function is accomplished on the level of the novel's overall orchestration and its symbolic structure.
In Amalgamemnon the central female character takes an overtly subversive approach.
She both appropriates and adulterates the discourses of history, challenging their claim to tell the truth and their implicit exclusion of women from positions of discursive authority.
In each novel there is an effect of double-voicing: the female voice speaks through the discourses in question in such a way as to shift their emphasis.
She uses them selectively and strategically to reveal the assumptions behind them and their hidden agendas.
Brooke-Rose's use of double-voicing is a natural extension of the metaphoric combination of discourses in her first two experimental novels.
But it is also a technique that is ‘parodic’ in the Bakhtinian sense, or ‘subversively mimetic’in the sense that Luce Irigaray uses this concept.
Both theorists valorize polyphonic discourse because it implicitly questions the notion of the unitary subject and the binary logic which subtends this notion.
Bakhtin's theory of dialogism had a significant influence on French theorists of the late 1960s, and many of their conceptions of the disruptive power of certain kinds of language follow a similar logic.
Julia Kristeva and Gilles Deleuze both reject the Aristotelian logic of the excluded middle which they see as being based on the subject-predicate structure of the sentence.
Kristeva posits a poetic 0–2 logic that is ‘transfini’ or ‘dialogique (1969:92,141–4).
It is the logic that transgresses the unitary 1 of ‘Dieu, la loi, la définition’(90); it is the logic of ambivalence and of the ‘polyphonic’ novel, for fiction, as she defines it, is ‘cette réunion non-synthétique entre ‘est’et ‘n'est pas’'(1974:353).
Deleuze elaborates a ‘logique du sens’ valorizing paradox and ‘synthèse disjonctive’(1969:84), while Derrida's ‘logique du supplément’(1967) and his quaternary chiasmatic logic (1972a) provide a means of integrating indeterminacy or ‘play’into the heart of binary structures.
The attempt to subvert binary logic threatens to invalidate the structuralist enterprise, and it is not without reason that in the early seventies Kristeva, Irigaray, and other women theorists began to map structuralism's binary logic onto the social and discursive oppression of women by men.
Lévi-Strauss had already described the fundamental structure of society and language in terms of the exchange of women, which he saw as the basis of all exchange:
…les règles de la parenté et du mariage servent á assurer la communication des femmes entre les groupes, comme les règles économiques servent á assurer la communication des biens et des services, et les règles linguistiques, la communication des messages.
(1958:95)
Citing Lévi-Strauss's analogy between the object of exchange in each of these systems and Jakobson's zero-phoneme, Jacques Lacan draws out the consequences of this paradigm for (male) discourse:
…la Dette inviolable est la garantie que le voyage où sont poussés femmes et biens ramène en un cycle sans manquement á leur point de départ d'autres femmes et d'autres biens, porteurs d'une entité identique: symbole zéro, dit Lévi-Strauss, réduisant á la forme d'un signe algébrique le pouvoir de la Parole.
(1966:279)
He goes on to link Lévi-Strauss's idea of exchange as the mastery of women to Freud's interpretation of his grandson's game of fort/da as a representation of the alternation of presence and absence.
Lacan reasons that the accession to subjectivity is accomplished through the accession to language which involves the substitution of linguistic presence and absence for the presence and absence of the desired object (284–5,318–19).
The child becomes a discursive subject when it succeeds in controlling the departure and return of its mother through symbolic mastery.
Language use is thus dependent on the suppression of the mother ‘beneath the bar’ of signification because ‘le symbole se manifeste d'abord comme le meurtre de la chose’(319).
Women obviously have an interest in contesting this understanding of language as the exchange and symbolic annihilation of their sex.
Since it is based on Lévi-Strauss's binary conception in which women figure as absent (0) and men as present (1), the unitary male discursive subject is the first target of the feminist deconstructive enterprise.
The logic of 0–2, or disjunctive inclusion, rejects the principle of the excluded middle; like the Freudian unconscious, it is thus able to accept contradiction.
The unconscious as ‘process’, the ‘imaginary’, and the zone of the pre-symbolic are privileged in the feminized logical structures of Cixous (1975), Kristeva (1974), and others because they mark the areas in which male domination and discursive control are incomplete or ineffective.
The gendering of logical structures leads Kristeva in 1974 to posit a distinction between the ‘semiotic’(Lacan's ‘Imaginary’) and the ‘symbolic’.
The semiotic is closely associated with the mother in that it is pre-discursive (pre-Oedipal).
It can therefore not be articulated on its own; it must be spoken through the language of the symbolic, just as in Bakhtin's ‘dialogic’ conception of parody one voice speaks through another which it seeks to undermine.
The semiotic surfaces as rhythmic pulses, disturbances in logic, and other ‘poetic’ mechanisms that mark it as the source of the ‘poetic’in writing (1974:22–30, see also Brooke-Rose 1981:342).
Luce Irigaray sees a similar process at work in the language of the hysteric which is never able to assert itself as definitive or complete (1966:29–30).
In her analyses of Freud's conception of female sexuality, she demonstrates that Freud's view of women as lack or as absence forces them into the discursive position of the hysteric because it denies them autonomous identity and obliges them to mimic the voice of the dominant male if they wish to be heard at all(1974:66–71).
Their voice is stigmatized by men as a ‘foisonnement de phantasmes, de fantômes, d'ombres'(70), in other words, as the voice of non-truth.
It can only ever be a mimicry, for, as Irigaray argues, women can never accede to the condition of subjectivity: ‘Toute théorie du ‘sujet’ aura toujours été appropriée au ‘masculin’'(165).
They are forced to operate in the pre-subjective domain of the specular imaginary, using a tactic of ‘mimétisme ’(subversive mimesis) that Irigaray both describes and illustrates in her writing.
Women's discourse may only be a flawed copy of its male counterpart, but, as Irigaray shows, women can use this apparent deficiency to their advantage by allowing the ‘bad copy’ to become a subversive caricature in which the difference between the double and the ‘original’reveals the gender bias underlying male discourse and (male) subjectivity (1977:73–4).
What Irigaray describes as mimétisme can also be thought of as parody.
According to Bakhtin, parody is a ‘dialogic’ form which frees consciousness from the coercive force of ‘monologic’language by registering the distance between language and reality (1981:60).
In an article first published in 1985 Brooke-Rose discusses the theories of parody developed by both Bakhtin and Genette (1985c; revised in 1991a:191–203).
She compares Bakhtin's definition of parody as divergent bifocal discourse based on the degree of presence and orientation of ‘voices’ with Genette's more restricted definition of the term.
Genette distinguishes parody from other forms of ‘hypertextuality’ as that ludic mode which effects punctual and systematic transformations of specific texts while retaining the noble style of the original (1982:33–5).
According to both these definitions Between ,Thru , and Amalgamemnon exhibit parodic elements.
They contain punctual alterations of specific texts, and they stage the confrontation between two or more voices.
But all three novels also exhibit significant variations on parody as it has been practised in the past.
The internal relations of the multiple ‘voices’ in Brooke-Rose's parodies are considerably more complex than in the examples Bakhtin analyses; though their ‘orientations’are not always directly opposed, they nevertheless succeed in deflecting the text away from its nominal object and making the reader aware of the devices they use.
With reference to Genette's definition they are exceptional in that their object texts are not only other ‘noble’ works of literature but quotations from scholars, product labels, radio broadcasts, advertisements, propaganda slogans, and various other ‘public texts’or textual objets trouvés .
The radical ‘para’ found in both ‘paradox’and ‘parody’provides a spatial model for a variety of techniques displayed in the novels.
Meaning both ‘against’ and ‘beside’, ‘para’suggests a tactic of confrontation through juxtaposition.
Between ,Thru , and Amalgamemnon manifest structures of adjacency or alterity in which exemplary texts of both past and present are invoked and implicitly questioned by being brought together and made to interact; their semantic orientation is refracted by the context in which they are placed and their referential function remotivated.
This form of parodic engagement with the discursive edifices erected by a male-dominated society is depicted in the novels as a distinctly feminine linguistic strategy.
It is suggested that only by acting on the systems which constrain them can women hope to free themselves, and each of the three novels explores different possible forms this discursive action can take.
Nevertheless, Christine Brooke-Rose does not classify herself as a feminist.
Though Between and Thru exhibit striking parallels with the emergent thinking in the late 1960s and early 1970s about the relation of women to language, it was not until nearly fifteen years later that she began to make use of gender-specific arguments in her critical writings.
In the mid 1980s she became increasingly conscious of the links between gender and reception.
Since that time she has published four articles in which she discusses the problems women experimental writers face (1986d, 1988a, 1989a, 1989c; see also 1989e).
In each case she argues that female creativity has been constructed by men as a contradiction in terms.
In the article ‘Illiterations’(1989a; revised in 1991a:250–64) she demonstrates that the development of the Western conception of creativity in women and men is based on metaphors of reproduction which figure woman's role as the material ‘work’ of child-bearing, and the experience of men as spontaneous spurts of genius.
But she points out that men have also appropriated the female role (which is more active) as a painless metaphor for their own artistic endeavours:
For men have always had it both ways: the begetting and the travail (the travail which, as ‘work’ belongs to culture, but which as bearing and ‘labour’belongs to nature); the genius and the work (the genius which is itself both passive possession and authoritative production), the penis and the womb.
Man has in fact appropriated, to represent his relation to truth or God, both aspects of woman's role in relation to man: the being made fecund and the travail. (1991a:256–7; italics in the original)
In Between ,Thru , and Amalgamemnon Brooke-Rose reappropriates for women the role of one whose relation to language is both active and passive, that of the producer as well as the means of production.
This paradoxical role is represented in Between and Amalgamemnon by the symbol of Jonas inside the whale, waiting to be ‘reborn’.
It is the provisional position of the female subject who is still dependent on discourses developed by men and saturated with their prejudices.
While she awaits her birth into her own voice, she can only speak through the voices of others, but this ‘speaking through’ also constitutes her struggle to get out.
The refraction and fusion of discourses accomplished by discursive metaphor provided Brooke-Rose with the technical means for the strategy of mimétisme with which she began to experiment in Between .
Soon after, she recognized in a certain strain of feminist theory an approach to language which had much in common with the approach she herself had been developing over a number of years.
The feminist arguments in favour of dialogic forms of language use helped her to clarify her own reasons for employing discursive metaphor and parody, and the gendering by feminists of the notion of the ‘bad copy’ enabled her to incorporate her own techniques of mis-representation into a readily recognizable social context.
Brooke-Rose's engagement with feminist theory is typical of her encounter with literary theory in general.
In a recent essay she claims to have had a strong sense of déjá-vu upon first reading theories of post-structuralism and postmodernism, for though she had never been able to articulate them clearly in conceptual form, she had discovered many of the concepts these theories present through writing fiction (1991a:165).
The double-voicedness of the novels examined in this chapter is thus itself double: not only are they illustrations of how the voice of an individual interacts with the anonymous collective voice of a discursive system, they also stage the confrontation between the language of fiction and that of the human sciences which have the same object but different methods.
By articulating the fictional through the ‘scientific’, the novels question the authority of the latter and reassert the specificity of the former as a discourse which has as its function to mimic and to question.
3.1 Between: The Semiotics of Culture and Gender.
It will by now have become apparent that Brooke-Rose shifts her attention increasingly toward language over the course of her oeuvre .
This is particularly noticeable in Between ; indeed she herself says ‘it's really with Between that I discovered what I could do with language’(1989e:83).
In Out phrases of government jargon reverberate within the protagonist's mind and the multiple meanings of words generate associations which guide his train of thought.
In Such the dissection of conventional locutions is contrasted with the ‘transparent’ day-to-day use of language.
But it is in Between that the function of language to convey meaning is most actively questioned.
As we saw in chapter two, the number and variety of messages with which the main character is bombarded causes her to reflect on the role they play in her daily life.
I shall examine in this section the means by which different discourses and public texts are ground together to reveal the common structures that underlie them and the common strategies they employ.
With Between the relationship between language and gender becomes significant both thematically and structurally for the first time in Brooke-Rose's fiction.
Brooke-Rose started writing the novel in 1964, but she became blocked and eventually put it aside in order to write Such .
When she again took up Between in 1967 she decided to change the gender of the main character from male to female and ‘it suddenly worked’(1990c:32).
She suggests that this was perhaps because women have traditionally been seen as having a passive relation to language which is similar to that of a simultaneous interpreter who translates the ideas of others but does not produce any of her own (32).
Brooke-Rose acknowledges that this is a ‘cliché’, but claims that it was ‘true enough generally…for the purpose of creating the language of the novel’(1991a:7).
The language of the novel makes use of this cliché to demonstrate first that there is a profound ambiguity in the social construction of femininity according to which women are passive but at the same time subversive of the binary distinction which so construes them, and second that all people, male and female, are condemned to being at least partially the product of the language of others.
According to the gender stereotypes that permeate the novel, the mixing and crossing of multiple codes is a characteristically feminine approach to language.
By contrast, the (masculine) discourses of knowledge weaken symbolic systems by treating them as ‘true’: ‘our masculine-dominated civilisation…has turned vital lies into fragile truths’(175/569).
The female version of knowledge is characteristically an inversion: ‘our masculine-dominated myth turned upside down, in, out, around’(118/512).
A mock-textbook example drawn from a conference paper symbolizes the figure of ambiguity and multiplicity associated with femininity: ‘Comment on the gender of amour’(163/557).
Masculine in the singular and feminine in the plural, the word amour encapsulates a structure which serves as a model for the respective conceptions of unitary masculine logic and multiple, reversible feminine logic.
Linguistic and sexual terminology come together most often in the context of the Saussurian theorization of binary opposition, illustrated by an excerpt from a paper given at a conference on linguistics:
Et comme l'a si bien dit Saussure, la langue peut se contenter de l'opposition de quelque chose avec rien.
The marked term on the one hand, say, the feminine, grand e , the unmarked on the other, say the masculine, grand.
Mais notez bien que le non-marqué peut dériver du marqué par retranchement, by subtraction, par une absence qui signifie. (32/426)
Derivation of the masculine from the feminine ‘by subtraction’ sets up a logical opposition between positive, present feminine and negative, absent masculine.
This corresponds to the main character's own personal situation of being without a man.
But paradoxically, the phrase ‘une absence qui signifie’ is also used to designate her conception of herself as being without identity (which corresponds to Freud's characterization of femininity as a ‘lack’or symbolic castration).
An analysis of feminine and masculine symbolism delivered at a conference on ‘archetypology’ characterizes ‘inversion by double negation’as ‘typical of the imaginative function in its descending aspect of depth, night, femininity, container which becomes contained, swallower which becomes swallowed’as opposed to the ‘upward masculine aspect’(109/503).
Later the masculine myth is restated as a phallic ‘spiral…like a ziggurat or seven-terraced Tower of Babel’(139/533).
The inauguration of linguistic difference, associated with the Tower of Babel, is then typically masculine, whereas mythic ‘femininity’ subverts distinctions through inversion.
According to this scenario, the maintenance of oppositional structures is constantly being protected by the masculine aspect, while its feminine counterpart strives to undermine them, and even to undermine this constitutive definition itself by the use of reversible structures echoed in the novel's metaphoric construction.
The liminal position of the female voice with regard to the texts she translates provides an illustration of this ‘female’ tendency to undermine distinctions.
Like the Saussurian sign, she defines herself by and through her relations with others.
She feels she has no intrinsic self but only the provisional identity of the texts she translates.
Her role as a simultaneous interpreter is a hyperbolic figuration of the Barthesian character who is no more than the point of intersection of a number of different public codes (Barthes 1970b:74).
The absence from the novel of the verb ‘to be’ corresponds to this differential definition of the self that is no one thing but can say anything, and the ‘loss of identity through language’, which Brooke-Rose regards as one of the most important themes of the novel (1989e:84), is evident in the character's consciousness of living ‘between ideas’(19/413).
Though her job is to translate as faithfully as possible, this process is replicated in her mind by ‘bad copies’ in which analogous discursive systems are conjoined in such a way as to emphasize disparities between them or unexpected parallels.
Very often her ludic manipulation of language takes the form of intentional ‘errors’.
Multilingual puns are a favourite plaything of both her and her friend Siegfried.
When accused of using words ‘most imprecisely’, Siegfried replies ‘I use them simultanément’(36/430).
The subtle flaws inherent in any equation of equivalent terms becomes a generative device.
I demonstrated in the previous chapter that the use of discursive metaphor causes simultaneity and association to replace causality and linear chronology as the compositional principles of the novel, allowing changes of scene in mid-sentence and the coexistence of a number of often incompatible signifieds in a given signifier.
This process is described as ‘telescoping time with an error’(13/417,110/504), but it can also be understood as a creative transformation.
In The Dear Deceit mis-quotation generates an ironic effect of mis-contextualization.
The device of mis-quotation is used in a similarly ironic fashion in Between when an American character mangles a passage from Macbeth : ‘lirrechur, eh?
Tomorrow and tomorrow and tomorrow, creeps in this petty place from day to day…’(35/429).
The act of quotation is a demonstration of supposed knowledge, an exhibition of what Pierre Bourdieu terms ‘cultural capital’; but here it misfires and the quoted text becomes the agent of parody.
Several pages later the central voice sabotages this transaction of symbolic worth by crossing the American man's substitution of ‘place’ for ‘pace’with a creative mis-translation:
I luoghi: Slowly now.
The places: La Francia, la Germania, e sopratutto la Britannia, la dolce Inghilterra….
Tomorrow and tomorrow creeps in this petty luogo dove esplose il divorzio tra uomo e Dio….(41/435)
The ‘explosion’ in and of the sentence recalls the protagonist's lapsed faith.
In her mind she associates the act of translation with transubstantiation through a chain of associations (see 13/407,20/414,112/506,139/533,164/558), and the lapse in her relations with God corresponds to similar ‘flaws’ in her use of language.
The same metaphor is employed in The Languages of Love , but rather than representing tragic alienation as it does there, here it acts as a principle of formal and thematic patterning.
The ‘bad copies’ the main character produces are made possible by the fact that a number of comparable codes are juxtaposed simultaneously in her mind.
In an interview Christine Brooke-Rose illustrates the capacity for this type of juxtaposition to generate parody:
…when the Nixon pardon was announced on television…it said CBS special, you know, complete and free pardon, etc. and then, on the local station, ‘this program is presented to you by X, the deodorant that kills domestic odors.’
I just collapsed with laughter….
Maybe the announcer thought it was funny, but these things happen, the coincidences in life.
So that rather than doing what language is supposed to do, that bit of publicity, it does exactly the opposite.
You know, one whiff and it's clean, and of course with the Nixon pardon this is exactly what happened.
(1976k:15)
The semantic remotivation characteristic of parody is accomplished in this instance not by exaggeration, but by the repetition of an ‘equivalent’ message in two different contexts.
This technique is evident in Between , published six years earlier:
…the men in the café sit transfixed by the flickering local variation in the presentation of opposite viewpoints on every aspect of an instant world through faceless men who have no doubt acquired faces for them as their arch-priests of actualitá that zooms flashcuts explodes to OMO!
Da oggi con Perboral!
Lava ancora più bianco!
Gut-gut.
Più bianco than what?
We live in an age of transition, perpetually between white and whiter than white.
(24–5/418–19, cf. 38/432, 125/519)
For Bakhtin, parody and stylization objectify their target by introducing ‘a new semantic intention into a discourse which already has, and which retains, an intention of its own’(1984:189).
In the case of parody, this intention is ‘directly opposed to the original one’ and the result is ‘an arena of battle between voices’(193).
The ‘battle between voices’ in the above passage is not so much a semantic opposition as a fight for rhetorical supremacy.
Conforming to Genette's definition, the target is a specific pre-existent text incorporated literally into the parody (though in this case the original is ‘vulgar’ not ‘noble’).
Semantic inflation devalues the referential relevance of the advertisement's claim.
The comparative ‘più’ has no object; the difference between ‘white’and ‘whiter than white’is neither quantitative nor qualitative, it is a difference between determinate meaning and its abolition.
As with the misquotation cited above, the function of the advertisement is deflected: the text is made to refer to its own rhetorical device of washing meaning out of language.
It is also used as an agent of ironic comment whose target is the ‘actualitá’ of the news broadcast from which all distinguishing features have been purged.
The discourse of rhetoric (advertising) and the discourse of truth (the news) are implicitly equated through their juxtaposition, and the purgative action described by the one is operated on the other.
In Mythologies Barthes discusses advertisements for Omo and Persil in terms of the connotations they invoke.
He argues that the products are portrayed as chasing away dirt without harming the fabric:
…on met en mouvement la vanité, le paraître social, en donnant á comparer deux objets dont l'un est plus blanc que l'autre.
La publicité Omo …engage ainsi le consommateur dans une sorte de mode vécu de la substance, le rend complice d'une délivrance et non plus seulement bénéficiaire d'un résultat….
L'important c'est d'avoir su masquer la fonction abrasive du détergent sous l'image délicieuse d'une substance á la fois profonde et aérienne. (1957:39–40; italics in the original)
Indeed the advertisement cited in Between engages the central figure in a ‘mode vécu de la substance’.
She thinks of herself as a discursive fabric in which beliefs get lodged and are subsequently removed.
In an ironic vulgarization of Christian symbolism she is ‘delivered’ from her marriage, her country, and even her religion through the purgative action of language.
In order to get a job at the end of the war, she and Siegfried need to obtain what she calls a ‘Persil-Schein certificate denazifying us whiter than white’(79/473).
But the language she uses to describe this process demonstrates her parodic attitude toward it.
Like the implicit analogy between the Nixon pardon and a cleaning product, the comparison between denazification and the action of washing powder points to the arbitrary nature of the performative act and questions the authority on which it is based.
By tacitly demonstrating that the claim of denazification is no more legitimate than the commercial propaganda of television publicity, it levels them semantically and reveals the similarity of the linguistic techniques they use.
There is a fundamental ambiguity, however, in the protagonist's relation to language: the levelling of meaning and the abolition of distinction is at once the device used by parody and the effect it attacks.
The surfeit of codes and jargons in which she is immersed brings about a loss of faith in the power of the word, but her attitude toward the ‘instant world’ that is ‘whiter than white’because it has no memory and no values makes her uneasy.
Because of the inherently paradoxical nature of her existence, she is a representative figure of the ‘age of transition’.
As Susan Suleiman observes, she is an ‘emblem of our ambiguous present’(1989:127),
…on the one hand, close to being submerged by the detritus of civilization whose broken-up quality she both registers and exemplifies…; on the other hand,playing with that very sense of loss, that same detritus, and producing (sometimes) an exhilarating laughter.
(126; italics in the original)
The object of parody in Between is not so much theories and belief systems themselves as the linguistic manoeuvres by which they attempt to convince.
All efforts to communicate, whether in the context of a scholarly debate or a love-letter, are reduced to propaganda and rhetorical gimmicks designed to co-opt the truth in the name of patriotism, love, or science.
But in none of the above cases do the manoeuvres by which the main character resists her passive relation to language engage her in active polemic with other texts.
By making language do other than what it is designed to do in its original context, parodic manipulation undermines its illocutionary force rather than its explicit semantic content.
Though local assaults using pre-existent texts are not uncommon in the novel, they constitute a subset of a more generalized strategy described by Genette as pastiche and by Bakhtin as discourse with a ‘sideward glance at someone else's word’(1984:199).
Between is a hotch-potch of different ‘voices’ with degrees of autonomy ranging from direct quotation to the barely noticeable trace of the influence of a specialized discourse evident in a single word or the syntax of a sentence.
Most of the novel falls between these two poles: pastiches of learned vocabularies are interwoven with the ‘vulgar’ language of travel, and the effects this produces vary widely.
What joins the various devices under a common heading is the fact that in all cases the discourses invoked are spoken through by a voice which has little or no inherent identity of its own but is defined as a principle of interrogative conjunction.
This tactic of disarming a discourse by inverting it and tacitly denying its claim to tell the truth is implicitly linked to the feminine mythology that the novel elaborates thematically.
Linguistic posturing of this sort is the extreme reaction of a character in an extreme situation, but it dramatizes rhetorical manoeuvres available to both men and women who are forced into a position of discursive subservience.
3.2 Thru: Theories of Fiction and Fictions of Femininity.
With Thru Brooke-Rose turns from the discourses of culture in the wide sense of the term to the discourse of ‘high’ culture.
While Between explores the discursive role of women from a semiotic perspective and isolates characteristically female forms of language use which hold the potential for critical examination of our contemporary cultural ‘mythologies’, the object-discourses on which Thru works are those of which it is itself an object.
The same parodic tactics used in Between are evident in this novel, but transposed onto the self-reflexive plane of metafiction they become magnified, hence more overt.
Thru subverts the literary theory which has as its premise that every narrative contains a meaning and that this meaning can be accounted for in terms of a universal ‘elementary structure of signification’ which posits woman as an object of exchange between men.
The novel does to structuralist theories of meaning what Irigaray does to Freud's theory of feminine sexuality: it mimics them, draws out their implications and ultimately demonstrates their limitations, using the structures they propose as metaphors for personal relations.
In the early 1970s Brooke-Rose described the different ‘houses of theory’ she encountered when she moved to Paris in 1968:
Living in France…is rather like walking round a national exhibition, entering one fantastic and beautiful structure after another, the Lévi-Strauss Palace, the Derrida Daedalus, the Lacan Labyrinth, the Kristeva Construct, the Barthes Pavilion, the Planetarium showing the Sollers System.
(1973b:614)
She comments also on the ambiguous fascination these theorists exhibit with regard to their own practice: ‘it is all a beautiful, theoretical game, that they themselves don't perhaps really believe in, but indulge in it as one indulges in a passion, overwhelming at the time then looked at with mild amusement, a passion for beautiful systems’(614).
The characteristic stylistic tic ‘tout se passe comme si’ puts their discourse technically into the mode of the hypothetical or the fictional, reflecting ‘this curious paradox, the ardent desire for a system and the basic scepticism about all systems’(614).
The same ambivalence is evident in the prevailing attitude toward language.
Brooke-Rose follows structuralists and post-structuralists in their belief that language is the only tool we have at our disposal for apprehending reality, and that linguistic structures have a formative effect on the mind.
She concludes that an individual ‘can only protect his own patterning from the invasion of others by a kind of wild jay-walking among the traffic, trying not to get run over’(614).
Thru enacts this strategy of ‘wild jay-walking’ between theories by side-stepping their systematicity and making them into stories.
It shares with Brooke-Rose's 1960s novels the same basic technique of literalizing specialized discourses by means of a metaphoric mapping of one discourse onto another.
As in Between , the binary definitions on which structuralist theory is founded receive parodic treatment which voids them of their original function and uses them for the purpose of telling the tale(s) of the novel.
That this project is based on a ‘feminist’ logic is significantly more obvious in Thru , however, than it is in Between .
Thru models many of its narrative strategies directly on the writings of Julia Kristeva and Luce Irigaray, and more indirectly on those of Jacques Lacan and Jacques Derrida.
The status in the novel of the different types of theoretical discourse varies according to the degree of ‘internal dialogization’ these writings possess.
The novel does not question the concept of ‘theory’ so much as those theories which refuse to acknowledge the fact that they are ‘fantastic structures’in the mode of the hypothetical, and that their status as autonomous systems will always be compromised by their relation to their object.
In the case of narratology, systems which fail to recognize the fictionality inherent in their constructs and strive to maintain a rigorous distinction between ‘houses of fiction’ and ‘houses of theory’are subjected to subversive mimesis.
In what follows I shall analyse how one such theory — the narrative semantics of A. J. Greimas and the Lacanian theory of subjectivity with which it is associated — is ‘played with’ in this way.
The gender stereotypes inherent in binary definitions of ‘male’ and ‘female’are explored in Between , but structuralist theory as such does not come under attack.
By contrast, a keen awareness of the sexist bias of many structuralist theorists is evident in Thru .
In 1985 Brooke-Rose published an article entitled ‘Woman as a Semiotic Object’ in which she analyses the ‘deep, ancient, phallocratic’(1991a:249) structures for which thinkers such as Greimas, Lévi-Strauss, and others have an unconscious nostalgia.
Chief among these is the logical rectangle which Greimas sees as the ‘structure élémentaire de la signification’(Greimas 1970:160).
This ‘rectangle’ is composed of four arrows pointing diagonally outward from a central ‘O’to four corners which represent the four terms in a homology: A:B:: A':B'.
The deixes relate each term to both its contrary and its contradictory.
As a narrative paradigm, this diagram represents the exchange of an object ‘O’ between two ‘actants ’and two topographical sites.
Greimas maps onto his diagram Propp's basic narrative chiasmus: traitor ravishes king's daughter and transfers her elsewhere to hide her, hero finds somewhere king's daughter and gives her back to her parents.
Brooke-Rose's main objection to this model is that Greimas follows Lévi-Strauss in making of woman a silenced object of exchange whose signified has been repressed (ravished) into the unconscious (elsewhere).
This reflects, she claims, man's attitude toward woman in general, split between the ‘Pygmalion urge’ to form her to suit his own desire and the ‘demolition enterprise’(1991a:247).
She points out, however, that man's power over woman, like his power over language, is illusory, for ‘man thinks he shapes and masters and exchanges words and women, while all the time language is shaping and mastering him (and women), so that his exchanges and controls and double standards must be as mutable as language itself’(246).
The process of exchange, the underlying grammar of narrative so cherished by Greimas as a fixed structure, ‘must’ in fact be ‘mutable’.
Moreover, its mutations must follow those of language: when the functioning of language changes, so must narrative functions.
This hypothesis, although difficult to prove or demonstrate in the context of theoretical commentary, is dramatized in Thru , published some ten years earlier in 1975.
As in Propp's folktales, characters in Thru are variables while their functions are constants.
The principal characters, Larissa Toren and Armel Santores, teach literature and literary theory at two equally radical universities.
Similarly, the thematic structure of the novel vaguely follows Propp's paradigm: Armel takes Larissa into matrimony only to betray her; Stavro, a gallant but naïve young man, ‘saves’ Larissa, begging her to marry him and go with him to Peru, or: ‘The anti-hero anti-rescuing her from an anti-monster in an anti-romanzo’(149/727).
Yet as a tool for ‘de-coding’ literature, structural analysis is labelled ‘already out of date’(52/630).
Larissa talks of going beyond structuralism and goes so far as to disown it: ‘of course I am not a structuralist I never have been I merely played with it’(84/662).
Likewise, the novel plays with normative paradigms such as those proposed by Greimas which seek to standardize narrative by defining it according to a canonic conception of what a story is.
In the late 1960s and the early 1970s, Greimas, Todorov, Genette, and Barthes all argued for the autonomy of narrative theory with respect to its object.
According to this position, the aim of narrative poetics is to produce a typology which includes all possible narrative forms, not only those that have been realized in the past.
But Paul Ricoeur points out the fact that most such theories are simulations of our internalized grammar of narrative, which is based perforce on narrative structures that have been made common in the past (1986:139–40).
It follows that narrative poetics is in fact a form of historiography, a highly abstract story of stories.
Thru reveals that many structuralist theories of narrative are simulacra of the story we have all internalized of the constitution of subjectivity through the reification of women.
It also confutes their claim to completeness by staging narrative structures for which they cannot account.
This points to gaps in their typologies which indicate their dependence on a historically determined narrative competence.
The result is a ludic collapsing of autonomous theoretical systems on the basis of structural similarities or ‘slips’ from one to another which point to the common ‘story’underlying them.
Brooke-Rose distinguishes her novel from the plethora of ‘fiction about the writing of fiction’ in that its purpose is to play with ‘the reader's habit of trusting the reliable narrator’(1976k:4–5).
The reader's expectations are elicited only to be thwarted.
She explains that Thru is ‘a text that is really constructing itself and then destroying itself as it goes along…whenever I slide into a realistic scene…something happens later to destroy it, to show that these are just words on a page’(4).
In this sense Thru marks a break with Out ,Such , and Between which are all, in one way or another, attempts to create a textual equivalent of the experience of a single consciousness.
Brooke-Rose's encounter with Lacanian theories of subjectivity made it possible for her to relinquish her last link with realism by breaking with the notion of character as discrete individual.
The Lacanian split subject is from the start a discursive subject traversed by the other.
This splitting of the subject is literalized in the novel as a shattering of the narrative voice into a multitude of surrogate ‘bearers of the tale’.
Thru opens and closes with the central figure of the driving mirror or ‘retrovizor’.
The driving mirror is first and foremost an image: a self-reflexive representation or, in psychoanalytic terms, a narcissistic identification.
But the mirror has two characteristics that indicate those ways in which Thru goes beyond the self-reflexive novel.
First, the person who looks into it sees not only his or her own reflection but also the other cars on the ‘thruway’: the viewer looks ahead in order to see behind.
The self-reflexive text is thus also an intertext: it looks into itself and sees all the other texts of the past.
If this notion of looking ahead in order to see behind is understood temporally, it can be recognized as the constitutive structure of narrative itself, which Genette describes as a series of ‘déterminations rétrogrades’ in that the action of a story is a function of its outcome (1969:94).
This same structure is conflated in the novel with Lacan's model of the constitution of subjectivity.
In ‘Subversion du sujet et dialectique du désir dans l'inconscient freudien’ Lacan notes that the ‘fonction diachronique dans la phrase’is an ‘effet rétroactif’(1966:805).
He then uses this analogy with the sentence to describe the trajectory by which the subject constitutes itself through the other.
This is figured as a retroactive effect specifically linked to the mirror: ‘tout ce dont le sujet peut s'assurer, dans cette rétrovisée, c'est venant á sa rencontre l'image, elle anticipée, qu'il prit de lui-même en son miroir’(808).
The condition of anticipated completion in which the subject experiences itself ‘au futur antérieur’(808) corresponds to the movement of semantic retroactivity, just as the visual term ‘rétrovisée’ corresponds to the spatial image of the mirror — the two moments of this process being one temporal and the other spatial (806).
But the description passes through the curious term ‘[e]ffet de rétroversion’(808) which seems strangely out of place.
The word ‘rétroversion ’ can be understood etymologically as ‘turning back’, yet in modern usage it is reserved exclusively for the turning or tipping of organs, especially of the uterus.
One wonders why Lacan's narrative of the genesis of the subject has to pass ‘through’ this flaw in the female anatomy — a flaw in the ‘proper’functioning of the female body.
This leads to the second main characteristic of the retrovizor in Thru : unlike the Lacanian mirror, it is flawed, causing it to reflect not two but four eyes, two in their correct position and two further up the brow (1–3/579–81).
The rectangular figure which this creates provides a frame for the Greimassian narrative chiasmus in which the four eyes become four ‘I’ s or ‘actants ’.
It fuses this schema also with the Lacanian version of the diagram which Thru lifts from Lacan's ‘Séminaire sur ‘La Lettre volée’'.
Here the two ‘other eyes’(72/650, 146/724) are the locus of the ‘other scene’ or ‘elsewhere’.
The Greimassian chiasmus functions in a literal sense as the ‘elementary structure of meaning’ in the novel, organizing circuits of exchange on narrative, interpersonal, and pedagogic levels.
In each case the text has to ‘pass through’ this figure.
Being a discursive subject and speaking are a matter of having access to a mirror, and it is not insignificant that a male subject is initially in control of the retrovizor.
When one of Armel's string of mistresses is riding in the car with him, she notices the effect of the flaw in the glass and tries to appropriate this phenomenon of double retro-vision for herself:
She shifts the mirror to her rearward glance.
It doesn't work for her the mistress of the moment of sudden isolation at not seeing back to the black magician who fantastically juggles luminous hoops in the recto-rectangular hey put my mirror back.
So it needs adjusting.
(4/582)
The phrase ‘so it needs adjusting’ is an a posteriori justification for a failed narrative coup.
The narrative process the mirror represents ‘doesn't work for her’, she fails to see behind to the ‘luminous hoops’ of other subjects, which is a necessary condition for her accession to the position of subject of discourse.
She experiences a ‘moment of sudden isolation’ before her male companion demands that his specular image be restored to him.
‘Put my mirror back’ can be read as the cry of all men who have the narcissistic relation they enjoy with the image of their own desire threatened by a woman.
Nevertheless the flaw in the mirror suggests that all specular images are from the start marked by their passage through an ‘imperfect’ female discourse.
The reiterated question in the novel is precisely one of mastery of language: ‘Who speaks?’(1/579,22/600,42/620, 59/637,110/688,116/694).
This is largely a matter of narrative voice, but it is also a question of accounting for subjectivity.
It is Lacan's question in ‘Subversion du sujet’: ‘Qui parle? quand il s'agit du sujet de l'inconscient’(1966:800).
The unconscious ça speaks, to be sure, but the role of the Lacanian unconscious in subjectivity is complex.
The unconscious is ‘la place de l'inter-dit’, and the voice of the Other can only be spoken through the subject.
When this happens — and it happens constantly — the classical subject is eclipsed, it undergoes the effects of ‘fading’, and what is spoken is in fact ‘l'intra-dit d'un entre-deux-sujets’(800), a discontinuous, intersubjective voice (801).
In S/Z Barthes interprets Lacan's concept of the intersubjective voice in terms of narrative instance.
He argues that in the ‘modern text’ it is language alone that speaks: ‘Dans le texte moderne, les voix sont traitées jusqu'au déni de tout repère: le discours, ou mieux encore, le langage parle, c'est tout’(1970b:48).
But in a modern text such as Thru which mimics the classical narrator in order to counter classical conceptions of subjectivity and narrative voice, the narrator undergoes the effects of ‘fading’ peculiar to the traditional novel as well.
In the ‘texte classique’, Barthes argues,
…il arrive que…la voix se perde, comme si elle disparaissait dans le trou du discours.
La meilleure façon d'imaginer le pluriel classique est alors d'écouter le texte comme un échange chatoyant de voix multiples, posées sur des ondes différentes et saisies par moments d'un fading brusque, dont la trouée permet á l'énonciation de migrer d'un point de vue á l'autre, sans prévenir. (48–9)
The multiple voices in Thru do often suffer the effects of ‘fading’, they fall into the ‘hole’ that Lacan and Barthes refer to, the ‘blue lacuna’in the ‘delirious discourse’(14/592,26/604,54/632,59/637), of the novel.
For Emile Benveniste the peculiarity of ‘histoire’ as opposed to‘discours’is that it tells itself, no one ‘speaks’(1966:241).
Thru literalizes this defining characteristic of narrative by constantly thwarting the reader's attempts to assign the text to a given ‘voice’.
Because of the ontological indeterminacy inherent in the narrative, it is often impossible to tell who an interlocutor is, or whether a scene is being remembered or merely imagined by one of the characters involved.
It is even possible that either Armel or Larissa might be a figment of the other's imagination (8/586,26/604,53/631,91/669).
Matters get more complicated still when it becomes evident that a group of students may well be inventing them both as an assignment for a creative writing course, until the students admit that they too are ‘a pack of lies dreamt up by the unreliable narrator in love with the zeroist author in love with himself but absent in the nature of things, an etherised unauthorised other’(155/733).
The narrating instance is an object of exchange in Thru , indeed it figures in Greimas's diagram as an ‘O’(117/695).
It is a role passed from character to character, each of whom makes different use of it.
Though we often think we know ‘who speaks’, we invariably find out that we are mistaken when a slip in narrative level catches us unawares.
But none of the above-mentioned theorists works this logic through in terms of the male-female relationship and the respective relation to language of men and women; this is accomplished by Irigaray and Kristeva whose writings are interpolated into the novel, like the quotation from Shakespeare in Between , as the agent of parody rather than as its object.
While there can be no doubt that the polyvalent image of the retrovizor has its source in Lacan's article, a closer examination of the structure of the mirror image will reveal that it also resembles Irigaray's version of the constitution of the subject.
Larissa is described in her narratorial capacity as ‘some teller or Other’(27/605).
Her narrative corresponds to the ‘other eyes’ which have ‘psychic invisibility’(5/583,14/592,25/602,26/603,27/605,32/610, 107/685,120/69) and ‘reflect nothing’(5/583,72/650,120/698).
She writes to Armel that what matters in their narrative are ‘the innumerable and ever-escaping levels of Utterance by the I who is not the I who says I’ and she advises him to ‘read Irigaray’on this concept (53/631).
In the article ‘Communications linguistique et spéculaire: modèles génétiques et modèles pathologiques’ Irigaray traces the constitution of the subject not to the symbolic mastery of the mother by the child, as do Freud and Lacan, but to a recognition of the positionality of subject and object in language use.
This is only possible after the child has been forced to recognize itself as ‘il’, as an object of exchange between its parents.
This objectification temporarily reduces it to zero, to the
forme vide qui répond de la structure….
Impliqué dans la communication comme sa possibilité de fonctionnement, ce troisième nombre…est un blanc, un vide, le lieu d'une exclusion, la négation qui permet á une structure d'exister en tant que tel. (1966:17)
When the subject emerges from its temporary death into the position of the ‘je’ it can then assume a name.
The proper name thus figures ‘ce paradoxe de l'engendrement du ‘un’ á partir du ‘zéro’'(18).
But this ‘one’ of subjectivity is in fact double, for the subject experiences ‘la disjonction du ‘je’lui-même en (je), sujet de l'énonciation, et ‘je’, sujet de l'énonc é'; (20) the first of which is invisible.
The utterance is therefore always an enigma, a ‘rébus, où le sujet s'occulte’(20).
The specular experience recalls this passage through the zero by which the subject is engendered:
Face á son image le sujet s'éprouve comme situé au lieu de cette exclusion, non spécularisable….
Ainsi, l'expérience spéculaire est-elle réminiscence de ce passage par le néant que suppose l'introduction du sujet dans l'ordre du signifiant, figuré au mieux par l'imposition du nom propre. (24)
Irigaray's version of the specular (imaginary) experience corresponds to the flawed retrovizor where the ‘other eyes’ represent the non-specularizable ‘I’behind the discourse, the ‘other author’who is never present in the text.
This absence also figures the male definition of woman as lack, as an inverted image of man, as a hole in the male economy of signification (Irigaray 1974:57), or ‘O’(object and zero) as opposed to‘I’(singular subject and penis).
This might appear exorbitant, and indeed as a symbolic castration of the Oedipus complex it represents a partial subversion of Lacanian theory.
But there is ample evidence in the novel, in addition to the flawed mirror, to suggest that it is Irigaray's version, not Lacan's, that functions as Thru 's theoretical ‘deep structure’.
the Master (borrowed from Jacques le fataliste ) tells a somnolent Jacques about Kristeva's use of Irigaray's pronominal framework to describe the role of the narrator:
…out of the zero where the author is situated, both excluded and included, the third person is generated, pure signifier of the subject's experience.
Later this third person acquires a proper name, figure of this paradox, one out of zero, name out of anonymity, visualisation of the fantasy into a signifier that can be looked at, seen.
You should read Kristeva that's what she says.
(69/647)
Jacques's Master follows Kristeva in her argument that, just as the subject is eclipsed or subverted in the process of its creation, so the author must pass through the same ‘zero’ in order for the reader to be able to participate as receptor in the economy of communication established by the novel:
…the construction of a character has to pass through a death, necessary to the structuring of the subject as subject of utterance, and for his insertion into the circuit of signifiers, I mean the narration.
It is therefore the recipient, you Jacques, or anyone, the other, who transforms the subject into author, making him pass through this zero-stage, this negation, this exclusion which is the author.
(69/647)
It is at this point that the Master realizes that Armel Santores and Larissa Toren are near anagrams, except that‘I’ is missing from his name and ‘me’from hers (69/647).
The characters and their conjugal disjunction have indeed been generated out of a play of pronouns, out of‘words on a page’, for it is due to the lack they experience in each other that they are not able to constitute themselves through each other as subjects.
Irigaray's analyses of the use of pronouns by hysterics and obsessives (1966:29–31, 1967:55–68) reveal that whereas obsessives are unable to say ‘me’ because they are caught in a specular image of themselves in which there is no object, only an undifferentiated self (Irigaray's ‘on’), hysterics are unable to say ‘I’because they are unable to complete the trajectory through the other that would allow them access to full subjectivity.
It thus becomes clear that the play of pronouns in the chiasmus of the narrative circuit through which the subject plays out its split existence does indeed function as an ‘elementary structure of signification’ in Thru , though not in the way Greimas intended.
For a female story teller such as Larissa, the act of narration is therefore a risky proposition, for her story is always in danger of being labelled a ‘hystery’.
The ‘crossword’ on page 6/584 weaves together voices from a number of other texts in a ‘hysterical’imitation of male story-telling.
The uppermost portion of this page suggests the link between female discourse and fiction:
The message is enigmatic: ‘nevertheless this is not no the my/hystery of the eye’.
The ‘hystery of the eye’ is presumably a reference to Bataille's story ‘L'Histoire de l'oeil’, a story of enucleation, which is, of course in Freudian terms equivalent to castration.
The ‘Histoire’ of Bataille's title has been appropriated by the female voice which turns it into ‘hystery’— a ‘bad copy’of the original, and an enigmatic, repressed female story, a mystery.
The passage could be read as ‘this is not my ‘Histoire de l'oeil’, but a male story that I have been subjected to’, or as ‘this is not ‘L'Histoire de l'oeil’ but my story of the eye which is not a his-story but a hystery, i.e. a female story’.
The play of negatives: ‘never’, ‘not’, ‘no’, causes an additional ambiguity.
Is ‘no’ added to ‘not’for emphasis, or do the two negatives cancel each other out?
What precisely is being disclaimed or denied, the story or its possession?
Given the fact that insistent negation in dreams and the speech is interpreted by psychoanalysis as resistance to a truth which the conscious mind would sooner deny, are the negatives not perhaps to be disregarded altogether?
And given the identification in the text of ‘eye’ with ‘I’, the passage could also be read as ‘this is not the hystery of the I’, in other words: ‘this is (not) the (hi) story of a hysterical subject’.
Not surprisingly, this indeterminacy is itself the main characteristic of ‘hysterical’ discourse which is never willing to assert anything definitively (Irigaray 1966:29–30, 1967:67–8).
But if the move from history to hystery were simply a matter of role reversal it would be relatively unproblematic.
In fact, as the Lacanian schema indicates, the self and the other are caught in a more complicated relationship.
The relationship between Jacques and his Master is founded on a tacit agreement that the roles they occupy are the reverse of what they appear to be, but when Jacques tries to articulate this he risks losing his power which depends on its going unacknowledged.
Transferred to the realm of gender relations, this would describe the state of affairs in which a woman has influence over a man and manipulates his discourses, but is allowed this power only as long as she agrees not to flaunt it and remains in the position of silent partner with no autonomous voice.
She is then reduced to the unconscious side of man, his Other who speaks through him.
In Thru this condition is posed as a choice between two masters: ‘couldn't she be happy with y o u in the orbit of an eye and no referent without?
Or with the Other with he passed into hystery within?’(12/590).
Woman's inability to be content with either living in the orbit of the male ‘I’ or repressing her desire into ‘hystery’is a result of the fact that male desire is an essentially narcissistic ‘Pygmalion urge’to invent woman in its own image, while permitting the male subject the freedom to enjoy multiple reflections.
‘If the woman objects she is being hysterical and making a scene’(58/636), an accusation that is demonstrated when Larissa and Armel quarrel about his extramarital sex life and he tells her to ‘stop this hysterical rewriting of history’(76/654).
It is precisely this rewriting of ‘history’ as ‘hystery’that is forbidden to woman.
She is not allowed her own story, her version is by definition a retroversion, an imperfect, displaced version that appears in the wrong place in the mirror.
In a recent article on her fiction, Christine Brooke-Rose describes Thru as ‘the only truly deconstructionist novel’ she knows of (1988a:133).
By ‘deconstructionist’ Brooke-Rose does not simply refer to the fact that her novel ‘deconstructs’itself.
This it manifestly does, but it is aware that it is not unique in doing so (whence the many references to Tristam Shandy and Jacques le fataliste , archetypes of the novel that undermines its own stated project of telling a story).
Thru is ‘deconstructionist’ in the additional sense that it places itself in multiple positions within the field of literary discourse.
Not only does it constitute the object of its own criticism, it also contains a number of theories of this criticism, and in a recursive move that can truly be termed deconstructive, it presents criticism of these theories and it narrativizes this criticism.
Just as it collapses the hierarchy of narrative levels, so the novel un-builds the hierarchy of metatextual discourses that has come lately to encrust itself around ‘metafictional’ novels.
It does this by folding the entire structure back into the narrative.
What Derrida describes as the ‘double jeu’(1972c:14) of deconstruction is thus accomplished: the hierarchical relation between narrative theory and its object is reversed, and at the same time the subject-object relation is itself challenged, illustrating Lacan's widely disseminated dictum ‘il n'y a pas de métalanguage’(1966:813).
But if many of the theories with which the novel grapples have their roots in or near the work of Lacan, Lacan's text does not escape the double move of appropriation and subversion which characterizes the feminist enterprise.
Irigaray's strategy of mimétisme makes use of Lacanian conceptual tools simultaneously to appropriate and to undermine discursive authority (including that of Lacan himself).
It is for this reason that this approach proved so helpful to Brooke-Rose when she chose to turn her creative attention to narratology.
She too exhibits both a fascination and a scepticism with regard to structuralist theories of the text, manifest in Thru as a healthy mistrust of theory whenever it becomes over-systematic.
The subversive tactics deployed in the novel are a direct consequence of the male construction of gender roles within the discourse of narrative theory.
Both as social models and as models of narrative functioning, structuralist theories have gained wide currency within the institutional framework that determines how literature is read and the role it plays in society.
Thru demonstrates by means of a parodic conflation and manipulation of selected literary theories the problems inherent in such an approach to literature, and it uncovers the value-laden stories which subtend it.
3.3 Amalgamemnon: Women and Myth.
In Amalgamemnon the technique of mimétisme is generalized as the awareness of gender bias becomes more prominent.
If Thru may be read as a deconstruction of the androcentric preconceptions in the theories of certain structuralists,Amalgamemnon can be seen as a burlesque exposition of the procedures of exclusion operative in dominant versions of truth about the world, from the texts of antiquity to modern-day news broadcasts on the radio.
As Foucault and others have demonstrated, the interpretation of information in contemporary society follows a set of discursive criteria which determine what is classified as objectively true and what is seen as subjective opinion or fiction.
Amalgamemnon suggests that this split between fact and fiction corresponds to spheres of action and influence appropriate for men and for women.
Woman's domain is that of private relations and psychological matters, while men deal with the public concerns of politics and economic affairs.
Herodotus's Histories and Aeschylus's Agamemnon serve as touchstones for Brooke-Rose's novel, for in going back to the classical period, it is able to return to the point at which these distinctions began to be associated with different ways of talking and writing attributed to fact and to fiction.
The ‘hysterical rewriting of history’ of which Armel accuses Larissa in Thru is literalized in Amalgamemnon where the founding text of history is literally rewritten.
By selective citation the novel foregrounds the link between Herodotus's epistemological ambiguities and his ambivalent attitude toward the role of women in society.
Aeschylus's tragedy represents a loss of faith in the prophetic voice of women and the consequence of that loss for the Western discursive tradition.
The mythical story of Cassandra functions as an allegory for the fate of alternative forms of language use; truthful but ‘unheeded and unhinged’(12,144), the figure of Cassandra is an example of the extreme to which women's frustration at not being heard can push them.
The principal voice of Amalgamemnon is Mira Enketei, a university lecturer in the humanities who is on the verge of being made redundant due to the seeming irrelevance of her field in present-day society.
Her conjectures as to her possible future occupation lead to a number of wild escapades involving kidnapping and terrorism, as well as to more humble pursuits such as pig-farming.
These are intercalated with long nights of insomnia which she spends on the sofa with the radio and Herodotus, having fled her snoring lover Willy (later Wally).
In relation to both Willy and Herodotus, Mira sees herself falling into the role of Cassandra who was cursed by Apollo to have her prophecies ignored because she had refused to yield to his desire.
Cassandra's rage finds its outlet in the distortion of male discourse to the point at which communication falters.
She is described by the Argive elders as speaking in riddles because they fail to understand her predictions.
Clytemnestra thinks her mad because her exasperation at not being understood or believed drives Cassandra to a hysterical frenzy of gestures and grimaces (Agamemnon , lines 1061–5).
Amalgamemnon takes Cassandra's voice as representative of the way in which the discourse of women is seen by society at large.
‘Cassandra Castratrix’(119) is both the breaker of men (Cass-andra) and the powerless captive.
Not only do her efforts to assert her freedom from male domination lead her into the hands of another man, but she is also punished for her resistance by having her words deemed valueless, just as today ‘pseudo-escaperoutes will so lightly turn sado-escape, and…women's very freedom will so easily be used against them by even moderately clever men’(12).
Though women are typically characterized as prophets of doom, Mira's modest demand in relation to both personal and political situations is ‘let us recognize one another before annihilating one another’(15,136; variations: 20,74,136).
But it is suggested that even this is not possible, for in refusing to recognize their autonomy, men often effectively annihilate women from the start.
Mira's only possible recourse is to a parodic ventriloquy of male modes of communication which subtly undermines them by using word play to expose the ‘fictions’ that underpin supposedly objective information and ‘expert’analyses from Herodotus's time to the present.
From one point of view this is a defiant retreat into the ‘utterly other discourse’(5,15,143) of Cassandra who yields to her penchant for lexical distortion because she has been forced into an impossible position.
But it is also a vindication of the creative manipulation of language and a revalorization of the traditional relation between women and fiction.
The distinction between public and private spheres of existence has been used for centuries to exclude women from the activities through which larger social processes are effected; it has made of them goods to be protected, the stakes for which wars are fought by men.
This segmentation of spheres of action and influence along the lines of gender difference is reflected in the radio programming in the novel.
There is a sharp distinction between news broadcasts in which men tell the facts about the world and phone-in programmes run by women in which people discuss their personal problems.
When one caller transgresses this line of demarcation, asking the presenter Dolores what she thinks of a terrorists' kidnapping, she replies ‘That would be a little outside the scope of this programme Charlie, there'll be experts commenting again in the morning to tell you what to think of it, why don't you talk to me about yourself…’(80).
The realm of public discourse is that of events, expert diagnoses and scientific prognoses, whereas the private sphere is that of opinion and anecdote, subjective reaction, and cultural mythology which is devalorized by its implicit feminization.
In order to challenge this complex of interlocking polarities,Amalgamemnon goes back to a time when the two domains, though distinct, were not yet differentiated by separate modes of narrative, back to Herodotus, the first prose artist and ‘the father of fibstory’(22,113).
Out of Herodotus's attempt to distinguish truth from myth arose our own codification of discursive types, but in his text this structure is still in a state of flux.
Herodotus has long been regarded as a mythographer as much as a historian, for he records not just the bare facts, but the multiple versions of events he has gathered from a variety of sources.
Where these are lacking he readily substitutes rumours, conjecture and legend, as well as his own hypotheses.
The Histories is particularly relevant today because it represents the common discursive origin of historiography, sociology, anthropology, ethnography, and prose fiction.
Herodotus opens The Histories with a brief statement of intent:
Herodotus of Halicarnassus, his Researches are here set down to preserve the memory of the past by putting on record the astonishing achievements both of our own and of other peoples; and more particularly, to show how they came into conflict.
(41)
His aims are thus established from the outset both to record the evidence he has gathered and to evaluate it for the purposes of determining the truth.
But rather than starting straight away with ‘the facts’, he begins with the traditional account of the cause of the wars which he rejects because he has no way of substantiating it.
This is the story of a quarrel over women involving a series of abductions and retributions which culminate in Paris's kidnapping of Helen.
Herodotus cannot bring himself to believe in a story which gives as the cause of centuries of rivalry ‘nothing worse than woman-stealing on both sides’(42), for he does not think the Greeks could possibly have gone to war over anything so trivial, and indeed he appears to concur with the Persian view that ‘no young woman allows herself to be abducted if she does not wish to be’(42).
But this pre-history he rejects serves as a symbolic equivalent of the narrative of multiple usurpations and misappropriations of territory that occupies the following six hundred pages.
This is possible because in the cultural tradition of the West, as described and exemplified by Lévi-Strauss, the exchange of women is figured as the source of all exchange.
Herodotus's account of the ‘true’ history of the Medic wars can be read as an elaborate repetition or working out of the ‘truth’about misappropriation encapsulated in ‘fictional’form in the first two pages.
It is not fortuitous, then, that Amalgamemnon should begin its reading of Herodotus with a citation of the tales of abduction he himself rejects as fanciful: ‘Herodotus, the Phoenicians kidnapping Io and the Greeks plagiarizing the king of Tyre's daughter Europe’(5).
Like the quotation of Greimas in Thru ,Amalgamemnon 's abduction of Herodotus's text is clearly an act of retribution.
The word ‘plagiarize’(meaning originally ‘to kidnap’) makes this explicit: Mira denounces the sexist bias of The Histories by quoting the text selectively, cross-examining it, altering it to suit her purpose, and interweaving it with bits of the radio news.
Unlike many of his successors, Herodotus was a firm believer in the explanatory power of oracles, and he frequently cites their predictions in lieu of causal arguments.
But Amalgamemnon traces in The Histories a pattern of male appropriation of the oracle's discourse.
Either she is relegated to the status of mere spokesperson, transmitter of the divine logos of Apollo:
I'll know it'll be he who'll end up cassandring me, precisely in nomansland where the male gods will ever take over the pythian oracles, turning them into twittering spokespersons.
(136; variation: 14)
or she is in some way masculinized:
Pedasus will get warning of impending disaster through the priestess of Athene growing a long beard, I'll read to him to make him laugh and he will, and talk with his sidetrack mind….(14)
This juxtaposition of the myth of Athena growing a beard with the strategies Mira employs to bolster Willy's ego points to the fact that in each case a female voice transforms itself into a voice men will trust.
Woman's ability to assimilate the language of men and man's inability to fathom that of women is craftily demonstrated by a selective summary of Herodotus's account of the oracles of Dodona and his description of the Amazons:
And yet the story which the people of Dodona will tell about the black dove from Egypt becoming their oracle would surely arise because the foreign woman's language would sound to them like the twittering of birds.
And later the dove will speak with a human voice because of course the woman will stop twittering and learn to talk intelligibly.
Similarly the young Scythians will be unable to learn the language of the Amazons but the women will succeed in picking up theirs, and therefore disappear.
(11)
As Brooke-Rose observes elsewhere, the ancient oracle is the only instance of an institutional valorization of women's voice as truthful (1991a:241).
But by forcing it to conform to ‘male’ discursive norms, society succeeds in bringing oracular speech within the realm of ‘male’criteria of veracity.
The novel challenges this ‘amalgamation’ by turning ‘male’discursive strategies against themselves.
Amalgamemnon is parodic in Genette's sense in that it makes punctual and systematic alterations on a pre-existent ‘noble’ text of the past, and in Bakhtin's sense because with regard to sex roles its ‘orientation’is directly opposed to that of Herodotus.
As in Between and Thru , the works invoked are divided into agent and object of parody.
The voice of ‘Cassandra Castratrix’ is adopted strategically to perform an operation of creative mut(il)ation on the text of Herodotus.
This procedure involves two basic linguistic techniques: the anteriorization of discourse with respect to the events it describes, and lexical distortion.
First, the ‘true’ discourse of male authority is defamiliarized by being removed from the present and preterite forms of the indicative and transposed into the future, the conditional, the imperative, and the subjunctive.
In the interview quoted above, Brooke-Rose discusses her use of the negative in Between as a means of asserting and not asserting something.
A statement that something does not happen both creates an event and abolishes it in the same act (1976k:21–2).
Thru makes use of similar techniques at the level of narrative.
But the problem with this type of creation-as-destruction is that the negative aspect is easily equated with nihilism.
Moreover, the positive-negative opposition is inescapably binary, and any text structured on this polarity will be, like Thru , a constant oscillation between the two poles.
In Amalgamemnon Brooke-Rose gets round this problem by using non-realized tenses and moods.
The result is a text that operates in the mode of potentiality.
This is what Irigaray calls the hysterical ‘comme si’(1974:70), a caricature of the discourse of the (male) subject which is complete or ‘finalized’.
All ‘events’ in the novel are virtual; it is irrelevant to debate whether Mira imagines buying a pig farm with her severance pay or whether it ‘really’happens, because nothing is ever ‘really’accomplished.
In A Rhetoric of the Unreal Brooke-Rose cites Genette's claim that anterior time is a rarity in narrative, a mode reserved for subordinate accounts of dreams and prophecies (1981:329).
She says the reason for this is ‘the need to believe that the event recounted actually took place, or is taking place: no one believes a prophet, and even a prediction needs to be realised within the narrative for sense and interest’(329).
But she gives Maurice Roche's novel Compact (1966) as an example of a narrative which uses the future tense effectively for purposes other than prophecy.
In Compact the future entails a fundamental undermining of the reader's need to believe in fictional events…. the detail and intensity are such that we do believe that what is predicted not only will occur but is occurring/has occurred, while at the same time not occurring, abolished, a mere fiction of words.
(329)
Though she points out that Compact is not consistent in its use of the future, this description anticipates the development of the tense in Brooke-Rose's own novel.
Just as the constant circulation of narrative voice in Thru makes the reader at all times aware of the fact that the characters are just ‘words on a page’, so the use of the future in Amalgamemnon operates to maintain the reader's awareness of the fictional status of the events described.
The second discursive strategy used in the novel is the portmanteau technique exemplified by the title.
The combination of the words ‘Agamemnon’ and ‘amalgam’mimes on the linguistic plane the process by which Mira's Agamemnon, her amalga-mate, assimilates her to himself and denies her autonomous identity.
In an interview contemporary with the novel, Brooke-Rose explains that ‘Amalgamemnon is in fact about the violence which we all commit when we're always trying to amalgamate people and put them in a category’(1984b), but the novel also turns this strategy back on itself and uses ‘amalgamation’ to shatter categories.
The specificity of the lexical amalgam and its variation, the pun, is that they partake simultaneously of two different contexts which they join on grounds that are quite obviously a function of the free play of the signifier.
For Jonathan Culler, the pun provides a demonstration of language's inherent instability, mutability, and susceptibility to spurious motivation based on chance phonemic associations.
This last procedure, ‘the exploitation of formal resemblance to establish connections of meaning’, Culler characterizes as ‘the basic activity of literature’(1988:4), and it is in this sense that the pun can be seen as a cognitive model which accounts for the ‘literariness’ of even the most rigorous forms of language use.
Whereas in The Languages of Love the pun is indicative of the tragic breach between the human and the divine, in Thru it is described as ‘free, anarchic, a powerful instrument to explode the civilization of the sign and all its stable, reassuring definitions’(29/607).
The pun challenges models of cognition based on analytic reasoning and proposes instead a conception of language as a force capable of altering its object.
The fact that language can be used in this way as a political tool is a key to understanding the link between politics in the public sphere and personal politics.
In Amalgamemnon the pun and the lexical amalgam or portmanteau word work in the same way as discursive slips work in Out and mis-translation works in Between to create metaphors by revealing structural parallels between disparate discourses.
As in Between , this technique serves to map the terminology of geopolitical conflict onto personal relations:
And since even a polygonal story should have at least two sides in all international farewell orgies, how about packing it in and having a bash at normal behaviour eh, so as to get bashed again as whipping boy despite my morseled-out attempts to break free or go shiating on, turning the other cheek to sheer cheek as sitting target for the unclear missiles of affreux dizzy acts or as wailing wall of blame beyond the demarcation line or bowstring frontier that will boomerang back and much joy may it give me. (102)
Amalgamemnon 's conflation of these two domains through the transformation of language prefigures a possible transformation of the discursive systems which maintain distinctions between public and private, fact and fiction.
But on another level the linguistic acrobatics which the novel displays provide Mira with verbal strategies that enable her to cope with her fear for the future and her personal situation in the present.
In her relations with Willy she has constantly to choose between her ‘postface’ and her ‘preface’: ‘I shall put on my postface and mimagree, unless I put on my preface and go through the routine’(16,138).
The ‘postface’ is both a po-faced stoicism when confronted with male egotism and the face of ‘mimagreement’(14) whereby Mira pretends to allow herself to be amalgamated to Willy.
It is a ‘post’ face because it mimes the finality of male discourse, the self-assured certainty of the preterite.
The ‘preface’, on the other hand, is the language of the novel in which a statement is always a preface to that which it purports to describe, since only the language itself is ever realized.
If the ‘postface’ is the attitude of feigned female acquiescence to male views, the ‘preface’is that which objects, that which goes through the tiresome ‘routine’of explaining exactly why these views are objectionable.
The first attitude involves a conscious repression of her own identity on Mira's part, whereas the second attitude, though supposedly more contentious, often leads Willy forcibly to repress her ‘disagreeable’ qualities: ‘All my objections, which I'll put as genuine unacceptabilities of my cassandring person, which no man'll take, will be swept under his magic carpet with the ho-ho joke if no man will and I will, what am I?’(136).
Willy sees himself as the beneficent saviour who will ‘irrigate’ her ‘emotional desert’(17,138), and any attempt by her to suggest that she might be happier without him is ‘blackmarked against me as pretentiousness’(136).
Like the Trojans, Willy simply laughs away Mira's ‘cassandring’ voice.
The only viable alternative is to ‘mimagree’ otherwise, to mime agreement in such a way as to contest subtly the authority of the language used rather than launching a direct challenge to male discursive authority.
The fictional is a role Mira is forced into; she has no option but to tell a story about herself.
Yet if she plays at telling the truth, she also plays with the telling of the truth.
Willy's synthetic abstractions which generalize and falsify are countered by her analytic and critical re-writing of Herodotus.
By exposing the story of the silencing of women which underlies Herodotus's project, the novel demonstrates that ‘originary myths’ are at the heart of factual descriptions about the world, and that in this sense women, by virtue of their historical ties with the discourses of fiction, have a privileged relation to the voice of knowledge.
Luce Irigaray maintains that for her ‘l'enjeu n'est pas d'élaborer une nouvelle théorie dont la femme serait le sujet ou l' objet , mais d'enrayer la machinerie théorique elle-même, de suspendre sa prétention á la production d'une vérité et d'un sens par trop univoques’(1977:75).
One of the means she advocates for ‘jamming the machinery’ is the disruption of syntax (73).
This is because the ‘syntax’ of theory, the logic on which it is based, is at the root of structures which have historically been used to trivialize, marginalize, and devalue the discourse of women, to pass it off at best as a mere fiction, and at worst as an illicit form of language use or one in poor taste, like the pun.
If they are to avoid falling into the theoretical machinery that perpetuates such stereotypes, women are obliged constantly to dodge the conceptual apparatuses that seek to mould their language.
But this ‘jay-walking’ or ‘side-stepping’can result in unforeseen discoveries as the logic of juxtaposition, simultaneity, and other ‘lateral’processes are explored.
Rather than rejecting objectionable discourses past and present, this approach entails an unstable coexistence with that which it contests, and it manifests this textually as the parodic adulteration, manipulation, or ‘doctoring’ of another's language.
Between ,Thru , and Amalgamemnon exhibit an increasing awareness of the gendering of discourse — both the implicit gendering in Western culture of different modes of speaking and writing, and the explicit efforts by certain women to appropriate for ‘the feminine’ modes of language use that are inherently interrogative.
That there is a necessary link between this form of discourse and ‘fiction’ is grounded both in the historical links between them and in their contemporary utility as means of contesting the legitimacy of the language of authority.
The three novels chart an attempt to develop linguistic techniques which represent the current state of affairs and at the same time challenge it by enlisting subversive laughter as a tool to destabilize fixed systems and tear away their protective layers of discursive convention.
The concern manifest in these novels with the status of fictional discourse and its relation to the discourses of ‘truth’ lays the ground for the examination of the place of the novel in contemporary society which Brooke-Rose undertakes in the Intercom Quartet.
Chapter IV
Amalgamemnon ,Xorandor ,Verbivore , and Textermination : Technology and the Novel
‘I can imagine, I suppose, the binary languages of the computers making love to each other’(Brooke-Rose 1976k:18)
Amalgamemnon ,Xorandor ,Verbivore , and Textermination form what Christine Brooke-Rose has tentatively called the ‘Intercom Quartet’.
The Quartet picks up the novel where Thru leaves it, dissected and decentred in vitro , and returns it to the social and historical context out of which it arose.
The four novels deal with the status of the genre relative to the public discourses of the media and the discourses of specialized expertise in the domain of communications technology, both of which have become contemporary discourses of authority.
Each warns of the consequences of failing to recognize the merits of the novel and the fictionality of many of the non-literary forms of representation which threaten to supplant it.
With the Quartet Brooke-Rose moves away from abstract theories and scientific models as a source of new concepts and toward the consequences of the technological innovations which advances in pure science have made possible.
Her closer engagement with concrete social change has been accompanied by a rapprochement with the conventions of science fiction.
The Quartet is distinct from most examples of this genre, however, in that its focus is firmly fixed on its own status within a world which is increasingly under the control of non-verbal forms of communication.
But as the social role of technology changes, so must the genre whose task has traditionally been to keep one step ahead of science as we know it.
In an article on science fiction, Jean Baudrillard maintains that the traditional mode of the genre depended on a simulation of expansion that is no longer feasible in the contemporary world.
This is because all possible fictions of scientific progress are virtual in present-day technology which has taken over the function of ‘productive’ simulation.
The only recourse for science fiction is to turn to ‘simulacres de simulation, fondées sur l'information, le modèle, le jeu cybernétique’(1981:179).
The Quartet can be read as a ‘simulacrum of simulation’ in this sense: it reveals the simulated nature of the projections, speculations, and reconstructions fed us by the oral media and the role of story-telling in all so-called ‘objective’compilations of factual information.
Though the novels of the Quartet are linked by common characters and motifs, they cannot be said to have a continuous story line.
Their common concern is rather the effect of technological innovation on our thought processes and our ability to communicate.
Each in its own way, the four works examine the role of the novel in an age in which electronic networks have begun to overtake the printed codex as the archetypical manifestation of the word.
Though the novel is not the sole domain of either narrative or fiction, in contemporary Western culture it exemplifies both.
By foregrounding the historical specificity of novelistic discourse, Brooke-Rose is able to explore both narrative and fiction in what are, from the point of view of contemporary discursive categories, their most characteristic guises.
The distinctive features of the novel as a genre are three-fold: it is written, it is fictional, and its principle device is that of narrative.
According to this definition we are living in a particularly ‘novelistic’ age.
First, undecidability and paradox are the basis of the ‘new sciences’ which have made possible the technological innovations we currently enjoy, and written narrative is uniquely suited to accommodating logically impossible situations and mixing heterogeneous ontological postulates.
Second, even physics, the most rigourous of sciences, has recognized the fact that it is an elaborate fiction or secondary modelling system, not a recreation of its object.
Finally, it is becoming increasingly evident that scientific enquiry is an ongoing narrative through which generations of thinkers have sought to understand the world around them, and also that narrative as a mode of knowledge can be used as a means of accommodating the logical paradoxes of contemporary sciences.
But despite the widespread awareness of these three characteristics among those who analyse the practice of science, the institutions through which technological advances are implemented and disseminated tend to present the results of scientific research as facts or codified knowledge, ignoring their inherent paradoxes, their fictional status, and the cognitive evolution which made them possible.
In Brooke-Rose's view, the role of the novel as a self-consciously written, fictional, narrative genre is to remind other discourses that they too possess the same attributes of logical paradox, fictionality, and narrativity.
Furthermore, if we recognize that the discourses of codified knowledge are not fundamentally dissimilar to novelistic discourse, it becomes evident that the novel has validity as a cognitive tool which fosters individual creativity and interpersonal communication.
The ‘intercom’ of the Quartet's title refers not only to technological developments in information-processing systems, but also to how these developments have affected intercourse between individuals in everyday situations, and how this has in turn made possible a new role in society for narrative fiction.
In The Act of Reading , Wolfgang Iser argues that the literary work should be understood as a means of communication rather than as a representation of the world: ‘It is a vital feature of literary texts that they do not lose their ability to communicate; indeed, many of them can still speak even when their message has long since passed into history and their meaning no longer seems to be of importance’(1978:13).
But Brooke-Rose is careful to point out that a novel is not an act of oral exchange, and that most communication models are thus inappropriate to it (1991a:70–1).
The novel needs to be understood in the context of the modes of textual communication which have been made possible by the digital revolution.
With the advent of word-processing and other cybernetic-based means of producing and distributing text, the possibility for interaction between writer and reader increases, while the distinction between them becomes ever more blurred.
The text itself is transformed into a protean tool for unfolding ideas and responding to those of others.
Only a conception of the novel as an evolving genre will be able to take the potential of this development into account, and it is such a conception which the Quartet adumbrates.
Yet the Quartet also hints at the threat technology poses to the novel.
We tend to describe our lives using images from the conceptual languages with which we are most familiar, and the metaphor of life as a novel or the world as a book has yielded in contemporary culture to cybernetic models.
A fear that ‘techne…will soon be silenced by the high technology’(Amalgamemnon : 5) lurks behind the futuristic tales of these novels which echo the suspicions first hinted at in Out of the intentions of those who implement technological innovation.
In the pessimistic scenario, the writing of fiction is a last ditch effort to salvage humanist discursive forms.
The contemporary relevance of narrative fiction is one of the things that is at stake in the technological ‘revolution’, and Brooke-Rose addresses the issue from a perspective that is both sceptical and hopeful, ludic and apocalyptic.
In what follows, the three main attributes of the novel — its written, narrative, and fictional status,— will be treated in turn in relation to the four novels which comprise the Quartet.
Amalgamemnon inaugurates the theme of fiction versus fact.
As we saw in chapter three, it takes a historical approach to the origin of factual narrative (Herodotus) and the origin of fiction as discredited language (Aeschylus), comparing these to their modern-day equivalents in the oral media.
Xorandor examines the narrative aspect of the novel by exploring the theoretical problems of story-telling from the point of view of children whose minds have been formed by their exposure to computers; here techniques specific to narrative are shown to be central to even the most logical of sciences.
Verbivore focuses on writing as a form of communication: it posits a society in which writing has become outmoded and is then rediscovered, prompting a renewal of discursive modes peculiar to the novel.
Textermination examines the fictionality of the novel from the point of view of the reading process.
In all four novels the link between technology and narrative technique is characterized in terms of innovations in both areas which challenge the commonsensical conception of what is possible.
All four employ the variable narrative voice found in Thru , and Amalgamemnon ,Verbivore , and Textermination contain metalepses.
This return to the pre-nineteenth-century use of anti-realist techniques is accompanied by a recognition of the wealth of discursive forms which the more narrowly conceived realist novel has left untapped.
Changes in technology have made it possible to imagine means of communication that would have been unthinkable two hundred years ago: radio broadcasts, instant word-processing, telephone conversations, etc.
Brooke-Rose incorporates these into her novels but refuses to subordinate them to the narrative conventions of realism.
In so doing she demonstrates that the potential scope of the novel is enriched, not exhausted, by technological development, and that, conceived as an ‘open’ and heterogeneous genre, the novel still has a significant role to play in contemporary society, both as a mode of knowledge and as a means of communication.
4.1 Amalgamemnon: Fiction and the Media.
The genre of the novel long competed with ‘the news’ as a primary means of circulating information about the world, but its advantage as a source of entertainment as well as information failed to maintain its edge over the less demanding oral media of radio and television.
The novel then began to stake its claim as a genre which could give insight into the human psyche that no news broadcast or film ever could.
This led, however, to a drastic reduction in the scope of its subject matter and fostered the gender-coded distinction discussed in chapter three between the public sphere of events and discoveries presented as factual statements on the one hand, and on the other hand the inner world of psycho-social dramas presented as narrative fiction.
The consequence of this division is one of the problems Brooke-Rose set out to examine in Amalgamemnon :
…the crisis today is that we have fictions which no one admits to be fictions, whereas before people had myths, people had religions, and so on, and a lot of it was believed in as a matter of faith, whereas now everything is presented as real, and it is no more real than the myths of before.
(1987d)
As demonstrated in chapter three, the future and conditional tenses of Amalgamemnon put all ‘facts’ about the world under the sign of ‘fiction’.
If we follow Bakhtin in tracing the origin of the novel back to Menippean satire, this unusual use of tense can be understood as a typical novelistic device in that it brings the ‘completed’ past into the present and ‘contemporizes’it.
Amalgamemnon foregrounds the ‘novelistic’ aspect of contemporary society by using the future tense and other conspicuously fictional devices to reveal the speculative and constructed nature of the supposedly factual information conveyed through the media.
Yet Amalgamemnon is steeped in anxiety about the fate of the novel and other forms of individual creativity in a world of secondary orality where humanist pursuits are fast becoming obsolete.
It is not so much the production of the novel in the literal sense as its production in the social sense that is at issue.
There is a tangible risk involved in introducing a novel, and a difficult novel at that, into a world of instant accessibility in which fiction is discursively ‘redundant’.
Amalgamemnon takes the pejorative term ‘redundancy’ and uses it to fight the very exclusion it designates.
Redundancy is figured as an existential situation which is used to exemplify the condition of the humanist academic in an increasingly technocratic world.
The novel opens with the sentence: ‘I shall soon be quite redundant at last despite of all, as redundant as you after queue and as totally predictable, information-content zero’(5).
We soon begin to see the double-voiced nature of this supposedly ‘useless’ discourse.
The sentence is itself ‘redundant’ with respect to the opening sentence of Beckett's Malone Dies which it self-consciously imitates, and the implication is that all discourse is but a re-hashing of another's words.
In reiterating its own superfluity, however, Mira's ‘redundant’ language spells out the hidden resources of the novel's position.
Richard Martin shows that redundancy in Amalgamemnon functions as a catalyst for creative generation through variation and elaboration (1989b:180 et passim ).
There is also another sense in which redundancy is employed strategically.
In reducing the flow of daily life to ‘information content’, the mass media present as primary data a series of facts which have been culled through a complex process of information-processing.
Mira takes these facts and re-inserts them in narrative — not the original narrative representations from which they were drawn, for these are inaccessible to her,— but playful conjectures as to what might have been.
Logically Mira's version precedes the ‘events’ it details, for a narrative is always implied in a list of facts.
This discursive pre-emption is reflected in her use of the future tense which pre-dicts the story it relates.
She subtly contests the assumption that narrative fiction is ‘redundant’ with respect to‘reality’by grammatically inverting the relation of her stories to those she hears on the radio.
The discursive mode of Amalgamemnon is also plausible realistically in as much as the future and other unreal verb forms are commonly used in news broadcasts to describe scheduled events, to make meteorological and economic forecasts, and to speculate as to the possible consequences of events that have already taken place.
The voice of the future mimes the supposed experts who presume to know what lies in wait: ‘Soon the ecopolitical system will crumble, and sado-experts will fly in from all over the world and poke into its smoking entrails and utter smooching agnostications’(15), or: ‘The ecozoologists will then fly in from all over the world and poke its entrails and fraudcast a stooging diregnosis’(18).
But, as here, this mimicry often has the effect of comparing such experts with soothsayers, challenging the contemporary distinction between rational knowledge generated out of numbers and graphs and the irrational predictions of those who ‘fraudcast’ on evidence from stars or the entrails of animals.
De-realization is used to suggest that economic and other ‘scientific’ models are no more real (nor even more accurate) than the fictions and oracular pronouncements from which they seek to distinguish themselves.
Like the discourse of the realist novel, the discourse of the news media operates according to a specific set of technical conventions (reliance on the word of ‘experts’, abundant statistical and other quantitative information, scrupulous use of qualification, etc.) which guarantee that it appears truthful.
The stories Mira tells to divert her attention from her personal situation and to exercise her imaginative powers reveal the link between the conventionality of the supposedly transparent discourse of realist fiction and the conventionality of news stories.
She constructs out of bits of stories heard on the radio elaborate dramatic scenarios which parody genres such as the thriller, the spy novel, and the popular romance.
Imaginative story-telling thus represents an alternative to information, but also to the realist novel which shares the media's obsession with factual precision.
Her stories are a playful mimicry of the techniques of realist writers who use devices such as genealogical trees as ‘semiological compensation’ to help the reader assimilate the complex world they have invented.
Far from clarifying the world envisaged, these devices serve in Amalgamemnon to generate the fiction itself.
Mira starts by drawing a genealogical tree and then proceeds to invent stories to account for it.
She is eventually drawn into the stories she tells, and she is obliged to redraw the tree with herself in it.
Other metalepses include letters written to Mira by the characters she invents, and arguments with terrorists of her own creation.
By fusing news broadcasts with traditional novelistic tropes, she foregrounds the conventionality of both discursive genres and points to the fact that they both rely on an assumption of verisimilitude which her flagrant transgressions of narrative ontology undermine.
The voice of the media portrayed in Amalgamemnon is that of ‘afterthought’(21) which operates by ‘rearranging history past and present in the light of national self-esteem for political ends’(21).
Mira's dream is to get away from both this approach to the past and the alternative approach of realist fiction, to found a school of history in which ‘The highest marks will be given, not to the most correct which will be unverifiable but to the most ingenious’(21).
There she ‘could speak to an issue with a tissue of lies’(140).
This is an imaginary world where fiction would be indistinguishable from fact because, like the novel, it would be under the sign of potentiality.
In Amalgamemnon story-telling in the future tense is at once a reassertion of individual creativity and a counter-attack on the discourses of the media which ignore the fictionality of the material they present and the conventions which are at its source.
4.2 Xorandor: Narrative and Cybernetics.
The sceptical attitude toward information technology that surfaces in Amalgamemnon is tackled directly in Xorandor , but from a very different perspective.
The first thing someone familiar with Christine Brooke-Rose's fiction notices about the novel is that it reads almost like conventional science fiction.
The characteristic verbal acrobatics of Brooke-Rose's earlier work are kept to a minimum, and when they are employed they are always motivated in a naturalistic way.
There are two child narrators who work in tandem, but distinguishing between them poses no problem, and their identity is never overtly threatened.
As the novel progresses, however, it becomes apparent that Xorandor does in fact address many of the same concerns as Brooke-Rose's earlier novels, and that her assumption of the narrative idiom of the popular novel and her mimicry of a childish language are carefully calculated.
The seemingly ingenuous children discover that as a model of reality, narrative can have explanatory force to rival even the most powerful scientific theories, and indeed that narrative has many of the same characteristics as the concepts on which modern science is founded.
Furthermore, it becomes evident over the course of the novel that the story of this founding is itself illuminating in the context of contemporary scientific practices.
Xorandor is a tale set in the near future of two twelve-year-old fraternal twins called Jip and Zab who find a talking stone at an old carn in their native Cornwall.
They discover that although the stone is capable of communicating on ‘vocal’, its more natural medium is ‘softalk’, or direct interface with their pocket computer.
They call the stone Xorandor but, still half believing it is the ghost of Merlin, they amuse themselves teaching it to speak their own peculiar cybernetic slang.
Their secret is soon discovered, however, when the local nuclear waste storage facility where their father works as a physicist records mysterious disappearances of radioactive materials.
Xorandor explains that he lives on radioactivity, that he has come from Mars in search of food, and that he has been stealing the waste to feed himself.
His consumption of nuclear waste would seem at first to be an ideal solution to the problems of both Martians and humans, but of course there is a hitch.
Xorandor has inadvertently eaten a dangerous isotope which has caused a ‘syntax error’ to occur in one of his offspring, Xor 7.
This mutant stone takes over a nuclear reactor and threatens to blow the reactor up if he and his race are not permanently supplied with ‘high quality food’.
Only the twins are able to convince the terrorist stone to renounce his plan, yet once the crisis has been averted they are sent off to school in Germany.
When they are finally allowed to return a year and a half later, they discover that Xorandor and seventeen of his children are under close surveillance in different parts of the world, but that he has ‘programmed’ them to escape and neutralize nuclear missiles.
The governments of nuclear-armed countries rightly perceive this as a threat to their defence strategies and decide to send all the stones back to Mars.
Though Xorandor resigns himself to his fate, he tells the children a secret: he has not in fact come from Mars at all but is a member of a race that has been living on Earth for millions of years, communicating over vast distances through radio pulses in binary code.
He has broken his age-long silence in order to warn humankind that he has committed a dangerous ‘syntax error’.
Or perhaps he has intentionally made the ‘syntax error’ in order to alert people to the danger of their nuclear inventions.
The question is never resolved, but neither is it a new question.
Did Christ come to save man from his original sin, or did man commit his felix culpa in order to be redeemed by and in Christ?
Though the ‘facts’ of his existence are ultimately undecidable, as a ‘story’the information Xorandor conveys makes sense.
Jip and Zab criticize the scientists who analyse Xorandor for their obsessive concern with his ‘synchronic’ functioning to the exclusion of his ‘genealogy’(60,191).
They, who know his ‘true’ history, are the only ones to grasp the significance of origins and myths of origins.
Like narratology, cybernetics takes linguistics as its model discourse, and the analogy between narrative and programming provides the underlying conceit of the novel.
As computer whizzes, the twins' main expertise is the logic of programming languages, so it is natural for them to discuss story-telling in terms of program-writing.
They discover, however, that the logic of narrative is far less rigorous and relies far more on individual taste: ‘…it seems harder to tell a story, even our own, than to make up the most complex program.
Or at least to choose how to tell it’(8).
They complain that ‘even with hindsight we can't decide what's really relevant and in what order’(35), which causes problems with ‘sequence-control’(23,28) because of‘spaghetti stacks’(poorly ordered sequences of instructions, 12).
They also criticize each other for including ‘waste instruction[s]’(8).
The narrative method they eventually choose is ‘dialogic’ in the most literal sense, for together they dictate the story directly into their computer.
The twins' ignorance of narrative technique stems from a change in education which has been brought about as a result of the increasing dominance of science over the humanities.
In the society they inhabit they will have to choose at the university level between physics and hi-tech; philosophy and literature may be pursued only as hobbies.
Zab wants to study both physics and philosophy ‘As it used to be’(187) in Aristotle's day.
The novel represents an attempt to bring these two domains back together through the common discursive mode of narrative.
Far from being a romantic reaction against science, this represents an effort to make people recognize that the scientific concepts which permeate our society have implications far beyond the immediate domain of their technical application, and that they are rooted in seemingly more primitive modes of thought such as story-telling.
Xorandor's principal strategy for communication, which the children term ‘play-acting’, is, like theirs, an ad hoc narrative technique:
As mothers with children, and sometimes women with their men.
Xorandor doesn't laugh at people, he goes along with them at their level, telling them what he knows they want to hear.
After all, we all play language-games…
And what started as a language-game had to go on as a lie, or a myth.
(190)
He simulates the picaresque ingenuousness of the alien, pretending to learn English from the children in order to gain their confidence, and gradually modifying the historical account he gives of himself to meet peoples' changing conception of him.
Near the end of the novel Jip and Zab discuss the status of what Xorandor has told them, whether or not it is the truth, and how they can be sure.
But as they analyse what he has said to different people, they begin to see that the question is not really pertinent.
They realize that in every case he has answered people's questions according to their particular logic.
Thus when the postmistress asks him if he has come from Mars, he answers ‘yes’ because she has just told him the story of Merlin that is a local myth.
His ‘myth’ has the same status as hers, though later when scientists attempt to verify this he has to alter the chemical composition of his exterior in order to substantiate his claim.
He has ‘told a story and altered his reality to fit’(186).
As in Amalgamemnon , there is a blurring of the distinction between ‘originary myth’ and ‘truth’.
As Peter Brooks argues in Reading for the Plot (1984), narrative is a mode of explanation used when other forms of logic break down, in the case of insurmountable contradictions, undecidability, or other seemingly irrational states of affairs.
Because narrative is able to cope with these problems, it is often enlisted by the human mind to work through logically impossible situations.
It is also the communicative technique Xorandor uses to smooth over the paradoxes inherent in his make-up.
One of the first things the children notice about the stone is his odd logic.
Because he ‘fails’ to grasp the concept of pronouns as shifters (the understanding of which is, in Irigaray's terms, the necessary condition for entry into the discourse of the symbolic), they term him ‘slow’(16).
But when he does eventually ‘learn’ the concept, they concede that ‘Even now it still seems as if his sense of identity is quite different from ours’(17).
They name him Xorandor because they notice that ‘His logic could be both absolutely rigorous and absolutely contradictory at crucial points, some arguments could be both XOR and AND, or XOR and OR’(18).
These are terms used in digital electronics to designate the basic logical operations on which digital systems are founded.
The terms, derived from the concepts of Boolean algebra, correspond to specific types of logical operators, or gates, in an integrated circuit.
In an OR gate (also known as inclusive or) an initial input of two binary terms will yield one if either or both of the terms is one.
In an XOR gate (exclusive or) the output will be one if either but not both of the initial terms is one.
An AND gate will yield one if and only if both initial terms are one.
In all other cases the output is, of course, zero.
Xorandor's logic transgresses that of binary systems because he combines mutually exclusive operations.
When the children ask him why he has contacted them, he replies: ‘for security and insecurity xor insecurity andor communication’(81).
His paradoxical logic is in many respects similar to the non-binary logical structures developed in France in the late 1960s to account for the peculiarities of literature and of narrative in particular(see section 3.2 above).
But there is also another sense in which narrative is pertinent to the concept of undecidability, for the narrative of cybernetics as a field of study has this concept at its source.
Jip tells of something he has seen written on a wall: ‘If the human brain was simple enough for us to understand we'd be so simple we couldn't’(88).
Zab pipes in with the comment: ‘Why, it's a popular version of the Gödel theorem’(88).
She goes on to link Gödel's theorem to Alan Turing's proof that ‘no machine could…completely understand itself, I mean, tackle all its own problems’(88).
In 1936 Turing succeeded in demonstrating that there are undecidable problems which no algorithm can solve.
He did this by means of a conceptual prototype of the modern computer which was in effect a definition of the algorithm (Stewart 1987:214–18).
The concept on which computing is based thus contains an element of the indeterminate: the history and origin of computers is inextricably linked to the discovery of ‘originary’ undecidability.
But this history is easily overlooked, as is the modern computer's capacity to accommodate ‘semantic’ undecidables, in scientists' eagerness to construct a myth of the internal consistency and autonomy of their discipline.
Jip and Zab's father claims that computer logic, unlike human logic, ‘can't cope with a word used in a figurative sense, or with humour, which depends on wordplay, which is like assigning two values to a character’(87).
The twins point out that this conception of polysemy has only limited applicability, for it does not explain ambiguity caused by contextual factors.
Xorandor is capable of wordplay, he even puns on Shakespeare: ‘softwarily we are observed’(179), and he gives a reply to one of the twins' questions that they later discover to have been ‘syntactically clear but contextually ambiguous’(183–4).
They then realize that not only is this type of undecidability possible in Xorandor's logic, but that it is also the founding condition of their binary systems.
Even in their own computer in a context-free grammar no general procedure exists for determining whether the grammar can be ambiguous in any one of every single case, however long one ran the program.
The question is then said to be undecidable. (182)
Xorandor is not in fact an alien creature from another planet; likewise, his seemingly irrational logic is implied by their own.
In their encounter with Xorandor, Jip and Zab discover a race that is radically ‘other’ to their own conception of life, a race that, though voiceless, and apparently powerless, nevertheless surpasses humankind in cognitive capacity: ‘…their life-purpose, their survival kit, seems to have depended on silence — not to each other but towards us, though they learnt from us and went beyond us’(192).
They recognize that even the most basic logical processes involve an element of indeterminacy; they also base their techniques of communication on the strategies of narrative fiction rather than the endless flow of information.
Inventing the past to suit our needs, telling stories to account for paradox, and acting out roles are the forms of narrative which make possible all our cognitive endeavours and all communication.
Modern science ignores this at its peril, and Xorandor may be read as a fable for scientists and would-be scientists, written in their own idiom, warning them of the consequences of cutting their project off from its conceptual genealogy, its own founding story.
4.3 Verbivore: Writing and Communication.
Like Xorandor , its sequel Verbivore examines the social and discursive implications of present-day technology by postulating the consequences of a radical variation on communication as we know it.
In Verbivore the focus is switched from the principles on which high technology is based to the media through which it is transmitted.
Recalling Marshall McLuhan's dictum that ‘the medium is the message’, the novel posits the possibility of an obligatory shift in the primary medium of communication from oral and cybernetic forms to a ‘secondary literacy’ in which the world is required once again to rely on the written word.
The consequences of this shift for people's habits and thought processes provide both the subject-matter and the technique of the novel which is composed entirely of people's written accounts of their experience of the crisis.
As in the first modern novels of the eighteenth century, technical experimentation in Verbivore is closely linked to generic conventions specific to the written text.
It is the interaction of high technology with traditional novelistic modes which is the focus of the work.
Of the four volumes which comprise the Quartet, only Xorandor and Verbivore have directly related story lines (though characters from Amalgamemnon surface in both Verbivore and Textermination , most notably perhaps, Mira in the role of narrator).
Verbivore takes place twenty-three years after the action of the previous novel.
The twins have gone their separate ways and become estranged: Jip is a nuclear physicist at NASA and Zab is a Euro-MP in Aachen, which has become the new seat of the European Parliament.
Since the adventure of their adolescence, they have had no contact with their mineral friends whom they have all but forgotten.
But strange occurrences prompt them each to wonder whether Xorandor's progeny may not again be interfering with human activities.
The story starts with various accounts of what journalists have dubbed ‘Verbivore’, an unexplained phenomenon in which the modulations of electromagnetic waves are being mysteriously ‘flattened’ by some unknown agent.
At first the cuts are only occasional, but they become increasingly common until finally all signals have disappeared from the airwaves.
Radio, television and the radar-dependent navigational devices of planes and other vehicles are affected, as are computer networks and satellites.
The economy comes to a virtual standstill as the population is forced to turn to print and writing for communication purposes.
Sensing that the stones may be at the root of the problem, Zab contacts one of Xorandor's offspring, and she learns that ‘Verbivore’ is a reaction by the mineral race to information overload.
Because it cannot cope with so many messages, its only recourse is to sabotage the airwaves themselves.
Aided by Jip and their old friend Tim who is now head of the BBC, Zab acts as an emissary between humans and stones and strikes a deal: people will voluntarily agree to curb the amount of material transmitted if the stones will agree to stop their interference.
Yet as with many agreements on environmental pollution, voluntary abstention is unsuccessful.
After an initial period of relative restraint, people return to their former prolixity and the novel ends with ‘Verbivore’ being resumed for good.
Verbivore starts and ends with Mira as narrator.
Like several other story-tellers active in the novel, she includes in her narrative bits and pieces of what she reads and hears around her.
In the opening pages she interpolates a radio play called ‘A Round of Silence’ by Perry Hupsos (a character she invented as a radio presenter in Amalgamemnon (74) out of the title Peri Hypsos (Longinus's On the Sublime )).
The play functions as a mise en abyme of the novel as a whole.
Two of the main characters are Julian, who is writing a thesis on ‘neopostdeconstructionism’, and Decibel, a voice he hears inside his head when he is recovering in hospital from an accident.
Julian cannot tolerate noise, while Decibel cannot live without it.
This much is established in the play, but, unable to think of a suitable ending, Perry anticipates the events to come by aborting the drama prematurely with a radio cut written into the script.
The two characters continue to appear throughout the novel, however.
It becomes evident that Julian is a representative figure of the writer when he decides to write a novel (82), and Decibel that of the oral media when she declares writing to be her natural enemy (186).
Though they are opposing principles, Julian and Decibel need each other.
Julian is aware of his status as a character in a radio play, and he laments the paradox whereby he hates noise but relies on being broadcast in order to exist (113).
Decibel is an oral character in the sense that she is part of a play, but she has nevertheless been conceived of and written by Perry.
This opening parable may be read as an allegorical figuration of the main idea behind the novel: written and oral means of communication are interdependent in the modern world.
Certainly Verbivore is characteristic of its cybernetic times in that it is more ‘user-friendly’ than much of Brooke-Rose's previous work.
Linguistically it is even more straightforward than Xorandor ; the twins have largely abandoned their cybernetic slang (though they fall back into it when excited), and while frequent, multilingual puns are always motivated realistically.
The novel can plausibly be labelled science fiction by virtue of the fact that it takes place in the future and involves ‘alien’ life forms, but the use of science and other specialized discourses is kept to a minimum.
From this perspective Verbivore is the most accessible of Brooke-Rose's novels since The Middlemen .
It nevertheless refuses to conform to the narrative conventions of nineteenth-century realism.
Instead it takes as its model the typically eighteenth-century genres of direct discourse: the epistolary novel, the journal novel, and the fictional autobiography.
By developing these devices in the light of modern technology, Brooke-Rose is able to circumvent the conventions of realism while still remaining within the bounds of what is accepted as novelistic.
The intimate relation of the novel as a genre to the written word is evident in its historic evolution out of letters, diaries, and autobiographical accounts.
In the eighteenth century the first modern novelists recognized that these genres could be used to tell a story.
The conceit of the ‘found document’, discovered, preserved, and presented to the public by an ‘editor’ was a justification no longer necessary in the nineteenth century when the novel was firmly established as a genre.
It is at this point that the historical link between the novel and the written text began to be lost sight of; the highly unrealistic convention of the omniscient third person narrator then became a realist norm.
But because the novel is still a written genre, it is threatened by the rise of ‘secondary orality’.
The onus is on writing as a medium to demonstrate that it is capable of forms of communication which are impossible in the oral media, and that it therefore still has a place in contemporary society.
The specific effects of the written text have been the preoccupation of literary theory from Derrida and Barthes onward, and the writerly nature of the novel has often manifested itself in the form of typographical devices which defy oral utterance or those specific to the codex.
This is the approach taken in Thru where ‘concrete prose’ is used to exploit the possibilities of the printed word, creating a text that is ‘unspeakable’by virtue of the fact that it relies on visual as well as auditory performance.
But concrete prose is borrowed from concrete poetry as practised by Carroll, Mallarmé, Apollinaire, and others; though it is a form possible only in written texts, it is not one specific to the novel.
In Verbivore Brooke-Rose makes use of techniques that are possible only in prose narrative: the mixing of documentary-like realism with ‘events’ which are unthinkable from a visual or aural point of view, and the circular embedding of narrative fragments.
Verbivore combines the fantastic ontological postulates of Amalgamemnon with the basically realistic postulates of Xorandor , creating a hybrid form which can be likened to magic realism as practised by many Spanish-American writers, and more recently by a number of British authors.
The characters from the two novels carry their ontological status with them and pass it on to those they engender.
Thus Perry, Julian, and Decibel are ‘unrealistic’ characters.
Julian is aware, for instance, that he is a character in Perry's play; Decibel is the personification of an abstract quality.
When at one point Decibel meets Zab, Zab wonders if she must not be dreaming.
She relates her ‘dream’ to Jip and he confirms her interpretation of the episode, for in their realist world, ‘only dreams mix real and fantasy items’(139).
This is a classic case of dramatic irony which alerts the reader to the fact that novels too are capable of mixing fantastic and realistic elements, that indeed the capacity to do so is one of their defining characteristics.
The imagining of what someone else is writing is the mechanism by which the novel switches from one first-person narrator to another.
Mira imagines what Zab must be typing into her word-processor; soon we are reading Zab's text in which she imagines what her brother Jip is typing, and so forth, through their mother Paula, the playwright Perry Hupsos, his characters Decibel and Julian, and finally back to Mira.
While the effect is a variation of point of view, the structure is that of a ‘strange loop’— by definition a transgression of conventional ontology — which works itself through several narrative levels.
Just as the ‘Verbivore’ phenomenon is caused through a flattening or levelling of the modulations of air waves, so the hierarchy of narrative levels is ‘flattened’such that it becomes impossible in any given instance to determine whose account we are reading or whose mind we are supposedly ‘inside’.
As in much self-conscious fiction, we are constantly being reminded of the fictionality of the novel, but Verbivore makes it clear that this fictionality also applies to the ‘simulations’ of the media which its ‘fictions’purportedly replace.
Far from enabling true communication, ‘communications’ networks process information which is immediately outdated, and can therefore never claim a response.
In Verbivore people's dependence on the endless flow of facts and interpretation has reached the proportions of an addiction to ‘that best narcotic, vox humana’(31).
As Mira sees it, this form of language use has had an indelible effect on human consciousness:
our minds and psyches, our entire nervous system and networks of expectations have been transformed by the media.
…We depend on the media for our life-blood, the stream of information, the adventures, the violence, the romance,…the eternal commentary that lines our lives like a loving companion, a double, making sense of it for us. (30–1)
The ‘eternal commentary’ or ‘double’is absorbed in a one-way continuous-feed process which has replaced dialogue.
This is a sinister view of the world of simulacra and simulation described by Jean Baudrillard, the world in which people have the illusion of being actively hooked into vast information networks, whereas in fact they are only the passive recipients of processed data, more and more isolated in front of their televisions and their computer screens (1970:186–91, 1981:121–31).
It can also be likened to the world envisaged by Hassan's ‘new gnostics’, who see the future as a vast network of information systems produced, as Brooke-Rose points out, by the few for the many (see section 2.1 above).
At one point Zab asks: ‘What have we lost…since the disappearance of books?’(38), and as if in reply, Tim describes cybernetic abstractions as the cause of mental and physiological degeneration: ‘We've become stunted human beings.
Loss of senses and muscle through the media, loss of memory and logical capacity through computers’(92).
Indeed, Jip and Zab have lost their almost telepathic ability to communicate, and, as witnessed by the outcome of the novel, the world is unable to communicate well enough to reach a full consensus or enforce a communal decision.
Simulation has also begun to supplant individual creativity.
Being an inveterate story-teller, Mira is quick to remark on the degenerate effect the dominance of the media has on personal development: ‘Gradually all our secret treasures have been removed and we've all been made to share the same abstracted and alienating public knowledge’(111).
According to Tim, this has resulted in a return to an élitist society in which ‘The population has learnt to live on abstractions and interpretations of the world as presented by a few’(92).
With the advent of Verbivore, however, people are forced once again to rely on their own cognitive and creative resources.
It is not long before their imaginative faculties are reactivated and word-processing becomes a universal withdrawal symptom.
For lack of information about what is happening elsewhere in the world, people record ‘screendiaries’ or ‘mimic minimemoirs’(7) on their ‘chatterscreen[s]’(127).
Not only do they write of their personal experiences, speculations and fears, they also begin to imagine what people they know are thinking, saying, and most of all, what they are typing into their word-processors.
This spontaneous surge of ‘substitute fictions’(169) is commented upon by many of those who take to keeping computerized journals.
Zab finds herself using the now obsolete narrative conventions of the memoir.
She notes that ‘clearly I am deriving pleasure, just as fiction-writers used to, from the mere fact of noting facts’(37).
When it comes to her imagined transcriptions of Jip's diary, she goes on in the same descriptive vein for a paragraph, then stops herself with an abrupt exclamation of ‘No, he wouldn't say all that’(54), whereupon she starts again in more concise fashion.
Jip, for his part, imagines his mother Paula writing and then he catches himself and reflects on his motives:
…why am I writing all this out as if I were trying to assimilate myself to her?
Are these increasing breaks in our daily fictions turning us all into d.i.y.
fiction producers?
Which, Zab would cut in, we've all been all along anyway, but in our heads, not on paper.
(75)
Paula (who writes in long-hand) reflects in turn on the genre of the journal per se :
Why am I scribbling all this to myself?…
Perhaps I'll send these pages to Zab for comment.
I've certainly never kept a journal before, it's not the age of journals.
…Perhaps everyone will now, it's catching.
(79)
As these passages demonstrate, the passive consumption of information and oral commentary is contrasted with characteristically written forms of language use which encourage intersubjective communication by forcing people to imagine, in the case of the journal, what others are doing or, in the case of the letter, how they will react to what is being written to them.
This active projection of consciousness outside the self is the condition of true communication, and also the condition of the creation of narrative fiction.
But just as the invention of print prepared the way for the traditional novel (Watt 1957:196–200, Couturier 1991:93–144), so the fictions characters produce in Verbivore are conditioned by the technological advances which have made them possible.
Taking a broader perspective, Mira remarks on the situation at large.
She notes that there is a difference between the stories people have been producing and traditional fiction.
The facility with which a fiction in the mind or on the word-processor can be altered means that the effect is nearly as ‘evanescent’(169) as the fictions provided by the media.
Already in Out the narrator was obsessed with the mind's capacity for erasing one version of a story and substituting another: ‘We can make our errors in a thought and reject them in another thought, leaving no trace of error in us’(51/53).
Likewise, Mira in Amalgamemnon describes the stories she tells herself as writing ‘on sand’(140).
The oral media have accustomed people to continual and infinitely practicable mutability.
With a text on a word-processor no one version is final, any version can be altered without a trace.
as if to demonstrate the facility with which word-processed text can be subject to systematic manipulation, Perry repeats an entire paragraph of his text in which he lists the commands that effect this repetition (167).
It is in the nature of long-hand and typescript that corrections and annotations are visible, as in Out , whereas in Verbivore there is very little of Brooke-Rose's characteristic variation on the same phrases.
This technique is grounded in a form of composition that is outmoded: the age of the word-processor has made possible in practice a perpetual variation and continual performance which can only be indicated obliquely in print.
In the society portrayed in the novel the printed codex is obsolete; books are distributed on diskette which can be altered at will, heralding the end of the definitive text.
Marshall McLuhan and Walter Ong see the print revolution as an enabling condition for the establishment of fixed point of view which led to the rise of the novel (McLuhan 1962:126–7,135–6; Ong 1982:133,148–9).
Maurice Couturier disputes the necessary relation between print and perspectival unity in narrative, arguing instead that ‘print has allowed the novelist to multiply the points of view without making his book unreadable’(1991:142).
But here he confuses the issue, for while print may well have initially encouraged authors to focus on an individual's perception and cognition of the world, this does not mean that this technique is necessarily bound to be dominant in printed texts, for as the novel evolved, so did the concept of point of view.
Moreover, the examples Couturier gives are of multiple discrete points of view carefully distinguished within the novels in question (The Sound and the Fury ,Pale Fire ), whereas the mutable point of view employed in Verbivore is a technique developed out of the possibilities inherent in print, but moving toward the mutability of cybernetic text.
Couturier is more convincing in his demonstration of how the increase in available textual material brought about by the invention of print led to new strategies for incorporating one text into another without overt plagiarism (48).
The even greater increase in the availability of textuality made possible by the digital revolution, combined with the facilities it allows for altering, merging, and adding to already written texts, presents a related but different set of problems to the novelist.
In his analysis of the relationship between literary study and advances in cybernetic technology, Richard Lanham argues that the computerization of knowledge — including fiction — will change our conception of the nature of textuality.
Not only will we be obliged to recognize the ‘perpetual immanent metamorphosis’(1989:273) characteristic of contemporary multi-media texts, but our understanding of the ‘great works’ of the past will be modified as well.
Lanham predicts the emergence of a new ‘rhetoric of the arts’ which will focus not on a set of ‘Great Ideas’but on ‘how knowledge is held’(286), both on the medium and on the message, and of course, on their interaction.
What Lanham describes as ‘perpetual immanent metamorphosis’ comes in Verbivore to infect the coherence of both point of view and plot structure.
That the mutability of a text should be based on a cybernetic paradigm as opposed to a print paradigm in no way threatens to affect the characteristics specific to its status as a written text.
Rather, certain elements of the written narrative — its ability to mix different modes of discourse and to create logically impossible situations — will be foregrounded to the detriment of elements such as unity of point of view which came to narrative with the invention of print.
In Verbivore as a whole, as in its fantastic sub-plot, the oral and the written dimensions of language are opposed but also intimately related.
Jip and Zab succeed in contacting Xorandor's offspring orally, and of course it is orally that they themselves finally work out their differences.
Furthermore, the written narratives which constitute the novel are shot through with the vestiges of oral culture: incomplete sentences, a tendency toward verbosity and digression, as well as an abundance of transcriptions of actual dialogue.
It is clear that Brooke-Rose does not propose a return to the hegemony of the printed word, and that her tale of the sabotage of communication technology is not merely the vengeful fantasy of a frustrated novelist.
We have, as the novel suggests, been immersed for too long in a predominantly oral culture for it not to have permanently altered our minds.
If there is to be a ‘secondary literacy’ of the kind imagined and enacted in Verbivore , it will necessarily have a reciprocal relationship with contemporary technological inventions and institutions.
It will be one which relies on its oral counterpart for its survival (through television and radio adaptations, interviews with authors, etc.).
But the dependence is mutual: Decibel needs an imaginative creator to invent her, and without the creative impetus represented by written genres, it is hinted that the powers of the imagination will slowly die.
4.4 Textermination: Creative Reading and the Ontology of Fiction.
Just as there is a break in the four volumes which constitute the Omnibus ,Thru being in many respects a new departure, so the final volume of the Quartet breaks with the technological preoccupations of the first three novels.
Textermination is not directly concerned with technology; rather it elaborates the issues raised by the current place of the novel in our technological society.
Many of the questions of communication and individual creativity which are explored through media and cybernetic models in the earlier novels are treated in Textermination with relation to the communication between a fictional text and its readers.
Similarly, science fiction motifs give way in this novel to fantasy elements which maintain it at one remove from realism but prevent it from falling into a generic category.
Like its three predecessors,Textermination is a cautionary novel, for it deals with the gradual (ex) termination of novelistic worlds.
But it is neither an elegy of the novel nor a grim prediction of its imminent demise.
Instead it plays with the ‘death of reading’, for novels have always relied on the reader to bring them to life.
Whereas Amalgamemnon focuses on the fictionality of many of the so-called discourses of ‘truth’,Textermination treats the concept of fictionality from the point of view of reception.
This treatment takes two forms.
The novel sets the individual reader's response above authorial determination of meaning, orthodox critical interpretations, and other ‘closed’ forms of response.
It also emphasizes the importance of readings in which fictional texts are recognized for what they are rather than being treated as truth claims or pronouncements about the world.
The setting of the novel is the annual ‘Convention of Prayer for Being’ held in San Fransisco.
Attending the convention are characters from hundreds of works of literary fiction from all ages and all parts of the world who convene with the express purpose of bolstering their existences and securing their continued survival.
They accomplish this task by listening to papers delivered on them and by attending ‘pray-ins’ in which they pray to the Implied Reader.
Prominent figures include Jane Austen's Emma, Emma Bovary, Dorothea Brooke from Middlemarch , Felipe Segundo from Carlos Fuentes's Terra Nostra , and Gibreel Farishta from Salman Rushdie's The Satanic Verses .
There are also characters present from works by authors as diverse as Homer, Clarice Lispector, Mark Twain, Milan Kundera, and Eugène Sue.
The convention is organized by eminent literary critics and support staff include ‘interpreters’ whose job it is to facilitate relations between the characters as well as ensuring the smooth running of the convention generally.
The novel opens with a series of quotations from well-known works of European literature loosely strung together with third-person narrative.
Each quotation describes a journey in a carriage taken by the protagonists of works which are in many cases those whose titles bear their names:Emma ,Madame Bovary ,Clarissa , etc.
Suddenly all the characters find themselves in an ‘aerobrain’ headed across the Atlantic toward San Fransisco, with a stop-over in Atlanta en route .
On leaving this city the characters have a vision of its demolition by fire, or rather, as it burns we are given a series of famous fictional burnings of cities, libraries, and books.
This constitutes a ritualistic burning of the books in which the characters were conceived; they are thus taken out of the ‘old world’ of their origins and made to embark on an adventure in the ‘new world’of Brooke-Rose's novel.
The plot of the remainder of the novel revolves around a series of attempted rebellions by various factions at the convention who are critical of the way it is organized.
Each of these challenges comes to nought in the end though, for, as one of the interpreters explains, ‘Some will say nothing happens in this novel, in this, Convention, and they'd be dead right.
It's not about events, but about characters and their discourse’(160).
When the delegates from Western literature meet on the first day to pray for their existence, there is an attempted disruption of the ceremony by Muslim fundamentalists who claim to object to the Christian format of the proceedings, but, as we later discover, their real target is the elusive Gibreel Farishta whom they are trying to punish for his heretical views.
Order is eventually restored through the good offices of the interpreters Kelly and Jack, but no sooner are the terrorists under control than there is a second attempt to sabotage the convention by characters from television who demand representation.
A quarrel ensues in which the television characters argue that they are more deserving of prayer than novelistic characters because the latter have a far longer life; the characters from novels insist that only they need their existences reinforced because only they are in danger of losing their audience.
Meanwhile Kelly begins to suspect that many of the people helping to run the convention may also be fictional.
The police inspector who investigates the terrorist attack turns out to be none other than Columbo, the clerks at the hotel are discovered to be Akaky Akakievich, Badin, Devushkin, Mr Guppy, Goliadkin, Sainthomme, and Uriah Heep, and the journalists who report it include Jake Barnes, Ian Scuffling, Joe McCarthy Hynes, and Rouletabille.
Her worst fears are confirmed when she finds a list, containing the entry ‘McFadgeon, Kelly.
From Textermination , by Mira Enketei’(98), of all the characters who have completely ceased to exist because they are no longer read.
Mira herself makes several appearances, both in the first and the third persons, before also discovering that her name is on the list as the delegate from Amalgamemnon , whereupon she too ‘dies’.
There follows an attempted conspiracy by ‘I-narrators’ in the aim of increasing their prominence and defining their specific needs, a revolt by several characters against their authors (most notably Oedipa Maas from The Crying of Lot 49 who declaims her views as a feminist despite Pynchon's ‘macho’stance), and finally, a protest by a gay rights group against the under-representation of homosexuality in literature.
The novel ends with San Fransisco going up in flames, then succumbing to a monstrous earthquake.
(This recalls the burning of Atlanta at the beginning: here it is the novel Textermination which is auto-destructing.)
The only survivors are, appropriately, the participants of the convention who wander the streets before eventually making their respective ways home in a repetition of the opening scene.
What Brooke-Rose does with discursive and textual matter in much of her previous fiction she does here with personae .
Thru and Amalgamemnon ‘plagiarize’ texts from other authors, whereas Textermination abducts their characters.
The first scene of the novel involves a paradigmatic ‘crossing’ of characters from different fictional worlds.
When Jane Austen's Emma accidentally enters a carriage containing Goethe's Lotte and Goethe himself (characters from Thomas Mann's Lotte in Weimar ), she finds herself unaccountably thinking and speaking in Lotte's voice, for she has crossed into another fictional world.
Just as in her earlier fiction Brooke-Rose fused discourses, so in Textermination she fuses characters by making them (and their discourses) interact.
In Textermination the reader's mind becomes a veritable anthology of literature which supplants the author's literary heritage as the source on which the novel draws.
The narrator of Flann O'Brien's At Swim-Two-Birds expresses the view that ‘Characters should be interchangeable as between one book and another….
The modern novel should be largely a work of reference’(1939:25, cit.
Brooke-Rose 1981:114).
Textermination is a work of reference of this kind.
The idea that characters could be interchangeable units raises the question of just what a fictional character is and what is involved in shuttling it between novels.
As early as The Sycamore Tree Brooke-Rose displayed frustration with the limitations of the traditional character, but in Textermination she succeeds in manipulating these limitations in such a way as to move beyond them without completely abandoning the trappings of realism.
The ‘reduction’ of characters to functions or ‘ghosts’does not threaten their vitality; as fictions they survive and ‘wander the streets’even when the physical world is severely altered.
Their mode of existence has changed, however: they no longer represent coherent subjects but discourses transmuted through (metaphoric) interaction into ‘poems’, ‘gaps’ in the text at which the reader is invited to intervene, or deictics with multiple and mutable referents.
Like the ‘alien’ Xorandor and the fantastic figure of Decibel, these characters are coextensive with their language, but in Textermination there is displacement of creative responsibility from author to reader.
It is up to the reader to recognize the imported characters and thus to ‘actualize’ the discursive worlds the novel brings together.
In questioning the ontological determinacy of the fictional character, Brooke-Rose is striking at the mainstay of the traditional novel.
If a character is not inscribed in the text, but instead a product of the reading process, the status of the entire world the character represents is highly variable.
The ontological status of fictional worlds has been of interest to philosophers as well as literary critics.
Roman Ingarden's seminal work The Literary Work of Art provided the basis for much subsequent analysis of the nature of fiction and the process of reading.
Ingarden defines the act of reading as the ‘realization’ of the work which is accomplished as the reader progressively fills in the ‘spots of indeterminacy’in it (1931:246–54).
In Verbivore Decibel makes an oblique reference to Ingarden's theory when she describes her own problematic existence:
Perry tried to kill me off — as if one could kill an abstraction, a measurement.
Oh, I know, some of you oddball characters will say: Don't be so vague, if you're a measurement.
But a few might add: you also belong to the stratum of represented objects, you have a right to be indeterminate.
(177)
Wolfgang Iser points out that Ingarden's analysis implies two types of indeterminacy: that which is eventually eliminated in the process of ‘realization’ and that which is integral to the world of the text and a constitutive aspect of its status as fiction (Iser 1978:173).
Brian McHale sees the foregrounding of the second type of indeterminacy as a characteristic strategy of postmodernist fiction.
In his discussion of transgressions of ontological levels in which characters are instrumental, McHale remarks that ‘Characters often serve as agents or ‘carriers’ of metalepsis, disturbers of the ontological hierarchy of levels through their awareness of the recursive structures in which they find themselves' (1987:121).
Yet novels and plays that have characters who are aware or become aware of their fictional status generally focus on the relation of the characters to their author, as in Luigi Pirandello's Six Characters in Search of an Author , Flann O'Brien's At Swim-Two-Birds , Muriel Spark's The Comforters , Robert Pinget's Mahu, ou le matériau and countless other postmodernist texts.
Brooke-Rose reverses this familiar postmodernist trope by focusing instead on the relation between the characters and their readers.
McHale points out that ‘a character's knowledge of his own fictionality often functions as a kind of master-trope for determinism — cultural, historical, psychological determinism, but especially the inevitability of death’(123).
When used to foreground the character-reader relationship the same device does just the opposite.
A reader is free to interpret the actions and the motivations of the characters of even the most traditional novel in a variety of ways.
Knowledge of their ontological status thus functions in Textermination as a trope for indeterminacy.
Iser expands on Ingarden's description of the reading process as the filling in of gaps but criticizes Ingarden's belief that there are true and false realizations of a text (1978:178).
Susan Suleiman points out, however, that Iser's claim for the multiplicity of ‘correct’ readings is in fact not borne out by his readings themselves (Suleiman 1980:24, cit.
Brooke-Rose 1981:35).
In Textermination the variety of reading experiences is ensured by the fact that for each reader the ‘gaps of indeterminacy’ will be different.
How he or she reads depends not only on what Eco calls ‘passeggiati inferenziali’(1979:204), but also on his or her specific cultural heritage, a dimension of the reading process which Iser acknowledges but fails to take fully into account.
Like Between , in which foreign languages serve as a psychological trigger to recall the experience of incomprehension that is an integral part of travel,Textermination makes use of novelistic allusions which readers will be aware that they do not always understand.
The interpreter Kelly functions as a surrogate for the reader who is ashamed of his or her literary ignorance: ‘Gaps, so many gaps in her reading, she'll never catch up’(42).
In this novel the reader is the one irreducible gap or ‘spot of indeterminacy’ which roves the text at will and fills holes in his or her knowledge on whim.
Because the novel relies on prior literary knowledge, each individual reading will necessarily be the idiosyncratic result of an interaction between the proper names given and the reader's capacity to ‘round out’ these names by furnishing them with personalities and circumstantial details (which may vary considerably even between readers who have read the same texts).
The use of extraneous knowledge is a feature of all of Brooke-Rose's novels, but in this case the knowledge deployed requires that of the reader to activate it.
Textermination thus privileges active participation in the creative process on the part of the reader over authoritative readings by professional interpreters.
At one point in the novel the ‘implied author’ intervenes to argue that in critical discourse the critic-as-reader becomes a principle of unity and semantic determination:
…when came the fashion for the vanishing author, the silent author, the transparent text…, the critics, always quick to adapt their vocabulary to the latest bandwagon, started calling the narrator both character who narrates and the producer of the text, that is, the author….
The author was out.
All authority rested in the text.
And later still all authority rested in the Reader, Implied, Ideal or whatever.
And so they passed imperceptibly from phrases such as‘the author's intention is clearly’ to ‘the text clearly says’, and then to ‘the reader clearly infers’.
But behind this lip-service to fads, what the author intends, what the text says, what the reader infers, is in any case what the critic interprets.
He too is Reader, he too is God.
(117)
This type of interpretation is impossible in the case of Textermination , for no critic can foresee each and every one of the possible epistemological permutations put into play by the interaction between the text and its potential readers.
Though deceptively easy to read, the novel resists authoritative ‘readings’.
All texts must be read in order for them to ‘exist’; the corollary of this is that the mode of their existence in the world depends on how they are read.
In Amalgamemnon ,Xorandor , and Verbivore the fictional or mythic nature of the simulations and abstractions we take to be fact is demonstrated by simulations of these simulations which reveal them to be discursive constructs.
Similarly,Textermination exposes the fictional nature of readings of texts.
Like the critical readings which present themselves as accurate representations of what an author ‘really’ intended, what a work ‘really’means, or how a reader ‘really’experiences it, but are no more than interpretations or simulations of these supposedly verifiable facts, readings of ‘non-fictional’texts are also in part fictitious constructs.
In a recent article (1990a) Brooke-Rose addresses the issue of determinate versus indeterminate readings of texts and the consequences this has for people's world-views.
She brings together under the heading ‘palimpsest history’ both Terra Nostra and The Satanic Verses , for both novels provide creative or poetic readings of discursive traditions — the history of the Spanish empire and the history of Muslim heritage.
That these ‘alternative histories’ should be deemed in some sense heretical is a consequence of a perceived transgression of the firmly grounded distinction between secular and sacred exegesis on the one hand, and novels on the other.
The fundamentalist outrage directed against Salman Rushdie (parodied in Textermination ) is a real-life consequence of a failure to read the novel as a novel, that is, as a plotted confrontation between people with different points of view, not as a tract or a credo.
This ‘mistake’ is itself the result of a failure to recognize the ontological status of the novel, i.e. the irreducible indeterminacy which leaves it open to multiple interpretations.
Brooke-Rose describes The Satanic Verses as ‘a different, a poetic, re-creative reading, of what is in the Qur'an’(1990a:25).
Readings such as this must be situated between sacred or received texts and those of their official interpreters:
…the novel's task, unlike that of history, is to stretch our intellectual, spiritual and imaginative horizons to breaking point.
Because palimpsest histories do precisely that, mingling realism with the supernatural and history with spiritual and philosophical reinterpretation, they could be said to float half-way between the sacred books of our various heritages, which survive on the strength of the faiths they have created,…and the endless exegesis and commentaries these sacred books create.
(1991a:189)
The view that certain types of fiction occupy a mediatory position between the ‘reality’ of a cultural heritage and contemporary ‘true’accounts of it elevates these texts to a status which the novel has not held for quite some time.
The novel's role could then be said to be to question the way we think about culture.
This role is assumed in Textermination vis-á-vis the genealogy of the novel itself; Brooke-Rose's novel can thus also be included in the generic category of ‘palimpsest history’.
By using characters from other such works, she draws an implicit parallel between religious or historical fundamentalism which enforces a single interpretation of the discourses of the past, and literary critical ‘fundamentalism’ which arrogates an individual reading of a text to the status of a general truth.
The obviousness of the creative mis-reading of world literature offered by the novel highlights the idiosyncrasy of reception and demonstrates that ‘perpetual immanent metamorphosis’ is inherent in reading as well as writing.
The relation between contemporary modes of communication and the contemporary novel may not always be obvious or straightforward, but it has profoundly changed the ways in which people think about fiction and the value they attach to reading.
At one extreme is Calvino who views technology as the occasion for a radical reconception of the act of reading.
He foresees the disappearance of the author in favour of a cybernetic combinatory which will shift the decisive moment of a text from its production to its reception.
The reader will, he predicts, find in a machine-produced text the quintessentially human ‘ghosts’ that haunt the collective unconscious (1967).
Christine Brooke-Rose does not go so far as to disavow authorial creativity altogether, but she too sees technology as the possible key to a breakthrough in how we think about the human subject.
In ‘The Dissolution of Character in the Novel’ she expresses her faith in the power of the computer as a concept to change literature in the same way that print did nearly five hundred years ago:
…perhaps the computer…will alter our minds and powers of analysis once again, and enable us to create new dimensions in the deep-down logic of characters.
I do not mean computers with human emotions or humanoids with computer brains.
…I mean a completely different development arising from computer logic but as unimaginable to us now as a Shakespearean character would have been to an oral-epic culture, and a different way of thinking about and rendering…all worldly phenomena, as revolutionary as the scientific spirit that slowly emerged out of the Renaissance and the Gutenberg galaxy.
(1986a:195)
The ‘Intercom Quartet’ represents an attempt to move in this direction by exploring the cognitive and cultural consequences of contemporary developments in technology.
Modern technology and the discourses of knowledge associated with it represent both a threat to society and a possible means of expanding human consciousness.
The role of the novel at this juncture is seen by Brooke-Rose to be crucial.
Its status as written narrative fiction and its function as a means of communication provide it with the wherewithal to participate actively in present-day debates about the future of social institutions.
Whether it will rise to this task is, the Quartet suggests, a question of its ability to recognize its potential and adapt itself accordingly.