

The Soviet interest in Latin America
Latin America is clearly not an area of vital security interest to the Soviet Union, notwithstanding the importance Moscow attaches to the preservation of a socialist Cuba (see chapter 4).
It is the United States, rather than the USSR, which is significantly dependent on Latin America for its raw materials, and Moscow's interest in this respect is largely confined to the as yet unexplored potential of Antarctica.
Soviet strategic concerns in Latin America stem from the region's status as a high priority area for the United States and the challenge thereby posed to the USSR as a rival superpower.
Indeed Latin America, as the Third World region furthest from the USSR and nearest to the United States, has traditionally been an area of low priority for Moscow.
It was not until the late 1960s that the Soviet Union began to build a relatively stable and extensive network of diplomatic links in the sub-continent.
According to CIA estimates, Latin America (excluding Cuba) was allocated only 5.6 per cent of the aid extended by the Soviet Union to all non-Communist developing countries over the period 1954–78, and received less than 2.5 per cent of Soviet military deliveries to the Third World.
Conventional trading links have been even weaker: between 1975 and 1978 Latin America supplied barely 1 per cent of Soviet imports and absorbed less than one quarter per cent of Soviet exports.
A number of factors combined to explain why this was the case prior to 1959.
Firstly, until the 1950s foreign trade played only a very subsidiary role in the inward-looking Soviet economy, as Stalin pursued a policy of autarky.
Within that schema, trade with the geographically remote countries of Latin America naturally occupied a position of low priority.
Thus there was little incentive to overcome the second factor, namely that Moscow's early view of Latin America was governed by what became known as the law of ‘geographical  fatalism’.
Soviet officials saw little hope either of establishing formal political ties or of promoting revolution in countries forced to live within the shadow of the United States and its 1823 Monroe Doctrine.
(It is worth noting that the Monroe Doctrine, which aimed to exclude all European influence from the American continent, consisted of two parts, the first of which was designed to deter Russian expansionism down the northwest US pacific coast.
The tsarist threat receded in 1867, when Russia sold Alaska to the United States, and the doctrine subsequently became better known for its challenge to the perceived intention of the European Holy Alliance to help Spain reconquer its former colonies.
By extension it has become widely interpreted as the formulation of Washington's view that any intrusion by European powers into the Americas would be regarded as an act of hostility towards the United States.)
This assumption seemed to be justified when Argentina and Bolivia, having shown some signs of willingness to recognise the Soviet Union, succumbed to British pressure not to do so.
In the pre-war years Moscow had state-to-state relations with only two Latin American nations: Mexico (1924–30) and Uruguay (1926–35).
After the USSR joined the Allied cause following the Nazi invasion of the Soviet Union in June 1941, the United States launched a huge propaganda effort directed towards persuading Latin American governments that they should establish relations with Moscow.
Most accordingly did so, although several (notably the 1943–6 military regime in Argentina) chose to postpone the decision until the Allied victory was imminent.
As soon as the war was over, however, most Latin American countries broke off or refused to recognise their ties with the USSR.
Only Mexico, Uruguay and Argentina retained links throughout the Cold War period.
This fact, along with the 1947 Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance (in effect a restatement of the principles behind the Monroe Doctrine), confirmed that, in the context of Moscow's then rigid categorisation of the world into ‘capitalist’ or ‘Communist’, the Latin American nations were firmly entrenched in the capitalist camp.
In 1951 Stalin, denouncing the exclusion from the United Nations of the people's Republic of China, berated the twenty Latin American republics for being the ‘most solid and obedient army of the United States’(Pravda interview with Stalin, 17 February 1951, p. 1).
Even after Khrushchev announced, at the Twentieth Congress of the Communist party of the Soviet Union (CPSU) in 1956, that the Soviet Union had abandoned its strictly bipolar view of the world and was ready to open up relations with the developing nations, there was little change in Moscow's attitude towards Latin America, which had recently been ‘vindicated’ by US covert involvement in the 1954 overthrow of the Arbenz government in Guatemala.
In his 1956 speeches Khrushchev placed new emphasis on the’ peaceful road' to socialism which, it was asserted, might be taken by those of the newly independent and underdeveloped states which, albeit not ready to take the fully socialist road, were nevertheless ‘anti-imperialist’in orientation.
In retrospect it seems clear that this ideological shift was made, as were a whole series of later ones, because the Soviet Union in its role as emerging superpower (rather than as leading socialist nation) wished to respond to a perceived change in the world situation in a more positive way than was permitted by the orthodox formulations.
The new pre-eminence of the ‘peaceful road’ was clearly aligned with Khrushchev's drive for ‘peaceful coexistence’with the United States.
It also enabled the Soviet Union to pursue a more active policy towards developing countries in order to take advantage of the rapid decolonisation which followed in the wake of the Second World War, none of which, with the exception of North Vietnam, was a result of action by local Communist forces.
This was a time of great Soviet optimism about the potential of the Third World: the fact that Latin America was not included in Khrushchev's ‘zone of peace’ of African and Asian nations is a telling indication of the region's ill-defined status and low priority in Soviet eyes.
The third factor which is relevant to an explanation of the limited development of early Soviet — Latin American ties is that significant sectors of the Latin American elites were (indeed, in some cases still are) deeply imbued with a strong anti-Communism.
This derived largely from fears amongst Latin American ruling groups of a threat to their own positions, concerns which have been played upon and reinforced by Great Britain in the 1920s because of its considerable stake in the Argentine economy, and subsequently by the United States.
Anti-Communism lay behind several setbacks to early Soviet initiatives in the area, notably the closure of the first trading office in Latin America, Iuzhamtorg (set up in Buenos Aires in 1927), by the military regime of General José Uriburu who came to power in a 1930 coup .
Furthermore, tensions ensuing from the USSR's need to support its claim to be the vanguard of world revolutionary movements and its  interests as a nation state (and subsequently as a world superpower) were felt particularly acutely in these early years.
In the 1930s Moscow's attempts to pursue a two-track policy, combining increased Comintern militancy with endeavours to cultivate state-to-state relations, strained the Soviet Union's weak diplomatic links to breaking point.
Mexico severed its relations with the USSR in January 1930 after the Comintern had made a clumsy and ill-judged bid to exploit the uncertainty caused by a right-wing rebellion against the portes Gil government (see pages 39–40).
In 1935 Uruguay acceded to Brazilian pressure to break links with Moscow because of allegations, apparently not unfounded, that the Soviet trading office in Montevideo had been used as a conduit for funds to the Brazilian insurgents.
The closure of this last remaining branch of Iuzhamtorg ‘[brought]Soviet trade with Latin America virtually to a standstill’(Zinoviev: 1981, p. 100).
The pro-Washington stance of most post-war regimes in Latin America, along with the onslaught of anti-Communist propaganda generated by the Cold War, were the main reasons for the refusal of all but three nations to have diplomatic relations with the USSR during that period, and of all but one (Perón's Argentina, which was undergoing a near-total trade embargo imposed by Washington) to engage in commercial activity.
Since the late 1950s, however, the importance of all of the above factors has diminished to the extent that, even taken together, they no longer offer more than a partial explanation for the restricted nature of Soviet — Latin American relations.
As far as the first factor is concerned, foreign trade has clearly assumed greater importance to the Soviet economy in recent years.
To what extent this is the case is a matter for debate; however, the fact that trade with the developing nations is intended to play some part is indicated by the Guidelines for the Economic and Social Development of the USSR for 1981–5 and for the Period Ending in 1990 adopted at the 26th CPSU Congress in 1981, which envisage ‘[the development], on a long-term and equitable basis,[of a]mutually beneficial exchange of goods…with developing countries’(in Koshelev: 1982, pp. 8–9).
Specifically with respect to Latin America, Soviet commentators have written, ‘The socialist countries…are interested in widening their trade and economic ties with Latin America, particularly in the form of regular purchases of individual foodstuffs which either do not grow in the temperate climate of the socialist countries (coffee, cocoa-beans, bananas, and so on) or whose production at home is not yet sufficient to meet the population's needs completely’(a discreet reference to grain and meat, which the Soviet  Union has purchased in substantial quantities in Latin America)(Zhuravleva: 1983, p. 44).
Some observers have attributed the Soviet Union's apparent willingness to carry a high trade deficit with almost all of its trading partners in Latin America to the fact that it is using trade primarily as a political instrument in order to increase its influence within the region.
While there may have been isolated instances which appear to confirm this interpretation (for example, in 1970 the Soviet Union bought up Costa Rica's excess of coffee, which may well have been a factor contributing to the establishment of diplomatic relations the following year), other such instances have been similarly small-scale and the evidence overall is against it.
The Soviet Union has shown itself anxious to expand trade with, for example, Mexico, with which Moscow already has good and well-established political relations.
Moreover it ‘has been confirmed independently from various Soviet sources’ that ‘Moscow finds Latin American offerings attractive’(Blasier: 1983, p. 50).
Most Soviet imports from the area consist of essential foodstuffs and the Soviet Union would in any case have to buy many of them, notably grain, meat and wool, in hard currency markets.
In addition there are constraints imposed by the Soviet economy itself: it is likely that, as Cole Blasier suggests, ‘Soviet resources are still so limited as to discourage purely political use.
Domestic needs for resources are so great that the USSR cannot afford to take many losses in Latin America for purely political purposes.
Moreover, other geographic areas closer to home take priority (Blasier: 1983, p. 54).
persistent Soviet attempts to penetrate the Latin American market with its machinery and equipment indicate a distinct reluctance to acquiesce in the continuance of the existing trading imbalance.
In the light of the above considerations, I would argue that the Soviet Union has a genuinely economic interest in expanding its trading links with Latin American countries, and that it wishes to apply purely commercial principles to such dealings.
As for the second factor, the January 1959 revolution in Cuba irreversibly changed the perceptions of Soviet policy-makers concerning the opportunities available to them in Latin America.
This event was acclaimed as having ‘destroyed the myth of geographical fatalism with respect to the United States and Latin America’(A. F. Shul'govskii, ‘Rasstanovka klassovikh sil v borbe za osvobozhdenie’, in Avarina and Danilevich: 1963, pp. 482–4).
The triumph of Fidel Castro's 26 July Movement took the Soviet Union completely by surprise.
As late as October 1958 Khrushchev referred in the same breath to’ the tragic fate of Guatemala' and’the heroic but unequal struggle of the Cuban people’.
This reflects the fact that Soviet assessments of events in Latin America were then made almost wholly on the basis of information received from local Communist parties.
The Cuban Communist party, in a message to the Eleventh Congress of the Communist party of Chile signed by Juan Marinello and Blas Roca and dated November 1958, had deplored the’ disunity of the opposition forces' and called for’national unity' in order to overthrow Batista and form a ‘democratic coalition government’.
It is unlikely that the Cuban Communists were sending the CPSU a different evaluation of the situation in their country.
However, after the Cuban revolution Soviet analysts began to include Latin America in their discussions of the underdeveloped world, and a series of initiatives were taken by Moscow both to overcome its ignorance of the area and to increase its presence there.
In 1961 an Institute of Latin America was established at the Academy of Sciences in Moscow, on the recommendation of Anastas Mikoian, who had recently returned from Cuba.
previously, a very limited number of Latin America specialists had worked within the Institute of World Economy and International Relations or the Institute of Universal History.
The Latin America Institute has since expanded to become ‘the largest, and probably the most prolific, research centre devoted exclusively to Latin America in the world, with over one hundred full-time researchers’(Blasier: 1983, p. 171).
In 1969, when the initiation of diplomatic relations with recently established nationalist regimes in Peru, Bolivia, Ecuador and Colombia had considerably broadened the Soviet diplomatic presence, the Institute launched a regular publication,Latinskaia Amerika .
This journal, which  covers most aspects of Latin American affairs with the emphasis on contemporary socio-political developments, was originally published bi-monthly in Russian and three or four times a year in Spanish.
Since 1980, in the light of events in Central America, both editions have been produced monthly and the presentation of the Spanish version has become far more lively and colourful.
The journal has 10,000 subscribers, most of them in Latin America and the United States.
Under the editorship of Sergei Mikoian (son of the late politburo member) it has sponsored and published regular’ round-table' discussions on salient issues in Latin American studies such as the nature and degree of Latin America's dependence and the social and political role of the military.
One American political scientist argues that the debate on Latin America is the most sophisticated and open of all published Soviet debates on the outside world (Hough: 1981).
(Debate about Cuba, however, was not permitted to surface in print until very recently.)
It is clear that the Soviet Union, which now has far more information and greater understanding of Latin America than in the early 1960s, no longer regards the area as a monolithic whole.
There appear to be four main Soviet categories for Latin American regimes:(i)‘revolutionary democratic’ states or (a label rarely applied) states of ‘socialist orientation’, such as post-1979 Nicaragua and 1979–83 Grenada;(ii) capitalist, yet ‘progressive’and ‘anti-imperialist regimes which are willing to be friendly to the Soviet Union and stand up to the United States, such as Mexico and panama (particularly under General Omar Torrijos (1969–81), who negotiated a treaty with the Carter administration providing for complete Panamanian sovereignty over the Canal by 1999, a campaign that was strongly supported by Moscow).
The Alfonsín government elected in Argentina in late 1983 woúld probably also be included in this category, as would the recently elected (1984) administration in Uruguay (president Julio Maria Sanguinetti called for expanded economic relations with the USSR shortly before his inauguration) and the APRA government led by Alán Garcia in Peru which, since its election victory in May 1985, has taken an active role in the Non-Aligned Movement, vying for the leadership and backing its challenge with moves to extend diplomatic recognition to the Palestine Liberation Organisation;(iii) capitalist, ‘liberal-bourgeois’ governments that are oriented towards Washington, for example, Venezuela, Peru under Belaúnde, Colombia (before 1982), Costa Rica and Jamaica;(iv)‘right-wing’, ‘reactionary’military dictatorships generally not liked, but supported by the United States.
The latter category,(which  did not include the 1976–83 military regime in Argentina) is usually divided into two groups: those which have relations with the USSR, i.e., pre-democratisation Brazil and Uruguay, and those which do not, i.e., Chile, Paraguay, pre-1985 Guatemala, and Duvalier's Haiti (Valenta: 1983, pp. 291–2 and Blasier: 1983, pp. 81–91).
Soviet specialists identify the main political force within the region as nationalism and, just as in the 1960s countries were judged by their policy position regarding Cuba, the touchstone now is their degree of independence from the United States.
Moscow's current policy in Latin America is aimed at undermining US influence while seeking to develop its own ties with the more ‘progressive’ and independent governments, and events have demonstrated that anti-Communism can no longer be regarded as a significant impediment to the success of such a policy.
In the 1960s, the Soviet Union rapidly discovered that its connection with Cuba led to the complication and distortion of its relations with other Latin American nations at the same time as it presented them with new opportunities in the region.
The 1962 Cuban missile crisis severely damaged the USSR's image in Latin America, and Moscow's claims to be seeking peaceful coexistence were further undermined by Castro's outspoken advocacy of guerrilla warfare and his stated policy of support for such endeavours in Latin America (see chapter 4).
During the 1970s, however, the basic conflict between Soviet interests as superpower and as revolutionary vanguard was contained, albeit not completely resolved.
Castro's material aid to groups embracing guerrilla warfare was effectively halted after the death of Che Guevara in 1967, polemic with the Soviet Union died down, and in the early 1970s Havana launched a successful diplomatic initiative to establish its own ties with Latin American governments.
Towards the end of the decade Communist party strategy in Latin America, with its renewed emphasis on broad political alliances and electoral participation, was brought more firmly into line with Moscow's overall foreign-policy stance.
In most Latin American countries the Communist parties are now an accepted part of the political scene, largely because of their willingness to engage in the horse-trading of Latin American politics.
Individual partes have offered their backing to a wide variety of regimes, ranging from the Peruvians' support for Velasco, the Panamanians' generally favourable stand towards Torrijos and the Argentine Communists' (critical) support for the 1976 military coup led by General Videla.
By the late 1960s all of the orthodox parties, with the partial exception of Colombia, had clearly distanced themselves from the armed struggle.
Guerrilla groups such as Carlos Marighela's  National Liberation Action in Brazil, Uruguay's Tupamaros and the Montoneros in Argentina operated without Communist support and indeed were founded in the belief that the Moscow faithful lacked either the will or the capacity to engage in armed struggle.
Moreover, the unexpectedly progressive nature of the military government which came to power in Peru in 1968 provided an effective counterweight to Castroite arguments.
These factors, together with an overall reduction in East-West tension (symbolised by detente, the SALT accords and the Helsinki conference) and the emergence of nationalist governments in Latin America, facilitated an increasing Soviet diplomatic presence.
Whereas in the early years of the 1960s only two Latin American nations resumed relations with Moscow — Brazil in 1961 and Chile in 1964 — by the end of the decade a host of countries were willing to renew links: Colombia in 1968, Peru, Bolivia and Ecuador in 1969, Venezuela and Guyana in 1970 and Costa Rica in 1971.
Moscow has taken various measures aimed at overcoming Latin American mistrust of the Soviet Union, including academic and cultural exchanges, which are facilitated by the Soviet friendship societies now existing in most Latin American countries.
Soviet cultural initiatives have traditionally been focused on Mexico, but in recent years Soviet musicians and dancers have toured in other parts of Latin America, often with spectacular success.
More importantly, Soviet diplomats have by and large restrained from trying to cultivate political ties with groups considered unacceptable to the government in question and, when accused of doing so, have apologised and made every effort to smooth over the situation, in dramatic contrast to the vehement denials and abusive tirades which any such allegation elicited in the 1930s.
As the 1970s progressed, Moscow succeeded in establishing and maintaining diplomatic links with the majority of Latin American and Caribbean states.
By the early 1980s, only pariah regimes such
A similar pattern has occurred in the development of economic relations.
Since the 1950s the USSR has tried to persuade Latin American governments that trade with the eastern bloc should be ‘a major element in the Latin American countries’ drive for economic independence', since it would enable them ‘to gain more favourable terms with the industrially developed capitalist states, to consolidate  their forces in the struggle against foreign monopolies [and]to expand their export (sic ) and develop their industry and agriculture’(Gladkov: 1975, p. 11).
In the cold war climate of the early 1950s only Perón's Argentina showed any sign of having seen the merits of this argument (see chapter 6), and during the following decade the political costs of Moscow's connections with a militant Castro further obstructed commercial relations with the Latin American mainland.
However, in the early 1980s, anti-Communism per se is probably more of a nagging difficulty than a significant obstacle to trade, at least at governmental level.
Trading links have survived right-wing military coups in Argentina (1976), Brazil (1964), Uruguay (1973) and Bolivia (1971, 1978, 1979, 1980), countries which have accounted for the bulk of Soviet trade with Latin America over the past two decades.
The only partial exception is Peru: after Morales Bermúdez took over from Velasco in 1975 the military regime drifted rightwards and trade with the Soviet Union sharply diminished.
This is largely due, however, to the fact that a significant proportion of Peru's imports from the Soviet Union consists of arms — clearly a highly sensitive commodity.
Thus, neither Latin American political developments nor Latin American suspicions of the USSR — although either or both may lie behind isolated set-backs to Soviet policy — can any longer be considered a significant factor in the overall development of commercial relations.
What, then, are the main constraints on Soviet attempts to project its power into the sub-continent and to consolidate a strong economic presence there? perhaps the most obvious and important factor to take into account is still the long-established and deeply entrenched socio-political and economic ascendancy of the United States of America.
As indicated above, the Cuban revolution induced Soviet leaders to modify the view (hitherto almost as firmly believed in the Kremlin as in the White House) that the Latin American nations were destined to remain trapped in a position of subservience to the United States.
However, the Soviet Union still has to contend with the need, perhaps more pressing than in most areas of the world, to keep a wary eye on Washington when considering its options in South and, since 1979 particularly, Central America.
The majority of Latin American governments have to operate under much the same constraints and, although nationalist tendencies have intermittently rendered this factor advantageous to the USSR, it has more consistently worked against Moscow.
Economic and political realities in Latin America determine that any government, whatever its orientation, will ultimately have to find a modus vivendi with Washington.
The second factor, which constitutes an additional hypothesis which will be explored in the following chapters, is that there are highly significant and fundamental economic and geographical determinants which have acted in the past to constrain Soviet activities in the region and which will remain a crucial obstacle to an increased Soviet presence, even in the context of a more favourable political climate.
It will be argued that such factors may have had considerable influence on what are widely believed to have been exclusively ‘political’ decisions.
Foremost among these economic constraints is the markedly low level of complementarity in the structure of production of the two regions.
Furthermore, although ‘planned’ convergence arising out of favourable political conditions in individual countries cannot be excluded as a possibility, the economic costs inherent in any such operation are likely to be increased considerably in Latin America because of the formidable physical barriers to communications and trade with the Soviet Union.
Prior to the 1960s, Soviet economic relations with Latin America were highly sporadic, unstable and confined to only a few countries, principally Argentina and Uruguay.
Soviet trade with Latin America at the time of the Cuban revolution compared distinctly unfavourably with its trade with Asia and Africa.
In 1955 Soviet trade amounted to 122 million rubles with Asia, 40 million rubles with Africa and 58 million rubles with Latin America.
In 1958 the figures were 459 million rubles, 189 million rubles and 58 million rubles respectively.
By 1962, while trade with Asia reached 636 million rubles, and with Africa 265 million rubles, it was still only 96 million rubles with Latin America (excluding Cuba)(Mirovaia ekonomika i mezhdunarodnye otnosheniia , no. 3, 1964, p. 87).
This is still the case today.
In 1987the Soviet Union exchanged 3,583.7 million rubles' worth of goods with Asia (excluding Vietnam, China, North Korea, Mongolia, Afghanistan and Japan), 1,399.8 million rubles' worth with Africa and only 969.4 million rubles' worth with Latin America (Foreign Trade (Moscow), no. 1, 1988).
Although Moscow undertook a trade push in Latin America in the late 1960s (offering credits of $100 million to Brazil in 1966, $57 million to Chile in 1967, $2 million to Colombia and $20 million to Uruguay in 1968) and saw its efforts pay off to some extent with a steady increase in turnover between the two regions during the 1970s, the true extent of the Soviet economic presence in Latin America is by no means as great as many observers claim (see appendix for detailed figures on Soviet trade with Latin America).
Moscow has increased the number of countries with which it has commercial dealings from four in 1960 to  over twenty by the end of the 1970s, but the volume of trade has not exceeded $30 million with more than eight (Argentina, Brazil, Uruguay, Peru, Bolivia, Mexico, Colombia and Nicaragua) and it is only with Argentina, Brazil and Nicaragua that it has risen above the $100 million level.
Before Soviet purchases of Argentine gain boosted overall trade figures in the early 1980s, the USSR's trade with Havana exceeded its dealings with the rest of Latin America by a ratio of approximately four to one.
With the exception of the freak year 1981 the ratio since has been about two to one.
Four phases can be identified in the development of economic relations between the two regions:(1) In the 1920s tentative links were initiated by the new Soviet government, which was anxious to secure diplomatic recognition and to explore the potential for trade with Latin America as part of its attempt to break out of what was perceived as an economic blockade by the Western nations.
These approaches (directed primarily at the River plate nations and Mexico) were thwarted by the difficulties of sustaining commerce over such long distances and by the political complications discussed above.
(2) In the 1950s nationalist leaders in a few Latin American countries (Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay), at critical junctures when their economies were undergoing varying degrees of pressure, sought to explore the potential political and/or economic benefits of relations with the Soviet Union.
(3) With the onset of detente and the new multipolarity of the post-1970 world, the majority of Latin American countries followed the lead of the regional powers in establishing economic links with the Soviet Union.
The 1970s saw what one Soviet commentator described as ‘a real change for more active trade with the USSR’(Zinoviev: 1981, p. 100), with some consolidation of earlier initiatives.
Perhaps one of the more important developments of the 1970s was that Moscow secured mutual most-favoured-nation status trading agreements with a majority of Latin American countries.
Such accords are all-important to Soviet officials in that they offer a clear indication of Latin American interest in trading with the USSR, act as the official sanction which enables the Soviet trade bureaucracy to move into action, and facilitate the organisation involved in the completion of transactions.
Moscow also has trade missions in most Latin American capitals, and where trade has become at all significant joint inter-governmental  commissions have been set up with the aim of promoting fulfilment of the trading agreements.
In addition, from the Soviet point of view, ‘Within the whole spectrum of measures taken to promote trade between the USSR and Latin America, of greatest importance have been the agreements reached between the USSR Chamber of Commerce and Industry and the Chambers of Commerce in some Latin American countries including Argentina, Brazil, Peru, Colombia and Mexico’(Zinoviev: 1981, pp. 101–2).
personal contacts have also improved: one Soviet commentator reports that ‘In the past, visits of Soviet and Latin American businessmen to each other for commercial talks or for an appraisal of export and import requirements were incidental; nowadays hundreds of businessmen and experts from Latin America come to the Soviet Union each year and as many Soviet specialists visit the Latin American countries’(Gladkov: 1975, pp. 11–12).
In the early 1970s, four shipping lines (Baltamerica, Baltpacific, Baltcaribbean and Baltgulf) were established by the Soviet Union to facilitate transportation which, in view of the distances involved, can be a costly and problematic operation even today.
The most notable consequences of the new Soviet initiative were that in 1975 Mexico signed an agreement with Comecon, and trade with both Argentina and Brazil reached a peak in 1981 when both countries refused to take part in the grain embargo introduced by Resident Carter as one of his sanctions against the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.
(4) Since 1981, however, there has been a distinct slackening of impetus in relations, largely because of the disillusionment experienced by both the USSR and the Latin American countries about what could be expected from each other.
Trade with Argentina and Brazil has failed to realise its potential.
Neither have Soviet-Mexican economic links developed to the extent anticipated in the 1975 agreement.
Trade turnover with other countries, such as Colombia, Bolivia, Peru and Uruguay, still tends to fluctuate from year to year, lacking a coherent pattern of expansion.
The reasons for this are outlined below and discussed in detail in chapter 6.
Despite the more stable pattern of Soviet — Latin American trade since the 1970s and its firmer organisational base, its most prominent characteristic is still a sharp imbalance in favour of the Latin American nations.
The Soviet Union has a trade deficit with virtually all of its Latin American partners.
(The exception is Venezuela, but to date Moscow's trade with Caracas has been almost negligible.)
In 1978 Moscow's imports from the area outweighed exports by a ratio of four to one, obliging the USSR to pay in hard currency for most of its Latin  American purchases.
There is scarcely an article published in Moscow concerning the development of Soviet-Latin American trade which does not cite this factor as the principal and most enduring obstacle to the further expansion of commercial relations.
Part of the explanation for the slow and uneven progress of Soviet — Latin American economic links can be found in the nature of the Soviet economy.
As indicated above, trade now has an acknowledged role to play in Soviet development.
However, it clearly performs a much less crucial or well-defined function than is the case in the Western capitalist economies.
To this extent, Soviet foreign traders, who came late to the Latin American markets, may be disadvantaged in their competition with capitalist suppliers either because their own authorities prevent them from participating in the bidding for a project or because they cannot mobilise the Soviet bureaucracy in time to meet deadlines.
Moreover, in 1973 one deputy minister of foreign trade described the deficiencies in Soviet marketing as follows: ‘While we were only beginning to understand that before entering the marketplace we had to study it, determining which machinery could or could not be supplied where, as well as how to organise the work involved, capitalist firms had already created a whole science to deal with the question, coordinating production, advertising and commercial activity into a single discipline’(N. Smeliakov,Novy mir , 12 (Dec.) 1973, 216–17).
An additional problem is that Soviet organisations are automatically barred from competing for infra-structural projects sponsored by the World Bank or the Inter-American Development Bank, which require bidders to be members of these institutions.
However, a more basic explanation for the persistent trade imbalance is that the economies of the two regions have developed in such a way that the scope for exchange always has been (and remains) severely limited.
At first sight it may appear that the general pattern of Soviet trade with the Third World, consisting of the export of capital goods and equipment in return for raw materials, could be applied successfully in Latin America.
On closer examination, however, it emerges that the Soviet Union is self-sufficient in many of the traditional Latin American primary exports and indeed is exporting some of them in competition with Latin American supplies.
This applies to, for example, gold, petroleum, copper, iron ore, lead, silver, nickel and zinc.
The most obvious exception is tin, the main export of Bolivia, which may help to explain the Soviet Union's especial enthusiasm for its relations with Bolivia, which have survived that country's  numerous changes of government.
(In 1984, Bolivia was the only country in Latin America with Communists in the government: one of its two Communist ministers had responsibility for the mining industry.)
The bulk of the USSR's purchases in Latin America consists of primary agricultural produce, for example, tropical crops such as coffee and cocoa, and, most notably, grain and meat.
As far as Soviet exports are concerned, Latin American economies, which have generally attempted import-substitution industrialisation in the consumer goods sector rather than in capital-intensive heavy industry, might be considered a potentially receptive market for Soviet machinery and equipment.
Soviet officials have themselves consistently indicated that they have hopes in this respect.
With very few exceptions, however, this has not proved to be the case, largely because Latin American states have retained a high degree of integration with, and dependence on, the developed capitalist economies.
One of the main reasons for the Soviet failure to undermine Latin American reliance on Western imports is that Soviet industrial machinery and equipment is widely considered to be inferior in quality to its capitalist produced counterparts.
It is possible that some Latin American judgements that Soviet goods are uncompetitive are founded in the belief that Soviet producers take less trouble over ‘aesthetic’ qualities, such as finish, than do their Western rivals.
However, as late as 1979 a Soviet researcher wrote that no system existed for checking and analysing technical and economic information relating to product quality, and that ‘present methods of assessing the quality of goods manufactured for export or already delivered to the foreign consumer cannot provide an adequate view of how well they are produced’(Gruzinov: 1979, p. 191).
Thus, although trade with the Soviet Union would enable Latin Americans to benefit from lower prices and improved credit terms, to conserve scarce foreign exchange and, according to opinions recently expressed in Latin America, to receive better guarantees and local servicing, it is still generally the case that both public and private sector companies prefer to deal with the West.
There is one main exception to the above generalisation, namely, energy supplies.
From an early stage the Soviet Union has tried to exploit Latin American dependence on imported oil.
The first attempt to penetrate the Latin American market was made in the early 1930s, when Moscow found itself with a surplus of oil in a world marketing network tightly controlled by the major multi-nationals.
Chile and Argentina were both offered barter deals, involving the exchange of  Chilean nitrates (demand for which had recently collapsed because of German development of synthetic substitutes) and Argentine agricultural products for Soviet crude oil, along with assistance in the setting up of their own national refineries.
The refusal of foreign-owned oil companies operating in Chile to handle Soviet crude lent weight to the arguments of nationalists who wanted to accept the Soviet offer, which was heatedly debated in the Chilean Congress for two years before the incoming elected conservative government of Alessandri felt strong enough to reject it.
In Argentina, serious negotiations with the state oil firm YPF were broken off after the 1930 coup .
Only with Uruguay did the Soviet Union achieve a limited agreement involving the supply of petroleum products; this led to the creation of a state distribution company to handle the Soviet supplies which, in 1932, took 39 per cent of the Uruguayan market.
The intention was that the Uruguayans would construct a state refinery to process Soviet crude, so that they would no longer need to buy the more expensive refined products.
Two years before the refinery became operational, however, Montevideo severed all links with Moscow.
Again, in the late 1950s, the Soviet Union found itself with a surplus of oil, and this time succeeded in negotiating agreements with Uruguay and Argentina in 1958, and with Brazil in 1959.
Mexico was offered credits tied to the purchase of petroleum equipment, but rejected the initiative (Philip: 1982, p. 342).
Bolivia used a similar offer of Soviet technical assistance to the nationalised oil company YPFB to pressurise President Eisenhower into reversing his policy of refusing to supply credits to state-owned enterprises (a major factor behind Argentina's acceptance of the deal).
The Uruguayan agreement consisted of a barter arrangement (Soviet oil for Uruguayan wool), which suited Montevideo since it had a large surplus of wool and a shortage of foreign exchange.
In 1958 and 1959 Uruguay sold 16 per cent of its wool exports to Communist countries, the bulk of which went to the Soviet Union.
However, resistance on the part of the Uruguayan government to Soviet overtures in 1959 for a larger share of the market indicated that the agreement had been little more than a contingency measure on the part of Montevideo.
In retaliation, the Soviet Union threatened to curtail its purchases altogether, and in the midst of this dissension better prospects for the wool made together with modifications in US tariff regulations concerning wool made it unnecessary to reverse the decline in Uruguay's short-lived burst of trade with the Soviet Union.
The Argentine agreement was thwarted largely by the  March 1962 coup which brought to power a right-wing military government which promptly suspended the 1953 trade agreement with the USSR.
The most successful of the three accords was with Brazil, whose president Kubitschek needed both to find new export outlets and to conserve foreign exchange in the aftermath of a rapid industrial expansion policy which had placed severe strains on his country's economy.
In recent years several Latin American countries have sought to reduce their reliance on imported oil by harnessing potential hydro-electric resources.
Thus the Soviet Union has retained its interest in meeting Latin America's energy needs, for the USSR's world-class technology and expertise in the field of hydro-electric engineering enable it to compete easily and indeed advantageously with the West in this respect.
The Soviet Union has supplied equipment for two hydro-electric stations in Brazil (at Capivari and Sobradinho).
In 1973 the Soviet company Elektromashexport was granted the contract for fourteen turbines and generators for the Salto Grande project (sponsored jointly by Argentina and Uruguay), which went into operation in 1981.
The USSR is also supplying equipment for thermal electric stations at San Nicolás, Luján de Cuyo and Costanera, and has prepared the design for the huge $4 billion Paraná Medio scheme.
A contract has been signed with Colombia for the design and supply of generators for the Urrá 1 and Urrá 2 complex, a deal worth approximately $500 million.
In Peru, the Soviet Union is part of a consortium involved in the Olmos project to bring water across the Andes to irrigate the drought-ridden northern coast.
A second potential means of reducing the Soviet trade deficit with Latin America would be through the sale of arms.
As yet, however, such initiatives have proved largely unfruitful.
With the exceptions of revolutionary Cuba, Nicaragua and Grenada (all denied ready access to Western arms supplies), Peru is the only country willing to receive Soviet materiel.
From 1973–5 the Soviet Union sold Peru aircraft, tanks, surface-to-air missiles and artillery on very generous terms and when, in 1978, the Peruvians found themselves unable to maintain payments for their weapons, the Soviet Union rolled over the debt until 1981–8, indicating their reluctance to relinquish this sole market.
Arms were offered to Allende's Chile, but were refused, and various rumours in 1982–3 to the effect that the Argentine generals had ordered Soviet weapons have so far proved unsubstantiated.
It is possible that Mexico has also been approached, but again there is no indication that the latter has proved responsive to such an offer.
Apart from the political objections many Latin American governments would have to the purchase of Soviet armaments, the traditional predominance of the United States as supplier of military hardware to the region, along with the increasing strength of Brazil as an arms exporter ($1 billion worth in 1981), are highly significant obstacles to the expansion of Soviet arms sales to Latin America.
Moreover, there are no major unresolved conflicts between states (such as persist in, for example, the Middle East) to be exploited by a potential arms supplier.
‘Communist subversion’ in Latin America?— The impact of Marxist thought
Exponents of the ideological-strategic approach outlined in the introduction frequently draw attention to the Soviet propaganda offensive in Latin America.
As they correctly point out, this has broadened and diversified over the past twenty-five years.
Thus we are told, for example, that in the late 1980s there are 10,000 Latin American students enrolled in Soviet universities compared with the 144 who were attending Patrice Lumumba in 1960; that in 1982 Latin Americans could tune in to Soviet radio broadcasting for 105 hours per week compared with only 63 in 1962 and that at least seventeen Soviet journals are now translated and distributed in Latin America, six of which also appear in Portuguese (Blasier: 1983, pp. 12–13 and pp. 191–2; Goldhamer: 1972, p. 147).
Whilst the relevance of such information should not be denied, to present it divorced from the Latin American context leads to a seriously distorted picture of Soviet-Latin American relations.
Too often evidence which merely indicates the existence of a greater Soviet propaganda effort in Latin America is upheld as confirmation of a corresponding degree of success in instigating’ subversion’.
The first point to be made in response to this is that current Soviet initiatives are clearly designed to foster a positive attitude towards the USSR as a country which has a viable socio-economic system and offers valuable commercial opportunities, rather than trying to incite the masses to Soviet-style revolution.
The propaganda effort is very low-key compared to the diplomatic and trading activities discussed in chapter 6 and in general appears to be intended to complement them.
However, even if, for the sake of argument, it is assumed that this is not the case and that the USSR is directing substantial resources to the winning of Latin America for Communism, it is still necessary to extend the analysis further.
Issues which must be incorporated are the extent to which Latin Americans — either the educated elites or the mostly under-educated masses — are receptive or responsive to Marxist  propaganda.
In what ways, if any, do they perceive Marxism to be relevant to Latin American conditions?
How much latitude does the political structure of Latin American countries allow for the development of Marxist-based organisations?
It is the purpose of this chapter to suggest answers to these questions.
The most fundamental barrier to the penetration of Marxism into Latin America throughout the period under discussion has been the Catholic Church.
This remained a crucial obstacle until well into the 1960s, when attempts began to synthesise the two ideologies, in what has become known as Liberation Theology.
Contemporary Nicaragua, however, offers a revealing example of the problems which still confront Marxist leaders of a predominantly peasant-based economy.
The contradiction was less dramatic for the revolutionaries in Cuba, where the Church's influence was not great, partly because of the presence of vestiges of African religion from the slave culture and partly because of the comparatively developed state of Cuba's economy and educational system.
Argentina, Chile and Uruguay are also relatively urbanised and secularised societies where the role of the Church was less significant than in, say, Mexico, Brazil or Colombia.
In its assertion of a total world-view, the Church was also important in terms of creating a receptivity to a certain kind of all-embracing ideology.
Mexican novelist Carlos Fuentes has lamented that’ We are the sons of rigid ecclesiastical societies.
This is the burden of Latin America — to go from one Church to another, from Catholicism to Marxism, with all its dogma and ritual' (in Riding: 1986, p. 429).
For dissident Catholics, Marxism was the only ideology which could provide a sufficiently all-encompassing vision to replace what they had rejected, replicating the Church's concepts of dogma, orthodoxy and heresy.
This was a particularly important factor in the conversion of intellectuals, particularly writers and artists, who have played a key role in the dissemination of Marxism in Latin America.
The examples are numerous.
José Mariátegui and César Vallejo, who travelled to the Soviet Union three times in 1928–31, both played important roles in the foundation of the Peruvian Socialist party.
Jorge Amado and the Mexican muralists (José Orozco, David  Siquieros —who was involved in a plot to kill Trotsky — and Diego Rivera, who was Trotsky's main protector in Mexico) were all active.
In Chile, Pablo Neruda was an established poet with a continent-wide reputation before his conversion to Communism under the impact of the Spanish Civil War — particularly the murder of García Lorca, whom he saw as the bearer of the spirit of Republican Spain.
In 1969, when the Chilean  Communist party opted to announce their own presidential candidate in order to force a decision from the other parties in the popular Unity coalition about whom to support, their nominee was Pablo Neruda.
After he became a Communist, Neruda consciously tried to write a different kind of poetry incorporating a political message and which would be comprehensible to working people, the most famous and successful example of which is his Canto General .
This was apparently one of only two books which Che Guevara carried with him to Bolivia (the other being an arithmetic textbook), and Che told Neruda that he used to read it to the guerrillas in the Sierra Maestra, and presumably in Bolivia as well(Neruda: 1974, p. 439).
The importance of such figures in terms of their ability to carry the message of Marxism to working people is suggested by Neruda's account of how, travelling the nitrate region of Chile as a senator in 1945, ‘at hundreds of meetings, all very far away from each other, I heard a constant plea: that I should read my poems.
Many times they asked me for them by title.
Of course I never knew whether anybody understood very much of my verses.
It was difficult to tell, in that atmosphere of absolute silence, of sacred respect in which they listened to me’(Neruda: 1974, p. 240).
In Cuba, the avant-garde poet Rubén Martínez Villena played a leading role in events of the 1920s and 1930s, and Nicolás Guillén joined the Communist party in 1937.
Other leading writers, whilst not fully committing themselves to the Communist movement, have been fellow-travellers, the most notable recent example of which is Nobel prize-winning novelist Gabriel Garcia Márquez.
The importance of these cultural bearers of Marxism, whose glamour, charisma and intellectual weight have done much to enhance the acceptance of Marxist ideas in Latin America, is hard to over-estimate.
(Officials in the Soviet Union have also understood the significance of cultural ambassadors: for example, they sent their leading film director, Eisenstein, to make a film in Mexico.)
A strong and enduring link has been established between Marxism and culture.
Many of the leading Sandinistas in revolutionary Nicaragua are poets and writers.
Minister of Culture Ernesto Cardenal (who is also an ordained priest), in particular, has used poetry workshops as a prominent means of raising consciousness amongst working people.
What attracted Latin American artists and writers to Marxism?
The influence of intellectual life in Europe was important for many leading figures, particularly those who travelled and lived there, for example, Mariátegui, Vallejo, Siquieros and Neruda.
Of particular importance was the Clarté movement founded by French intellectual Henri Barbusse  in 1919, which called on intellectuals to engage in the struggle against ignorance and its perpetrators.
In his 1927 Manifesto to intellectuals Barbusse argued that they should do everything possible to help the birth of a new society.
Claridad movements arose in Peru (where both Mariátegui and Haya de la Torre were involved), Argentina, Chile (where the magazine published some of Neruda's early poems) and Brazil.
As indicated above, the Spanish Civil War was a deeply felt experience for Neruda, also for Octavio Paz, César Vallejo, David Siquieros and others.
At a more general level, however, artists embraced Marxism because of its ability to offer a total world-view, an intellectually palatable explanation for underdevelopment and social injustice, a Utopian (and historically determined) solution and a programme for immediate political action in which intellectuals were called upon to play a role.
Marxism was appropriate for those who, like Vallejo and Neruda, were intellectuals who were not particularly comfortable with their consequently privileged status.
Neruda explains what he got out of being a member of the Communist party in personal terms: ‘I found in my party, the Communist Party of Chile, a large group of simple people, who had left personal vanity,caudillismo and material interests far behind.
I felt happy to know honourable people who were fighting for the common good, that is to say, for justice’(Neruda: 1974, p. 435).
Perhaps the clearest example of Marxism being embraced as a substitute for a rejected Catholicism is offered by César Vallejo, whose poetry is constructed around biblical images both before and after his conversion to Communism and whose proletarian heroes ‘appear as new Christs’ urging redemption through collective love (Vallejo: 1970, p. 69).
Vallejo expressed his concept of revolution as follows: ‘Revolution does not mean the fall of the Tsar or the seizure of power by the workers.
What it means is what is happening today in the hearts of families and of the peoples’(Vallejo: 1970, p. 66).
For him, as for Neruda and others, Communism was less a political philosophy than a metaphysical need.
A final introductory point concerns the importance of differentiating between Marxism and Marxism-Leninism in Latin America.
This distinction is frequently blurred by those who choose to see all who assume radical leftist positions as ‘tools of international Communism’.
The resulting confusion entails a highly inaccurate assessment of the extent of Soviet control over the diverse groups in Latin America which claim a ‘Marxist’ orientation.
As will be made clear in the following brief history of Marxist thought in Latin America, there has been very little interplay between the evolutions of Marxism-Leninist prescriptions for revolutionary development in Latin America, as shaped by Soviet ideologues, and the way that  Latin Americans themselves have applied Marxism to their situation.
Trotskyism and Maoism have both had an impact in Latin America, which has also produced its own distinct versions of Marxist theory in Castroism and Guevarism.
In order to make the comparison, this history is divided into five main periods:(1) before 1917;(2) 1917–35;(3) 1936–58;(4) 1959–75; and (5) 1975 to date.
Pre-1917
Despite the evidence put forward by Soviet historians to assert a Marxist tradition in Latin America antedating the Russian revolution, it is difficult to draw any conclusion other than that Marxism as a basis for worker organisation became a significant force in the region, with few exceptions, in the wake of the Bolshevik triumph.
Nevertheless, the events of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries established a crucial background for the diffusion of Marxist ideas.
In the relatively prosperous years of the late nineteenth century Latin American intellectuals were primarily concerned not with the economic progress of their nations, but with their development away from a state of ‘barbarism’ to one of’civilisation' along European lines.
Great faith was placed in the efficacy of (secular) education as a means of inculcating democratic and national values.
positivism, with its emphasis on orderly, scientific advancement, was in vogue amongst the intelligentsia.
Thus the ideology of the Church, in addition to its power as an institution, was beginning to be challenged.
However, the prevailing hegemony of Catholic ideals is revealed by the way in which Marxism was initially received in Latin America.
For intellectuals, encouraged by Rodó's Ariel (1900) to seek a ‘disinterested ideal’ for Latin American development in contrast to the utilitarianism of the United States, socialism was ‘romantic and individualistic…the expression of a desire more moralistic than social’(Zea: 1963, pp. 23–4).
Latin American philosophers who were interested in its potential for eliminating poverty made no attempt to formulate a ‘scientific’ programme for political action on the part of the working classes.
For workers, Marxism was a ‘doctrine much like the doctrine of emancipation preached by Jesus Christ.
For them it was an intuitive idealisation of justice and well-being.
It meant more bread for the hungry, higher wages, and fewer hours of work.
It meant civil, social, human liberation and, thus, a greater spirit of democracy’(Santiago Iglesias, in Aguilar: 1968, p. 76).
It was in the Southern Cone countries where industrialisation, the  pre-requisite of a proletariat, came earliest to Latin America, in the middle to late nineteenth century.
It was introduced by confident elites who were strong enough to pay minimal wages and subject workers to appalling and often highly dangerous conditions (particularly in the mining industry), extremely arduous hours of work and quick — if necessary, brutal — repression of worker demands.
It also brought European immigrants, who were to play a crucial role in the introduction of Marxist ideas to Latin America, flooding into these countries, where newly built ports and railways were facilitating the spread of new political theories.
Thus, the intellectual climate was transformed by refugees from the failed Paris Commune, and from Spain, Italy and Germany, who had brought with them their socialistic education, which led to the general practice of mutual aid among the immigrants — a practice little known to the people of Argentina' (Juan Justo, in Aguilar: 1968, p. 79).
The importance of the Europeans is indicated by a revealing description by Juan Justo of a German Vorwärts Club formed in 1882 in Buenos Aires, which ‘was truly an international movement.’
The public meetings were conducted, in turn, in Spanish, Italian, French and German' (in Aguilar: 1968, p. 79).
Many of the immigrants were supporters of the First and Second Internationals and had considerable experience in the labour movements of their native countries.
Excluded from the political process in their newly adopted lands, where they were not allowed to vote, and anxious to ensure a higher standard of living in the New World than they had enjoyed at home, they were instrumental in the creation of early workers' organisations and political parties in Latin America.
The ideas of Marx and Engels were introduced by the first International (1864–76), which had sections in several Latin American countries.
The Second International, launched in 1889, prompted the formation of the Argentine Socialist party in 1896.
Socialism had only a limited impact, however, confined (at least in terms of parties) to the countries where immigration was highest — Argentina, Chile and Uruguay.
The most significant of these parties was undoubtedly Luis Recabarren's United Socialist Workers' party, founded in Chile in 1912, which later formed the basis of the Chilean Communist party.
The Socialist parties suffered from the consequences of the Second International's theory of revolution in stages (which led the Argentine Socialist Party to support US interventions in the Caribbean) and its under-estimation of the power of nationalism.
The collapse of the Second International under the impact of the First World War, which  dealt a severe blow to socialist illusions, demonstrated the need for an alternative solution to the workers' plight.
More appealing than socialism to the still largely artisanal work-force of most Latin American countries was anarchism and its collectivist variant, anarcho-syndicalism, which was a highly potent force amongst nascent labour movements, above all in Argentina, but also in Brazil, Peru and Mexico, and to a lesser extent in Uruguay, Chile, Bolivia, Ecuador, Colombia and Cuba.
The anarchist movement and its radicalism provided a crucial background for the introduction of Marxist ideas.
As with socialism, its inherent limitations were as important in this respect as its positive aspects: Luis Recabarren founded his Socialist Workers' party partly out of a conviction that anarchist prohibitions on party and parliamentary activity were short-sighted and had to be rejected.
Changes in the structure of the work-force (greater concentration into single industries and decline of artisanal activity, especially after the First World War) also tended to reduce the relevance of anarchism and to leave a vacuum for Marxist ideas.
At a purely practical level, the anarchist and socialist press provided a forum for the dissemination of information about the October revolution, where it was given an enthusiastic reception.
However, anarchism remained an influential competitor to the Communist movement until well into the late 1920s.
Chilean Communist Elias Laferrte offers the following revealing explanation of the fluidity of the political situation at the time, of how Marxism was introduced into the Chilean Socialist Workers' party, and of how the evolution of the party was influenced by a blend of Marxist and anarchist ideas and attitudes:
People came from all camps.
There were Democratic party militants, anarchists, people with no party, workers, small businessmen, intellectuals, professional people.
But the working class was predominant, from the nitrate pampa , from Iquique, from the bakers' unions.
Many anarchist ideas and customs flourished in our ranks: for instance, resistance to the law, free love, anti-clericalism.
We were not really Marxists.
Marxism came in good time to the Socialist Workers' party after study, after reading the books from Europe, from international contacts, from the travels of our comrades, from the contact with the Communist International.
But we had in our midst…the capacity to fight, to resist injustice, to organise, the sentiment of unity, the pride of the proletariat and above all class consciousness.
(Laferrte: 1961, p. 101)
1917–1935
Impact of the Russian revolution
There is no doubt that the October 1917 victory of the Russian revolution captured the imagination of the reform-minded Latin American intelligentsia.
It came at a time when dislocation of the Latin American economies as a result of the First World War caused widespread unemployment and increasingly militant labour unrest.
This had also triggered an assertive economic nationalism amongst a small but significant sector of the Latin American elites.
In this context of the search for a model which would resolve Latin America's economic and social contradictions, events in Russia had all the impact of an apparently successful solution.
Argentina's José Ingenieros, for example, saw the Bolshevik triumph as the harbinger of a new era.
Moreover, anarchists and socialists who offered alternative ways forward had few tangible achievements with which to support their arguments.
The immediate response from intellectuals and students was a euphoric sense that if it could happen in backward Russia then why not in Latin America?
Eudocio Ravines, the former Peruvian Communist, describes how in 1917 ‘all the events in Russia went straight to my heart.
Every morning I read the news avidly, and in it I saw gradually a possibility of believing in something again…
I could find genuine analogies between the [Peruvian]Indian and what I imagined the Russian muzhik to be’(Ravines: 1951, p. 13).
It is difficult to overestimate the prestige of the Soviet leaders amongst the university communities in Latin America during these years.
It was on their own initiative that Recabarren's Socialist Workers' party (in 1922) and weaker versions in Argentina (1921) and Uruguay (1920) gained admission to the Communist International.
In Brazil (1921) and Mexico (1919) existing anarcho-syndicalist groups were converted to Bolshevism.
In Mexico, where revolution had antedated the Russian uprising by seven years, the establishment of a bourgeois' republic in the 1917 Constitution of Querétaro had highlighted the lack of an effective organisation of the working-class.
According to former Mexican Communist Valentin Campa, the attitudes to the Russian revolution of intellectuals such as Ricardo Flores Magón, who was not a Marxist but initially saw the Bolsheviks as ‘the true internationalists’, and leaders such as Emiliano Zapata, were influential in the decision to form a Communist party.
Campa describes how the conversion from anarcho-syndicalism to Bolshevism took place: ‘Somewhat generalised opinions [arose]amongst unionists and also amongst numerous  intellectuals as to the need to create a party of the working class.
The process [took place]on a confused basis in which there were some theoretical elements, but in which intuition and discontent [played]a considerable part’(Campa: 1978, pp. 59–60).
At this stage it would have been surprising if the theoretical basis for action had been anything other than weak: there was scant Marxist literature in Mexico available in Spanish.
Material from the Bolshevik party and later the Third International was received only sporadically by individuals, although what did arrive was circulated with significant impact.
Mexico was also the object of early Comintern interest: Moscow was keen to promote Communist activity in Mexico in order to distract the United States from intervening against the Soviet Union, and dispatched Mikhail Borodin in 1919 partly to achieve this end.
Agents from the Mexican party were later instrumental in founding Communist parties in Cuba (1925) and Central America.
Thus Communist parties were functioning in the major Latin American countries by 1923, and had been set up in most others by the end of the decade.
However, the number of people willing to make the commitment to Communist party membership remained disproportionately small.
For example, at the Fifth Comintern Congress in 1924 delegates from their respective countries reported 1,000 members in Mexico, 3,500 in Argentina, 2,000 in Chile, 600 in Uruguay and in Brazil, where the party was illegal, 350 members (Cerdas Cruz: 1986a, p. 98).
The Communist movement failed to extend its influence much beyond this restricted minority.
One of the most important reasons for this is that the Latin American elites reacted quickly and in most cases effectively to the social and economic changes brought about by the industrialisation, urbanisation and immigration of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
At the socio-economic level, the traditionally powerful agricultural interests established themselves in positions of control in industry and commerce, and were remarkably successful in transferring landowner-peasant patronage relationships from the countryside to the cities.
At the political level, labour organisations or parties based on working-class interests suffered persecution throughout Latin America.
The rapid response of the elites is typified by events in Peru in 1919.
A three-day strike declared by the workers of Lima-Callao in January of that year in support of lower food prices and the demand for an eight-hour day brought the army out to disperse them.
Labour organisation and activism was clearly still in its early stages: notwithstanding this, dictator General Leguia, who took power in July  1919, announced that he had done so’ not only to liquidate the old state of affairs, but also to detain the advance of Communism which, because it is premature among us, would produce dreadful consequences' (Skidmore and Smith: 1984, p. 206).
The pattern of repression was repeated across Latin America.
In Venezuela, the dictatorship of Juán Vicente Gómez attacked all workers' movements and the Communist party was outlawed from the 1920s until 1945.
In Brazil, the Communist party was illegal from 1922 to 1945, and the abortive Communist-led uprising in 1935 (see page 41) provided a pretext for a comprehensive crackdown on the entire left.
The Chilean Communist party was proscribed by dictator Ibáń0ez from 1927 to 1931, and in Argentina the 1930 coup by the armed forces presaged a fifteen-year period of illegality for the PCA.
Suppression of the Communist-inspired 1932 insurgency in El Salvador (see page 41) was truly ferocious and resulted in the complete destruction of the party apparatus and the execution of its leaders (including the man whose name has been adopted by the current guerrilla movement in El Salvador, Farabundo Martí).
Similar difficulties were experienced by almost all of the Latin American Communist parties during these years.
In most countries persecution was pre-emptively instigated by an elite which had identified the threat to its position from worker or peasant organisation, rather than constituting a defensive reaction to Communist activity itself.
(One possible exception to this was Mexico, where the Communists were more or less tolerated until they made a misjudged and Comintern-inspired attempt to exploit an abortive right-wing coup against the portes Gil government in 1929 — see pages 39–40.
Legality was restored to them in 1935.)
Thus the willingness of the Latin American elites to use repression to safeguard their interests severely hampered the Communists in their attempts to recruit cadres.
However, the restricted influence of the Communists must be attributed in part to the subordination of their parties to the Communist International, which manifested a distinct lack of interest, knowledge or understanding of the local conditions within which they had to operate.
The Comintern's attitude towards Latin America must be seen in the context of its view of how the national liberation movement in ‘colonial’ countries should be evaluated in relation to the world socialist revolution.
This raised the question of what policy the Comintern ought to adopt towards such movements, which in its turn was intimately related to the security concerns of the fledgling Soviet state.
The first Comintern Congress in 1919 devoted almost exclusive  attention to events in Germany, where revolution was believed to be imminent.
Trotsky's Manifesto to the proletariat of the world failed to mention Latin America.
At this stage, liberation of the colonies was regarded as being crucially dependent upon the overthrow of existing state structures in the metropolis.
This extreme Euro-centric viewpoint was called into question following the fading of prospects for proletarian revolution in Europe, an upsurge in the activities of national liberation movements and the emergence of the national and colonial question within Soviet Russia itself.
At the Second Congress in 1920 Indian delegate M. N. Roy's counter-thesis that the fate of the revolution in Europe depended upon the success or otherwise of the revolution in colonial countries was adopted in a weaker form.
However, although theoretically this assigned a primary role to the struggles of colonial peoples (a position which seemed to be at least partially vindicated by events in Turkey, Persia, India and China), Soviet foreign-policy considerations determined that discussion of colonial problems be suppressed at the 1921 Third Congress.
Great Britain had recently signed a commercial treaty with the Soviet Union, in which the latter promised to abstain from propaganda that would incite the peoples of Asia to act contrary to British interests, and for security reasons an aid pact was signed with Kemal Ataturk, in spite of his massacres of Turkish Communists.
Soviet security concerns with respect to Latin America were obviously minimal and were confined to Mexico and the River plate nations.
In addition to Mexico (see above), Soviet attention was also directed towards Argentina and Uruguay because of their role as food suppliers to Great Britain, whom the Soviet government regarded as another potential aggressor.
It is hardly surprising that, at this stage, Moscow assigned little theoretical importance and a low priority in practice to the fate of the revolution in far-flung Latin America, obliged to live within the shadow of the United States and its 1823 Monroe Doctrine.
This relegation of Latin American affairs reflected Lenin's conviction that ‘there were more urgent revolutionary tasks which must have priority.
It would be a long time before revolution could succeed in the New World.
Conditions might mature in the near future.
But American imperialism was on the alert to intervene as it had done in the past’(Roy: 1964, p. 346).
The USSR devoted more energy and resources to the development of diplomatic and trading ties with these nations than it did to establishing effective operational links with the Communist parties.
Mexico, which had relations with the Soviet Union from 1924 to 1930, was courted by Alexandra  Kollontai (ambassador 1926–9), and trade was carried out with Argentina and Uruguay despite the acknowledged difficulties of transporting goods across the Equator.
As a result of British pressure on Argentina, the only country apart from Mexico to maintain relations with the USSR was Uruguay (1925–35).
Thus political links were largely confined to the Comintern network which, notwithstanding this fact, was initially extremely weak.
The failure of the revolution in Europe, together with events in China and elsewhere, forced the colonial issue back on to the agenda at the Fourth (1922), Fifth (1924) and Sixth (1928) Comintern Congresses.
At the Fifth Congress the colonial question began to be perceived as an essential factor for the triumph of socialism on a world scale.
A delegate from Mexico argued that the United States had become the centre of gravity of imperialism, and it was this growing awareness of the importance of the United States which prompted the Comintern's rising interest in Latin America, as the ‘colonial, economic base of the new imperialism.
It was after this Congress, in 1925, that the Argentine Communist party was instructed to establish a South American Bureau, through which most of Comintern's operations in the area were directed.
A Caribbean branch was opened in New York in 1928.
However, it was only in 1929 that a separate Secretariat for Latin America was formed within the Comintern's Moscow administration; hitherto relations with Latin American Communist parties had been handled through a ‘Latin Secretariat’ which also covered Southern Europe.
The potential role of Latin America in any conflict between the United States and Great Britain had become a main concern of Comintern policy by 1928, when its Sixth Congress was held.
For the first time, Latin America was significantly represented and its revolutionary potential discussed, a development also partly attributable to events in Nicaragua where Augusto Sandino was raising a nationalist banner to challenge US imperialism.
Within the Comintern schema (outlined at the 1928 Congress) Latin America's fundamentally agrarian economic structure required that it attain the capitalist stage of development before a transition to socialism was possible.
Its century of political independence forestalled the possibility of ‘skipping’ this stage, as was proposed for the colonial countries of the East.
This analysis appeared to be substantiated by the small size of the proletariat in most Latin American countries, and by the agrarian and peasant character of the Mexican revolution.
Latin American Communists were directed to work for a ‘democratic-bourgeois’ revolution.
The main tenets of this were nationalisation of foreign concessions, expropriation of large landed estates (although it was not specified to whom they should be transferred, an omission reflecting the ambivalent attitudes regarding the role of the peasantry, which proved one of the most controversial issues in the debates between Latin American and Soviet Marxisms), repudiation of the national debt, rejection of imperialist control over the economy, the fight for an eight-hour day and the ‘stamping out of semi-slave-like conditions of labour’.
However, although the resolutions of Congress specified that the revolution in Latin America could only be democratic-bourgeois at this stage, they also said that, because of the weakness of the national bourgeoisie and their links to imperialism, Latin American Communist parties should work at the same time for the eventual dictatorship of the proletariat.
This echoed the ambivalence of the original 1920 Lenin and Roy theses on the colonial question in general, formulated as an interim measure in what Lenin saw as an inconclusive debate at the Second Congress.
The theses advocated both support for national liberation movements and agitation to ensure that workers and peasants were prepared for the Soviet revolution which was to follow, a policy contradiction which was never resolved.
The basic problem with Comintern attempts to formulate a strategy for revolution in the colonies was that issues such as the nature of the revolution and the role of classes were examined by means of a formal analogy with the Russian revolution, rather than a structural analysis of the specific conditions in individual countries (Cerdas Cruz: 1986a, p. 41).
This led to fundamental inadequacies in the Comintern approach, which were graphically demonstrated by its relationship with the nationalist leader Sandino of Nicaragua, who fought against a US occupation force from 1927 to 1934.
Comintern officials first tried to convert Sandino to Communism (battling for influence with APRA) and then, having failed, denounced him as a traitor.
The Comintern's aim was to convert a nationalist struggle into a broader social struggle (in accordance with part of its remit), but Comintern officials made no serious attempt to fulfil the second part of the resolutions adopted at the Sixth Congress by setting up a Communist party in Nicaragua, which could have given the Sandinista movement an organisational base and therefore the possibility of continuity (Cerdas Cruz: 1986a, pp. 363–97).
Clearly one of the major difficulties of applying the standard Comintern model of a vanguard Communist party with a proletarian base to the Latin American situation was that the proletariat in the majority of these countries was small in size, rural in origin and lacking in organisation and political consciousness.
It is noteworthy that the two figures who made the most substantial contribution during this period to the formulation of a Marxist-based model which was more directly relevant to Latin American reality both came from Peru, where the above features were particularly accentuated and where, therefore, the Comintern prescription seemed least appropriate.
The first of these men was Victor Raúl Haya de la Torre, founder of the Alianza Popular Revolucionaria Americana (APRA), who initially established contact with the Comintern and whose model was in fact not dissimilar to that proposed by the Soviet theorists, although he differed greatly on questions of strategy and tactics.
The second was José Mariátegui, a socialist whose position was almost directly opposed to Moscow's on all the major points at issue.
These were:(1) the nature of Latin America's existing economic structure and its relation to world capitalism;(2) the role and characteristics of the ‘national bourgeoisie’;(3) attitudes towards the peasantry; and (4) the indigenous question.
Haya de la Torre rejected the Comintern premise that Latin America was set on the same course of development as the European industrial nations.
He disputed Lenin's contention that imperialism constitutes the last stage of capitalism, arguing that in Latin America it represented only the first stage.
While accepting the Comintern classification of Latin American agrarian structures as ‘feudal’ or semi-feudal, he maintained that what was happening in Latin America was not that capitalism was superseding feudalism, but rather that the two systems tended to coexist.
He stressed the deformed nature of Latin American capitalism, with its bourgeoisie of foreigners, the enduring alliance between imperialist bourgeoisie and native landowners, a weak, impoverished petite bourgeoisie threatened by foreign competition, and a very small proletariat.
In terms of tactics the implications of this analysis were a repudiation of the Leninist thesis that capitalism could be overthrown in backward countries before the revolution took place in industrial Europe.
Early Comintern documents on Latin America — authorship unknown — had explicitly denied the applicability of the national-democratic stage and called for an agrarian, anti-imperialist and  anti-capitalist revolution.
In contrast, Haya de la Torre insisted that the orthodox Marxist theory concerning stages of production had to be applied to Latin America, and he urged completion of the democratic ‘bourgeois’ stage of political development through a combined anti-imperialist and anti-feudalist revolution.
The revised 1928 Comintern theses on Latin America, as indicated above, came closer to this position, although differences remained over the nature of Latin American development and the issue of the possible coexistence of feudalism and capitalism.
Tactical positions were completely at variance: Haya de la Torre rejected the concept of the vanguard party and sought to build an alliance of workers, peasants, the petite bourgeoisie and the ‘national’ bourgeoisie — similar in concept to the Chinese Kuomintang.
Mariátegui also challenged the Comintern theory of an ‘autonomous’ stage of capitalist development in Latin America.
He maintained that Latin America had already been drawn into the capitalist system in a dependent role, and that the activities of imperialism would ensure that it would retain this colonial status.
He disputed the idea that Latin American agrarian structures were’ feudalist', arguing that they too existed in dependent relation to a capitalism which was ultimately supported by their very primitivism.
The conclusion he drew, in stark contrast to Haya de la Torre, was that the revolution in Latin America could only be socialist, and that the united front, gradualist tactics advanced by the Comintern (and by APRA) were invalid in a continent overshadowed by the United States and deeply penetrated by monopoly capital.
He wrote, ‘Only a socialist Latin or Spanish America can pit itself effectively against plutocratic, imperialist North America.
The era of free competition in the capitalist economy is over in all areas and in all respects.
We are in the age of the monopolies, one might say of the empires.
The Latin American countries came late to capitalist competition.
The destiny of these countries, within the capitalist order, is that of mere colonies.’
Mariátegui's assertion of the need for a socialist revolution excluded the possibility of coopting the bourgeoisie, whom he believed had an intrinsic interest in collaborating with imperialism.
He advocated revolution based on a worker-peasant alliance, and drew substantially  on evidence of a communitarian life-style amongst the Incas to present a somewhat mystical vision of a racially integrated, socialist Peru.
Whereas Marxism-Leninism does not always take a wholly positive attitude towards the peasantry, identifying petit bourgeois tendencies — particularly amongst the less impoverished — which can make them a sometimes unreliable ally, Mariátegui and subsequent Latin American Marxists have pointed to a dual oppression — both economic and racial.
The role of the peasantry in the revolution or its relationship with the industrial proletariat was never satisfactorily defined by the Comintern.
This neglect of the indigenous peasantry helps to explain the appeal of Maoism in Latin America and the over-estimation of the revolutionary potential of the rural areas by Castroism and Guevarism.
The differences in approach of Soviet officials and Latin Americans had, by the time of the Sixth Congress, already led to tensions between Latin American Communists and their Soviet mentors.
One Comintern categorisation that the nationalistically minded Latin Americans found particularly unpalatable was the description of their countries as ‘semi-colonies’.
Jules Humbert-Droz, a Swiss friend of Lenin's, as head first of the Latin Secretariat and then of the Latin American Secretariat, was the Comintern official most concerned with Latin America until 1931.
He then resigned his post after incurring Stalin's mistrust because of his association with Bukharin.
He reported after the Sixth Comintern Congress that’ As a rule, when we tell our Latin American comrades, on meeting them for the first time, that the situation of their country is that of a semi-colony and consequently we must consider the problems concerning it from the viewpoint of our colonial or semi-colonial tactics, they are indignant at this notion and assert that their country is independent, that it is represented in the League of Nations, has its own diplomats, consulates, etc.’
Latin Americans also resented the lack of interest shown in their region.
Peru's Victor Raúl Haya de la Torre, after meeting Trotsky, Chicherin, Lunacharskii and Frunze, testified that they knew ‘little or nothing about conditions in our America’(Haya de la Torre: 1961 pp. 158–9).
When Bukharin, in his speech to the Sixth Congress, emphasised that the Latin American Communist parties ‘had an important role to play in the development of national and agrarian  revolutions’, Brazilian delegate Fernando Lacerna somewhat tartly pointed out that a Communist movement had existed in Latin America since 1920 but it was only in 1928 that’ the Communist International [had]shown its interest in Latin America for the first time’(La Correspondance Internationale (organ of the Communist International), 1928, in Alba: 1964, p. 188).
The following year a Latin American delegate at the Tenth plenum of the Committee of the Communist International stated bluntly that Latin American Communist parties needed’ stronger organisational and more effective political support' from the Comintern (Alba: 1959, p. 136).
If the Latin Americans had their nationalist sensibilities ruffled by the refusal of the Comintern to recognise that they were in the best position to analyse the situation in their own countries, and were disappointed by the level of support received from Moscow, Comintern officials in their turn were unenthusiastic about the evolution of the Latin American Communist parties and their approach to revolutionary politics.
In 1926 the South American Bureau complained that the process of ‘Bolshevisation’ had been insufficiently implemented in the Chilean party, which had returned representatives and senators to Congress and had been involved in the drafting of the new Constitution of 1925 (Angell: 1972, p. 32).
This lack of Bolshevik militancy (and the reluctance to comply with Moscow's directives) was particularly galling for the Comintern since, as one of its own documents acknowledged, ‘the Chilean Communist party is the one with the most influence amongst the masses out of all the South American Communist parties’.
Mexico was also regarded as a promising base for the expansion of Comintern influence, but Moscow's distrust of the Mexican Communists was such that in March 1926 the Comintern took a decision to entrust the Communist party of the United States with special responsibility in the same area: the Mexican Communist party was therefore effectively under a dual tutelage (Clissold: 1970, p. 10).
In 1929 a serious dispute over tactics arose between the Communist International and the Mexican Communists.
When a right-wing revolt broke out against the newly-elected president portes Gil, the Communists, who were highly influential with the peasant Leagues, instructed them to fight on behalf of the government to help quell the uprising.
The Comintern, however, disapproving strongly of these  tactics, obliged the Mexican Communists’ to send directives to the peasant leaders instructing them to turn their arms against the government and fight an action on two fronts with a view to precipitating social revolution' (Clissold: 1970, p. 6).
The attempt of one of the leaders concerned to implement these extreme tactics resulted in his being caught and summarily executed by the local military commander.
Notwithstanding this, at the First Latin American Communist Congress in Buenos Aires in June 1929, the Comintern delegate castigated the Mexicans for their failure to take effective advantage of the situation.
Other disputes arose and, in general, Comintern officials were inclined to be disparaging of their Latin American comrades.
Alexander Lozovskii, head of the Profintern, who was closely involved with the Latin American Communist parties, wrote:
Today, in Latin America we have a young movement, a movement which incorporates hundreds of thousands of workers, but which is, from the ideological point of view, very confused and, from the organisational point of view, very weak.
Revolution is not made by proclamations, strikes cannot be declared every twenty-four hours, and in order to struggle against the bourgeoisie it is not enough to have a weekly publication or a hundred militants.
What is needed is an organisation which is strong enough to combat and overthrow the capitalist state.
In Latin America there is too much talk about social revolution.
All Latin American manifestoes conclude with ‘Long live the social revolution’.
This is all very well, and I am not against it.
But there are a number of comrades who have too primitive an idea of social revolution.
They believe that if socialist revolution has not arrived today, it will come tomorrow.
The Third period (1929–1935)
As Stalin asserted his dominance over the Comintern during what is known as the ‘Third period’(1929–35), Soviet doctrine (related to the perceived need to defeat social democracy in Europe) became correspondingly extreme, insisting that the only authentic revolution was one led by an orthodox Marxist-Leninist party.
Communist parties were exhorted to eschew all alliances and push forward with armed insurgence whenever the opportunity arose.
This led the Chilean Communist party to lose substantial support by its opposition to the short-lived Socialist Republic declared by Colonel Marmaduke  Grove in June 1932.
The Communists, following their isolationist policy, were the only working-class group to oppose this experiment.
In Cuba, the Communists played a less than glorious role in the 1933 overthrow of dictator Gerardo Machado.
Both parties were further weakened by splits as the Stalin-Trotsky conflict was played out in Latin America.
The one major attempt to apply the Third period model in Latin America, in El Salvador in 1932 (where the Comintern operated through International Red Aid), was quickly and brutally suppressed by a massacre of over 30,000 people.
By contrast, the 1935 insurgency in Brazil was instigated by the Comintern through one of its most trusted Latin American lieutenants, Luis Carlos Prestes (who was not formally a member of the Brazilian Communist party).
According to Peruvian Communist Eudocio Ravines, the decision was a consequence of rivalry within the Comintern hierarchy between Dmitrov, chief proponent of the new popular Front line adopted at the Seventh Comintern Congress in 1935, and Manuilskii, who still favoured violent tactics.
In Brazil, the popular Front approach was to be used to achieve the seizure of power by armed force, rather than by the non-violent means more usually associated with the popular-Front era (Ravines: 1957, pp. 255–7).
The Communist International failed to turn any political situation to its advantage during the years 1917 to 1935, largely because of the rigidity of its model and its lack of interest in the actual conditions of Latin America.
Attempts by Latin American Communists to implement the ultra-leftism and isolationism of the’ Third period' (tactics which had been formulated to respond to the very different political conditions prevailing in Europe) resulted in considerable loss of support and influence for many of these parties.
Nevertheless, by 1935, the definitively Stalinised Comintern and its network of party faithful comprised the main organisational basis of Marxism in Latin America, and therefore provided a vital touchstone for all other sectors of the Left, which were forced to define themselves in relation to its characterisation of the Latin American revolution.
One major consequence of Communist International neglect of Latin America during the 1920s was that inadequate literature was made available in Spanish for the dissemination of Communist ideas (this was pointed out by a Mexican delegate at the Sixth Congress).
In 1927 the South American Secretariat started publishing La Correspondencia Sudamericana , which appeared fortnightly at first.
In 1930, however, its name was changed to Revista Comunista , and the editors  explicitly stated their intention to produce a theoretical journal rather than an information bulletin as hitherto.
The organ rapidly degenerated, however, into a vehicle for Stalinism.
It was really only in this intellectually impoverished form that Marxism-Leninism arrived in Latin America.
By this stage, Mariátegui, unconstrained by the rigidities of Stalinist orthodoxy, had already undertaken his original application of Marxism to the Latin American situation.
His death in 1930 halted the immediate ascendancy of his version of socialism, but facilitated his canonisation as the prophet of a distinctly Latin American Marxism.
His Seven essays on the interpretation of Peruvian reality became a standard text (more readily available than most of Marx and Lenin's works) for Latin Americans interested in Marxism.
Thus his ideas remained as a potent legacy for the new generation of Marxists which emerged in the 1950s and 1960s.
1936–1958
This period saw the development of two significant trends: the perceived relevance of Marxism to Latin America increased, whilst the stature of the Communist parties markedly declined after reaching a peak in the immediate aftermath of the Second World War.
The 1930s witnessed the emerging confrontation with Fascism in Europe, a struggle which was played out on the battlefields of Spain from 1936 to 1939.
Franco's hostility to intellectuals of any persuasion meant that intellectuals the world over were driven into the defence of the Spanish Republic.
Moreover, the shock of the 1929 Wall Street crash and the ensuing economic depression (which hit the primary-producing nations of Latin America particularly badly as the industrialised countries slashed imports) had two correlated effects.
Firstly, the United States economic system was shown to be far from invincible: the myth of the Great American Dream was, if not exploded, at least undermined.
Within intellectual circles, this new uncertainty compounded an emerging assertion of Latin America's need to seek its own identity rather than continually strive to emulate the United States.
There was a growing awareness that to be Latin rather than Anglo-Saxon should not necessarily imply inferiority.
Thus an assertion of cultural identity became closely bound up with the quest for a political model to supersede the North American system.
Secondly, it prompted a recognition of Latin America's economic vulnerability, a search for alternative models of development and a sense that radical solutions had to be found.
Latin America's weak  position in relation to world capitalism was further confirmed in the aftermath of the Second World War, when drastic reductions in import-demand from the war-torn European economies plunged Latin America back into recession.
The increasingly urgent political situation at home and abroad gave Marxism an appropriate context.
Thus Latin American nationalism was coupled, albeit loosely at this stage, to the Marxist bandwagon.
The 1930s saw the beginning of the development of a primarily student/intellectual sub-culture in which Marxism gradually became the prevalent ideology.
With the massive expansion of state education in the aftermath of the Second World War, teachers, freed from the constraints of imparting the Catholic texts, tended to propagate the Church's rival ideology.
The 1935 Seventh Comintern Congress and its emphasis on united-front tactics (stemming from the Soviet leadership's need to build alliances to counter threats from Germany and Japan) gave the Communist parties some chance to regain the ground they had lost by their isolationist, class-against-class policies of the early 1930s.
The Chilean party, in alliance with Radicals and Socialists (who had sprung up to challenge the Communists in 1932) won a popular Front victory in 1938, and in 1946 they collaborated with the Radical party to win an election (this time without the Socialists) and participated briefly in the government.
In Cuba, where the Communists were also relatively strong, class collaborationist tactics gave the party a ministerial position under Batista (1943–4) and control of the officially recognised Confederación de Trabajadores de Cuba (Confederation of Cuban Workers).
The Communist parties inevitably lost credibility as a result of staunchly adhering to the Comintern line throughout the series of volte-face involved in the Nazi-Soviet pact of 1939 and the subsequent German invasion of Soviet Russia in June 1941.
They profited, however, from the general admiration for the USSR's contribution to the defeat of Fascism, and attained the peak of their popularity in the immediate aftermath of the war.
Once again, however, Communist inability to consolidate this position can be attributed to a combination of swift and effective repression of Communism in Latin America (partly a response to their increased support, partly due to the onset of the Cold War and the pro-US orientation of most Latin American regimes in the late 1940s and 1950s) and failures in tactics by the parties.
post-war instructions from Moscow (the Comintern had been dissolved in 1943) were to maintain the policy of cooperation with democratic forces which had been implemented during the latter  stages of the war.
Under this banner, Communist parties in several Latin American countries supported not only ‘democratic’ forces, but openly repressive ones, including Vargas, Manuel Odria in Peru and Medina Angarita (an ally of former dictator Gómez) in Venezuela.
In Cuba the Communists' early association with Batista did them great disservice when his second regime (1952–8) became increasingly corrupt and unpopular.
perhaps the greatest blunder of all was the Argentine party's support for Unión Democrática (an alliance of the right-wing oligarchy, the conservative military and the US ambassador) in the fight to prevent the 1946 election of Colonel Perón.
This resulted in a perceived split between nationalism and socialism which, as Regis Debray points out, helped to keep’ socialism apart from the mass of the people, and…gave a certain fascist tinge to all the nationalist and anti-imperialist movements…the two effects are inseparable' (Debray: 1978, p. 225).
These years also saw the rise of Trotskyism.
Leon Trotsky himself arrived in Mexico in early January 1937, having been granted asylum by president Cárdenas.
The Comintern's attempts to involve the Mexican Communist Party in Moscow's decision to liquidate Trotsky resulted in violent convulsions within the party, with Valentin Campa and Hernán Laborde expelled.
Trotsky was murdered by Stalinists in Mexico City in August 1940.
Although many Latin American Communist parties were split by Trotskyism, the only significant Trotskyist party in the region was the Bolivian Workers' Revolutionary party (POR), which became one of the two leading Fourth International affiliates in the world (the other being in Sri Lanka).
The POR was set up in 1935 not as a breakaway from an orthodox Communist party (none existed in Bolivia until the formation of the PIR in 1940) but as the party of a group of intellectuals attracted by Trotsky's ideas and personality.
The POR had considerable influence in the powerful Bolivian mine-workers' union, the FSTMB, and was responsible for drafting its main charter, the Thesis of Pulacayo, in 1946.
By the mid-1950s, however, the POR's importance had diminished, having lost members both to the populist-oriented National Revolutionary Movement (MNR) and to other factions of the Fourth International.
During the late 1940s and early 1950s the Communist movement was further weakened by splits in the parties of Mexico, Venezuela, Colombia, Argentina, Bolivia, Peru and Brazil — mostly over the questions of local tactics discussed above or because of rivalry for the party leadership.
Those parties that were not forced into clandestinity demonstrated scant ability to formulate new strategies or even to  adapt existing ones to contemporary situations.
The ideological bankruptcy of the Communists is perhaps most graphically conveyed by quotation of a comment by Soviet Latin Americanist Anatoli Shul'govskii to the effect that in 1945 the Mexican Communist party had a ‘Marxist’ ideology comparable to the ‘legal Marxism’of tsarist Russia (Löwy: 1982, p. 37).
Well over two decades of failure to mount any effective challenge to the established order led to their being seen for what they fundamentally were: bureaucratic ‘enclaves’ of the international workers' movement with little substantial contribution to make to the debate on Latin American development.
Michael Löwy argues that
[As a]professional leadership group, organically structured and hierarchical, the behaviour and thought of the Communist Party of Brazil leadership corresponds with their situation as a social category and their political nature as leadership apparats of a party belonging to a particular current of the international workers' movement.
In the framework of this hypothesis, the organisational, political and ideological relations between the leadership of the PCB and the Third International (and/or the CPSU) are a far more decisive variable for an understanding of their vision of the process and of their strategy than the military petty bourgeois origin of prestes and other leaders of the party.
This same explanatory principle is valid for the other Communist parties of Latin America…
(Löwy: 1982, p. 29)
However, it was not only on the Left that the search for radical solutions was being pursued.
Most significantly in Argentina, Brazil and Mexico, where the organised working classes were large and strong, longer-term strategies to forestall the problems posed by labour militancy were already being implemented.
Basic tenets of Catholic social philosophy have contributed to the formation of a Latin American political tradition, the underlying assumptions of which are antipathetic to fundamental Marxist class analysis.
In this tradition the state is perceived as the vehicle by which the unity of the nation should be achieved in order to work for the common good.
Looking at the major political movements in Latin America in the twentieth century, it is striking how all of the most successful have championed the ideals of integration, national unity and incorporation.
At one level, of course, this simply reflects Latin American political realities: these societies are highly fragmented and any governing group will find itself with a diverse power base and the need to sustain its position by means of either coercion or consensus building.
However, the ideological position is not an empty one.
Perón, Vargas and Cárdenas — who, judged by their mass following, have led the most  popular governments of their respective countries — all worked on the basis of an active, aspiring state.
Perón expressed the concept thus: ‘To the Peronist doctrine, all economic goods were created and are created and exist for man.
Therefore we condemn the principles of individualism and collectivism which put man at the service of the economy or the state and we maintain that the economy and the state must secure human happiness by promoting social well-being’(in Stepan: 1978, p. 49).
Indeed one of the main reasons for the failure of Marxists to make headway amongst the Latin American working classes is that labour organisations in many of these countries were originally the creation of the state.
Perón (who built up his power from the Ministry of Labour after 1943, was elected president of Argentina in 1946 and governed until 1955) created his movement precisely on the basis of an alliance between nationalist military officers, industrialists and the non-Marxist (largely unrepresented) sections of the working classes.
Perón's capacity to deliver the tangible benefits that established unions working against the state apparatus could not hope to obtain for their members (labour's share of the national income increased by twenty-five per cent between 1946 and 1950) ensured that the loyalties of massive sectors of the post-1955 labour movement were to Peronism rather than to Communism or socialism.
A similar process of incorporation took place in Brazil under Vargas (1930–45) and the Estado Novo (1937–45).
This latter period saw the creation of a labour code (1943) limiting the functioning of unions to a local and plant level and bringing them tightly under the control of the Ministry of Labour.
In Mexico, president Cárdenas (1934–40) achieved the incorporation of unions into the state under the aegis of four sub-divisions of the Mexican Revolutionary Party (PRM)(forerunner of today's ruling PRI): agrarian, labour, military and ‘popular’(a residual group largely covering the middle classes).
The principles behind his approach are embodied in Mexico's 1917 Constitution, as analysed by Frank Tannenbaum:
By implication, the Constitution recognises that contemporary Mexican society is divided into classes, and that it is the function of the State to protect one class against another.
The Constitution is therefore not merely a body of rules equally applicable to all citizens, but also a body of rules specially designed to benefit and protect given groups…
What has in fact happened is that the old idea of the’ estates' has been re-created in Mexican law.
The pattern of the older Spanish State, divided into clergy, nobility and commons, has been re-created in modern dress, with peasants, workers and capitalists replacing the ancient model.
This is not done formally, but it is…evident that  a very different kind of social structure is envisioned in the law…than that in a liberal democracy.
(Morse: 1967, p. 233)
One reason for the weakness of the Communist movement in Mexico is that intellectuals were effectively incorporated into the system until at least the late 1960s, the Mexican government ‘preferring the price of appeasing or coopting intellectuals to the perils of ignoring or alienating them’.
Thus, ‘academics, writers, painters and musicians of minimal renown inherit the right — even the duty — to participate in politics, to give opinions on subjects far removed from their areas of talent, to sit in judgement on the regime, even to denounce the system’(Riding: 1986, p. 427).
The price intellectuals pay is that they are dependent on the government for both professional and financial recognition, since ‘the most important definition of an intellectual is that he should be recognised by the government as such’(Riding: 1986, p. 428).
Thus, for example, Diego Rivera's membership of the Communist party did not stop him from painting radical murals on the walls of government buildings.
There are strong elements of a liberal tradition in Argentina, Chile and (to a lesser extent) Brazil.
One of the basic contradictions in the politics of these and other Latin American countries derives from the difficulties of trying to superimpose the liberal concept of a state as a mechanism for ensuring free interplay between competing interest groups onto societies with a built-in tendency to corporatism.
Classical democracy's belief in the self-regulation of the individual is recognised as theoretically valid, but the legacy of aristocratic colonial politics means that it is highly restricted in practice.
The tensions induced by the conflicts between Marxism versus Liberalism and Liberalism versus corporatism are incarnated in the figure of Salvador Allende, who tried to introduce socialism on the basis of populist support and subsequently refused to sacrifice his belief in ‘constitutionalism’ until it was too late to save his revolution.
Whereas a strategy of incorporation can be relatively successful when applied by a regime of right-wing orientation which is prepared to support it with repression, it has proved to be ineffective for leftist groups which claim to be advancing the interests of the working class.
To date, such experiments have failed under dual pressure — from the Marxist-based Left, which has been unwilling to concede the fight for its class interests, and from the Right, which has continually threatened to halt the reform process.
In Peru the Aprista movement founded by Haya de la Tone — an alternative to both Comintern-style Marxism-Leninism and the radical tradition established by Mariátegui  — became discredited owing to its regression into counter-revolutionary responses precisely when its success was greatest.
The Apristas — for all their original Marxist inspiration — pursued similar ‘incorporating’ tactics, trying to maintain a populist coalition in order to build state capitalism.
From 1945 to 1948 APRA in government embraced the United States' ‘Good Neighbour policy’ and on the agrarian issue defended private property rights, betraying their earlier demands for nationalisation of land.
Similar policy reversals were made by Acción Democratica in Venezuela and — probably the most important example — by the Bolivian Movimiento Nacional Revolucionario (MNR).
As early as 1956, economic crisis forced the 1952 Bolivian revolution to confront the contradictions inherent in its class conciliation model.
Faced with the option of further radicalisation or retreat, the MNR chose the latter course, proceeding to expel its left wing in 1964.
It is worth noting that the Cuban revolution avoided a similar fate by incorporation of the Communists; the Bolivian experience may well have been in Castro's mind when he was assessing the means by which he could sustain his own revolution.
The success of the Peronist movement and, to a lesser extent, of Vargas and Cárdenas, in gaining widespread acceptance for their visions of national unity cannot be explained without reference to a second major element of the Latin American political tradition which is related to corporatism and which also cuts across class-based Marxist politics:caudillismo , and its modern corollary, populism.
At the level of mass impact, the myth of the strong individual, the all-conquering hero, the leader — a myth deriving from the historically dominant role of military actions and actors in the shaping of Latin American nations — is firmly entrenched.
It was strengthened by the historical development of Latin American social structures.
Large landed estates were run on the basis of patronage relationships between landowners and peasants, which were reinforced by the Catholic institution of compadrazgo (god-parenthood).
This broad network of clientelism (which has now been transferred to the cities) has combined with the fact that many of these societies are highly fragmented, to create a tendency to unite around a leader rather than around an ideology.
(This is especially true when the ideology in question has the doctrinaire, dogmatic and collectively oriented features of Marxism.)
Groups such as APRA, which were aiming to create a broad alliance across class boundaries, were obliged to resort to very general slogans, typified by their rallying cry of ‘Against Yankee imperialism, for the unity of the peoples of Latin America, for  the realisation of social justice’, in order to avoid alienating any of their potential supporters.
The classic example of the populist leader is Argentina's Perón, whom commentators have found impossible to classify in terms of received ideologies such as Fascism and socialism (although there were elements of both in his style and his policies).
To some extent the caudillo phenomenon has worked in favour of Marxism.
Moscow established a special relationship with fellow-travelling Mexican labour leader Vicente Lombardo Toledano (similar to their connections with Brazil's Luis prestes), in recognition of his following not only in the labour movement but also amongst the university communities.
Lombardo travelled throughout Latin America drumming up support for the Communist Confederation of the Workers of Latin America (CTAL) formed in 1938, before forming his own popular party in Mexico a decade later.
His role was effectively one of a papal nuncio, a part which is now played by Fidel Castro, who is the epitome of the charismatic caudillo .
It was largely by the force of his own personality that Castro took the Cuban people with him along the road of Marxism-Leninism (although he was also tactically astute — for a long time implementing only the minimum conditions of Marxism, allowing rhetoric to fill the vacuum, and emphasising the glorious and dramatic aspects of Marxism, notably the armed struggle and proletarian internationalism).
Cubans are Fidelistas first and Marxists second, and this pattern of allegiance to a leader rather than to an ideology occurs repeatedly throughout Latin America wherever Marxism has established a working-class base.
The Sandinistas in government are somewhat at a loss for their own charismatic figure, but continue to draw amply on the (revised) ideology and mythology of Sandino himself and of the martyred heroes of the revolution.
By extension, this tendency to rally around a leader operates not only at national, but also at local and party political levels, and here its drawbacks are more apparent.
Reduced to its minimum, the Latin American idea of a ‘party’ comes down to a group of friends, which makes the Leninist concept of a totally committed, exclusive vanguard very difficult to accept or implement.
This is seen nowhere more clearly than in the Latin American Communist parties which’ prefer systematically an alliance with a strong personality (not to speak of a strongman) rather than with an organised political party which could propose or, worse, impose independent tactics and a different and  permanent leadership upon the whole alliance' (Caballero: 1986, p. 109).
The most noteworthy consequences of such an attitude was that at the same time as growing numbers of Latin Americans, particularly young people, were looking to Marxism for some kind of solution, the orthodox Communist parties were widely perceived to be inert and impotent.
Thus by the late 1950s both the Comintern version of Marxism-Leninism and a native Marxist-based gradualist model were perceived to be sterile.
This period was impoverished in Latin American Marxist thought compared to the 1920s: no figure emerged with the stature of Mariátegui or Haya de la Torre.
In the 1950s, however, a new generation of Marxist economists — notably André Gunder Frank, Sergio Bagú and Caio Prado Junior — began experimenting with and developing ideas derived from Mariátegui's work.
The theses that Latin American socio-economic structures could not be regarded as simply a local variant of European feudalism, and that the agrarian economy was already incorporated into the capitalist system were restated and developed, and the argument that the revolution in Latin America could only be socialist reasserted.
This theoretical position seemed to be vindicated in 1954 by the prompt CIA-organised counter-revolutionary response to the radicalisation of the Communist-supported Arbenz government in Guatemala.
This defeat of the most successful application of Communist party popular front tactics appeared to demonstrate that opposition forces within Latin America (backed up by the United States) were too powerful for such a strategy to be ultimately successful.
In this context, I would argue that while the unleashing of widespread revolutionary activity in Latin America in the 1960s must obviously be attributed to the impact of the 1959 Cuban revolution, this event was essentially a catalyst, which supplied a model and a source of inspiration to a radicalised generation who were already looking for an alternative to the Soviet theory of ‘revolution in stages’.
1959–1975
The years 1959 to 1975 witnessed a consolidation of radical trends.
perhaps the single most important effect of the Cuban revolution was that it proved beyond all doubt that Marxism was not an exclusively European doctrine and that it could be applied successfully in Latin America.
The 1962 Second Declaration of Havana , with its call to turn the  Andes into the Sierra Maestra of Latin America, counteracted the Euro-centrism of orthodox Communism.
Many became convinced that the region could now find its own way to socialism, without the help of a Communist party or Stalinism.
Moreover, Cuba's insistence on ‘uninterrupted’ revolution made a subsidiary issue of the whole debate about which ‘stage’was appropriate.
In re-uniting Marxism and nationalism under the anti-imperialist banner, Castro succeeded at one fell stroke where the Communist parties had failed for years.
Thus, in the 1960s, the initiative passed to what became known as the ‘New Left’— which in practice referred to all those who sought radical social change in Latin America.
Most of those under this broad umbrella adopted a Marxist idiom, and have relied on three ‘minimum conditions’ of Marxism to act as their rallying point.
These are (1) anti-imperialism (in effect, an anti-US stance): increasingly, as Washington insists on defining indigenous anti-US sentiment within the region in terms of‘Communist subversion’, Marxism comes to be regarded as the natural channel for such feelings;(2) an acceptance of the Marxist premise of ‘the exploitation of man by man’; and (3) a refusal to accept the existing economic order, or to be bound by conventional economic remedies for Latin America's development problems (either of the orthodox ‘monetarist’ variety which the International Monetary Fund (IMF) is trying to introduce into most major Latin American countries, or of the moderate reform-and-investment strategies pursued by Christian Democratic groups, for example in Chile from 1964 to 1970).
For all its fragmentation and factionalism, most of the ‘New Left’ was also united around the central tenets of Che Guevara's Marxism, which included (1) the necessarily socialist nature of the Latin American revolution (that is, a rejection of the concept of a ‘progressive national bourgeoisie’and the ‘national democratic’stage, which was perceived as yet another indefinite postponement of the eradication of poverty);(2) the role of the armed struggle as an essential pre-condition for it;(3) the emphasis on the self-disciplined and altruistic ‘new man’; and (4) the importance of the countryside and the potential of the peasantry as the new revolutionary class.
The theory of foquismo (as presented in the works of Regis Debray) took the above positions to their logical conclusion, arguing that a small dedicated band of guerrilla fighters would be sufficient to spark mass peasant revolution in defiance of prevailing political conditions.
The guerilla foco would replace the Leninist party as the  revolutionary vanguard, and the experience of combat would ‘proletarianise’ both the guerrilla fighters and the peasantry.
The attraction of foquismo to many young, radicalised, middle-class Latin Americans is hard to overestimate, offering as it did the immediacy of a rapid solution and a legitimisation of their participation in the revolutionary process despite their non-proletarian origins.
In Nicaragua, for example, the Frente Sandinista de Liberación Nacional (FSLN) was formed, in 1962, by cadres disillusioned with the peaceful efforts at reform by the Nicaraguan Communist party (known as the partido Socialista Nicaragúense) and, in October 1975, Jaime Wheelock and his Tendencia proletaria were expelled from an FSLN directorate dominated by Tomás Borge, for the ‘sterile dogmatism’ of their economic materialism.
Similarly, in El Salvador, the formation of the Fuerzas Populares de Liberación-Farabundo Martí (forerunner of the current FMLN) in 1970 was a result of a bitter factional fight within the Salvadoran Communist party over revolutionary tactics, the final split being provoked by the party's backing for the 1969 four-day war against Honduras (Dunkerley: 1982, pp. 87–102).
This new attempt to apply Marxism to the Latin American situation has sought little outside inspiration and, when it has done so, has turned to other Third World countries rather than to Moscow.
Maoism, with its emphasis on the countryside surrounding the cities, has been influential, particularly in Peru, where it is strong in the teachers' unions and is the ideology of the Shining path guerrilla movement.
More typically, however, the ‘New Left’ has drawn on Latin America's own political tradition, resurrecting the work of Mariátegui and embracing earlier, non-Marxist, liberation struggles.
Current revolutionary activity in the sub-continent is referred to as the ‘Second War of Independence’: the nineteenth-century fight to gain political emancipation by ousting the Spanish has been succeeded by the struggle to achieve economic liberation by discarding the yoke of imperialism.
This is a crusading, flamboyant Marxism, emphasising the role of the supposedly heroic and glamorous armed struggle.
It has attempted to weave the mythology of historical liberation struggles with the martyrdom of its own guerrilla fighters of the 1960s and 1970s to create an unbroken thread of radical revolutionary tradition in Latin America.
In Cuba, for example, ‘figures of the Wars of Independence, like Marti and Maceo, or of the 1933 revolution [against the dictator Machado]…give the revolution legitimacy by linking it with the historic past and, at least in the case of the heroes of 1933, they have been in a very real sense the inspiration of the present revolutionary  leaders, to a far greater degree than Marx and Lenin' (Lambert: 1977, p. 237).
With its assertion of militarism, voluntarism and adventurism, it stands for everything that orthodox Marxists in Latin America had been arguing against for years.
The established Communist parties, however, although overshadowed at first by the new radicalism, were by no means totally eclipsed by it.
In the aftermath of the Cuban revolution, the Communists, forced to contend with Castroite, Maoist and Trotskyist dissenters, all of whom advocated armed struggle, were at times uncertain how to respond to the rise of guerrilla activity in their own countries.
In Guatemala and Venezuela support was initially given, and then later withdrawn.
However, the majority of established Latin American Communist parties were unwilling to fall into line either with Castro's strategy or his leadership, an attitude most dramatically expressed by the 1966 refusal of Bolivian Communist leader Mario Monje Molina to support Che Guevara in his campaign.
As the Venezuelan Communists said, in the midst of polemics with Castro over their withdrawal of support for the guerrilla movement, ‘We reject the role of revolutionary ‘pope’ which Fidel Castro arrogates to himself.’
The new movement's influence was undermined by its manifold divisions: Guevarists, Castroites and Maoists proliferated into further factions as differing positions were adopted in response to the rapid succession of events in the 1960s.
In particular, Castro's abandonment of the guerrilla strategy, and his favourable attitude to governments such as the reformist military regime in Peru, caused splits between Castroism and Guevarism.
The ability of the Communist parties to survive the onslaught from the ‘New Left’ also bore witness to the fact that the debates over strategy and tactics were real, and had a deeper basis than is suggested by the oft-manifested rivalry for the role of ‘true’revolutionary.
Communist party critics of the Cuban line stressed its neglect of the role of the masses, its under-estimation of the grip of reformism (Aprismo ), especially amongst the peasantry, and the need for a party.
The pertinence of these arguments to Latin American reality was borne out most clearly by the failure of both rural guerrilla warfare (powerfully symbolised by the death of Che Guevara in Bolivia in 1967) and of attempts to apply the same tactics in an urban situation.
Moreover, with the advent to power of the Peruvian military radicals in 1968, the brief rule of left-wing General Torres in Bolivia in 1970 and the election of Chile's popular Unity in September 1970, the arguments for a ‘peaceful road’ acquired far greater force.
Thus the 1975 Havana Conference of (for the first time since the Cuban revolution)all Latin American Communist parties and its rehabilitation of orthodox ideas such as the primacy of the party and the importance of mass organisation, reflected a widespread recognition that the central premise of foquismo was false.
The staging of this conference must be seen in the context of certain foreign-policy imperatives for Castro (to accommodate himself with the Soviet Union and to re-establish the link between Cuba and the revolutionary process in Latin America).
However, subsequent developments in revolutionary tactics in Latin America (both the Nicaraguan FSLN and the Salvadoran FMLN have attempted to combine the use of the armed struggle with the building of a mass movement) indicate that the conference was at least symbolic of real shifts in theoretical position and of a maturing of Latin American Marxist thought.
1975 to date
The necessity for a re-evaluation of tactics was further confirmed by the wave of counter-revolutionary repression which swept Latin America in the mid-1970s, the most dramatic example of which was the abrupt and extraordinarily violent termination of the Allende experiment by a Chilean military which for several decades had prided itself on respecting the nation's democratic traditions.
(Also significant was the 1975-onwards descent into repression by the Peruvian military as they desperately sought to regain control of an explosive situation unleashed by their own policies.)
If the 1960s had shown that the armed struggle was not in itself sufficient, the most frequently drawn ‘lesson of Chile’ was that the Left could not afford to dispense with it entirely, since the bourgeoisie ultimately would not hesitate to use force in defence of their interests.
Since the mid-1970s there has been an attempt to fuse the voluntaristic, militaristic, flamboyant aspects of Guevarism and Castroism with the tactical positions of more orthodox thought.
The 1979 Nicaraguan revolution provoked a fresh round of debate on Communist strategy for Latin America.
Round-table discussions held at the Institute of Latin America early in 1981 revealed that several Soviet ideologists were now prepared to lend credence to the long-discredited theories of guerrilla warfare upheld  by Che Guevara.
Sergei Mikoian, summarising the arguments, wrote, ‘As yet only the armed path has led to the victory of revolutions in Latin America.
And the Nicaraguan experience affirms what had been considered refuted by some after the death of Che Guevara and the defeat of a number of other guerrilla movements’(Mikoian: 1980, p. 103).
In 1980 the Communist parties of El Salvador, Chile, Uruguay and Honduras revised their position on armed struggle, although the peaceful road is still the preferred strategy in the majority of Latin American countries.
Nevertheless, there is no doubt that Guevarism and other currents of thought have been influential in forcing established Communist parties to rethink their role and recognise the need to be far more responsive than hitherto to the specific circumstances of their own country.
In Mexico and Venezuela this has resulted in the development of a new openness towards the broad left, reflected in the formation of the Left Coalition in Mexico in 1977 and the Movement Towards Socialism in Venezuela.
In 1978 Mexican Communist theorists and activists ‘polemicised with Soviet Latin American specialists over a series of issues relating to the character of Mexican capitalism in the late 1970s…
The Mexican participants emphasised the mature development of capitalism in their country and the impossibility of distinguishing between local and foreign monopolies…
The Soviet specialists doubted the existence of local Mexican monopolies and defended an interpretation which ascribed a more progressive character to the Mexican state and which noted the primacy of anti-imperialist struggle’(Carr: 1985, p. 216, footnote 38).
The Mexican party has also become increasingly independent of Moscow, condemning the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968 and the 1979 intervention in Afghanistan.
In summary, then, at present advocates of an orthodox Marxist-Leninist (Soviet-inspired) solution to Latin American problems do not enjoy much support, and it seems clear that Communist parties need to develop more flexible strategies and to ally themselves with the broader left if they are to sustain an effective role in political life.
The ideologies of indigenous Marxist groups need to be studied in their own right.
Within a broadly Marxian framework, these groups encompass a wide range of positions, many of which have only a very tenuous connection with Soviet doctrine.
The Soviet Union has little or no influence, let alone control, over the vast majority of them.
The vehement anti-US feeling in Nicaragua (so often cited as the latest Communist ‘gain’ in Latin America) has as much to do with the history  of US involvement in the country (not to mention its current support for counter-revolutionary activity) as it does with any Marxist ‘indoctrination’.
The Sandinista leaders themselves identify four elements which have contributed to the evolution of their ideology, one of which is the Marxism of the student sub-culture in the 1950s, another of which is the example of Cuba.
Equally important, however, are Nicaragua's historical tradition of political violence and, above all, the heroic image of General Sandino's struggle against imperialist occupation of his country (Nolan: 1984, p. 13 passim ).
This is not to deny that there are those amongst the Sandinistas who are urging a more orthodox Marxist-Leninist approach to the problems of Nicaraguan development and the need to counter threats from Washington, but to date the Nicaraguan Communist party (Partido Socialista Nicaragüense ) has been almost completely excluded from the process of implementing the revolution.
It would be an oversimplification to reduce the complex ideology of the movement to the positions of a minority within it, or to assume that such a viewpoint will necessarily prevail.
Moreover, all Marxist groups operating in Latin America confront a formidable array of obstacles, apart from the problems caused by their own factionalism.
Firstly, counter-revolutionary forces on the continent, armed and trained (particularly since the Cuban revolution) by the pentagon, remain impressively strong, and in Central America are backed up by the threat of military action by the United States itself, as recent events in Nicaragua and El Salvador have reaffirmed.
Secondly, the strength of the Catholic Church is still a major factor in the failure of Marxism to make any significant inroads into the Latin American masses, particularly the peasantry.
Initiatives in the 1970s, by adherents of Liberation Theology, to redefine the relationship between the Church and politics in Third World areas, and the charisma of activists such as the 1960s Colombian guerrilla-priest Camilo Torres, have helped the Sandinistas, three of whose leading figures are ordained priests.
However, the potential political pitfalls involved in any attempt to confront the contradictions of a socialist and a Catholic Nicaragua were clearly demonstrated by the events of the pope's 1982 visit.
Although worker-priests have been active in promoting the possibilities for convergence between Christianity and Sandinismo, the head of the Nicaraguan Church Cardinal Obando y Bravo has emerged as a focus for the non-armed Nicaraguan opposition.
Thirdly, the debates over how far to forge a strategy either for winning power or for promoting economic development in a post-revolutionary society have not been satisfactorily resolved, and  indeed perhaps cannot be, given that counter-revolutionary response to any successful formula will ensure that it will be that much more difficult to apply the same tactics in another situation.
Such is the relation which Nicaragua bears to El Salvador, for example.
That Cuba's style of development is still influential in the search for a Marxist-based model for Latin America is confirmed by many of the Sandinista government's policies, for example literacy and health campaigns and the building of mass organisations, Equally, however, Nicaragua's attempts (on Castro's advice) to preserve a mixed economy reveal an awareness of the limitations of the Cuban model.
Its diminished stature is mainly due to its continuing economic difficulties and its inability so far to break out of an increasingly stultifying dependence on Soviet aid and trade subsidies.
Cuba provides a graphic confirmation of the received wisdom that it is very hard for an under-developed country to proceed to the construction of socialism without first achieving economic independence.
There is no doubt that for very many Latin Americans it is a successful capitalist (North American) lifestyle that embodies their hopes and their aspirations, rather than a socialist society which, for all its economic and social advantages, entails restrictions and shortages.
A more sober evaluation by the Latin American Left of the prospects for achieving revolution is reinforced by the recognition that the Soviet Union is not going to do what it did for Cuba for any other Latin American country.
Castro's Cuba —‘A gift to the Russians’?
The Soviet-Cuban embrace, 1959–1962
In the immediate aftermath of Castro's January 1959 victory neither the Soviet Union nor Cuba evinced any great interest in the forging of a closer relationship.
There was no Soviet declaration of support for the new government, and Soviet press articles underplayed the revolutionary potential of the Cuban situation.
Khrushchev, who was preoccupied with trying to promote a policy of peaceful coexistence with the United States (Khrushchev and Eisenhower met at Camp David in September 1959) whilst at the same time seeking to contain the emerging Sino-Soviet rift, had little thought to spare for the bearded revolutionaries in far-off Cuba.
In his memoirs he records:
At the time that Fidel Castro led his revolution to victory and entered Havana with his troops, we had no idea what political course his regime would follow.
We knew that there were individual Communists participating in the movement which Castro led, but the Communist party of Cuba had no contact with him…
When Castro's men captured Havana we had to rely completely on newspaper and radio reports, from Cuba itself and from other countries, about what was happening…
We had no official contacts with any of the new Cuban leaders and therefore nothing to go on but rumours.
(Khrushchev: 1970, pp. 488–9)
Neither did the Soviet leaders appear to feel any great need to rectify this situation.
It was not until November 1959 that Moscow deemed it necessary even to send a TASS correspondent to Havana.
The main priority on the Soviet foreign-policy agenda at this time was to secure its objectives with regard to Berlin.
The failure of Krushchev's confrontation tactics (on 11 November 1959 he threatened to negotiate a separate peace treaty with the German Democratic Republic if the Western powers did not withdraw their troops within six months) had forced him to moderate his stance, and it was apparent that the Soviet Union would minimise the chances of an agreement on Berlin if it simultaneously pressed hard everywhere else, thereby exacerbating Washington's fears that any concession  would be interpreted by Khrushchev as a sign of weakness.
Clearly mindful of the likelihood of a US military intervention against Castro (on 10 April 1959 Izvestiia published an article entitled ‘Those who dream of a repetition of Guaternala’), the Soviet Union took care throughout 1959 not to take any step which might jeopardise its negotiations with the United States.
The Kremlin was also anxious to avoid involvement because of the potential loss of face if the USSR's inability to send conventional military support to a friendly country undergoing a successful US action were to be made manifest.
The indications are, however, that Moscow wanted to establish relations with the new Cuban regime as part of its overall campaign for promoting global diplomatic acceptance of the USSR.
Soviet recognition was extended to the Castro government a few days after it had taken power, but this was not reciprocated, and it appears to have been the Cubans, concerned not to give Washington any pretext for claiming that Communism had arrived in the Caribbean, who were responsible for the fact that for well over a year after the revolution the two countries did not have diplomatic ties.
What is often overlooked because of Cuba's active (although never particularly substantial) support for armed struggle in Latin America later in the 1960s is that, initially, the Castro regime made consistent attempts to build diplomatic relations with its hemispheric neighbours.
Cuban leaders visited all the major Latin American capitals and indeed were regular participants in meetings of the Organisation of American States (OAS).
The partial success of Cuba's policy is confirmed by the fact that as late as January 1961 Washington was aware that its scope for attacking the Castro regime through the OAS was still limited, and a majority for sanctions not yet assured.
(Current Intelligence Weekly Summary, 12 January 1961,United States Government Declassified Documents (henceforth US Declassified ), 1977, 10C.)
Whilst there is no denying that from its early days the Castro government provided safe haven and some aid to the revolutionary groups which flocked to Havana from all over Latin America and the Caribbean — in 1959 Cuba was the launching base for unsuccessful attacks on Haiti, Panama and the Dominican Republic — these activities must be set in context.
Apart from the fact that Havana's support for these adventures added up to little more than ‘a limited amount of old weapons’ in the chaotic early months of revolutionary power (Bourne: 1987, p. 188), ‘it must…be recognised that giving aid to revolutionaries seeking to overthrow dictatorships is a long-standing tradition for Latin America's democratic Left.
Costa Rica's Figueres, Guatemala's  Arévalo, even Venezuela's Betancourt — Washington's number one ally in the Alliance for Progress — all played similar roles during the late 1940s…’
(Robbins: 1984, p.218).
Castro was said to be’ embarrassed' by all but the 14 June expedition against Dominican Republic dictator Trujillo, which was the only one in 1959 launched on Cuban government initiative with, it should be noted, the support of president Rómulo Betancourt (Szulc: 1986, p. 393; Martz and Myers: 1977, p. 337).
It was not until 1962, when the Organisation of American States resolved that Cuba had voluntarily placed itself outside the inter-American system, that Castro — finding a temperamental and ideological disposition backed up by pressing security considerations — switched his energies to the export of revolution on a more substantial level.
The prime target was Venezuela, whose president Betancourt, convinced that the Cuban revolution posed a threat to his own model of promoting economic and social change within the framework of institutionalised democracy, had personally overruled the objections of his Foreign Minister to signing the OAS August 1960 Declaration of San José (a condemnation of all interference in the Americas by non-American states, that is, a watered-down attack on Cuba's ties with the Soviet Union)(Martz and Myers, p. 339).
In April 1959 Castro, despite the misgivings of some of his close associates, visited the United States.
Whilst there, he stated publicly that Cuba wanted to maintain good relations and to remain in the OAS.
He accepted the direction of a United States public-relations expert to help him present a favourable impression of the revolution, and was described by a Department of State official as ‘a man on his best behaviour’ throughout the visit (Memo for the president from Christian A. Herter, 23 April 1959,US Declassified , 1976, 58F).
He also claimed that his government would adhere to the Guantánamo Bay treaty, recognise US property rights and respect concessions granted in 1945 to foreign capital.
This broadly non-provocative approach undermined the argument — at least in the eyes of US and Latin American public opinion — that the Cuban revolutionary government threatened US national security.
In fact, the US-owned Cuban Electric Company, which was widely accused of inefficient operations and monopoly profits, had already been seized (in January 1959) by the new government.
Furthermore, concessions granted to the Cuban Telephone Company by Batista had been cancelled and consumer charges drastically reduced shortly before Castro left Havana for the United States.
Both personal conviction and political pressure within Cuba required that any post-revolutionary relationship with the  ‘Yankees’ had to be drastically redefined from the previous ‘imperialist’one.
The Cuban leader instructed his negotiators not to accept loans from Washington, despite the apparent willingness — even eagerness — of the State Department to extend them.
(Felipe pazos, the former president of the National Bank of Cuba, who accompanied Castro to the United States, wrote in March 1963 that ‘In the conversations with the State Department…
I had the feeling that they were almost forcing me to accept loans…’
González: 1968, p. 40, note 3.)
Nevertheless, Edward González (1968, p. 44) shows that the Cuban Communists ‘worked to preclude the possibility of a rapprochement between Castro and Washington’, a fact which indirectly supports the contention that such an accommodation was at least feasible at that time.
Shortly after the US trip, at a meeting of OAS ministers at punte del Este in Uruguay, Castro made an appeal for US$30 billion for Latin American development over the next ten years.
An early bid for Latin American leadership, this, too, could be discounted as a propaganda gesture (and, indeed, such was the response of the US administration).
Nevertheless, the indications are that, although Castro was not prepared to sacrifice Cuba's new and hard-won independence by entering into bilateral loan agreements with the ‘colossus of the North’, he might have been willing to accept US dollars through an intermediary regional organisation.
Apparently the Cuban leader was ‘very enthusiastic about his private Alliance for Progress scheme’ and ‘was seriously considering’staying on the American side of the fence as the sponsor of this plan and as the leader of a Nasser-type revolution’(Javier pazos, ‘Cuba — Was a deal possible in ‘59?’,
The New Republic , 12 Jan. 1963, in Carla Robbins: 1984, p. 218).
At this stage Castro, at least in public, was holding himself aloof from two disputing tendencies which had emerged from the various parties to the revolution.
These may be classified as the ‘moderate’ left — advocating a democratically based restructuring of Cuban society and a neutralist foreign-policy stance — and the’radical' left.
The latter urged far-reaching reforms that could only be implemented by a revolutionary dictatorship, which would need to realign itself internationally in order to secure protection against the United States.
Having distributed his favours fairly equally between these two groups in the first half of 1959 Castro then abruptly and decisively abandoned his on-the-fence posture in favour of the ‘radical’ position.
An indication of what was to follow was given on 12 June when Roberto Agramonte, a moderate who was in favour of conciliation  with the United States, was replaced as Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs by radical nationalist Raúl Roa.
(Roa, however, was hardly a figure calculated to please Soviet officials.
In 1956 he had delivered a scathing attack on Moscow for its invasion of Hungary and was not invited to the Soviet Union until 1971.
[Bourne: 1987, p. 199.])
However, the event which clearly signalled the shift in policy was the forced resignation on 17 July of moderate president Urrutia and Castro's installation of Osvaldo Dorticós, a former member of the university committee of the Unión Revolucionaria Comunista (the 1939–45 name of the official Communist party, later known as the popular Socialist party — PSP), in his place.
This episode — involving his own stage-managed ‘resignation’ as Prime Minister — definitively established Castro as the Maximum Leader and arbiter of power in Cuba.
A whole series of measures followed promoting the position of radicals — and the Communists — at the expense of the moderates.
The culmination of this process was the initiative which paved the way for a Soviet commitment to Cuba: the issuing, in late November 1959, of an invitation to Anastas Mikoian — then in Mexico — to visit the island.
The measures, as detailed by Edward González (1968, pp. 49–53), were as follows: In early August 1959, anti-Communist leaders were removed from the National Directorate of the 26th July Movement and, later in the month, anti-Communist officers were transferred from the Rebel Army to less sensitive civilian posts.
In mid-September Castro indicated that the 26th July Movement newspaper Revolución's polemical attacks on the Communists would no longer be tolerated.
More significantly, on 17 September Castro announced a new economic course, signifying the phasing out of the mixed economy and the agrarian and redistributive stage of the revolution, and their replacement with a new socialist order, emphasising statism-collectivism and industrialisation.
It has been argued that these policies were adopted at Moscow's instigation.
However, there is little or no evidence for this.
Che Guevara, on an extensive tour in search of new markets for Cuban goods, had met two Soviet representatives in Egypt in August, with whom he concluded an agreement by which the Soviet Union bought 170,000 tons of sugar at the world market price.
A further purchase of 333,000 tons of sugar was negotiated at the International Sugar Conference in London on 30 September 1959.
Both of these deals appear to have been routine commercial transactions, with scant political significance.
Despite the fact that Moscow had severed relations with the dictator Batista in 1952, the USSR had made somewhat erratic purchases of Cuban sugar throughout the 1950s, which amounted to half a million tons in the peak year, 1955.
The fact that the announcement of Castro's new economic course was ignored by Izvestiia, Pravda, New Times and International Affairs is additional evidence for the argument that at this stage Moscow was interested in restraining, rather than fostering, radicalisation of the Cuban revolution.
González continues:
By the end of September or early October, the Castro-Communist alliance appears to have been concluded or tacitly agreed upon, as the PSP pledged labour's full support for the new economic course.
On 16 October, a new Minister of Labour was appointed to promote trade union’ unity' with the Communists, a policy that was fully implemented a month later [when]the labour movement was opened to Communist penetration by Castro's personal intervention in the National Congress of the Confederation of Cuban Workers (CTC) on 18 and 21 November…
In late November, the respected economist Felipe pazos was replaced by Guevara as president of the National Bank with authority to recast the Cuban economy.
Finally, toward the end of the year, the National Institute of Agrarian Reform (INRA) expanded its industrial activities and accelerated the collectivisation of agriculture.
In the meantime, Castro had begun to jettison the middle class and to cultivate support among the peasantry, workers and students through the use of nationalistic and class appeals.
As a result, he gave up any further pretense of restoring constitutional democracy and relied instead upon the enactment of a ‘direct democracy’ between himself and’the people’.
In order to ensure a personally loyal military apparats, he also launched the full-scale organisation of the’ popular militias' to be recruited principally from among the peasantry and the urban lower class.
(González: 1968, p. 50 and p. 52)
That Castro had come to regard the Centre-Left as an obstacle to the course he wanted the revolution to pursue was made clear on 19 October, when he warned, ‘It would be better if those who prefer to remain on the borderline in these hours…become enemies; that is, they would do more damage as companions than enemies’(Hoy (newspaper of the PSP), 21 October 1959, p. 3, in González: 1968, p. 51).
A forcible demonstration of Castro's changed attitude was given on 21 October when he ordered the arrest of his former companion-in-arms, the charismatic Major Huber Matos, Commander of Camaguey Province (an area where there was significant resistance to the new regime), who had resigned his commission in the Rebel Army in protest at the increasing Communist influence in the revolution.
Thus it is clear that Castro had deliberately moved to implement socialist and pro-Communist policies before there was any question of Soviet involvement in Cuba and, indeed, before any decisive deterioration had taken place in US-Cuban relations (see pages 66–9).
The shift in policy occurred between late May (on 21 May Castro had publicly accused the Communists of ‘anti-revolutionary’ activities) and mid-July 1959, when the Urrutia affair blew up.
What prompted this change?
There is little or no hard evidence to support the theory that Fidel Castro was a ‘closet Communist’ even during the 26 July 1953 assault on the Moncada barracks, as has been claimed.
The core of Fidel's men at this stage consisted of supporters of the Ortodoxo party, so-called because of its avowed adherence to the principles of José Marti, a radical thinker in many respects but one who was unequivocally in favour of democratic government for Cuba.
Communists from the PSP, with the exception of Fidel's younger brother Raúl, were excluded from the venture, which was anathema to the party line and was subsequently dismissed as ‘adventurist’.
Raúl Castro, having worked closely with PSP members at the university during 1952, attended the Communist-sponsored Fourth World Youth Congress in Vienna in February 1953 and went on to visit Bucharest, Budapest and Prague.
On his return to Havana the following June he enrolled in the Communist Youth.
However, Raúl ‘was excluded from all secret policy planning and decision-making’(Szulc: 1986, p. 154), and when he joined Fidel's movement in July 1953 (primarily, it seems out of loyalty to his brother rather than conviction as to the political correctness of the enterprise) he did not tell the Communists what he was doing (Lockwood: 1969, p. 163; Szulc: 1986, p. 181).
Khrushchev's statement that the Cuban Communists had no contacts with Castro at the time of his victory is not strictly accurate.
The PSP reconsidered their policy of total opposition to the guerrilla strategy late in July 1958, when Carlos Rafael Rodriguez was sent up into the Sierra, where he encountered ‘understanding’ in Rául's encampment and’suspicion' in Fidel's (Thomas: 1977, pp. 220–1).
He stayed until 10 August, and returned again in mid-September to remain (although not at Fidel's headquarters) until the end of the war.
Rafael Rodriguez claimed that during the course of the first visit Castro gave a verbal acceptance of the idea of an alliance between Fidelistas and Communists (Thomas: 1977, p. 224).
The indications are that, in Castro's eyes, the failure of the April 1958 general strike had exposed the political and organisational unreliability of many moderate 26th July  Movement leaders (Szulc: 1986, p. 352).
In retrospect it is quite clear that, despite the various (and for the most part ill-defined) policy proclamations issued by the 26th July Movement both before and immediately after the revolution, Castro wanted his revolution to instigate radical social change in Cuba.
The PSP, as the only party in Cuba with an organisational apparatus throughout the island, potentially offered the discipline and political expertise which would be needed to form a revolutionary government and which seemed to be lacking in Castro's own movement.
Thus the possibility of coopting the Communists into the revolution presented itself.
The precise timing of this decision remains a mystery.
Tad Szulc presents testimonial evidence for a clandestine agreement between Castro and the PSP ‘within days of his arrival in Havana’(Szulc: 1986, p. 376).
This possibility cannot be discounted, but it must be borne in mind that Szulc's sources for this are confined to interviews with Blas Roca, Fabio Grobart and Alfredo Guevara, all of whom are ‘old’ Communists who might well be anxious to give an enhanced impression of their role in the early stages of the revolution.
A second hypothesis (which corresponds closely to the timing of events) is that the decision was taken in the wake of the first major attempt to restructure Cuban society: an Agrarian Reform Law, introduced on 17 May 1959.
The limited scope of the moderate provisions of this first law should be emphasised: up to 402 hectares of ordinary farming land were allowed; for cattle farming the maximum was 1,340 hectares.
In comparison the agrarian reform introduced by the Chilean Christian Democrats under Eduardo Frei (1964–70) provided for a maximum basic unit of only 80 hectares.
The Cuban law made provision for compensation with government bonds, redeemable within twenty years with an annual interest rate of 4.5 per cent.
However, the agrarian reform followed a March 1959 Rent Law which greatly dismayed property owners by introducing statutory reductions of 50 per cent for the very poorest tenants (those paying less than 100 pesos per month) and 40–30 per cent decreases for those in higher income brackets.
In this context, the agrarian reform was perceived by the middle classes as decisive confirmation of how Castro intended to resolve the contradiction between his promises of social reform and his assurances that the wealthy had nothing to fear, and therefore provoked a swift backlash of opposition within Cuba.
Indeed several members of Castro's own cabinet found it unpalatable.
Foreign Minister Agramonte was not the only person to be dismissed on 12 June.
Elena Mederos, Minister of Social Welfare, Luis Orlando Rodriguez, Minister of the Interior, Angel Fernández at the Ministry of Justice and Sori Maríin at the Ministry of Agriculture, all of whom had at least partially opposed the Agrarian Reform, were also replaced (Thomas: 1977, p. 447).
I would argue that it was this domestic response-signalling that even moderate and gradual reform was unacceptable to the Cuban elite — which was the most immediate cause of the shift in Castro's strategy.
The Agrarian Reform also, inevitably, provided the already hostile sectors of the US press and Congress with specific ammunition, and it was at this stage that the cries of ‘Communist’ first began to be heard.
More significantly, the State Department evinced the first sign of active hostility to Cuba by pressurising the British government into rejecting a Cuban order for military helicopters.
Two other factors which have been adduced to explain Castro's shift in position are the failure, in mid-June, of the Cuban-based expedition to liberate the Dominican Republic (Suárez: 1967, pp. 65–9), and the defection of Major Díaz Lanz, Commander of the Rebel Air Force, to the United States shortly afterwards.
Díaz Lanz proceeded to testify before the Senate Internal Security Subcommittee on the Communist infiltration of the Cuban armed forces.
Neither of these events in themselves (or even together) seems significant enough to account for such a drastic change in policy direction.
However, in the context of the volatile reaction, both internal and external, to a relatively mild Agrarian Reform initiative, they may well have served to endorse Castro's conclusion that the social change which he wanted the revolution to effect in Cuba was incompatible with extremely powerful domestic and foreign economic interests.
As González remarks, ‘Given the Guatemalan precedent [in 1954 the CIA organised the overthrow of left-wing President Arbenz][Castro]may therefore have calculated that if his regime was inevitably to be labelled as ‘Communist’, he had everything to gain by moving closer to the Cuban Communists who could serve as brokers in obtaining indispensable Soviet assistance' (González: 1968, p. 48).
It would be an oversimplification to ascribe the deterioration of US-Cuban relations during 1959 and 1960 solely to cynical manoeuvrings on the part of Castro (although these certainly took place) or to the imperialist aggression of the United States (although this was undoubtedly evident).
In fact both sides (at different times) gave out conciliatory signals, but in the highly charged atmosphere between the two countries each chose to concentrate on the hostile signs and ignore any others.
On the Cuban side, this attitude was brought about by a combination of two factors.
Firstly, there is the history of US direct intervention in Central America and the Caribbean, and indeed in Cuba itself.
Events in Guatemala in 1954 set a vivid precedent and were a potent reminder that even a glance in the direction of Communism was more than the United States was prepared to countenance.
Secondly, from very early days, several leading members of the revolutionary government were arguing that US intervention in Cuba was inevitable.
Che Guevara, whose analysis stemmed from his own experiences in Guatemala in 1954 (Hodges: 1977, pp. 15–16), said, in an interview given on 18 April 1959:
The present indications are very clear that they are now preparing to intervene in Cuba and destroy the Cuban revolution.
The evil foreign enemies have an old method.
First they begin a political offensive, propagandising widely and saying that the Cuban people oppose Communism…
At the same time they intensify their economic attack and cause Cuba to fall into economic difficulties.
Later they will look for a pretext to create some kind of dispute and then utilise certain international organizations they control to carry out intervention against the Cuban people.
Moreover, a Marxist-Leninist analysis of foreign-policy formulation in the United States (which would have been accepted by Guevara and also by Raúl Castro, both extremely powerful figure) implicitly makes two assumptions which have been shown to be inaccurate: firstly, that the’ bourgeoisie' always act in concert, and secondly, that the ruling group has control over the statements of major Interest groups within society.
Thus the implication is that if the State Department issues a mild statement in response to an issue which is provoking inflammatory articles and speeches in the press and Congress (for example, over the Agrarian Reform Law), then it is simply that the government is hiding its’ real' intentions in order to deceive.
Whilst US administrations certainly have instigated ‘two-track’ policies (for example, in Allende's Chile) these have not proved particularly successful, and it would seem that American foreign-policy-making is rarely as well co-ordinated as this analysis suggests.
In fact it can be extremely difficult to isolate the pressures and influences which have gone into the making of any one decision.
Thus, a deterministic view of US actions combines with historical evidence to form the basis of a fear of inevitable US intervention which, while clearly not without a rational foundation, encourages a  hyper-sensitivity to potential threats which can lead to over-reaction and over-compensation in policy-making.
I believe that this Cuban fear of US military action must be taken seriously as a component of Castro's decision-making.
It should not be discounted as merely a cynical manipulation on his part in order to restore flagging revolutionary morale by invoking the imperialist threat, even though it has in practice served that purpose.
Herbert Matthews, who was close to the Cuban revolutionaries from the late Sierra Maestra days, wrote that ‘I made up my mind early in the revolution on the basis of many talks with all the top Cuban leaders that their greatest preoccupation was the conviction that the United States was determined to overthrow the Castro regime’(Matthews: 1969, p. 171).
In fact, throughout this first period, Eisenhower's official policy was to remain aloof, fearful that any direct intervention would make Castro a martyr.
In January 1960, shortly before Mikoian's visit, Eisenhower issued another in a series of conciliatory statements, and throughout 1959 Ambassador Philip Bonsal in Havana had worked untiringly to establish grounds for accommodation.
The basic attitude of the United States was undeniably one of active hostility.
The agenda of a National Security Council meeting as early as 10 March 1959 included as a main item the possibility of bringing ‘another government to power in Cuba’(Szulc: 1986, p. 384).
Nevertheless, it appears that’ the Intelligence community was split on Cuba.
Late in March [1959]…a special panel on Cuba in the CIA's Board of Estimates concluded in a secret review that Castro was not ‘a Moscow-oriented Communist’…
The full board rejected that conclusion under pressure from CIA director Allen W. Dulles, architect of the Guatemala approach…’
(Szulc: 1986, p. 385).
Almost inevitably, however, day-to-day irritants and culturally blinkered judgements by both sides aggravated the tensions between the two countries even before policy decisions became the source of more substantive disputes.
Tad Szulc discusses the problem of the Cuban government's trials of Batista’ war criminals' by revolutionary justice:’…the issue — in the eyes of Fidel Castro and masses of Cubans — was that while the United States government had never protested against the killing and torture of thousands of the old regime's opponents by the Batista police and soldiers (and public opinion took hardly any notice), now that the victorious revolutionaries were punishing their opponents with executions and lengthy prison sentences Americans were indignant [about the lack of Anglo-Saxon judicial guarantees]' (1986, pp. 385–6).
Thus the climate for negotiations on a major issue such as what constituted acceptable compensation for expropriated US properties (the Cubans, desperately short of foreign exchange, were prepared to offer only 4.5 per cent bonds) was soured.
The United States also argued that Cuban assertions of independence and declarations of neutrality in the Cold War, most notably by Raúl Roa at the United Nations General Assembly on 24 September 1959, had potential security implications.
In fact the Cuban position at this session was not stridently anti-US.
Cuba voted against Washington on several African motions, for example on Algerian independence, but abstained on crucial issues such as the admission of the people's Republic of China to the United Nations.
Both of these points of contention were symptomatic of the fundamental issue at stake for Washington, which was that it had lost control of events in Cuba and a client state which had been regarded virtually as a part of the American mainland had moved out of the US orbit.
However, the only manifestations of hostility up until October 1959 had been pressure on its European allies not to supply Cuba with weapons (in mid-October Washington had blocked the sale of British jet fighters to Cuba).
Thus, when on 21 October a Florida-based plane piloted by Díaz Lanz bombed Havana, Castro's violent denunciation of the United States before a mass rally (on 26 October) lacked an ‘objective correlative’.
It was a product of Castro's evolving strategy for dealing with the concrete hostility that he anticipated from the United States, rather than a response to the bombing itself.
Peter Bourne reveals that on 16 October 1959 Camilo Cienfuegos (who disappeared in a still unexplained air accident only ten days later) was interviewed at the Havana Riviera Hotel by Alexander Alekseev, a KGB official who quickly developed an excellent rapport with Castro and played an extremely important role in the development of relations between Cuba and the Soviet Union.
(After Cuba's incorporation into the Soviet bloc Castro succeeded in persuading the Kremlin to appoint Alekseev ambassador to Havana in place of Sergei Kudriatsev who, complained Fidel, was even more boring than the American Philip Bonsal [Thomas: 1977, p. 6031.)
Alekseev asked Cienfuegos to arrange an interview with Fidel, which took place ‘a few days later’ at the offices of the agrarian reform institute.
Alekseev — reflecting the Soviet Union's interests at the time — asked about diplomatic relations, but Castro would say only that ‘what is fundamental now is not diplomatic relations.
What is most important is that the Cuban and Russian people be friends.’
Castro did, however, mention Cuba's desire for trade relations and Alekseev, presumably perceiving this to be the best way forward, suggested that the Soviet trade exhibition then in New York should be brought to Havana, and that Anastas Mikoian might come for the opening (Bourne: 1987, p. 189).
The invitation to Mikoian was issued shortly after the Diaz Lanz bombing.
Although, unfortunately, we do not know the exact date of the meeting between Alekseev and Castro, it seems highly probable that, as Edward González contends, ‘Castro seized upon the [bombing]incident as a pretext for ‘the turn against the Centre-Left and the United States’(González: 1968, p. 51, note 39).
As far as we can judge, in the early days at least, anti-Americanism went against the grain of popular feeling within Cuba.
Carlos Rafael Rodríguez wrote that in the fifties ‘Anti-imperialism was…a proscribed word…
Young people whom we knew to be honest, stung as we were by the sufferings of our Fatherland, lived convinced that Cuba's independence was a Yankee gift and that our denunciations of national oppression were simply ways of serving an idea that they considered to be ‘anti-Cuban’(‘Reflexiones ante un aniversario’,Hoy , 29 July 1959, p. 1, cited in Farber: 1983, p. 61).
Thus Castro's harangues against Washington were attempts to introduce an anti-American feeling rather than to rally support around one that already existed (which is the case in many Latin American countries).
This is suggested by the very vehemence of the speeches and the fact that they always contained prolonged and strident calls on Cuban nationalism (which certainly was a strong popular sentiment).
The two factors combined to foster the belief that to be a patriot a Cuban had by definition to be anti-United States.
Further evidence that Castro was pursuing his own course rather than responding to US actions is given by the testimony of US Ambassador Philip Bonsal, who found his efforts to meet with Castro and to pursue negotiations thwarted.
In November 1959 the first expropriation of US property took place, an event signalling that the Cubans were no longer willing to accept the need for negotiations on Washington's terms.
What, then, lay behind Castro's invitation to Mikoian?
An overriding concern was to find a source of arms supplies to equip the Rebel Army and the people's militia to fight the anticipated US invasion.
Herbert Matthews reported that, according to Raúl Castro, the Soviet Union agreed to supply arms during Mikoian's visit (Matthews: 1969, p. 148).
In this respect, those who argue that US policy was responsible for Castro's turn towards the Soviet Union are justified: by using its influence to deny access to Western arms supplies, Washington left  Cuba with little option (as it subsequently left Nicaragua) but to purchase weapons from the Eastern bloc.
However, the overture also appears to have been motivated by economic considerations.
As early as January 1959 Guevara emphasised the importance of agrarian reform and pointed out that if the constitutional requirements for compensation were met, the reform would be so slow as to be imperceptible.
Moreover, to accomplish a programme of rapid industrialisation (the favoured economic strategy of Che, Raúl Castro and Carios Rafael Rodriguez) the state would have to be in control of the main sectors of the economy, which again would lead to an unavoidable confrontation with the United States.
The influential Rafael Rodriguez (who at first refused government positions, but gave advice on economic matters) believed that Cuba could not rely on the Western capitalist countries (accustomed to regarding Cuba as their sugar-bowl) for the assistance necessary to develop an industrial economy.
Che Guevara's three-month tour of Africa, Asia and Europe (mid-June to mid-September 1959) had confirmed that other Third World nations (like Cuba, importers of manufactured goods and exporters of raw materials) offered little scope for trade.
Thus there were significant economic incentives for revolutionary Cuba at least to increase its options with the Soviet Union.
By this stage it is possible — the idea is corroborated to some extent by Castro's actions in December 1959 and January 1960 — see pages 72–3 — that he had already taken the decision to embark on a campaign to present the USSR with a fait accompli of ‘socialist’ reforms to enlist their total support.
However the evidence suggests (see pages 75–6) that it is more likely that this decision was reached at a later date, when the force of events made it seem imperative.
In November 1959, Castro must simply have felt that he had little to lose by seeing what Moscow was prepared to offer.
The Soviet Union officially accepted the invitation, but it was not until the end of January that Mikoian's imminent arrival (on 4 February 1960) was announced.
Why did the Soviet leadership decide to send him?
Internationally, the increasingly frequent application of the label ‘Communist’ to the Cuban regime throughout 1959 had introduced the issue of prestige for the Soviet Union.
The fact that Guatemala in 1954 had ‘returned from Communism’(and was regarded by the United States as the first country to do so) increased Soviet reluctance to be perceived to be experiencing another ‘loss’ in  the area (even though they did not accept that Castro was embarking on a road towards Communism).
This factor was exacerbated by Chinese criticism (at that stage, expressed privately) of the USSR's lack of revolutionary internationalism and its willingness to appease the imperialists.
More specifically, significant pressure was exerted on Moscow by the Cuban Communist party and by Castro himself with his new policy orientation.
In late 1959 Castro began to stress the class content of his revolution and referred to’ the image of the revolution' as’the tight union of the workers and peasants', apparently precluding any future role for the national bourgeoisie.
A rapid acceleration took place in the implementation of the agrarian reform.
In late 1959 less than ten per cent of the expropriable land area had been touched, and only 6,000 out of a potential 150,000 beneficiaries had received their allocations.
At that rate, twenty years would have passed before the reform became fully effective (Brundenius: 1984, p. 43).
However, in one week of January 1960 over 600,000 hectares were expropriated, including 70,000 acres of US-owned lands.
Thus Castro was demonstrating not only that he was serious in his commitment to social reform but also, more importantly — in terms of how Soviet analysts assess the viability of a regime — that his revolutionary government had the power to implement the measures that it chose.
The revolution was also clearly in control of armed power within Cuba.
In addition to the Revolutionary Armed Forces, Castro was sufficiently confident of support by late 1959 to organise the formation of popular militias, and was stirring up patriotic fervour by repeated assertions of the imminence of US military action against Cuba.
Castro also openly courted the Communists throughout December 1959 and January 1960.
The Cuban Communists, who for the first six months of 1959 had made policy proclamations which were cautiously but unequivocally more radical than Castro's, subsequently found that they were fast being outstripped by him in the proposal of anti-capitalist measures.
Recognising that they had no power and little influence with which to contain Castro's radicalisation (as Moscow wished), the skilled and experienced politicians of the PSP responded quickly to the changed situation and began asserting the advanced character of the revolution as one of their ploys for enlisting Soviet assistance.
In fact their own interests — in terms of improving both their domestic position and their leverage with Moscow — coincided with Castro's in pushing for a fully socialist revolution.
As early as 29 September 1959, Anibal Escalante  had publicly demanded Sino-Soviet support for Cuba.
The tactic of exploiting the emerging rupture between Beijing and Moscow was an all too obvious one, particularly in the light of the appropriateness of the Chinese agrarian model to Cuba.
It became a dominant element in the PSP campaign (on 9 January Escalante publicly acclaimed Beijing's position on Cuba), along with a defence of Castro's foreign policy and critical references to Khrushchev's strategy of accommodation with the United States.
A conciliatory statement by Eisenhower on 20 January 1960 (which may in itself have given the Soviet leadership the impression that a little meddling in Cuba would not incur serious repercussions) was vociferously denounced by the PSP, creating an additional source of pressure on the Kremlin to make at least some show of solidarity with Castro's ‘small country struggling alone’.
February 1960-July 1960
At the press conference at the end of his visit, Mikoian made it quite clear that the Soviet Union did not want a show-down with the United States over Cuba (Dinerstein: 1962, p. 69).
However, Mikoian was favourably impressed with the enthusiasm and commitment of the Cuban revolutionaries and, on 13 February, he signed a trade agreement, by which the Soviet Union undertook to buy 5 million tons (m.t.) of sugar over five years, 20 per cent of which was to be paid for in hard currency and the remainder in Soviet goods, including 6 million barrels of oil per year.
The USSR also agreed to lend Cuba $100 million at a yearly interest rate of 2.5 per cent.
Two points are worth noting regarding this agreement.
The first is that Khrushchev's general policy of extending Soviet links with developing countries had resulted in the signing of similar agreements with various African and Asian governments.
Therefore, at this stage, Soviet policy towards Castro was related to this broad objective and there is no indication that Cuba was as yet regarded as having the priority status that it later commanded.
The second point is that this agreement reflected a certain degree of complementarity between the Soviet and Cuban economies.
Clearly Soviet oil was an attractive buy for the Cubans: Che Guevara stated that the landed price of Soviet crude was 33 per cent lower than the price at which the majors imported oil to Cuba from their Venezuelan subsidiaries, and the fact that it was a barter deal enabled the revolution to conserve its dwindling hard-currency reserves.
Furthermore, Cuba's new arrangement with the Soviet Union reduced its dependence  on the multi-nationals.
What is not always made clear, however, is that the February agreement was economically quite favourable to the USSR.
As was indicated above, Moscow had continued to buy Cuban sugar even after the severing of relations with Batista.
In 1960 the Soviet sugar crop was hit by drought, at the same time as the authorities were embarking on a drive to raise the levels of sugar consumption.
Moreover, the Soviet negotiators had clearly hoped to sell some of the sugar on the world market, which would have been highly advantageous to them, but the Cubans insisted on the insertion of a clause prohibiting re-export to their traditional markets.
In addition, Moscow was at that time, after the discovery of rich deposits in the Urals, looking for outlets for a disposable surplus of crude oil.
As they had done in the 1930s, Soviet organisations approached state-owned Latin American oil companies.
Although Mexico rejected a Soviet offer in 1959, as indicated in chapter 1, the Soviet Union did succeed in selling oil to Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay.
Soviet oil also made substantial inroads into the Italian market and, in 1960, an offer of cheap Soviet crude enabled the Indian government to extract price concessions from the major oil companies.
In this context Cuba, with its exceptionally high dependence on imported oil (which accounts for approaching two-thirds of the island's total energy consumption) and its sophisticated modern refining capacity (installed by Shell, Esso and Texaco), must have looked a promising market for Soviet oil.
None of this is to deny that the February 1960 agreement was partly a result of Khrushchev's ‘allowing Mikoian to make trouble for the Americans in Cuba’(Bonsal: 1971, p. 156), but it is important to recognise that, whatever political considerations were involved, they were firmly backed up by a favourable set of economic circumstances.
Nor was the Soviet Union at this stage inclined to be particularly generous in its terms.
According to Mikoian himself, the USSR insisted that the Cubans buy Soviet goods if they wanted Moscow to continue purchasing their sugar, and adamantly refused to pay more than the world market price for Cuban produce (Mikoian in Cuba (Crosscurrents press, New York, 1960), in Boughton: 1974, p. 450).
As Jorge pérez-López points out, ‘since in 1960 the world market price was around 3 cents per pound, this meant that sales to the Soviet Union would be effected at prices significantly below the prevailing preferential price paid by the United States in that year — 5.3 cents per pound…
In fact, some of the sales to the Soviet Union in 1960 were made at prices below the world market price.
For example, a sale of 345,000 tons announced in February 1960 was made at 2.78 cents per pound, compared to a  world market price of 2.90 cents per pound’(pérez-López: 1988, p. 124).
In his concluding press conference Mikoian also made it clear that it was Havana, rather than Moscow, which was stalling on the resumption of diplomatic relations, a remark which was not quoted in the Pravda report (Dinerstein: 1962, p. 68).
This is not surprising: the Cubans had obtained a useful economic agreement from the Soviet Union, but it was hardly a substantial enough commitment to warrant precipitating an open break with the United States by resuming relations with the USSR.
What, then, prompted the change of heart that led, less than three months later, to the official announcement (on 8 May) that Soviet — Cuban relations were at full diplomatic level?
From Cuba's point of view, the significant events occurred in March 1960.
On 4 March the Belgian ship La Coubre — carrying weapons purchased by the Castro regime — was blown up as it entered Havana Bay by a bomb allegedly planted by the CIA.
At about the same time a consortium of West European banks refused to grant Cuba the credits it had requested, apparently as a result of US pressure.
Moreover, as Eisenhower later publicly admitted, on 17 March Washington took the decision to prepare an invasion of Cuba (The New York Times , 13 June 1961, p. 18).
Whilst there is no conclusive proof, it seems highly likely that this piece of information would have reached Castro's ears soon after.
Thus the Cubans identified a new aggression in Eisenhower's attitude, and my hypothesis is that it was in response to these events that Castro decided to stake the survival of his revolution on enlisting the total support of the Soviet Union.
The actions of the USSR must be seen in the context of a dramatic change in the international situation, caused by the shooting down on 1 May of a US U2 spy plane flying over the heart of continental Russia.
This incident acted as a powerful catalyst, forcing each superpower to reveal its true position.
On 5 May Eisenhower chose to respond to the ensuing crisis by asserting the right of the United States to fly its planes over the Soviet Union if security considerations demanded such a course of action.
(This belligerent insistence on Washington's right to behave as it chose in the interests of US ‘security’ must have aggravated Cuban fears.)
Eisenhower reiterated this theme from 15–18 May at the much-vaunted Paris Conference, which had originally been intended to further cooperation and understanding between the USSR and the United States, France and the United Kingdom.
It was significant that during a press conference called on 18 May 1960 Khrushchev not only denounced Eisenhower but also asserted the  importance of the Cuban revolution, which had suddenly become the subject of enthusiastic and laudatory articles in the Soviet press.
Now that Moscow's hopes for fruitful negotiation with the United States had been shattered, it was necessary for the Soviet Union to adopt a more aggressive stance if it were to maintain credibility as a rival to Washington.
Cuba — only ninety miles from the United States — must have seemed to Khrushchev (who had to be seen to be making progress on at least one front) an irresistibly appropriate object for a Soviet response to US arrogance and intransigence.
The outcome was that at the end of June 1960 a Cuban delegation in Moscow was warmly received by Khrushchev himself, and was told by the Soviet premier that’ the Soviet Union has only to press a button in any part of the Soviet Union for rockets from that country to fall on any other part of the planet’.
A few weeks later, in a speech made to the All-Russian Teachers' Congress in Moscow on 9 July, Khrushchev made a specific reference to Cuba in this respect.
‘Figuratively speaking’, he declared, ‘in case of need, Soviet artillerymen can support the Cuban people with their rocket fire should aggressive forces in the pentagon dare to start intervention against Cuba’(Pravda , 10 July 1960, pp. 1–3).
During a visit to Moscow made by Raúl Castro in mid-July 1960, the USSR not only arranged to supply arms to Cuba, but Khrushchev ‘reaffirmed that the Soviet Union would use everything to prevent US armed intervention against the Republic of Cuba’(Soviet — Cuban Communiqué,Pravda , 21 July 1960, p. 1).
Khrushchev, whose ‘peaceful coexistence’ policy had been criticised both at home and abroad (by the Chinese Communist party at the Congress of the World Federation of Trade Unions held in Beijing in June 1960) was taking advantage of the situation in Cuba to reassert Soviet strength.
He may also have hoped that by supporting a revolution with which the Chinese felt no small degree of identification, he would be able to outmanoeuvre his Maoist critics.
K. S. Karol points out that it was the same meeting of the Central Committee (on 11 July) which both endorsed Khrushchev's announcement on 9 July of virtually unlimited economic aid to Cuba and approved his decision to withdraw all Soviet economic aid from China, and argues that the Cuban affair gave Khrushchevan unexpected internationalist alibi' for his anti-Maoist campaign (Karol: 1971, p. 204).
However, scrutiny of the events leading up to the 9 July announcement suggests that this decision was a result not so much of Soviet ‘opportunism’ as of the policies of the Eisenhower administration and the brinkmanship of Fidel Castro.
The first shipment of Soviet crude petroleum arrived in Havana on 9 April 1960, to be processed at a small refinery operated by the Cuban petroleum Institute.
On 17 May the three major oil companies were informed by the Cuban National Bank that they would each have to purchase and process 300,000 m.t.
of Soviet crude oil during the remainder of 1960, in order to comply with the government's new purchasing arrangements.
In June 1960 the United States Treasury advised the companies not to refine Soviet crude, and they accordingly refused to do so, alleging that, without expensive alterations, their refineries would be seriously damaged by any attempt to process the Soviet product.
The weakness of this argument was later shown up by the fact that ‘Russian technicians readily overcame the difficulties alleged to be inherent in running the Russian product through the refineries in Cuba.
There was no interruption in the availability of refinery products to consumers in Cuba’(Bonsal: 1971, p. 150).
The US move was clearly designed as a challenge to the Castro regime, but it was one which (in the words of the then US Ambassador to Cuba, Philip Bonsal, who strongly opposed the Treasury decision) would, if met, give the Cuban revolution a ‘shot in the arm’ comparable to the effect of the Suez Crisis on the Nasser regime.
This proved to be the case: on 29 June 1960 the Cuban government — encouraged by Khrushchev's statements of Soviet support — seized the refineries operated by the multi-nationals on the grounds that they had violated the law by their refusal to process Soviet petroleum.
Castro later admitted to Herbert Matthews that when he took over the refineries he did not know whether or not Moscow would supply Cuba with oil (Matthews: 1969, p. 171).
On 6 July, in a move generally interpreted as a retaliation for this seizure, the Eisenhower administration cut the balance of the Cuban sugar quota.
It is interesting to note, however, that US Ambassador Bonsal argues that the suspension of the sugar quota was not linked solely to the intervention in the oil refineries, but would in any case have been ‘a major element in the programme for the overthrow of Castro’(Bonsal: 1971, p. 151).
Thus Cuba, which for nearly half a century had run its economy on the basis of near-total reliance on the United States, was faced with the need to find a new market for 700,000 tonnes of sugar and an alternative source of oil supplies.
Moscow's decision to assume the  economic burden of Cuba can be attributed to the fact that, by this stage, it had no other credible option in political terms, partly because of Khrushchev's own extravagant statements of support for the Castro revolution, but largely because of the policies pursued by the United States.
Ambassador Bonsal states, ‘I do not believe that the Russians would have taken sugar from Cuba which the United States was prepared to purchase.
The opportunity we now presented them with was one I am convinced they would gladly at that time have done without’(Bonsal: 1971, p. 153).
That Khrushchev's decision was not without some immediate economic cost is indicated by the difficulties which ensued from the commitment to supply Cuba with its oil which, according to his memoirs, placed a sudden and unwelcome demand on the Soviet fleet:
the Cubans were obliged to turn to us for help.
Life on the island was in danger of coming to a standstill.
It was urgent that we organise an oil delivery to Cuba on a massive scale.
But that was easier said than done.
We didn't have enough ocean-going vessels in our own tanker fleet.
Our efforts to provide Cuba with the petroleum products it needed put a heavy burden on our own shipping system and forced us to order extra tankers from Italy.
(Khrushchev; 1970, p. 490)
The sudden influx of sugar also caused some temporary problems: ‘Russian storage facilities for Cuba's raw sugar appear to have been strained to the point that some sugar spoiled.
Some domestic beet production was diverted from human consumption to cattle feed to make room for Cuban imports’(Bonsal: 1971, p. 208).
However, it appears that the plentiful supplies of sugar were not wholly unwelcome to Soviet leaders, who were still pursuing the consumption drive which was behind the February 1960 agreement.
After the initial difficulties:
Through increased consumption per capita, through the development of markets for refined sugar among Russia's clients in Third World countries, and with assistance from other Communist countries Russia not only solved the problem of absorbing the portion of the Cuban crop formerly taken by the United States, but did so in the context both of a resumption after 1964 of the upward movement in its home production and of a contractual willingness to buy far more Cuban sugar than Castro has so far produced for the Russian market.
(Bonsal: 1971, p. 208)
Deliveries of Cuban sugar, which arrives mainly in the first half of the year, load the Soviet sugar factories' productive capacities in the period when they are not processing sugar beet (Kolodov: 1984, p. 16).
It is important to bear in mind, however, that in July 1960 the Soviet leaders could have had little or no intimation of exactly how  imbalanced their economic relationship with Cuba was destined to become.
Their expectation that this relationship would be based, at least to some extent, on mutual advantage is indicated in an assertion, made on 21 July 1960, that:
the forces of the countries of the socialist camp are so great today and they are so strong economically that they can fully take upon themselves,on the basis of the development of normal trade relations , the provision of Cuba with all the necessary goods which are denied her by the United States…the Soviet Union is prepared to deliver oil and other goods in amounts fully meeting the requirements of Cuba,in exchange for Cuban goods .
(Soviet-Cuban communiqué,Pravda , 21 July 1960, p. 1 [my emphasis])
This assumption is also implicit in the major 1964 oil and sugar agreement, the terms of which were such that ‘Had Cuba been able to deliver in full its annual commitment of sugar to the USSR, this would in all probability have balanced the cost of Cuban imports from the Soviet Union.
Furthermore, if world sugar prices had remained high, Moscow might even have realised a profit in its Cuban trade by reselling imported sugar on the world market’(Gouré and Weinkle: 1972, p. 75).
August 1960-May 1962
During the last half of 1960, the Soviet leaders — perhaps conscious of having over-reached themselves in political terms, retreated from their former position as staunch defenders of the Cuban revolution, and adopted a far more equivocal tone.
A proposed visit to Cuba by Khrushchev was cancelled, probably as a result of a combination of the following factors:(1) pressure from Khrushchev's political opponents at home;(2) fears (both Soviet and Cuban) of inciting Washington; and (3) Castro's own worries about according too high a profile to the relationship with Moscow.
However, the Cuban leader had eagerly latched on to the dramatic statements made by Khrushchev in June-July 1960.
Not only were relations with the United States very tense, but in August 1960 an OAS meeting in Costa Rica issued a declaration denouncing Sino-Soviet designs to gain a foothold in the hemisphere, proving that Washington could obtain the support of Latin American countries for its anti-Cuban policies.
Thus Castro was in dire need of a Soviet commitment to preserve his revolution, and in a speech given to the United Nations on 26 September 1960 the Cuban leader may  have been hinting at the price he might have been willing to pay when he said, ‘We understand how terrible the subordination of the economy and life in general of nations to foreign economic power is.
I need only note that my country was left defenceless in Costa Rica’(Fidel Castro: 1972, p. 49).
Cuba replied to the Declaration of San José with the First Declaration of Havana which welcomed the Soviet Union's ‘offer to support Cuba with the aid of rockets’(Obra Revolucionaria , 6 September 1960, in Clissold: 1970, p. 259).
The USSR, however, mindful of the fact that Cuba had been made into a prominent campaign issue by both contenders for the US presidency, paid no heed to the wave of Cuban nationalisations of US property during August-October 1960.
In retaliation for confiscation of its sugar mills and oil refineries (6 August), its banks (17 September) and the majority of its larger companies (13 October), the United States announced an embargo on Cuba on 19 October, covering all goods except non-subsidised foodstuffs and medical supplies (within a few months even these items were included).
In response, Havana nationalised the remaining US properties in Cuba.
In this tense situation Khrushchev, perceiving the inauguration of president Kennedy in November 1960 as a new opportunity to promote peaceful coexistence, made a point of stressing the ‘symbolic’ nature of the rocket pledge (interview with Cuban journalists on 22 October 1960,Pravda , 23 October 1960, p. 1).
So far as is known, nothing definite came out of the meeting between Castro and Khrushchev in New York in late October 1960, despite all the drama attached to the Soviet head of state's seeking out the Cuban leader at his hotel in Harlem.
After the encounter Khrushchev observed that Castro was ‘like a young horse that hasn't been broken.
He needs some training, but he's very spirited, so we'll have to be careful’(Shevchenku: 1985, p. 106)— a revealing indication of a patronising attitude that the Russian was to have cause to regret.
It seems to have been Moscow's need to counter a challenge from Beijing which prompted the next Soviet commitment to Cuba.
Castro had established relations with the People's Republic of China in September 1960 and, two months later, Che Guevara signed an agreement in Beijing whereby the Chinese bought 1 m.t.
of Cuban sugar in 1961 and made a $60 million credit available for the purchase of Chinese goods and technical assistance.
With the rift between Beijing and Moscow deepening, the Soviet leaders, aware that the Maoist model was not unattractive to the Cubans, made haste to better the Chinese deal.
On 19 December 1960 a new Cuban — Soviet agreement  was announced, by which the USSR committed itself to the purchase of 2.7 m.t.
of sugar in 1961 at 4 cents per pound, along with a wide variety of economic aid and technical assistance measures.
Even so, there were several passages in the ensuing joint communiqué emphasising the Cubans' appreciation of’ the sincere efforts of the Soviet Union to attain world peace’.
The early months of 1961 saw an intensification of US pressure on Cuba, initiated by the rupture of diplomatic relations on 3 January, and culminating in the abortive Bay of pigs invasion on 17 April.
The Soviet leadership, no doubt extremely relieved that Castro had succeeded in crushing the invasion without having to redeem the pledges that Khrushchev had made to him, extracted maximum propaganda value from Washington's loss of face, but once again reassured the Americans that ‘we have no bases in Cuba and do not intend to establish any’(Khrushchev's message to J. F. Kennedy, 22 April 1961,US Department of State Bulletin , 8 May 1961, pp. 664–6).
The Soviet leaders were evidently nonplussed by Castro's assertion, on the eve of the invasion, that the Cuban revolution was a ‘socialist’ one.
Khrushchev records that’ We had trouble understanding the timing of this statement.
Castro's declaration had the immediate effect of widening the gap between himself and the people who were against socialism, and it narrowed the circle of those he could count on for support against the invasion.
As far as Castro's personal courage was concerned, his position was admirable and correct.
But from a tactical standpoint, it didn't make much sense’(Khrushchev: 1970, p. 492).
Of course Castro's stand, far from being just one of principle, was an attempt to enforce his claims on the Soviet Union at a time when the security of his revolution had never been more seriously threatened.
It was one of a whole series of measures designed to force the pace of Soviet identification with his regime and Cuba's integration into the Soviet bloc.
As early as January 1961 a US Department of State report on Cuba argued that ‘Castro, aware of [growing discontent within Cuba]and of the lack of decisive support by the Soviet countries is endeavouring, through his acts of provocation, to create a crisis against Cuba that will compel the Soviets to support him and will restore him to the position of anti-imperialist hero in the eyes of his own people and the Latin American masses’(US Declassified , 1982, 001697).
At first the Kremlin refused to respond to Castro's manoeuvres.
Highly conscious of the strategic risks of the defence of Cuba, sensing that Castro — who had no orthodox Communist credentials — was too ambitious and unpredictable a leader to be a wholly reliable client, and (as explained in chapter 4) already beginning to regret the extent of their economic commitment, the Soviet leadership once again retreated into caution.
The most they would say in 1961 regarding Cuba's ideological status was that ‘Cuba had achieved its revolution independently and had freely chosen the path of socialist development’.
Soviet commentaries referred to ‘the USSR, the people's Democracies, and Cuba’, conveniently leaving the status of the latter hanging in the air.
Castro, however, was not to be deterred, and he set about organising his revolution along lines that were acceptable to the USSR, as will be described below.
In the meantime, however, the Cubans sought to gain at least a breathing space by making a little known but highly significant approach to the United States.
On 17 August at 2 a.m.
Che Guevara, representing Cuba at the OAS conference at punta del Este in Uruguay, instigated a meeting with the US delegate Richard Goodwin, who gave a full account of the conversation in a memo for president Kennedy dated 22 August 1961 ((US Declassified , 1978, 303A).
An Argentinian, Horatio Larretta, and a Brazilian, Edmundo Barbosa Da Silva, acted as interpreters.
It is worth citing Goodwin's description of what took place in some detail:
Guevara begun by saying that I must understand the Cuban revolution.
They intend to build a socialist state, and the revolution which they have begun is irreversible.
They are also now out of the US sphere of influence, and that too is irreversible.
They will establish a single-party system with Fidel as Secretary-General of the party.
Their ties with the East stem from natural sympathies, and common beliefs in the proper structure of the social order.
He said that in building a Communist state they had not repeated any of the aggressive moves of the East.
They did not intend to construct an iron curtain around Cuba but to welcome technicians and visitors from all countries to come and work.
[Che went on to discuss several basic problems in Cuba at that time]:(1) There was disturbing revolutionary sentiment, armed men and sabotage.
(2) The small (sic ) bourgeoisie were hostile to the revolution or, at best, lukewarm.
(3) The Catholic Church (here he shook his head in dismay).
(4) Their factories looked naturally to the United States for resources, especially spare parts and at times the shortage of these resources made things very critical.
(5) They had accelerated the process of development too rapidly and their hard currency
83
reserves were very low.
Thus they were unable to import consumer goods and meet basic needs of the people.
He then said that they didn't want an understanding with the United States, because they know that this was impossible (sic ).
They would like a modus vivendi — at least an interim modus vivendi .
[Guevara then went on to mention]some things he had in mind:—(1) That they could not give back the expropriated properties…but they could pay for them in trade.
(2) They could agree not to make any political alliance with the East, although this would not affect their natural sympathies.
(3) They would have free elections — but only after a period of institutionalising the revolution had been completed.
In response to my question he said that this included the establishment of a one-party system.
(4) Of course, they would not attack Guantánamo.
(At this point he laughed as if at the absurdly self-evident nature of such a statement.)(5) He indicated, very obliquely and with evident reluctance because of the company in which we were talking, that they could also discuss the activities of the Cuban revolution in other countries.
Goodwin came away convinced that ‘Cuba [was]undergoing severe economic stress, that the Soviet Union [was]not prepared to undertake the large effort necessary to get them on their feet…and that Cuba [desired]an understanding with the United States’(US Declassified , 1981, 605A).
The initiative foundered, probably largely because Kennedy found it politically unacceptable to be seen to be making any deal with the Cubans after Washington's humiliation at the Bay of pigs.
However, the incident is highly revealing of the concern felt in Cuba about the difficulties of persuading Moscow to make a substantial commitment.
In pursuance of this objective, in July 1961 Castro announced the formation of a new political party, known as the Organizaciones Revolucionarias Integradas (Integrated Revolutionary Organisations —ORI).
Although the detailed composition of the party was not made public, it was well known that prominent members of the PSP, including Anibal Escalante and Carlos Rafael Rodriguez, had significant influence in the new organisation.
Moscow was thereby reassured that the situation in Cuba was under control.
Castro's next move, designed to convince the Soviet leaders of his personal reliability, was his famous declaration of 1 December 1961 that ‘I am a Marxist-Leninist, and I shall be a Marxist-Leninist until the last day of my life’(a statement which was reported in full in the Soviet press).
However, the Cuban leader's tactics were not purely conciliatory.
In the Second Declaration of Havana , issued on 4 February 1962 in response to the suspension of Cuba from the OAS, Castro reminded the Soviet Union that there is more than one interpretation of Marxism-Leninism.
He made no concession whatsoever to Moscow's policy of peaceful coexistence and asserted the primacy of the guerrilla strategy in the fight of oppressed peoples against imperialism.
Not surprisingly, the Declaration was warmly welcomed in Beijing.
Similarly, the announcement on 8 March 1962 of the composition of the National Directorate of the ORI, which revealed that the Communist old guard would have the upper hand, was countered three weeks later by the denunciation of Anibal Escalante for’ sectarianism', a measure which forced the Soviet Union to take a stand.
This is not to say that Castro's actions as described above can be explained solely in terms of Cuba's relations with Moscow.
Clearly there were also domestic factors involved, primarily concerning Castro's needs to consolidate the power base both of the revolution and of himself personally.
Nevertheless, this in itself cannot easily be divorced from the introduction of organisations on Soviet-approved lines, for the USSR to some extent provided a much-needed model for the Cuban revolutionaries.
It is also clear that Castro's overriding concern with the security, both military and economic, of his revolution obliged him to conduct domestic policy with one eye on Moscow.
The Soviet Union decided to endorse the expulsion of Escalante: Castro was henceforth referred to as ‘comrade’ and Cuba's place in the Soviet bloc was officially acknowledged when it was listed along with the other’socialist' states in the traditional May Day slogans.
Thus from mid-1962 the Soviet Union and Cuba were committed to each other to an extent which made it extremely difficult for either party to renounce the relationship.
Cuba needed Moscow's military, political and economic protection, and the Soviet Union could not afford politically to abandon its new-found ally.
On the other hand, in the event of direct US aggression the Soviet Union would be confronted with the even more unacceptable choice of risking nuclear confrontation with the United States.
This is the background to the event which perhaps more than any other has fuelled the arguments that the Soviet Union has ‘expansionist’ designs on Latin America which can only be countered by US strength.
The Cuban Missile Crisis (October 1962)
My contention is that the events of October 1962 took place in a very specific historical context in terms of the Soviet appraisal of global power relations.
There is no doubt that the launching of the first earth  satellite (Sputnik ) in 1957 — which, at least in Soviet minds, symbolised the idea that socialism was the wave of the future — together with the successful Soviet testing and subsequent deployment of Inter-Continental Ballistic Missiles produced a decided shift in both Soviet and American perceptions of international relations.
William Zimmerman, who offers a detailed and convincing analysis of Soviet perspectives at this time (Zimmerman: 1969), states that by far the most important aspect of the changed situation for Soviet commentators was that’ the United States had lost its privileged position of strategic invulnerability’.
From Moscow's standpoint this represented ‘a turning point in the development of international relations’(Zimmerman: 1969, pp. 171–2).
The new strategic situation, Soviet space successes, the decolonisation process and (until 1958–9) the apparently successful reintegration of the socialist camp after 1956 all contributed to a surge of optimism within the Soviet Union that socialism was in the ascendant.
Measured against ‘a stagnant US economy, a not altogether successful satellite programme, and perennial crises in NATO’(Zimmerman: 1969, p. 179), these developments created high expectations expressed at the November 1960 Conference of Eighty-One parties in the definitive formulation that’ the superiority of the forces of socialism over those of imperialism…is becoming ever more marked in the world arena' (Zimmerman: 1969, p. 181).
Khrushchev asserted in March 1960 that’ the Soviet Union is now the world's strongest military power' (Izvestiia , 2 March 1960) and, although it was recognised that Soviet economic capacity was then inferior to that of the United States, it was confidently predicted that the socialist nations would have outstripped the West within a decade.
By the time that the decision was taken to challenge the United States by the installation of missiles in Cuba (probably in early July 1962) the USSR had been forced to revise its optimistic view.
The decisive response by the Kennedy administration to a potential missile gap and the Sino-Soviet crisis were the two main factors forcing Moscow to scale down its claims.
In the first months of Kennedy's presidency the United States not only undertook a substantial arms build up, but also began to float new ideas in strategic doctrine, most notably Maxwell Taylor's theory of flexible response.
From his analysis of Soviet commentary, Zimmerman argues that in the period October 1961 to March 1962 these developments ‘exacerbated the ongoing dialogue within the Soviet ruling group concerning the adequacy of the Soviet deterrent’ and ‘suggested grave misgivings on the part of –ome Soviet observers lest the defining characteristics of  imperialist international relations be restored’(Zimmerman: 1969, p. 187).
By March 1962, however, the Soviet military had taken several steps — nuclear weapons' tests, the development of the ‘global rocket’, the redeploying of launch sites — to bolster the credibility of the Soviet deterrent, and commentators once again‘buried the myth of the invulnerability of the United States of America’(Pravda , 31 March 1962, in Zimmerman: 1969, pp. 189–90).
The very need to do this — for the second time in four years — testifies to a certain degree of insecurity within the minds of the Soviet leaders that their recent gains in terms of strategic power could easily be snatched from them.
Zimmerman points out that ‘it was at this stage that Soviet authorities permitted, tolerated or encouraged Marshal Sokolovskii and his colleagues to publish an awesome picture of American military might’(Voennaia Strategiia , 1962) and that ‘wide dissemination was given to statements declaring that never before had imperialism been so strong’(Zimmerman: 1969, p. 192).
Thus it was in this context, with Soviet leaders feeling that although they possessed an adequate deterrence, it was only minimally adequate, that the decision was taken to install missiles in Cuba (see Horelick: 1964).
In the aftermath of the Cuban Missile Crisis and in the broader context of the continuing growth in US military strength and reappraisal of strategic doctrine, even under Khrushchev the Soviet leadership ‘reverted to an appreciably more restrained description of the distribution of power’(Zimmerman: 1969, p. 205).
After Khrushchev's ouster in 1964, his successors avoided the use of bold terms such as pereves (preponderance) or ravnovesie (equilibrium) which had been fashionable in the early sixties, and contented themselves with less specific formulations depicting the global correlation of forces (sootnoshenie sil ).
This was consonant with the repudiation of Khrushchev's style of conducting international relations, which was designated a ‘voluntaristic and unrealistic approach to the phenomena and events of international life’, fraught’ with grave consequences, and capable of giving rise either to smug over-confidence or a weakness in the face of the military threat from imperialism' (Pravda , 8 August 1965, pp. 3–4).
Khrushchev initially claimed (in a report to the Supreme Soviet on 12 December 1962) that by installing the missiles in Cuba he acted in response to a Cuban request; this has been contradicted not only by statements from Castro, but also by Khrushchev himself.
In his memoirs he wrote, ‘It was during my visit to Bulgaria that I had the idea of installing missiles with nuclear warheads in Cuba without  letting the United States find out they were there until it was too late to do anything about them’(Khrushchev: 1970, p. 493).
There seems little doubt that the initiative came from Moscow.
However, arguments along the lines of ‘the Russians’ real objective was less their alleged anxiety to protect Cuba than to alter the whole balance of global strategy to their advantage by one bold stroke' (Clissold: 1970, p. 49) would seem to raise something of a false dilemma.
Undoubtedly Khrushchev wanted to challenge the Americans, and to force them to acknowledge that Soviet power was an equal match for the power of the United States.
This is implied in the following passage from his memoirs: ‘We hadn't given the Cubans anything more than the Americans were giving their allies in Italy and Turkey.
We had the same rights and opportunities as the Americans.
Our conduct in the international arena was governed by the same rules and limits as the Americans’(Khrushchev: 1970, p. 496).
However, this cannot be divorced from the fact that, in the minds of the Soviet leadership, Soviet prestige had become inextricably linked to the fate of Cuba: ‘One thought kept hammering away at my brain: what will happen if we lose Cuba?
I knew it would be a terrible blow to Marxism-Leninism.
It would gravely diminish our stature throughout the world, but especially in Latin America.
If Cuba fell, other Latin American countries would reject us, claiming that for all our might, the Soviet Union hadn't been able to do anything for Cuba except to make empty protests to the United Nations’(Khrushchev: 1970, p. 493).
To this extent, Khrushchev's strategy was partially successful.
Although he did not achieve any recognition from the United States that the USSR was an ‘equal’ power, he did secure an American guarantee not to invade Cuba, which has diminished the spectre of how the Soviet Union would respond to such an event.
From the Cuban point of view, however, the missile crisis looked rather different.
Castro subsequently admitted that he had been opposed to the removal of the missiles, and his adamant refusal to allow US inspections to be carried out on Cuban territory (despite Soviet pressure) testifies to the anger and resentment that he felt over the fact that matters which vitally affected Cuban sovereignty were settled without his knowledge or consent.
A revealing passage from Khrushchev's memoirs, citing a letter written by the Soviet premier to Castro in late 1962, shows his complete insensitivity to the Cubans' wounded national pride and barely conceals his irritation at what he evidently believed to be ingratitude on Castro's part.
He wrote:
The main point about the Caribbean crisis is that it has guaranteed the existence of a socialist Cuba.
If Cuba had not undergone this ordeal, it is very likely that the Americans would have organised an invasion to liquidate Cuba's socialist way of life.
Now that the climax of tension has passed and we have exchanged commitments with the American government, it will be very difficult for the Americans to interfere.
If the United States should invade now, the Soviet Union will have the right to attack.
Thus we have secured the existence of a socialist Cuba for at least another two years while Kennedy is in the White House.
(Khrushchev: 1970, p. 504)
Whatever Castro's feelings at being addressed in such patronising tones, they were not made public.
His speech of 1 November 1962 made references to’ some differences' between the two governments, but it was asserted that ‘Nothing shall come between the Soviet Union and Cuba’, and the emphasis was on the Soviet arms which had not been withdrawn rather than on the missiles which had (Cuba Socialista , no. 16, Dec. 1962, pp. 28–30, in Clissold: 1970, p. 276).
The Cuban leader could not afford to allow anti-Soviet feeling to take a hold amongst the population.
Castro is reported to have said in private that ‘we shall not make the same mistake twice; we shall not break with the Russians after having broken with the Americans’(Suárez: 1967, p. 175).
Nevertheless, the Russians were left in no doubt that they had blundered in their relationship with Castro.
At a post-crisis discussion between Mikoian and a State Department official, Mikoian was ‘clearly influenced by commitments to Castro to make a strong case on Castro's behalf’ and tried to establish the idea of a protocol signed by all three countries ‘[attaching]a good deal of significance to Cuba being one of the signatories’.
The degree of pressure the Russians felt from Castro is indicated by the fact that in the course of this discussion Mikoian raised the possibility of the reciprocal inspection of territory (‘and then we would not have any trouble with Castro on getting international inspection in Cuba’), and even mentioned Puerto Rico, although he can only have expected the immediately forthcoming flat refusal by the United States (Memorandum to the Secretary of State from Mr McCloy, 25 November 1962,US Declassified , 1985, 002292).
In what was interpreted by the CIA and the Department of State as a post-missile crisis concession, the Soviet Union agreed to turn over control of all weapons systems within Cuba (including surface-to-air installations which could be used to shoot down US overflights).
Peter Bourne recounts how Carlos Rafael Rodriguez, visiting Moscow in December 1962 to negotiate an economic agreement for the following year, had lengthy private meetings with Khrushchev and Mikoian, at which they expressed their surprise at Fidel's reaction and gave assurance that there had been no intention to offend him.
Khrushchev declared, ‘Fidel is a son to me’, to which Rodriguez replied, ‘That is the mistake.
Fidel is not your son.
Fidel is the leader of the Cuban revolution and you have treated the Cuban revolution as a daughter of the Soviet revolution, which it is not, and Fidel as your son, which he is not.
You have taken liberties that you can take with a son, but not with a leader’(Bourne: 1987, p. 243).
The lavish reception afforded to Fidel Castro himself when he went to the Soviet Union the following year is well known, and it was during this visit that he was guaranteed economic concessions, notably a rise in the price paid for Cuban sugar.
Thus there is every indication that the Cubans, stung by the ignominious discovery that Moscow's attitude towards dependent Third World allies was not significantly different from Washington's in the context of superpower relations, managed to extract significant compensation (both material and symbolic) for the slight.
It is also interesting to note that in the aftermath of the October Crisis both Castro and Kennedy sought to exploit the low point in Soviet-Cuban relations.
William Attwood recounts how, as a member of the US delegation to the United Nations and a close associate of Kennedy, he received information in September 1963, both directly and indirectly, that Castro was interested in an accommodation with Washington.
Exploratory discussions were pursued with chief Cuban delegate to the United Nations, Carlos Lechuga, and Dr René Vallejo, Castro's personal physician (Attwood: 1967, pp. 142–4).
president Kennedy, interviewed by Jean Daniel of L'Exprès , hinted that the United States might be willing to make some concessions.
Daniel passed this on to Fidel Castro on 23 November and the Cuban leader, who was apparently convinced of Kennedy's sincerity, expressed eagerness to pursue the dialogue.
During the course of their meeting, however, news arrived of Kennedy's assassination the previous day, and what seems to have been primarily a personal initiative by the President was dropped.
By the end of 1962 Castro had sound economic reasons for sustaining Cuban links with the Soviet Union, apart from his security concerns.
In 1961 and 1962 the USSR had provided virtually all of Cuba's oil imports and had purchased just under half of its sugar crop (Gouré and Rothenberg: 1975, p. 52).
In addition, the Soviet Union  and its East European allies had given-large-scale economic aid to Cuban development projects.
However, mutual dissatisfaction with the nature of this aid and the way it was administered had already given both sides cause to regret their commitment.
The root of the problem lay in the fact that, having cut its links with the United States, Cuba ‘was forced to graft itself onto a bloc which, apart from being totally different, was already afflicted with its own specific illnesses.
The operation would at best have caused a great deal of pain, even if all those concerned had given proof of great foresight and clarity of mind; in the absence of both, it became a source of enormous waste and disappointments’(Karol: 1971, p. 225).