

SEVEN
Two packets of sandwiches snuggled up to each other on the back seat of the car, tumescent in their cellophane wrappers.
Dexter had snatched them from the canteen just before he and Blanche had set off.
The superintendent started eating hers as soon as they had turned out of Chester Row, peeling back the clingfilm with one hand while shuffling through the sheaf of papers she held in her lap with the other: formal, typewritten statements from people at TV London who had something relevant to say about Nicola Sharpe.
As they had stumbled out of the incident room, new names were already being scribbled up on the action boards with blue marker pens — yet more people to be trawled by the team of detective constables.
As they crossed Chelsea Bridge Blanche sank her teeth into her third sandwich, flicked over a sheet of paper and slotted a cassette into the tape machine.
She never ceased to amaze Dexter with her ability to do several things at the same time — perhaps too many things, he thought, regarding her dishevelled hair and the flush of stress in her cheeks.
Heroines, at least the ones he saw on television or in the cinema, were not supposed to look like this.
They were ageless, unwrinkled and calm.
Success fell into their laps like ripe fruit from a tree.
Blanche had been doomed to fight for her promotion, watch her weight, and fret over her childlessness.
And doomed to be one of the best detectives in the Met.
When Dexter had first worked with Blanche he had not  liked her.
He was unable to relax.
She seemed to misunderstand deliberately everything he said.
When they travelled together in a police car they had driven around in silence.
But one day he made the mistake, at least from his point of view, of bringing along a few tapes of his favourite soul and reggae music.
He started to play one and a look of pain flickered across Blanche's face as if someone was trying to shave her legs with a blunt razor.
She said nothing.
The next day she appeared with a box of her own tapes of classical music which she thrust endlessly into the cassette machine with a distracted smile.
Nothing was said.
After a few days, burning with a sense of injustice, Dexter plucked up courage and asked Blanche about her double standards — what right had she to make him listen to her type of music, when he could not force her to listen to his?
She thought for a moment and turned to him with flushed cheeks.
‘You're right, Sergeant.
I've been doing it without thinking.
I'm sorry.’
She sounded genuinely regretful.
An embarrassed silence hummed on the air.
Dexter was stunned.
A superior officer had never apologised to him before.
‘That's all right, ma'am,’ the sergeant gulped, suddenly wishing he had not said anything.
‘I didn't want to make a big thing of it.’
From that moment he had had respect for Blanche: he knew it took a rare combination of self-confidence and courage to admit she had been wrong.
Nothing more was said, but ever since Dexter had brought along a selection of his own tapes and there had been an informal division of playing time on the cassette player in the car.
Dexter hadn't heard the tape Blanche was playing before.
He let the opening float over him: undulating strings, like someone stirring from sleep, which rose to one crashing climax, followed by another.
Finally a man began to sing in the muffled distance, as if from the bottom of a lake.
‘What's this then, guv'?
Not more bloody opera?’ he asked through a yawn.
‘I'm afraid so.’
Blanche glanced up.
‘La Cavalleria Rusticana.’
‘What's that mean then?’
‘Rustic chivalry.
One Sicilian peasant kills another one for seducing his wife.’
‘Sounds a good laugh.’
‘Not much of a good laugh in this opera, Sergeant.
It's all about love, hate, jealousy and revenge.’
Blanche squinted thoughtfully.
‘A bit like the murder of Nicola Sharpe.’
‘Would you like a drink?’
Jane Pargeter said, nodding towards her open drinks cabinet, even before Blanche and Dexter had time to sit down on the black leather armchairs in her sitting-room.
A cut glass tumbler sat on the coffee table beside a bottle of gin and a bottle of tonic water.
Both were half empty.
Dexter's immediate reaction was to say yes, but he declined the offer: he was on duty after all, and even the detective constable's iron constitution wilted under the influence of alcohol at half past three in the afternoon.
In the flesh Jane Pargeter was familiar but different to how Dexter had imagined her from the image on television.
The voice was the same: clear and authoritative, sure of itself, although faintly slurred by alcohol.
He also knew the face — the firm jaw, the wide mouth that sagged slightly on one side as though supporting an invisible cigarette, the pert nose, the dark blue eyes: the constituent parts of beauty.
Other things were a surprise.
The sergeant had expected her to be taller, instead of a good nine inches shorter than Blanche.
He also thought she would have looked younger and fitter.
Dressed in a pair of designer jeans that were stretched over her buttocks like clingfilm, and with blotchy skin without a trace of make-up, she looked closer to fifty than the forty Dexter knew she really was.
Jane Pargeter was one of those lucky people who looked better on television than in ordinary life, a woman transformed by the camera.
She kept up a flow of nervous chatter from the kitchen while she brewed up two cups of instant coffee.
Everyone at TVL was just stunned by the murder, she said.
People  were stopping outside the office where it took place and whispering to each other— someone had even placed a bouquet of flowers at the door that morning.
She'd gone in first thing but couldn't face the idea of working.
Blanche stood in the centre of the room and suppressed a yawn, her eyes absorbing the surroundings.
Jane Pargeter's flat was in a huge and expensive mansion block on the north side of Clapham Common.
The apartment itself was enormous and, as if she were scared of the space, Jane Pargeter had crammed it with expensive furniture.
All of it was modern — whether reproduction antiques, like the bookcases and table, or high-tech, like the light fittings.
It was a confusing hotch-potch, bought on impulse over a number of years without considering how it would all fit together.
Dexter rather liked it but he knew from the indifferent look on Blanche's face that she did not: she was very classic in her tastes.
Jane Pargeter poured herself another slug of gin and slopped in some tonic water, spilling some on the coffee table.
She did not bother to wipe up the puddle.
‘I'll obviously do what I can to help,’ she began, sipping her drink.
‘But I really think you're wasting your time coming to talk to me.
I mean I was at the party but I didn't see anything suspicious.’
Blanche sat down on the sofa and folded her hands in her lap.
She said it was a routine enquiry and the police were interviewing everybody who had been at Ken O'Mara's farewell.
Someone was playing rock music in the flat above and the faint throb hovered in the sitting-room.
Jane Pargeter blinked her watery eyes.
‘I turned up at the party pretty much at the start, I think, around a quarter to nine.
I drank quite a lot.
Ate a lot.
Talked a lot.
I enjoyed it.’
‘Did you go out of the room at all between the time you arrived and, say, a quarter to ten?’
‘Yes.
I popped out to the loo.’
‘What time would that be?’
She pulled on a wan smile.
‘I thought you might ask that.
Just after nine or so, I suppose.
And then I went  straight back to the party.
I didn't go out again until Ken stormed in and said he'd found Nicola.’
She said anyone at the party could confirm her story.
‘Did you see Nicola at all?’
‘At the party?’
Blanche nodded.
The TV presenter pondered for a moment, running her chubby fingers through her hair.
‘It's funny you should ask because I bumped into her just as I was coming back from the loo.
She was leaving the party.
That was the only time I saw her.’
Dexter assumed this happened just after Nicola had been called to the phone.
He asked Jane Pargeter to describe how Nicola appeared.
‘She looked quite normal.
She just nodded, walked past me and that was it.
I didn't think twice about it.’
‘And you had no idea where she was going?’
The presenter stopped fingering the amber necklace she wore round her neck and crossed her arms.
The movement made her look more self-contained and masculine.
‘No.
Why should I?’
It was as though a chapter in the conversation had finished.
The only sound in the room was the continued throb of rock music from the flat above.
Dexter stretched his long legs.
If Pargeter was telling the truth and did not leave the party until the body was found, she could not have murdered Nicola.
The only point in  eking out the conversation was the hope that she had seen something curious.
The superintendent seemed to share his thoughts.
She drew her hands together, fingertip to fingertip, and raised them to her nose.
‘Who did you talk to at the party?’
The TV presenter shrugged her shoulders.
‘Lots of people.
Ken.
Mike Slide.
Simon Franks.
I even bumped into Nicola Sharpe's husband — a tedious man called Jim something.’
‘Lancaster,’ added Blanche.
‘That's right.
Lancaster.’
‘What did you talk to him about?’
Jane Pargeter drew back her lips in a gesture of unconcern.
‘I can't really remember.
Education, I think.
The only interesting thing about him was to speculate why on earth a sparky girl like Nicola should want to marry him.’
Jane Pargeter threw her head back and contemplated the ceiling.
The TV presenter looked across at the sergeant, as though registering his presence for the first time.
She looked down at the carpet.
Blanche asked if she had seen Jim Lancaster leave the boardroom at any time.
‘I did actually.
I know he was looking for Nicola at one stage because he asked if I knew where she'd gone.
I said I didn't but I'd passed her coming in to the party.’
The superintendent's voice was calm.
‘What time was that?’
‘Oh, I don't know.
Some time between quarter past and half past nine, I suppose.’
Dexter tried to hide his excitement.
They had found a witness who confirmed that one of their prime suspects had left the party at the right time to murder Nicola.
Lancaster had even told Jane he was searching for his wife.
It was perfect.
The sergeant glanced across at Blanche but her face betrayed no emotion at all.
He remembered how she had reluctantly sat down to play him and a couple of other men at poker a few years before.
Her face had been just the same then — interested but inscrutable — and she had taken a fiver off all of them.
‘Did Lancaster seem calm or was he in a bit of a state?’ enquired Blanche, brushing her front teeth with the tip of her thumb.
The presenter drained off the last of her gin and tonic and clinked the ice in the bottom of her glass.
‘He seemed in a bit of a panic.
He just asked me if I knew where she was and then I watched him disappear out of the room.
It was only a matter of seconds.’
Dexter's instinct was to drive round to Lancaster's house and interview him straight away.
But he knew he had to be patient.
Blanche was not in a hurry.
She was still trying to win the woman's confidence.
The superintendent asked Jane Pargeter whether she had seen anyone else leave the party.
The presenter said she could only recall a few people, and volunteered the story of David Parkin throwing a glass of wine at his wife and how she had watched Maggie Parkin stalk out of the room trying to pretend that nothing had happened.
She told the anecdote with a glint of relish in her eye, revelling in their embarrassment.
Dexter remembered she had once been David Parkin's lover.
When pressed she also said she remembered catching a glimpse of David Parkin going out of the room.
‘You seem to have had a good view,’ commented Dexter.
The TV reporter chuckled and tossed her head back.
‘You've got to keep your eyes open at parties — for the gossip.’
Dexter decided he rather liked Jane Pargeter.
She seemed to have a proper regard for the frivolous things in life.
The rhythm of the rock music thumped relentlessly.
The sitting-room suddenly felt claustrophobic.
The cast-iron window framed the trees of Clapham Common under a darkening sky.
Flecks of drizzle brushed the window.
Jane Pargeter stood up and switched on the standard lamp beside her chair, standing with her arms akimbo, self-contained yet vulnerable.
‘I'm sorry to intrude on your personal affairs, Miss Pargeter, but didn't you have an affair with David Parkin?’
Blanche's question seemed to resound round the room with its impertinence.
‘What's that got to do with this bloody murder?’
Jane Pargeter slumped down in her armchair and crossed her legs angrily.
‘I thought you came round here to ask if I'd seen anything suspicious last night, not grill me about my sex life.’
Dexter caught a glance from Blanche: she was always intrigued by conflict or displays of strong emotion.
‘I'm sorry to intrude.
But you see, if — as I've been told — David Parkin…’
She paused to choose her words carefully.
Jane Pargeter looked up, her eyes watchful.
‘David Parkin had had an affair with you and then started one with  Nicola.
I just wondered whether the timing of the two affairs overlapped, that's all.’
Jane Pargeter's blue eyes grew chill with anger or sadness.
Dexter could not decide which.
Perhaps it was both.
‘Well, I'll answer the question, but only because I don't want to give the impression I'm hiding anything.
We were lovers on and off for three years.
Then David met Maggie Parkin about eighteen months ago and we split up.’
‘Were you very angry about it?’
‘Of course I was at the time.
But not now.’
She smiled, as if recalling some secret happiness.
Dexter guessed that she had found a new man.
‘I don't still hate his guts — if that's what you're asking.
David seems very happy and he's got a lovely little son.’
‘If he was so happy why did he start an affair with Nicola?’ asked the superintendent, leaning forward in her seat.
Jane Pargeter sniffed and prodded with her toe at an imaginary stain in the carpet.
‘It just happened, from what I can gather.
They were at the Labour Party conference together last year and that's when it began.
They tried to keep it a secret but you can't keep secrets long in television.’
Dexter believed Jane Pargeter was more interested in David Parkin's affair than she pretended: you can't be someone's lover for three years and then cast them off with the same indifference as an old pair of socks.
He knew.
He had been through the same mill a couple of years before.
Jane had probably watched rumours of the affair harden into fact with an amalgam of loathing, sadness and jealousy.
The superintendent squinted at Jane Pargeter for a moment.
‘Did Maggie Parkin know about the affair with Nicola?’
‘I haven't the faintest idea.
But she should have done unless she was completely blind.’
‘What about Jim Lancaster?
Do you think he knew about Nicola's affair?’
‘Pass.
It's not the sort of thing I ask people at parties.’
Her stare was cold and unreadable for a moment before she broke into a smile.
‘I don't know.
He probably did.
Ask him.’
Blanche sipped her coffee, now lukewarm after sitting untouched on the low table for a few minutes.
Jane Pargeter walked self-consciously to the kitchen to make herself a cup of tea: she had obviously decided she had drunk enough gin for the afternoon.
Dexter tapped his fingers on the tubular arms of his chair, thinking how much more comfortable his sofa was at home.
Pargeter intrigued him.
She was the first television celebrity he had met in the flesh, and he still could not quite believe the woman who had been sitting in front of him was the same one he had watched so regularly on the box.
It was rather like when he had gone to Paris for the first time when he was eighteen.
He had seen the Eiffel Tower so many times in photographs or on television he did not think it really existed.
And yet it did.
He had stood in front of it and pinched himself, observing the intricacy of the ironwork with the wonder of a child.
He observed Jane Pargeter come out of the kitchen — the neck of her shirt folded up, her forearms freckled but brown from a recent holiday with the same attention to detail.
The last piece of territory he and Blanche needed to explore was one the superintendent had not yet entered deliberately, Dexter suspected: Nicola Sharpe's drive to take over Jane Pargeter's job.
Even though Blanche's first question was innocent enough, Dexter knew immediately that the superintendent was thinking along the same lines.
‘How did you get on with Nicola, Miss Pargeter?’
The blue eyes, bloodshot but penetrating, held the detective's face for a moment.
‘Call me Jane, if you like, Superintendent.
As one professional woman to another.’
‘OK.
My name's Blanche.’
The superintendent paused and flicked up her eyebrows.
‘So how did you get on with Nicola, Jane?’
The presenter cradled her cup in her hands, staring down at the tea.
Dexter noticed her fingernails were long and primed with pink varnish.
‘All right.’
‘Really?’
Jane Pargeter flopped back in her chair and threw an arm across the back.
She smiled.
‘No, to tell you the truth, I didn't like her at all.
She was a jumped-up little bitch.’
There was little emotion in the way she spoke, merely a statement of fact.
Dexter was surprised that the TV presenter revealed her true feelings towards Nicola so quickly: most people in his experience, when first interviewed by the police, tried to hide extremes of love or hate.
Jane Pargeter was determined to look relaxed, Dexter thought, even though the number of times she kept bobbing her mouth down to sip her tea showed that she was not.
She stared first at the superintendent and then at Dexter without blinking.
‘She was after my job, you see.
She even had the cheek to go around saying she had it.’
Blanche probed, her voice husky with mock concern.
‘I gather there was some silly talk about you being replaced?’
‘'Silly talk’ is precisely what it was.
No more than that.
I've been at the top in television for a decade, you see, Blanche.
Nicola could hardly tell one end of a camera from the other.’
The matey use of Blanche's name struck a false note with Dexter, like interviewees he had seen on chat shows who kept tossing in the name of the host every thirty seconds to make it appear they were bosom pals.
Jane flopped forward on her chair and sighed heavily.
Her stomach edged up over the waistband of her slacks.
There was a hard edge of arrogance to Jane Pargeter — the same self-confidence she displayed on the screen.
‘So what was behind all these rumours that she'd got your job then?’
Blanche asked.
‘Are you saying Nicola made the whole thing up?’
Jane Pargeter sipped her tea again.
She suddenly pulled herself up short and injected some huskiness into her voice, like a politician who wants to convince you of his sincerity.
‘Yes.
I think she did for the most part.
That's why I stopped worrying about it.’
Blanche tightened her lips in polite disbelief.
‘But surely someone must have told her something.’
The TV presenter looked hard at Blanche, her eyes focused with suspicion.
‘Not as far as 1 know.
She was taking a lot for granted.’
‘Apparently Nicola was going round saying she had the backing of top management.’
‘Who exactly?’
‘Someone mentioned Mike Slide, the head of the department, and even the chairman of the company, Stephen Blufton.’
‘Well, there you are.
I'd always guessed Nicola had a rich fantasy life but I'd never guessed it was quite that rich,’ she snorted derisively.
‘Nicola was bullshitting.
That was one thing she was good at.
Mike Slide certainly rated her — although God knows why.
And as for Stephen Blufton well, he sticks his oar into programme-making a lot but he's got no interest in promoting the career of an inexperienced regional reporter.’
You did not like Nicola Sharpe, did you, thought Dexter, listening to the verbal stiletto slip between the dead woman's ribs.
Jane Pargeter certainly had a fine line in bitchiness.
The sergeant thought he should offer his boss some support in her battle to prise a little truth out of the woman they were interviewing.
‘Come on, Miss Pargeter, someone must have had an interest in giving Nicola a leg up?’
The presenter smiled.
‘Only Nicola herself, as far as I can make out.’
Jane Pargeter was lying.
Dexter was sure of that.
And he was sure Blanche shared his opinion: she was squinting at the TV presenter as if she were a small but fascinating object in a museum.
Jane Pargeter had come much closer to losing her job than she pretended.
The superintendent sighed and sat back in her chair, asking Jane to tell her side of the story.
‘I suppose it started about a month ago.
People were whispering about me behind my back — smiling to my face of course— but whispering behind my back.
I've been round long enough to realise something was up.
It didn't take long to find out Nicola had told them that she was in  line to take over my job.’
She leant forward in her chair as if to make the facts clearer, cool and in control, as if reading from autoscript in the studio.
‘I stormed round to see Mike Slide — he's the new head of Topical Features — and asked him outright if it was true.
He just sat there jiggling his bloody spectacles and saying that as far as he knew it wasn't.’
She drank off what remained of her tea.
When she spoke again it was with a sneer.
‘That clinched it.
I'd been in this business long enough to know he was lying and that something was going on.’
‘So what did you do then?’
‘Stormed around for a few days, lobbied as hard as I could and got on with my job.
What else could I do?’
The spark in her eyes suddenly died.
Her hands, like claws, clutched her cup and she looked sorrowfully at the lukewarm tea.
Her hair, Dexter noticed, was matt and streaked with grey, no longer glistening with the aid of a back light in the studio.
Her right cheek twitched faintly.
‘I'd given the best years of my life to television.
And sometimes I wonder whether it hasn't all been a complete waste of time.’
It was a maudlin performance fuelled by the gin in her blood, but none the less powerful for that.
Dexter, and he was sure Blanche as well, was left wondering whether Pargeter believed what she was saying.
The presenter sighed and rubbed one palm across the other.
‘People in television take it so seriously.
I've seen people burn themselves out.
Marriages break up.
And at the end of the day hardly anyone remembers the programmes they did it for.’
She looked across to a bureau on which stood a framed certificate for TV Presenter of the Year Award.
‘I've seen just the same in the police,’ murmured Blanche.
A smile flickered on the presenter's lips.
‘I suppose you're right.
Television's no different.’
The rock music above suddenly stopped, although its rhythmic throbbing seemed to linger in the air.
It was as if the neighbour had sensed that the police officers were  about to leave and wished to honour their departure with silence.
Blanche eased herself up.
Having asked Jane Pargeter to come and give a formal statement at Chester Row, Blanche halted just outside the open door to the flat.
‘Do you think Nicola's work might have put her in danger?’
Jane Pargeter asked what she meant.
‘I gather she'd been looking into drugs a few weeks back and then into child porn.
I wondered if she might have stumbled across something.’
The TV presenter reclined against the door-jamb, a crinkle of suspicion on her forehead.
She shook her head.
‘I think you've been watching too much television.’
She proffered her hand in farewell.
As his boss turned away and began to stride down the corridor, Dexter noticed a wary look slither into Pargeter's eyes.
He glanced over his shoulder when they were twenty yards along the carpet and was surprised to see her still leaning thoughtfully against the door.
Ten yards further down the corridor, he heard the door slam with a resounding crack.
EIGHT
The bleak greenery of Clapham Common slipped from sight as they headed east towards Blackheath.
Dexter had been stationed in Brixton several years before and he inhaled the familiar atmosphere as he wound along Coldharbour Lane towards Peckham: the dilapidated shops selling second-hand furniture and televisions, the handsome couple posing against a car as though for a fashion magazine, the parked cars tumbling over the pavement.
He felt comfortable now watching the black faces on the pavement, screwed up against the drizzle, but remembered his resentment when he had first learned of his posting.
How stupid the Met could be, he had thought.
Brixton was a black area.
PC Dexter Bazalgette was black.
Send Bazalgette to Brixton.
The pasty-faced bureaucrats at New Scotland Yard were not to know he felt about as much at home there when he first arrived as a Martian.
The Street Duties sergeant at the police station had given him a hard time.
Dexter wondered at first whether it was because he was black or a probationer, but after a few months he was sure it was because of his Jamaican origins.
Dexter had seethed silently for a few weeks and mentioned his anger to a priest during confession.
The soft, educated English voice floated through the dark grille.
It advised him to forgive the man and pray for him to have a change of heart.
Dexter did neither.
He whispered ‘bollocks’ under his breath and started going to another church.
Dexter did not forgive easily.
There were fun times of course when he got his  revenge.
He used to be stopped frequently after work and normally he just told the constable he was a policeman straight away.
But on one occasion, when he was waiting to meet a girlfriend, a constable came up and was so rude Dexter decided to play him along.
‘This your car, mate?’
‘Yeah.’
‘Makes a change, dunnit.’
He turned round and smirked at his squad car with a woman police constable in the front.
‘What are you doing here then?’
‘Meeting someone.’
Just then Dexter's friend came up — a white girl he had kept in contact with from his schooldays.
‘White slag, eh?’
Dexter let him continue.
‘You got a job?’
‘Yeah.’
‘You must be the one in a million then.
What do you do?’
‘Work for the government.’
The constable started to go round the car, examining it minutely occasionally glancing up at the WPC to confirm the impression he was making.
‘So where are you off to?’
‘Work, actually.’
‘Where's that then?’
‘In the police station down the road.
I'm a copper.’
Dexter flourished his warrant card.
The constable flushed red and apologised, causing the WPC in the squad car to rock with laughter.
Dexter smiled to himself as he remembered that incident.
He edged the car he was driving into Peckham High Street.
Parades of shabby shops, gathered like mongrel dogs on a street corner, were parted by a grim council estate, and then reassembled.
Pedestrians scampered blindly across the road to catch waiting buses, the cars jerked ahead a few yards every time the traffic lights turned to green.
The drizzle fell steadily, dribbling across the pock-marked tarmac, forcing forlorn figures at bus-stops to huddle together even closer under the shelters.
Dexter watched the lights of a garage or a garden centre slide by, glistening damply through the mist.
He  accelerated up a dark and steep hill and finally they emerged on to the flat expanse of Blackheath.
The Parkins' house stood in a drive marked at the entrance with a notice restricting access to residents only.
The sergeant bumped over the sleeping-policemen and gazed at the neatly trimmed lawns and hedges with aggrieved jealousy in his eyes: the private estate was a symbol of a world from which he was excluded, a world of privilege and snobbery, a world that had turned its back on the poor, the sick and the unfashionable who had been swarming round their car only ten minutes before.
Once again he thought how privileged he was as a policeman, given a special dispensation to walk into other people's houses — whether rich or poor, criminal or victim — and ask intimate questions that would have led anyone else to be punched on the nose.
Dexter remembered occasionally seeing David Parkin's face on television: handsome, weathered and topped by a shock of prematurely white hair.
He smelt of good-quality eau de toilette, his grasp firm as he shook them by the hand and strode ahead, waving the nanny and his young son towards the sitting-room.
For a man whose lover had been brutally murdered the night before he seemed cheerful and composed.
Although ten years older than Jane Pargeter, he exuded health and energy, as well as the same self-confidence.
Everyone in television seemed to have a sense of their self-importance, Dexter reflected.
Parkin gave a brief account of the previous night in his bass voice, saying that he had spoken briefly to Nicola at the pub outside TV London before the party started, and had spotted her in the boardroom.
But he had not seen her leave.
He did not mention the quarrel with his wife.
When David Parkin sat back on his armchair, tossing aside a copy of the Guardian, Dexter sensed a sneaking admiration for him.
Even Blanche, the sergeant thought, seemed to share it.
She was not immune to the charm of a handsome man.
When Parkin finished speaking, Blanche smiled.
‘Mr Parkin, just how well did you know Nicola?’
The gentle  stress on the word ‘did’ made it clear Blanche expected there to be more to their relationship than a glancing acquaintance at work.
His tongue flickered over his lips.
And then he smiled back — revealing a perfect set of small, white teeth — taking care to include the sergeant in the gesture.
The reporter's eyes narrowed, the flesh puckered up as if he was staring at the sun.
‘Very well indeed, if you must know.
I was having an affair with her.
There's no point in lying about it.’
He spoke without conviction, as if he believed the last phrase was something he was obliged to say rather than genuinely believed.
Parkin lounged back in his chair.
The sleeves of his pale blue shirt were rolled up over his muscly forearms.
The light from a standard lamp caught the hair bubbling up through the open neck of his shirt and on the backs of his arms.
The man was very conscious of his own image, Dexter reflected, like an actor measuring his every movement on the stage.
Blanche sighed.
‘Did your wife find out about it?’
Parkin's eyes narrowed again.
Dexter noticed that white hairs were even bristling from his ears and above the line on his cheeks where he shaved.
‘What's my wife got to do with it?’
‘I've no idea.
That's why I'm asking.’
A quiver of tension flickered through Parkin's hitherto relaxed body.
His grey eyes turned frosty.
‘I think I need a drink.
Do you want one?’
They said no and Parkin went out.
Dexter was sure the TV reporter's motive for leaving the room was more to check the nanny was not listening at the keyhole than a raging thirst.
He returned with a can of lager and a glass, shutting the door carefully behind him.
‘My wife did know that Nicola and I were having an affair.’
He made great efforts to include Dexter in the conversation, the sergeant noticed, embracing him in his replies.
He was probably the sort of liberal, Dexter thought, who boasted of the number of blacks he knew but whose acquaintance was limited to inviting them round to show off at trendy drinks parties.
‘So why didn't your wife tell us about it?’ asked Dexter.
‘She phoned me after you interviewed her and said she guessed you'd found out about the affair — to warn me.
She said she played innocent to try to protect me’
‘Protect you from what?’
Parkin shrugged.
‘She thought you might see a link between the affair and the murder.’
Blanche sat forward in her seat.
‘And is there?’
The question was posed in a flat tone, seeking information rather than accusing.
From long experience Blanche knew it was pointless to confront most interviewees, foolish to drive them into a corner.
Parkin sipped some beer, leaving a crest of foam on his upper lip, which he wiped with the edge of his hand.
For a moment, he seemed apprehensive to Dexter.
‘There's nothing to cover up.
I didn't do it, Superintendent.’
Blanche adjusted her skirt.
She asked when Maggie Parkin had found out about her husband's affair.
Parkin sighed with exasperation.
‘A couple of weeks ago, if you really must know.
It was all pretty sordid.
She found a receipt for a hotel in Hampshire in my suit.
I'd told her I'd been away filming in Scotland that night.’
Blanche said nothing.
Dexter knew that she preferred to wait and let the interviewee be sucked back into the vacuum of silence.
‘We had a flaming row.
I said it was just a fling.
That I wasn't in love with Nicola — which was true — and that I'd give her up.’
Blanche waited but Parkin was not going to say anything else unless prodded.
‘And had you given her up?’
The TV reporter swung his eyes back from the window and trained them on the superintendent in a long, calculating stare.
‘No.
That's to say I was going to — but…’
He swigged his lager.
‘I had to wait for the right moment to tell Nicola.
I couldn't see the point of rushing into it.
I'd made the decision.
That was the important point.
It was just a question of — how shall I say?— implementing it.’
In other words, thought the sergeant, Parkin was either a coward or a liar, or both.
A coward because he did not have the courage to tell Nicola that he was ending their  affair, or a liar because he made a false promise to his wife to give up his young lover.
Dexter suspected Parkin's indecision was a mixture of the two.
Maggie Parkin was infatuated with her husband and only too willing to believe his promise.
Pulled between a trusting wife and a beautiful young lover, David Parkin had decided to delay an unpleasant confrontation with Nicola as long as possible.
He was only human.
‘So you hadn't actually ended the affair with Nicola before she was murdered?’
Parkin made a long sigh to give himself time to think.
‘That's right.’
‘But you told your wife you had?’
He stared down at the carpet.
No one, Dexter reflected, likes to admit to an act of cowardice.
‘Yes, just to keep her quiet.’
‘So when did you intend to tell Nicola?’
‘When I was ready.’
‘And were you ready last night at the party?’
Parkin looked puzzled, trying to fathom the point of the question.
‘I was wondering whether you'd arranged to meet her for a talk — to break the news to her?’
Parkin glowered back.
‘No.
I did not.’
He articulated each word with precision.
‘You had the opportunity, after all.
You were seen to leave the party after Nicola had gone out.’
The reporter's eyes flickered down to the floor.
‘I did leave the party for a few minutes, it's true.
But that was simply to get a breath of fresh air.
I popped out on the sixth-floor roof and had a cigarette.’
Blanche rubbed her chin and stared at Parkin thoughtfully.
She asked if he had left the boardroom before or after the altercation with his wife at the party.
The reporter picked up his empty lager can and contemplated it as if it were a work of art.
After a few seconds, he crumpled the aluminium with a sudden grip of his fist, as though he had taken an important decision.
‘It was a stupid row really.
It was about Nicola.
You see, I had a chat with Nicola at the party and Maggie became  hysterical.
She told me I was never to speak to Nicola again.’
Parkin rolled the crushed can round in his palm.
‘Maggie started going at me about whether I really had finished the affair yet.
Her voice was getting louder and louder.
So, to calm her down, I threw my glass of wine over her.’
He laid the can down on the teak coffee table and spread his hands.
‘And that's it.
That's the truth.’
He said his wife was probably out of the room for about fifteen or twenty minutes.
‘And that's presumably when you went for a smoke on the roof?’
‘Yes.
I needed to calm down myself and think it all through.’
Dexter sensed a prickly atmosphere in the room — a chill on the hairs at the back of his neck, an almost eerie silence.
For some strange reason the image of the corpse of Nicola Sharpe floated up in his mind, and it brought with it a breath of foreboding, a sense that he was in the presence of evil.
It was nothing to do with David Parkin and nothing to do with the room — warm and comforting, the walls cluttered with Victorian paintings and prints, the antique furniture gleaming spotlessly.
The sensation had come from Dexter's imagination, a reminder that murder often had a smiling face and was just at home in bourgeois drawing-rooms as in seedy bed and breakfast hotels.
Blanche's voice suddenly became quiet and insinuating, without a trace of hostility.
Her relaxed manner was the reason, Dexter had concluded, why she often coaxed answers to some of the most prickly questions.
‘I don't like prying into people's private lives, Mr Parkin.
But I'm afraid it's my job.
I want to ask you about Jane Pargeter.’
Blanche's deep brown eyes held Parkin steadily.
The reporter uncrossed his legs and sat back in his chair.
‘Jane told us she hated Nicola.
I was just interested in whether you thought she disliked Nicola so much because she'd started an affair with a man who'd recently been her lover — you.
Parkin spread his hands in a gesture of uncertainty.
Dexter wondered if the idea appealed to his vanity.
‘I  think the fact Nicola was after Jane's job was far more important.’
The TV reporter rubbed his cheek.
‘But Jane wouldn't have murdered her, if that's what you're getting at.
She's a hard woman but…not as hard as that.’
Dexter watched Blanche shuffle into a more comfortable position in her chair.
Her eyes glanced round the room before coming to rest on the lithe and handsome man sitting opposite.
He guessed she was mulling over what Parkin had told them and garnering any remaining questions.
‘Who was it, by the way, who told Nicola that she had the presenter's job?’
‘She said Stephen Blufton was behind it all.
He's the chairman of TVL, if you didn't already know.’
‘I've seen his name in the papers a few times,’ murmured the superintendent, whose forehead creased with puzzlement.
‘And why would he promise her the job?’
Parkin curled his lips into a sneer.
Somehow it appeared undignified to Dexter because the TV reporter's face was so classically handsome.
‘Because he wanted to sleep with her.
That's why.’
‘And did he?’
‘Not as far as I know.’
‘What do you mean?’
Parkin picked up the crushed lager can and turned it round and round in his hands.
‘Nicola had met him once or twice at various parties.
And then a few weeks ago she told me she'd been invited to go and see him at his house or ‘castle’ as Blufton prefers to call it.’
The sneer scarred his lips again.
‘She went, because Nicola was never one to miss out on a chance to push herself forward.
Anyway, she said he made a pass at her and she almost had to fight him off.’
‘But he promised Nicola that she'd take over Jane Pargeter's presenter's job?’
‘Apparently.
He told Nicola the programme was looking tired and the job was hers for the asking’
Blanche asked if Blufton had been at the farewell party the night before.
Parkin pondered for a moment.
‘No, he wasn't.
He only  comes to the odd party.
He sometimes likes to mix with the troops — especially the good-looking female ones.’
Parkin added that although Nicola had become his mistress, she was keen to avoid gossip in the office and maintain her independence.
She insisted that they were not seen often together at TVL and that she kept what she called her professional distance.
‘Nicola was known as a chatterbox at work but she was very good at keeping the secrets that really mattered.’
David Parkin placed the crushed lager can back on the coffee table and examined it regretfully, like a faded photograph.
Dexter saw Blanche gaze at Parkin with sadness.
Whether it was to share his moment of regret at the passing of time, or to express disillusion with Parkin himself — she had made some comment in the car about how he was one of the few television reporters she knew and respected — Dexter did not know.
After a second or two she glanced down at her notebook: although the detective had a retentive memory she sometimes scribbled the odd reminder.
‘One last thing, Mr Parkin.
Nicola's husband told me that he thought you had something to do with the murder.
Why do you think he should say that?’
Parkin looked worried but then snorted a laugh through his chiselled nose.
‘Well, it's obvious, isn't it?
The little creep was trying to get his own back on me for sleeping with his wife.’
Blanche nodded thoughtfully as though Parkin had made a profound point rather than a cheap jibe at a cuckolded husband.
As they rose to leave, Dexter wondered why.
As he was waiting for the barmaid to pour the drinks, Dexter could not resist temptation.
He slid a coin into the slot of the juke-box and let a long, chocolate finger trip over the buttons.
He made his choice and watched fascinated as the arm jerked across and laid the record on the turntable.
The throb of the music swelled into the pub in Peckham, thumping the thick varnish that smothered the bar, the Formica-topped tables and the stained, velvet  curtains.
Although many London pubs seemed to look the same when he first walked in, Dexter enjoyed collating the differences that set one apart from another.
Sometimes it was the people, sometimes the decor, sometimes the smell.
In this pub it was the dark emptiness, the isolated figures clutching their half-empty glasses, eyes transfixed by the jumble of images on the television screen high on the wall.
The sergeant made a mental note never to come to this pub again.
The barmaid took the money wordlessly and Dexter swaggered over to the corner where Blanche was sitting.
She took the double whisky he offered her and greedily took a gulp.
Dexter knew that she was not always as relaxed as this in pubs.
Blanche enjoyed social drinking with her officers but Dexter sometimes noticed she was ill at ease.
Pubs could become for her extensions of the office, places to put on a good show for the Yard, swilling pints of bitter with the lads to enhance her image.
It was then Dexter detected an underlying tension: Blanche became bored and wanted to leave, but was reluctant to do so in case she gained a reputation as a straight-laced bore.
‘People like you are a menace, Dexter,’ she scowled good-naturedly.
‘Noise polluters.
There I was revelling in the murmur of drunken conversation from the bar and you go and spoil it by sticking the juke-box on.’
‘Getting my own back,’ Dexter smiled, ‘for all that bloody opera you were playing in the car today.’
The sergeant gnawed hungrily at his cheese roll and sipped from his glass of bitter.
He said nothing for a moment, watching Blanche with his wide eyes, the black lashes curling back on themselves.
‘The trouble is,’ murmured the superintendent, wiping a crumb from the side of her mouth with a paper napkin, ‘we've just got too many suspects.
And credible ones at that.’
Dexter pretended to nod agreement.
He often believed Blanche saw cases as more complicated than they really were.
It was almost as if she wanted the intellectual stimulation, the fascination of the difficult.
‘Lots of people with a motive, and lots of people with an opportunity,’ continued the superintendent morosely.
‘It could have been Jane Pargeter, who was about to lose her job.’
‘Remember she didn't leave the party though when Nicola was out of the room.’
This was a good example, Dexter thought, of Blanche being unwilling to exclude someone from their investigation at an early stage so that they could concentrate their efforts.
Besides, he rather liked her boozy self-confidence — and her style of interior decoration.
‘True,’ replied Blanche, unconvinced.
‘Or it could have been Maggie Parkin —’
‘She's certainly suspicious, trying to cover up her hubby's affair.’
There were other things as well, Dexter recalled.
The convenience of a change of dress in her car.
Even the row with her husband could have been provoked.
Blanche twirled her glass, sending the ice-cubes inside racing round.
‘Or it could have been David Parkin.’
‘I thought you said you had a lot of respect for him as a reporter?’
Blanche laughed gently, allowing the whisky to roll over her tongue.
‘Until I met him in the flesh.
He's too charming by half.’
‘What's puzzling me is that phone-call Nicola had at the party.
I'm sure it's got something to do with the murder.’
‘It could just be a coincidence.
Or from someone connected with the mysterious Mr Kennedy — perhaps his secretary saying the meeting was off.’
‘At nine o'bloody clock.
Come off it, guv'.’
Dexter shrugged with disbelief.
‘Based on what we know so far, I think it's the husband.’
Blanche laughed.
‘You haven't even met him yet and already you've put him behind bars for life.’
The sergeant tapped the side of his nose.
‘Instinct, ma'am.
Instinct.’
Dexter ignored her friendly chuckle and explained the reasons why he thought Jim Lancaster was the prime suspect, counting off the points on his fingers.
First, he had the opportunity.
They knew he was out of the boardroom at the right time.
Second, Jim Lancaster had a good motive.
His wife was having it off with another man.
‘That's enough for me.
He's the man to watch for the moment — until we can point the finger at somebody else.’
‘Yes,’ said Blanche, ‘in a case like this there's always a husband, isn't there?’
Dexter was unable to decide whether her wistfulness was caused by sympathy for the victims of adultery or knowledge that the majority of murders were committed by close relatives of the dead.
Blanche drank off the last of her whisky, leaving a few pebbles of unmelted ice in the bottom of her glass.
Dexter was glad to get back to Chester Row.
He enjoyed the camaraderie of police life and spent several minutes going about the murder squad office, exchanging pleasantries with officers he did not know and catching up with the latest news.
He saw one of his jobs as keeping his ear to the ground on Blanche's behalf, trying to catch discontent while it was no more than a distant rumble and to spot which detectives needed encouragement and which a gentle kick up the backside.
Blanche's antennae were very sensitive at gauging the progress of an investigation but she relied on Dexter to hoover up male gossip that was beyond her reach, idle chatter in the canteen or the gents' toilet that sometimes hardened into hostility or resentment at some way a case was being handled.
It transpired that nothing dramatic had happened since they had left: tests on pairs of scissors at TVL headquarters were getting under way and Hugh Parnham, the third candidate for the Inside Out presenter's job, had phoned from Scotland to say he would be back in London the next day for an interview.
Dexter sat with the superintendent while she dialled the head of the Press Bureau, who told her his phone had not stopped ringing all day: press and television news editors were demanding to know why Scotland Yard was keeping such a low profile on the Nicola Sharpe story.
They were desperate for solid information rather than rumour, and a  few made veiled threats to scale down their coverage of another case for which the Yard was desperate for publicity unless there was a press conference.
The head of the Bureau said the pressure had become so intense by the end of the afternoon, and Blanche had proved so elusive, he had been forced to phone her boss for advice.
Commander Brian Spittals had ordered a press conference to be called at ten o'clock the next morning so that it could catch the lunchtime news bulletins.
The superintendent slipped the phone back into its cradle and a crease of worry tucked itself into her forehead.
Dexter asked what aspect of the investigation was causing her concern.
Blanche took a second to focus on what he had said and then laughed.
‘Oh, it wasn't the case I was worried about.
It was something far more important.
I was wondering where the hell I can get my hair done first thing tomorrow morning.’
She heaved out a great sigh and did not move for a full fifteen seconds: the sergeant watched them tick past, marked by the flick of the thin red hand of the electric clock on the wall.
Dexter guessed she was starting to share the same nagging sense of depression that had afflicted him since the end of the interview with Parkin.
The sergeant was buoyant and resilient but sometimes a dark mood ambushed him.
It might last a minute, an hour or even go on for days and there was nothing Dexter could do to fight it.
Dexter explained how he was wavering about the list of suspects: one moment thinking it consisted of only a handful of people and then believing almost anyone in the building could have done it.
Perhaps it was this very indecision that made him depressed.
Blanche listened patiently, like the elder sister Dexter had never had but always wished for.
The superintendent sat back, shoulders slumped, her eyes bleary with fatigue and thoughtfulness.
She peered out into the office, winding down now at the end of the first day: at the two constables scribbling notes at their desk, at another sitting at the HOLMES computer, at a  WPC glancing through the actions book.
‘We mustn't fall into a trap, Dexter.’
‘What do you mean, ma'am?’ the sergeant grunted suspiciously, over-sensitive in his present mood, and fearful the superintendent was blaming him for some unknown misdemeanour.
‘I mean that someone, somewhere, might want us to look at things in a particular way.’
Dexter could not be bothered to ask her to explain.
She chewed her bottom lip.
‘After the press conference tomorrow, I want to cast our net a bit wider.’
That's not the problem, the sergeant groaned inwardly, tightening his lips to hide his irritation: the net was wide enough already.
‘In the meantime,’ Blanche said, ‘I want to have another chat with our prime suspect.’
NINE
Dexter was puzzled when the man answered the door.
He did not fit the description of Jim Lancaster that Blanche had given him in the car that morning.
But the superintendent did not seem surprised.
She showed her warrant card and when she explained that they had come to see Nicola's husband, the man invited them in.
He was dressed in a shabby olive-green pullover and jeans.
‘Jim's in the sitting-room,’ he said, leading them along the corridor.
Dexter caught a look of suspicious surprise from the man as the sergeant followed Blanche in, a glance that said, ‘Crikey, the black is a policeman too; I just thought he was her driver.’
As the years went by, Dexter saw the look less frequently but when he did it irked him as much as ever.
‘I'm Derek Beasley, an old mate of Jim's from college,’ the man murmured.
And then, realising that his presence needed further explanation, he added, ‘Jim asked me to keep him company until his sister gets here tomorrow.’
Dexter felt there was something strange about Beasley but could only place it when Lancaster's friend raised his right hand to tug at his beard: the last two fingers were no more than withered stumps.
‘Jim's still very shocked.
The doctor gave him a sedative this morning but he's spent most of the day slumped in front of the box.’
Jim Lancaster seemed to shrink when he saw Blanche.
His rounded shoulders collapsed further and his timid eyes quested to right and left to avoid her gaze.
He reminded Dexter of a panic-stricken mole who had suddenly found himself trapped outside his burrow.
But Nicola's  husband recovered himself and padded over from the settee to switch off the television.
With the chatter of the sitcom dead, the room seemed unnaturally quiet.
Dexter watched the husband's eyes grow watchful and his hand rise to brush the side of his nose.
The sergeant remembered it was one of his characteristics Blanche had mentioned.
He struck the black detective immediately as a man trying to hide something, although Dexter knew that timidity often aroused unwarranted suspicions.
It was a modern house and everything in it was modern: the low ceilings, the plaster on the ceiling scumbled in circles like icing on a cake, bare walls, the woodwork all deal and varnished.
The furniture was also modern and marked by a northern love of cheap glamour — polished brass, smoked glass and white crocheted curtains flirting at the windows.
Dexter felt cold.
‘Do you mind if I take a seat?’ began Blanche.
Lancaster grunted, as if suddenly waking from a reverie.
Dexter wondered if his vagueness was due to the shock of his wife's murder or an attempt to gain time.
Nicola's husband sat down on the sofa, rubbing his hands on the knees of his brown corduroy trousers, blinking through his spectacles.
Blanche asked him how he was.
The enquiry seemed to take the school teacher by surprise.
He mumbled that he was still in a state of shock and had been walking around in a dream all day.
His comments were guarded, as if he feared they might incriminate him.
Dexter found his brevity a refreshing contrast to the self-conscious talkativeness of most of the people who worked at TV London.
‘Look, I'm terribly sorry,’ continued Blanche, ‘to have to come back and see you at a time like this, Mr Lancaster —’
‘Call me Jim, Superintendent.
I get enough surnames at school,’ said Lancaster wearily.
His voice was marked by flat northern vowels and was so soft Dexter felt the muscles in his cheeks tense as he strained to hear.
‘OK, Jim,’ replied Blanche with a smile.
Dexter noticed his boss did not suggest Lancaster address her by her  Christian name in return: she only encouraged such informality from the victims of crime rather than its possible perpetrators.
‘A few things have cropped up that I didn't have a chance to talk to you about last night.’
Lancaster scratched his nose.
Blanche sighed.
‘For a start, we've learnt Nicola was having an affair with another man.’
‘Yes.
I know,’ he groaned.
Blanche's eyes widened slightly, as though she had been irritated by the reply.
‘Why didn't you tell me last night?’
Jim studied the carpet like an ashamed schoolboy.
‘I don't know.
Shock, I suppose.
It was something I was trying to forget.’
He glanced up when he finished speaking to gauge the effect of his words.
Blanche gazed at him fixedly.
‘But you can understand how suspicious it looks?
You learn your wife's having an affair — but you don't tell the police about it.’
‘Look, I may have been angry when I found out but…’
Lancaster flared, before trailing off in mid-sentence.
He shuffled in his chair.
‘But I didn't want to see Nicola dead.’
‘Why didn't you mention it last night?’
Blanche repeated.
The school teacher snatched his breath, as though about to snap back.
But he thought better of it and slowly breathed out the air through his nose.
When he did finally speak it was with a studied calm to smother his irritation.
‘Shock.
It didn't seem relevant last night.
Anyway, I've told you now,’ he exclaimed, glancing up and blinking wildly.
‘So you can't accuse me of hiding anything.’
‘I'm just trying to get at the truth,’ soothed Blanche.
Dexter was glad they had come back to see Lancaster at the end of the day.
And God, it had been a long one: Simon Franks, Maggie Parkin, Jane Pargeter, David Parkin.
Twenty-four hours before, Nicola Sharpe was little more than a bloody corpse, a name, a glossy image on a television screen.
But as the day had passed, and Dexter had started to picture her personality, he had come to realise how deceitful that image was.
Nicola was not just a simpering and empty-headed blonde with a pleasant voice.
She was calculating and ambitious, and by all accounts at least a competent journalist.
Dexter guessed she was deeply in love: not with her husband, with whom she was trapped in an unsuitable and corroded marriage; nor even it seemed, although no one knew the secrets of the dead woman's heart, with her older lover; but she was certainly in love with herself, Dexter believed, and with her image on the screen.
The sergeant wondered what he would have thought of Nicola if he had met her when she was alive.
He imagined she would have been charm personified if she wanted something from him, but offhand and dismissive if she had not.
Like many journalists, he concluded cynically.
But although she may not have been popular at work she was not evil.
She did not deserve in that tiny viewing room to have been stabbed by a pair of scissors through the heart.
‘Who was she having the affair with?’
Blanche's question woke Dexter from his reverie and he cast around for a photograph of Nicola in the room.
There was none.
The only photograph was of an elderly couple on top of the television, grey-haired and sporting smiles of false teeth.
A groove of concern chiselled itself down the middle of Lancaster's forehead.
‘David Parkin.’
‘Is that why you told me he had something to do with the murder?’
‘I suppose so.’
Blanche paused.
‘You only suppose so — have you got any other reason?’
Lancaster slipped off his spectacles and began to clean them meticulously with a white handkerchief, scouring the rims with his fingernails.
‘Look, Superintendent, he's the shit who's been screwing my wife.
I was so upset last night that his name just slipped out.
I've got no evidence against him — I was just…’
He glanced round the room, grasping for words.
‘Speculating.’
He could have done it, Dexter saw suddenly.
Lancaster could have murdered his wife.
And the sergeant was sure Blanche agreed with him, from the way she was  scrutinising the man in front of her.
The anger was there, the bitterness of betrayal, the sickness that came with the understanding that another man had been caressing his wife's nakedness.
Dexter had been betrayed by lovers once or twice.
He knew what it was like.
But he realised that for a man like Lancaster — trusting and timid — the betrayal would have been much, much worse.
Blanche respired steadily to allow the tension to subside and asked Lancaster why David Parkin might want to murder his wife.
Lancaster waved his hands vaguely.
His normally flat voice was tinged with desperation.
‘Oh, I don't know.
Perhaps they'd had a row or something.
You see, one of the reasons I mentioned his name last night was that he wasn't in the room when I came back — the boardroom, you know, where the party was being held.
You remember I said I went off looking for Nicola?’
Blanche nodded.
‘Well, I didn't find her.
So I went back up to the party to see if she'd come upstairs again.
But she wasn't there either.
Nor was David Parkin.
It was more than I could stand, you know.
I had an image of them having it off together in the same building where I was.
I felt sick.
So I just went home.’
This must have been when Parkin said he was out on the roof having a smoke, Dexter concluded.
All very convenient if Jim Lancaster had killed, or was about to kill, his wife.
A rap on the hall door echoed round the room.
Although fully furnished it had an air of emptiness and desolation.
Beasley's apprehensive face appeared.
‘Everything all right?
I wondered if you fancied some tea or coffee?’
Blanche's lips set into a pout of annoyance.
Dexter guessed why: Lancaster had been ruffled by her questions and the interruption would allow him to regain his composure.
‘Not for me, thanks, but I don't know about Jim or Sergeant Bazalgette.’
Dexter was gasping for a drink but decided thirst was the better part of subordination: he did not want to annoy  Blanche by prolonging the interruption.
Jim Lancaster looked around with predictable relief and asked for a coffee.
Blanche waited for the door to click before she asked the next question.
‘And when you discovered Nicola and David Parkin were missing from the party, you didn't go down to the office again?’
He shook his head.
‘No.
I couldn't face it.
I just took the lift straight down to reception and went home.’
Blanche sighed and squinted at Nicola's husband, summoning up all her powers of concentration.
‘What do you mean — you ‘couldn't face it’?’
Lancaster looked alarmed for a moment.
Dexter just caught a flash of white in his eyes behind the gold-rimmed spectacles.
‘I just meant…the whole thing.
Her and Parkin together.
The party.
I just wanted to escape.’
The superintendent nodded slowly, pretending to be satisfied by the reply.
Dexter knew it was tempting to ask Lancaster whether he was lying and that he really meant that he couldn't face the idea of seeing his wife again, a wife he had murdered and left a bloody corpse on the floor downstairs only a few minutes before.
But he realised they needed much more evidence before they could arrest him for murder.
Nicola's husband sat quietly on the sofa, his only movement the whisper of his hands rubbing on the knees of his trousers and his eyes blinking wildly behind his spectacles.
Dexter understood why Blanche had described this shy, finicky man as a wimp.
‘When did you first find out the affair was going on?’ the superintendent asked.
The pause before Nicola's husband spoke again seemed long to Dexter.
‘I found out a couple of weeks ago.
Through a letter.’
‘From Parkin?’
Jim Lancaster nodded.
‘Have you still got it?’
‘No, I burnt it,’ he replied, so softly that Dexter had difficulty hearing what he said.
When he spoke again it was with more confidence.
‘I showed it to Nicola, you see, and she confessed.
She said it had been going on for a few months.’
Blanche leant forward in her chair, alert and watchful, but her tone sympathetic — playing the marriage guidance counsellor, Dexter thought.
‘And what did you decide to do about it?
Get a divorce?’
Lancaster stared at the superintendent and gulped.
Dexter watched his prominent Adam's apple rise and fall.
‘No.
Nicola told me she didn't want one.
She said she loved me and the affair had been a big mistake.’
He looked down at the carpet and folded his arms in a protective gesture.
‘Is that what she really said?’ asked Dexter, speaking for the first time, not believing a word of what Lancaster had said.
He was sure that when confronted by the letter Nicola would have told her husband to get lost.
Before the school teacher could answer, there was another rap on the door and Beasley scampered in like an overgrown puppy, casting inquisitive glances at Jim Lancaster and the two police officers.
As he passed across a cup of coffee, he asked Jim if it was ‘going all right’.
The husband smiled nervously and said he was fine.
The sergeant's eyes surveyed the room: the prints of countryside scenes in aluminium frames, the meretricious chandelier, the knick-knacks accumulated from various holidays, including a bouzouki on one wall.
‘I see there aren't any photos of Nicola anywhere.’
It was more a statement than a question.
‘I threw them all away a couple of weeks ago as soon as I came across that letter from Parkin,’ Lancaster murmured.
‘I was so angry.
I had to do something.’
His words hung on the chill, stale air.
Dexter yearned for a cigarette and squeezed his ballpoint tighter to quieten the urge.
Outside his ears picked up for the first time the rustling of invisible leaves and the rattle of window-frames: the wind was rising.
When Beasley finally skipped out of the room, Dexter posed his original question again.
‘Are you sure about that?
Nicola said she was going to give Parkin up?’
Jim Lancaster nodded and a dim look drifted into his  eyes.
‘That's right.
She said she'd been stupid.
She said she'd give up her job and we'd go back up north.
Start again.’
Dexter pursed his lips with disbelief and turned to Blanche, who was examining her fingernails thoughtfully.
‘Can you remember who you talked to at the party?’
‘Not really.
I was pretty drunk.
They were just faces.
Hardly any of them can be bothered to talk to me anyway.’
‘Do you remember talking to Jane Pargeter?’
‘Yeah, just about.’
‘Anyone else?’
‘Not really.’
Jim looked away and focused on the solid glass ashtray on the coffee table.
The sergeant lounged back in his chair and gnawed the end of his pen.
He asked if Nicola had ever mentioned a man called Kennedy.
Lancaster shook his head.
He also denied that his wife had given him any details of who she was supposed to be meeting at TVL at the time of the party.
She said only that someone was coming to see her.
Dexter gnawed his pen again.
He was hungry.
It was a good job he had filled his mini-freezer with chilled meals from the supermarket a couple of days before.
The thought of a hot lasagne at home cheered him up and helped him ignore the throb of a headache that had begun during the drive up to Kentish Town.
‘Did you have any idea what the story was she was meant to be meeting this person in connection with?’
‘She didn't tell me and I didn't ask.’
‘She didn't say it was drugs or child porn?’
Lancaster looked slightly shocked when the sergeant mentioned child porn.
‘She mentioned both stories to me.
But she didn't go into any detail.’
Blanche leant forward and Dexter automatically deferred to her.
‘You don't think she could have come across something that put her in danger?’
‘Doubt it.
I didn't see much of her recently anyway.
She was always working so hard — or so she said.’
The last words were suffused with a whining bitterness.
‘Someone told us she'd got hold of the name of some MP  who's mixed up in child porn.
Do you know who it is?’
‘No idea.
There are probably hundreds of them mixed up in it anyway.’
It was a dry, harsh humour, born of trusting no one in authority.
Lancaster sighed and brushed an imaginary fly from his nose.
He looked away, his eyes blank like old coins.
Blanche eased herself up and Dexter watched the tension start to drain from Lancaster's body.
Outside a car revved up its engine as it changed up a gear only to screech to a halt at the corner and roar off again.
Probably a group of youths returning from the pub, thought Dexter.
Next door, through the partition wall, some shouts were audible, so muffled it was impossible to tell whether it was a violent assault or someone asking for his bath to be turned off.
London, meditated Dexter — so many people crammed together, yet knowing so little about the others standing only a few feet away.
‘There's just one last point,’ said Blanche, ‘the clothes you were wearing last night when I called round.
Have you still got them?’
She posed the question as casually as possible but the school teacher recognised its significance.
His eyes clouded with suspicion.
‘No…
I haven't actually.
I took them to the dry cleaner's this afternoon.’
Dexter noticed that Blanche hid her surprise, although her eyelids parted slightly.
Nicola's husband was after all, thought Dexter, the second suspect they had seen that day who had decided to dry-clean the clothes worn at the farewell party.
‘Why such a hurry?’
Lancaster was tense again, his thin hands clasping each other.
‘I wanted them cleaned, that's all.
They were mixed up with what happened last night.’
Blanche wrinkled her forehead.
Nicola's husband caught her look.
‘It was a kind of psychological thing — a sort of purification, I suppose.’
Blanche turned her biro slowly round in her fingers, meditating on the patterns created by the octagonal tube of plastic, and asked for the name of the dry cleaner's.
The superintendent slipped her notebook and pen back into her capacious handbag to indicate the interview was over.
Jim Lancaster's lips twitched into a smile of relief and  he led them towards the hall.
There, much to Dexter's amazement, Blanche strode down some steps to the kitchen, where Beasley sat at a pine table nursing a glass of wine.
The superintendent thanked him for his help and bade him goodnight but with a distracted air as though her attention were elsewhere.
She reappeared a moment later and the police officers walked out to their car.
‘What was that about then, ma'am?’ probed Dexter, once they were out on the pavement, puzzled by his chief's foray into the kitchen.
‘Just drive slowly round the block, Dexter, and you'll find out.’
The pavements were deserted, a kaleidoscope of patterns as the light from the streetlamps was fragmented by the wind-whipped trees.
Nicola's house was one of a block of three modern ones squeezed into a gap in a row of substantial Victorian villas.
Most of the houses were well maintained with the few rooms that were still lit disclosing the appurtenances of middle-class living: paintings and prints, a piano, a music-stand, crammed bookshelves.
As the police car hummed round the block, one or two other houses caught Dexter's attention because of their air of dirt and dilapidation: divided into bed-sits, they had batteries of bells by the main door, broken windows mended with brown tape and unkempt front gardens crammed with junk.
Kentish Town just before midnight, thought Dexter.
Dexter stopped the car about fifty yards down the road from Jim Lancaster's house.
Blanche glanced up and down the empty pavement, slid on her leather gloves and loped off into the night.
A few minutes later she slumped back into the front seat of the Granada.
Her right hand held a mangled silver photograph frame about eight inches by six.
The glass was smashed.
Within was a colour photograph of Nicola that had been taken several years before: her face was chubbier and her hair, although still a remarkable blonde, was straight and parted down the middle.
A cheeky innocence was imparted to the ruined photo by Nicola's prominent  front teeth: her vanity and the ambition to succeed in television must have made her pay later for cosmetic dental work, concluded Dexter, who had an acute eye for wigs worn by men and corsets by women.
‘Where did you find this then, ma'am?’ asked the sergeant, taking the photo from Blanche and studying it by the map-reading light.
‘The dustbin.
I left two others there,’ murmured Blanche.
‘But one would have been enough.’
‘Yeah.
At least he's not lying about one thing.
He did get rid of his wife's photos.’
The superintendent's face, softened by the glimmering light, nodded gently.
‘Yes.
But not when he said he did.’
Her car seat squeaked as Blanche reached up to switch out the light.
Her face was plunged back into shadow.
Dexter watched as his boss stared out into the night, no more than a black profile: her full lips, rounded nose and firm chin silhouetted against the wall behind.
‘The photos were on the top of all the other stuff in the dustbin.
And the rubbish bin in the kitchen was empty when I looked in it as we left.’
As Dexter adjusted to the dark, he saw that Blanche had turned back to him, her heavy-lidded eyes trained on his face.
‘So that's why you trooped off to say goodnight to that bloke Beasley in the kitchen.
I didn't think you'd be interested in his home phone number.’
Blanche chuckled.
‘Don't worry, Dexter, I gave him yours.’
‘Thanks, guv',’ joked the sergeant.
‘Don't get me too excited.’
Dexter sensed Blanche's eyes on him, excited and expectant.
He paused and thought through the implications of her discovery.
‘So…if the kitchen bag had just been changed and the photos were on the top outside, it can only mean he threw out the photos in the last couple of days.’
The superintendent nodded vigorously.
‘Yesterday probably because the photos weren't in the house when I called to see him last night.
I should have spotted it then, but I didn't.
So well done you.’
She rubbed her chin slowly with her forefinger.
‘Now, it's perfectly possible that he did  discover Nicola was having an affair a couple of weeks ago but only threw out the photos last night.
But why would he bother to lie about it?’
‘Search me,’ grunted Dexter who, having met Lancaster, was increasingly convinced of his guilt.
And as his conviction grew so his depression and associated headache began to fade.
Dexter was by nature impatient.
He was sometimes irritated by what he saw as Blanche's deductive ramblings, her obsession with the power of reason.
He liked to decide who was guilty early in an investigation after gulping down his own potent brew of intuition and prejudice mixed with the available evidence — and then squeeze a confession from the suspect.
He hated cases that required painstaking enquiries over months and months and had little prospect of solution.
The sergeant was irresistibly drawn towards activity.
Whether in choosing the pattern on his wallpaper or deciding what to do next in a murder case, Dexter wanted action.
‘I think we should arrest him,’ said the sergeant simply.
‘Lock him up in an interview room.
Make him sweat a bit.’
Blanche turned to her sergeant with a weary smile.
‘You really do need some sleep, don't you?’
‘What do you mean, guv'?’ replied the sergeant resentfully.
‘Come on, Dexter, he's not going to come voluntarily, is he?
So as soon as he's in the station the clock begins to run and he'll be screaming for his brief.’
Dexter sighed.
She was right of course.
Under the law a suspect had to be charged within twenty-four hours of arrest or else released.
And Lancaster was just the sort of geezer to know his solicitor's telephone number off by heart.
Dexter held up the mangled photograph frame.
‘You've got this.’
‘And what am I expected to do with it?
Hold it up in front of him like a cross in front of Dracula?
Sometimes, Dexter, I think you're a real — what do you call Wootton sometimes behind his back?’
‘Dickhead, ma'am?’
‘Yes, dickhead.’
The expletive sounded strange to the  sergeant on Blanche's lips, as if she were hearing it for the first time.
Her voice was edged with irritation.
Dexter realised that she was tired and frustrated too.
The sergeant decided to beat a tactical retreat.
‘Well, I didn't mean arrest him just at this minute.
You could go back and confront him with the photo now.
See what he's got to say.’
‘We need some proper evidence, Dexter.
Not smashed photos from dustbins.
You can start first thing tomorrow morning by going to that dry cleaner's on the Kentish Town Road.’
She yanked back her sleeve to peer at her watch.
It was midnight.
Dexter yawned and she smiled.
‘I want you there at eight o'clock, please.
I should just about have finished at the hairdresser's by then.’
TEN
Things started to go wrong from the moment Dexter got up.
As usual he had planned his early morning routine with almost military precision.
Not a minute was to be wasted.
The electronic cheep from the alarm chiselled into his skull at precisely a quarter to seven.
He waited two minutes to focus his thoughts, threw back the duvet — its stale scent reminding him yet again to visit the launderette soon — and staggered into the bathroom.
He turned on the shower and waited for the hot water to flow through so that he could adjust the temperature.
He waited and waited.
And waited.
His fingers kept dipping into the torrent but the water remained chill.
‘Shit,’ he murmured under his breath, goosepimples plucking at his naked skin.
He ran the pink insides of his fingers along the radiator.
It was as cold as a glass of lager.
‘Fucking shit,’ he said, ‘this is just what I need.’
The central heating was not working.
He tore open the cupboard door and peered at the tiny porthole of glass on the front of the central heating boiler.
It was black.
The comforting blue flame of the pilot light was dead, blown out by the gusting wind of the night before.
Still swearing under his breath, Dexter pulled off the cover from the bottom of the boiler and relit the pilot light.
At least he would have hot water that night when he returned home — if he had the time to return home.
Now what was he supposed to be doing that morning?
Dexter recalled the meeting with Jim Lancaster and Blanche's order to visit the dry cleaner's.
There was some hope, he  supposed, that the clothes had not yet been laundered.
He certainly hoped so.
Having met him, Dexter was convinced Lancaster was their prime suspect.
He was evasive and weak.
And he had lied.
Only in small things so far but Dexter was sure, thinking back to the taut image of the man sitting on his sofa the previous night, that he was lying about bigger things as well.
Flicking the side of his nose, the spectacles, the feeble and whining voice — all irritated the sergeant.
As a boy Lancaster would have been the natural victim of bullies — punched, thumped and insulted.
And it is often those who suffer abuse who are capable of horrendous acts of violence, storing up their hatred for release in an act of revenge against the world.
The sergeant paused, pulling the electric shaver away from his chin with an angry buzz, and cut short his flight of fancy.
Blanche was right.
They needed evidence against him.
They needed it quickly and they needed it badly.
A dark curtain of cloud hung over the horizon to the north as Dexter weaved his way through the clotted traffic on the Kentish Town Road.
The dry cleaner's lurked in a short terrace of shops, penned between an off-licence and a cafe.
The door was secured by a hasp and a heavy padlock and the windows were protected by grilles.
Dexter pressed his nose against the grid of cold metal but all he could make out in the shadowy interior was a counter and the shimmer of clothes hung up in plastic bags.
A rectangle of cardboard hung on the door announcing that the shop was due to open at nine o'clock.
Dexter had woken up early only to find himself with forty minutes to kill.
The sergeant swore good-naturedly at Blanche under his breath.
He did not resent her visit to the hairdresser's.
He would have done the same in her position if he had to appear at a press conference — appearance was important to Dexter.
But he would have preferred to spend the extra time in bed none the less.
He ordered a cup of tea and a bacon sandwich in the cafe a few doors down and sank his weary limbs down to wait, revelling in his first cigarette of the day.
A price list drooped listlessly on the back wall, the letters and numbers  formed from rectangles of clear plastic slid into horizontal grooves.
Although the wall was originally orange, a brown shadow in the shape of a fan stretched up to the ceiling above the frying pans on the hob.
A handsome Irish youth with ginger hair squirted some boiling water into the teapot and swilled a cup of dark brown liquid into a chipped cup.
Dexter threw him a glittering smile but there was no response.
He felt like one of those astronomers who pumped radio waves out into the galaxies in the hope of finding intelligent life elsewhere in the universe but never heard anything back.
Vaguely disappointed, the detective sat by the steamed-up window, attracting the occasional glance from the groups of sullen men at the Formica tables, his nose prickling with pleasure at the smell of frying bacon.
Both newspapers he bought had big articles on the murder of Nicola Sharpe.
It was their first opportunity to treat the murder in detail.
The lead story on the front page of the Daily Mail blazoned a colour photograph of the dead girl under the headline ‘TV GIRL MURDER MYSTERY.
The Daily Mirror devoted a whole inside page to the story.
He scanned the newsprint greedily while his teeth sank into the bacon sandwich, the melted margarine dribbling over his fingers.
Unlike Blanche, he enjoyed the cases he worked on being in the public eye.
Both newspapers gave fairly accurate accounts of what had happened the night before last.
They said Nicola had been found brutally stabbed to death in her office although neither newspaper disclosed that the murder weapon was a pair of scissors.
Both gave glamorised summaries of Nicola's rise in the space of ten years from being a cub reporter on a local newspaper in Keighley to ‘stardom’ at TV London.
Both also gave prominence to the fact that Blanche happened to be at TV London at the time of the murder and had taken charge of the case.
The detective superintendent, despite her dislike of publicity, was now quite a celebrated figure in the media.
Dexter smiled to himself as he imagined his boss's grimace when she saw herself described in the Mirror as ‘Scotland Yard's  female supersleuth’.
He knew Blanche would be much happier with the file photo the same newspaper had used of her.
It was probably three or four years old and Dexter clicked his tongue with the realisation that Blanche had aged.
‘Do you own this place then, mate?’
The man swung round, fear flashing in his eyes.
He was about fifty, Dexter supposed, with great soulful eyes and brown leathery skin.
Every movement he made was slow and deliberate, as if designed to conserve energy.
‘What if I do?’ he grumbled with a tremor of his sculpted lips, his accent indefinably foreign.
The sergeant produced his warrant card and said he wanted to ask some questions.
The man examined the card quizzically as if the rectangle of plastic was a conundrum.
Then he beckoned Dexter in.
The fluorescent tubes on the ceiling flickered into life.
The air stank of chlorine.
The proprietor thrust aside the plastic  tassels that filled the doorway through to the back of the dry cleaner's and dumped his shopping bag on the floor next to an ironing board.
Dexter explained why he had come.
The man gave a sigh of resignation.
He started to run a gnarled forefinger down the receipt stubs.
‘You said this Mr Lancaster come in yesterday?’
Dexter nodded.
A few seconds later the finger stopped moving and the man turned round the book to face Dexter.
‘There you are — one jacket and one pair of trousers.’
‘And have you cleaned them yet?’
The man shrugged his shoulders apologetically.
‘Yes.
My son did them last night.
They're hanging up over there.’
He nodded towards the rack on Dexter's right.
‘Shit, what a bloody morning,’ groaned the sergeant under his breath.
First the central heating.
Then having to kill forty minutes when he could have been in bed and now this: the delay in visiting the dry cleaner's meant a vital piece of evidence might have been destroyed.
The proprietor lumbered over and dumped the clothes on the counter.
The sergeant flicked up the plastic film and scrutinised the tweed jacket and brown trousers with a faint sneer: he wouldn't be seen dead wearing such clothes.
With such dreadful taste Lancaster deserved to be the murderer, Dexter told himself with a smile.
But the detective saw nothing suspicious.
‘Did he give any special instructions when he handed these in?
You know — get rid of any stains?’
The man ran a calloused hand through his thick, curly hair and stretched his lips into a look of uncertainty that presaged a loud belch.
He touched the right cuff of his pullover.
‘There were a couple of stains here he wanted us to get rid of.
And on the knees of his trousers.
My son had a job doing it.’
‘Blood?’
The proprietor stared back over the great, sagging pouches under his eyes.
His skin was sown with little black spots.
‘Might have been.
He just used the normal stain stuff, you know.’
Dexter took the jacket to the window so that he could scrutinise the cuff by natural light.
The tweed was completely clean.
‘Well, there's nothin' there now.’
The proprietor beamed behind the counter, revealing a row of yellowed teeth.
‘They come up real well, didn't they?
He's a hard worker, my son.’
Dexter detected a glimmer of pleasure, as if the man felt instinctive sympathy for Lancaster and took personal satisfaction in thwarting the police.
Fuck you, thought the detective.
Dexter arrived back at Scotland Yard just in time for the press conference.
He knew Blanche was nervous by her uncharacteristic air of distraction and tried to calm her with compliments about her appearance.
Her hair had been cut shorter than usual round her neck, accentuating the elegant curve of the nape and softening the slight masculinity of her features.
She had applied more make-up than usual but with her habitual restraint.
Dexter  decided once again that Blanche's attraction did not lie in any classical beauty.
It resided in her peculiar amalgam of irregular features, dull when separate, but irresistible when brought together and animated by her intelligence and energy.
While he and Blanche hummed up in the lift to the conference room, Dexter told the superintendent what he had found out at the dry cleaner's.
Although she did not seem to be listening, Dexter knew from experience that she would remember everything important he had told her.
Her only reaction was a sigh of disappointment.
Dexter stood at the back of the conference suite behind the video cameras and serried ranks of reporters.
The room hummed with an expectant murmur which heightened and then died away when Commander Brian Spittals, followed by Blanche and the head of the Press Bureau, strode out on to the platform.
The veneered desk where they sat was suddenly drenched in light as the languid television crews jumped up and took their positions, communicating with each other by harsh whispers or frantic sign language.
Trust Spittals not to miss a chance to get into the papers, thought Dexter with a snort.
Spittals made great play of tapping the microphones and checking that they worked before he introduced the superintendent.
Blanche blinked into the glare and began to speak from her notes in a well-articulated voice.
As she spoke the pens of the newspaper reporters seemed to take on a frantic life of their own, skipping across the lines of their notebooks.
Their television colleagues were more patrician, only occasionally deigning to nod down at the page and scribble the time of an important section of Blanche's statement.
Four photographers scampered round the podium, halting to squint through their viewfinders and freeze the scene with their flashlights.
A murmur crossed the room like a wave when Blanche revealed she was seeking a man called Mr Kennedy, who had been due to meet Nicola Sharpe at nine o'clock on the night she was murdered.
When she had finished, Blanche sat back with evident  relief.
Dexter noticed that she had made no mention of the murder weapon being a pair of scissors or of the discovery of blood in a wash-basin near where the body was found.
A flurry of hands whisked into the air, accompanied by chaotic shouts.
‘Quiet, please!
Gentlemen, a bit of hush, please!’
Spittals' voice rose above the chaos with the natural authority of one who was used to being obeyed.
‘If you'd care to raise your hands, we'll take questions one at a time.
Reg?’
The commander nodded down to a middle-aged man with a florid face and crinkly, Brylcreemed hair.
The face was familiar: he had been the crime correspondent of a well-known tabloid newspaper for many years and was guaranteed to give the Yard a favourable press.
The man smiled gratefully at the commander.
‘Superintendent, do you know anything about this mysterious man, Kennedy — why he was meeting Nicola Sharpe, for example?’
Blanche leant forward towards her microphone.
‘I'm afraid not.
All we know is that Nicola was due to meet him at nine o'clock and that he didn't turn up.
For all we know he was a complete stranger.’
The reporter's bloodshot eyes did not leave Blanche's face.
‘I gather you've been interviewing some of the well-known faces down at TVL, Superintendent — like David Parkin and Jane Pargeter.
Can you confirm that?’
The room was silent with expectation.
Blanche coughed and responded that the police were talking to everyone who had been at the farewell party on the sixth floor, including Parkin and Pargeter.
‘And are they suspects?’
‘It's much too early in the investigation to talk about anyone being a suspect,’ exclaimed Blanche curtly, pointing to a waving hand several rows back.
She cut across Spittals who was about to signal to another of his cronies on the front row.
Dexter smiled: Blanche had obviously decided to show some independence now that the press conference had begun.
A young, blond man with a high forehead and loosened  tie jerked up.
He asked with a pronounced Welsh accent whether Blanche had interviewed Nicola's husband.
Blanche winced as a cameraman's flash exploded in front of her.
‘Yes, I have.
In fact it was me who had to break the news of the murder to him.’
‘How did he take it?’
The superintendent looked at the reporter coldly.
Dexter guessed that if the conversation had been in private, Blanche would have said, ‘He sat down and opened a bottle of Bollinger ‘59 actually — what do you think?’
Dexter remembered the name and vintage from a description Blanche had reluctantly given him once of a feast at her old Cambridge college.
But the detective superintendent was only too aware of how double-edged a weapon irony could be when deployed against a bunch of journalists.
Their sympathy had to be cultivated not abused.
So she contented herself with giving the reporter what he wanted.
‘Nicola's husband was obviously very, very distressed.
He's still in a state of severe shock.’
‘You said Nicola was brutally stabbed to death, Superintendent.
Presumably it was a knife, was it?’
Blanche paused for a fragment of a second, calculating how to mislead the press without lying to it.
‘That's a fair assumption, although we're still waiting for the full results from the post-mortem.’
The superintendent told the lie fluently, looking the reporter full in the face.
‘Superintendent,’ began a woman TV reporter a few rows back, who wore artificial eyelashes like black combs.
‘You've talked about Nicola's husband.
But was Nicola romantically linked with anyone else?
I mean could that have been a motive for the murder?’
One man a few yards ahead of Dexter turned to a colleague and muttered, ‘Bonking in the viewing room, eh?’ with a smutty chuckle.
The superintendent grimaced as though her nostrils had suddenly detected a bad smell.
Dexter knew she hated intrusions into the private lives of the victims of crime.
‘No comment, I'm afraid.’
Whispers hummed round the room.
A look of  puzzlement flickered on the woman journalist's face.
‘So, you're confirming she was having an affair with someone?’
Blanche sighed.
She gave a knowing smile.
‘'No comment’ means exactly that.
I'm neither confirming nor denying anything.
It's simply too early to say.’
The woman journalist pressed on in her throaty drawl.
‘What about personal rivalries in the office, Superintendent?
Have you found out anything there?’
Dexter had always been impressed by Blanche's coolness under fire.
He knew she was nervous and that this reporter was pressing the superintendent on the most delicate areas of the investigation.
But Blanche gave nothing away.
‘Nothing out of the ordinary.’
‘What do you mean by that?’ barked the woman, obviously annoyed by Blanche's laconicism.
‘Just what I said.
Most journalists by nature, as I'm sure you know, are back-biters.’
A titter of whispered ‘Oooooos’ echoed round the conference room.
The detective smiled to soften the barb she had just thrown even though the tone was not hostile.
‘And by all accounts Nicola Sharpe had her supporters and her detractors.
But so far — and this may be what you're driving at — we haven't found evidence of anything that could explain her murder.’
A reporter a few yards ahead of Dexter turned to his colleague and murmured, ‘Christ, she's tight-arsed, isn't she?
Getting a story out of her is like getting blood out of a stone.’
‘It's all the same with these women who think they're heading for the top.
They always play it by the bloody book.’
A tall, dark figure slipped into a seat to Dexter's right.
The sergeant acknowledged the man's smile with a nod.
‘Are you getting any special insights 'cos you're a woman?’ asked another voice.
‘You know, a professional woman in a man's world?’
Blanche smiled and shook her head.
‘No.’
Several reporters chuckled, one of them shouting, ‘Didn't know you were editing the women's page, Charlie.’
Another titter passed round the room.
After a few more desultory questions, Brian Spittals beamed and called the press conference to a halt.
The journalists gathered in knots to compare notes and decide on the best angle on the story.
Blanche, smiling blandly so as to appear co-operative, was ushered over to a corner of the room to record the first of a series of television interviews.
Dexter loved watching press conferences for cases with which he was involved.
They served up to the public a version of events and only those, like Dexter, who were privy to the truth would be able to distinguish how close that version of events was to reality.
The detective enjoyed the sense of privilege imparted by being an insider.
As usual, Dexter judged that Blanche — despite her misgivings — had performed well at the press conference, providing enough information to keep the newspapers happy without compromising the investigation.
He stood up, intending to wander over and offer his boss congratulations on her performance.
Blanche finished almost every press conference or interview in a state of mild depression.
Instead he was confronted by the tall, dark man whose hand was extended ready to clamp on to the sergeant's and give it a hearty shake as if he were an old friend.
‘DS Bazalgette, aren't you?’
‘Probably.’
The man laughed nervously.
He was in his mid-forties, his hair liberally splashed with grey.
‘What do you mean, probably?’
‘Well, I'm goin' through a bit of a personality crisis at the moment.
I often wake up in the morning and wish I was Eddie Murphy.’
Dexter was wary: he was using the banter to keep the man at a distance.
The man laughed loudly, too loudly for the sergeant.
Dexter remembered that cackle and so the journalist who owned it: John Barry, who had helped report Blanche's last murder case for the Herald.
Dexter guessed immediately that the man was trying to extract an exclusive story on the investigation into the murder of Nicola Sharpe.
The sergeant was tempted to walk off but did not.
He was  intrigued and wanted to know what the Herald had discovered.
Besides, his ego was tickled by the implicit flattery of the journalist's attention.
He folded his arms, admiring the two glittering rings on his right hand.
Barry leant forward and whispered conspiratorially, his breath smelling of mint, ‘Look, Sergeant, we know as well as you do that Parkin was having it away with Nicola Sharpe.
The question is — did he murder her or was it the husband?’
The black detective edged away from the chairs towards the door.
He had decided to play a little game and risk putting pressure on the person he was convinced had committed the murder — Jim Lancaster, the man who had taken his jacket and trousers to the dry cleaner's the day after the murder to have some stains removed.
‘Work it out for yourself.
Why on earth would Parkin want to kill his own mistress?
Angry hubbies, on the other hand, kill double-crossing wives all the time.’
Dexter strode away to ask Blanche how the interviews had gone.
He was sure no one had noticed him talking to the journalist.
ELEVEN
Dexter was suspicious from the moment Blanche first shook hands with Eddy Russell.
There was an unwonted gaiety in her manner as if the superintendent had spent the morning swallowing double Scotches.
He knew she had not because the press conference had finished only an hour before and not a drop of alcohol had passed Blanche's lips.
Dexter crimped with irritation: Blanche fancied the man she was meant to be interviewing.
It had all begun innocently enough.
When the press conference was over Blanche had led Dexter down to the incident room.
The sergeant thought Blanche would be tired after the tension of the previous hour or two, and he expected Blanche to sit at her desk quietly for a few minutes.
But the superintendent was too excited to rest.
She prowled among the desks and glowered at the action boards as if they were a bunch of football hooligans.
Suddenly she bustled over to her sergeant and motioned him into her office.
‘Dexter, I think we've got to step back a bit.
Approach this murder from some new angles.
I'll tell the squad later.
But I want you to make a start now.’
The sergeant sighed to himself.
He knew what was coming: the pursuit of some clever ideas of Blanche that were totally irrelevant to the case, ideas that sprang from intuition but were justified by reason.
Dexter was irritated by Blanche's love of the difficult and complicated as opposed to his preference for the simple and straightforward.
He wondered if it was because a woman's mind worked in a different way to a man's or whether  Blanche simply thought too much.
The superintendent said she wanted some men to investigate the stories that Nicola was looking into before her death — child porn and drugs.
They were to start by talking to the officers in the Drugs Squad that Nicola had met.
She wanted another group to collect more background about TVL and its bosses, in particular about the chairman, Stephen Blufton.
‘Who, the guy who's meant to have told Nicola she had this new job?’
‘That's the one.’
Dexter had nodded with mock enthusiasm.
He thought they were investigating a murder at TV London not whether its chairman had a casting couch.
But on reflection he concluded Blanche was right.
The investigation was already starting to stagnate.
Dexter began work.
And for the first time since the investigation had begun the sergeant felt he had been lucky.
When he phoned up the Scotland Yard Press Bureau the woman who answered said it was she who had fixed up Nicola's first contact with the Drugs Squad.
It was with a detective inspector called Eddy Russell.
Russell happened to be in the office and sounded watchful when Dexter explained why Blanche wanted a word with him.
The inspector, though, agreed there was no time like the present for a meeting.
An hour later Dexter found himself sitting next to Blanche on a settle in a pub near Scotland Yard with Detective Inspector Eddy Russell of the Drugs Squad perched on a stool on the opposite side of the Formica table.
Knots of office workers in various poses hid the bar, girls in high-heeled shoes and heavy make-up, men in cheap suits and loud ties: only the glasses hanging suspended in a rack above their heads indicated where drinks were being dispensed.
Russell was tall and slim, with a well-sculpted face, his eyes wide and grey.
He gave the impression of vulnerability by sitting with his chin on his chest so that he had no alternative but to look up through  his eyebrows.
Dexter thought the inspector spoke with the brittle confidence of someone who underneath was not that sure of himself.
‘Nicola wanted a story for her TV programme,’ he began, sipping his pint of lager.
‘Said she wanted to find out the latest angle on the police battle against drugs.’
His voice struck Dexter as unremarkably attractive, like an actor's.
Russell gulped another mouthful from his pint of beer and ripped open a bag of crisps.
‘Did you tell her about any specific operations?’
Blanche slid forward on her seat to attract the inspector's attention.
Russell caught the look with a shiver of panic in his eyes as if it were a wet glass that had slipped out of his hand.
‘No — except ones that were finished.
Why?’
It was Blanche's turn to tug her lips into a flirtatious smile.
She murmured that Nicola Sharpe had told her editor that she had been given a really good story by someone in the Drugs Squad.
Russell finished munching a few crisps.
‘You know the bullshit that some journalists talk.’
Blanche chuckled.
He took a swig of lager and looked up watchfully.
‘Besides, if the story was so good, why didn't she do anything about it?’
‘She said it didn't stand up.’
Dexter was not sure what to make of Russell.
One side of him found the inspector attractive and amusing.
Another whispered that the policeman was wary, unsure of what to reveal and what to hide.
Blanche did not seem to share his ambiguity, flirting with the inspector.
The mating instinct allied to fear of loneliness was an irresistible combination, concluded the sergeant, gazing round the pub to conceal his irritation.
It was filling up with more and more people.
The odd, lugubrious figure sitting on a stool at the bar was now completely hidden from view along with the half-caste man yanking the arm of the one-armed bandit a few yards away.
Dexter let his eyes play over the clutter designed to bless the pub with a friendly air: two post horns slung like bombs from the ceiling, mock Tudor beams, lines of plates balanced on every available ledge, and a grubby portrait of the Queen hung in dusty splendour above the bar.
When Dexter focused back on the conversation, Blanche was laughing at some joke of Eddy Russell's that the sergeant had missed.
The sergeant knew she was a tough woman and had few weaknesses.
She coped well with the peculiar pressures of being only an honorary man in a male world.
She did not scream and weep — at least in front of him — when things went wrong and did not have a reputation for being raucous about women's rights.
She was ever watchful, and careful not to court publicity.
Whatever risks she took in her career were calculated ones.
But with men — and this was the reason for Dexter's apprehension — it was different.
After the separation from her husband, Blanche's love life was a Russian roulette of the emotions: taking men to her heart, and sometimes to her bed, with the fateful enthusiasm of a suicide pulling the trigger of a gun.
None of the relationships had survived, although Blanche had.
But one day, unless she was more circumspect, Dexter feared she might not.
‘Inspector,’ broke in the sergeant, determined to pose some important questions that Blanche had not yet bothered to ask.
‘Do you think Nicola could have got hold of something that put her in danger?’
Russell turned to Dexter with a look of surprise and irritation, as if he were a complete stranger butting in on a private conversation — which indeed was just how the sergeant felt.
He had smooth bags under his eyes, Dexter noticed, puffed out with fatigue.
‘Like what?’
‘I don't know.
She might have stumbled on to some big-time drug smugglers for example.’
Russell did not answer immediately.
His eyes — matt like those of a dead fish on the slab — flickered up to the bone china model of a Suffolk Punch above their heads, the bright colours making the creature appear unearthly.
‘It's funny.
But when I heard about the murder I wondered just the same thing.’
The superintendent dropped her head to one side.
‘Why?
Because you thought she was in danger when she met you?’
Russell jerked his head defensively.
‘Oh, no.
I didn't have any reason to think she was in trouble.
She was much too smooth for that.
But if you know anyone who comes to a bad end you tend to think over what you said to them, what they said to you.’
Russell smiled again but Dexter found it impossible to decide whether it was a smile of contemplation, charm or mendacity — or all three.
Dexter did not trust Russell one millimetre, let alone an inch, and he made up his mind to tell Blanche at the earliest opportunity.
‘I don't know.
She may have stumbled across something.
There's so much money riding on drugs deals…’
He shrugged his shoulders as his voice trailed away.
Dexter watched the conversation between his boss and Russell rattle on for several minutes.
It seemed a waste of time to the sergeant and a mood of depression began to cloak him again.
Blanche was right to insist that these leads were followed up but it did not look as if they were going to take them anywhere.
As Blanche and Russell chatted on about some Woody Allen film, Dexter let his eyes glaze over.
He felt increasingly irritated and despondent.
He wondered what had happened to handsome Georgie, the boy he was supposed to be meeting at the pub on the night of the murder.
He had rung his number several times but there had been no reply.
Loneliness stole across him at the strangest times.
After a few minutes, Blanche seemed to sense Dexter's baleful mood, checked her watch and stood up to go.
The pub was a pullulating stew of people, swelling and bubbling behind a screen of smoke.
Russell's eyes followed her every move as if he were looking through the sight of a gun.
‘I'd like to keep in touch,’ he said.
‘Just in case something crops up and I need to let you know.’
He drew out his Metropolitan Police diary.
Blanche dictated the direct line to the incident room.
She hesitated for a second and then gave Russell her home  number.
‘Give me a call whenever you want.’
Dexter noticed that her smile of farewell was warmer than it need have been.
As the superintendent cut her way through the herd of lunchtime drinkers, Dexter followed in her wake, like a driver who glues himself to the back of an ambulance careering through busy streets on an emergency call.
The sergeant was pensive.
At least the interview with Russell had told them Nicola's investigation into drugs had taken place.
And if it had, who knows who else she had spoken to.
After all, the inspector himself admitted wondering whether Nicola had learnt or been given something that put her in danger.
Dexter looked back and saw Russell drain off the last drops of his lager.
The sergeant doubted if they would need to see him again.
And with an inward smile Dexter realised another reason why Blanche's flirtation with the inspector had made him so irritable.
He also had found Russell attractive — battered yet handsome and oppressed by some secret worry.
Dexter shrugged philosophically.
He had given up years ago the delusion that all men were homosexual at heart, and that it was just a question of finding the key to unlock their repressed desires.
The two security men Dexter had interviewed immediately after the murder were on duty when the sergeant loped into the headquarters of TV London late that same afternoon.
The giant Asian greeted the detective with a silent nod, his red-headed companion with a suspicious glare.
Blanche had left a message for the sergeant to join her in the editor's office of Inside Out on the fourth floor.
Dexter had no idea why, except that the superintendent sometimes found it useful to revisit the scene of a crime alone and absorb its atmosphere at different times of day or night.
Dexter distrusted the whole concept, fearing that Blanche did not just operate at the rational level of searching for evidence and reassembling facts, but that she so thought herself into the mind of murderer and victim, that she communed with spirits.
He had read that acts of  violence can leave their imprint on a place, a shadow that some can sense for centuries afterwards.
He suggested once to Blanche that she could perhaps feel such chill draughts blowing from the past when others could not.
Blanche laughed.
‘I thought you were a Christian, Dexter, not a spiritualist.’
‘I might be a Christian, guv', but I also believe in ghosts.’
‘Do you?’
Blanche looked at him as if he needed urgent psychiatric treatment.
‘Well, I don't.
What I believe in is the power of the human imagination.
That's the only thing I use to think myself back into the past.’
It was unsettling for Dexter to walk the same corridor of frosted glass and fire extinguishers at TV London again.
With so many memories already jostling in his mind, it seemed that weeks had passed since the killing.
He had experienced this telescoping of time before when working twenty hours a day at the beginning of a murder investigation, but the slowness of passing time still came as a shock: Nicola Sharpe had been stabbed to death less than forty-eight hours before.
The door to the main office was unlocked and Dexter walked in.
The room was deserted and desolate: the arctic blue bubble of the drinking water machine looked as if it had turned to ice, two desk lights burned pointlessly above unoccupied desks and the rubbish bins were still brimming with polystyrene cups and waste paper.
The office looked as if it had fallen under the same spell of passing time as Dexter, and been unoccupied for weeks rather than hours — the motes of dust, the grime of London gently settling on files, videotapes and yellowing newspapers.
A man with black curly hair and a nose like a doorknob bustled up from his desk when Dexter walked in to the inner sanctum of the editor's office.
Blanche introduced the sergeant to Dave Pushell, who had taken over from Ken O'Mara as the new editor of Inside Out just before the murder.
Pushell pumped Dexter's hand.
He throbbed with nervous energy: when one of his thighs was not jigging, one of his fingers would tap or his teeth would hungrily gnaw the end of a biro.
‘As I was saying, Superintendent,’ he said, spinning back to Blanche, ‘I really do understand your problems but we do have to get back to normal at some stage.
There's a slot to fill this week, another one to fill next week and so on.’
He talked fast and fluently: everyone in television seemed to, Dexter reflected, as if they were born with cassette tapes in their mouths rather than tongues.
‘I've had to move the whole of our office down two floors into the variety shows department.
I mean, there we are in the middle of some serious investigation into terrorism and some dickhead stumbles into the office dressed up as a pumpkin.’
Blanche nodded in a conciliatory way.
‘Most of the interviews should be finished in a couple of days —’
‘That's only the start of my problems.
One of the loopier producers is going round saying the office is haunted.’
Dave Pushell adjusted his bright red spectacles which had lenses the size of teacups.
‘She says she won't move back in here until we redecorate the whole office from top to bottom and hold a bloody seance.’
Dexter smiled to himself, recalling his thoughts in the corridor a few minutes before.
Although he had only been in his new job for a few days before the murder, Dave Pushell had already tried to imprint his personality on the office.
His own journalistic scalps now adorned the walls rather than those of O'Mara — a photograph of the doorknob nose in the company of Mikhail Gorbachev, a flag of the African National Congress, and a TV award so shapeless Dexter imagined it to be modelled on a cow turd.
And Pushell had not finished unpacking.
Crates and cardboard boxes still littered the floor.
Pushell's voice was shrill with frustration as Blanche led him out.
She strode back to the editor's room and slumped down in a chair.
‘God, I'm glad I don't work for him,’ she sighed.
‘He thinks the whole world revolves around his flipping programme.’
The sergeant waited a moment for Blanche's exasperation to dissipate, for her attention to return to why he was there.
‘What do you want first, ma'am?
The good news or  the bad?’
He did not know why he asked the question, except as part of a ritual that reassured him Blanche had not changed.
The female detective always gave the same answer.
‘The bad.’
It was part of Blanche's character to want the pain first before the pleasure.
Perhaps she was a bit like that as a child, Dexter sometimes wondered, always eating the pastry round the outside of a tart before she gobbled up the fruit-crammed centre.
‘Drawn a blank so far on the child porn.
Simon Franks told one of the DCs that Nicola had mentioned some MP in the West Midlands.
We're checking out the name but nothing's come up so far.’
‘And the good news?’
Blanche wanted her reward, her confirmation that the world was not as unjust as she sometimes imagined.
‘I've got some half-decent background on TVL and Stephen Blufton.’
The superintendent gave a snort of mock disbelief.
‘Call that good news?’
‘Well, you'd hardly expect Jim Lancaster to ring me up and confess, would you?’
‘You never know.
He might do, if you agreed to reverse the charges.’
‘What, with your reputation for watching the pennies, guv'.
Sometimes I think you're an accountant rather than a copper.’
Blanche laughed easily.
It was true: she did have a reputation for good housekeeping.
It was one of the reasons she had been promoted so fast.
Expenditure on the police was no longer open-ended, regardless of efficiency.
The sergeant smiled and took out his notebook.
Although they had only had a few hours, he was happy with what the squad had uncovered from newspaper cuttings and phone-calls — not that they had detected any connection with Nicola Sharpe.
But he knew from experience it was often best with Blanche simply to answer a question she asked rather than seek to question why she  posed it.
That was one of her privileges of authority.
‘TV London won the franchise to broadcast to the London area a couple of years ago.
I don't know if you remember, but there was quite a punch-up over who would win it.’
Blanche nodded.
‘That's right.
Some of the other contenders said TV London was lying, didn't they?
Saying TVL couldn't afford to pay the amount they were offering and still produce good television?’
‘Yeah.
Dexter breathed in to calm his annoyance.
Sometimes he wondered why the superintendent asked him to research questions to which she already knew the answers.
Blanche listened attentively as the sergeant skipped through details of the company structure and gave a thumbnail sketch of Stephen Blufton, the chairman of TV London.
‘Interesting guy, Blufton,’ said Dexter.
‘No one knows much about his background.
Apparently his mum died when he was just a kid and his dad was a confidence trickster.
Spent a lot of time inside.
Blufton says that's the main reason why he's into prison reform.’
‘He set up his own charity or something, didn't he?’
‘That's right.
It helps ex-cons find jobs.’
Dexter explained that Blufton had left school in Guildford when he was sixteen and had built up a chain of antique shops and pizza parlours.
He had also been registered as the owner of a number of import-export companies.
Blanche took a sip of water.
‘Sounds as if Blufton's a sharp operator.’
Dexter nodded.
He went on to explain that Blufton was one of the first people to start seeing how much money could be made in the independent TV sector — the little companies that mushroomed all over Soho.
He set up a couple himself but also put some big money into a facilities house that hired out videotape machines, camera crews, and picture editing.
‘And did he make a lot of money?’
‘Oh yeah, he did very well.’
Blanche paused and chewed her bottom lip.
She asked how Blufton had come to establish TV London.
‘Well, when the franchise for the London area came up he put together a big consortium with him as chairman, promising a lot of money and a lot of telly.
And much to everyone's surprise he won it.
He built the new headquarters by the river here and everything looked rosy.
But he borrowed too much money from the banks.
And now there's also been a drop in the number of people watching, so the advertisers aren't too happy either.’
Blanche squinted at her sergeant, as if trying to read his mind.
‘So is the company going bust?’
‘Oh no, nothing like that.
TVL's got problems, but no one says it's going to pop its clogs.’
Dexter looked up and saw the superintendent's heavy-lidded eyes still narrowed with concentration.
Blufton had carefully manicured his image as a man of the people over the past couple of years, the sergeant went on, preferring to give interviews in an open-necked shirt and jeans — both with designer labels — rather than wear a suit.
He wanted to project the image of being in television not to make money but because it was fun.
He came across in the media as being very different to the classic TV executive, relaxed and friendly and sporting a social conscience through his prison reform work.
The superintendent wandered over to the window.
She gazed down at the London horizon, its tranquillity pierced by hulks of office buildings.
The sun was a great cauldron of red, painting the edges of clouds that swung round ponderously in the sky like a child's mobile.
Cars streamed along the Embankment, their headlamps probing the dusk; a barge slapped its way along the shimmering river.
Dexter caught Blanche's eyes twinkling with curiosity for a moment, held by the magnificence of the scene, a fleeting moment when the much abused city appeared beautiful.
He sometimes wondered if it was not Blanche's ability to daydream like this for a few seconds a day, the power to see beauty in apparent ugliness, that was the key to her resilience.
‘What about Blufton's love life?
Is he married?’
‘Used to be.
He got hitched fifteen years ago to some fashion model.
But it didn't last more than a year.
They  got divorced and he didn't get married again.’
‘Girlfriends?’
‘He used to get through them like a packet of Polo mints apparently.
There are stories about him turning up at parties with various bimbos on his arm — you know the kind of thing.
But now he's in his forties he seems to have slowed down a bit.’
Blanche asked if Blufton was close to any woman in particular.
‘Not that's public anyway.
His big thing at the moment doesn't seem to be women but some ruined castle down in Berkshire that he's getting restored.’
Dexter handed across an article dated about a year before from one of the broadsheet newspapers.
It was accompanied by a photograph of Blufton standing — arms akimbo — in front of a grey smudge of masonry.
The photograph was in black and white and showed pretensions to art by being shot through a wide-angle lens with Blufton's face in close-up.
The effect was, in Dexter's view, unflattering and vaguely sinister, like the one produced by trick mirrors at fairgrounds.
Blufton's nose seemed bulbous, every pore of his skin highlighted, every hair of his spade beard appeared to bristle.
Even the man's ready smile was made to appear broken and toothless.
The article said the chairman of TV London had just taken up residence in the castle.
‘I'm glad you dug this up,’ commented Blanche, squinting quizzically at the photograph, ‘because that's where you and I are going to meet Blufton tonight.
I just hope he's better looking than this.’
She smiled.
The sergeant nodded sagely, trying to work out how best to dissuade his boss from a fruitless trip to the country.
Blufton only seemed interesting as a wicked seducer, luring Nicola on to his casting couch with the bait of Jane Pargeter's job.
Dexter decided his best weapon was irony.
‘So, we're gonna see where he tried to get his wicked way with Nicola, are we?’
Blanche looked at him in mock disapproval.
‘Nothing's even proved about that, Dexter.
It's only rumour.’
‘Yeah.
But rumour's more fun,’ replied the sergeant  with a lascivious widening of the eyes.
Blanche told Dexter she had passed an hour or so in informal chats with producers on Inside Out, hoping she might learn something of significance.
They confirmed Nicola's unpopularity in the office, especially amongst the women, because of her ambition and insecurity.
They had also confirmed that the affair with David Parkin had been a public secret on the programme for several months, and that Nicola had whispered to several people that she had been promised Jane Pargeter's job by Blufton.
It was this, Blanche said, that had pushed her towards phoning his personal assistant and arranging the interview that night.
Jane Pargeter was not particularly popular on the programme either, but several people who had been at the party supported her story that she had not left the party at all until Nicola's body had been found.
‘So that seems to rule her out as the murderer,’ Blanche concluded with a sigh of relief.
Dexter let his eyes wander over the crates on the floor, brimming with files and books, and on to a dusty azalea on the window-sill for which he sensed a twinge of sadness.
TWELVE
Dexter thrummed his fingers on the steering-wheel as one clot of traffic thickened into another.
He was no longer indifferent to the cars around him — they had become alien and aggressive, peopled by spectres whose driving was at best incompetent and at worst downright criminal.
The sergeant sensed the muscles in his chest tighten with irritation as he edged along Cromwell Road, glued to the bumper of the car in front.
It seemed he had been behind the same car for hours now — a Jaguar whose iridescent blue reminded Dexter of oil shimmering on the surface of a puddle.
The car was driven by a man so shrunken his head hardly protruded above the steering-wheel.
Dexter tried every manoeuvre imaginable to overtake.
He flashed his headlights and jumped lanes whenever a gap opened up.
But whatever he did, the Jaguar was always there, filling any crack in the traffic with stately inevitability.
Even when the police car was able to surge up on to the elevated section of the motorway at Chiswick, the stream of traffic moved no faster and the Jaguar continued to glow in Dexter's headlamps.
The sergeant's irritation was sharpened by Blanche lying back, eyes closed, and wallowing in the same opera music she had played the morning before.
The brittle hysteria of the singing heightened Dexter's mood before he finally broke free and roared past the Jaguar.
He thrust up two fingers in triumph at the driver, an old man who was as indifferent as a waxwork.
Blanche opened a road atlas once they left the motorway and navigated with the diligence of a woman who did not  have a natural sense of direction.
They soon left the urban sprawl of roundabouts, sodium streetlights and Wimpey homes and Dexter began to speed along country lanes.
Solitary oaks loomed up in the headlights, negative images on a photographic plate.
With all sense of distance blotted out by the night, their car slapped over the deserted tarmac.
Dexter lost all sense of time and space.
He could have been plummeting down to the centre of the earth, in a submarine nudging over the seabed or flying soundlessly through outer space.
The moon had risen but no sooner did it spill its silver light over the fields than it was swallowed up by cloud.
Blanche said little, her head no more than a deep blue profile against the window.
Occasionally her face was illuminated by the navigation light for a few seconds.
It looked grey with fatigue.
After a twenty-minute drive, Blanche spotted a notice marking the entrance to Malbis Castle.
A brick wall about six feet high stretched away into the blackness of trees to right and left.
Flimsy steel gates hung from two pillars.
Shivering in the night air after the fug of the car, Dexter pressed the buzzer installed in one of the pillars and the gates hummed apart.
A plaque had been hung on the gates: ‘Fierce Dog — Beware’.
Dexter drove through a small wood, emerging on to a small apron of gravel.
The superintendent slid out of the car and tried to rub the tiredness from her eyes, respiring the chill of the night like an elixir.
Dexter was constantly surprised by her resilience, her ability to summon up reserves of concentration and energy.
His eyes played over the building in front of them — a jumble of towers, crenellations and massive walls with a sagging Rag of St George above the gatehouse picked out in the beam of a spotlight.
The edifice was ringed by a narrow, black moat and the obscurity in which most of the rebuilt castle was wrapped only sharpened the impression of Gothic romance.
Dexter thought it was outlandish and rather fun.
Blanche was less impressed.
‘It's like something at a theme park,’ she commented with a yawn.
‘A bit of  tourist kitsch.’
‘You're too much of a snob, guv' — that's your problem.’
Dexter meant it as a joke but Blanche stared at him for a moment, as if the comment was intended as a serious criticism, before she chuckled softly.
The sergeant sometimes forgot how sensitive to criticism the superintendent was under her carapace of self-confidence.
‘And your problem, Dexter, is that you're not snob enough.’
Another beam splashed a pool of light over the gatehouse, revealing a drawbridge lowered over the moat with portcullis behind, while another illuminated the apron of the car park.
One of the four cars parked there was a Porsche Carrera with the number plate SOB 1.
‘That must be his car,’ murmured Blanche.
‘Stephen Something Blufton.’
‘Or just Son of a Bitch,’ Dexter replied with a smile.
The sergeant felt uneasy while he and Blanche stood on the drawbridge.
It was nothing to do with the castle.
He always sensed he was exposed in the countryside at night.
The rustle of leaves in the breeze deafened him; the black water of the moat lapped against the banks with the insistence of a rising tide.
He felt more at home in a city at night, comforted by strips of empty pavement, the harsh lines of concrete towers and by the ubiquitous blanket of artificial light.
Even at four in the morning, if he woke during a rare, sleepless night, Dexter liked to brush back the curtains of his bedroom and marvel at the twinkling lights.
It made him feel safer and less alone.
But in the countryside, when there was only an intermittent moon, it could be truly black — the darkness of the blind that Dexter found terrifying.
A heavy door swung open and a figure beckoned them into a warm lozenge of light.
It was only when his eyes had adjusted to the brightness that Dexter could assess Stephen Blufton properly.
He bore little resemblance to the photograph in the newspaper, with wide hamster-like cheeks and a narrow chin masked by his spade beard.
He stood a little below six feet and sported a warm smile beneath a curly mop of black hair liberally sprinkled, like  his beard, with grey.
He shook them firmly by the hand — a comforting, hearty grasp that cheered Dexter, who had a pet dislike of cold hands proffered nervously like fragile porcelain.
The chairman of TVL had an engaging air of untidiness about him, symbolised by his uncombed hair and floppy pullover.
Dexter had expected a bigger and taller man with the harsh glint of money-making in his eyes, rather than this relaxed, almost shambling, figure.
He led them into the kitchen, chatting to Blanche and Dexter as if they were house guests rather than police officers who had come to interview him about a murder.
The room was crammed with bric-à-brac — a Gothic pew, a rusty suit of armour, an umbrella stand in the form of a bear.
Around a pine table sat a beautiful girl with two men.
They gave pinched, nervous smiles and said, ‘Hi.’
Blufton introduced the girl as Selina, his personal assistant, and the men as the producer and scriptwriter of a new film project about King Arthur.
Dexter remembered that Blufton had a reputation as an executive who took a direct interest in the programmes his company made.
The scriptwriter — a trim, balding man in his fifties with a moustache — squeezed Dexter's hand a little too warmly and gave him a serious smile of appraisal.
It was an unmistakable pass but the sergeant had no desire to respond: the man was too camp for his taste.
Dexter glanced at Blanche but she was as inscrutable as usual, diffident but assured.
With easy charm, the chairman of TVL led the police officers down a corridor past studded chests, fragments of sculpture and pottery.
They passed several canvases of Dutch landscapes glowing on the walls — trees huddled under magnificent skies or minute skaters twirling on expanses of ice.
Blanche listened politely but said nothing, so Dexter felt obliged to respond to Blufton's patter.
‘Interesting place you've got here, Mr Blufton,’ commented the sergeant politely, awestruck by the amount of dosh the man had to afford such a place.
‘You must have been collecting antiques quite a while.’
Blufton smiled with pleasure, wrinkles tugging at his  eyes that kept searching hungrily for their faces.
Dexter noticed for the first time how thin his legs were as they wandered along the corridor.
‘On and off.
I pick them up when 1 can.
When 1 bought the castle five years ago it was just a ruin.
I've had to build it up from scratch really.’
His voice was an enthusiastic drawl, indeterminate and classless.
They passed through a room furnished only by a great oak table and two benches.
The walls were bare stone covered with a fan of rusting swords and three flintlocks.
‘This is what we call the Armoury,’ bubbled Blufton.
‘You know, where the sentries kept their weapons and so on.
We even found a record of the castle being besieged for one day during the Civil War.’
Blufton's study matched the rest of the castle in its eclecticism — an enormous library desk strewn with papers, tin soldiers and teddy bears propped up on shelves, the walls lined with Victorian prints and paintings.
A fax machine lurked in one corner and the two telephones on the desk were studded with a variety of buttons indicative of modern efficiency.
He removed a birdcage containing a mechanical singing canary from his chair and sat down, gesturing for his guests to do the same.
His almond-shaped eyes twinkled as they watched Blanche and Dexter absorb the room.
‘It's quite a weird mixture, isn't it?’
He glanced round.
‘I just can't resist the junk antiques as well as the good ones, you see.
I like the variety.’
‘Is the castle open to the public?’ asked Blanche.
‘From the summer.
I'm picking up the PR material in a couple of weeks.
Malbis Castle has a very rich history.
I think it'll soon be on the tourist map.’
Blanche flicked up her eyebrows in polite surprise.
‘And will you carry on living here then?’
The chairman of TVL gave two dry grunts in lieu of a chuckle.
‘No way.
I'll have moved on to something else by then.
I'll need a new challenge.’
Blanche scrutinised the man they were interviewing, as if he were a wasp she was trying to trap.
The millionaire seemed to catch the change in mood and suddenly looked  serious.
The room was silent, apart from the hollow and remorseless tick of a grandfather clock in the corner.
The dial had a painted face that showed a scene of rural bliss at sunset: a family sitting outside their thatched cottage while three children gambolled on the grass.
It seemed incongruous to Dexter, inappropriate when he knew they had come to talk about violent death.
‘I first heard about the murder around midnight, I suppose,’ Blufton began with a sigh.
‘I got a call from Mike Slide — have you met him?’
Blanche nodded.
The millionaire sat forward in his chair to show his concern, rubbing one hand across the other in his lap.
He looked relaxed and calm.
‘Mike knew I always work late, and even though there wasn't anything for me to do, he thought I ought to know.’
The clunk of the grandfather clock swelled into the room.
‘How well did you know Nicola?’
Blanche let the question drop as softly as a feather.
Blufton rubbed a finger across the edge of his lips.
Dexter wondered if it was an indication of nervousness.
But the gesture was accomplished so smoothly and was finished so quickly Dexter found it impossible to judge.
‘I knew her as one of my employees.
I'd met her at the odd party where we'd chatted and that's about it.’
His eyes, flecks of blue mixed with brown and framed by thin lids, did not waver.
Blanche's armchair squeaked as she moved her weight from one side to the other.
‘Did you ever invite Nicola out here?’
‘Yes, I did.
On one occasion.’
Although he narrowed his eyes, there was no hesitation in his reply.
He gave the impression of wanting to be open and frank — perhaps even defiantly honest, Dexter considered.
‘I wanted to sound her out about a job.’
The sergeant saw his opening and decided to pounce.
‘So you did offer her the presenter's job on Inside Out, yeah?’
Stephen Blufton swung his head calmly round to the  black detective with a glint of watchfulness in his eyes.
This was the sort of look Dexter had expected Blufton to wear permanently, the calculating glance of a businessman forced to take a prickly decision, weighing risks and benefits against a tight deadline.
‘I asked her if she was interested in the job.
I didn't at any time actually offer it to her.’
His voice remained calm.
Dexter paused, wanting to study Blufton's face.
The man's eyes did not blink.
It was a poker game of honesty.
‘And was she interested?’
‘Of course,’ he said, the conviction of surprise in his voice.
‘Anyone with an ounce of ambition would have been.
But I made it perfectly clear — or at least I thought I did,’ Blufton added, spreading his palms in a gesture of openness, ‘that I wasn't actually offering her the job.
As I told her at the time there were several possibilities.’
‘Like who?’
‘Hugh Parnham for a start.’
Blufton's eyes twinkled with mischief.
‘And then there was always the possibility that we might decide to keep Jane Pargeter after all.’
‘Hardly sounds like decisive management, Mr Blufton,’ Blanche interrupted with a gentle smile to soften the barb.
‘Since when has decisive management produced good television, Superintendent?
Since when has decisive management produced anything creative?’
The millionaire grunted up from his chair and opened a mahogany wardrobe to reveal a refrigerator full of bottles within.
His confidence in facing the world seemed genuine enough, with little room for self-doubt.
Dexter had met such relaxed optimism only once or twice before — either in evangelists or conmen.
Not that there was any of the same obvious strain with Blufton to convert his visitors to his vision of the truth.
He gave the impression of telling the detectives what had happened and asking them to believe it on the authority of his charm and personality.
Blufton paused by his drinks cabinet, a smile tugging at his lips.
‘Who told you by the way — that I talked to Nicola about the presenter's job?’
‘It's common gossip at TV London,’ replied Blanche.
‘Nicola spread it round the office.
Except she was saying that you'd actually offered her the job.’
Blufton grunted again.
‘I should've guessed she couldn't keep a secret.
Hardly anyone can in this business.’
Having established that his visitors did not want a drink, the businessman poured himself a tall glass of gin and tonic.
Blanche waited for him to sit down and take a couple of sips.
‘Why did you think Inside Out needed a new presenter?
What was wrong with Jane Pargeter?’
‘Nothing's wrong with her,’ he said with sudden warmth.
Realising that his reaction might appear excessive, Blufton sighed and consciously relaxed.
‘She does her job brilliantly.
It's just that we thought the programme might benefit from a new face.
To freshen it up.’
The superintendent asked if he thought Nicola could do the job better.
‘Not necessarily better.
But differently.’
Blanche stared hard at Blufton, her fleshy lips slightly parted.
‘And there weren't any other reasons why you sounded her out about the job?’
‘Such as?’
You know what she means, thought Dexter.
You don't gain anything by playing innocent.
Blanche picked up the challenge.
‘You wanting to sleep with her for example.’
Blufton laughed, revealing a line of white teeth, regular except for the two upper canines which had grown forward over the teeth in front.
Dexter, who noticed such things, wondered why, with all his money, Blufton had not bothered to have them fixed.
The sergeant could never understand rich people with imperfect features who did not spend money on cosmetic surgery.
He would have corrected his flattened and crooked nose — broken in an accident when at school — immediately if he had ever had the money.
‘Superintendent, I can assure you the sofa you're sitting on is not a casting couch.’
‘Do you wish it were?’
Blufton pondered for a second and ran a strong, spade-like  hand through his hair.
He sat forward on his chair, clasping his hands.
‘Look,’ he sighed, ‘I gave that sort of thing up a while back.
I realised I was getting too old.
It's just not worth the candle.’
Blanche harried him relentlessly.
‘So you didn't make any advances to her?’
The businessman stared unsmilingly at the superintendent.
‘No.
I invited her here on business.
And that was it.
Strictly business.’
Watching him sip his gin and tonic, Dexter admired the millionaire's self-confidence once again.
It was the foundation on which his whole image rested: the lack of pomposity, the charm, the casual clothes.
The sergeant suspected that Blufton's self-confidence sometimes crept into arrogance, a desire to treat the people around him as tools for his own gratification, although he was too in control to allow this to happen in the presence of police officers.
Blanche propped her head on her elbow and asked when Nicola came out to visit the castle.
The businessman leant across to an enormous, leather-bound diary and gave the date in early March.
Blufton sipped his gin and tonic.
‘She came in the morning, about half past ten I suppose.
She told me how she thought the way to put Inside Out on the map was to do more hard, investigative stories.
Like the one she said she was doing on drug smuggling.’
He frowned.
‘Do you know about that by the way?’
‘Only vaguely.’
Blanche gestured with her right hand, inviting him to continue.
Blufton respired deeply, his eyes glued first to the superintendent's face and then Dexter's.
The sergeant felt uncomfortable, as if the millionaire was trying to possess them through his unwavering stare, attempting to inveigle them into doing his will.
Dexter had encountered the same expression many years before in his teens.
He had been in a pub in Hammersmith when a hypnotist jumped on to a low podium and put on a show.
Dexter had allowed himself to be hypnotised and still remembered staring into  those wide eyes, as blue as the top of a ballpoint pen, with pupils that shrank and swelled in time to the man's words.
But with Blufton the spell, the sense that he was engaged in some elaborate, magical charade, was broken as soon as he began to speak.
‘Nicola told me she'd found out about a couple of drug smuggling operations in this country run by the Mafia.’
‘The Mafia?’
The muscles of Blanche's face tightened with disbelief and surprise.
Dexter sat back in his armchair, unsure whether to laugh outright or smile knowingly at the businessman's practical joke.
The Mafia was as much at home in Britain as coconut trees or rattlesnakes.
London and the United Kingdom was the wrong environment — too cold, too sunless, too well policed.
There was corruption, Dexter knew well, but it was not widespread, not endemic, as it was in New York or Sicily.
But then it occurred to him that perhaps the joke was Nicola's and not Blufton's at all, some invention to impress her boss and ensure her succession to Jane Pargeter's job.
Blufton's eyes glittered with irritation: he had obviously expected his revelation to be treated with respect.
‘Well, that's what Nicola said.
She told me they were both being organised by the Sicilian Mafia.
One was heroin, the other cocaine.’
He shrugged dismissively.
‘But if you don't believe me, you don't have to.’
Dexter turned to Blanche.
He sensed a tension in the air, prickling with Blufton's bruised ego, and thought it was best for her to defuse it.
The superintendent sat slumped back in her chair, cupping her chin in her hand.
She eased herself up quickly.
‘It's not that we don't believe you, Mr Blufton, it's just that what you said was a bit of a surprise.’
Dexter wondered what sort of game Blanche was playing — encouraging Blufton rather than calling his bluff.
She paused and smiled.
‘Did she give you any further details?’
Blufton sighed and furrowed his brows.
He seemed placated, even relieved, now that the police officers had expressed their belief in him.
‘Well, not a great amount.
She said the Mafia loved the idea of a free market right across Europe as much as legitimate businesses do.’
Blufton relaxed back in his armchair, like a dinner guest telling a well-worn anecdote.
As he relaxed, his charm and humour seeped back and, to trap their attention, Blufton rarely allowed his eyes to stray from those of his listeners.
Dexter found the effect comforting rather than disconcerting: he had been won over by the man's charm.
‘She said the heroin comes in by what's known as the Balkans route.
It arrives in Turkey from Pakistan and then it's hidden in secret compartments in lorries.
The lorries drive off across Europe and with the amount of traffic there is the chances of them being caught are pretty minimal.
And the Mafia have people in this country who meet the lorries at Dover and then distribute the heroin.’
Dexter nodded.
‘What about the cocaine?’
‘Well, Nicola said the Mafia have something going at Gatwick airport.
They've bought some baggage handlers who intercept the stuff before it gets through to customs.’
Blanche rubbed her chin sceptically, staring back at Blufton.
‘Did Nicola mention anything specific about these two drug smuggling operations?’
The businessman nodded and sat forward on his chair.
‘She did actually.
She said — and I don't know if she was just bullshitting me,’ and here Blufton opened his palms in a gesture of frankness, ‘that she'd found out the dates when a couple of lorries were due at Dover.
She even said she'd discovered the name of the Mafia boss who's running the whole shebang.’
Blanche turned to Dexter, her eyebrows uplifted in surprise for a moment before her gaze sank thoughtfully to the carpet.
Blufton stood up and plunged a pudgy hand into a concertina file.
‘I don't know if it's of any help but — er — I made a couple of notes at the time.
It just interested me, you know.’
The hand rampaged through various pockets and emerged a few seconds later with a rectangle of paper torn from a reporter's notebook.
Dexter walked across to look over Blanche's shoulder.
At the top of the sheet was Nicola's name and below a few scribbled notes, summarising what  Blufton had just told them.
Lower down Dexter read: ‘Two sailings expected.
Dover 17 March and Dover 4 April.
The boss: Leonardo Della Torre.
Supposed to live at Godalming.’
At the bottom of the page was the injunction: ‘Good story.
Tell Mike Slide.’
Blufton pointed with a stubby finger to the second date.
‘As you can see, a lorry's supposed to be in tomorrow.
I don't know if it's any help to you.’
The rumpled millionaire stood above them, eyes narrowed to note their reaction, one hand scratching the back of his head.
Dexter shrugged.
He did not know what to believe.
He was inclined to think Nicola had invented the whole story, or else been told it and then discovered subsequently that it was a sham.
This, at least, would explain why the murdered reporter had abandoned her research so suddenly.
Blanche scratched the underside of her right eyelid, weighing up her response.
‘Did Nicola say where she got this information from?’
Dexter guessed that she thought the same as him but was keen to learn as much as she could from Blufton about Nicola and her motives for giving these ‘facts’ to the chairman of TVL.
The tension drifted from Blufton's eyes, as if he had expected another challenge to his veracity.
‘No.
She wouldn't tell me.
She kept going on about ‘confidential sources’.
I assumed it was someone in the police or customs.’
Blanche held the man's gaze for a second and glanced back down at the piece of paper.
‘And who's this Leonardo Della Torre?’
‘Nicola said he was the man sent over to organise things for the Mafia.
Sent over from Sicily — or so she said.
She said she thought he lived somewhere near Godalming but she wasn't sure.
That's why I put a question mark.’
Dexter stirred restlessly.
He was becoming impatient with the superintendent's dispassion, her willingness to fret time away on these pointless enquiries.
‘All sounds silly to me, ma'am.
Mafia bosses don't operate out of Godalming for Christ's sake.’
‘Don't they?’
She looked up at him through her  eyebrows and smiled.
‘Ever heard of a man called Francesco Di Carlo?’
The sergeant shook his head.
‘He ran the Mafia's drug business in Britain for ten years until he was arrested in the mid-eighties.’
The superintendent sighed and turned the paper round and round in her hands as if it were a visual conundrum that could be solved by approaching the problem from an unexpected angle.
‘Who else knew Nicola had this information?’
Blufton edged back to his seat.
‘God knows.
Whoever gave it to her and whoever she told, I suppose.’
‘Did she tell anyone at work?’
‘Probably everybody from what you were saying about her ability to keep a secret.’
‘And did she intend to tell the police and customs at some stage?’
Blufton sighed and chopped the air decisively with his right hand.
‘Look, Superintendent, I assumed they were the source of the information in the first place.’
Blanche shifted in her chair and rubbed a finger across her lips.
‘Why do you think she told you all this?’
‘To impress me, I think.
After all, she wanted the presenter's job.’
He glanced down at the mechanical bird caged at his feet.
Blanche smiled politely and asked Blufton whether Nicola had ever mentioned a man called Kennedy.
The chairman of TVL shook his head and asked why.
The superintendent explained about the name of the guest Nicola was expecting to meet.
Blufton raised his eyebrows with interest and seemed amused to Dexter, as if the name Kennedy triggered off the memory of some private joke.
‘So you need to interview this man Kennedy urgently?’
‘Yes, very much.’
The restful clunk of the grandfather clock echoed round the room.
The millionaire raised a hand to his left eye and massaged the lid gently as though it were sore.
‘OK,’ he murmured, ‘I'll offer a reward.
Twenty thousand pounds for information leading to the police being able to interview this Mr Kennedy.
How's that?’
Dexter nodded.
This man was loaded.
In the past he had only got decent-size rewards for the arrest and conviction of armed robbers and known murderers, not for information leading to a mere interview.
The reward would bring even more publicity to the case and, Dexter reminded himself with a groan, endless claims for the money from conmen and lunatics.
It was more trouble than it was worth.
Blanche obviously agreed.
‘That's very generous of you, Mr Blufton.
But if I may, I won't announce the reward for a couple of days.
I'll keep it back in case we get bogged down.’
The millionaire shrugged.
‘Well, it's up to you, Superintendent.
I'm just keen that the bastard who murdered Nicola Sharpe should be found.’
‘So are we.’
The chairman of TVL did not seem offended by the implied criticism.
Instead he stared at Blanche, his eyelashes remarkably long and black, his hamster cheeks plump and shiny.
He pulled on a charming smile, inspired once again— or so it appeared to Dexter — by another private joke which only he could understand.
‘Let's broaden it then.
Make the reward for information leading to the arrest and conviction of the person who murdered Nicola Sharpe.
How does that sound?’
Blufton was obviously used to cutting deals and exercising the power that money bestowed.
Blanche said she would instruct the Press Bureau at New Scotland Yard to announce the reward.
She closed her notebook and stood up in her usual, brisk way.
Dexter expected the superintendent to bid farewell and for she and the sergeant to roar up the motorway back to the Yard as soon as possible.
Instead, Blanche asked Blufton where he had bought the mechanical canary.
The millionaire proudly handed the superintendent the cage and, while winding up the clockwork mechanism, described how he had bought it at a country auction in Warwickshire.
Blanche placed the antique on the library desk and listened with rapt attention to the tin bird's  hollow cheep.
Dexter enjoyed such distractions but was surprised by this moment of innocence in Blanche.
Her puritan temperament usually allowed no quarter, little escape from the burden of an investigation.
She could laugh and joke with her colleagues but Dexter often wondered how much of the crude banter she found genuinely amusing.
Blufton gave a puzzled smile — the expression of a bachelor uncle who discovers an everyday object in his pocket that makes his nieces and nephews scream with laughter.
Despite Blanche's protestations, the businessman insisted on leading the police officers back to the drawbridge by a route which took in the Great Hall.
It was no more than an enormous drawing-room but the combination of a log fire, wood panelling and a Jacobean table covered with a crisp, white cloth and laid with four places for dinner created the illusion of gracious living.
The sight of empty wine-glasses reminded Dexter of a question he had intended to ask earlier.
‘You didn't come to the farewell party for Ken O'Mara, did you, Mr Blufton?’
‘No, I didn't, unfortunately — or fortunately, depending on your point of view.’
‘Why was that?’
The millionaire, standing with his legs apart, breathed in to help disguise a nascent paunch.
‘I didn't have the time.
I had a business dinner here at the castle.
Just like the one tonight.’
He gestured towards the table with an amiable smile and led them to the gate.
Dexter parked the car next to the first telephone kiosk they chanced across on the way back to Reading.
It stood under some beech trees, between a row of cottages and a battered church.
A faint drizzle had started to fall, hanging like droplets of liquid silver in the light from the headlamps.
As soon as the sergeant turned off the windscreen wipers a curtain of mist was breathed across the glass.
Dexter had said nothing since leaving Malbis Castle, sensing that the superintendent was tired and wanted time  to think.
‘Nice enough bloke, Blufton, I thought,’ the sergeant began, remembering the businessman's lack of pomposity.
‘I reckon he was telling a pretty fair version of the truth, yeah?’
Blanche was biting her lip in thought.
She sighed.
‘Probably.
He seems plausible enough.
Perhaps a bit too plausible.’
Dexter watched the shadows of the trees play over the panels of the door of the kiosk as it creaked shut behind Blanche.
She stood in the hazy light cast by the bulb in the ceiling, looking uncomfortable and angry, as she phoned Eddy Russell of the Drugs Squad with the information about Della Torre and the lorry due to arrive at Dover the next day.
‘So much for the bliss of rural life,’ snapped the superintendent, as she slumped back into her seat, her nose wrinkling.
‘There was stale wee all over the floor.
It was like phoning from the middle of a public toilet.’
Dexter shrugged.
‘Well at least the phone worked.’
‘As you know, Dexter, I'm never thankful for small mercies, only big ones.’
Blanche tugged a handkerchief from her bag and blew her nose violently as if to remove the smell of urine from her nostrils.
‘So what did he say?’
The superintendent narrowed her eyes with puzzlement.
‘Well, he sounded surprised and a bit worried — as if he'd been caught on the hop.’
‘Did he pooh-pooh the Mafia idea?’
Dexter asked the question with the implication that the inspector should have done.
‘No, he didn't.
He didn't say much at all really.
Just made a note of what I said and said thanks very much.
He told me he'd tell customs about the lorry straight away.’
She glanced across at Dexter.
‘I'm meeting him tomorrow night for a chat.’
Dexter nodded to himself as he understood what was happening.
Under the cover of her investigation, Blanche was warily trying to get to know the inspector better, hoping to develop the relationship into something more  intimate.
Blanche would never admit it of course.
The superintendent's personal life was alien territory to Dexter, one that she guarded fiercely, even though it was the sergeant who suffered the consequences when Blanche emerged from it wounded.
The only times she talked openly about her hopes and disappointments was when she was drunk — a state Dexter had seen her in only three times, all at parties and all after the separation from her husband.
She had not been maudlin then: the tears, Dexter felt, were as much ones of laughter as of despair.
But on these rare occasions the frontier posts protecting Blanche's personality had been unmanned, and Dexter had been able to wander at will through her past and her present.
And each time Dexter believed he had come closer to Blanche, understood her better, and liked her more.
Dexter knew the superintendent well enough now to chance his arm occasionally and probe into her personal life when she was sober.
‘This chat is purely business then, ma'am?’
‘Of course, Dexter, what else?’
Blanche yawned, trying to hide the flush of excitement burning her cheeks.
Blanche's favourite curry house was in one of London's most eclectic suburbs.
Among red brick terraces, under grey skies and deafened by the whine of jets swooping down to Heathrow airport, a nation had chosen to found a colony in exile.
Although far from the dust and heat of India, the Sikhs had come in their thousands, roosting like exotic birds on the chimney-pots and the concrete of Southall.
They brought their turbans, their pride and their brown eyes twinkling at the prospect of business.
They built a temple in a side-street to house their Holy Books and to dispense hospitality.
They founded a little Punjab through whose gates they left in the morning and returned in the evening, glad to be back among their own kind.
The superintendent had fallen asleep during the journey, her head gently rolling from side to side against  the car seat, her front teeth prominent in her open mouth as she breathed through her nose.
She suddenly looked tender and vulnerable to Dexter and he wondered once again how she had managed to survive the grimy and bruising life of the Met.
Dexter ate Indian dishes without relish and when he did, he preferred a curry house with a clean table-cloth, candles in yellow globes of glass and obsequious waiters.
Being the son of an immigrant himself, he had no time for what he regarded as ethnic tourism.
Blanche, on the other hand, loved her café with its ramshackle tables, grubby menus and her face being the only one in the restaurant that was not Asian.
So on their way back from Reading Dexter had swung in to Southall from the motorway and parked in a side-street.
The heavy scents of Indian cooking however soon revived Blanche.
She swigged from a pint glass of lassi and munched her chapatis.
‘You're right about Blufton.
He probably is OK.
But I don't know…there's something almost too convenient about his story.’
For Dexter the issue was clear.
Blufton seemed trustworthy enough and had no direct relationship with Nicola.
He might have coveted her body but there was no evidence that he had ever managed to seduce her.
He had not even been at the party.
The only thing of real interest Blufton had passed on was the intriguing story — and the sergeant was less sceptical now — of Mafia drug smuggling.
Dexter shared his thoughts with Blanche, who listened politely.
‘I thought he was all right for a millionaire.
Not posh or anything.’
The superintendent folded up a chapati.
‘The castle was a bit of a con, though.’
‘Seemed all right to me.’
‘It's about as genuine as a Roman roof tile made of polystyrene.
Didn't you notice the table in the Armoury?’
‘What about it?’ asked the sergeant, sipping his pint of lager.
‘Well, its legs were the upturned legs of a billiard table.
The whole thing was made from bits of scrap.’
‘What about all those paintings then?
They looked the real thing to me.’
‘Oh, yes, they were genuine enough.
But as for the pottery…’
Blanche twisted her lips into a sneer.
‘What do you mean?’
The superintendent dipped the chapati into the tin bowl of dal and chewed off a mouthful.
‘Hardly any of it was really medieval — which was the impression Blufton was trying to give.
Most of it was Indian, made in little villages in Rajasthan, just over the border from where these people came from,’ she added, waving towards the other diners.
Dexter shrugged.
He thought Blanche was being too finicky.
It did not matter two hoots to him that Blufton was not over-concerned with authentic period detail.
It was the overall impression that counted.
Blanche chewed thoughtfully.
‘Perhaps you're right.
There's probably nothing to it.’
The sergeant called across one of the waiters to order another pint of lager.
A glint of panic flashed in the boy's eyes because he did not speak English very well.
He scurried across to fetch his cousin — a tall, gangling youth — who took the order with a flourish of smiles.
‘On the other hand,’ said Dexter, through a mouthful of chicken tikka masalla, one of the few Indian dishes he could stomach, ‘there might just be something to this drugs thing.’
‘You never know.’
Blanche wiped her lips with a paper napkin.
She gave a sceptical shrug.
‘I'm dubious about this Mafia story.
Sounds just the sort of thing Nicola would have made up to impress Blufton.’
With DI Russell not dismissing the Mafia theory out of hand Dexter had found his outright disbelief weakening.
‘It might just be possible though, right?’
‘Anything's possible, Dexter.
I might even become a chief constable one day.’
The comment was meant humorously, and the sergeant could detect no bitterness, only amused, ironic detachment.
Until quite recently there might have been a sting of sarcasm in her voice, the anger  of the betrayed.
But Dexter knew Blanche had benefited from a growing friendship with a woman she had met on a management course at the police college at Bramshill — a former commander in the Met who had taken to lecturing after a heart attack.
Dexter had met Helen Briggs only once but liked her straight away— the bubbling laugh, the enormous bosom, the trunk-like legs and, above all, the endless cigarettes that drooped from her finger.
Commander Briggs had counselled Blanche to calm down and accept more of the things in the police she could not change.
And Dexter had watched Blanche slowly become calmer and more stoic about the future.
The ambition and drive were still there, but more tempered, more resilient than before.
Blanche had increasingly come to accept that doing her best was good enough and that she did not need to measure herself against some ideal standard.
‘Straight up, though, ma'am.
Do you think Nicola could have stumbled on something big?’
‘It's always possible.
But I doubt if the Mafia is involved.
London isn't New York, you know.
Do you remember the Di Carlo case — the one I mentioned to Blufton?’
Dexter's lager arrived.
He took a swig and shook his head.
‘The Sicilian Mafia laundered piles of drugs money before Di Carlo got caught and sent to jail.
But that was an isolated case.
The Mafia never really got established in London.
Thank God.’
Dexter was always surprised by Blanche's memory: she collected facts with the passion others sought stamps or antiques.
The superintendent tore off a piece of nan and wiped the curry sauce from her plate.
‘Besides, if you're a drugs syndicate and want to murder someone who knows a bit too much, you don't do it in the victim's office, do you?
Much too risky.’
The sergeant nodded agreement.
He remembered the menacing phone-calls to Nicola and wondered aloud whether someone from a drugs syndicate had been trying to scare her.
Blanche made a non-committal murmur.
She signalled to the waiter that she wanted the bill and asked Dexter to  phone in to the incident room to see if anything had happened.
He was directed down a corridor faced with mud-brown wallpaper to a payphone.
The air was pungent with spices; the linoleum on the floor peeped through offcuts of burgundy carpet.
‘Where the hell have you been?’ muttered DS Wootton breathlessly, who had been summoned to the phone by a constable.
‘I've been trying to find you everywhere.’
Trust Wootton to be panicking again, thought Dexter, determined to disguise his dislike of the man.
‘Why, has something happened?’
‘Oh, yeah, something's happened all right.
We might have found the pair of scissors that killed Nicola Sharpe.
They were in David Parkin's desk.’
THIRTEEN
Blanche took the plastic bag from the Scenes of Crime Officer with a grim smile.
She turned the pair of scissors over with her long, slim fingers and frowned.
The scissors themselves were ordinary enough, standard office issue, and shining steel: there was no outward sign that they could have been a weapon of murder, Dexter thought.
The closed blades were not smeared with blood, and nothing about the scissors screamed out that they had taken a human life.
Detective Sergeant Wootton — pasty and blinking through his dirty spectacles — stood in the circle, keen to be involved.
There was a hum of excitement in the incident room that had not existed when Blanche and Dexter had left earlier that evening.
Two detective constables walked in and listened eagerly to the latest gossip, glancing over to the superintendent with new animation in their eyes.
as if anticipating a question from Blanche, the SOCO pointed to the screw joining the two blades.
‘The blood's in there, ma'am, inside, between the blades.
They were cleaned but not very well.
There's a fair amount left…’
Dexter leant forward and saw some black marks around the rivet.
‘Did you find any prints?’
The superintendent looked up at the SOCO, posing the question like a doctor checking the symptoms of a sickly patient.
‘There are a few partial ones on the handle.’
Blanche nodded.
‘OK.
Get them lifted.’
The SOCO was a woman of about thirty.
Although her  face was pale it was lit by a flush of unmistakable triumph.
She explained how she had continued her search for the murder weapon that afternoon.
She had deliberately not revealed what she was looking for, and so insisted on evacuating every office before she began work.
With the help of a detective constable, she had to sift through the papers on every desk top and the rubbish in every drawer.
By early evening they had reached the documentary department offices on the second floor and in one desk, at the back of an open drawer, was the pair of scissors.
The stains around the rivet had shown up positive in the test for human blood.
The desk belonged to David Parkin.
Besides working on Inside Out, the reporter was also presenting a special documentary about forensic science.
The four police officers laughed at the irony.
‘Well, he doesn't seem to have learnt much from it, does he?’ chuckled Dexter.
Blanche retreated to her cubicle in the corner of the room, a knot of thoughtfulness still on her forehead, her movement followed by all the constables in the office who looked up from their conversations.
Dexter knew they were hungry for information so he winked at them and made a thumbs-up sign.
If he could not inform he could at least reassure.
Although he had been told to do this on some goddamned boring management course, the sergeant did it instinctively.
Dexter bounced along behind Blanche with renewed energy.
He was buoyed by the knowledge that at last they had a clear suspect.
Not someone, like Jim Lancaster, implicated just by opportunity and motive but a suspect linked to the murder by hard evidence.
A murder weapon had been discovered in Parkin's desk, David Parkin had been in the right place at the right time and he had a conceivable motive to kill the television reporter.
After all, he and Nicola were lovers, and from his own experience the sergeant knew violence and passion were jealous twins.
Admittedly, it would take twenty-four hours to see if the blood on the scissors matched the sample from Nicola Sharpe and if the partial fingerprints could be matched  against the elimination prints from David Parkin.
Only then could they think of moving against him.
It was essential, Dexter knew, to gather together as powerful a case as possible against the reporter before arresting him because from that moment the clock would begin to run: Parkin would either need to be charged with the murder or released within twenty-four hours.
Dexter jigged his toes on the floor of Blanche's office, impatient for the night to slip away quickly.
Blanche leant forward on her desk, her hands in an attitude of prayer, her eyes unfocused with thought.
‘Even if these tests on the scissors are positive we still need more evidence.’
Wootton lifted his eyebrows sceptically.
‘Do we?’
‘Parkin will say he lent Nicola the scissors and there was some accident.
She cut herself or something.
No jury will convict on that.’
Dexter's toes suddenly flopped down and stayed glued to the floor.
His shoulders slumped and nervousness fluttered in his stomach.
Blanche was right of course.
They did need more evidence.
And Dexter tried to calm his faint resentment against her for casting a shadow over his optimistic mood.
He often told himself he was stupid to feel like this but the sensation was real none the less.
Looking back, the superintendent's solution seemed obvious to the sergeant.
It was a matter of elimination.
There was only one place they could scour that did not need a search warrant: TV London.
The Asian security man unlocked the door to the documentary department office and loped off down the corridor with a distracted smile on his face.
The Scenes of Crime Officer walked in and the fluorescent bulbs on the ceiling flickered into life.
In one corner of the rectangular office a television set had not been switched off and the title sequence of a forgotten film from the seventies flickered silently on the screen.
The office was smaller and tidier than the one used by Inside Out, although laid out in a similar way with desks back to back.
The SOCO strutted across to one at the far end, shielded behind a panel of rough hessian.
The desk was less neat than the others with a stack of yellowing newspapers on one corner and two piles of books about forensic science on the other.
In the middle was a framed photograph of a woman, whom Dexter recognised as Maggie Parkin, holding a baby.
The sergeant smiled to himself.
David Parkin was obviously keen to preserve at work the image of a happy marriage despite, or perhaps because of, his affair with Nicola.
The SOCO indicated with her soft, white hands the drawer on the top left in which she had found the scissors.
She said the drawer was unlocked and the scissors were at the back.
Dexter nodded.
The desk was anonymous and modern, blockboard veneered with mahogany, the legs no more than sticks of black metal.
The drawers were divided into two blocks to right and left.
‘Did you check all the drawers?’
The woman said she had, and in the filing cabinet behind, but that she was searching specifically for a pair of scissors.
Dexter dragged over a chair and sat down at the desk.
He pulled out each drawer on the left one by one and methodically sifted through the files, papers, pens and notebooks.
After fifteen minutes' work he had found nothing of interest.
The drawers on the right were locked.
The SOCO drew the key from her pocket with a smile, saying she had borrowed it from the office manager.
The top drawer contained a bizarre mixture of objects: a stapler, a bottle of ink, assorted keys, a leather bookmark, an empty black plastic container for film — the flotsam washed ashore in an office from any human life.
Dexter drew out the second drawer with more hope.
It was crammed with notebooks filled with Parkin's bold scribble as well as copies of various scripts in loose folders.
Some related to the project he was working on, others to previous films he had made — one on schizophrenia, another on pollution of the North Sea, another on the future of  Islam.
Dexter flicked through the files with all the concentration he could muster.
He began to wonder how much more time he would need to waste before phoning Blanche with the bad news that he had found nothing.
After all, what could he expect to find?
A signed confession?
A video of Parkin engaged in the act of murder?
His attention was seized by a triangle of pale blue, the corner of an airmail envelope, the two protruding edges marked by alternate parallelograms of red and dark blue.
Dexter drew it out and registered David Parkin's name written on the front in ballpoint pen with the words ‘PERSONAL AND CONFIDENTIAL.
The letter had been ripped open so Dexter drew out the note within, a sheet torn from a reporter's notebook.
There was no date.
‘My dearest David — although I don't have the faintest idea why I should still call you this after what you told me last night — I've had a long think.
I'm not just going to let you throw me away.
I just won't let it happen.
It's up to you.
But if you go ahead with your threat I'm warning you that you'll be finished.
I'll tell the tax people about how you've been on the fiddle all these years over your freelance earnings and I've got those photos of you.
Do you remember — the ones of you sniffing coke in the hotel bedroom for a joke when we first met?
That would look great in the tabloids.
Think about it, David.
I don't want to threaten you but you've forced me into a corner.
I love you too much and I'm not going to let you walk over me just because your wife found out about our affair.
Think about it and let's have a proper talk.
Love Nicola.’
Dexter realised his fingers were shaking as he finished reading Nicola's round, almost childish, writing for the second time.
A surge of elation rushed through his body as he read the note for the third time, unable to believe the implications of what he was reading.
Nicola had threatened to blackmail David Parkin if he ended their love affair.
He was holding the evidence in his hand.
No  wonder Parkin was havering, unable to assemble the courage to make the final break with Nicola.
Parkin must have received the note and, in a panic, thrust it into the bottom of the locked drawer, assuming that no one would find it.
‘I think we might have got the bastard,’ said Dexter, taking deep breaths to calm himself.
‘If only those tests work out.’
The incident room was in darkness, except for a couple of desks whose reading lights had not been switched off, a glowing computer screen and the flashing red lights of some electrical equipment.
Wootton had already gone home: he had a young family and a termagant wife.
Blanche stood by the door for a moment with her hand on the switch, the back of her head lit fiercely by the lights in the corridor, her face hidden in soft obscurity.
Her heavy-lidded eyes were vacant with thought.
‘And leaves the world to darkness, and to me,’ she murmured.
‘What's that?’
‘A line of old poetry, Dexter,’ she said with a smile.
Her fingers pressed the switches and the lights on the ceiling of the incident room flickered into life.
She threw herself down at her desk and read Nicola's note through yet again, the sparkle of excitement in her eyes.
‘You're right.
If those tests turn out the right way tomorrow —’ she glanced at her watch, remembering they were now in the early hours of the morning —‘or rather tonight, it'll be worth bringing Parkin in.’
She laid the rectangle of glistening plastic down on her desk and sat back in her chair.
‘Do you know, I've been thinking.’
‘Always a good idea, guv'.’
The superintendent smiled.
Dexter could tell she was exhilarated by the day's events.
‘I'm not sure that man Kennedy that Nicola was supposed to be meeting ever existed.’
‘What — you mean Nicola or Parkin just invented him?’
Blanche stared at her desk and nodded.
‘Yes.
And if not them, somebody else.’
She studied the sergeant with a twinkle of amusement in her eyes.
‘I don't know why you look so amazed.
You look like a kid who's just discovered  Father Christmas doesn't exist.’
‘You mean he doesn't?’
Dexter pulled on a face of mock disappointment to cover his surprise.
He had just assumed Kennedy had existed.
Thinking about it again, Blanche might be right.
No one— absolutely no one — had seen a man called Kennedy arrive, or known anything about a man with that name.
The only evidence for his existence was a phone-call from Nicola and his name scribbled in a book.
‘That's something we can ask Parkin about tomorrow night, yeah?’
‘Don't count your chickens, Dexter.’
Blanche coughed and ran a hand over her forehead.
‘If the blood does turn out to be Nicola's, it does look stupid of him, doesn't it — to leave the murder weapon in his desk?
And the letter.’
‘It was his second office, remember, a long way away.’
Dexter was deliberately sparing with his words.
He was tired and wanted to go home to bed.
‘But why should he keep the scissors rather than throw them away?’
‘Perhaps he wanted a souvenir.’
‘What, like a stick of Brighton rock — with blood running down the middle?’
‘Murderers have done weirder things.
And don't forget — they can be bloody stupid sometimes.’
The superintendent suddenly looked up, her eyes flashing.
‘Come on, Dexter, you're meant to be giving me inspiration not falling asleep,’ she snapped.
Dexter shook himself awake.
‘Sorry, ma'am, but I'm knackered.’
He smiled submissively.
He could recognise the danger signs: Blanche was over-tired and as impatient as he was underneath for night to fall again.
Every investigation was to her like a personal crusade, a quest, that she had to complete.
Failure was an abdication of personal responsibility, a cause of a guilty conscience.
She was more relaxed than she used to be but still, in Dexter's view, judged herself too harshly.
‘We're missing something obvious, Dexter.
Something that pulls all the pieces together.
It's like doing one of those IQ tests and you keep going over the words and  numbers again and again.
And then when someone tells you the answer you kick yourself.’
Dexter levered himself up from the chair, his eyelids leaden with sleep, and murmured that he had to go home and rest.
Blanche nodded goodnight.
As Dexter staggered out of the door, he saw the superintendent still pondering over Nicola's letter, her face bathed in the light of her desk lamp.
FOURTEEN
The canteen at TV London was largely deserted at half past ten the next morning when Dexter and Blanche sat down at a table in the corner of the self-service section.
It had just been wiped by a sullen black woman in a nylon overall, from whom the sergeant tried in vain to extract a smile, and the police officers sat back to allow it to dry before resting their elbows on the surface.
The whole room breathed an air of hygienic efficiency: the walls were emulsioned so that they could be repainted at little cost, and the tables stood on plastic tiles which could be quickly wiped and disinfected.
The cosy harshness was broken only by a pair of plastic houseplants and by prints of country scenes on the walls.
Blanche sniffed unhappily as cigarette smoke drifted across from a table on the other side of the room occupied by a raucous group of maintenance men in boiler suits.
One was hoovering up a plate of sausage and chips while reading the Sun.
Another table was hidden by a group of young men in open-necked shirts and brown pullovers.
Others were occupied by scattered individuals, some reading a newspaper, others dreaming into space or others still sipping a coffee and chatting.
Jane Pargeter stood at the counter, nervously elegant, Dexter considered, in her khaki skirt and crisp, white blouse, an antique brooch pinned to the neck.
Behind her and to the right stretched a plastic canopy containing cakes and filled rolls.
A man in a suit came up beside her and made some remark which caused Jane to throw her head  back and cackle.
Her laugh was so loud it attracted glances from people in the room.
‘Did he really?
You're joking?’ she said with her distinctive throatiness, as she paid for the coffees.
Jane carried the tray across to the police officers with what looked to the sergeant like absurd concentration and Dexter wondered uncharitably whether she had already been drinking.
She slid the tray on to the table with a jolt, slopping some of the coffee over the edge of the cups.
‘There's something a bit seedy about this side of the canteen, I'm afraid,’ she began, lighting a cigarette.
‘I would have preferred to have invited you to a waitress service lunch over there of course.’
She coughed and nodded towards a section that was cordoned off, where the tables were laid with cloths and Dexter was reminded of a holiday hotel on the Costa Brava.
‘But you seemed keen to meet me this morning, so this seemed like the best place.’
Her make-up had been applied thickly that morning but with great dexterity.
She looked as if she was about to walk on stage rather than be interviewed by detectives from New Scotland Yard.
But Dexter preferred it.
By larding on the make-up, Jane Pargeter seemed to have regained the charm and sharpness she displayed on television but lacked on the afternoon following the murder.
‘I love sitting here sometimes, watching the world go by.
All of human life is here, you know.
It's a bit like a pavement café in Paris.’
Her eyes, set amongst crow's-feet when she smiled, flickered over the other people in the canteen.
She rattled on breathlessly, perhaps encouraged, Dexter thought, by a desire to delay Blanche coming to the point of the meeting.
‘It's particularly fun when all the actors come in dressed up in costume — it's like being in some surreal painting.’
The superintendent smiled, watching Jane carefully.
Blanche looked a little ragged at the edges, her sergeant noted indulgently, but was otherwise unmarked by just four hours' sleep the night before.
Her eyes were sparkling and her legs bustling when he had staggered into the incident room an hour late at nine o'clock: he had been so  tired he had slept through the high-pitched beep of his alarm clock.
Dexter had expected her to say that the day was to be spent seeking more evidence against David Parkin.
Blanche explained however that since her sergeant had rifled through all the available files and drawers at TV London there was nothing more to be done.
Better, she believed, to while away the leaden hours until evening by talking again to three people.
Two — Parkin's wife and Jim Lancaster — had both opportunity and motive to murder Nicola while the third, Jane Pargeter, had at least a conceivable motive.
All three on the other hand, and here Blanche was imagining what Parkin might say in his defence once in the interview room, had a good reason to want to see the blame for the murder transferred to Parkin should they have killed Nicola themselves.
All three might have planted the pair of scissors in the reporter's desk.
The superintendent sipped her coffee.
‘You told me the other day that you couldn't remember the farewell party very clearly,’ she began.
‘Have you remembered anything important since?
Anything that's come back to mind?’
The TV presenter sucked extravagantly on her cigarette and blew out the smoke over her left shoulder.
Her eyelashes, clogged with thick make-up, flickered together.
‘No.
I can't say I have.
Why?’
‘I'm interested in checking the times when various people were seen to leave the party.’
Jane Pargeter said nothing for a moment, tugging back her cheeks in a wince that looked to Dexter as if she was attempting to suppress a smile.
‘I told you everything I saw when you interviewed me before.’
Blanche nodded.
‘That's right.
You said you saw Jim Lancaster, Maggie Parkin and David Parkin all go out of the boardroom.’
She counted them off on her fingers.
When pressed by Blanche she added nothing to what she had said before.
Dexter admired the way in which his boss disguised who she was really interested in.
But when the superintendent mentioned David Parkin's name, Jane Pargeter flicked her cigarette nervously  and a curl of grey tobacco fluttered into the porcelain pot.
Although it was faint, Dexter was sure he smelt the sour staleness of alcohol on her breath.
‘David was out of the room for — I don't know, ten or fifteen minutes I suppose.’
‘Did you see him come back?’
‘No.
I didn't.
I just happened to look up and he was back.
That's all.’
She fingered the brooch at her neck — Victorian gold plate with an amethyst in the centre, held in place by a fierce pin.
Blanche sighed.
‘From what you know of David Parkin's character, Jane, would you say he was a violent man?’
The TV presenter stared at the female detective for a second and then her face twisted into a sly smile.
‘If you're asking whether I think David could be the murderer, then I'm afraid the answer is yes.
He's got a cold, violent side.’
She paused and touched her cheek.
Dexter noticed her hand was shaking faintly and she struck him as keeping her self-control with great difficulty.
‘He hit me once, you know.
I suppose it's possible he had a row with Nicola and killed her.’
Blanche squinted with concentration.
‘You're still quite bitter about him ending your affair, aren't you?’
A look of watchfulness stole across Jane Pargeter's eyes.
She inhaled deeply, like a participant in a yoga class.
‘Superintendent, I don't know why you keep harping on about this.
As I told you that was all a long time ago.
Time's a great healer.’
Pargeter looked away and stubbed out her half-finished cigarette.
She shuffled in her seat, smoothing out the wrinkles from her skirt.
The last thing you are, thought Dexter, is healed.
The sergeant watched his boss scrutinise Jane Pargeter, her lips pulled into a look of scepticism to match his own.
Suddenly her face relaxed and a new twinkle animated her brown eyes.
Dexter had seen the look many times before: Blanche had had an idea.
She leant forward, saying she wanted to go back for a moment to what the TV presenter had said about Jim Lancaster.
The flinty look in Pargeter's face told Dexter that  Blanche had struck home in some way.
The woman's shaking hand plucked another cigarette from the packet.
Her shoulders slumped a little as she sucked the smoke into her lungs.
She smiled — a mouthful of perfect if yellowing teeth, Dexter noted coldly — and spoke in an excellent, though female, imitation of Jim Lancaster's accent.
‘Hello, my name is Jim Lancaster.
I'm a teacher and I'm really boring.’
She chuckled and her voice returned to normal.
‘What else is there to say about him?’
Blanche stared into the woman's eyes without blinking.
Dexter wondered what the superintendent's idea was, except that it must relate in some way to Jim Lancaster.
He decided to sit back and wait.
‘You remember that farewell party better than you pretend, don't you?’ prodded Blanche.
‘I remember it all right— I enjoyed it.’
The female detective glanced around the canteen and spoke in a confidential whisper, her eyes drilling into Pargeter's so as to miss none of her reactions.
‘Did you enjoy telling Jim Lancaster that his wife was having an affair with David Parkin?’
Dexter watched the flintiness harden back into Jane Pargeter's face, as she pondered how much the superintendent knew.
So that was it, Dexter reflected.
Of course.
Despite her protestations, it was evident Jane Pargeter still resented David Parkin for dumping her for another woman.
He and Blanche also knew that Jim Lancaster had lied to them about when he stumbled across his wife's adultery.
He had learnt about it much closer to the time of the murder.
Why not at the party, from a woman who suddenly saw a way to wreak her spite not only on Parkin but on his ambitious young lover?
Pargeter's tongue crawled over her yellow teeth.
She drained off the last of her tepid coffee.
‘He's told you, has he?’
Blanche lied with a nod.
The black detective watched anxiously, wondering whether Pargeter would take the bait and confirm the superintendent's theory.
‘To answer your question with brutal honesty — I did  rather enjoy it.
I didn't when I discovered what happened afterwards of course.’
Hardly surprising, considered Dexter.
Jane Pargeter probably just thought she would fulfil her petty revenge and leave Jim Lancaster to have a row with his pushy wife.
Instead the wife was a corpse within the hour.
Dexter studied the TV presenter's face for a clue as to her sincerity about regretting Nicola's death but all he saw was brittle nervousness.
He suddenly felt some sympathy for her: her intentions had been evil but Jane could hardly have foreseen the appalling results of her maliciousness — if indeed Jim Lancaster had stormed off and murdered his wife.
‘You'd better tell me exactly what happened.’
Blanche's voice was calm and authoritative.
Jane scratched the side of her nose with a manicured fingernail.
‘Well, I bumped into Nicola's husband at the party.
And whenever I meet the spouse of someone who's having an affair with someone else, I always ask myself whether they know.
And, if they do, how they feel about it.’
‘So you decided to ask him, did you?’
Dexter saw that Blanche could not hide a faint sneer of distaste at how the TV reporter had behaved.
Jane detected it.
She slid a hand through her newly washed hair and her eyes rolled desperately from Dexter to his boss.
‘I assumed the poor man already knew, you see.
I had no idea he'd been kept in the dark for so long.
As it turned out, I was doing him a service.’
‘Doing him a service?’ asked Blanche, her voice pitched high with incredulity.
Jane realised her desperation had led her to saying something foolish.
‘OK, maybe I wasn't doing him a service.
But he had to find out at some stage, didn't he?’
Jane Pargeter inhaled and blew the smoke out with a pout of self-righteousness, reminding Dexter of a spoilt and naughty child.
She shrugged.
‘I had no idea he was going to storm off and try to find her there and then, did I ?’
Blanche's eyes were cold with dislike.
Dexter decided that although he understood her predicament, he  no longer warmed to her either.
‘He just collapsed.
It was quite dramatic really.
He obviously didn't have the faintest idea it was going on.’
Jane pulled on a dry smile, making the skin crinkle round the margins of her eyes.
‘It was stupid of me.
I shouldn't have done it, of course.
It was an act of petty revenge.
But I have to say, when I saw his eyes start to dart round the room looking for Nicola, I felt better for it.
That little bitch had it coming to her.’
God, you did hate her, reflected Dexter, and the thought fired through his brain that perhaps Jane Pargeter had foreseen Nicola's murder after all.
Willed it at least, even though she had not carried it out.
‘And where was Nicola when you were telling her husband all this?’ asked Dexter.
Pargeter turned her alert eyes to the sergeant.
‘She wasn't in the boardroom because I'd seen her leave.
Her husband muttered something to me about going to find her and then stormed off.’
‘Did you actually see Jim Lancaster leave the room?’
Jane Pargeter shook her head.
‘Once he'd disappeared I didn't take any more notice.
I carried on drinking and talking until Ken O'Mara rushed into the room and screamed that he'd found the body.’
The superintendent pushed her chair back on its aluminium legs.
Her head drooped to one side, and her heavy-lidded eyes stared at the ashtray, even though they did not focus on it.
She looked slightly strange when she was deep in thought, as though in a trance.
Dexter was used to the superintendent's mannerisms but after a second or two, Blanche caught Jane Pargeter's look of puzzlement, and the detective smiled apologetically.
She glanced round the canteen with a twinkle in her eye.
‘You television journalists have a job a bit like mine, don't you?’
‘What do you mean?’
‘We're both meant to be seekers after truth.
And no one wants to let us near it.’
Pargeter laughed cynically.
‘I think people take television far too seriously.’
She was more relaxed now, her shoulders less hunched, as if she realised the interview  was coming to an end.
‘So why do you do it?’ commented Blanche, as she stood to say farewell.
‘Because it gives me a buzz.
I get recognised in the street.
Above all, it's better than working all your life in a fish-finger factory like my mum did.’
The TV presenter twitched her cheeks into a smile of farewell.
The sergeant understood for the first time just how tough a woman Jane Pargeter was underneath, steely and unforgiving, hardened by life.
He watched her all the way to the swing doors, her head of brown hair held high and bobbing slightly as her heels clipped the floor.
‘I bet she's heading for the bar — if it's open yet.’
While they were talking in a corner, the room had drained of people.
Three women in nylon overalls sat at a table eating the food they had prepared for the canteen lunch.
Through the window Dexter saw the silver arrow of a jet flare in the sun as it turned to make its descent to Heathrow.
‘It was clever of you to work out the connection with Jim Lancaster, ma'am.’
Blanche smiled appreciatively.
She began to trace circles on the table top with the drops of spilt coffee.
Her eyes only focused on the sergeant a couple of seconds after he posed the question.
‘It was a guess really.
When someone discovers they've been betrayed by their partner they get angry.
I should know, Dexter.’
The sergeant saw her eyes were dim with sadness and he guessed she had been thinking about her former husband.
‘The art of interviewing is to put together various theories on the basis of the available evidence, not the evidence you'd like to be there.
Then you try it out.
And sometimes you're lucky, and sometimes you're not.’
‘Well, we're doing all right.
If only we can get some proper evidence against Jim Lancaster, we'll have two kosher suspects rather than one.’
Blanche smiled and strode towards the swing doors.
Dexter loped along behind, knowing things were not as simple as the woman detective liked to make out.
FIFTEEN
‘Oh, it's you again.’
‘Yes, it's us.’
Jim Lancaster fingered the open door of his house, unable to hide a look of worry.
He had good reason to look apprehensive, Dexter thought.
After all, it was the third time the police had visited him in as many days.
‘I'm fed up with this.
Can't you just leave me alone for God's sake?’
‘I'm sorry.
I know how you must be feeling —’
‘Do you?
Do you really?’
His voice was staccato with anger.
‘It's bad enough — with Nicola being killed — but you keep coming round here — harassing me.’
The sergeant considered Jim Lancaster was going to slam the door and he prepared to thrust his right foot up against the jamb.
‘I'm sorry…’ pleaded Blanche with an expressive shrug.
‘But it could be important.’
Nicola's husband hesitated for a moment, rubbing his nose.
Dexter watched the man's annoyance drain away: he was the sort who could not stay angry for long.
Walking with his gauche, bouncy tread, his shoulders hunched, Nicola's husband led Blanche and Dexter down the steps into the kitchen and gestured for them to sit down round the kitchen table.
The sergeant gazed out at the suburban garden with a gardener's informed eye.
It was not just the flower-beds marked by dying crocuses and the general air of neglect, with last autumn's leaves left to rot in sunless corners, that  made him depressed.
It was also the cold: a chill wind had risen during the morning and ruffled the feathers of a sparrow which stood shivering on the window-ledge.
Blanche looked at Lancaster with a quizzical smile and did not say anything for a full ten seconds.
Dexter counted them off by the hand of his watch.
He wondered where she was going to begin: with the stains or Jane Pargeter.
‘I'd be grateful if you could start to tell me the truth,’ she said finally.
‘About what?’
‘Everything.
But I'd like to start with just one thing for the moment — when you learnt your wife was having an affair with David Parkin.’
Jim Lancaster blinked behind his spectacles.
‘But I told you —’
‘You told me you learnt about it a couple of weeks before Nicola was murdered.’
‘That's right.’
‘But the truth is the first you knew about it was at the party.’
His lips parted as if about to shape some words.
But none was said.
He stared back blankly.
His mouth closed to moisten suddenly dry lips.
The kitchen window was flecked by a new fall of drizzle whisked against the glass.
Blanche leant forward on her chair, her eyes watchful.
‘We've been talking to Jane Pargeter.’
Dexter saw Lancaster's eyes flicker as he registered the implications of what Blanche had just told him.
‘It must have been terrible when she told you about Nicola's affair with Parkin.
I want to give you a chance to put the record straight.
Tell me what really happened.’
Jim Lancaster looked confused for a moment, blinking furiously behind his spectacles.
‘If you've already spoken to her there's not much point…
It's like what she said.’
He crossed his arms.
‘She told me Nicola was having this affair…
At first I didn't believe her but there was something in her eyes that told me it was true.
And I'd also had some suspicions.’
His voice was so gentle the police officers had to strain to hear.
He gulped.
‘I was so shocked and  angry.
Hurt.
Like some wounded animal.
I had to speak to her, to Nicola.
So I ran off.
And I found her.’
Dexter had seen it happen many times before: the moment when a human being slips from conversation into confession, the moment when what seemed like a universal desire to atone for wickedness overwhelmed the conflicting wish for self-preservation.
That moment of clarity could be all too brief, later twisted and defined out of existence by clever lawyers when the criminal came to court.
If only the police and the criminal could reach an agreement on punishment or rehabilitation there and then, the sergeant sometimes thought, justice would more often be done.
Lancaster breathed out slowly and looked down at the table when he realised what he had said.
‘Where did you find her?’
Blanche had difficulty controlling the excitement in her voice.
‘In her office.’
‘Alone?’
A faint smile crossed Lancaster's face, as though he was laughing at a cruel joke in dubious taste.
‘Parkin wasn't with her if that's what you mean.
She was alone all right.’
The fridge suddenly switched itself on, the buzzing hum sharpening the tension.
Dexter sensed every nerve in his body vibrant and alert.
‘What happened?
Did you have a row?’
He shook his head in a daze.
‘Nothing happened.
We didn't row.
I didn't hit her.
I couldn't say anything to her.’
His voice was drained of emotion, his eyes lustreless, as Dexter imagined the memory of her body floating back into his mind.
The sergeant became aware of the tick of his watch against his ear.
‘She was dead.’
Blanche's chair creaked as she leant forward, hands on her knees.
‘What time was that?’
‘God knows — half past nine or so, I suppose.
I had more important things to worry about than the time.’
‘Did you see anyone?
See anything suspicious?’
Nicola's husband did not hear the question.
Instead he murmured to himself, his eyes glazed.
‘I can still see her.
Lying there, covered in blood.
It was the sort of thing I'd have done I suppose if I'd had the chance.
Only someone else got there first.’
Blanche and Dexter exchanged glances.
The superintendent asked if he really meant what he had just said.
‘Oh, yeah.
I was angry enough, ashamed enough.’
He took off his spectacles and began to clean them with his handkerchief.
‘I can still remember standing there at the party when that woman Pargeter told me.
I felt sick.
Covered in a kind of prickly heat.
I just wanted to get out, escape, find her.
Tell her what I thought of her.’
Dexter found Lancaster's performance quite convincing, but not convincing enough to win him over.
‘So if you didn't kill Nicola, why didn't you call the police when you found her body?’
Nicola's husband looked up wearily, his voice no more than the rustle of dead leaves.
‘I wasn't thinking straight.
It was the shock I suppose and the wine — I must have drunk almost a bottle.
I just wanted to get out.
And I did.’
He glanced out at a gang of starlings fighting over some breadcrumbs that had been tossed on the lawn.
The superintendent enquired calmly what happened next.
‘Does it matter?’
Blanche apologised with a smile.
‘You never know.’
‘I went down in the lift.
I asked the security guard to order me a taxi.’
‘Which one?’
Dexter realised that Blanche wanted to check out his story.
At the moment they only had the word of Nicola's husband for what had happened.
Lancaster thought for a moment.
‘There was only one there.
An Asian I think.
Anyway, I sat there for a couple of minutes and then the cab came.’
He looked up, a glint of desperation in his eye.
‘You've no idea what I felt like when I found Nicola.
She might have been having it off with Parkin.
But I loved her.’
Blanche squinted thoughtfully, fixing the man in front of her with an inquisitive stare.
Dexter wondered whether the superintendent believed Lancaster's story: she was so  difficult to read.
The sergeant was not sure himself.
How do you judge whether a human being is telling the truth?
The signs were so varied, so liable to misinterpretation, all Dexter could rely on was instinct.
And his instincts havered between guilt and innocence.
Blanche asked whether Nicola's husband had seen anything suspicious at the party.
‘Not really.
You see when Jane Pargeter told me, I suddenly looked round for Nicola at the party.
And she wasn't there.’
‘Was David Parkin?’
‘No, he wasn't either.
And I remembered what Nicola told me about her having to meet someone.
I thought it had to be him.
And she hadn't come back.
I know it sounds mad but I suddenly had an image of them doing it on the carpet in the office like a couple of dogs.’
His voice was flat with sadness.
‘Sounds silly, doesn't it?’
Blanche shrugged sympathetically, or so it seemed to the sergeant, as if to say, ‘I understand.
It wasn't silly.’
‘But the room was empty, you see.
I looked in the editor's office but no one was there.’
‘What about the viewing booth?’
‘Well, that was one strange thing.
I remember trying it and finding it locked.
I was so paranoid I even listened at the door.
But I couldn't hear anything.’
Blanche's eyes widened and she sat forward on the kitchen chair.
‘You're saying you went to the office twice then?’
‘Yeah, that's what I said, isn't it?’ whined Lancaster with irritation.
He had not, as Dexter well knew.
The detective wondered whether Nicola's husband was deliberately misleading them or had had a genuine slip of memory.
‘And the first time the door to the viewing room was locked in some way?’
‘Yeah, of course.
Otherwise I'd have got in.’
‘And do you think someone was inside?’ interrupted Dexter, suspicious of this latest revelation.
‘I don't know.
I couldn't hear anyone.
So I stormed off  down to reception.
Couldn't see her there.
So I went up to the bar, back to the party, and still couldn't find her.’
‘And was Parkin there then?’ asked Blanche.
‘Oh, yeah.
I ran across to him and asked him where the hell Nicola was.
He looked embarrassed and said he didn't have the faintest idea.
I felt like punching him but knew it was stupid to start a fight.
So I stormed off again down to the office and that's when I found her.
The door was unlocked then.’
Blanche sighed, stood up and wandered over to the window.
‘You weren't too upset finding her dead, were you?
In fact, you'd have quite liked to have done it yourself.’
‘She had something coming to her all right, Superintendent.
But she didn't deserve that.’
Lancaster's voice had suddenly become animated and loud as he recalled the sting of his betrayal.
Dexter even wondered for a moment whether he was drunk.
But the sergeant knew he was not, it was simply the effect of a quiet man suddenly giving vent to his anger.
Dexter moved his chair over the kitchen tiles causing a squeak that exploded round the kitchen.
He felt it was time to ask about the stains on the clothes that Jim Lancaster had taken to the dry cleaner's.
Nicola's husband gave a nervous smile.
‘Yeah, the owner said you'd been in.’
‘What exactly were the stains by the way?’
Dexter saw Lancaster moisten his lips before he spoke.
‘Coffee, Sergeant.
Just coffee.
I spilt some on the jacket.’
The sergeant was sure Nicola's husband was lying and that the stains were blood but knew he had no evidence to prove it.
If only that bloody dry cleaner had been as inefficient as most of them usually were.
Dexter did not see Blanche for another few hours.
While she was driven over to Greenwich to interview Maggie Parkin, the superintendent sent him back to Scotland Yard to harry the forensic science laboratories over the bloodstains on the pair of scissors.
They told him, however, that  they were short of staff and the earliest they could give a result was nine o'clock that night.
Blanche reappeared just after four, throwing off her coat and beckoning Dexter into her office in the same gesture.
Her skin had become paler during the afternoon, Dexter noticed, and her energy almost feverish.
She looked worried and preoccupied, her eyelids lined with red.
Fatigue was creeping up on her.
Blanche plugged in the electric kettle and spooned coffee into the percolator while she listened to the sergeant's account of his afternoon, swearing softly when he told her the news from the forensic labs.
‘And how was Mrs Parkin?’ asked Dexter, while Blanche took a packet of chocolate digestives from her filing cabinet and arrayed them on a plate.
It was a typical gesture of hers, thought the sergeant, a sign of gentility, of her desire to guard her feminine standards in a male world of sloppiness.
‘I think she's still hiding something,’ murmured Blanche, biting into a biscuit.
‘What?’
‘If I'd been trained in mind-reading rather than riot control, Dexter, I'd tell you.’
The sergeant rubbed the palms of his hands up and down on the side of his chair and waited for his boss to continue.
‘She was on edge, talking not so much the hind leg off a donkey as off an African elephant.
And she was puffing away at those wretched cigarettes like there was no tomorrow.
The smoke made me feel quite sick.’
Blanche extracted two cups and saucers from her filing cabinet and Dexter made the coffee.
‘I got out of her that she did know about Parkin's goings-on with Nicola Sharpe.’
‘So it was just a front?’
‘Yes.
She said she did it because she knew her husband was innocent and she didn't want him implicated.
Of course, it ends up making things look worse for him — as if she was trying to cover his tracks.’
Dexter leant forward and slipped two more lumps of  sugar into his coffee: Blanche was always trying to reduce his sugar intake and make his diet healthier.
The sergeant wondered aloud whether Maggie Parkin did secretly believe in her husband's guilt.
‘It's certainly possible.
She protested his innocence a bit too loudly: she was the one who actually brought the subject up.’
The superintendent narrowed her eyes, crinkling the dark flesh of the lids.
‘The alternative, of course, is that she did it.
Don't forget that phone-call, remember — the one to Nicola at the party.
It was from a woman and we've only got two female suspects, Parkin's wife and Jane Pargeter.’
‘What did she say when you asked her about it?’
‘She said she didn't know anything about it.’
Blanche sipped her coffee and licked a dab of chocolate from the end of her forefinger.
It struck Dexter as a very sensual act, at odds with what he thought of as the female detective's self-control and cautious approach to the world.
She smiled.
‘Who are you betting on then?’
The sergeant sat back and rubbed his fingernails thoughtfully.
He was uncertain, and could not see the point of hazarding a guess before the forensic labs had reported on the pair of scissors.
But he always liked being asked for his opinion: it made him feel important and he had never understood why people needed to go on assertiveness courses.
Dexter decided to make a joke of it.
‘I think it could be Nicola's hubby.
He's the sort of creep who'd do that kind of thing.’
Blanche nodded.
‘On the other hand, there's a lot of evidence against Parkin.
I'm not sure about his wife either.
And then I've got my —’
Blanche smiled good-naturedly.
‘Thanks, Dexter.
That's very useful.’
Dexter smiled back.
‘I do my best to please.’
A constable appeared at the door to say that DI Eddy Russell was on the phone for the superintendent.
Dexter had forgotten about the Drugs Squad and detected excitement crackle in Blanche's voice, the excitement of being a sexual quarry.
He listened to Blanche's nervous laugh as she agreed a rendezvous but then saw her brow  wrinkle as she replaced the receiver.
‘He says he's got to bring someone else along tonight, someone he's got to entertain.’
Dexter chuckled to himself.
He was amused that Blanche still felt the need to maintain the pretence that her interest in the handsome detective inspector was solely professional.
‘How's that going to fit in with David Parkin by the way — if the lab results are positive?’
Blanche studied her watch.
‘Easy.
You say the earliest we're going to get the results is nine, so let's just phone in around then.
There's no point in sitting here twiddling our thumbs.’
The sergeant nodded with approval, knowing that he needed some way to dissipate his nervous energy in the coming hours.
He suddenly remembered that Stephen Blufton's information about drug smuggling was due to be put to the test that day.
He asked Blanche what was happening but discovered her gaze was locked on the other side of the room.
He followed her eyes but found she was only staring at a door.
Blanche caught his look.
‘I've just had an idea, Dexter.’
She stood up, her eyes shining.
‘Let's pop in at TVL again.
I want to walk through what Jim Lancaster told us.
And also I think it's high time you and I watched a bit more television.’
She hovered for a second, selecting the right words.
‘By the way, I'd appreciate it if you came along tonight.
I need you to act as my chaperone,’ she added with a mischievous laugh.
SIXTEEN
‘People are coming back to work in the office downstairs from Monday, you know.
Some of them even think it's haunted.’
The security man swung open the door to the boardroom where the party had taken place and switched on the lights, revealing the room as Blanche and Dexter had last seen it the day after the killing.
‘I was glad I was part of a different shift.
It was a real shock to the boys who were on that night.’
The security guard — a tall, friendly man with dishevelled, greasy hair and a distant Irish brogue — stood by expectantly.
Dexter found him too talkative.
‘I'm sure,’ said Blanche, launching into a genteel chat with the security man about his work and colleagues.
Dexter sometimes thought the superintendent took the need to be polite to the public too far.
He wandered off to find Simon Franks and arrange a viewing of Nicola Sharpe's last few reports.
These were the ‘bit more television’ Blanche wanted to watch, since she believed they would help freshen her image of the murdered woman.
When Dexter met the superintendent twenty minutes later, Blanche stood outside the Inside Out office still chatting to the security guard.
Blanche thanked the man for his help and he loped off down the corridor, jangling his keys.
‘So, did you find what you were looking for, guv'?’ asked Dexter as the lift jerked into motion and hummed downwards.
Blanche yawned and leant back against the aluminium  bar that ran round the inside of the lift.
‘Possibly.
I'm sure Jim Lancaster isn't telling the truth about that door to the viewing room being locked.’
‘Why's that?’
‘Well, you need a special key and no one on the programme's officially got one.
I've just checked.’
Simon Franks stood in the basement corridor and shook Blanche's hand gingerly, as if it might crumble.
He made some remark about being surprised to receive Blanche's request so long after the murder and not being sure what she hoped to gain from viewing the tapes.
‘We'll see,’ the female detective merely shrugged in reply.
To Dexter the producer seemed much more self-confident than on the morning after the murder, talkative and charming.
The prickly distrust had faded to be replaced by an almost oily helpfulness.
Franks led them through some swing doors with a flourish and into another corridor, explaining that normally he would not waste money by taking them to a full editing suite.
But one happened to be free for a couple of hours along with the picture editor who cut Nicola's last report.
Franks said he thought the superintendent might find it interesting.
Their footsteps suddenly cracked like pistol shots as the carpet was replaced by plastic tiles.
On either side were a series of editing suites, visible through small windows in the doors.
In the dimness of the rooms Dexter made out blurred figures and machinery bedecked with lights, knobs and dials.
It reminded the sergeant of mission control for some dark and mysterious space flight.
They had to pick their way past trolleys loaded high with videotapes — some in large plastic containers, others in small plastic boxes plastered with labels.
The TV producer led them to one of the last suites on the left and a young man in pullover and jeans swung round on his chair.
Franks introduced him as Terry, the picture editor.
On the desk in front of him were a pile of grey videotape boxes.
The superintendent picked one up.
‘This is all of Nicola's work in the last few weeks of her life, is it?’
‘Yeah.
Everything,’ replied Franks.
He picked up the tapes and sifted through.
‘A few reports for the local news.
The Inside Outs we did together on homelessness and cancer cures.
Even the farewell tape.’
‘The farewell tape?’
Franks snorted dismissively.
‘It's the thing I put together for Ken O'Mara's party — a sort of piss-take.’
‘And Nicola's in it?’ asked Dexter.
The producer turned to him with an apologetic smile, his voice injected with what the sergeant considered a theatrical dose of concern.
‘Yeah.
In a rather bad taste way, I'm afraid.
We were due to show it at the end of the party and of course…well, you know what happened.
No one ever got to see it complete, except me and Terry of course.’
Terry nodded and looked away to one of the machines, twiddling the knobs to hide his nervousness.
Blanche did not linger long over the local news reports.
One was about a new initiative to help people dying of AIDS; another about the closure of a London theatre; a third about a motorway pile-up on the M25.
Dexter noticed that each report ended with Nicola addressing the camera, even in the third one, where it was unnecessary and intrusive.
Terry smiled.
‘She did a piece to camera on every single thing she did.
She was quite a girl, Nicola.
But my God, she could be a pain in the arse sometimes as well, you know.’
Franks flashed him a look of irritation, as if it was disloyal of the picture editor to criticise Nicola now that she was dead, indeed criticise her at all.
That, the producer seemed to be signalling, is my job.
You are a mere picture editor, a workman, whose views on editorial staff are of no account.
Dexter wondered what Terry would say about Simon Franks behind his back.
Terry ignored the glance and pressed the homelessness film into the slot of one of the machines.
The tape laced up and showed a figure five on a TV screen.
‘This didn't get shown either,’ commented Franks.
‘It got pulled because of the murder.
The management want me to put another voice on it so the rushes don't go to  waste.
But I've refused.
As a mark of respect.’
In the half-light of the editing suite his face appeared more than ever like a mask, the nose attenuated, the skin smooth and polished.
Terry leant forward and languidly pressed the ‘play’ button.
He then disappeared to buy a round of teas from the canteen.
Dexter liked the picture editor and felt at ease with him.
With his gruff, Cockney drawl and lack of pretentiousness, he was the first person he had met on the production side of TV London who was not part of the middle-class mafia, and who seemed relaxed and at ease with himself.
Mind you, Dexter thought, Terry was probably playing a role as much as anybody else.
He found the film boring: tramps sleeping rough on pavements, women with grimy children in bed and breakfast hotels, men in suits pontificating.
Lots of talk about the Problem.
Just the sort of thing he avoided on his television at home.
The only interesting thing about the film was the revelation that in one London borough some local councillors owned several of the bed and breakfast hotels where conditions were particularly dreadful.
Blanche watched without expression, sipping at her cup of tea, except when Nicola appeared in one of her numerous pieces to camera.
Then she leant back and narrowed her eyes with concentration.
When the report was finished, Blanche made an appreciative comment.
Franks smiled — obviously pleased by Blanche's approval, Dexter believed, although trying not to show it.
‘It's so hard to capture poverty on video, you know, Superintendent.
Some of the places we went to were absolute tips — paper peeling off the walls, damp patches on the ceilings — and video just glosses over it all.’
‘I'm sure,’ said Blanche.
‘And was this film important to her in any particular way?’
‘She was proud of that piece to camera at the end,’ murmured Terry, in his flat London accent.
Simon Franks' smile was tight with irritation.
‘I wanted to cut it out at one stage in the editing but Nicola went  mad.
She said it was the best one she'd ever done.
She said she'd put it on her show-reel.’
Dexter recalled that halfway through the homelessness report Nicola had delivered a short lecture about the appalling conditions in which one family lived while managing to look stunning at the same time.
It was quite a performance, Dexter had to admit, and Nicola was a beautiful woman.
Simon Franks picked up another grey box containing the film for Ken O'Mara's farewell party.
He handed it to Terry with a show of false reluctance, preceding it with a string of apologies.
For Christ's sake, just cut the crap and show it, thought the sergeant with a sigh.
The film only lasted for about ten minutes and began with a satire of Ken O'Mara's eating habits.
Dexter registered the narrator's voice immediately.
It was David Parkin, whose gravelly tones gave the report an air of spurious authenticity.
O'Mara's wife was shown meekly pushing a trolley along the aisles of the local Sainsbury supermarket, stuffing it with packets of biscuits.
At home she unloaded and stacked them in the basement.
The film then cut to plates of biscuits on every conceivable ledge in every room of the house.
Parkin interviewed a giggly Mrs O'Mara who said her husband ate tons of biscuits every week but added that, now Ken was to leave TV London, she would have her revenge.
The camera panned away from her to rest on a gleaming exercise bicycle.
David Parkin was next shown outside a pub in Pimlico, where he delivered a piece to camera with mock gravity about Ken O'Mara's commitment to investigative journalism and to recruiting more female reporters.
‘This is Nicola's bit,’ hissed Franks.
Nicola was shown on a bar stool in a black skirt that barely hid her crutch.
The word ‘RECONSTRUCTION’ flashed up on the screen.
‘And now at last we can reveal Ken O'Mara's recruitment techniques,’ intoned Parkin's commentary.
‘Hello, my dear,’ said a male Irish voice off camera, imitating O'Mara.
‘How would you like to be in TV?’
Nicola turned from the bar, eyelashes fluttering, lips pouting.
‘Oh, I'd be thrilled,’ she said, standing up.
‘Is there an interview?’
‘Don't worry,’ continued the Irish voice, ‘it's easy.
It's just to get the feel of your personality.
It's the shape of your body — sorry, mind — that matters.’
The film cut to a closeup of what was supposed to be O'Mara's hand pinching Nicola's bottom.
The next shot was of Nicola hunched over a table in a darkened room.
Her right hand was scribbling in a notebook whose page was headed ‘Drugs Investigation’.
Dexter saw Blanche lean forward in the dimness, her eyes alert.
Parkin's commentary talked of Ken O'Mara's insistence that all new reporters had direct experience of the stories they were investigating.
At that moment the camera tracked to the left and zoomed in to reveal that Nicola had a tube of paper up her left nostril and was pretending to sniff cocaine from the table top.
Just like Nicola's note to Parkin, Dexter remembered, with the threat to expose him.
He turned to meet Blanche's steady gaze, wondering whether the murdered woman wished to transmit a message through the scene.
The humour was heavy-handed and, in response to Simon Franks' nervous laugh, Blanche smiled politely.
Nicola appeared next knocking on Ken O'Mara's door.
An Irish voice told her to come in and the rest of the scene was filmed from the point of view of O'Mara's chair.
Parkin's commentary said that another notable feature of Ken O'Mara's time as editor was his commitment to running controversial films — whoever they might embarrass.
Nicola approached the desk.
‘That drugs story you asked me to investigate, Ken, has turned out amazingly.’
‘Really?
Come a bit closer, my dear,’ crooned the mock O'Mara voice.
Nicola tottered round the table on her high heels and slid her buttocks on to the table.
‘You've got to run it, Ken.
I've got all the interviews in the can and some fantastic sequences.’
‘What's the story?’
Nicola leant forward.
‘Ken, I've discovered the whole bloody Cabinet — the people who run Britain — are drug smugglers.
They're in a secret conspiracy with the Colombian cocaine barons and the Mafia to flood this country with cocaine.’
Melodramatic music flared on the soundtrack to accompany close-ups of a mouth — supposed to be O'Mara's — sagging open, and of Nicola's look of tough determination.
‘Great story,’ gasped the O'Mara voice finally.
‘But I'll think I'll just need to talk it over with a few people before we run it though.’
‘But, Ken, it's cut.
It's ready to run.
You've got to go with it tonight,’ Nicola pleaded.
‘Don't worry, I'll have a look at it straight away.
Have you got the tape?’
Nicola handed it across.
‘That's wonderful.’
‘Great, I'll just go and tell everybody,’ gasped Nicola, full of breathy enthusiasm, running towards the door.
Suddenly she halted.
‘You will be showing the drugs film, won't you?’
‘Of course.’
After the door closed, a pudgy hand picked up the videotape gingerly as if it were a dead bird and, pausing for a moment so that the viewer could read ‘GOVERNMENT DRUGS SCANDAL’, dropped it into a wastepaper bin.
His hand reached into a drawer and took out another videotape box marked HAVE THE ROYALS GOT A FUTURE?
Everyone in the editing suite sat in silence, their faces softened by the gentle light.
Terry tapped his fingernails on the table.
‘I'm glad to see the art of satire isn't dead,’ commented Blanche.
Franks leant forward, resting his hands on his thighs.
‘Ken's got a good sense of humour.
He'd have known no offence was meant.’
Dexter saw Blanche was not listening to him.
‘Who suggested the drugs idea by the way?
Was it Nicola?’
‘Yeah.
She'd been looking into it for Ken anyway — as I  told you.
And it seemed a good laugh.
She came up with the wonderfully whacky idea of the Cabinet all being drug smugglers.’
‘It's probably true,’ said Blanche with a chuckle.
The superintendent gazed at the blank TV screen before suddenly turning to Franks, her eyes drained of laughter.
‘Do you think there was any link at all between her research and the video?’
‘What — the Cabinet being drug smugglers?’
The producer paused for a moment to make sure he had heard correctly and then burst out laughing, flicking a nervous glance at Terry.
Blanche smiled and said she did not mean that, but the reference to Colombian cocaine barons and the mafia.
The producer shrugged, adding that he knew no more than what he had told Blanche before.
‘I think you've been reading too many thrillers, Superintendent.’
Blanche's strong features softened into a grin in the dim light.
Dexter was still mulling over the scene in which Nicola pretended she was taking drugs.
‘Did Nicola actually sniff coke?’
He deliberately posed the question in an open way.
The producer groaned dismissively.
‘No, of course not.
it was just a joke.
I think you've got the wrong idea about the people who work in TV, Sergeant.
There's the odd junkie or alcoholic but they're the exception rather than the rule.’
Terry nodded agreement.
Dexter glanced at his watch and was surprised to see it was almost seven o'clock.
Time no longer had the same meaning down in the basement of the TV company, windowless and illuminated only by artificial light.
For a moment, the sergeant had that same sense of disorientation when the lights went up at the end of an afternoon programme in the cinema and he felt he had just flown back from another world.
The superintendent eased herself up with a sigh.
‘It's strange to think that pile of tapes is all that's left of Nicola's life, isn't it?’
‘It's more than most people have,’ bridled the producer.
‘I suppose you're right,’ Blanche shrugged.
‘I'm afraid I think of TV as a bit like a McDonald's hamburger — easily digested and soon forgotten.’
‘I love them myself — hamburgers.
Can't get enough of them,’ interrupted Dexter with a broad smile, anxious to push the superintendent off her soapbox before she started to sound off about the worthlessness of most television.
If only, he thought sometimes, Blanche would not worry so much about wasting time and let the minutes trickle like sand through her fingers.
Even the glasses on top of the cigarette vending machine quivered in time to the music.
The raucous beat of Rod Stewart thumped through the whole pub — jogging the fag ends on the worn-out carpet, stomping over the heavy brown paintwork, beating the dust from the velvet curtains draped across the windows and setting Dexter's toes tapping.
Three large bronzed fans whirred above in the smoky air.
A few lonely men nursing a half-empty glass patted the floor in time to the music.
Most of the young, rather shabbily dressed people in the pub shouted over it or craned their heads closer to hear.
For them the din increased rather than destroyed the intimacy of conversation.
With a smile Dexter noticed Blanche wince as soon as the swing door closed behind her.
He knew the youthfulness of the clientele — hardly any could have been above thirty — and the loud music would make her uncomfortable.
‘I suddenly feel old, Dexter,’ she shouted, paddling through the crowd towards Eddy Russell, who sat by himself on a huge mahogany settle on the right of the door.
The warmth of the detective inspector's greeting cooled when he caught sight of Dexter behind Blanche's shoulder.
It was what Dexter had feared: two was company and three very much a crowd.
He stiffened and wondered how he might escape.
Blanche caught his look and explained smoothly to the inspector that since Eddy said he was going to bring along a guest so would she.
DI Russell was too amicable to take offence and, after ten  minutes' conversation and a drink, the three slipped into the easy amity of fellow professionals, exchanging grumbles and gossip.
‘I'm afraid I've got a confession to make,’ said Eddy Russell finally, taking a swig from his pint of bitter and wiping the foam from his upper lip.
He turned to Blanche, who sat beside him on the settle, his face grave.
Dexter leant forward across the table to hear better what was about to be said.
Eddy smiled submissively, the smile of the good companion, the smile of one who wishes to be liked.
His face was flat and wide, clean, the skin marked only by a few freckles on the right cheek, the eyes set far apart and shallow in their sockets.
A handsome face, Dexter thought once again, admiring the aggressive, stubby nose.
‘I told Nicola Sharpe more than I should have done.’
‘What in particular?’ asked Blanche.
‘About the Mafia.’
The superintendent's forehead crinkled.
‘The Sicilian Mafia?’
Russell nodded and sipped some more beer.
‘I told her we'd had a tip-off.
They're meant to be operating in Britain again, smuggling drugs.’
Dexter whistled under his breath.
Nicola had told Stephen Blufton the truth after all.
No wonder she thought Jane Pargeter's job was in the bag.
He asked how much the Drugs Squad knew about them.
Russell swung his grey eyes across to Dexter.
He looked puzzled.
‘Well, that's the point.
We and customs didn't know much at all till you phoned last night with the stories about the lorries and the baggage handlers at Gatwick.’
‘So that information didn't come from you?’
Blanche interrupted.
Eddy shook his head.
‘Not from me.’
He stared out at the people in the pub, plunged in thought.
‘So are customs taking our tip-off seriously then?’
Dexter shouted above the din.
‘Oh, yeah.
Don't worry.
They've been going through all the lorries that've come into Dover today with some sort of connection with the Balkans.
It must be like looking for a  needle in a haystack — assuming there's a bloody needle there.’
Dexter tapped his feet in time to the music and eyed a handsome youth leaning by himself against the bar.
The sergeant admired the man's chiselled chin and ebony black hair glistening with gel.
He was pondering how to chat him up without attracting too much attention from Blanche and Eddy, when he heard the superintendent ask the man from the Drugs Squad who exactly had given them the tip-off in the first place.
‘It was the Italian police.
They told us a few months ago.
But they were vague.
They just said the Mafia were back in Britain again — running drugs, money-laundering.
You name it.
That's free trade in Europe for you.’
Blanche's eyes had focused on a group of American youths at the bar sporting baseball caps.
Suddenly she turned to the inspector, sipping her whisky.
‘So why did you tell all this to Nicola?’
The detective sipped his beer.
‘Because I was bloody stupid.’
‘You were threatening the whole of your investigation, weren't you?’
A flush of colour shot through the inspector's pale face.
‘I thought this was meant to be a friendly chat not a bloody interrogation.’
Blanche ran her tongue over her lips.
She spoke in a hoarse whisper.
‘I'm sorry, Eddy.
But don't forget, Nicola was murdered.
I have to know all the facts that might be relevant, not just some of them.’
The inspector heaved a great sigh.
He glanced from Blanche to Dexter and back again.
He had the hopeless look of a cornered animal to the sergeant.
‘My marriage is on the fucking rocks, if you really want to know.
I was lonely.
Nicola seemed to fancy me and I fancied her.
So, I told her more than I should have done.’
He wrenched the words out painfully, like rotten teeth.
‘I was infatuated with her.
She kept tagging me along, and bit by bit she wheedled the story out of me.’
The superintendent tightened her lips.
‘In bed?’
‘No.
It never got that far.
Believe me, Blanche, it never got that far.’
He pleaded with his eyes and sighed again, running a hand through his hair.
The female detective sat back and glanced round the bar to see if anyone was taking any notice of them.
No one was.
There was too much noise, too much animation.
‘What about Blufton?’
‘What do you mean?’
‘Blufton gave us some important details you didn't know,’ Blanche continued.
‘The dates of the lorries and this name Della Torre for a start.
Now, assuming they're true, Blufton is hardly going to shop a drug smuggling ring he's in on, so it's safe to assume Nicola had another source of information.
One we haven't found yet,’ she said, smiling at Eddy.
Dexter nodded.
What she said made sense.
Trust Blanche to be thinking so far ahead.
And an idea flipped up in his mind.
‘Perhaps it was this bloke Kennedy she was supposed to be meeting.
Perhaps he existed after all.’
Before Blanche could respond, Eddy Russell glanced at his watch and jumped up.
‘Talking of Blufton,’ interrupted Eddy, with a sly smile, ‘we better be on our way.
This guy we're meeting tonight has some interesting things to say about him.’