

RESHAPING EDUCATION
The Education Reform Act received the Royal Assent at the end of July, 1988.
The Act is of mammoth proportions with profound implications for every sector of education, and it has been the subject of intense discussion both inside and outside Parliament.
The professional teaching associations at all levels of the educational system objected to many of the Bill's provisions, and a joint rally and lobby of Parliament was organised.
The House of Commons spent over 215 hours on the Bill, including ten days on the floor of the House and twenty-two days in committee, and the House of Lords devoted over 150 hours spread over sixteen days to a discussion of the Bill.
Hundreds of amendments, some on matters of substance but the vast majority on points of detail, were tabled.
The House of Lords alone proposed 569 amendments, and the Secretary of State for Education and Science, Kenneth Baker, said: ‘I have been unable to find any measure since the war that has been more debated or had more parliamentary time allocated to it’.
Some changes were made and a few concessions were wrung from the government.
But, although the Act differed in detail from the original Bill, the main principles remained intact and Mr Baker had achieved most of what he wanted.
Many of the Act's provisions, at the time of writing, are only beginning to be put into operation, but it is clear that once they have been fully implemented they will completely transform the educational system in Britain.
The Educational Reform Act is to be the main focus of what  follows, but not all of the major changes flow from the Act.
These other changes (in levels of funding, the growing role of the Training Agency, and the enterprise culture as it affects higher education, for example) will be incorporated into the discussion.
For convenience, the chapter is divided into two main sections, one dealing with schools and the other concentrating on further and higher education.
SCHOOLS
The National Curriculum
In a speech delivered in 1976 when he was Prime Minister, Sir James Callaghan sparked off what became known as the ‘great debate’ about the quality and role of education in Britain.
He referred to the frequent complaints from industry that new recruits from school were ill-equipped with basic skills.
He was also disturbed by the relatively small proportion of graduates who chose to work in manufacturing industry.
There was a need for more technologically-based science courses and a change in the balance of educational priorities:
The balance was wrong in the past.
We have a responsibility now…to see that we do not get it wrong in the other direction.
There is no virtue in producing socially well-adjusted members of society who are unemployed because they do not have the skills.
Nor at the other extreme must they be technically efficient robots.
Both of the basic purposes of education require the same essential tools.
These are to be basically literate, to be basically numerate, to understand how to live and work together, and have respect for others and respect for the individual.
The speech was followed by a series of meetings throughout the country organised by the Department of Education and Science.
Eventually, in 1977, a Green Paper was published which identified four major topics for consideration: the school curriculum, assessment and standards, the education and training of teachers and the relationship between school and working life.
The same topics were addressed in a White Paper in 1985, and these issues became a major concern of the Education Reform Act which introduced a national curriculum backed up by standardised tests at the ages of seven, eleven, fourteen and sixteen.
The national curriculum is to consist of three core subjects of English, maths and science, and  seven other areas: a foreign language (not required in primary schools), technology, history, geography, art, music and physical education.
Several working parties were set up to make recommendations on the content of each subject and on the appropriate levels of attainment at each stage.
By the beginning of 1990 most of the working parties had reported.
A National Curriculum Council has been set up to advise the Secretary of State on matters relating to the national curriculum and to supervise the introduction of new curricula into schools and review their progress.
Within a few months of its establishment the National Curriculum Council had produced reports on the in-service training of maths and science teachers in the operation of the national curriculum and on attainment targets and study programmes in maths and science.
A School Examinations and Assessment Council has also been established to advise the Secretary of State on the operation of testing and assessment procedures.
The aims of the national curriculum and its related assessment procedures were set out in a consultative paper published in July 1987 in which it was anticipated that standards of educational provision and attainment would be raised by:
1.
Ensuring that all children studied a broad range of subjects and did not drop at too early a stage in their school careers subjects which might be useful to them later.
2.
Setting clear objectives for what children over the full range of abilities should be able to achieve; this will help all children to reach their full potential.
3.
Ensuring that all children irrespective of sex, ethnic origin and geographical location have access to broadly the same, sound curriculum.
4.
Checking on progress and making appropriate adjustments.
It was also claimed that a national curriculum would facilitate movement from one area of the country to another with minimum disruption to children's education.
Finally, the national curriculum and testing arrangements would make schools more accountable.
It should be noted that the national curriculum applies only to maintained schools — private sector schools and the city technology colleges are excluded.
There has been some opposition to the proposals even among the government's own supporters.
Lord Joseph, a former Conservative  Secretary of State for Education and Science, has argued that the plans involve too much central control and that they will lead to a loss of flexibility and a stifling of initiative and innovation.
Lord Joseph made two unsuccessful attempts to limit the national curriculum to a purely advisory role and to restrict its operation to the three core subjects.
Some concern has also been expressed by teachers, local authorities, the Labour Party and others that the national curriculum is being implemented with too much haste.
The Task Group on Assessment and Testing recommended that assessment arrangements should be phased in over five years, and that an intensive teacher-training programme should be mounted in the meantime.
Nevertheless the national curriculum in maths, science and English was introduced in 1989 and the teachers have complained bitterly of the short time available for training and of the meagre resources devoted to it — £47.5 million for training in content and £33.1 million for preparing teachers for the new tests and assessment.
By the start of the school year in 1992 the national curriculum will have been introduced in all subjects.
There is a problem of fitting the curriculum into the school day.
The maths and science reports imply that together these two subjects should occupy about one-third of the timetable.
The science report suggests that in the fourth and fifth years pupils should be devoting 20 per cent of their time to science.
Although no specific percentages were mentioned in the Act, the government had originally intended that the whole of the national curriculum should occupy 70 per cent of the timetable; but it should also be remembered that religious education has been mandatory since 1944 and remains so.
There have even been suggestions that the length of the working week for secondary school pupils may have to be increased.
The greatest controversy has been over the question of assessment and testing.
Teachers have expressed concern about the emphasis on testing which they claim will lead to greater stress among pupils and parents and will carry implications of failure.
It is possible, too, that tests will distort the curriculum with pupils being coached more than at present for examinations.
The Task Group on Assessment and Testing recommended a mixture of standardised written tests and continuous assessment by  teachers , but with the emphasis very definitely on the latter.
The  Secretary of State shared this preference for assessment by teachers, but the Conservative leadership was split on this issue with Mrs Thatcher herself favouring nationally standardised pencil and paper tests mainly because they lend themselves to direct comparisons between schools.
The government firmly believes in the value of competition among schools as a means of raising standards.
The idea is that all results are published and schools are then placed in league tables, so the main purpose of the tests is as much about the stimulation of competition as it is about diagnosing individual children's strengths and weaknesses.
The Task Group on Assessment and Testing said that results should be published using average scores, but as part of a more general report on the school together with information about the socio-economic characteristics of the school's catchment area.
Goldstein and Cuttance have argued that the use of average scores as advocated by the Task Group is meaningless and unfair to schools in deprived areas.
They claim that a more accurate picture is gained by using attainment data.
In this method, the attainment of a child at the time of the test is compared with his or her attainment at time of entry to the school.
What is then being measured is the progress of the pupil, and putting these together for all the pupils of a particular age in a school gives a far more accurate measure of a school's effectiveness.
At present several attempts are being made to devise performance indicators which would enable schools to be graded, and serve both as a management tool and as a guide to parents in choosing a school.
Choice of school is an aspect of ‘parent power’ which is the subject of the next section.
Parental power
Free parental choice of school was supposedly granted by the 1980 and 1986 Education Acts.
Local authorities, however, faced with the need to make the most effective use of school buildings and staff, did not make parental choice the paramount consideration.
The matter came to a head in Dewsbury where parents refused to send twenty-six children to a school in which the vast majority of the pupils were Asian.
They wished instead to send their children to a school two miles away.
As the law stood at that time local authorities could place limits on the number of pupils in each of its schools, and the Secretary of State said that he had no power to intervene in the  Dewsbury case.
Eventually the local authority reversed its decision after two parents had instituted a judicial review in the High Court.
The 1988 Act allows open enrolment, so that schools are forced to accept children up to the limit of their capacity.
The Dewsbury parents were vehement in their denial of racial prejudice.
It is undeniable, however, that the new regulations could easily lead to racially segregated schools.
Mr Roy Hattersley, Deputy leader of the Labour Party, said at the 1987 national conference that the new arrangements could lead to ‘an apartheid education system’.
In November 1987, Baroness Hooper, the Under Secretary of State for Education, stated in the course of a television programme: ‘If we are offering freedom of choice to parents we must allow that choice to operate.
If it ends up with a segregated system — then so be it’.
In the House of Commons Mrs Thatcher refused to disassociate herself from these comments, although she was invited to do so on three occasions.
The opting-out arrangements (see below) makes segregation even more likely and racial or religious segregation will be compounded by social segregation.
It is interesting to note that some Muslim schools are considering opting out of local authority control and offering separate provision.
In the three Education Acts passed during their first nine years of power, the Conservative government has made parental influence and involvement a central issue.
In 1980 it implemented the proposals of the Taylor Committee for representation of parents on governing bodies of schools, and under the 1986 Act, which became operative in September 1988, parent representation on governing bodies was extended.
At the same time governing bodies were made accountable to parents for the first time.
Governors are now required to produce annual reports and to organise parents' meetings at which the reports and any other matters parents wish to raise may be discussed.
Any meeting attended by at least 20 per cent of the parents may pass resolutions which the head teacher, the governors and the local education authority must consider.
The 1988 Act has altered the position by giving governing bodies increased powers and greater financial independence while retaining accountability to parents as a whole.
The devolution of detailed financial control from local authorities to head teachers and governing bodies means that schools will in future have to manage their own budgets which include an amount for teachers' salaries.
There  can be no guarantee that head teachers and parent governors have the necessary skills to perform this task effectively.
However, there is some evidence to suggest that parent power may be somewhat illusory.
In 1988 the Consumers' Association found that only 25 per cent of parents had attended a parent-teacher association meeting in the past twelve months and only 9 per cent had attended a school governors' annual meeting.
Over half of those questioned thought that teachers should be allowed to get on with their jobs free from parental interference.
Buckinghamshire is monitoring the process and in 1987 Audrey Simpson reported:
Only a trickle of progress reports have so far found their way back to Buckinghamshire's education department, but they confirm the trend nationally of a poor overall response and turnout confined principally to a hardcore of parents, generally stalwarts of a school parent-teacher association.
The National Confederation of Parent-Teacher Associations cites the example of a secondary school in the Midlands with a roll of 1,100 where the annual meeting was attended by the head teacher and deputy, four governors and seven parents.
Parent representation on governing bodies under the 1986 Act did not have an auspicious beginning.
It is evident that in some areas the local political parties were intent on retaining control.
In Barnet and Kent (both Conservative) and Manchester (Labour) nominations from opposition groups were refused.
A survey carried out by the Labour Party revealed that two-thirds of the authorities questioned were experiencing difficulties in recruiting parent governors, a quarter of them claiming that the problems were serious.
The Labour Party, which supports the idea of parent governors, has identified a number of shortcomings in the present arrangements.
It does not believe that all parents have been informed of their rights under the Act and it is critical of the lack of training for parent governors.
A number of local authorities, universities and polytechnics are offering courses for governors, but the Labour Party maintains that there should be a properly funded national scheme.
Something approaching this may yet emerge through Action for Governors' Information and Training — a co-ordinating agency based in Coventry.
The government has allocated £4.9 million to governor training.
As in all participatory schemes, there is a risk of middle class bias in parental representation on governing bodies, with the evidence pointing to the active involvement of relatively few parents.
This apparently low level of active parental involvement has important implications for other aspects of current policy — especially the arrangements for schools to opt out of local authority control.
Opting out
The most controversial sections of the Education Reform Act are those which allow secondary schools and primary schools with 300 or more pupils to opt out of local authority control.
Such schools, known as grant-maintained schools, become self-managing units funded directly by the Exchequer.
A ballot of parents has to be held before a transfer to grant-maintained status can be accomplished, the decision to hold a ballot being taken either by resolution of the governing body or at the request of a percentage of the parents.
A secret postal ballot of parents then determines the fate of the school, and once a decision to opt out of local authority control has been taken it cannot be reversed at a later date, although there is, of course, nothing to stop a new government introducing a legislation to repeal this provision.
The schools were given six weeks in which to draw up a register of parents, but decisions had first to be made about what constituted a parent.
This decision is to be left to the governors of the school, but the Department of Education and Science is recommending as wide a definition as possible, to include legal guardians, foster parents and the head of a children's home when the child is in care.
In the case of divorced couples who have remarried the vote will go to both natural parents and the spouse of the natural parent who has custody of the child.
A substantial number of Conservative MPs argued that parents of prospective pupils should be allowed to vote on the grounds that the parents of prospective pupils have a bigger stake in the future of the school than parents whose children are in their final year and who will not therefore be affected by any changes.
The ballot has been surrounded by considerable controversy.
In its original form the Bill made provision for a single ballot, the decision resting on a simple majority of those voting .
Critics pointed out that this could very well mean a well-organised minority taking an irreversible decision about the future of a school.
The Conservative  Education Association strongly urged the government to amend the legislation so that a majority of parents on the register would be required to vote for opting out.
The House of Lords passed an amendment to this effect, but the government overturned it when the legislation returned to the Commons.
The Labour Party argued that a two-thirds majority of those voting, or a simple majority of those on the register, should be required, and the National Union of Teachers went even further with its suggestion that opting out should be allowed only if two-thirds of those on the register approved it.
In the end the government was forced to make a minor concession, and the present position is that a second ballot will be held if fewer than 50 per cent of those eligible record a vote on the first occasion.
A second ballot will be held within fourteen days and a simple majority of those voting will be sufficient.
Many of those proposing changes to the balloting system were opposed to opting out in principle and were really seeking ways of reducing the number of schools withdrawing from local authority control.
The Conservative Education Association, the Labour Party, the National Union of Teachers, the Secondary Heads Association, the National Association of Head Teachers and the Local Education Authorities are all opposed to opting out in principle and the leaders of the Church of England and the Catholic Church have serious reservations.
A leader in The Times Higher Education Supplement had this to say:
Of course opting-out is a nonsense which will undermine rather than reinforce the Government's professed ambition to raise standards in schools.
Moreover, it is an obscure nonsense.
Mr Baker seems to see opting-out as the reinvention of the direct-grant schools, while Mrs Thatcher appears to regard it as analogous to selling off council houses or British Gas…
But opting-out is central to the Bill.
It is close to the cold heart of neo-Tory belief.
The Secondary Heads Association claims that opting out will not ‘improve good schools but will certainly weaken those that are less strong’.
It talks of the problems arising from ‘the power of possibly prejudiced and short-term pressure groups and the inexperience and lack of know-how of governors and the undermining of the local education authority.’
The National Union of Teachers fears that, because of its divisive potential, opting out will considerably weaken the educational  system: ‘What is proposed is really a means of reintroducing in a covert manner an elitist and centrally controlled system of direct grant schools on the lines of the grammar schools under the guise of increasing parental choice’.
The National Union of Teachers has also expressed fears that eventually the opted-out schools will become selective and fee paying.
This is expressly ruled out in the Act, but only for five years, although the Conservative Education Association recommended that the period should be ten years.
It is interesting to speculate on the likely effect of opting out on the present independent schools.
Dr John Roe, former headmaster of Westminster School, has estimated that the private schools could lose one-third of their pupils.
A further point made by the teachers is that opting out will jeopardise efforts to adjust to falling school rolls.
Public support for opting out is low and appears to be declining.
The low level of public support is demonstrated by the results of two opinion polls published in January and February 1988.
A poll conducted on behalf of the National Union of Teachers, published in January, found 36 per cent to be in favour of opting out.
A Marplan poll showed a very much smaller proportion of the population in favour — only 18 per cent.
In the previous June when Marplan asked the same question, 35 per cent expressed support for opting out.
Obviously the effect of opting out on educational provision will depend upon the number of schools electing to withdraw from local authority control, and Mrs Thatcher and Mr Baker seemed to disagree about what would be an appropriate number: Mrs Thatcher hoped that at least 50 per cent of schools will become grant-maintained, but Mr Baker talked of a trickle.
The government had hoped that left wing councils, especially those in the inner cities, would lose their schools, but the evidence so far does not bear this out.
Research by the Calham College Institute suggests that in the primary sector of education Conservative-controlled councils are more likely to lose schools than are councils controlled by Labour.
Schools threatened with closure or with the loss of their sixth forms are among the most likely to seriously consider opting out, and the Grammar School Association expects about one-third of the remaining 150 grammar schools to opt out.
Thus, schools opting out will vary considerably in character and resources.
In July 1988 an independent trust was set up to advise schools on how to opt out of local authority control.
The Grant Maintained Schools Trust, which has the Secretary of State's blessing, is chaired by a Conservative MP and its director is a former adviser to the government.
Its stated aim is to ‘advise’ schools, but ‘active encouragement’might be a more accurate description of its activities.
The Trust has sent prospectuses to all secondary schools and explanatory leaflets to primary schools.
In the first month of its operation it received 280 inquiries; but commenting on this figure, a spokesman said: ‘We expect a dramatic increase in inquiries once head teachers come back from holiday and examine the information we have sent them’.
On 1 September 1989 eighteen schools began their independent existence.
Eight of them were grammar schools, nine were comprehensive and there was one middle school.
On 1 January 1990 a further two schools, both comprehensive, became grant-maintained.
On 1 April four comprehensive schools and one grammar school left local authority control, and a further transfer of a Leicestershire high school took place on 21 August.
When it is remembered that there are about 5,000 secondary schools the number opting out is very small.
Abolition of the Inner London Education Authority
The Inner London Education Authority (ILEA) survived the abolition of the Greater London Council, but its control by Labour did not endear it to the Conservative government.
It seemed only a matter of time, therefore, before the spending cuts and restrictions already imposed on the ILEA were followed by more drastic action.
The Education Reform Act aimed to allow London boroughs to opt out of ILEA control.
The deadline set for this was 1990, a simple majority vote of the borough council being sufficient to ensure separation; neither parents nor governors were to be involved in the decision.
The reason for their exclusion, despite the government's professed desire for parent power, was that parents and governing bodies were known to be likely to reject opting out of the ILEA.
The results of allowing boroughs to withdraw would, to say the least, be chaotic.
The ILEA was to be killed off by attrition, and the Education Officer of the ILEA, Mr William Stubbs, claimed that the proposals would ‘result in a breakdown of the administration of  the service in the capital’.
The chaos would be compounded by some schools claiming grant-maintained status.
The Secretary of State recognised that if a high proportion of the boroughs left the ILEA, then what remained would be unworkable, and he therefore decided that if eight or more of the thirteen boroughs opted out he would force the remainder to follow suit.
At the report stage of the Education Reform Bill, Mr Heseltine and Mr  Tebbit tabled an amendment proposing outright abolition of the ILEA.
Even some ILEA officials agreed that abolition was preferable to attrition.
Finally the Secretary of State bowed to the inevitable, and agreed to abolish the ILEA in 1990, although he personally had expressed doubts about the ability of some of the boroughs to provide an effective education service.
Abolition may be preferable to a slow death but education in London is bound to suffer, especially in the poorer boroughs.
A leader in the Times Higher Education Supplement called the plan to abolish the ILEA ‘a disgraceful measure that plainly verges on maladministration’, and went on to claim that the abolition ‘will set back education in London for a generation’.
The view of parents lent support to this verdict.
A ballot organised by parents found that 94.3 per cent of those who voted were in favour of retaining the ILEA; and 51.6 per cent of those entitled to vote rejected abolition.
The Conservative Education Association also condemned the government plan and opposition mounted when it was learned that the government planned to cut education spending in London by 40 per cent following abolition of the ILEA.
However, the government continued to stand firm, and no concessions were made.
The abolition of the ILEA was not based on educational considerations nor even on economic ones.
Its intent was blatantly political.
Aspects of privatisation
Independent schools
In 1987 over 620,000 pupils, 7 per cent of the school population, attended the 2,563 independent schools.
The amount spent on school fees is about £2 billion a year, but this is expected to almost double by 1991.
In 1987 school fees rose by an average of 11 per cent as compared with an inflation rate of 4.1 per cent, but despite higher fees the independent schools are growing by about 6,000 pupils a  year, and by the end of the century they are expected to account for 8.5 per cent of the school population.
Not all independent schools are of a high standard, but Judith Judd claims that ‘independent schools are generally better resourced than their state counterparts and the gap is growing’.
This is a view shared by the Educational Publishers' Council which claims that independent schools spend twice as much as state schools on books and equipment per pupil.
Pupil-teacher ratios are much lower in the independent sector than in the public sector, and the disparity widened between 1975–6 and 1985–6.
In state primary schools the pupil-teacher ratio went down by 7.5 per cent and in state secondary schools there was a fall of 9.5 per cent, but in the same ten year period the pupil-teacher ratio in independent schools came down by 17.7 per cent .
In 1981 the Conservative government introduced the Assisted Places Scheme which provides help with tuition fees and certain other incidental expenses.
Schools participating in the scheme have a set quota of assisted places, and make their own selection of the pupils to be admitted.
The financial assistance is paid on a sliding scale according to family income.
In theory, the scheme is meant to help pupils who would otherwise be unable to do so to benefit from education at an independent school, but Janet Finch argues that past experience of the direct grant system ‘would lead one to suppose that many beneficiaries of such a scheme will be middle-class children’ .24 In 1986–7 about 24,500 pupils attended independent schools under the Assisted Places Scheme in England alone, and this transferred £43 million of taxpayers' money to independent schools.
Opting out may also serve to encourage the development of private education.
Under the Education Reform Act opted-out schools are prevented from charging fees for a period of five years.
After that period has elapsed, however, shortage of funds may make the charging of fees an attractive proposition, and there will be a double incentive if fee paying permits a reduction of government expenditure.
Fee paying may be related to the frequently recurring proposals for education vouchers.
Proposals differ in detail, but the most usual one is to give vouchers, which would pay for basic education, to everyone.
People could then ‘cash’ their vouchers at any school of their choice, and they could top them up by paying out of their  own pockets for a more expensive school.
Such a scheme would be of considerable help to private suppliers of education.
Blaug writes:
The concept of education vouchers fits remarkably well into the Tory programme of privatisation' of the social services and one might have expected the Conservative Party to move quickly towards a practical scheme of education vouchers…
Nevertheless, the idea of education vouchers is…regarded as so politically explosive that even the Tory government has moved very cautiously.
City Technology Colleges
City Technology Colleges are modelled on examples to be found in the United States, especially in New York.
As with their counterparts in the United States, the City Technology Colleges were originally intended as a contribution to inner city programmes.
The government plans to establish twenty City Technology Colleges with private industry footing a substantial proportion of the bill and being involved in college policy-making.
Among the distinctive features of the colleges are their highly selective nature and their specialisation, with about 50 per cent of the timetable devoted to maths, science and technology and the remaining 50 per cent of the time occupied by subjects found in the usual school curriculum, including art, music and drama.
In order to fit everything in, the school day may be lengthened.
The first City Technology College, in Solihull, opened its doors in September 1988.
The scheme has run into some difficulties in finding both sites and sponsors, although the City Technology Colleges Trust, set up to promote the scheme, claims that the programme is on course to meet its target.
By September 1989, however, only £44 million had been pledged by industrial sponsors, and since this £44 million can be offset against tax, industry's share is actually £26.4 million; the Treasury has committed £140 million.
Contrary to the original plans, therefore, over 80 per cent of the capital is coming out of public funds.
Mr Straw, the shadow Secretary of State for Education, says that the programme is ‘morally degenerate and educationally divisive’, and claims that most of the big companies are shunning the scheme: although 1,800 firms had been approached by July 1988, only twenty had promised contributions.
A leader in The Guardian in September 1988 confirmed this gloomy picture and reported that seventy-seven of the 100 biggest firms approached had refused to help.
The big tobacco companies, which offered financial support, caused some embarrassment by suggesting that anti-smoking campaigns should not be brought into the classroom.
The same leader outlined some of the criticisms of the scheme:
1.
The ‘pure irrelevance’ of the scheme as a response to a national shortage of scientifically and technologically trained personnel.
When set against the scale of the problem, the contribution of the City Technology Colleges is of negligible significance.
2.
The City Technology Colleges divert valuable resources of staff and equipment away from other schools where the need for them is great and they also cream off some of the more able pupils.
3.
The scheme interferes with the rational implementation of school closure plans and some local authorities have refused to sell their unwanted schools to the Trust.
By October 1989 only three City Technology Colleges had actually opened, although eleven more were at the planning stage.
Charges and parental contributions
The whole area of charges in education is filled with inconsistencies and variations between one local authority and another.
The present Conservative government found it much more difficult to introduce and regulate charges than it had anticipated, an indication of the difficulty being the long delay in issuing a promised consultative document on charges and the further delay before guidelines were produced.
One of the problems lay in the wording of section 61 of the 1944 Education Act which says that ‘no fees shall be charged in respect of the education provided in any maintained school’.
This could, of course, have been repealed, but to do so would have breached the general principle of free education, and the resulting expansion of charges would have risked a public outcry.
In several cases brought by parents, both the local government ombudsmen and the courts have ruled that charges (for field trips and music lessons, for example) are illegal.
Nevertheless, the Secretary of State has the power to draw up regulations about what can be charged for and what cannot and the Education Reform Act required local authorities and school governors to draw up policies on charging parents for their children's out-of-school activities.
The consultative document published in 1987 followed the  principle that had been acknowledged for some time, drawing a distinction between essential items which were to remain free, and desirable but not essential items for which charges could be made, a distinction not in practice very easy to make.
The guidelines issued in 1988 distinguished between activities within school hours and out-of-school activities.
The lunch break was defined as being outside school hours, and so any activities held during that time could be charged for.
Essential field trips could be charged for if more than half the time spent on the visit was outside school hours, and ‘optional extras’ such as individual music lessons might also incur a charge.
In addition, parents could be asked for voluntary contributions towards non-chargeable activities and the proceeds could be used to subsidise activities for children from poor families.
Irrespective of charges, there is a discernible trend toward higher parental contributions to state education.
Judith Judd reports one estimate of £70 million a year.
She also cites evidence from school inspectors which says that in almost 40 per cent of primary schools parents were topping up the capitation allowance for books and equipment by more than 30 per cent.
A survey by the National Association of Head Teachers conducted in 1987 found that half of the schools questioned were using voluntary funds to supplement their spending on materials and equipment which in previous years had been provided entirely out of local authority funds.
Some state schools have followed the example of the independent schools in asking parents to give covenanted sums.
Judd states:
So protests about the Government's proposals to charge parents for extras' such as swimming lessons and cooking materials fall wide of the mark.
Money donated by parents is already paying not only for extras and luxuries but also for such basic tools of education as books, art materials and computers.
One of the problems arising from reliance on parental contributions is that it produces wide disparities between the resources available to schools with different catchment areas.
In middle-class areas there is obviously much more spare cash to give to schools.
Hertfordshire County Council has revealed that primary schools with the greatest additional funds had fourteen times the extra amounts available to the poorest schools.
In the secondary sector  the disparities were even wider with the richest schools having thirty-seven times as much additional income as the poorest.
Some charges are particularly burdensome for poor parents.
The charge made for school meals is a good example, and in recent years the burden has grown as the price of a school meal has increased dramatically.
A Labour Party survey found that in the year up to August 1987 the price of a school meal in primary schools had risen at twice the rate of inflation, and this had resulted in a reduction in the number of children taking school meals.
In 1987 33 per cent of children were having packed lunches as compared with 13 per cent in 1979.
In September 1988 the situation worsened with the phasing out of free school meals for 500,000 children whose parents were in receipt of family credit.
An allowance is made as compensation in the rates for family credit, but the amount allowed varies from 45 pence to 60 pence a day, whereas the average price of a meal in primary schools is 65 pence.
The school meals service is a prime target in the government's plans for bringing in outside contractors.
Local authorities are obliged under the Local Government Act 1988 to invite tenders for the provision of school meals and for school cleaning.
As far as the school meals service is concerned, there are reports of lack of interest on the part of catering contractors.
Three major catering firms are being ‘highly selective about tendering for council contracts’.
Indeed, two of the three are offering a consultancy service to local authorities to help them to retain control of the service.
Two factors have influenced the contractors — one is the size of the school meals service with 2.5 billion main meals a year, and the second is the loyalty of the school meals staff to their present employers.
HIGHER EDUCATION
The Education Reform Act
One of the most important changes brought about in higher education by the Education Reform Act was the removal of polytechnics from local authority control and their conversion into independent institutions in much the same position as the universities.
Although one or two polytechnics had misgivings about the break with local government, the vast majority welcomed the greater independence of action implied by the separation.
There were some difficulties in achieving a smooth transition to independence.
For example, having lost the institutional support of local government, polytechnics had to strengthen their management structures very rapidly.
The government allocated £6.5 million to ease the transition but this was totally inadequate when set against the costs associated with reorganisation.
Another financial penalty was the loss of local authority ‘topping up’ money.
Prior to independence many local authorities topped up the amounts the polytechnics received from central government and from fees: the total addition to resources from topping up was between £60 million and £70 million a year.
The Education Reform Act established two new funding bodies: The Polytechnics and Colleges Funding Council and the Universities Funding Council.
Many people argued that, as the polytechnics had moved out of local government, two separate funding bodies made little sense and hindered the development of an integrated system of higher education.
Although there is little sign of it at present, the two funding bodies may eventually merge.
This was certainly the view of a leader in The Times Higher Education Supplement which talked of ‘the expectation, and for many the hope, that the bipartite structure to be established by the Bill will not endure for long’.
The universities complained that the replacement of the University Grants Committee by the Universities Funding Council posed a threat to their independence, arguing that whereas the University Grants Committee represented the universities to the government, the Universities Funding Council represents the government to the universities.
The Universities Funding Council was merely a creature of the Secretary of State, and the Committee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals saw this as a step towards central government control of the universities.
In an attempt to allay some of these fears, the government made a number of concessions during the report stage of the Bill:
1.
The funding councils were given the right to advise the Secretary of State.
2.
Any directions to the funding councils by the Secretary of State were made subject to negative resolution by both Houses of Parliament.
3.
The funding councils no longer have the power, as they had in  the original Bill, to direct institutions about how they should spend funds derived from private sources.
An issue related to the independence of the universities and their fears about central control is the whole question of academic freedom and the importance attached to tenure.
For many years university academic staff have enjoyed the unique position of having tenure for their working lives, the argument in support of this being that it protected academic staff from political pressure and avoided the possibility of someone being dismissed for expressing unpopular or unconventional views.
In the face of protests from the Association of University Teachers, the Education Reform Act abolished tenure for all staff appointed or promoted after 20 November 1987.
There was nothing in the original Bill about academic freedom and universities were to be permitted to dismiss senior staff in order to replace them with younger and cheaper people.
It was clear from the beginning that the government was going to remain firm on the question of tenure, but a concerted campaign secured two concessions: the clause relating to the dismissal of senior staff was withdrawn and a statement guaranteeing academic freedom was written into the Bill.
Funding of higher education
In 1963 the Robbins Report on Higher Education enunciated the following principle: ‘Throughout our Report we have assumed as an axiom that courses of higher education should be available for all those who are qualified by ability and attainment to pursue them and who wish to do so.’
This remained the guiding principle in higher education throughout the 1960s and the 1970s when higher education experienced an unprecedented expansion.
New universities were established and existing ones were expanded; between 1969 and 1973 thirty polytechnics came into being; and during the 1970s a third tier, colleges and institutes of higher education, was added.
Between 1965/6 and 1976/6 the number of students in higher education increased by 71 per cent: an 89 per cent increase in the universities and a 58 per cent increase in the polytechnics and colleges.
However, rapid growth came to an end in 1981 when, with very little warning, universities were told to cut costs by 18 per cent over three years.
This entailed the loss of about 3,000 posts with some  universities shedding 25 per cent of their staff; some departments were closed and a number of institutions came close to bankruptcy.
The cuts were not made evenly; Salford, for example, suffered a 44 per cent cut and Hull's grant fell by 31 per cent .
Further cuts were made in 1985 — 2 per cent in real terms — and subsequent years showed similar reductions so that the universities were forced to cut staff by any means they could.
The University Grants Committee made funds available for what it called restructuring, and universities began encouraging staff to take voluntary severance payments or enhanced early retirement.
Between 1980 and 1987 the number of academic staff in British universities declined by 12 per cent.
One of the problems with these job losses is that they were almost entirely unplanned: anyone who wanted to take severance or early retirement was allowed to do so irrespective of its effects on the department concerned and on the shape of the university.
Many of the more senior academics have left university employment and the Committee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals has spoken of the threat this poses to academic leadership.
The polytechnics have been under a similar financial strain.
The unit of resource (the yearly cost per full time student) has always been lower in the polytechnics than in the universities and recent downward pressure has widened the gap from £1,425 in 1982 to £2,315 in 1986/87.
In 1979/80 the expenditure per student in polytechnics was 82 per cent of that in the universities: by 1987/88 per capita expenditure in the polytechnics had fallen to 58 per cent of the university figure and by 1989/90 it stood at a little over 50 per cent.
While the number of students in universities remained virtually unchanged between 1982 and 1986, the polytechnics accepted the equivalent of 34,000 extra full time students.
Polytechnics have been pushed towards marginal funding, and this cannot continue for very long without the service to students suffering in terms of overcrowded facilities and over-stretched resources.
In the years since 1986 both sectors have increased their intakes.
In 1989/90 there was an increase of 12,000 students and the projected increase for 1990/91 is 20,000.
In January 1989 the Secretary of State for Education and Science said that he was expecting a doubling of student numbers during the next twenty-five years.
Elaborating on this statement, he said that some of the increase would come from widening access, with more women, more older people and more people from ethnic minorities entering  higher education, but he also anticipated a doubling of the participation rates among young people of the relevant age, from the present 15 per cent to 30 per cent.
He was careful to point out that not all of this increase would be funded by the government.
Eleven months later the new Secretary of State said that he was equally committed to a very substantial expansion in student numbers, and stated that the government's plans were for an increase of 50,000 by 1993.
In the government's statement of its expenditure plans, published in November 1989, higher education was allocated an extra £75 million between 1991 and 1992/93.
This is said to represent an increase in real terms of 5 per cent, but this assumes an inflation rate of 5.75 per cent by the fourth quarter of 1990/91 and a rate of 3 per cent in 1992/93.
At the time of the statement inflation was 7.3 per cent, and the government has consistently under-estimated future inflation.
Auriol Stevens, Director of the Universities Information Unit, said that there appeared to be no extra money to cover the projected increase in students:
It doesn't look at this moment as if there is any real increase and any money for the extra students.
When you do all the sums and move all the money from pocket to pocket it looks as if there is an increase of between 2 to 2.5 per cent and that is almost the difference between the previous inflation forecast of 3.5 per cent and the present inflation forecast of 5.75 per cent.
Even the most generous interpretation of the figures reveals a very modest increase in funding and it most certainly does not even begin to compensate for ten years of cuts.
In addition, both of the teaching unions in higher education have substantial pay claims awaiting settlement.
From 1981 onwards, the University Grants Committee attempted to introduce a greater degree of selectivity into its allocation of funds to the universities.
It undertook to grade all departments according to the quality of their research and it inaugurated a series of subject reviews.
Some of the reviews recommended the closure of departments and the restriction of others to undergraduate teaching.
However, the Universities Funding Council which replaced the University Grants Committee in 1989 has now announced that no further subject reviews will be carried out, and that the recommendations of reports not yet implemented will not be enforced.
The  universities may treat them as advisory and act upon them only if they so wish.
The Committee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals co-operated with the University Grants Committee, before its demise in 1989, in drawing up a list of ‘performance indicators’.
Much more attention has also been paid to formal staff appraisal, and every university now has such a system, some institutions employing outside consultants to train the appraisers.
Polytechnics have had appraisal systems for some years.
Institutions in higher education have responded to the harsher financial climate in several ways.
They have, for example, made strenuous efforts to attract overseas students from outside the European Community because they pay full cost fees.
There is fierce competition in this lucrative market, with polytechnics and universities mounting recruitment drives in the middle and far east using high-powered sales techniques, some of which are not wholly appropriate and may lead to unrealistic expectations on the part of prospective students.
Polytechnics and universities are also competing to secure funds from non-government sources: research trusts and foundations, industry, special appeals to the community at large or to former alumni.
Industry provides funds in a variety of ways: financing doctoral or post-doctoral fellowships, contracting research or entering into joint research agreements, setting up business in one of the increasing number of science parks, funding lectureships and professorships, the provision of equipment.
Research by The Guardian in 1989 indicated that universities receive just under £200 million a year from industry and commerce and the polytechnics receive about £60 million — taken together, these sums represent about 6 per cent of total funding.
As the author of the article says: ‘While a relatively small amount, this money nevertheless represents a significant statement of industry's commitment to higher education…’
There are, of course, dangers to be guarded against.
Too heavy a reliance on a particular firm or industry might lead to lack of balance in research output — fundamental research without an immediate pay-off may be pushed out, and there is also a danger that commercial pressures may begin to dictate the courses on offer.
There are problems, too, if firms withdraw their sponsorship.
In 1986/87 universities alone raised £630 million from all non-governmental sources: an increase of 18 per cent on the preceding  year.
There was also an increase of 9 per cent in the number of posts dependent upon outside funding, and posts of this kind now constitute one-third of all appointments.
Institutions engaged in higher education are now expected to be much more aggressively entrepreneurial, and they are also being invited to help their students to acquire marketing and business skills through the Enterprise in Higher Education Initiative.
Under this scheme the Training Agency is empowered to offer individual institutions up to £1 million to enable them to give every undergraduate the opportunity to learn the skills and acquire the attitudes that he or she will need in industry and commerce.
Just over 100 institutions submitted bids for ‘enterprise money’ in 1988.
This competitive, entrepreneurial spirit is reflected in the new funding arrangements in higher education.
Both of the funding councils are committed to a system of competitive bidding for students, but each council will have its own separate arrangements.
The bidding process began in the polytechnics in 1989, coming into operation in 1990, but the system will not be used in the universities until 1991/92.
The system is one in which the institutions compete for students on the basis of prices, and the Universities Funding Council has produced a detailed list of guide prices, banded to take account of the varying costs of providing courses in different subject areas.
The prices published in 1990 vary from £2,200 for politics, law and social sciences (other than economics, sociology and social work) to £5,400 for metallurgy: some high-cost subjects, notably medicine, dentistry and veterinary science, are excluded from the competitive bidding.
The prices quoted by the Universities Funding Council are meant to represent the maximum they are prepared to pay for student places in each subject group.
Rosalind Yarde describes the new system as ‘a radical shift away from the traditional method of formula funding and towards a reliance on market forces’, but a great deal will depend upon how the system works out in practice.
However, institutions will be tempted to try to undercut one another in bids to attract funding and this may very well result in reductions in the unit of resource.
The early experience of the polytechnics and colleges has not been encouraging, with complaints from the Directors of Polytechnics that fierce competition was leading to the under-funding of courses and falling standards; they also claimed that the Polytechnic  and Colleges Funding Council was favouring diploma courses over degree work.
In the first year of its operation only 5 per cent of polytechnic and college funding was allocated on the basis of competitive bidding, but the proportion is expected to be increased to 10 per cent in 1991 and further increases in subsequent years can be anticipated.
In the universities competitive bidding is to apply to all student places, although the Council has said that institutions will be protected from sudden and drastic cuts in funding as a result of unsuccessful bidding.
In spite of the problems associated with the new system of funding, the universities are busily making plans for expansion.
Fees are set to rise substantially.
In 1990 they considerably more than doubled and further increases are planned for 1991 and subsequent years until they approach the full cost of providing courses.
Polytechnics are also expanding rapidly — more rapidly at present than the universities — and it now looks as though government targets will be met.
Whether quality can be maintained in the face of such rapid expansion is a matter for conjecture.
Student funding
For more than a decade the real value of student maintenance grants has been continuously eroded.
A government survey of student expenditure, published in April 1988, showed that since 1982 alone the real value of the grant had fallen by 6.2 per cent.
Barr has claimed that ‘today's grant would have to be increased by 12 per cent to restore its purchasing power to its level in 1978/79, and by nearly 25 per cent to restore it to its 1962/63 peak’.
A survey conducted by the Committee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals in 1988 found that students outside London, after paying for board and lodgings, had £380 a year left for all other expenses, and students in London were even worse off with only £109 a year.
The only way in which students can make ends meet is by getting into debt.
The simplest solution would be to raise grants to a civilised level and then to peg them to the movement of wages or prices, but this was not among the options considered by the government when it began to look at student funding.
There was instead considerable support for a system of loans.
The case for loans has been most strongly argued by a group at the London School of Economics whose main criticism of an entirely  grant-based approach is that it favours better-off families, and as it is currently operated it leaves many students in poverty.
The system of parental contributions is unfair and unacceptable in that it expects students to remain dependent on parents into adulthood.
Furthermore, 35 per cent of parents pay less than their full contribution.
The government promised a White Paper on student finance, but the very long delay before it finally appeared in November 1988 suggests that there were problems in devising a suitable alternative to grants.
The government has long favoured a system of loans, but recognising that the complete replacement of grants by loans would arouse considerable opposition, they are introducing a mixed system.
From the academic year 1990/1 grants will be frozen, housing benefits for students will cease and top-up loans of up to £420 will be available to all students.
Each year the loan element will increase, until by 2001 loans will constitute 50 per cent of student finance.
The loans will be interest free but the amount outstanding each year will be increased in line with inflation.
It is intended that loans will replace parental contributions and that repayments will be similar to mortgage repayments.
At one stage it seemed as though the government would decide on a scheme operated by banks as the lenders, but the financial institutions were unenthusiastic.
Consequently, both the loans and the starting up costs will come entirely from the Treasury.
The loans were to be administered by a specially formed company under contract to the government; but the government has been unable to secure the co-operation of the major banks, who were to be the chief participants in the new company, and the loans scheme is in disarray.
To say the least of it, this scheme is clumsy and over-complicated.
Nick Barr, a keen supporter of loans, is of the opinion that the government has chosen the worst possible option, claiming that the scheme is inordinately expensive and that it will accentuate the middle class bias in access to higher education.
Kenneth Baker, formerly Secretary of State for Education, claimed that the normal repayment period would be five years.
Barr says that this will mean repayments of about £88 a month for a London student and that many, finding themselves unable to afford this, will have to extend the repayment period.
Barr and Barnes and their colleagues favour a scheme based on bank loans repayable through an additional national insurance contribution.
The additional contributions would be channelled back to the lending institutions by the Department of Social Security.
Barr and Barnes are among an increasing number who favour vouchers or bursaries topped up by loans.
The idea is supported by several Vice-chancellors and Directors of polytechnics, and the government is attracted to vouchers because such a system would encourage competition among higher education institutions, making them more responsive to the demands of students.
The polytechnics support vouchers because they believe that the system will give them parity of resources with the universities by allowing them to compete for students on equal terms.
The universities' support for vouchers is less whole-hearted, but those committed to the system see it as a means of increasing university independence from government.
This may be illusory since the government will decide the value of vouchers and can alter them at will.
Vouchers make planning more difficult, and there is also the problem that students following the more expensive courses, in science or engineering for example, or those with exceptional educational needs, may find the vouchers inadequate.
It would be possible to vary the value represented by a voucher according to the course.
but this would open up the possibility of governments manipulating the voucher system to encourage some courses and discourage others.
The schemes currently being canvassed allow for variations in the amount of the voucher according to the subject studied.
Among the more sophisticated proposals are those put forward by Barnes and Barr that make provision for tied bursaries to protect shortage subjects and for positive discrimination by means of‘bonuses’ on top of the standard bursary for particularly disadvantaged students.
CONCLUSIONS
Education under the Conservatives has been under-resourced.
It is true that between 1980/81 and 1988/89 expenditure on education in real terms increased by 7.4 per cent but this compares unfavourably with defence and law and order.
Furthermore, expenditure on  education as a percentage of GDP has fallen, In 1975/76 educational expenditure represented 6.3 per cent of GDP but in 1986/87 it represented only 4.9 per cent.
There are chronic shortages of teachers at every level of the school system.
The government admitted to 3,500 full time vacancies at the start of the 1989/90 school year, but the six teachers' unions reported an extensive survey which showed total vacancies of more than 8,000 affecting at least 250,000 children.
There are particular shortages in certain subjects: notably maths, science, technology and languages.
The inner cities — especially London — are very badly hit and some children have had to be sent home for lack of teachers.
In an attempt to overcome these problems, London and some other authorities are recruiting foreign teachers.
In February 1990 Her Majesty's Inspectors reported that 30 per cent of school lessons and 20 per cent in colleges were poor or very poor.
Not all of the shortcomings stem from inadequate resources, but problems arising from the lack of books and equipment, the poor state of some of the buildings and shortages of staff would be considerably eased if extra resources were made available.
Certainly, the Education Reform Act does nothing to solve the resource problems.
The reshaping of education incorporates all three of the main aims of Conservative social policy: privatisation (including promotion of the enterprise culture), curbing local government and the creation of inequality.
Education, seen by the Conservative government as an integral part of the enterprise culture, is expected to adopt the principles of the market-place.
The clearest manifestation of this is that institutions at all levels have to compete with one another.
Thus schools compete for pupils and, to this end, they must produce annual reports, publish examination results and operate a system of open enrolment.
An extra element of competition is the creation of grant maintained schools and city technology colleges.
City technology colleges illustrate another aspect of privatisation in their attempts to attract resources from industry and commerce.
Higher education is also expected to rely more heavily on private sources of finance with polytechnics and universities competing for commercial, foundation and research council contracts and building up relationships with industry through consultancy and science parks.
The new system of funding is also intended to foster competition as institutions attempt to outbid one another for student places; and should a voucher system be introduced, competition will intensify.
Higher education is also affected indirectly by the enterprise culture in that education is treated as a commodity like any other, and study and education for their own sake is no longer respectable.
Consequently, business management, economics, computer science and accountancy courses are increasingly popular, while subjects such as philosophy and classics are in decline.
There is a strong anti-intellectual element in the present government which appears to believe that the greatest achievement is making money as fast as possible.
Mary Warnock provides a scathing analysis of the government's attitude to higher education when she writes of the contempt that the government has for universities and their staff:
We are piously told the function of the universities is cultural and educational in the widest sense, yet at the same time all departments, even the most abstract and theoretical, are in practice required to show their cost-effectiveness, output measured against input in the manner of a commercial company.
The changes made to the educational system have also helped the government to achieve one of its other policy aims — reducing the role of local government.
A particularly disturbing feature of educational change since 1979, especially since the Education Reform Act, has been the greatly increased centralisation and the concentration of power in the hands of the Secretary of State.
Opted-out schools will receive their finance direct from central government.
The polytechnics have moved out of local government control and are now funded by the Polytechnics and Colleges Funding Council acting on behalf of the  Secretary of State.
Jack Straw, Labour Party spokesman on education, claims that in the first instance the Education Reform Bill gave the Secretary of State 175 new powers, but that these increased to 415 during the Bill's passage through Parliament.
Mr Straw comments:
How ironical that, as the Soviet Union moves away from bureaucratic control of its national life, the British educational system is being systematically nationalised by Mr Kenneth Baker.
His bill gives new meaning to the idea of the ‘nanny state’.
Among the most resented of the new powers acquired by the  Secretary of State is his right to veto senior appointments to the education departments of the London boroughs, following the abolition of the Inner London Education Authority.
The leader of the Authority, Mr Neil Fletcher, claims that up to twelve senior appointments in each of the thirteen boroughs could be made subject to the Secretary of State's veto.
The national curriculum puts considerable power in the hands of the Secretary of State and provides a good example of centralisation.
The subject working groups were given very detailed ‘guidance’.
What was expected of them was made very clear and Mrs Thatcher has been very quick to criticise their findings.
Finally, since 1979 the educational system in Britain has become less concerned with equality.
At the Conservative Party annual conference in 1987 Mr Baker stated that ‘the pursuit of egalitarianism in education is over’.
This serves as an explanation of changes already made and as a warning of those still to come.
The considerable expansion of the assisted places scheme is one of the factors contributing to greater inequality, entailing the use of taxpayers' money to swell the profits of private schools.
The greater use of charges and the use of parental contributions to purchase quite basic school equipment discriminates against poor children and schools in poor areas.
Poor families have also suffered from the withdrawal of free school meals for 500,000 children in 1988/89, following a tightening of the eligibility criteria.
The introduction of grant-maintained schools and city technology colleges is without question divisive, leaving local authority schools as poor relations.
It will be even more divisive if religious and ethnic minorities establish their own grant-maintained schools and if opted-out schools introduce fees.
Since 1944 the education service has been singularly unsuccessful in achieving greater equality of opportunity, use or outcome.
Perhaps too much has been expected of it: education policy is too weak an instrument for counteracting the great weight of inequality in British society.
But the policies of the Conservative government since 1979 have changed the nature of the debate in that equality in any of its forms is not to be pursued; it is not only unachievable but also undesirable.
An aggressively competitive market economy requires inequality.
HOUSING AND INNER CITY POLICY
Housing differs from the other services we have looked at in three ways: first, it is a durable asset and this gives exclusive rights of use; second, housing is the biggest single item of expenditure in the budgets of most households; and third, the housing market is dominated by an extensive and powerful private sector (cf. education and health services).
Housing is an important component of welfare: it is difficult to imagine anything more damaging to an individual's welfare than the lack of somewhere to live, and this is especially so in the case of families with young children and elderly people.
Furthermore, housing difficulties frequently give rise to other problems.
For example, there is growing evidence showing the relationship between poor housing conditions and poor health, both physical and mental,’ and it is also known that poor housing adversely affects educational attainment, and that overcrowded conditions can lead to domestic tension and perhaps violence.
Differences in housing must be included in any account of inequality and there is evidence in Britain of a wide gap between the majority of the population who are well housed and the poor who occupy the worst accommodation.
According to Willmot and Murie the housing market has become increasingly polarised in the 1980s.
One of the problems in evaluating the changes brought about by the Conservative government since 1979 is that of disentangling long term trends from the direct effects of policy initiatives.
The changing pattern of housing tenure might be taken as an example.
A very  marked long-term trend since the end of the second world war has been a growth in the proportion of dwellings in owner-occupation.
Nevertheless, as Table 6.1 shows, the rate of growth has quickened since 1979.
Between 1970 and 1978 the proportion of dwellings in owner-occupation increased by 4 per cent whereas the increase between 1979 and 1987 was 9.5 per cent.
Table 6.1 shows that another long term trend — a steady growth in the proportion of households renting from local authorities or new town corporations — has now been reversed.
This is a direct result of the right to buy policies introduced in 1980.
SALE OF COUNCIL HOUSES
Local authorities had the power to build houses for sale and to sell houses originally built for renting before 1980, but the proportion of dwellings sold was relatively slight until the Conservative government of 1970–4 presided over a substantial upsurge in sales.
However, the antipathy of Labour controlled local authorities towards the large-scale selling of council houses pushed the Conservative Party in the direction of compulsion.
The arguments used by the Conservatives in support of council house sales were a mixture of the pragmatic and the ideological.
They stressed the virtues of a property-owning democracy, encouraging thrift and prudence and leading to greater security and stability (and increasing the proportion of the electorate inclined to vote Conservative).
A property-owning democracy, it was argued, also leads to the improvement of the housing stock since people take a greater pride in homes they own.
There were the usual arguments about freedom of choice and to these were added the less usual one about equity, allowing local authority tenants to share in the economic benefits of owner-occupation.
The sale of council houses is part of the general movement towards privatisation, reducing the role of the state, and curbing public expenditure.
The Housing Act of 1980 extended the rights of tenants in a number of areas but, as Malpass and Murie say, ‘the centrepiece of the Tory version of the tenants’ charter is the right not to be a tenant'.
The Act converted the permissive policy,allowing local authorities to sell their houses, into a mandatory one which compelled local authorities to sell houses to tenants who expressed a wish to purchase the houses they were occupying.
Generous discounts were available: 33 per cent off the market value for tenants of three years' standing, rising by 1 per cent a year up to a maximum of 50 per cent after a total of twenty years as a tenant.
Furthermore, local authorities were obliged to offer mortgages to prospective purchasers who could include up to another four members of their households as joint mortgagors.
Between 1980 and 1982 twenty-seven councils were said by the Secretary of State to be either failing to implement the Act or employing tactics of delay.
Sheffield City Council simply refused to implement the Act and employed two officers to persuade tenants to withdraw applications to purchase.
The Secretary of State threatened the recalcitrant authorities that unless they met specific targets he would use his power under the Act to appoint an agent to take over the sale of a council's houses.
In the event, the power was invoked only in the case of Norwich City Council, the Secretary of State appointing a solicitor, aided by a team of civil servants, to organise the sale of houses.
Norwich City Council sought an injunction to prevent the intervention of the Secretary of State, but both the High Court and the Court of Appeal upheld the Secretary of State's decision, and permission to take the case to the House of Lords was refused.
This case had the desired effect of persuading other recalcitrant authorities to proceed more quickly.
The rules pertaining to the right to buy have been modified on several occasions.
One such change arose because, although in general it was the better houses that were sold, some tenants bought  houses, without survey, that were in poor structural condition (especially prefabricated buildings) and were soon experiencing difficulties paying for repairs and maintenance.
In September 1982 the Secretary of State announced that grants of up to 90 per cent of the cost of remedying structural defects would be available to those who had bought their houses under the 1980 Act.
In 1984 the Housing and Building Control Act reduced the qualifying period of tenancy from three years to two and increased the maximum discount from 50 per cent to 60 per cent, and this was followed by the Housing and Planning Act of 1986 which increased the discounts available on flats to 70 per cent .
Between 1980 and the end of 1987 approximately 1.1 million local authority and new town houses were sold in the United Kingdom.
The annual number sold rose from 92,660 in 1980 to a peak of 228,455 in 1982.
There was then a steady decline in the numbers sold until 1986 when sales reached 109,() 20.
There was a sharp upturn in 1987 when 141,530 houses were sold.
In January 1989 the government said it expected a further 361,000 sales over the next three years.
The winding up of the New Town Development Corporations began in the mid-1980s, and in December 1986 the Minister for Housing said that all of the New Town Development Corporations would have gone by 1992.
As the corporations were wound up some of the houses passed into private ownership.
A study carried out by Kerr for the Department of the Environment found that it was the better properties with gardens that were most likely to be bought (especially three-bedroomed, semi-detached houses) while the number of flats purchased remained small.
The Department of the Environment survey confirmed the results of earlier work carried out by Bristol University School for Advanced Urban Studies; that it was predominantly the better-off and middle-aged tenants who bought, usually with more than one wage-earner in the household.
As could be anticipated, those who had been tenants for several years, and therefore qualified for bigger discounts, were over-represented among the purchasers.
Elderly people, single person households and households with preschool children were significantly under-represented among those purchasing.
As the better-off tenants buy their houses, the proportion of poor, unemployed people in local authority housing increases and polarisation occurs.
Another possible route to home ownership for local authority tenants has met with less success.
In a number of areas local authorities have sold blocks of flats to private developers who then refurbish them prior to sale.
A Department of the Environment report on eleven such schemes found that there was often little or no consultation with tenants over the future of their homes and only a small proportion of the purchasers were local authority tenants or people on the council waiting list.
The rapid increase in home ownership has not been without its problems.
First-time buyers — especially in the South-east — frequently borrow to the very limit of their capacity to repay, and if there is a change for the worse in their circumstances, or if interest rates rise steeply, then they may find themselves in great difficulty.
Similar problems occur when local authority tenants buy their homes and then become unemployed or sick.
Even if they remain in employment, the combined costs of mortgage payments and maintenance may be difficult to meet.
The number of people more than six months in arrears with their mortgage payments rose from 8,420 in 1979 to 41,900 in 1984 and to 45,840 at the beginning of 1988.
It then fell to 37,440 by the beginning of the following year, but in the first six months of 1989 it rose by 20 per cent to 45,1()0 and by a further 29 per cent to over 58,000 in the second half of the year.
These figures, emanating from the Council of Mortgage Lenders, are challenged by Janet Ford who claims that they underestimate the number of people in arrears because they rely upon cross-sectional data, drawn from the experience of only the largest mortgage lenders.
She also questions the usefulness of looking only at those who are six months or more in arrears.
She produces figures of those who are two months or more behind in their mortgage repayments.
Between March and July 1989 the number of people in this position increased by 25 per cent.
Taking a longer view, in 1985 295,000 mortgagors, 4.6 per cent of the total, were two months or more behind in their payments.
By the end of 1989 the proportion had risen to an estimated 6 or 7 per cent, representing 450,000 to 600,000 mortgagors.
In 1978 the repayment of home loans absorbed about 23 per cent of take-home pay whereas the 1989 figure may be as high as 40 per cent.
In these circumstances it is not surprising that the number of repossessions has also increased sharply, from 2,530 in 1979 to  10,950 in 1984 and to over 24,000 in the twelve months ending in March 1988, and that some local authorities who sold houses under the right to buy scheme are now reporting mortgage repayment problems among the new homeowners.
In some instances local authorities have approached housing associations suggesting that the problem might be remedied if an association were to buy the properties and convert them into assured tenancies or into shared ownership.
The sale of council houses has produced an accumulated total of £8 billion in local authority housing accounts.
Until March 1990 the authorities were allowed to spend only 20 per cent a year of the receipts from the sale of council houses, and the purposes to which the money could be put were circumscribed.
From April 1990 local authorities were allowed to spend 25 per cent of the proceeds as and when they choose, but the remaining 75 per cent must go towards paying off council debts.
It is obvious that in future very few council houses will be built, and in 1987 sales exceeded total completions by local authorities, new town corporations, and housing associations by more than four to one.
The sale of council houses, as Malpass and Murie argue, ‘reduces the housing opportunities of those who must rent — of those who cannot buy on grounds of means, age and eligibility for borrowing — and who rely on becoming council tenants and on transfers and exchanges to satisfy their housing need.’
RENTED HOUSING
The government has consistently maintained that market rents should prevail in the private sector and that local authority rents should more nearly approach those obtaining in the private sector.
The higher local authority rents rise, of course, the more attractive purchase becomes, and this has no doubt influenced the government's determination to push up local authority rent levels.
However, in its first two terms the Conservative government was more interested in the sale of council houses, and it was only when this policy was fully established that they could turn their whole attention to the rented sector.
The government's proposals for rented housing, outlined in a White Paper in 1987, were given legislative form in the Housing Act 1988.
This Act may be divided into four main sections:
1.
The private rented sector.
2.
Housing associations.
3.
Housing action trusts.
4.
Changing landlords.
These four sections provide a convenient framework for an examination of the Act.
The private rented sector
One of the long term trends identified in the introduction to this chapter was the decline of the privately rented sector.
The Conservative government, which seeks to reverse this trend, blames the decline on over-regulation and rent controls, although it allows that the relative attractiveness of owner-occupation has been a contributory factor.
Freely negotiated market rents and deregulation, the government believes, will be sufficient to revive the private rented sector, and the White Paper promised to put new life into the independent rented sector' claiming that ‘the letting of private property will again become an economic proposition’.
The main strategy was to be ‘the deregulation of new lettings by private landlords’.
The Act introduced revised forms of tenancy for new lets: assured tenancies and assured shorthold tenancies, which became available to landlords after 15 January 1989.
Without becoming enmeshed in too much technical detail, the Act took one step further the policy changes initiated by the 1980 Act which created assured tenancies and shorthold tenancies.
The revised tenancies and those they replaced differ from the regulated tenancies under the 1977 Rent Act in that there is a weakening of security of tenure and other rights, and most rents will be set at market level.
Assured tenants can be evicted only on the authority of a court order, and the landlord has to give the tenant a notice of proceedings for possession, which will include a statement of the grounds for possession the landlord is using.
There are altogether sixteen grounds for possession that the landlord may use.
Assured shorthold tenancies have no security of tenure.
Burrows says that in general the Act:
has meant a general weakening of tenancy rights, and a corresponding weakening of landlord responsibilities.
And it is not all a question of which policy will provide homes for the future.
There is also a strong element of  brimstone in the legislation.
The Government really does believe that tenants have fallen victim to what William Waldegrave, who ceased to be Minister of Housing halfway through the Bill, called the dread drug of dependency. 
As a result of the 1988 Act private sector rents will rise.
The White Paper referred to ‘a more diverse pattern of rents’ which appears to mean higher rents for all new tenancies.
In new assured tenancies fair rents will give way to market rents freely negotiated between the landlord and the tenant, and neither assured nor assured shorthold tenants will have access to a Rent Officer under the fair rent procedures.
There is limited access to a Rent Assessment Committee, but it will set what it judges to be a market rent.
Whether these changes will achieve the government's aims of reviving the private rented sector is open to question.
Burrows argues that the reverse will happen:
The Government cannot avoid the simple truth — the rents demanded by landlords to persuade them to stay in letting are far beyond the means of the great majority of potential tenants…the 1988 Act will lead to a smaller not a larger sector.
Six months assured shortholds will be the dominant face of new letting — with eviction and homelessness at the end.
The Institute of Housing, in more moderate tones, claims that the replacement of fair rents by market rents will slow down the decline of the private rented sector rather than revive it.
Existing tenants are unaffected by the changes, except that their mobility may be reduced.
The White Paper recognised that unscrupulous landlords might be tempted to harass existing tenants to force them out of the property, which could then be let to new tenants at the higher market rent, and in an effort to prevent this, the harassment provisions of the 1977 Protection from Eviction Act were strengthened and a new right of compensation — civil law damages-was introduced in cases of unlawful eviction.
Damages are equal to the difference in the value of the house when vacant and when occupied.
The Act also gives local authorities stronger powers to force landlords to carry out repairs.
If a landlord refuses to comply with a repair notice the local authority now has increased powers to carry out the repairs itself and recover the costs through sequestration of rents.
The extension of assured tenancies and the deregulation of rents have been important contributory factors in the increased use of the  Business Expansion Scheme (BES) in the private rented sector.
BES was first introduced in 1983 to give tax incentives to investment in high-risk new technology, but the government extended BES to assured tenancies in the budget of 1988.
In 1988 the Nationwide Anglia Building Society, already involved in rented housing, was the first to launch a BES fund linked to the rented housing market.
Since then other building societies and financial institutions have followed Nationwide's lead.
Those who buy shares in BES funds receive tax relief on their investment, and after five years the houses are sold.
Housing associations have begun to take an interest in BES projects.
An interesting example is a scheme initiated in 1989 by Assured Tenancies Ltd and the Bradford and Northern and the North British Housing Associations.
Under these arrangements the housing associations undertake to buy the BES houses at the end of the five year period at a pre-agreed price.
The associations manage the properties and nominate tenants from their own lists.
A report published at about the same time as this scheme was being inaugurated suggests, however, that BES competition for limited funds may damage housing associations by raising the cost of borrowing.
The report, by researchers at Glasgow University's Centre for Housing Research, was based on a study of nineteen BES companies in Scotland and the authors conclude that BES entails a misdirection of public resources which would be better employed as direct payments to housing associations.
Housing associations
Housing associations, supervised by the state-funded Housing Corporation, are non-profit-making organisations whose main purpose is to provide good quality homes at rents which are affordable by people on low incomes.
There are about 2,600 housing associations in England and Wales with a total stock of over 600,000 dwellings, and although this represents only about 3 per cent of all dwellings, the associations' share of the total stock will increase substantially as the full impact of the 1988 Act begins to be felt.
In 1988/89 the Housing Corporation invested more than £1 billion — an increase of £80 million over the previous year — and approved 25,000 dwellings: 22 per cent more than in 1987/88.
It is clear from ministerial statements and the White Paper that the government is pinning great hopes on housing associations.
The use of associations adds a degree of respectability to the ‘pick a landlord’ scheme, and the government clearly expects housing associations to become the main providers of ‘social housing’— housing for those in need.
Addressing the Institute of Housing in 1989, the Junior Minister of Housing said of housing associations: ‘We have given them a vital job to do.
We have done so because we think they can do it better than anyone else.
Let them go out and show us and the world that we are right’.
Given the government's enthusiasm for housing associations, it is curious that recent changes have made the associations' task more difficult.
Most of the provisions of the Housing Act 1988 relating to private sector renting apply equally to housing associations, but the most important change relating to housing associations came not in the Act but by ministerial decision.
In 1988 it was announced that in future government grants in support of housing association projects would fall from 100 per cent to an average of 75 per cent, the balance having to be provided from private sources.
Private financiers will, of course, require a return on their investment, and this will almost inevitably mean rent rises.
The National Federation of Housing Associations (NFHA), which monitors all new lettings, has produced figures showing that only 25 per cent of association tenants work full time, that 98 per cent have lower than national average incomes and 66 per cent have incomes derived wholly or partly from state benefits.
These statistics indicate that even slight rent increases would cause considerable hardship among housing association tenants.
The government continues to stress affordable rents, but does not say what it understands by the term.
In the past, the Housing Corporation has always regarded no more than 20 per cent of net income as an affordable rent, but in July 1989 the Chief Executive of the Housing Corporation, David Edmonds, suggested one-third of net income as an affordable rent.
The NFHA reported that in 1989 the rents of tenants in work had already reached 21 per cent of disposable income and single elderly people were paying up to 35 per cent of their incomes in rents.
Between April 1988 and March 1989 average rents in housing association properties rose by 24 per cent with most of the increases occurring in the first four months of 1989.
An editorial in Housing Associations Weekly says:
The period of greatest rent increases, during the first four months of this year, corresponds with the scrapping, on 15 January, of fair rents and the introduction of assured tenancies for all new lettings.
This appears to validate the NFHA's prediction that the abolition of fair rents would fuel rental inflation.
It appears from another NFHA report that single adults are the most seriously affected by increasing housing association rents.
Single adults constitute 30 per cent of total lettings, with 13,000 of the group moving into association homes each year, most of them in poorly paid jobs or unemployed, whose rents amount to about 38 per cent of net income.
Some tenants would be better off or only slightly worse off when unemployed, because housing benefit would then cover their rents in full.
The report anticipates increasing rent arrears.
Housing associations have been thrown off-balance by the combination of increased responsibilities, the reduction in the proportion of funding coming from government, and changed tenures.
The voluntary movement seems determined to retain its traditional role, and the government is apparently relying upon it to do so.
If the upward shift in rents continues, however, the poorer members of the community may be excluded from housing association provision.
One welcome step is the clearer duty placed on the Housing Corporation to adopt anti-racist policies, to promote racial harmony and to ensure equality of access.
Both the Housing Corporation and the NFHA have produced guidelines on how anti-racist policies are to be effected.
The public sector
Housing Action Trusts
Housing Action Trusts (HATs) are set up to take over run-down estates from local authorities.
The HAT becomes responsible for managing the estates and particularly for improving both the housing and the environment.
Originally the Housing Bill allowed the Secretary of State to impose HATs against the wishes of tenants who simply had the right to be informed, but the opposition to this proposal was widespread and sustained.
After a defeat in the House of Lords the government agreed that transfer to HATs would be preceded by a ballot among  the tenants concerned.
The opposition had wanted HAT takeovers to depend upon a majority of those eligible to vote, but the government insisted upon only a simple majority of those voting.
Once a positive vote has been recorded by a designated estate, the Secretary of State appoints a board of between seven and thirteen members to manage its affairs.
Occupants of houses taken over by HATs will be secure tenants, but during the passage of the Bill fears were expressed about the possibility of much higher rents.
The government has said, however, that rents will rise only after improvements have been made, and any increase following improvement will be in line with council house rents.
It should be noted, though, that the government is making efforts to push up council house rents.
The improvements to estates should have been completed in five years when the HATs will be wound up and the houses disposed of to new landlords who could be the local council, a private individual or company, a housing association or a co-operative.
If the houses are bought by the council then the occupants remain secure tenants, but if a private landlord or a housing association becomes the new owner then occupants become assured tenants.
Initially the government proposed establishing HATs in twenty estates but by March 1989, because of financial constraints, they had decided to proceed with only nine.
Although the government has always maintained that HATs will be restricted to the worst estates, it is by no means clear what criteria have been applied in the selection of these nine.
Between 1989 and 1991 £180 million will be spent on the programme.
Changing landlords
The most controversial section of the 1988 Housing Act allows for the transfer of council and new town property to either private landlords, housing associations or tenants' co-operatives.
The initiative for a change of landlord may come from prospective landlords, the local authority or from tenants themselves.
The government expressed the hope that most applications would stem from tenants, but the Housing Corporation has described the tenants' response as lack-lustre.
A small number of tenants' co-operatives have been formed, but if Burrows is correct in his assertion that the scheme was ‘structured around landlord applications’, then an unenthusiastic response from tenants is hardly  surprising.
Most of the applications, then, have come from prospective landlords; most but by no means all of them being housing associations.
In many cases local authorities have taken the initial steps and some have gone so far as to form housing associations for the specific purpose of transfer.
Landlords who wish to take over public sector dwellings have first to seek the approval of the Housing Corporation which has set out the criteria for approval in some detail.
Among the more important requirements are: the demonstration of management skills and financial viability; commitment to equal opportunities policies; the provision of full information to tenants and the Corporation; an agreement to retain dwellings acquired as a Tenants' Choice landlord for letting at rents within the reach of those in low-paid employment; compliance with the terms of the Housing Corporation's guidance on the management of Tenants' Choice dwellings.
The first stage in the transfer is a preselection process, involving informal discussions with tenants where they may make their own alternative suggestions, which eventually produces a single applicant to go forward to the final stages.
The present landlord and the alternative landlord then enter into lengthy and quite complex negotiations at the end of which a price is agreed.
The next step is to ascertain the views of the tenants about the proposed takeover by means of a ballot of all those affected.
The ballot is organised by an independent teller — usually the Electoral Reform Society — and takes place over several weeks.
All those who have not voted will be visited by the teller who will try to persuade them to vote.
The ballot has been the subject of much hostile comment.
Particular anger has been caused by the treatment of abstentions as votes in favour of the proposal.
If the ‘yes’ votes and the abstentions add up to 50 per cent or more of those eligible to vote, then all those who voted ‘yes’and all those who abstained will become tenants of the new landlord, their tenancies changing from secure to assured.
Those who recorded a ‘no’ vote will stay with their present landlord.
When the Bill went to the House of Lords this system was rejected on the grounds that it was undemocratic.
The government overruled the Lords' amendment, but made one small concession: if less than 50 per cent of the eligible voters recorded their vote then the election was to be declared null and void.
The change of landlord scheme is another example of the government's drive towards privatisation.
It is also indicative of the antipathy of the Conservative Party leadership towards local government.
Burrows says:
The essential aim of the scheme is the dismantling of council housing — an adjunct to the Right to Buy.
It is notable that private tenants are not given the right to choose a council landlord.
It is yet another part of the Government's overall policy of transferring the means of housing provision from the public to the private sector.
Higher council house rents
The 1987 White Paper said that public sector landlords ‘should seek an adequate return on investment’.
Wherever possible rents should be at ‘full economic levels’, but the government recognised that in some areas this would put rents beyond the means of many tenants and some degree of subsidy might be necessary.
Ministerial statements have talked about raising council house rents to ‘more realistic levels’ or so that they more nearly approach rents in the private sector.
In its most recent statements the government's main concern has been to try to ensure that council house rents reflect more closely the values of the houses.
The Local Government and Housing Act, which came into force in April 1990, prevents local authorities from subsidising their rents and insists that 75 per cent of the product of sales goes to pay off housing revenue account debts.
Central government subsidies are to be calculated according to a complicated formula that takes into account house prices in each area.
Using this formula, the Department of the Environment issues guidelines' on local authorities' rent levels, and since levels are meant to relate to local house prices, they will vary considerably from one part of the country to another.
The guidelines published in July 1989 indicated average rent increases for 1990 of 10 per cent, the amounts varying from 95p to £4.50 a week.
The Labour Party claims that this represents the first stage in a policy of full market rents.
Using government subsidies to increase local authority rents is not a new ploy.
Murie says that this was also happening under the previous system: ‘As the new subsidy scheme under the Housing Act 1980 had been operated to increase council rents (which in 1982–3 accounted for a higher proportion of average earnings than at any time since 1945), so exchequer subsidies have fallen’.
Council housing is becoming more and more marginalised as the better off tenants move out and higher rents encourage others to exercise their right to buy.
This means that the higher rents are being imposed on some of the poorest members of the community, including a high proportion of elderly and unemployed people and a preponderance of semi-skilled and unskilled manual workers.
It is, of course, true that housing benefits are available and, as rents in all sectors rise, total expenditure on housing benefit increases; but the amounts paid to many individuals were drastically cut in 1988, and the consequence may be rent arrears, eviction and homelessness.
HOMELESSNESS
In 1979 local authorities in England and Wales accepted 57,000 households as homeless under the homeless persons legislation.
By 1987 the number accepted as homeless had more than doubled to 118,000.
At the end of 1987 25,000 homeless households were in temporary accommodation; double the number at the end of 1984.
By June 1989 the number of households in temporary accommodation had increased to 33,750- the highest figure ever recorded: some 14,800 were in short-life dwellings (including properties leased from private landlords), 11,720 were in bed and breakfast accommodation and 7,230 were in hostels and women's refuges.
In 1987 there were 236,000 enquiries in England and Wales from people claiming to be homeless; 62,000 were found not to be homeless within the definition used in the legislation and 57,000 were found not to be in priority need and were given advice and assistance only.
But these are official figures which do not include what are referred to as the hidden homeless — those sharing households and those living rough.
Bed and breakfast accommodation for homeless people is usually overcrowded and insanitary, and yet some London boroughs have been paying £250 a week for a single room.
In 1987 the average cost of accommodating people in bed and breakfast hotels was over £11,000 in London and about £8,000 elsewhere, and in 1987/88 English and Welsh local authorities spent a total of £92 million on bed and breakfast.
This must be one of the most objectionable  forms of privatisation with public funds being used to line the pockets of sometimes unscrupulous owners of bed and breakfast establishments.
A report produced jointly by the British Medical Association and the Health Visitors Association in 1989 warned that bed and breakfast accommodation constituted a serious risk to health, and many homeless families receive little or no health care.
In 1987 the Department of the Environment set up a national review of homelessness to look at the implementation of the law relating to homelessness and to consider whether it needed changing.
Plans to change the definition of  homelessness to rooflessness were reported to be under consideration, but when the review body reported in November 1989 no changes in either the definition or the law were recommended.
Some of the statements of Mrs Thatcher and some of her ministers have not been at all helpful.
In 1988 the Secretary of State for the Environment suggested that people were becoming homeless simply to jump the housing waiting list queue.
The Social Security Minister suggested that unmarried women were deliberately getting themselves pregnant in order to be housed and Mrs Thatcher has endorsed this view saying that the problem arises from family instability and unrealistic expectations.
The government shows an increasing tendency to blame the victim.
In view of these attitudes, it came as something of a surprise when the Chancellor's 1989 Autumn statement included an extra £250 million over two years to tackle the problem of homelessness.
However, although any extra funds are to be welcomed, this is a very small sum when set against ten years of inaction and a massive increase in the scale of the problem.
The £250 million is to be spent mainly in London and South-east England, its main purpose being to bring empty houses back into use.
Some of the money will be used to revive a flagging scheme, introduced in January 1989, which allowed local authorities to award grants to those of their tenants who wished to purchase private sector houses.
Grants of up to £20,000 have been offered in London.
The measure was principally designed to tackle homelessness by freeing council houses for homeless people.
Two pilot schemes had demonstrated the potential effectiveness of the strategy, but a report in August 1989 claimed that the government had failed to attract much local authority support.
In Scotland not  one local authority had taken up the scheme and only twenty-five councils in England and Wales had responded.
Councils were reported as being reluctant to participate partly because grants had to be funded from their existing budgets.
Caroline McLaughlin of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities said: ‘We warned the impact of the scheme on homelessness would be negligible…paying council tenants to vacate their homes does very little.
What we need are more homes and more resources.’
It remains to be seen whether the extra £250 million will put new life into the scheme.
The main reason for the rapid growth in homelessness is a shortage of homes to let at rents which the poorer sections of the population can afford.
This has been brought about by two main factors: the sale of council houses and a decline in public sector investment in housing.
Between 1961 and 1970 local authorities and new town corporations in the United Kingdom built on average 161,000 dwellings a year, and in 1967 the public sector (including a small contribution from housing associations) completed 211,000 dwellings — 51 per cent of all housebuilding completions.
Between 1971 and 1980 local authority and new town completions averaged 143,000 dwellings a year, but in 1981 the figure plummeted to 68,000 and in 1987 it reached an all-time low of 22,000.
It is worth recalling that in 1987 141,500 council houses were sold.
Inadequate funds for maintenance, repairs and improvement was also a feature of the 1980s.
Thus housing in a poor state of repair cannot be brought back into use and marginal property is in danger of deteriorating to the point where it ceases to be habitable.
A Department of the Environment report on the condition of local authority housing in 1985 said that in England alone almost £19 billion needed to be spent to restore it to good condition.
This gloomy picture was confirmed by an Audit Commission report, published in 1986, which found that 85 per cent of council houses needed repairs.
Another aspect of government policy that has contributed to the growth of homelessness has been the combined effect of reduced entitlement to housing benefit and higher rents.
According to the Association of Metropolitan Authorities there was a massive 37.5 per cent increase in rent arrears in the six months immediately following the benefit changes in April 1988.37 Other benefit changes may have contributed to this increase in arrears: the change from  supplementary benefit to income support; the insistence that everyone should be required to pay at least 20 per cent of their rates (community charge) and all of their water rates; and the replacement of urgent needs payments by social fund loans.
In 1987 rent arrears and mortgage default accounted for 13 per cent of homelessness.
One problem has been the payment of income support two weeks in arrears.
Owners of bed and breakfast establishments nearly always require payment in advance and they are now refusing to take people on social security benefits who are not actually placed and paid for by the local authority.
The government has also extended the role of the rent officer who is now responsible for setting the maximum market rent in the area for which she or he is responsible, and any local authority paying housing benefit above the limits set will receive no subsidy from central government for the excess.
The rent officer is also responsible for monitoring the rents which voluntary hostels can claim back in the form of housing benefits, and there are fears that the limits for hostels will be set at too low a level creating difficulties for both residents and the hostel management.
Nigel Duerdoth of the National Federation of Housing Associations thinks that the new payment system for hostels is ‘most likely to break down in the inner cities — the areas where stress is greatest and hostels are most concentrated and needed’.
It is the problems of the inner cities to which we now turn.
INNER CITIES
The problems
At least since the early 1970s successive governments have expressed concern about the decline of our inner cities, but no government has been prepared to devote the massive resources which are now required to overcome decades of neglect.
In the 1970s scheme after scheme was launched, but there seemed little sense of direction or coherence.
When the Conservatives came to power in 1979, a series of inner area studies, commissioned by the government, had been completed and a White Paper,Policy for the Inner Cities , had been issued two years previously.
The Inner Urban Areas Act reached the statute book before the Conservatives took office.
The problems of the inner cities were by now well documented.
The Archbishop of Canterbury's report on urban priority areas (UPAs) comes to much the same conclusion as the inner area studies and the Scarman Report: ‘We can put forward a confident and melancholy generalisation — that the UPAs are places of severe and increasing deprivation.
Economic decline, physical decay and social disintegration are the three afflictions which denote the poverty of people and places.’
The economic decline of the cities is by no means a recent phenomenon.
The industries which used to provide employment for inner city residents have either died or long since gone to the new towns or to green field sites and industrial estates on the outskirts of the towns.
Consequently, the highest rates of unemployment occur in the inner urban areas — in some cases almost 40 per cent at a time when general unemployment levels, according to the official figures, are about 6 per cent.
Physical decay extends across whole areas of cities like Birmingham, Glasgow, Leeds, Liverpool, London, Manchester, Newcastle and Sheffield.
It includes derelict factories and some of the poorest housing in the country.
Much of the housing is unfit for human habitation, and the proportion of dwellings which are overcrowded or lack basic amenities is much higher in these areas than elsewhere.
The planning blight of the 1960s is apparent everywhere in the poorly designed, poorly constructed high rise blocks, most in a state of disrepair, which replaced terrace houses when whole areas were cleared.
Inner cities have more than a proportionate share of social problems.
Homelessness, unemployment, poverty and debt form the background to many people's lives, and ill-health, single parenthood, drug and alcohol abuse, crime, vandalism, outbreaks of civil disorder and poor community relations, especially between the police and ethnic minorities, are more prevalent in the inner urban areas than in other parts of Britain.
It is possible, of course, that some people with social and psychological problems gravitate towards the inner cities.
But this simply adds to the concentration of problems; it is not their original cause.
There can be little doubt that the problems of the inner city are rooted in unfair and inadequate access to economic and political resources.
In the discussion which follows it must be remembered that not all  those who live in inner cities have problems or are poor.
Equally, many poor people live outside the inner cities.
This is one of the drawbacks of all area-based policies.
Nor are the inner cities the only areas suffering from economic decline and physical decay — the coalfields of County Durham and South Wales come to mind, and the problems in some of the overspill estates on the outskirts of the cities may be as great as those in the centre.
Nevertheless the policy initiatives have focused on the inner cities and attention will now be directed towards the impact of Conservative policies upon the allocation and utilisation of resources in these areas.
The inner cities, 1980–1986
The Conservative government inherited the Labour Party's inner city initiatives.
In particular, the Inner Urban Areas Act of 1978 had initiated, according to Laurence and Hall, ‘the biggest single policy shift since inner urban policies were introduced’:
Though area-based positive discrimination measures with a primarily social service orientation continued, the new emphasis was strongly on economic revival'.
Henceforth, inner cities would have first place.
after Assisted Areas (with which in part they coincided), in the grant of industrial development certificates, and would thus take precedence over the new towns.
An adjustment of the rate support grant gave inner urban areas more resources and the urban programme was expanded, introducing central/local partnerships for the largest cities and more limited programmes for smaller towns.
When the Conservatives came to power they continued these policies, but with the crucial difference that efforts to control local government expenditure reduced the resources available to inner urban areas.
Even more significant, perhaps, was an intensification of the philosophy which promoted wealth generating activities at the expense of social programmes.
The first two Conservative initiatives were announced in 1980:
1.
The establishment of two Urban Development Corporations (UDCs) to take over and plan the development of the derelict dockland areas of Liverpool and London.
The UDCs were made up of representatives of financial institutions, private developers, construction firms and manufacturing industry.
This was a pattern to be followed when UDCs were set up in other areas in  succeeding years.
The UDCs were to plan, co-ordinate and supervise the development of the docklands by private contractors.
2.
The designation of certain economically stagnant and often derelict areas as ‘Enterprise Zones’.
The idea was to attract new industry to these areas by offering rent, rates and tax concessions and relaxing planning and other controls.
By the end of 1981 eleven Enterprise Zones had been established.
Together, these two initiatives exhibit most of the features which were to characterise Conservative policies towards the inner cities for the rest of the decade:
1.
The emphasis on private capital and private sector initiatives.
Mrs Thatcher sees the government's role as one of pump-priming, but much more than pump-priming is required to create the conditions that would encourage private investment in the inner cities.
2.
The concentration on wealth-generating activities rather than social programmes; this was most apparent in the creation of enterprise zones.
3.
The bypassing of local government.
This was particularly blatant in the case of the UDCs which to all intents and purposes supplanted local authorities as planning authorities.
Local authorities were totally excluded from the activities of the UDCs and some of the government finance which might otherwise have gone to the local authorities was diverted to UDCs.
The replacement of directly elected councils by appointed bodies is a quite extraordinary repudiation of democracy.
Mrs Thatcher attempted to justify the exclusion of local authorities on the grounds that left-wing city councils persistently refused to co-operate with private industry.
The local councils in Birmingham, Bristol, Liverpool, Manchester and Sheffield, among others, denied this charge and pointed to several joint ventures with business, arguing that had they not been denied the resources, more co-operation would have been possible.
Between 1981 and 1985, more stringent controls were placed upon local government finance, and from time to time the government renewed its efforts to interest the private sector in the inner cities.
In 1985 there were two developments.
The first was the  establishment of five City Action Teams: in Birmingham, Liverpool, Manchester-Salford, Newcastle-Gateshead and Hackney-Islington-Lambeth.
The object of the teams was to co-ordinate the regional activities of the Manpower Services Commission (now the Training Agency), the Department of Employment, the Department of the Environment and the Department of Trade and Industry, each of which was represented on the teams.
The second development in 1985 was the setting up of the Urban Housing Renewal Unit within the Department of the Environment.
The purpose of the Unit was to deal with the problem of run down council estates in urban areas, offering technical advice and assistance on the management of such estates.
The Unit also provides additional resources for housing investment in local authority estates where large numbers of houses remain empty because of insufficient funds for renovation.
In the following year Task Forces, intended to maximise the effectiveness of existing programmes, were introduced.
Their main concern is to improve training and employment opportunities, especially for young people and particularly those belonging to ethnic minorities; indeed, the size of the ethnic population is the main criterion for the selection of areas.
Also in 1986, the Metropolitan County Councils were abolished making strategic planning in the six conurbations more difficult.
The inner cities, 1987–1990
In 1987 the Conservative Party was returned for a third term.
The Party was very conscious of the fact that in spite of its large majority it had fared very badly in the inner urban areas, and it was without question this result which prompted Mrs Thatcher to state immediately after the election that policies for the inner city were to have top priority.
The rejection of the Conservative Party in the inner cities simply increased Mrs Thatcher's distrust of left-wing local councils and strengthened her determination to reduce their influence.
Although there were six central government departments concerned in one way or another with inner cities, the Prime Minister made it plain that she was to spearhead the inner city campaign and in 1987, to demonstrate the seriousness of the government's intent, a cabinet committee on the inner cities was established with Mrs Thatcher as its chairperson.
In addition a cabinet office unit was formed to advise on and co-ordinate inner city policies, and the  Prime Minister drafted specialist advisers into her own policy unit in Downing Street.
Many senior Conservatives, believing that the policies needed greater co-ordination, pressed Mrs Thatcher to appoint a minister with special responsibility for the inner cities.
She resisted this for several months, not wishing to loosen her control of urban policy, but eventually she capitulated giving the responsibility to Mr Kenneth Clarke, Minister for Trade and Industry.
The Prime Minister made it clear, however, that she would still control the direction of policy.
In the new government's first year of office three policy developments occurred.
First, an urban regeneration grant, designed to attract private investment, was introduced.
Under this scheme private sector owners or developers could receive a grant or a loan, or a combination of the two, for the redevelopment of derelict or disused sites or buildings in urban areas suffering from economic decline.
By 1988 five major schemes had been approved.
Second, four more UDCs were set up along the lines of those in Liverpool and London.
The four UDCs would each receive government budgets of up to £160 million over six years.
In addition four ‘mini-UDCs’ were established with much smaller budgets and with more limited objectives.
At the same time as these developments were being implemented, the new town corporations were being disbanded and a massive privatisation programme was well underway as industrial and domestic property in the new towns was sold.
Between 1980 and 1988 these sales yielded £800 million and a further £850 million was anticipated by 1991.
Some of the money was to be used to finance the new UDCs.
The third policy development in 1987 was the emergence of a curious body, English Estates, as an important government agency in urban regeneration.
English Estates had been in existence for some years, but its traditional role had been factory building and commercial development on green field sites with 5,000 factories and offices on 508 estates.
In 1987 it began to turn its attention to the inner urban areas, with the idea of opening small factories, workshops and offices in the hope that private industry would then follow suit.
As the third example shows, the government continued to pin its hope upon private sector industrial and commercial investment in the inner cities, the Prime Minister and her colleagues constantly urging industry and the financial institutions to do more.
Among the first to respond to these urgings was an organisation known as Business in the Community, led by Sir Hector Laing of United Biscuits.
Business in the Community set up six national teams to ‘promote the training and recruitment of the young unemployed, encourage partnership between schools and business, help in the formation of new, small enterprises, while promoting new loan funds to emerging entrepreneurs’.
The Confederation of  British Industry responded by setting up its own task force, made up of leading industrialists.
to encourage its members to invest in the inner cities.
The task force published its first report in September 1988.
It suggested small teams of business people in each city to provide leadership and to encourage private sector investment.
The CBI report estimated that £50 billion was needed for inner city reconstruction.
It is interesting to note that the CBI, not for the first time, was critical of attempts to bypass local councils, and it called for partnership between business, central government and local authorities.
This was a view endorsed by the Audit Commission report published in 1989.
The government had promised a White Paper on inner cities, but in March 1988 it produced instead a thirty-two page glossy colour brochure,Action for Cities , and twelve separate press releases.
The documents were launched at a press conference by Mrs Thatcher flanked by six of her ministers.
Of this conference, Hugo Young writes:
So this was an obvious sales pitch, a shameless hype, designed to remind the world that the famous inner cities, which have now received the ultimate accolade of being received into cliche, enjoy the attentions of six ministers as well as the Prime Minister herself.
Appropriately, it was one of those news conferences where the journalists are substantially outnumbered by PR men, consultants and the rest of the hucksters' fraternity.
There was precious little that was new in the Paper.
There was, for example, the usual emphasis on the private sector.
On this occasion we had the formation of a new company, British Urban Development (BUD) backed by eleven property, engineering and construction companies which have each contributed £5 million of initial share capital.
The firms participating in this new company are among the main contributors to Conservative Party funds.
Between 1988 and 1989 six to eight major projects were planned based on parcels of land of up to 1,000 acres.
Local authorities will be obliged  to sell derelict and unused land to BUD which will work through the UDCs.
Having acquired the land BUD will part-develop the sites by clearing, and by the provision of transport and services, and the sites will then be sold to private developers.
The other initiatives announced in the paper were also ‘more of the same’.
There was a new UDC for Sheffield and a doubling of the area covered by the Merseyside Development Corporation.
The addition of Sheffield brought the total number of UDCs to eleven and the government has stated that there will be no other UDCs before 1992.
Two new City Action Teams have been formed in Leeds and Nottingham, bringing the total up to seven.
English Estates was given increased funds for extending its workshop programme, and a simpler government grant system was introduced: the three existing grants have been replaced by a single ‘city grant’ with simpler application procedures.
In education two new city technology colleges were announced and attempts were to be made to extend the system of ‘compacts’ between business, schools and colleges.under which all pupils/students are guaranteed jobs with local firms when they leave school.
Two major road schemes for London and the Black Country were approved and the Home Secretary announced special crime prevention programmes in twenty areas.
Some of these developments were already in the pipeline before the publication of the government plans.
The Guardian leader quoted earlier said of the proposals: ‘There was no major initiative on inner cities yesterday.
There was no white paper.
No new strategy.
No new programme.
No major new investment of funds.
Instead, there were some useful but modest extensions to the present piecemeal programmes.’
Inner city riots
Civil disorder occurred in 1981 in Brixton and Southall in London; in the St Paul's area of Bristol; in Toxteth in Liverpool; and in the Moss Side district of Manchester.
There was considerable damage to property, burning of buildings, looting and violent clashes with the police in which petrol bombs were used and injuries were sustained by both rioters and police.
In 1985 further riots of a similar nature occurred in Handsworth (Birmingham) and Tottenham (London).
In the Tottenham riot a policeman was killed.
The Scarman report on the 1981 riots has become something of a  classic of its kind.
Scarman was in no doubt that the root cause of the rioting was unemployment and deprivation:
Whatever the special employment problems of black people, and of young black people in particular.
unemployment remains nevertheless an evil that touches all of the community.
There can be no doubt that it was a major factor in the complex pattern of conditions which lies at the heart of the disorders in Brixton and elsewhere.
In a materialistic society, the relative deprivation…it entails is keenly felt and idleness gives time for resentment and envy to grow.
This view was endorsed four years later by Faith in the City .
While the underlying cause of the riots was multi-faceted deprivation some of the incidents were sparked off by police action.
Scarman was critical of some of the methods employed by police forces, especially the use of special patrol groups in ‘saturation swamp 81’ which involved considerable police presence and the operation of what were known as the ‘sus laws’under which people can be stopped and searched simply on suspicion of misdemeanours.
There were complaints by black youths of police harassment, the sus laws merely being used as an excuse for this.
Lord Scarman found no evidence of a policy of racial discrimination and prejudice, although there was no doubt that some individual officers were racially prejudiced.
Equally, individual officers had over reacted to the disturbances with the over zealous use of dogs, truncheons and a number of unlawful weapons.
In most of the areas in which riots occurred there had been a breakdown in community/police relations; the public distrusted the police and they had no confidence in the police complaints machinery.
In Brixton consultative machinery involving the police and community leaders had ceased to function.
However, Lord Scarman concluded that:
The police do not create social deprivation, though unimaginative, inflexible policing can make the tensions which deprivation engenders greatly worse.
Conversely, while good policing can help diminish tension and avoid disorder, it cannot remove the causes of social stress where these are to be found, as those in Brixton and elsewhere are, deeply embedded in fundamental economic and social conditions.
The riots were unquestionably a blow to the government's law and order policies and to the Conservative's claim to be the party of law and order.
Mrs Thatcher, however, claimed that the riots had  nothing to do with unemployment and deprivation, but arose as a direct consequence of a lack of discipline within the family and in the schools.
She also talked of naked greed, although it takes a curious kind of logic to see the deprived as greedy while company directors were awarding themselves large pay increases and the ‘yuppies’ in the city were making a great deal of money and spending it as conspicuously as possible.
The government's response to the riots, apart from the setting up of the Scarman Inquiry, was to devote more resources to law and order and to renew its efforts to persuade business people to invest in the inner cities.
To this latter end Mr Heseltine accompanied a busload of businessmen on a conducted tour of Liverpool.
Inner city resources
The impression given by political commentators is that it is Mrs Thatcher who controls inner city expenditure — as she controls just about every item of government spending.
Mr Heseltine, when Secretary of State for the Environment, constantly argued for extra resources which were withheld by Mrs Thatcher and the Treasury, and succeeding ministers have been no more successful.
The government claims to spend £3.5 billion on urban policies; the Audit Commission puts the figure at £1.9 billion.
But even if the government's figure of £3.5 billion is accurate it is still only a fraction of what is required: as has been noted, the CBI estimates that £50 billion is needed.
Clearly, there is no possibility of any government achieving this level of expenditure which equals the total spent on the whole of social security and is over double the amount devoted to the NHS and the personal social services.
Inner city resources will be adversely affected by changes in the system of local government finance.
The community charge will entail massive increases in the bills to be paid by inner city residents or a substantial reduction in services.
However, the full effect of this will not be felt for four years since the government has provided resources to cushion the transfer from rates to the community charge.
Another change in local government finance is that the rate support grant has been replaced by the revenue support grant.
The allocation of the rate support grant took account of both variations in need and variations in resources among local authorities.
Although the new grant takes account of variations in need, it takes  no account of variations in resources, and this will disadvantage inner cities who were the main beneficiaries of resource equalisation.
The revenue support grant will be phased in over four years to prevent sharp falls in grant, but this will simply soften the impact.
It is difficult to obtain precise figures of private sector investment in the inner cities, but there may be reasons to doubt industry's willingness to commit billions of pounds to inner city developments.
So far the response of the private sector has been a very cautious one.
In spite of their support of the Conservative Party, the leaders of British industry have made it plain that there are limits to the extent to which they are prepared to sacrifice profitability in giving support to the government's inner city policies.
In the short term some sacrifices may be made, but eventually there must be a reasonable return on investments.
For the government strategy to work, therefore, it must create the conditions which will enable the private sector to make profits in the inner urban areas.
This implies massive investment in education and training, in low cost housing and in general environmental improvement; good transport links will have to be established and sites will have to be fully prepared with all the necessary services on hand.
There is little evidence that the government is willing to commit funds in quantities designed to bring about substantial improvements of this kind.
CONCLUSIONS
The ideology of the three Thatcher governments is more clearly demonstrated in housing than in any other area of social policy.
The policies involve privatisation on a considerable scale.
There have been drastic cuts in public investment in housing, both absolutely and relatively, and local authority stocks have been depleted.
Between 1978/79 and 1989/90 government expenditure on housing in real terms declined by 79 per cent.
The 1987 White Paper said that the ‘provision of housing by local authorities as landlords should gradually be diminished’.
But when the reduction in building, the sale of council houses, the introduction of HATs and the transfer of tenancies are taken into account, the diminution does not seem particularly gradual.
Flynn makes the connection between retrenchment and privatisation: ‘Here lies the key to Thatcherite housing and social welfare policies — within a general programme of retrenchment, the essential and fundamental element is the goal of ‘privatisation’.’
Flynn argues that housing policy exemplifies the shift from collective to individualised welfare provision.
The encouragement and support of home ownership, as Hills shows, is obviously the top priority:
the value of mortgage interest tax relief had risen to £4.500 million by 1986/7, more than twice its real level of eight years before, despite the cut in the basic rate of tax.
The increase in the real cost of mortgage interest tax relief over the period — £2.4 billion at 1986/7 prices — was the same size as the real fall in net public capital spending on housing .
Another feature of Conservative social policy — a distrust of local authorities — is particularly obvious in housing.
The sale of council houses, the appointment of HATs and the transfer of council housing to alternative landlords all reduce the role of local authorities.
Inner city initiatives exhibit a similar bias against local government.
Most inner city councils have a long socialist tradition which makes them even less popular with the government, and despite some recent softening of the government's attitude, local authorities are still largely excluded from inner city initiatives.
Conservative policies intensify housing inequalities.
Council tenants become more and more marginalised as the better-off tenants are encouraged, by generous discounts, to buy their homes.
Council estates become ghettos for the very poor, the unemployed, elderly people, single person households and young adults with young children.
As Forrest and Murie say:
Even the most ardent critics of council housing would find it difficult to conjure up images of featherbedded, oversubsidised council tenants driving expensive cars.
The public housing sector is well on the way to becoming an unambiguously residual, second class form of housing provision serving some of the poorest sections of the population.
The right to buy policy and the alternative landlord scheme are presented as extensions of tenants' choice, and for some this is undoubtedly the case.
A corollary of this, though, is that the choice for others is curtailed.
Those who wish to become local authority tenants find that the best houses have been sold and, as the stock diminishes and fewer council houses are built, waiting lists and  waiting times lengthen, and exchanges for those already in council housing and remaining in it become more difficult.
In addition, people are going to find themselves paying higher rents, irrespective of whether they live in privately rented, housing association or local authority property.
A report from the Policy Studies Institute, published in 1990, indicated that in the Summer and Autumn of 1989 16 per cent of tenants (more than a million households) were in arrears with their rents.
The average amount owed by individual tenants was about £270.
However, the most damning indictment of the Conservative government's record in housing is that it has presided over a massive increase in homelessness.
Most of this increase stems directly from government policies and, although some extra resources have been allocated for 1990/91 and 1991/92, little has been done to remedy the situation.
For the homeless the right to buy and the provisions of the 1988 Act are an irrelevance.
THE PERSONAL SOCIAL SERVICES
The personal social services are concerned with a range of services for children and for elderly, mentally disordered and physically disabled people.
Local authority social services departments, the principal providers of these services, are the main employers of social workers, but they also employ care assistants and home helps.
Many of the tasks performed by social services departments (SSDs) are statutory duties, although the interpretation of these varies from authority to authority.
Statutory duties now cover a wider range of special needs groups than was formerly the case.
For example, both the Disabled Persons Act of 1986 and the Children Act of 1989 impose extra duties on local authorities.
Statutory duties invariably take precedence over other aspects of the work and because of the publicity surrounding cases of child abuse, and the tendency to blame social workers when things go wrong, a disproportionate share of the energies and resources of SSDs is devoted to work with children.
SOCIAL WORK
After the Seebohm Report of 1968 and the Social Services Act of 1970, there was a trend towards genericism in social work practice and training.
Specialism never entirely disappeared, but in the 1980s there was a quite definite return to specialisation, especially in mental health and child care.
The 1983 Mental Health Act stipulated that only approved social workers should be allowed to deal with mental health cases.
Approved social workers under the Act would require specialist training and an appraisal of their competence, and the central council for education and training in Social Work (CCETSW) insists upon a minimum of sixty days' training culminating in formal examinations.
Between 1983 and 1987 just over 2,000 underwent specialist training with 82 per cent completing the courses successfully.
In child care the movement towards specialisation has been even more marked, and child protection teams, for example, are now the norm in local authorities.
This development came about in response to an increase in the number of child abuse cases being uncovered and the sensitivity of the issues involved, combined with a widely held view that social workers were ill-prepared to deal with complex cases of this kind.
In 1989 the government launched a £10 million training programme in child protection.
Most of the money went to local authorities who developed in-service courses and co-operated with educational institutions in establishing post-qualifying courses in child protection.
The funds available for child protection were continued into 1990/91 and further money has been made available for training in relation to the new Children Act.
The Department of Health has established a Training Support Programme for training in other areas of work, and in 1988/89, its first year of operation, the programme contributed £10 million to the cost of training 70,000 social care staff working with elderly people.
The programme will continue in 1990/91.
Also in 1990/91 the programme will provide £2 million for training in social services management.
While the government was willing to set aside very limited funds for specialised and principally in-service training, it rejected a £40 million proposal from CCETSW to replace the two-year Certificate of Qualification in Social Work (CQSW) with a three-year programme leading to the award of the Qualifying Diploma in Social Work.
This rejection discounted the recommendations of three separate reports between 1985 and 1987 that social work training should be lengthened.’
In most EC countries training courses for social workers already last for three years and the Commission has suggested an extension to four years.
CCETSW has had to rethink its training strategy.
It now proposes to replace both the Certificate in Social Service and the CQSW with  a Diploma in Social Work.
The Council is also proposing an Advanced Award in Social Work which will be based on a system of credits taking into account both post-qualifying training and practice.
A review of recent developments in social work, especially in the context of Conservative Party policy, would not be complete without some reference to the development of private practice.
The most obvious growth has been in consultancies in child abuse — especially sexual abuse — but there are also consultancies in psychotherapy, stress management and group work.
The most far-reaching changes in social work, however, are likely to result from the implementation of the government's proposals on community care.
THE GRIFFITHS REPORT AND COMMUNITY CARE
In discussions of community care a distinction is frequently made between care by the community and care in the community.
Abrams defines care by the community as ‘provision of help, support and protection to others by lay members of societies acting in everyday domestic and occupational settings’.
Walker, on the other hand, takes a different approach: ‘We are concerned…with the concept of care in the community.
which may be provided ‘informally’, through kinship networks, by friends, neighbours and volunteers, or ‘formally’ by statutory social services'.
The mid-1980s saw an intensification of interest in community care, as witnessed by the publication since 1985 of four major reports on the topic.
All four reports are agreed that there is a discrepancy between sentiments of support for community care and practical action to implement it.
The Griffiths Report, for example, says:
At the centre, community care has been talked of for thirty years and in few areas can the gap between political rhetoric and policy on the one hand, or between policy and reality in the field on the other hand, have been so great.
To talk of policy in matters of care except in the context of available resources and timescales for action owes more to theology than to the purposeful delivery of a caring service.
A report from the King's Fund Institute expresses concern that ‘there is clearly no articulated national policy on community care’, and the Audit Commission found the progress towards community care to be slow and uneven.
It was the indictments of the Audit Commission that led the Secretary of State for Social Services to ask Sir Roy Griffiths ‘to review the way in which public funds are used to support community care policy and to advise…on the options for action that would improve the use of these funds as a contribution to more effective community care’.
Griffiths follows the orthodox welfare pluralist approach in which the state's role (local authorities in this case) as a direct provider of welfare is diminished, and the roles of the informal, voluntary and private sectors are increased.
This approach is clearly expressed in the following passage:
The primary function of the public services is to design and arrange the provision of care and support…
There is value in a multiplicity of provision, not least from the consumer's point of view, because of the widening choice, flexibility, innovation and competition it should stimulate.
The proposals are therefore aimed at stimulating the further development of the ‘mixed economy’ of care.
It is vital that social services authorities should see themselves as the arrangers and purchasers of care services — not as monopolistic providers.
Local authorities are thus seen as ‘enablers’— designing, organising and purchasing non-health care services rather than providing them directly.
In greater detail, local authority social services departments would be responsible for:
1.
Assessing community care needs in their localities, setting objectives and priorities and formulating community care plans.
2.
The financial management of community care funds to be transferred from both social security and health authorities.
3.
Monitoring and regulating performance.
4.
The provision of information to both consumers and providers of care.
5.
The assessment of individuals' needs and the design of packages of care to meet them.
Under these arrangements, social workers would become case managers, designing packages aimed at achieving the most effective combination of services within the resources available.
Responsibility for the administration of community care grants, at present administered by the Department of Social Security as part of the social fund, should be transferred to local authorities.
In its  response to Griffiths, the government is non-committal about this transfer, simply saying that the position will have to be reviewed.
The report emphasises the importance of the private sector: a central aim is to secure the expansion of for-profit welfare.
In what is described as ‘a key statement’, the report claims that: ‘the onus in all cases should be on the social services authorities to show that the private sector is being fully stimulated and encouraged and that competitive tenders or other means of testing the market, are being taken’.
Later in the report local authorities are enjoined to ‘maximise choice and competition by encouraging the further development of private services’.
However, Griffiths also envisages greater support and encouragement of the voluntary and informal sectors.
The report recommended that local authorities should be given the leading role in planning and co-ordinating community care.
This placed the government in something of a quandary.
It was attracted to the Griffiths proposals because of their potential for promoting private services, but it went against the grain to leave local authorities with so much power, and it was this dilemma which caused the considerable delay in the government's response to Griffiths.
Mrs Thatcher wanted to explore every other possible alternative to local authority leadership of the community care programme.
The matter was discussed in Cabinet and a special cabinet committee was established onto which Sir Roy was co-opted.
Eventually Mrs Thatcher's reluctance was overcome, and in July 1989 it was announced that responsibility for community care would be given to local authorities.
This decision was confirmed in the White Paper, published in November 1989, which outlined the government's plans.
The Griffiths proposals were based on the further development of a mixed economy of welfare.
The relevance of this concept is not restricted to domiciliary care, and we will return to it once we have looked at residential services.
RESIDENTIAL CARE
Private residential homes — especially for elderly people — have constituted one of the growth industries during the 1980s.
Between 1979 and 1986 the number of private residential homes in Great  Britain increased by an average of 18.1 per cent a year.
The number of private homes more than tripled in that period, so that by 1986 over 52 per cent of all residential homes were in private hands.
During the same period the number of places in private residential homes increased by an average of over 17 per cent a year.
By 1986 there were three times the number of places in private homes than there had been in 1979.
The number of places in local authority and voluntary homes remained virtually unchanged.
In 1979 almost 65 per cent of places in residential homes were in local authority establishments, but by 1986 the proportion had fallen to just below 50 per cent.
Since 1986 the proportion will have fallen even further, as some Conservative local authorities have sold their old people's homes to either private operators or housing associations.
Private companies are also heavily involved in the provision of sheltered housing.
This enormous expansion of private residential care was financed in part by the taxpayer.
Without an infusion of funds from the DHSS (now DSS), fewer private homes would have been established and many more would have proved to be unprofitable.
Phillips et al.
identify the other factors making for the expansion of private residential care, but give primacy to public finance:
The movement into private care has been accentuated by tight control of local authority expenditure at a time when numbers of people have been ‘deinstitutionalised’ from psychiatric and psycho-geriatric units, and when people from an ageing population have been seeking residential care for the first time.
Most importantly, though, these sources of potential demand coincided with higher levels of DHSS benefits to support residents in private residential homes.
Between 1979/80 and 1986/87 the DHSS subsidy to private homes increased from £10 million a year to £489 million.
Estimates for 1989/90 put this figure at £1 billion — a one hundredfold increase in ten years.
In 1989 the board and lodging allowance varied from £140 to £230 a week depending upon the category of resident.
Both Griffiths and the Audit Commission were critical of this expenditure which, they argued, cut across the declared policy of promoting community care, and in 1991, in accordance with the Griffiths proposals, responsibility for board and lodging allowances will pass from the DSS to local authorities.
Serious allegations have been made about the running of some  private homes.
A study by Harriet and Sarah Harman, for example, documents appalling and degrading treatment of elderly people in private homes.
In some cases homes were being run by convicted criminals.
It is not suggested that any but a small proportion of private homes are like this, but where such conditions do occur, it indicates that the vetting, registration and monitoring procedures are failing.
The Harman study looked at the ninety-six cases which had been decided by the Registered Homes Tribunal between 1985 and 1989.
The Tribunal hears appeals by prospective residential home owners against local authorities' refusal to register.
The study found inconsistencies in the rulings of the Tribunal and wide variations in the registration practices of local authorities and in the criteria applied by them.
The report claimed that the Code of Guidance which accompanied the Registered Homes Act of 1984 was not being applied, partly because of lack of resources and partly because of the restricted power of local authorities.
The Code of Guidance, the authors maintain, should be given the force of legislation.
Furthermore, the original intention of the 1984 Act was that the burden of proof should rest on potential proprietors to demonstrate suitability, and Harman and Harman claim that the reverse of this is happening with local authorities having to prove unsuitability.
A report by the West Yorkshire Low Pay Unit demonstrated that it was not only residents who ran the risk of exploitation, but also the staff.
Rates of pay for what is a stressful job were extremely low, starting at £1.20 an hour: three-quarters of the unqualified workforce received £2.00 an hour or less and the highest rates of pay were well below £3.00 an hour.
A forty hour week at £2.00 an hour would produce a weekly income of £80.00 which compares with an average weekly wage for full time female workers in 1987 of £148.00.
The average weekly earnings of female manual workers amounted to £115.00 in 1987.
Private residential homes are frequently small family businesses and, as such, they are in tune with Conservative Party ideology and with the government's economic strategy.
Residential care is very labour intensive, and fundamental to the viability of private homes is the heavy involvement of the owners and their families, often working very long hours.
Reliance upon family labour means that the proprietors need very few employees, and the low wages paid to  these employees contributes further to the profitability of the home.
Keeping staff to a minimum and paying them very little obviously reduces costs, but it does not necessarily lead to good quality care.
Although private residential homes are typically independent family businesses, if the same happens in Britain as happened in the United States, then large companies may come to occupy a bigger share of the market.
Several hotel and leisure groups are already beginning to diversify into this field: they are aiming at the top and more lucrative end of the market, charging fees well above the DSS limits.
In a House of Commons debate on the Griffiths proposals, the Health Minister, Mr David Mellor, said that a commitment to care in the community meant ending the incentives to residential care in the social security system.
Such a change is likely to affect the smaller businesses rather than the large companies.
In the same debate Mr Mellor restated the government's intention of encouraging local authorities to make greater use of the private and voluntary sectors and to see themselves as enablers rather than providers.
The White Paper, while not excluding local authority provision, stresses the need for actively supporting the private and voluntary sectors: ‘The statutory sector will continue to play an important role in backing up, developing and monitoring private and voluntary care facilities, and providing services where this remains the best way of meeting those needs.’
The local authority, the White Paper concedes, may have to provide for people ‘with high levels of dependency or particularly challenging patterns of behaviour…’
The White Paper clearly indicates the government's intention of shifting the balance of provision away from local authorities, and this brings us back to the mixed economy of welfare or welfare pluralism.
WELFARE PLURALISM
The term welfare pluralism became part of the vocabulary of social policy after its use in 1978 by the Wolfenden Report on The Future of Voluntary Organisations .
Hatch and Mocroft, two prominent welfare pluralists, offer the following definition:
In one sense welfare pluralism can be used to convey the fact that social and health care may be obtained from four different sectors — the statutory, the voluntary, the commercial and the informal.
More prescriptively, welfare pluralism implies a less dominant role for the state, seeing it as not the only possible instrument for the collective provision of welfare services.
The shift from description to prescription in this formulation is interesting.
The welfare state in Britain has always been pluralistic in that there have always been several sources of welfare provision.
But the present government's preference for a mixed system of welfare is based on a desire to reduce the role of the state and correspondingly increase the role of the informal, voluntary and commercial sectors.
This position is clearly stated in the White Paper,Growing Older , which appeared in 1981:
Whatever level of public expenditure proves practicable, and however it is distributed, the primary source of support and care for the elderly people are informal and voluntary…
It is the role of public authorities to sustain and, where necessary develop — but never displace — such support and care.
Care in the community must increasingly mean care by the community.
This view was given even greater prominence in the Griffiths report which, as we have seen, also advocated an enhanced role for the commercial sector.
The government believes that the informal, voluntary and commercial sectors should substitute for the state in welfare provision.
The local authorities' functions would be in the planning, coordination, regulation and finance of community care, rather than its direct provision.
If local authorities are to provide less, then the informal, voluntary and commercial sectors will need to provide more.
It is assumed, on very little evidence, that the other three sectors have the capacity to expand their activities and that there are no countervailing drawbacks to their doing so.
There are persuasive reasons for doubting this.
Phillipson, for example, argues that the Griffiths perspective ‘conveniently ignores some difficult questions relating to the provision of informal care’.
He continues:
Indeed, by failing to acknowledge what applied research has to say on this matter, the Griffiths report proceeds from a false premise (that care by the community — in its present form — is desirable and will continue) to a false  conclusion (that publicly provided services can be increasingly restricted to an enabling and facilitating role).
By ignoring a substantial body of research produced in the 1970s and 1980s, the report presents…a misleading picture of the tasks facing the statutory sector.
Those pursuing a reduction in the welfare role of the state have, in their eagerness, paid insufficient attention to the problems facing the mixed economy of welfare.
Some of these problems will now be examined, beginning with those facing the informal sector.
The informal sector
More often than not community care means care by families — especially nuclear families.
Within the informal sector, bonds of kinship support the strongest reciprocal obligations, as Bulmer argues:
Kin ties remain the most important source of informal care for the majority of the population…
Within the web of kinship relations, the nuclear family is central and the source of most caring relationships.
Ties with extended kin are very much a matter of personal choice; those with members of one's nuclear family are more enduring and more likely to lead to responsibility for care.
To deny the importance of the family as a source of care would be to ignore the accumulated evidence of several decades.
Nevertheless, informal care by families faces considerable pressure at present and this is likely to intensify during the 1990s.
Population projections indicate that between 1986 and 2001 the number of people aged 85 and over will increase by 70 per cent.
A report from the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys in 1988 revealed that the number of disabled people in Britain stood at six million; twice the number estimated in 1971.
Two-thirds of disabled people were at or below the poverty line.
These figures indicate that the number of potential dependants in the population is increasing and likely to go on increasing.
At the same time the number of potential carers is declining.
Three factors have been particularly significant in bringing about this decline: reduced family size, the increasing participation of women in the labour market, and rising divorce rates.
Between 1971 and 1987 total period fertility rates declined by almost 22 per cent in the United Kingdom.
One obvious consequence of this is smaller families, which means that there will be  fewer potential carers when the present generation of parents reaches old age or when a sibling becomes disabled.
Traditionally the burden of long-term domiciliary care has fallen on women.
It is usually women who have left work, or moved from full time to part time employment, to care for a sick or frail elderly relative.
However, one of the most significant trends of the last three decades has been a steady growth in the number of women in the labour force.
Between 1971 and 1987 the total labour force increased by 2.3 million, and almost the whole of this was attributable to increased employment among women.
Furthermore, while male activity rates are likely to remain constant between 1987 and 1995, women's activity rates will go on rising.
The proportion of married women in employment increased from 47 per cent in 1971 to 60 per cent in 1987.
The government's policy on community care ignores the significance of this change, and assumes that women ‘will continue to accept their cultural designation as carers’ and that they will always be willing to sacrifice work opportunities in the interests of caring for dependent relatives.
None of this can be guaranteed.
Divorce rates in England and Wales have risen from 2.1 per thousand married people in 1961 to 6.0 in 1971 and 12.6 in 1987.
Rising divorce rates affect the family's capacity for caring by adding to the number of lone parents.
Divorce is easily the most common cause of lone parenthood.
Lone parents, 91 per cent of whom are women, have fewer resources than other families, and the lack of a partner with whom one can share child-rearing responsibilities leaves little time and energy for other forms of care.
Phillipson identifies another set of problems for the government's family care policies.
He challenges the orthodox view that elderly people turn to formal agencies for help only when informal support is absent or inadequate.
In relation to Britain this proposition can be neither proved nor disproved.
He says that it would be unfortunate if this perspective were used ‘as a rationale for distributing resources, particularly when a contrary position stressing a preference for community-based professional support could just as easily be advanced’.
Phillipson summarises American research which indicates that elderly people may be turning away from informal care based on kinship towards formal professional support.
A British study by West et al.
showed low levels of support for informal care packages  and a preference for professional support in the community, and this suggests that dependence on state services may be preferred to dependence upon kin.
Phillipson writes:
This is not to say that people will not give the support (as we know they do and invariably at great sacrifice); but it does suggest that care by the community is seen as a less attractive option than care from professionals, but with the support and involvement of the family.
If this view is correct it means that the whole approach suggested by Griffiths, and accepted by the government, is flawed.
Falling standards of care may well result from a transfer of responsibility from professional agencies to family care.
This in no way underestimates the contribution of families to the welfare of their members: nor does it diminish the importance of care in the community.
But the government is committed to the notion of care by the community and wants families to take on greater responsibilities.
From the problems identified it would appear that we should be asking not whether the family can provide more care in the future but whether it will be even able to maintain its current level of provision.
There are obvious limits to the extra work that families can be expected to absorb and these limits may already have been reached.
Families and people needing care in the community may, of course, receive support from friends and neighbours, and the government's proposals also anticipate a substantial contribution from this source.
However, although friendship is an important source of mutual support and companionship, it does not provide a sound basis for long term care.
Allan observes that friendship depends upon a degree of equality between the participants, and that a one-sided caring relationship denies the essential element of reciprocity.
If caring is unlikely to lead to friendship, the reverse is also true:
While part of friendship is caring about each other to a greater or lesser degree, caring for one another is not an element inherent in the routine organization of friendship…the majority of routine friendships are not  particularly well suited for providing the sort of caring community care entails, notwithstanding the friendship ideals that might make one think they would be.
Friends may be spread geographically.
Neighbours, by definition, have the advantage of proximity and are in a better position to  keep an eye on elderly or infirm people living nearby.
Neighbours are useful in emergencies and they provide help in countless small ways, such as shopping, taking in deliveries, admitting tradesmen, providing transport and looking after each other 's children for short periods.
Thus, friends and neighbours are usually concerned with short term help of a fairly straightforward nature.
Care of a personal kind and care which is long term and continuous is almost always provided by kin.
The contribution of friends and neighbours, therefore, is important but limited.
It supplements care by kin, but families continue to provide the bulk of domiciliary care.
There is no possibility of the family, even with help from neighbours and friends, substituting for state provision.
Indeed, if present levels of family care are to be sustained, the state will have to do more to support families in terms of both services and cash benefits.
Let us now turn our attention to the voluntary sector to see if it is in any better position than the informal sector to compensate for reductions in local authority provision.
The voluntary sector
The voluntary sector is an essential feature of a welfare pluralist system of personal social services.
If local authorities are going to withdraw from direct service provision — even if only in part— the voluntary sector will have to be extended, and this will entail increased funding by local authorities.
Griffiths makes this clear:
To develop the potential contribution of the voluntary sector further, financial support for its role needs to be provided on a clear basis, fully understood by all concerned.
I therefore see a need for clear agreements to be made between public agencies and not-for-profit bodies on the basis of public agency funding.
This may be, for example, on a fee per client basis, or a contract providing that the not-for-profit body should provide a given level of service.
In either case, this should allow the social services authority to hold the not-for-profit body to account for the proper use of public funds.
In recognition of a role which goes beyond the direct provision of services (e.g. developmental work, advocacy, campaigning and education), Griffiths also recommends a general core grant payable by local authorities to voluntary organisations.
This view of the role  of voluntary organisations and of their relationships with local authorities is endorsed in the White Paper which states that the government ‘will expect public funding agencies to develop an increasingly contractual relationship with the voluntary bodies they fund’.
If substantial public funds are to be made over to voluntary associations then, as Griffiths intimates, some form of audit ‘becomes essential: and this raises the question of the independence of voluntary organisations, which is said to be one of their great virtues.
The problem of retaining independence will become more acute as voluntary bodies are drawn increasingly into service provision as the agents of local authorities, as Caring for People suggests.
The distinction between public bodies and voluntary agencies will be blurred, and the independence of action of voluntary bodies will be hampered as some of their resources and energies are absorbed in winning and fulfilling local authority contracts.
Furthermore, if the local authority is known to favour particular kinds of programmes, voluntary organisations applying for funds may feel obliged to tailor their applications accordingly.
Billis and Harris have identified the conflicting goals of funders and agencies as a major concern in the voluntary sector.
At present local authority procedures for regulation and control are rudimentary, and the criteria to be applied to funding decisions are less than clear.
The call by Griffiths for ‘clear agreements’ is obviously justified, but their achievement may prove to be a bigger problem than either Griffiths or the government anticipate.
Matters may become a little clearer when the results of the efficiency review of government funding of voluntary agencies, begun in 1989, become available.
There is a more general issue of accountability in the voluntary sector.
Leat has identified four forms of accountability applicable to voluntary organisations:
1.
Fiscal accountability — accountability for the proper use of public money.
2.
Process accountability — accountability for following proper procedures.
3.
Programme accountability — accountability for quality of work.
4.
Accountability for priorities-accountability for the relevance or appropriateness of the agency's work.
The enforcement of these different forms of accountability may not be easy, and voluntary organisations are not subject to direct accountability to the electorate, as are local authorities.
It is true that contractual accountability may be viewed as an alternative to political accountability, but much of what the voluntary sector does is not capable of precise measurement for inclusion in a contract.
There are, then, considerable difficulties in attempting to ensure accountability and Leat comments that ‘problems are likely to increase if a policy of pluralism and closer relationships between the voluntary and statutory sectors is pursued’.
Another problem of the voluntary sector is the unevenness in its provision.
In some areas of the country, where voluntary services are well developed, substitution of voluntary for local provision would be easier than in areas where the voluntary sector is weak.
Even within a single local authority variations are likely to be considerable.
It is true that local authorities do not achieve uniformity of provision, but usually an attempt is made to match resources to need.
The problem with voluntary agencies is that their number and strength is inversely related to need.
Although their research was done some years ago, the conclusions of Hatch and Mocroft still hold: ‘On the whole, towns low in voluntary organisations tended to be the ones that were low in terms of social class’.
If low social class is related to greater need, then voluntary organisations are least active where the needs are greatest.
Brenton, in a study looking at the feasibility of the voluntary sector replacing the statutory sector to some degree in the provision of personal services, concludes:
Asking what is the capacity for such an expansion, in practical terms, we must conclude that the available evidence suggests that it would require a transformation that would be nothing short of miraculous.
Voluntary organisations are thinly and unevenly distributed, and where the need is greatest, they do not exist.
Voluntary agencies are also unevenly distributed among different client groups.
Children and physically disabled and elderly people tend to be well served by voluntary agencies, whereas the mentally disordered, alcohol and drug abusers and the single homeless are poorly served.
The voluntary sector is characterised by fragmentation and poor  co-ordination, leading to overlapping and gaps, with ample facilities in some areas and shortages in others.
Transfer from local authorities to voluntary organisations would result in a less equitable distribution of resources, and it is difficult to see how the shortcomings of the voluntary sector could be sufficiently modified to make voluntary organisations an acceptable alternative to local authorities as providers of community care services.
Brenton comments:
To devolve responsibility for the kind of social services we currently enjoy to a mass of informal, ill-organised groups and organisations would constitute so great a dismantling of the personal social services system as to leave its functions solely to hidden providers of informal care.
The dismantling of the personal social services would also open the way for commercial providers.
The commercial sector
Commercial suppliers are already well established in the personal social services.
As we have seen, the residential care of elderly people is predominantly in the hands of private companies.
We have also seen how dependent these private companies are on public finance and how difficult they are to regulate.
One of the aims of Griffiths, already noted, is to promote the private sector and encourage competition.
The White Paper takes the same approach: ‘Local authorities will be expected to make maximum use of the independent sector.
The Government will ensure that they have acceptable plans for achieving this’.
The ‘independent sector’ includes voluntary agencies but it also implies private market provision of luncheon clubs, meals-on-wheels, home helps, care attendants, community nurses and day centres.
Equally, there would be nothing to prevent private social work companies setting up in opposition to local authority and voluntary agency workers; private training companies are already emerging.
One of the problems is that once the commercial sector has been legitimated, it is difficult to limit its growth.
Beresford and Croft voice this fear:
The problem is that welfare pluralists seem to overestimate the capacity of the state to regulate the slice of the welfare market the commercial sector takes…
More fundamentally…welfare pluralists cannot escape opening wider the door to privatisation by the support for the commercial sector inherent in their advocacy of a plurality of sources of welfare.
The changes envisaged in the White Paper could lead to a personal social service system dominated by commercial suppliers.
It might be thought of as over-reacting but the development of local monopolies and cartels is just conceivable.
Full-scale commercial provision by big companies is one possible model of market-based welfare.
At the other extreme is the introduction of market principles into local authority practice by means of paid care schemes.
An interesting study of ten such schemes by Leat and Gay refers to ‘the growing practice within social services departments of paying ‘ordinary people’ to provide various forms of care for a wide range of client groups'.
It should be stressed that no payment is made by the client.
Two important distinctions are made: first, between care provided in the carer's home and that provided in the client's home; and second, between substitute care, in which the ‘normal’ carer (or the local authority) is replaced, and supplementary care, where the paid carer supplements the care of others or the client's capacity for self-care.
According to Leat and Gay: ‘Payment for care schemes attempt to overcome the weaknesses of bureaucratically organised statutory care by buying in the strengths of care in the private domain whilst at the same time overcoming the weaknesses of informal sector care’.
In this way these schemes form a bridge between the formal and informal sectors.
Other schemes, to which we now turn, attempt to interweave statutory, voluntary, informal and, less often, commercial care.
INITIATIVES IN COMMUNITY CARE
The government launched two community care initiatives in the 1980s.
In 1983 the DHSS issued the ‘Care in the Community’ circular which sought to bring about the transfer of long-stay hospital patients into the community: this would allow the closure of long-stay wards and hospitals.
The circular also contained the following statement: ‘Ministers wish to encourage a programme of pilot projects, to explore and evaluate different approaches to community care.
It will be important to demonstrate methods which are both beneficial to the people concerned and cost-effective’.
A demonstration programme of twenty-eight pilot projects was begun in 1983 with government funding of £19 million until 1988.
The Personal Social Services Research Unit of the University of Kent was commissioned to promote, monitor and evaluate the programme.
Their results can be seen in Demonstrating Successful Care in the Community which describes all twenty-eight projects and looks in some detail at five of them.
The projects were small scale, covering only 857 clients between them.
Two of the projects were each concerned with only three people.
In 1986 the government launched a second scheme under the title of ‘Helping the Community to Care’.
There is a strong element of self help in the programme.
In October 1986, the Secretary of State for Health announced the setting up of a project in which ten voluntary agencies would be responsible for self-help family centres.
Play-groups, mother and toddler groups and the teaching of parenting skills to families at risk would all feature in the family centres, but a subsidiary aim would be to explore different models of self help.
However, most community care schemes have developed quite independently of central government initiatives.
Some schemes have been consumer-led; others have been initiated by local authority or health service managers or by local councillors; for others the impetus has come from social researchers; and still others have come about through joint action by social workers and their managers.
It would be impossible to describe all the schemes, and difficult to select a handful as representative of the rest.
The most satisfactory approach is to try to identify features which are replicated in most of the schemes.
These will be grouped under four heads decentralisation, consumerism and participation, self help and joint action.
Decentralisation
Almost all schemes involve some element of decentralisation.
For example, much publicity has been given to the patch or neighbourhood system of social work which entails a small integrated team of social workers dealing ideally with small communities of between 5,000 and 10,000 people.
In fact, many of those authorities operating a patch system have much bigger areas.
The average population served by a social work team in East Sussex, for example, is 16,000, but varying from 4,000 to 25,000.
Islington operates a decentralised system based on neighbourhoods with populations  between 10,000 and 20,000.
The notion of neighbourhood social work received something of a boost from the Barclay report of 1982 which endorsed the patch system and community social work as a possible way forward and recommended the ‘development of flexible decentralised patterns of organisation’.
Many commentators share the Barclay report's view that decentralisation is crucial to any plans for community care.
The Audit Commission, the King's Fund Institute, Hadley, Hatch and Willmott are among those supporting this view.
Nevertheless, decentralisation is not without its problems.
Glennerster, for example, while supporting the general aims of decentralisation, warns of the dangers of damaging inter-agency co-ordination and planning; he is particularly concerned about links with health services and the fate of specialist teams concerned with mental handicap, mental illness and geriatric assessment.
There is also the danger of spreading resources too thinly and separating teams from local authority power structures.
Challis draws a distinction between geographical decentralisation and resource decentralisation where ‘decisions over the precise allocation of resources are formally pushed to a lower level than is usual, at times to the individual field worker, to ensure more appropriate allocation of resources’.
Resource decentralisation is practised in the Kent Community Care Scheme which attempts to provide care at home for frail elderly people as a means of avoiding institutional care.
Social workers design co-ordinated packages of care for individually assessed elderly people.
This scheme, which has now spread to other areas, obviously influenced the Griffiths proposals.
Consumerism and participation
Decentralisation is often regarded as a prerequisite of participation and the effective expression of consumer views.
Cambridge and Knapp make very clear the relationship of consumerism to community care:
In the 1980s we have seen greater emphasis than heretofore on the voice of the consumer.
Consumerism has been enshrined in most recent government statements about community care…
Consumerism is now more likely to play a part in individual programme planning and case management.
It is clear that consumerism — including self-advocacy and citizen-advocacy — is going to be an important component of community care in the future.
If consumerism is to be as important as this suggests, then the definition of consumer needs to be wide: it must include the ‘hidden consumers’ who do not have much contact with social services departments, and it needs to include both clients and their carers.
Beresford identifies three models or approaches to hearing the voice of the consumer.
The first is the market research model in which clients and potential clients are asked what services they would find helpful and what they think is wrong with current provision and how they think it might be improved.
The second model is the consumerist approach which Beresford claims has emerged in response to the expansion of commercial provision.
It implies a less passive consumer than the market research model with the emphasis on market preferences and consumers' rights.
The third model — the democratic — is much the most difficult to achieve: it is also the most radical, resting as it does on the direct involvement of clients in the planning, management and provision of services.
Democratic consumerism is what used to be called participation before the term consumerism became fashionable.
A great deal depends upon how successfully all sections of the community can be persuaded to participate.
To date, there has always been a middle class bias in participation in formal organisations.
Much more attention needs to be paid to examining how poor and disadvantaged people might be enabled to participate, and particular efforts should be made to find out if there are any factors inhibiting participation by Afro-Caribbean and Asian members of the community.
We know that black elderly people, for example, have very little contact with formal social services but we know far too little about the reasons for this.
There are also problems in securing participation for people with mental disorder and for people in institutions.
The full implementation of the substance and spirit of the Wagner Committee's proposals might go some way towards giving people in institutions a greater say.
Information is of central importance in a consumer-oriented service.
Providers must be fully informed of consumers' needs and consumers must be fully informed of the services available and the options open to them.
All information must, of course, be made available in several languages.
It must not be assumed that everyone wishes to participate —‘active  citizenship’(to use one of the Conservative Party's catchphrases) is not for everyone.
Many people wish to be left alone to get on with their own lives and they must be allowed to do so, and there must also be opportunities for different degrees and different kinds of involvement.
One particular kind of involvement is self help.
Self help
Many community care schemes have elements of self help built into them.
The Audit Commission makes the following comment:
The change to a community-based service…involves much more than a change to the pattern of service provision.
It involves a change of approach, with emphasis and priority placed on encouraging patients and clients to do as much for themselves as possible….
Self help, one of the fastest growing areas of the voluntary sector in recent decades, fits in well with Conservative Party notions of self reliance, individual responsibility and active citizenship.
Self help is undoubtedly double-edged.
On the one hand, it has the following merits:
1.
It may be seen as a challenge to the dominance of bureaucrats and professionals characteristic of both statutory agencies and the more traditional voluntary organisations.
2.
It enables groups to identify their own needs and to do something about meeting them.
3.
It has the potential for achieving change through political militancy (see, for example, the women's movement, the civil rights movement and consumer groups).
4.
It enables people to develop new skills which may enhance confidence and self esteem.
On the other hand, while self help by its very nature is participatory, it has a strong middle class bias.
Finch, in a study of preschool playgroups, found that for working class women self help was illusory, because taking turns in looking after other people's children did not fit in with their life styles or with their aspirations.
Finch argues that the setting up and running of self help groups is essentially a middle class activity, and she concludes that the promotion of self help is deceitful for three reasons:
First, encouraging the women to run their own preschool facilities rather than seek an extension of statutory resources is deceitful because it  promotes a form of provision which such women cannot supply for themselves.
Second, the idea of self help obscures the fact that what is being sought are facilities on the cheap, incorporating the unpaid labour c.f mothers themselves…
Third, as a form of preschool provision, playgroups make no contribution whatsoever to the needs of parents in paid work, since they both assume and encourage full-time mothering.
Self help, if it can overcome its middle class bias, has considerable potential, but government support for the principle is conditional upon self help groups not threatening the status quo .
Self help groups may also be used as an excuse for lack of government support, and a general philosophy of self help may lead to deprived people being blamed for their plight.
Joint action
Joint consultative committees and joint care planning teams have been in place since the 1974 reorganisation of the NHS, but joint finance of community care projects on any significant scale dates from 1976.
The recent drive towards community care has increased the need for joint planning and joint action, as the Griffiths report stresses:
The proposals mean that joint local planning and action will continue to be essential, but that responsibilities and accountability for the plans and action will be clearer than they are now…it must be emphasised that effective co-operation at the local level will be essential, both to the success of individual projects and, more broadly, if the whole range of community care services is to be delivered effectively.
Some research carried out by the Centre for Research in Social Policy at Loughborough University (in collaboration with the Centre for Health Economics at the University of York) has produced some interesting material on joint action.
The research was concerned to examine joint finance and joint planning following the restructuring of the NHS in 1982 and the ‘community care circular’ of 1983.
Five sites were chosen for detailed case studies, but the Loughborough team also undertook a number of issue-based studies to assess the effectiveness of inter-agency collaboration.
Among the issues examined were: the success of joint planning in involving a wide range of agencies and personnel; the comprehensiveness and coherence of the joint arrangements and their effectiveness in  securing particular outputs; the efforts made to devise systematic procedures for the control, appraisal, selection and monitoring of joint finance schemes.
It was hoped to establish what factors were associated with good practice in collaboration.
The results of the survey indicated a number of problems and shortcomings in joint planning and finance, and these will have to receive some attention if the new community care scheme is to succeed.
The achievement of what the Audit Commission calls ‘locally integrated community care’ depends upon the successful interweaving of statutory, voluntary and informal services.
In describing the Dinnington project, Bayley and Tennant say that ‘the main aim was to interweave the help and resources of the formal health and welfare services with the informal support and help and services given by family, friends and neighbours, together with the contribution of the voluntary sector’.
Judging from its White Paper, the government would be unhappy with Bayley and Tennant's failure to consider the interweaving of commercial services.
If social workers become case managers, as is suggested in both the Griffiths report and the White Paper, then they will assume responsibility for interweaving services at fieldwork level.
They will be devising packages of care which draw upon a variety of sources of support.
CONCLUSIONS
When the provisions of the NHS and Community Care Act are fully implemented in 1991 local authority social services departments will be changed out of all recognition.
The government has so far been equivocal about the resources to be made available, but it is significant that the Griffiths proposal for a specific grant has been rejected, except in the case of the mentally ill.
If there are insufficient resources, the changes will result in more commercial provision, greater use of charges and greater reliance on informal carers.
Wicks maintains that the costs of community care ‘tend to lie where they fall — on the family concerned and, in particular, on the female carer within the family’.
This tendency is further emphasised by ‘a conscious attempt to shift costs from the governmental to the private, family sector’.
Even before the community care changes, the resources of local authority social services departments are stretched to their limit.
At the end of 1988 there were 2,200 social work vacancies, the position being most serious in the inner cities.
In London alone there are 600 children at risk who are unsupervised because of staff shortages, and there are over 4,000 vacancies in social services departments, including 700 social work posts.
A report in October 1989 said that many people were leaving the social work profession: low morale, increased pressure and poor pay all contributed to this exodus.
Many workers were also worried that the community care proposals would lead to de-skilling, partly because of the increased use of non-professional helpers and partly because care packages would concentrate on practical help with a lower value being placed on the less quantifiable aspects of social work support.
Increased pressure on social services departments arises from a greater number of child abuse referrals, higher levels of unemployment since 1979, higher levels of crime, policies of de-institutionalisation and demographic factors.
The House of Commons Social Services Committee estimates that expenditure on the personal social services needs to increase by 2 per cent a year in real terms simply to keep pace with rising demand.
Over the period from 1980/81 to 1984/85 net expenditure (gross expenditure less money recouped from charges) on the personal social services increased by 2 per cent less than was required to meet increased demand, and gross expenditure increased by 3 per cent less than was required.
Between 1980/81 and 1985/86 almost two-thirds of local authorities fell short of the target increases of 2 per cent a year, and the most recent expenditure plans indicate that between 1988/89 and 1990/91 real expenditure on the personal social services will fall by 0.7 per cent.
Presumably, the amount for 1991/92 will have to be increased since the new community care plans come into effect in April 1991.
In March 1990 a report from the Association of Directors of Social Services claimed that 36 per cent of local authority social services departments had had to cut services, stop new projects or impose charges as a result of pressure to keep the poll tax down.
The report estimated that 75 per cent of local authorities would have insufficient resources to implement the government's community care proposals.
These figures give cause for considerable concern: they raise  doubts about the genuineness of the government's stated intention of improving community care.
The myth that community care is cheaper than institutional care has long since been dispensed with, but this may not necessarily deter the government from seeing the impending changes as an opportunity to cut costs.
In spite of government protestations to the contrary, privatisation lies at the heart of the proposals: commercial and voluntary sector provision will be expanded, local authority provision will contract and informal carers will be expected to carry a bigger load.
The government decided against the enforcement of competitive tendering in the domiciliary services, but this was largely because of the undeveloped state of private and voluntary agencies in this area.
However, the government expects local authorities to encourage independent suppliers and make ‘wider use of service specifications, agency agreements and contracts.’
It also intends to monitor local authorities' progress in fostering provision by private companies and voluntary agencies.
This will be achieved through the annually updated three-year community care plans which local authorities are required to produce for the Secretary of State's approval.
The White Paper says:
Social services authorities will be expected to make clear in their community care plans what steps they will be taking to make increased use of non-statutory service providers or, where such providers are not currently available, how they propose to stimulate such activity.
In particular, they should consider how they will encourage diversification into the non-residential care sector.
The Secretary of State can insist upon changes to any plans that do not make sufficient use of independent suppliers.
It seems probable that compulsory competitive tendering will be introduced, once voluntary and commercial suppliers of domiciliary services are in a stronger position.
The chairperson of the UK Homecare Association has claimed that, because the profit margins in the domiciliary services are relatively small, there is a danger of corner-cutting and slipping standards.
Nevertheless, companies trading in domiciliary care are now beginning to multiply — some from a base in the residential sector.
Companies such as Home Care and Nursing Services, Care Concern and Care Services provide home helps, nursing auxiliaries and care attendants, meals cooked in the home and home nursing  for the terminally ill.
Crossroads Care, a voluntary, non-profit organisation reaches 12,000 families, and provides each year more than one million care hours in the home for physically disabled and mentally handicapped people.
However, not all voluntary associations are in agreement with The White Paper's recommendation that greater reliance should be placed upon the independent sector.
The Spastics Society, for example, has said of this proposal: ‘We are deeply concerned about any assumptions that the public provision of care for disabled people can be in the main shifted to the private and not-for-profit sector without serious consequences for disabled people.’
As far as informal carers are concerned, the evidence that families may be unable to take on extra responsibilities, and the less certain evidence that elderly people may prefer care by professionals, with help and support from the family, rather than entirely by kin, are conveniently ignored.
The exploitation of informal carers especially women — does not appear to enter into the calculations.
It would be untrue to say that there is no evidence to support the government's proposals.
There have been many demonstration projects, but most of these have been on a very small scale.
As the King's Fund Institute observes:
The challenge is achieving the spread of those good services.
Currently they tend to be small scale.
geographically isolated and add-ons to mainstream provision.
Future policy at both national and local levels needs to be directed towards integrating such schemes into mainstream service provision across the country without sacrificing quality of care.
It should be noted, too, that most of the experimental schemes have not included commercial enterprises.
The new community care arrangements are consistent with the Conservative government's general policy aims in that they have privatisation as one of their major objectives.
However, the Thatcher government's antipathy towards local government is less clearly seen in the personal social services than it is in either education or housing.
Local authorities are to be given the leading role in the organisation of community care, but the decision to give them this responsibility was taken with the greatest possible reluctance and only after every other possibility had been explored.
Furthermore, as already noted, there will be extensive central control of local authorities who will be expected to surrender some  of their responsibility for direct provision of services.
Although there will always be a need for residential care and some people will always prefer it, community care does have a potential for service improvement.
However, a policy of community care has to be based on hard reality, not on romantic notions of the caring community nor on an ideology favouring charges and commercial provision.
The interweaving of statutory, voluntary and informal care may be a way forward, but there is no alternative to social services departments remaining the main providers.
It must also be remembered that the voluntary sector has an important role as critic and that this may be impeded by interweaving.
If, however, local authorities are going to continue to be responsible for personal social services, then they need to look at alternative methods of service organisation and delivery.
In particular, more research is needed to ascertain how the voice of the consumer may best be heard.
CONCLUSION: THE THATCHER LEGACY
Before the election campaign of 1987 began, the Labour Party claimed that the government had run out of ideas.
This may have been no more than wishful thinking, and during the campaign the Conservative Party managed to project itself as the most radical of the contenders for office.
During her third term Mrs Thatcher became the longest serving Prime Minister this century, and she has had, therefore, an unparalleled opportunity to change British society.
No-one could complain that the government has not been an active one.
The number of Acts, statutory instruments, White and Green Papers, consultative documents, guidelines and codes of practice gives the impression of intense activity, and each period of office has been marked by major pieces of legislation affecting health and social services, and by Acts which have brought about the denationalisation of important sectors of industry.
Frantic activity, however, does not of itself produce change.
There also has to be a clear purpose and a degree of co-ordination to ensure coherence.
Furthermore, legislation frequently fails to achieve its objectives and it may have unintended consequences.
The aim of this chapter is to assess the achievements of the Conservatives' years in office.
In evaluating the government's achievements reference will be made to the policy objectives identified in Chapter 1: privatisation, curbing local government and promoting inequality.
PRIVATISATION
In Chapter 2 the point was made that privatisation can mean reduced government provision, reduced government finance and reduced government regulation, and that reduced government provision and finance usually means the transfer of responsibilities to non-statutory agencies.
Easily the most common meaning attributed to privatisation, however, is the sale of public assets.
In this the government has had a measure of success in that twenty-three separate sales have gone ahead, and most of them have been greatly over-subscribed.
Even water privatisation, which every opinion poll showed to be a deeply unpopular measure, was almost six times over-subscribed.
Thus, popular capitalism has been extended: in 1980 there were just over three million shareholders but by the end of 1989 the number had risen to just under twelve million.
But there is no evidence to suggest that those buying shares in privatised industries have then gone on to buy other shares, and the Conservatives' boast of a share-owning democracy does not stand up to serious examination.
The General Household Survey for 1987 reveals that the typical investor in privatisations is male, middle-aged, professional and lives in the South-east.
More than a third of all shareholders had investments solely in privatised companies.
The North had the lowest percentage of share-owners and shareholding among women, manual workers and young people was low.
Privatisation is always preceded by extensive television and newspaper advertising; in the most recent privatisations, about £42 million was spent on advertising the water sell off and the estimated cost of promoting the sale of the electricity industry was over £100 million.
Nor are these the only costs involved, since fees also have to be paid to the city: £330 million in the case of water and £824 million in the case of electricity.
Investors have frequently been offered special inducements, but the biggest inducement of all has been the underpricing of many of the issues and the chance of an immediate profit.
The privatisation programme has also had its failures.
The BP flotation in 1987 coincided with a stock market collapse, so that when the shares started trading they stood at 88p — well below the partly paid offer price of 120p — and investors stood to lose heavily.
In the end the Chancellor and the Bank of England came up with a 70p a share safety net.
The electricity privatisation also ran into difficulties over nuclear power stations.
For two years critics argued that nuclear power stations should not be included in the sale, but the government remained adamant.
In November 1989, however, the government reversed its decision because the banks and financial institutions refused to carry the huge financial risk of de-commissioning nuclear power stations.
The government's embarrassment was increased when Lord Marshall, chairman of National Power, resigned because of the climbdown.
Almost at the same time there was an investigation into the circumstances surrounding the sale of Rover to British Aerospace.
The House of Commons Public Accounts Committee, the Trade and Industry Committee and the European Commission all expressed grave concern over the payment of ‘sweeteners’ to British Aerospace to make purchase of the Rover Company a more attractive proposition.
The other major sale of public assets has been the sale of council houses, and there can be little doubt that the sale of individual houses to tenants has, from the government's point of view, been a success.
Between 1980 and the end of 1987 about 1.1 million houses were sold.
However, high interest rates in 1989 and 1990 brought about a sharp reduction in sales, and some of those who had already bought their houses found themselves in financial difficulty.
The sale of the remaining rented houses to private or housing association landlords has been less successful.
The 1988 Housing Act was heralded as promoting ‘tenants’ choice': the government assumed that there was widespread dissatisfaction with local authorities as landlords and that tenants would apply in large numbers to transfer to an alternative landlord.
This simply has not happened.
Nearly all transfers have taken place on the initiative either of prospective landlords or of mainly Conservative local authorities.
Clearly, the sale of council houses either as rented accommodation or into owner occupation increases private provision and finance and reduces the role of the public sector.
After housing, the service in which privatisation has made the most progress is the NHS, inroads have been made on several interrelated fronts.
Robin Cook, Labour's health spokesperson, charged the government with being ‘concerned less with the quality of health care than with widening the role of the market in its provision — by increased competition, by more commercial medicine and by larger  public subsidy of private medicine’.
This is obviously a partisan statement, but there is corroborating evidence.
Charges, for example, have been increased beyond the rate of inflation under the Conservatives.
One of the purposes of health service charges is to transfer a proportion of the cost of treatment to the patient.
The charges for prescriptions have seen the sharpest rise — an increase of no less than 1,425 per cent between 1979 and 1990.
Indeed, for about half of the prescriptions the charge exceeds the drug's cost, and people are now finding it cheaper to buy the simpler remedies over the pharmacist's counter.
Dental charges have also increased, the supply of spectacles has been entirely privatised, and new charges for dental checks and eyesight tests have been introduced.
Charges in the NHS have the effect of making private health care relatively more attractive.
There has also been an increase in private practice within the NHS and the private sector itself has expanded considerably.
The evidence for this assertion is to be found in Chapter 4 which indicates that, although the greatest growth in private provision has occurred in outpatient services and in hospital and nursing-home facilities, the private market is now moving into primary health care.
These developments have been helped by a doubling in the number of people covered by private health care insurance between 1979 and 1988.
It is instructive to note that 24 per cent of professional workers and 22 per cent of employers and managers were covered by private insurance in 1986, as compared with 1 per cent of unskilled workers, 2 per cent of the semi-skilled and 3 per cent of skilled manual workers.
Contracting out has also become a more prominent feature of the NHS under the Conservatives.
This takes two forms: the contracting out of clinical work to private hospitals and competitive tendering for the provision of non-medical services such as cleaning, catering and laundry services.
Competitive tendering in the NHS actually declined between 1980 and 1983 when it became mandatory.
After two years of compulsory competitive tendering in-house providers had won 57 per cent of all contracts, and by 1988 this proportion had risen to 85 per cent.
The implementation of the National Health Service Act will give further encouragement to the private sector since private health care companies will be able to bid for District Health Authority contracts, and for the provision of clinical services to the patients of  GPs who are managing their own budgets.
The Act will also facilitate the further development of internal markets with competition between suppliers and opted-out hospitals acting as independent contractors.
Competition among state-financed institutions has also been heightened in other services.
In education, for example, schools are expected to compete with one another in a system of open enrolment and universities and polytechnics are required to engage in competitive bidding for students.
The community care proposals also involve a form of internal market with social workers devising packages of care for clients, drawing upon commercial and non-profit suppliers.
It is plain that the government sees the re-organisation of community care as an opportunity to develop the role of the market in domiciliary care to complement its dominance in residential care.
The personal social services provide a good example of a transfer of responsibility for provision from the state to the commercial, voluntary and informal sectors.
In a number of instances the government has ‘fixed the odds’ in favour of private provision.
One example of this is the discounts offered to tenants purchasing local authority houses: these were altered in 1984 when sales showed signs of flagging and they were increased on flats in 1986 because few buyers could be found for flats.
Increased rents has also tipped the balance in favour of purchase, although this has been more than outweighed, at least in the short term, by increased interest rates.
A second example concerns private pensions.
The government offered a 5-year subsidy to people moving from the state earnings-related pension scheme to take out a private pension.
The state scheme was also made less attractive by reducing the benefits available.
Responsibility for provision may change without corresponding changes in the source of finance.
This is what is planned in the community care services, with local authorities losing some of their responsibility for provision but retaining responsibility for the allocation of resources.
The effect is similar when a District Health Authority pays a private hospital to perform operations on NHS patients.
Another instance in which the government subsidises private concerns occurs in the area of industrial training.
In both the Youth Training Scheme and Employment Training the government pays private training organisations to provide programmes.
On the other hand the sale of local authority housing estates to private developers or private landlords involves a change of provision and finance.
When schools opt out of local authority control (provision) responsibility for their finance switches to central government.
The privatisation of finance occurs when the government reduces subsidies or increases charges.
Local authority housing provides an example of the former and we have already looked at the role of charges in the NHS.
There are two particularly interesting examples of government reliance on private finance for some of its policies.
The first example is the government's emphasis on private investment in its inner city programmes in which private funds are seen as a preferred alternative to public finance.
The second example concerns the financing of the City Technology Colleges, and the government's expectation that 80 per cent of this funding would come from private industry.
There was, however, disappointment for the government on both counts: investment by industry in the inner cities has remained relatively small, and only 20 per cent of the funds for the first City Technology Colleges came from non-government sources.
A reduction of government regulation is another form of privatisation.
The government's record in this respect is a mixed one.
There has been considerable deregulation in the economic, financial and industrial spheres and deregulation of the private rented sector in housing, but in spite of its frequently articulated preference for a non-interventionist state, the Conservative government has used its years in office to increase central government power and control.
Every chapter of this book contains examples of greater government intervention: in social security, health, education, housing and the personal social services.
The increased regulation of the poor and unemployed in the social security system and in the sphere of training has been particularly marked.
What is sometimes not appreciated is that privatisation of provision and finance requires extra regulation.
No government can simply hand over services for vulnerable groups to a completely unregulated private sector, because the political repercussions of any abuse might be too serious and the reputation of private market provision might be damaged.
Gamble explains the increased intervention in a different way.
He argues that the twin objectives of the Conservative governments  of the 1980s have been the creation of a free economy and a strong state.
Intervention arises from attempts to restore the authority of the state and secure the compliance of other agencies and interests.
Gamble writes:
The problem for the Thatcher Government is that its own diagnosis of the crisis of state authority constantly impelled it towards intervention whether in the internal affairs of trade unions, the spending priorities of local authorities, the curricula of schools and universities, or the patterns of family behaviour.
This brings us to the final point in this section: the relationship between authority, the market and rights.
King, in an analysis similar to that of Gamble, argues that the New Right theories adopted by the Conservative government under Mrs Thatcher consist of two conflicting elements: a liberal element which emphasises freedom from state control, individualism and free markets and a conservative element which emphasises authority and order and the use of government to achieve these.
King argues that these two elements have combined in an attack upon the citizenship rights enshrined in the welfare state.
Gamble advances the same argument when he identifies the Conservative challenge to the social democratic concept of citizenship as an attempt to block the extension of equal civil, political and social rights to all citizens.
He argues that a central aim of Conservatism has been ‘to discredit the social democratic concept of universal citizenship rights, guaranteed and enforced through public agencies, and to replace it with a concept of citizenship rights achieved through property ownership and participation in markets’.
The notion among Conservatives that citizenship is based upon participation in free markets can be connected with consumption-sector theory, which claims that the main cleavages in British society, cutting across class divisions, are based upon consumption patterns.
Of particular significance is the distinction between those who obtain goods and services through the private market and those who are forced to rely upon publicly-provided services.
The split between the private and public sectors extends beyond consumption into employment, so that the use of private services and employment in the private sector are perceived as status enhancing, while the consumption of public sector goods and services and public-sector employment are perceived as stigmatising.
Defining  citizenship in terms of market participation is therefore one aspect of the Conservative government's aim of promoting inequality.
THE PROMOTION OF INEQUALITY
Income and wealth
The Conservatives have reversed the trends established in the 1970s of a narrowing of both income and wealth distribution.
Between 1973 and 1979 all but one of the five most highly paid occupational groups experienced a fall in their real incomes: members of the most highly paid occupational group of all (professional, management, administration) saw their incomes fall by 5 per cent in real terms.
The five lowest paid occupational groups all experienced rises of income in real terms ranging from 2 to 7 per cent.
Between 1979 and 1987 the median gross weekly earnings of the lowest decile of male manual workers increased by 92 per cent in cash terms, as compared with the highest paid non-manual decile whose incomes increased by 150 per cent.
Among women, the median increases for the lowest decile of manual workers was 97 per cent and for the highest non-manual decile it was 143 per cent.
A Labour Research Department survey of fifty-two large UK companies in 1988 found that in only twelve of them had the percentage pay increases awarded to the lowest paid workers exceeded those awarded to the highest paid director.
The Chairman of British Airways, for example, had received a pay increase of 117 per cent compared with the 6 per cent awarded to the company's lowest paid workers.
In nine other companies the top director had received an increase of 30 per cent or more.
Under the Conservatives, then, pay differentials have widened.
Dominic Byrne comments:
it is in the period since 1979 that the growth in pay inequality has been most dramatic.
Over that period the proportion of the British work-force falling below the Council of Europe's minimum ‘decency threshold’ for wages increased from 36 per cent to 42.3 per cent…
Around 8.8 million workers earned less, excluding overtime, than the Council of Europe level.
Byrne argues that the greater disparities in income result from a combination of a laissez faire approach to the wages of the more highly paid and a deliberate policy of ‘driving down the wages of the  lower paid’.
Policies aimed at reducing the wages of the lower paid have included:
1.
The curtailment of employment rights.
2.
Tile weakening of the trade unions.
3.
The use of the New Workers' Scheme (discontinued in 1989) which subsidised employers who agreed to take on young workers at low rates of pay and the similar effect of the Jobstart Scheme for the long term unemployed.
4.
The prohibition of fair wages clauses in contracts awarded by public bodies to outside companies.
5.
Reducing the protection offered by wages councils.
Those dependent on state benefits have fared particularly badly during the 1980s, eligibility conditions having been made more stringent and the rates of many of the benefits having been cut.
The House of Commons Social Services Committee has reported on the operation of the first twelve months of the new social security system.
It calculated that single people had lost up to £8.84 a week and that single parents, childless couples and elderly people had lost substantially.
A study published by the National Association of Citizens' Advice Bureaux revealed that 80 per cent of the claimants seen by the bureaux were worse off as a consequence of the new system.
The Social Services Committee said that couples with children had gained marginally.
However, this conclusion was based solely on a comparison of income support levels with supplementary benefit rates.
When other changes are taken into account couples with children are also seen to be considerably worse off.
Particularly significant to families with children has been the loss of single payments and their replacement by loans.
It is alarming that families with children who accept a social fund loan have to try to make ends meet on 85 per cent of their normal income support entitlement.
Furthermore, all families on income support have to pay 20 per cent of the community charge and the whole of their water charges, and although the rates of income support include an allowance to cover the community charge payment, it is quite insufficient to compensate for the extra expenditure.
Housing benefit has also been drastically cut: many claimants have lost entitlement altogether and the majority of those still in receipt of benefit are worse off.
Families have also suffered as a consequence of the freezing of child benefit for three years in succession and the greater emphasis being placed upon means-tested family credit.
This can be seen as one example of a greater reliance on means tests throughout the whole of the social security system.
Between 1979/80 and 1988/89 the number of people in receipt of supplementary benefit/income support increased from just under 3 million to 4.9 million.
As a proportion of average earnings, the value of the benefit has declined steadily since 1979.
Supplementary benefit for a couple with two children aged 6 and 8 was equivalent to 51.1 per cent of average weekly earnings in April 1979.
In April 1987 supplementary benefit for the same family equalled 43 per cent of average earnings, and in April 1988 the level of income support available to this family amounted to only 37.3 per cent of earnings.
Research conducted by a team at Bristol University asked a sample of the population in London what weekly income they thought was necessary to stay out of poverty.
The incomes thought to be needed exceeded the amounts available under the social security system by 61 per cent.
A separate survey by the same group identified a ‘threshold income’ below which multiple deprivation commonly occurred.
The threshold for childless couples under pensionable age was 57 per cent above income support levels.
For couples with children the threshold income was 151 per cent of income support payments, and for single parents severe deprivation occurred when levels of income fell below 168 per cent of the amounts available from income support.
Over the last ten years the gap between benefits and wages has widened and the new social security system has served only to heighten the disparity.
It is not surprising, therefore, to find multiple deprivation among benefit recipients-deprivation in terms of health, education, housing, diet, clothing and participation in community activities.
Bradshaw and Morgan demonstrate that children whose parents are in receipt of supplementary benefit suffer from deficiencies of iron and calcium and are below a basic clothing standard.
The new benefit system, then, has considerably worsened the position of the poor and widened the gulf between those on benefit and those in receipt of wages.
Income inequalities among those in  employment have been widened by inequitable wages policies, but  even more important than wages policies as a means of promoting inequality have been changes in the tax system.
John Hills has produced an excellent guide to the workings of the fiscal system and most of the statistics quoted here are drawn from that source.
Hills points out that the government has failed in its stated aim of reducing the level of taxation.
In its first three years in office tax revenues from all sources increased as a proportion of national income .
Between 1982/83 and 1984/85 the level of taxation remained relatively stable.
Between 1984/85 and 1988/89 the tax ratio fell very slightly, but in April 1989 it was still higher than it had been when the Conservatives took office.
What has happened is that the tax system has become less progressive, the changes having benefited those on high incomes who now surrender a smaller proportion of their earnings in the form of tax.
Four sets of changes have contributed to this:
1.
Income tax: the basic rate of tax has been reduced from 33 per cent to 25 per cent, the top rate of tax has been reduced from 83 per cent to 40 per cent and investment is now treated more favourably following the removal of the investment income surcharge.
Since April 1990 married women have been taxed separately from their husbands, and Hills calculates that this benefits mainly those with high earnings or investment income.
Several concessions have been introduced which allow the better off to avoid their full tax liability.
Notable among these are the Business Expansion Scheme, personal equity plans and the halving of stamp duty on share transactions.
2.
Value Added Tax (VAT) has been greatly increased.
Although VAT is slightly progressive, it is less progressive than income tax.
Thus, the policy followed by the Conservative government of reducing income tax and increasing VAT necessarily favours the better off.
3.
National Insurance Contributions (a form of income tax) have been increased.
The contributions are levied on earnings but not on investment income.
4.
In 1989 in Scotland and in 1990 in England and Wales the wholly regressive community charge replaced the less regressive rates.
Hills sums up the combined effect of the tax and benefit changes since 1979:
There has been…a major redistribution from those on low incomes to the better off…
Overall, the bottom 60% of the income distribution has lost, while the top 30% — especially the top 10% — has gained…
The losses for the bottom 50% average out at nearly £8.50 per family…while the top 10% have gained nearly £40 per family…the bottom half of the population has lost £6.6 billion, of which £5.6 billion has gone to the top 10%; indeed –4.–billion has gone to the top 5%.
So much, then, for changes in the distribution of income.
Table 8.1 indicates that the Conservatives have also virtually halted the trends of the 1970s in relation to wealth.
In 1971 the most wealthy 1 per cent of the population owned 31 per cent of marketable wealth, but by 1979 this proportion had fallen to 22 per cent.
Between 1979 and 1985 the proportion of wealth, held by the most wealthy 1 per cent fell by only 2 per cent.
The proportion of marketable wealth owned by the most wealthy 10 per cent of the population of fell from 65 per cent in 1971 to 54 per cent in 1979, but there was no change at all between 1979 and 1985.
Changes in income distribution in favour of the rich and the more generous treatment of investment income have an effect upon capital accumulation and investment.
To some extent this is what has been happening in Britain in the 1980s.
Two other changes, however, have had a more direct impact upon the accumulation and retention of wealth by a small proportion of the population.
An inheritance tax has replaced the capital transfer tax.
The level at which tax becomes payable has risen from £25,000 to £110,000 and the rates have been changed from an amount varying between 10 per cent and 75 per cent, to a single rate of 40 per cent .
This clearly benefits those inheriting the largest sums.
No tax is payable on any gifts made seven years before death, an exemption that did  not apply to capital transfer tax.
Several concessions have also been made in relation to capital gains tax: the amount of gain allowed tax free has risen from £1,000 a year to £5,000 a year and this allowance now applies to all gains, not just small gains as was formerly the case.
These changes again work to the advantage of the better-off, but a change which has the opposite effect is the replacement of the flat rate tax of 30 per cent with the individual's top rate of tax (either 25 per cent or 40 per cent).
Nearly all of the changes made by the Conservatives during the 1980s with respect to wages, benefits, taxation and the treatment of wealth have worked in the same direction.
They have benefited the rich at the expense of the poor, and Britain in 1990 is a much more unequal society than it was in 1979.
It is also a more deeply divided society.
We have so far looked at divisions of income and wealth.
In very broad terms these may be thought of as divisions based on social class.
Cutting across these are several other divisions, and below we look at four of the more important, each of which became more pronounced during the 1980s: geographical divisions, labour market divisions, racial divisions and gender divisions.
Taken together, they constitute a quite dramatic increase in inequality.
Geographical inequalities
It has become a commonplace of political and economic discourse to talk about a North-South divide.
Lewis and Townsend describe the North-South divide as ‘one of the distinctive characteristics of Britain in the 1980s’.
There is general agreement among the writers on this subject and in the media that the divergence between North and South has widened during the period of Conservative government.
The evidence to support this conclusion is substantial and convincing.
It cannot be dealt with fully here for lack of space but an attempt will be made to summarise the main features and dimensions of the divide.
During the 1980s population growth has been very uneven; in the most general terms there has been a decline of population in the less prosperous North and gains in the prosperous South.
This generalisation conceals wide variation, however, the heaviest losses having been in Merseyside, Manchester, Cleveland and parts of Scotland.
Greater London itself has also lost population.
The most significant gainers have been Berkshire, Buckinghamshire, East Anglia, Hampshire, parts of South-west England and the South coast generally.
All of these areas showing substantial growth lie south of a line drawn from the Wash to the Severn.
There are, however, some exceptions.
For example, the rural areas of North Yorkshire and parts of Cumbria have experienced population increases as did the area around Aberdeen during the North Sea oil boom.
To a large extent population changes reflect changes in prosperity and employment opportunities.
Areas with the highest levels of unemployment are likely to be net exporters of population.
The North has been hit by changes in the British economy; changes which were already apparent before the Conservatives took office, but which accelerated during the 1980s.
In particular, there has been a rapid erosion of Britain's manufacturing base.
Between March 1979 and March 1989 employment in manufacturing fell by 28.1 per cent.
Employment in metal manufacturing and chemicals fell by 40.8 per cent.
During the same period employment in the service sector increased by 14.5 per cent.
New, high-technology industries have prospered (especially during the late 1980s) and there has been an expansion of small businesses.
Service and high technology industries and new small businesses are concentrated in the South, whereas the traditional industrial base of the North has been in manufacturing.
In the light of these structural changes, it is not surprising to find regional variations in unemployment.
This is illustrated in Table 8.2.
In both of the months shown unemployment in Northern Ireland, the North, the North-west, Yorkshire and Humberside, Wales and Scotland was very much higher than it was in the South-east, East Anglia and the South-west.
It is interesting to note that as unemployment fell from 14 per cent in January 1986 to 7 per cent in January 1989 the disparities between the regions actually increased.
In other words, unemployment has fallen most sharply in those areas where it was least severe.
Regional statistics, however, conceal local differences.
Winyard reports, for example, that at the beginning of 1987, when the UK unemployment rate was 11.9 per cent , fifty-one ‘travel-to-work areas’ had unemployment rates of more than 20 per cent .
Winyard notes that, ‘Not only is unemployment far higher in the North, but also people stay on the register for longer periods.’
Comparing 1979 with 1986 Lewis and Townsend reveal widening differences between the North and the South in terms of per capita GDP, disposable income and consumer expenditure.
In 1979 per capita GDP was 7.8 per cent higher in the South than in the North.
By 1986 the gap had grown to 20.5 per cent.
The disparity in per capita personal disposable income in favour of the South widened from 11.8 per cent in 1979 to 15 per cent in 1986.
In 1979 people in the South spent 12.5 per cent more per head than people in the North, but by 1986 the difference had widened to 23.4 per cent.
Share ownership is also unevenly spread with a heavy concentration in the South-east and much lower levels in the North.
Most of the evidence produced in this section deals with variations between the North and the South and most of the statistics refer to regions.
However, it would be a mistake to assume that the differences within regions are any less significant.
Poverty and deprivation are by no means confined to the North.
Parts of Bristol and London, for example, are extremely deprived with high unemployment, poor housing, poor schools, poor health facilities and strained police/community relationships.
Similarly, there are pockets of prosperity, some of them quite extensive, in the North.
Furthermore, from a financial point of view it may be worse to be unemployed in London than in Manchester because of the differences in the cost of living.
Labour market divisions
The major division here, of course, is between the employed and the unemployed.
The first two Conservative governments presided over an economy which produced ever increasing numbers of unemployed people.
In January 1983 the figure passed the 3 million mark, reaching a peak in August 1986 and then declining slowly but steadily.
In October 1989, however, there were still 986,000 more people unemployed than there had been in October 1979.
A word of warning must be given about unemployment statistics: the official figures are totally unreliable as a means of gauging changes in the level of unemployment.
Since 1982 the government has made twenty-nine changes to the way in which the unemployed are counted, each change resulting in a downward shift in the number said to be unemployed.
Fortunately, in 1983 the Unemployment Unit began to produce statistics based on the pre-1982 system of counting, and these give a much more accurate picture of changes in the level of unemployment.
The discrepancy between the official figures and those produced by the Unemployment Unit varies, but is usually between 500,000 and 700,000.
In October 1989, for example, the Unemployment Unit figure exceeded the Department of Employment count by more than 589,000.
Table 8.3 shows the progress of unemployment giving both the official figures (DE Count) and the Unemployment Unit figures (UU Index).
As unemployment grew the number of long-term unemployed also expanded.
The official definition of long-term unemployment is more than twelve months without work, although employment training, which is designed for the long term unemployed, requires entrants to have been on the register for more than six months.
Although a short period of unemployment may be unwelcome and will certainly cause hardship, it is not necessarily disastrous.
However, how long does a period of unemployment have to be before people become disheartened and experience a loss of self worth?
As the period of unemployment lengthens, financial reserves (if any) are exhausted and increasing debt may follow.
Eventually entitlement to unemployment benefit ceases and means-tested income support is then the only alternative.
Between 1979 and 1987 the proportion of unemployed men who received supplementary benefit alone increased from 43 per cent to 61.4 per cent.
In January 1986 long-term unemployment stood at 1,371,632.
Since 1986 the number has fallen steadily, declining to 821,419 by January 1989.
Although this is still far too many it represents a substantial improvement.
However, the picture is less optimistic when the figures are looked at a little more closely.
Some of those classified as short-term unemployed may be intermittently unemployed and this may be just as demoralising as a long spell off work.
Another point to bear in mind is that in 1988 only 35 per cent of the 400,000 new jobs created were full time: 34 per cent were part time and 31 per cent were in self employment.
Furthermore, the Government Actuary's financial estimates predict a rise in unemployment during 1990/91 of 80,000.
This could very well be an underestimate since the government's spending plans are based on an estimated growth in the economy of only 1.25 per cent in 1990/91.
This includes the proceeds from North Sea oil, and if oil is excluded then the rate of growth is reduced to only 0.75 per cent.
Christopher Huhne says that this ‘would represent the lowest growth rate since 1981 and is almost certain to lead to a rise in unemployment’.
The Unemployment Unit shares this view.
The Conservatives have created greater cleavages between the employed and the unemployed.
Apart from the reductions in benefits noted earlier, the treatment of the unemployed has become increasingly demeaning.
Several factors have contributed to this, but the government's attitude to the unemployed has been the most crucial factor.
Norman  Tebbit's advice to the unemployed to ‘get  on their bikes’ to look for work implied that many people were voluntarily unemployed and this statement was probably symptomatic of the government's whole approach to unemployment.
Blaming the victim has always been popular with governments anxious to shrug off the blame attaching to themselves but the Conservative governments of the last decade have been particularly prone to this.
Another aspect of the disregard for the feelings of the unemployed was the reduction in the number of mainstream staff in DSS offices at a time when the number of claimants was rising.
Putting greater pressure on DSS staff increases the possibility of mistakes and makes incivility and friction more likely.
Staff cuts have also occurred in Jobcentres and there have been repeated threats of privatisation.
The cuts in mainstream staff in DSS offices and Jobcentres have been accompanied by an expansion of those staff concerned with regulating the poor.
The DSS established Specialist Claims Control Teams in 1980 and it has appointed over 1,000 additional social security investigators.
In 1983 the Department of Employment set up Regional Benefit Investigation Teams.
The government has imposed increasingly stringent tests on those in receipt of unemployment benefit.
Restart interviews are now automatic and compulsory after each six months of unemployment.
To the availability-for-work test has been added the actively-seeking-work test in which the unemployed person has to demonstrate and provide evidence that he or she has taken all necessary steps to obtain employment.
After a certain period a job cannot be refused on the grounds of low pay or travelling distance from home.
A Claimant Advisor may offer a Restart interviewee a place on the Employment Training Scheme.
In a purely formal sense such an offer does not have to be accepted, but a refusal will contribute to the impression a Claimant Advisor forms of the claimant's seriousness in seeking work.
The Employment Training Scheme is a classic example of blaming the victim.
The Unemployment Unit says of it:
The Government are changing the terms of the debate about long term unemployment.
By concentrating public attention on the training, employability and motivation of the unemployed, the Government hope to divert attention both from poverty and personal hardship experienced by claimants and away from the failure of their economic policies to create enough jobs.
The Unit is highly critical of the White Paper, ‘Training for Employment’ which claims that the long-term unemployed share a combination of negative characteristics such as: lack of skills and motivation; inappropriate skills; problems of numeracy and literacy; lack of qualifications; ignorance of ‘in-work’benefits; unrealistic expectations of pay levels; lack of flexibility and adaptability and dependence on state benefits.
It appears that the unemployed are segmented into two groups each of which is accorded different treatment: those who have been unemployed for more than six months and those who have not.
The second group may be further divided into two segments: those for whom the present unemployment is a single episode and those who are intermittently unemployed.
The notion of segmentation is useful in identifying different categories among the unemployed, but it also has a wider usefulness in analysing cleavages in the labour market generally.
This is not the place to explore the subtleties of dual or segmented labour market theories.
However, the idea that there are two or more sectors or segments in the labour market has some relevance for the present discussion.
The simplest variant of the theory is to split the labour market into two sectors.
One sector is composed of trained, skilled workers with stable employment, good working conditions, opportunities for advancement and for further training and with good pay.
The secondary sector consists of low-paid, largely unskilled or semi-skilled workers with poor working conditions, little or no job security and no chances of promotion.
A high proportion of these workers may be part time.
It is this sector that has suffered most from the low pay strategies of the Conservatives and from unemployment.
It is the same workers in the public sector who have had their employment privatised and further marginalised.
Segmented labour market theories help to explain the disadvantaged position of women and ethnic minorities in employment, and it is to these groups that we now turn.
It should be noted that the purpose is not to discuss the various dimensions of inequality affecting women and minority groups.
What needs to be considered is whether these groups are better or worse off as a result of ten years of Conservative rule.
Have inequalities of gender and race been widened or narrowed?
Gender inequalities
Writing in 1987, Glendinning says that ‘women, of all ages have borne much of the brunt of the increasing poverty and social inequality of the last eight years’.
I would agree with this view.
Although there have been a few gains, these have been outweighed by the losses.
The gains can be divided into four categories:
1.
There is now a greater degree of formal equality within the social security system.
For example, when a couple claim income support they can choose whether the man or the woman is to make the claim.
2.
The law against sex discrimination was strengthened by the Sex Discrimination Act of 1986 which removed the restrictions on the hours women could work, allowing both night work and shift work, and gave women the right to work until the same age as their male colleagues.
The Employment Act of 1989 further extended equal employment opportunities for women and removed restrictions on the types of employment available to them.
3.
The Job Training Scheme has been replaced by Employment Training which has better provision for married women.
There are 15,000 places for married women who do not qualify for benefit in their own right.
This is something of a doubtful privilege since such women receive only £10 a week.
One good feature of the scheme is that single parents are entitled to child care payments, although the benefit of this development is reduced by the exclusion of lone mothers with children below school age.
4.
As from April 1990 husbands and wives will be taxed separately.
This is certainly less sexist, but the married couple's allowance goes to the man unless he has insufficient income to benefit from it.
It is difficult to be certain of the impact of unemployment upon women.
Figures relating to female unemployment are unreliable and there is substantial under-recording.
It is probably the case that women have not been so seriously affected by long-term unemployment as have men in comparable occupations.
However, many women are forced into part time, low-grade jobs — more often than not in the public sector.
As Table 8.4 demonstrates, between 1985 and 1987 some 60 per cent of all women of  working age were in employment with 31 per cent working full time and 24 per cent part time.
Among men of working age, 78 per cent were in employment with 63 per cent working full time and 2 per cent part time.
Part-time employees have fewer rights than those in full time work and their work is less secure.
Full time work is also very often the passport to various forms of occupational welfare such as pension rights, private health insurance, subsidised meals and paid holidays.
In 1987 31 per cent of the female workforce worked in the public sector as compared with 21 per cent of males.
In 1988 slightly more than 82 per cent of employed women worked in service industries as compared with 57.5 per cent of employed men.
Most of the public sector and service industry jobs taken by women are in cleaning, catering and laundry work.
In spite of equal pay legislation women have continued to be paid less than men.
In 1988 women's average gross hourly earnings represented 74.9 per cent of men's earnings, which is slightly down on the peak of 75.5 per cent in 1977 but is an improvement on the 1985 figure of 73.9 per cent.
These are not dramatic changes, but one might have hoped that Britain's first woman Prime Minister would have taken a tougher line on women's pay.
The reduction of wages council protection will affect women's earnings since 75 per cent of the labour force in the industries concerned are women.
Changes to the social security system have reduced the living standards of the majority of recipients; but, since women are the main users of the system, they are the main losers.
Women are  disproportionately represented among income support recipients for two main reasons: first, there is a high proportion of elderly and disabled women in the population; and second, lone parenthood is increasing and the proportion of lone parents dependent upon state benefits has also increased (by 1986 about 40 per cent of the income of lone parents came from state benefits).
Lone parents, 91 per cent of whom are women, are among the poorest members of the population.
The replacement of single payments by social fund loans will also have a disproportionate effect on women in general and on lone parents in particular.
Women are also being hit by the changes in child benefit and family credit.
As mentioned elsewhere, child benefit has been frozen for three consecutive years.
All families with children are disadvantaged by this, but, since child benefit is nearly always paid to women, it is they who are most disadvantaged.
Increasingly, poor families are forced to rely upon family credit, which is of course means-tested and to make matters worse, free school meals have been withdrawn from over 500,000 children whose parents are on family credit.
An allowance is made for this, but it is insufficient to pay for a school meal.
Two other benefit changes directly affecting women are the reduction in widows' benefits and the replacement of the universal maternity grant by statutory maternity pay, administered by employers, which is subject to contribution conditions and liable for tax.
The harsher conditions attaching to the receipt of unemployment benefit affect all claimants, but the consequences for women are particularly unfortunate.
The available for work condition is interpreted to mean immediately available, and women have to demonstrate that they have made adequate arrangements for the care of dependants.
Furthermore, they may have to accept work further away from home than they are accustomed to travelling, which may in itself present child care problems.
The actively seeking work condition also discriminates against women who, because they are usually responsible for child care and domestic work, have less time to devote to formal jobsearch.
This raises the whole question of responsibility for care.
The bulk of domiciliary care is already provided by families, but Mrs Thatcher has made it plain that she expects families to take on extra responsibilities, and this is also apparent in the White Paper on Caring for People .
Janet Finch writes:
In the 1980s, the Conservative government has become increasingly explicit about its desire to encourage families to take care of their members.
This is seen as part of its policy to make citizens more self-reliant, and less prone to look to the state for financial and practical support when they are out of work, chronically sick, elderly and infirm and so on.
This issue is discussed more fully in Chapter 7 where it is argued, with no claim to originality, that community care usually means family care and family care means care by women.
It also argues that the Conservative emphasis on family care ignores much recent research indicating that social changes are restricting the family's capacity to care.
Not the least among these changes is the greater participation of women in the labour market and their increased career expectations.
Stereotyped gender roles are changing only slowly and women still take on most of the caring and domiciliary tasks, which has fairly obvious implications for equal opportunities policies.
The government has failed to provide adequate day-care facilities for children to enable women to go out to work.
Increasingly, firms are making their own provision, but where this is not available, women have to rely on friends, relatives and informal self help arrangements, or else pay for private care.
Racial inequalities
It must be stressed again that this section of the chapter does not attempt to look at the level and nature of racial discrimination in Britain.
It is concerned with the effects of Conservative policies since 1979.
In this section I shall use the term black or ethnic minority to refer to all non-white groups.
I recognise the dangers of lumping together people with quite different cultures but the problems I am concerned with are experienced by members of all minorities in Britain.
It also has to be remembered that all too often it is the black population that is seen as the problem, when the real problem is society's treatment of black people: it is not black people who need to change, but the discriminatory attitudes and practices used against them.
The final point by way of preface is that it is a mistake to assume that all black people are deprived.
In one sense only is this true: all black people are discriminated against no matter what positions they occupy.
I shall concentrate upon deprivation among black people because this is where the government's policies have been most damaging.
The section on gender began with a summary of some of the gains made by women.
I would have been pleased to start this section in similar fashion, but could find very little evidence of improvements.
As Hilary Arnott says:
To look at the black experience in Britain since 1979 is to expose the effects of Conservative policies at their harshest, with few if any palliative gestures to hide the stark reality of life for deprived minorities in the 1980s.
It is not so much that the Conservatives have deliberately introduced racist policies as that they have ignored the harmful impact of their policies on ethnic minorities.
When problems have arisen such as in the urban riots they have explained them away as resulting from a lack of proper parental and school discipline (blaming the victim again) or as the work of political agitators.
Ethnic minorities, over represented as they are in the secondary labour market referred to earlier, are forced to take jobs (frequently in the service sector) with low pay, poor working conditions, no training and little security.
According to de Sousa, similar discrimination occurs in the Youth Training Scheme (YTS):
The Youth Training Scheme has, from its inception, been riddled with racist practices.
The abuses and discrimination which Black (Afro-Caribbean and Asian) workers face in the labour market are replicated in every aspect of the scheme.
From the moment they seek training — whether voluntarily or because of benefit withdrawal — to the day they leave.
Black trainees are subject to considerably worse conditions than their white colleagues.
The Training Agency frequently claims that it insists on non-discriminatory practices, but ‘all the evidence points to widespread exclusion of Black trainees from prestigious employer based schemes…most likely to lead to full-time jobs, top-ups to the allowance and higher quality training’.
Just under 30 per cent of black trainees obtain work as opposed to just over 45 per cent of their white counterparts.
De Sousa blames the Training Agency, the Careers Service and the YTS schemes for this situation.
As is demonstrated in Table 8.5, black people suffer disproportionately from unemployment.
It will be observed that the disparities occur at different levels of overall unemployment, and that all ethnic minorities experienced higher rates of unemployment than the white population in the 1980s.
The plight of the Pakistani/Bangladeshi  minority is particularly serious with unemployment rates almost three times the level of those among the white population.
Cuts in social security benefits have important implications for ethnic minorities because of their higher rates of unemployment.
There have also been successive attempts throughout the 1980s to restrict the benefits available to immigrants.
The latest of these was contained in the Immigration Act of 1988, which requires anyone wishing to bring their family to this country to demonstrate that there is support and accommodation available and that the marriage was not entered into primarily for immigration reasons.
The purpose of the new rules is to ensure that there is no recourse to social security benefits or access to housing.
Because of low incomes, high unemployment and plain discrimination black people are forced into the worst housing.
They have therefore suffered more than most from cuts in the housing programme.
They have also been among the major victims of the failure of the government's inner city policies.
The inner cities have been hit by reductions in rate support grant and by rate capping.
The position will worsen once the full effects of the poll tax and the revenue support grant are felt after the expiry of the four-year transitional period.
CENTRALISATION AND DEMOCRACY
Mrs Thatcher has talked at length and often about popular capitalism and consumer choice, and she has also said much about  freedom and democracy.
Independence, self help and active citizenship have all been praised.
Yet throughout her period of office there has been a strong authoritarian tendency.
Mrs Thatcher prides herself on her strong and determined leadership, but this frequently means overruling colleagues and ignoring advice.
However, Mrs Thatcher's personal style is less important than the policies she has supported, some of which are distinctly anti-democratic.
The government's disregard for democratic processes is seen in the voting procedures originally proposed and eventually adopted for opting out in housing and education.
The 1988 Housing Act, as we have seen, offered tenants the opportunity to opt out of local authority control.
An election would be held to decide the final outcome, but quite astonishingly the government decreed that abstentions would count as ‘yes’ votes.
In education, schools were given a similar opportunity to opt out of local government control.
Again, an election would decide the outcome, but a simple majority of those voting (as opposed to those on the register ) was all that was required.
There was intense opposition to these proposals but the only concession made in both instances was to require a second ballot if less than 50 per cent of those entitled to vote did so.
The government clearly wished to tilt the balance in favour of opting out.
In the 1980s the powers of the central state were considerably enhanced as the practice of discussion with affected parties and major interests was abandoned.
The government confronted opposition and frequently overcame it, and the extra powers given to ministers — especially in education and housing and potentially in the personal social services — were extensive.
Centralisation gained considerable impetus from the government's attack on local authorities which, as we saw in Chapter 2, has been one of the major features of Conservative policy.
The means used to emasculate local government have been varied.
Local authorities have been forced to sell the best of their housing stock into owner occupation, and to agree to the transfer of houses remaining in the rented sector to alternative landlords.
They have also lost houses to Housing Action Trusts and been forced to raise the rents of the houses still within their control.
Local authorities' ability to plan and develop a co-ordinated housing policy has been curtailed.
Council housing is rapidly becoming a residual service for  specific categories of clients: the poor, the unemployed, the elderly and the disabled.
Inner city initiatives have demonstrated the extent of the government's contempt for local government.
There has been a heavy reliance on private market initiatives forcing local government out, and the Urban Development Corporations, where they exist, have virtually supplanted local authorities as planning authorities.
The Metropolitan County Councils, the Greater London Council and the Inner London Education Authority have all been abolished.
The main reason for this abolition was their control by Labour councils and their opposition to government policies.
Local education authorities have lost their polytechnics.
In the school system we have the possibility of schools opting out, although by 1990 there had been no rush to do so.
The city technology colleges, outside local authority control, have also failed to develop at the speed the government hoped for.
Nevertheless, the policies are in place and resources are being made available.
Local authorities are to retain overall control of community care services, but they are to be responsible for planning, finance and regulation rather than direct provision.
Local government was allocated these responsibilities with great reluctance only after the government had explored every other possibility.
The government has met with less success than it had anticipated in its policy of compelling local authorities to put services out to competitive tender.
The 1988 Local  Government Act required competitive tendering, as from 1 April, 1989, in seven areas of service: school meals, other catering, refuse collection, street cleaning, building cleaning, grounds maintenance and vehicle maintenance.
A report on the first three months of the system claimed that 77 per cent of contracts had been won by in-house tenders.
Throughout the 1980s the government made attempt after attempt to control and curb local government expenditure through cash limits, rate-capping and grant withdrawal.
How successful have they been?
As Table 8.6 indicates, between 1980/81 and 1987/88 there were two years in which reductions in expenditure in real terms were achieved.
The overall trend, however, has been upward — an increase in real terms of 11.6 per cent.
At first glance it appears that the government has not been particularly successful in bringing about reductions in local government expenditure.
However, since  1983/84 local government expenditure has fallen slightly as a proportion of GNP and one would question the usefulness of the Retail Price Index as a measure of inflation within local government.
Furthermore, many authorities, had they been given the option, would have chosen to spend more on services.
Authorities that have been rate-capped and lost grant have had to cut services or put off planned improvements.
Nevertheless, the government takes the view that local authority expenditure has not been effectively controlled, and one of the main purposes of the community charge is to try to remedy this.
In his Autumn Statement in November 1989 the Chancellor of the Exchequer accused local authorities of ‘massive overspending’, and held them responsible for the fact that public expenditure for 1989/90 was expected to be £1 billion higher than originally planned.
The Chancellor said: ‘As the House knows, new arrangements for the finance and control of local authority expenditure in England and Wales are being introduced on 1 April 1990.
This year's outturn shows how necessary these new measures are.’
A strong and independent system of local government is a necessary feature of a democratic system of government.
It constitutes a restraint on excessive centralisation.
Since the Conservatives came to power they have considerably weakened local government and greater centralisation has been the consequence.
The 1980s have also seen infringements, actual or potential, of civil liberties.
The measures include the withdrawal of the right to  belong to a trade union at GCHQ; the drawing up of a poll tax register; and, under the Local Government Act of 1989, the restrictions placed on the political activities of all local government officers earning over £13,500 a year.
The government has been obsessed with secrecy as is indicated by the prosecution of Clive Ponting and Sarah Tisdall over the disclosure of material covered by the Official Secrets Act and by their efforts to prevent the publication of Spycatcher by Peter Wright.
The government has spent more heavily than its predecessors on promoting its policies.
The bill for the privatisation of public sector companies amounted to £2.4 billion, White Papers have become glossy booklets, and the expenditure of the Central Office of Information increased from £67 million in 1985/6 to £195 million in 1988/9.
At the same time the government has made great efforts to centralise the control of information.
They have also tried on more than one occasion to influence the editorial policy of the BBC and have complained of biased reporting.
In 1989 government information and press officers claimed that they were under considerable pressure from ministers to give a much more party political slant to press releases and general information for public consumption.