

SIX BOX
Ideas for Sixes to try together
STOCKING CARD
Trace this Christmas stocking on to brightly coloured paper.
Stick a piece of Christmas tape across the top of the stocking, cut it out and stick it to a folded piece of card.
Leave the top free.
Trace the teddy bear.
Cut him out and slip him into the stocking so he peeps out of the top.
Write a message inside the card.
Across
1
A Christmas theatre show.
6
Pulled at Christmas.
7
December 25 is Christmas…
8
Born on Christmas Day.
9
Helps Santa in his grotto.
11
They are hung up on Christmas Eve.
Down
2
Eaten at Christmas.
3
Has a red berry.
4
Contains greetings.
5
Given at Christmas.
10
The Yule…
Now take the 11 outlined letters and unscramble them to find something else we have at Christmas.
CHRISTMAS LETTERS
Write the letters of CHRISTMAS down on a sheet of paper, then try to think of as many things as possible to do with the Christmas season which begin with each of the letters.
For example: C for card or cracker, S for saviour or stocking and so on .
THE NATIVITY STORY
Act out the story of Jesus' birth in your Six.
Curtains and towels make good costumes and you could use a doll as the baby Jesus.
Perhaps you could have taped carols as background music to a mime?
If you think your acting is good enough, perform the play for your Pack.
DECORATION
Trace this flower shape and cut out several in bright colours.
Glue two contrasting colours together as shown and use Blu-tack to stick them to walls and doors.
MARZIPAN SWEETS
Roll small pieces of marzipan (with clean fingers) into banana, apple or orange shapes.
Colour with tiny drops of food dye.
Pack assortments of the sweets into small box lids lined with tissue paper.
Cover with cling film to make lovely gifts.
party games
If you're planning a Christmas party you'll need some good games to play.
Why not try some of these?
Horns
One player is chosen to call out, ‘Horns, horns, bull's horns,’ and everyone taps their knees and puts their fingers to their forehead to make horns at the animal's name.
When an animal that has no horns is named, everyone keeps their fingers down.
Anyone getting it wrong drops out of the game.
Blind Man's Buff
Everyone sits in a circle with one person sitting blindfolded in the middle.
All the other players then change places.
The blindfolded Brownie points to someone and asks them to make a noise.
She has to try and identify the Brownie making the noise.
Musical Islands
Place sheets of newspaper around the room on the floor.
All the players walk around the room while the music is being played.
When it stops, everyone rushes to stand on the newspapers.
Anyone not on a sheet of paper or who steps off, drops out of the game.
Take away a sheet of paper or fold one in half each time to make the game more difficult.
Twirl the Plate
Everyone sits in a circle with an unbreakable plate in the centre.
Each player is given a number.
Player one goes to the middle, spins the plate and calls out a number.
The person with that number must dash forward and try to catch the plate before it stops spinning.
If the plate falls the player must pay a forfeit.
Then the game continues with the player now in the middle calling out a different number.
Musical Freeze
Players stand around the room.
One person chooses a way everyone is to move — such as jumping, hopping, walking and so on.
When the music starts, Brownies move around the room.
As soon as the music stops everyone freezes.
Anyone who moves is out.
Balloon Burst
Each player ties a balloon to her ankle and holds a rolled up newspaper.
On the word ‘go’, everyone runs round the room trying to burst as many balloons as possible using only the newspapers.
When a player's balloon is burst she is out.
ExPeRiMeNt
Why do they put salt on icy roads?
In winter, workmen put a mixture of salt and grit on icy roads to stop cars skidding.
You probably know that the grit helps tyres to get a good grip on the road but what does the salt do?
This experiment will help you to find out.
You will need 
two identical drinking glasses
ice cubes
salt
First you need to crush the ice cubes.
The best way to do this is to wrap them in a thick layer of newspaper and hit them with a hammer.
Do this outside in case you make a mess.
Put equal amounts of ice in the two glasses and sprinkle two teaspoonfuls of salt over the ice in one glass.
Leave both glasses in the same place and keep an eye on them for about half an hour.
Which melts faster — the ice with the salt or the ice on its own?
You should find that the ice with salt melts more quickly because the salt helps ice to melt.
When workmen put salt on icy roads, the salt makes the ice melt and so the roads become safer for cars.
When you do this experiment you do three things to make sure it is a fair test.
Can you think what they are?
You use the same kind of glass, you put the same amount of ice in each glass and you leave them both in the same place (so that they are both at the same temperature).
If you wanted to melt ice quickly you would heat it.
Ice always needs heat to melt.
Where do you think the ice in your experiment gets heat from?
It wasn't salt.
The ice took heat from the air around it.
If the ice got warmer and melted, what happened to the air?
That's right, it got cooler.
Many years ago, before people had freezers, they made ice cream by using melting ice to cool the mixture.
The cream mixture was surrounded by ice and salt.
The salt made the ice melt, so the ice took the heat it needed to melt from the cream mixture which got colder until it froze and became ice cream.
You can try this yourself and see if it works.
Put plenty of crushed ice in the large container and (Fig 1) stir in several spoonfuls of salt.
Put some cream or milk into the small container and sweeten it with sugar.
Make a nest inside the ice and place and small container in it.
The ice should come well up the sides.
Cover both containers with a plate and leave in a cool place.
Check after half an hour.
Has the cream started to freeze?
Leave it for longer and you should find that it goes completely solid.
You've made your own ice cream!
If you use milk it might not go completely solid but you should still manage to get some lumps of frozen milk.
cream (or milk) with sugar added to sweeten it
plenty of crushed ice
ice
salt
two containers — one small and one large, such as a glass and a mixing bowl
a plate
You will need
Babushka
Here is Christmas story from Russia.
Once upon a time, in the heart of Russia, there lived an old peasant woman called Babushka.
She lived all by herself in a log cabin surrounded by a garden in which she grew vegetables.
Every time a tired traveller passed her cabin Babushka called, ‘Friend, stop and rest in my cabin,’ and the traveller did so.
One morning, when the forest was covered in snow, Babushka was outside busily clearing snow from her path when three travellers came up to her gate.
They were richly dressed and each one carried a leather bag.
‘Good day,’ said Babushka.
‘Can I help you?’
‘Indeed you can,’ said the first stranger.
‘We have travelled far and need good beds to sleep in and some food to eat.’
‘Then come inside,’ invited Babushka.
‘You are welcome to share what food I have and stay here.’
The men went into the little cabin and when they had eaten they thanked Babushka and went off to sleep.
While the strangers slept, Babushka baked some bread and thought about the men.
She wondered why they slept by day and travelled by night and decided to ask them when they woke up.
When the sun set, the travellers woke up and began to prepare for their journey.
‘Kind sirs,’ Babushka said, ‘why do you travel by night and sleep by day?
Surely it is hard to find your way in the dark?’
‘We are three kings who have travelled far from the lands of the east,’ replied the first man.
‘We are searching for the Christ Child,’ said the second king.
‘For many years we have been waiting for a mighty star to appear in the heavens and now it has.
We have been told that beneath that star the Christ Child will be born.’
‘We travel by night,’ said the third king, ‘so that we may follow the star and pay homage to the Christ Child.
We carry gifts of gold, frankincense and myrrh for the baby.’
‘Oh how I would like to go with you,’ said Babushka.
‘I have no rich things to give but I will take my black bread for they say it is the best in the whole world.’
‘Then come with us,’ urged the first king.
‘But we must leave now or we will lose sight of the star.’
‘I'm not ready,’ cried Babushka.
‘First I must clean my cabin.
Can't you wait a little longer?’
The kings shook their heads sadly saying that they could not wait even a moment longer.
They told the old woman to do her work and then hurry after them.
Babushka said she would do this and, waving goodbye to the kings, started to clean her cabin.
When she had finished, she wrapped her thick winter cloak around herself, picked up a basket of her bread and opened the cabin door.
But when she looked up at the sky she discovered that the star had gone.
Babushka had taken so long to clean her cabin that it was morning and the star no longer shone in the sky.
Even the kings' tracks had been covered by snow.
‘How silly I was,’ cried Babushka.
‘I should have left with the kings and forgotten my home.
Never mind, I will travel on.
There must be someone who has seen the kings and will tell me which way to go.’
So Babushka trudged through the snow, asking everyone she met if they had seen the kings.
But the answer was always the same: ‘No.’
Days turned into weeks and weeks turned into months.
Babushka grew tired and hungry and she looked in vain for the Christ Child.
One day she met a traveller sitting by the roadside.
He had not seen the kings but he told her of the baby who was born to be King in a nearby village called Bethlehem.
Babushka thanked the man and hurried into Bethlehem.
‘Where is the Christ Child?’ she asked a woman washing at the well.
The woman laughed.
‘If you believe that story you will believe anything.
But, if you want to know, the Child and his family have gone.
They stayed in a stable at the top of that hill.’
Babushka made her way up the hill to the stable.
It was empty except for an ox and ass who snorted and brayed a greeting.
‘Oh,’ sighed Babushka, ‘I am too late but I shall lay my black bread in the manager, then the Christ Child will know that I came.
I shall sleep here for the night and start home in the morning.’
Soon Babushka fell into a deep sleep only to be woken by a beautiful golden light which came from a far corner of the stable.
‘Babushka, Babushka come here,’ whispered a child's voice.
‘Who are you?’ cried Babushka in fright.
‘Do you not know?
You have been searching for me.
I am the Christ Child.’
‘Oh, I have waited so long to see you,’ said Babushka.
‘Then walk into my light, Babushka and let us hold hands,’ said the voice softly.
Babushka did as she was asked.
The next day, the villagers found Babushka dead in the straw, curled up with only an ox and an ass to watch over her.
But that is not quite the end of the story.
For every Christmas Eve, children all over Russia hang up their stockings.
And when they wake in the morning they find the stockings bulging with gifts.
Right at the bottom, wrapped in coloured paper, is a piece of black bread left by Babushka.
Just as she left bread for the Christ Child all those years ago.
BROWNIES ROUND THE WORLD
SWITZERLAND
Switzerland is a small mountainous country in Europe with no coastline at all.
Its neighbours are Italy, France, Germany and Austria.
The Swiss Father Christmas is called Saint Nicholas
Fact File
History
Switzerland is made up of 23 cantons.
These are small states with their own government and laws.
Three of these cantons (Uri Schwyz and Unterwalden) first joined together in 1291.
But the Swiss Confederation of all 23 cantons was only set up in 1848.
Since 1815 Switzerland has been a neutral country and at peace with everyone.
The Alps
High Alpine mountains, lakes and barren rocks cover over half of the country.
Wherever you go, even in the towns, you can see mountains and lakes.
In winter there is always the danger of an avalanche in the Alps.
‘Bannwalder’ or ‘protective forests’are planted on mountain slopes to stop the great rush of snow and protect the villages.
Tourism
The Swiss Alps attract visitors from all over the world.
They come for the winter sports and  the spectacular scenery.
In summer tourists can go rock climbing or walking.
Or just admire the brightly coloured Alpine flowers which are well adapted to the harsh Swiss winters.
Winter Sports
With so many mountains and so much snow, it's not surprising that the Swiss have become expert skiers.
Cross-country skiing is very popular and cable cars and ski lifts take the skiers up to the snow fields.
Other popular sports are tobogganing, skating, ice hockey and bob sleighing.
Money Matters
Since so much of the country is rocky mountain where nothing will grow, the Swiss have concentrated on developing their skills at making things.
They are famous for accurate watches (and cuckoo clocks), delicious cheeses and mouth-watering chocolate.
Switzerland is an international centre for banking and one of the richest countries in the world.
Most of its many banks are in Zurich.
This beautiful old city is the largest in the country.
Brownies
Swiss Brownies are called Little Bees.
They meet in packs called Hives and their Promise Badge is a silver bee.
Little Bees try to be like a bee.
Each girl has a card filled with different tests which she has to pass.
The tests are drawn in six-sided frames — just like the cells in a bee hive.
They include things like singing the national anthem, knowing the points of the compass, tying and addressing a parcel and knowing how to use a telephone.
Uniform
Little Bees wear a blue shirt and brown trousers.
Each Hive chooses its own coloured tie.
Promise
I promise to do my best to love God and my family, to follow the law of the Little Bees and do a good turn to somebody every day.
Promise badge
Law
The Little Bee thinks of others, keeps her eyes open, tells the truth and helps cheerfully.
Game
The Eagle and the Goats
One Brownie is the eagle and the others are goats grazing in a pasture.
The eagle swoops towards the goats with outstretched arms.
The goats try to guess who the eagle wants to attack and hide her in a circle.
If they are right, the eagle flies away.
If the goats are wrong, the eagle calls out the name of the player she is after.
The goats have to circle that Brownie before the eagle catches her and drags her back to her nest.
The game continues until all the goats except one have been caught.
She becomes the eagle next time.
Dancing Bear Collage
This dancing bear will make an original Christmas card for a special person.
Or you could make it into a picture for a baby or toddler to hang on their bedroom wall.
You will need
A piece of fabric 20cms x 26cms
A piece of thin white card 20cms x 26cms
A small piece of fabric 4cms x 4cms for bow
Thin brown or orange card for bear
A piece of thin coloured card 16cms x 22cms
4 paper fasteners
½m strong sewing thread
½m fine cord
1 toggle
Fabric glue
A black or brown felt tip pen
Sharp scissors
A piece of felt 2cms x 4cms
Glue
A needle
Scissors
INSTRUCTIONS
Frame
1
Press the fabric with an iron.
2
Glue the fabric to the white card by spreading a thin layer of glue over the surface of the card.
Lay the fabric exactly on top with the right side uppermost.
Gently smooth the fabric on to the card starting from the centre and then out towards the edges.
3
When dry, trim to 16cms x 22cms.
4
Measure a border 2cms in along all four sides to form a rectangle 12cms x 18cms.
5
Cut away the middle section (Fig 1).
Bear
1
Trace the bear shapes on to brown or orange card.
2
Carefully cut out all the pieces.
3
Trace or draw a face on the bear's head.
4
Mark the dots on the body, legs and arms.
5
Make small holes with a large needle through the dots.
6
Attach the arms and legs to the body by placing them in position under the body section and pushing paper fasteners through the holes.
7
Loosen the holes slightly by moving arms and legs up and down a few times.
8
Cut strong sewing thread into two pieces.
With a needle make small holes in the top of each arm.
Pass the thread from one arm to the other through the holes.
Knot, leaving the thread slightly slack to allow for movement (Fig 2).
Make a loop from one leg to the other in the same way (Fig 2).
9
Taking the length of cord, knot the top end around the centre of the arm loop.
10
Let the cord lie straight and knot again around the leg loop (Fig. 2).
11
Leave approximately 25cms hanging below the bear, attach the toggle and cut off any extra cord.
12
Glue the fabric for the bow on to a small piece of card, cut out and attach to the bear's neck by gluing the centre of the bow only.
13
Check that the bear's arms and legs move up and down freely when pulling the cord.
To assemble picture
1
Glue the frame on to a piece of coloured card, matching the edges and corners, then glue on to white card, again carefully matching the edges and corners.
2
Cut a piece of felt into two pieces 2cms x 2cms and glue one on top of the other on the back of the bear's head (Fig 3).
3
Attach the bear to the picture by gluing the felt pad in position on the card (Fig 4).
Bear shapes
GET CRACKING
This Christmas cracker is fun and easy to make and will look great as a Christmas tree decoration or as a gift for a friend.
YOU WILL NEED
an empty toilet roll
a rectangular piece of crêpe paper large enough to go around the tube once and have about 10cm to spare at each end
Scissors
Glue
Two small rubber bands
1
Roll the crêpe paper around the tube and glue the edge of the paper in place.
There should be 10cm of paper on either side (Fig 1).
2
Gather the crêpe paper at one end of the roll and secure it with an elastic band (Fig 2).
3
Put a hat, a joke and a small gift (see below) into the tube and secure the other end, as before, with an elastic band.
4
Decorate your cracker with bits of doily, tinsel, holly, silver foil or pictures cut from old Christmas cards and magazines.
You could also thinly spread some glue on the cracker and sprinkle some glitter powder over it.
Or, if the cracker is to be a gift for someone, write the person's name on it using a metallic pen (Fig 3).
PAPER HAT
A cracker wouldn't be the same without a paper hat inside so here's how to make one.
YOU WILL NEED
A measuring tape
A rectangular piece of tissue paper (see below for size)
Glue
Scissors
1
Measure your head with a tape measure and add 5cm for overlap.
Cut the tissue paper to this length.
The width will depend on how high you want the hat to be.
This hat should fit your Brownie and school friends.
If the hat is to be for a grown-up, measure a grown-up's head, again adding 5cms for overlap, and cut the tissue paper to this size.
2
Fold the tissue paper in half and stick the ends together by gluing the 5cm overlap (Fig 1).
3
Cut diagonally along one long edge of the tissue paper to make a crown shape (Fig 2).
Glue a Christmassy shape or picture to the front of the hat.
Fold the hat into a small bundle and put it inside the cracker.
FILLERS
Write your favourite joke or riddle on to a small piece of paper and put it inside your cracker.
Gifts for the cracker could include a badge, sweets, or a keyring.
Can you think of anything else?
DID YOU KNOW
Crackers have been a popular Christmas custom since the reign of Queen Victoria.
They were invented in the 1840s by Tom Smith, a London sweet shop owner.
BOOKSHELF
THE CHRISTMAS MOUSE by Robin Crichton
Tiny Nonny is a ‘mouseorganist’ in a church in an Austrian village.
Her job is to repair the church organ.
But one day even she can't patch the holes in the organ bellows.
So she has to find another way of providing music for the midnight service.
This is the story of how the carol Silent night was written.
And, as the author says, it's ‘mostly a true story’!
But, whether it's a true story or not, you'll still enjoy reading it.
THE SECRETS OF SANTA by Annie Civardi and Clive Scruton
Peregrine Penguin, chief waddling reporter for the South Polar Times , is off to the North Pole to visit Santa.
It's a terrific scoop for a small penguin!
And Peregrine's determined to make the most of his trip.
He's going to find out all Santa's secrets.
But even Peregrine doesn't expect to be invited to join Santa in his sleigh on the Big Night!
The Secrets of Santa is a magical, colourful book which all Brownies will love reading again and again.
SAVE THIS TREE by Maggie Pearson
Penny always gets landed with looking after the new kids in the class.
But looking after Jake (short for Jocasta) is like babysitting a pit bull terrier!
With her catapult and her shop lifting, Jake causes chaos.
It's only when their special tree is threatened that the two girls become friends as they fight to protect it.
THE GUINNESS BOOK OF RECORDS 1992
Did you know that there's a man in New Zealand who has 2,310 Christian names?
Or that the world's oldest bride married at the age of 102?
These amazing facts and lots, lots more, can be found in The Guinness Book of Records 1992 .
There are records galore about subjects such as sport, space, people, transport and animals which are sure to amaze you and your friends.
And, as usual, the book has been updated to include the latest record breaking feats as well as recent world events.
COMPETITION
Guinness Publishing Limited has kindly given us five copies of The Guinness Book of Records 1992 to give away.
To win one, just answer the following question correctly.
Which British King was married the most times?
Write your answer on a postcard and send it to BROWNIE /Bookshelf Competition,.
The closing date is January 6 1992.
The senders of the first five correct entries drawn on that day will each win a copy of the book.
Festive Food
Everyone seems to enjoy special foods at Christmas time — from roast turkey to stuffed dates and other sweet treats.
Here are some simple Christmas recipes from around the world for you to try.
DUTCH ALPHABET BISCUITS
Ingredients
1 packet ready-made short pastry
1 packet marzipan
Milk
Icing sugar
Method
1
Roll out the pastry thinly on a floured board.
Cut into strips 10cm x 4cm.
2
Dip your fingers in icing sugar.
Roll the marzipan into ribbons about as thick as your finger.
3
Wrap marzipan with the pastry strips, sealing the joins with milk.
4
Shape into letters (curving ones are easiest).
Use a dab of milk to join awkward letters.
5
Bake on a greased tray in the centre of the oven at 425°F, 220°C, Gas Mark 7 for 10–15 minutes.
SWEDISH GINGER SNAPS (PEPPERKAKOR)
Ingredients
400g (14oz) self raising flour
2 egg whites
230g (8oz) margarine
230g (8oz) dark brown sugar
1 heaped tsp ground cloves
1 heaped tsp cinnamon
1 heaped tsp ground ginger
Method
1
Cream the margarine and sugar until fluffy.
2
Beat in the egg whites
3
Mix in the dry ingredients
4
Wrap the mixture in greaseproof paper and chill for 12 hours
5
Roll out to 5mm thick on a lightly floured board and cut out shapes with fancy cutters
6
Bake on an ungreased baking tray at 350°F, 180°C, Gas Mark 4 for 10–12 minutes until light brown round edges.
7
Cool on wire racks.
Icing
Mix 250g (9oz) icing sugar with a little water.
Pipe on to the cooled biscuits.
MIDDLE EAST MUNCH
Delicious dates come from the Middle East, and are especially easy to obtain at Christmas time.
Dress them up for Christmas!
Ingredients
1 box dessert dates (stoned)
1 packet marzipan
50g (2oz) castor sugar
Method
1
Roll the marzipan into small balls
2
Insert a marzipan ball in each date.
3
Roll the stuffed dates in castor sugar.
If you like, you can use food colourings to colour the marzipan.
BOXING DAY BROWNIES
Americans make Brownies at any time of the year, so why not have some ready for Boxing Day?
Ingredients
100g (4oz) plain chocolate
50g (2oz) margarine
3 tbsps golden syrup
100g (4oz) sultanas
50g (2oz) glacé cherries
50g (2oz) chopped nuts
Method
1
Mix the sultanas, cherries, nuts and syrup in a bowl.
2
Heat the water in a pan on the stove and place a basin on top instead of the lid.
Ask an adult to help you with this.
3
Melt the chocolate in a basin over hot water.
4
Add the margarine and stir until melted.
5
Pour over the fruit and nut mix and stir well.
6
Spread in a shallow tin and leave to set.
Cut into squares.
FRENCH CHOCOLATE LOG
The traditional Christmas Eve sweet in France is a chocolate log.
There are many recipes but here's a specially easy one which needs no cooking.
Ingredients
1 packet of sweet biscuits
1 small pot double cream
1 tsp cocoa powder
1 tsp icing sugar
Method
1
Whisk the cream, icing sugar and cocoa together until the mixture forms peaks.
2
Divide the mixture into two.
Put one half in the fridge.
3
Spread the rest on to the biscuits, then pile the biscuits on top of each other to make a long roll.
4
Wrap the roll in foil.
Chill in the fridge until just before needed.
5
Remove the foil.
Put the roll on a plate.
Cover the log with the rest of the mixture, using a fork to make it look like bark.
6
Sprinkle with icing sugar and add a spring holly.
AMERICAN CHRISTMAS TREE CANDY
In America, it is traditional to hang ‘candy’ on the Christmas tree.
Here are some simple sweets you can make to hang up.
Of course, an attractively arranged selection of sweets also makes a lovely Christmas gift.
MULTICOLOURED MARZIPAN STARS
Ingredients
225g (8oz) marzipan
Food colouring
Ribbon
Method
1
Divide the marzipan into as many blocks as you have colours.
Tint each block and roll it in your fingers.
2
Roll out to 1cm thick and cut into star shapes.
3
Carefully pierce a hole in each star with a skewer and thread matching ribbon through, tying in a bow.
ALMOND ANGELS
Ingredients
450g (1lb) icing sugar
2 egg whites
2 tsps lemon juice
Almond essence
Green food colouring
Method
1
Beat the icing sugar, egg white and lemon juice together until stiff and smooth.
2
Add the almond essence and one drop of green colouring.
3
Roll out to 5mm thick on a board coated with icing sugar.
4
Cut into rounds.
Pierce a hole in the top of each and allow to harden.
5
Thread ribbon through the hole and tie in a bow.
LOUISIANA LEMONADE
While the adults are enjoying their special Christmas drinks with the celebration meal, you could be drinking delicious Louisiana Lemonade, made with frozen raspberries.
Ingredients
1 large bottle fizzy lemonade
1 lemon
275g (10oz) tinned or frozen raspberries
Method
Squeeze the lemon and blend the juice with crushed raspberries in large jug.
Top with lemonade and stir well.
DOILIES
Do remember that whatever you are serving, presentation is important, so why not make your plates look extra-special with home-made doilies.
Just fold a square of white paper into four and cut neat small triangles in the folded edges.
Open up the paper.
You will find an attractive network of shapes, a handmade doily to line your serving plate.
Enjoy your festive food!
12TH night
The twelfth day after Christmas, January 6, is usually called Twelfth Night or Epiphany.
It marks the day that the Three Kings arrived in Bethlehem to see the baby Jesus.
There are lots of customs connected with Twelfth Night.
For example, it used to be the time when farmers asked for their crops to be blessed for the coming year.
In Devon, the farmer and his workers stood around a tree in the orchard and drank a toast to the apple trees.
The first Monday after Twelfth Night was once called St Distaff Day.
In those days, many women earned their living by spinning wool.
The wool was wound on a long stick called a distaff.
During the 12 days of Christmas, women stopped spinning only to start again on Distaff Day.
The day was also a fun event.
Men tried to burn the distaffs while the women tried to stop them by throwing buckets of water.
After a time, the name changed to Plough Monday and other interesting customs came into being.
There were ploughing matches between farm workers.
The one who ploughed the straightest furrow as declared the winner.
In some parts of the country, ploughs, decorated with coloured ribbons, were carried from house to house and then a mumming play was performed.
This is a mimed play with all kinds of traditional characters, such as The Betsy, taking part.
Some people have a party on January 6 and eat a special Twelfth Night cake.
In France, the cake is called Galette des Rois (King's cake) and sometimes a dried bean and pea are baked in the mix.
The person who finds the bean is king for the night and the one who finds the pea is queen.
They rule over the party and lead all the games.
Perhaps your Pack could organise a Twelfth Night party?
You could put on a mumming play, sing The Twelve Days of Christmas and make a special cake.
Here is a recipe for a simple Galette des Rois.
Ingredients
225g (8oz) butter
grated rind of one lemon
150g (5oz) icing sugar
75g (3oz) self raising flour
75g (3oz) ground rice
6 egg yolks
3 egg whites
extra icing sugar
Cream the butter and grated lemon rind and beat in the icing sugar.
Sift the flour and ground rice together and add one third of it to the creamed mixture.
Beat in two of the egg yolks and repeat with the remaining flour and yolks.
Whisk the egg whites until really stiff and fold them carefully into the mixture.
Pour the mixture into a greased and floured tin (in the shape of a ring if you have one) and bake at 180°C, 350°F, Gas Mark 4 for about an hour until cooked.
Leave too cool on a wire rack and then sprinkle with icing sugar.
Decorate with little figures of the Three Kings.
SUPER SANTA
Here's a decoration with a difference — a super Santa plaque to hang on a wall.
YOU WILL NEED
1 cup of plain flour
⅓ cup wallpaper paste
⅙ cup of salt
Water
Extra flour for rolling out
Ribbon or string
TO MAKE
1
Cut out the template.
2
Mix the flour, wallpaper paste and salt together in a bowl.
3
Using a spoon to mix the dry ingredients, slowly add water to the mixture.
Keep mixing and stirring until all the ingredients form into one solid ball.
4
Shake some flour on to a table or pastry mat, if you have one.
Take the ball and put it in the middle of the flour.
Knead the dough for two minutes.
(If you are not sure how to do this, ask an older person to show you.)
Remember — do not lick your fingers while you are making this.
5
Using a rolling pin with more flour dusted on to it, roll the dough out until it is approximately 5–8mm thick and you can place the template on top and see dough all around its edges.
6
Using a blunt knife, carefully cut round the edge of the template.
Any pieces of dough left over should be thrown away.
Use a pencil to make a hole in the top which will be used to hang your pastry decoration on the wall.
7
Very carefully, lift your outline of Santa from the surface and place it on a floured baking tray.
Use a fish slice to do this, as the pastry is very floppy.
You may prefer to ask an older person to do this for you.
8
Place the baking tray into the oven.
Switch the oven on to 225°F, 100°C, Gas Mark ½ to 1, and ‘cook’ for up to 6 hours.
9
Ask an older person to check to see whether the decoration is hard.
If it is, it can be taken out and allowed to cool.
If not, it should be left in the oven for another hour and then be checked again.
10
When cold, the decoration can be painted and allowed to dry.
11
When dry, thread a ribbon or piece of string through the hole and your decoration is ready to hand on the wall.
PINBOARD
The 4th Great Harwood Pack in Lancashire held a sponsored silence to raise money for tracksuits.
Here they are wearing their new outfits while playing on a climbing frame.
These 2nd Bedfont Brownies dressed as Victorian flower girls for St Mary's Church Victorian fête.
Members of the 5th Kentish Town Pack worked on an anti-litter campaign as part of their Conservation badge.
Here are Diane, Lynsey, Alice, Heidi, Emma and Flora doing their bit to keep Britain tidy.
FOND FAREWELL
There just had to be a special Super Brownie cake and card for Lynn Hurdwell when she left the Association.
Lynn had been Editor of BROWNIE for over four years.
Now she's training to be a teacher.
HOME HELPERS
Last Christmas my Pack visited the Golden Age Home.
We treated the Home to lunch and a concert.
We sang Christmas carols in the parlour, recited poems, acted out skits and handed out the Christmas presents we had brought for the people.
After that we set the dining table and served the lunch we had brought.
They really enjoyed it.
The matron then showed us around.
We visited the chapel and then headed for the living quarters.
We said hello to the people who couldn't come to see us perform.
We were very quiet because some people were taking a nap.
We then looked around the garden.
It was so well kept.
Some of the people had little plots of their own where they planted flowers.
We cleared up and then said goodbye.
They thanked us for coming.
Everyone in our Pack got their Venture badges.
BIRD TREATS
Last Christmas I made parcels with my Brownie Pack for old people.
On Christmas Eve I went with my mum to Mr Brown's house.
He was a very nice man and said we could come in for a chat.
He asked if we wanted to watch him feed the birds.
We said ‘Yes, please’.
So we went outside and Mr Brown took some tiny bits of cheese with him.
He asked us to stay by the door while he walked a short way down his garden.
Then he whistled several times and very soon a blackbird appeared on the ground in front of him.
The blackbird then flew up and took the cheese from his hand and kept on taking pieces of cheese.
Mr Brown then put a piece of cheese between his lips and the blackbird flew up and took it.
After some more whistling several other birds came and took cheese from his hands.
It was then time to go home.
GOING CRACKERS
For Christmas Brown Owl thought it would be a good idea if we each made a  Christmas cracker for the children in our local hospital.
We all brought an empty toilet roll, Christmas wrapping paper and a gift to put inside.
They looked very nice when we had finished.
When Brown Owl took the crackers to the hospital, Bernie Clifton and his ostrich were there making the children laugh.
I'm sure they will have a lovely day.
CAROL SINGING
Last year we went to Trafalgar Square to sing round the Christmas tree with lots of other Guides and Brownies.
It was good fun except for the fact that it was extremely cold and we had the wrong Bethlehem carol sheet.
I was surprised when Newsround came and we had to sing Ding dong merrily on high again after singing it three times before.
When it had finished I had a pizza for tea.
CAKE MONEY
We made Christmas cakes and mine had a Christmas tree and a star on it.
Brown Owl let me and my friend crack an egg in a bowl.
I asked Brown Owl if we could sell the cakes that were left over and give the money to Blue Peter .
We made £10.
We do challenges for our necker to go with our Brownie uniform.
WINNER
A SPECIAL TIME
Christmas is a special time,
A time to remember with love
The birthday of dear Jesus
In heaven up above.
Christmas is a special time,
A time for wishing cheer,
Not only for this moment
But throughout the coming year.
Christmas is a special time,
A time for remembering too,
All the people in the world
Less fortunate than you.
The writer of this month's Star Letter has won a storybook.
If you would like the chance to win a prize, get writing now.
PACK NEWS
Brownies from the 1st Coggeshall Pack , Essex dressed up as Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs and entered the local carnival.
They looked so good that they came second in their section.
To celebrate their Diamond Jubilee the 5th Bangor Brownies were joined by their original Tawny Owl for a service at Wesley Centenary methodist Church in Northern Ireland.
The 12th Falmouth St Mary Immaculate RC Pack raised £110 for Romanian orphans by holding a craft competition, a bring and buy sale, a coffee evening and doing good turns.
The 2nd Boroughbridge and 1st Kirby Hill Packs held a recycled fashion show after making all the outfits themselves from bin liners, and so on.
They raised enough money to buy two acres of Belize rainforest each.
After washing up for five days, the 4th Bottesford Pack in South Humberside raised enough money to buy daffodil bulbs which they planted beside their church car park.
Christmas Message
Next February your BROWNIE magazine will have an extra eight-page, full-colour section for the Rainbows.
I know you will all be happy that we have chosen your magazine in which to include this new idea.
I'm sure many of you will have younger sisters who are already Rainbows or are, perhaps, thinking of joining when they are old enough.
So tell them about the new-look BROWNIE .
Wishing you all a very happy time this Christmas.
Chief Commissioner 
Pinboard cont.…
BERTIE BADGER
There's a real treat in store for you this Christmas!
From Tuesday, December 17 until Saturday, January 4, the Fortune Theatre in London's Covent Garden is staging The Pied Piper Theatre Company's production of Bertie Badger's Christmas Adventure .
Go along with your Pack or family and join in with the fun, sing songs and get to know colourful characters, like Bertie and Aristotle Tortoise, as they try to find a valuable stolen necklace.
For more information about performance times and ticket prices, ask your Brown Owl or parents to ring the Box Office on 071 836 2238.
RAINBOW SUPPLEMENT
Look out for the changes in February's BROWNIE .
There will be lots more coloured pages and a brand new section for Rainbow Guides!
This section will be packed with fun activities, stories and games.
And it can be pulled out so that Rainbow Guiders can use it at meetings.
But watch out when you get your extra thick copy.
If you've got a sister who's a Rainbow, she may want to read it first.
Be sure you beat her to it because, although the Rainbow section is really for her, you'll enjoy it too.
THE NUTCRACKER
English National Ballet are presenting a new production of the classic ballet The Nutcracker at the Royal Festival Hall in London from December 23 to January 18.
The season will run into the 100th anniversary year of the show's first performance in St Petersburg in 1892.
If your Pack or family are interested in seeing one of these magical performances, ask your Brown Owl or parents to ring the Box Office on 071 928 8800 for information on times and prices.
STAMPS FOR OXFAM
By now you are probably receiving lots of Christmas cards.
Perhaps you'd like to save the stamps from the envelopes and send them to Oxfam.
Oxfam can sell used stamps to stamp collectors and they hope to raise £30,000 this Christmas.
The money will help poor people in countries like Mozambique in southern Africa.
They will be able to buy seeds to grow more food, or tools to dig wells so that they have clean water to drink.
Perhaps your Pack would like to collect stamps together — why don't you ask your Brown Owl?
All you have to do is tear off the top right hand corner of your envelopes, leaving ¼″ of paper round the stamp.
Then send the stamps to:
If you want more information, ask your Brown Owl to contact your local Oxfam office — you can find details in the telephone book.
Or she can ring Ariane Judet on 0865 313133.
PRICE RISE
Due to the printing and publishing costs, we've had to put up the price of your BROWNIE magazine.
From January 1992 the magazine will cost 95p, an increase of 10p.
BROWNIE NOTEBOOK OFFER
A brilliant Brownie notebook from Acorn Marketing Limited is now available and comes complete with a pencil and a large printed eraser.
It has 48 pages for you to write down all those important things you have to remember, plus some jokes and puzzles on the back cover.
The notebooks come in sets of 24 costing £18.96, so maybe your Pack would like to buy a set.
Ask your Brown Owl to write to Acorn Marketing Limited  or ring them on .
In the meantime we've got 24 notebooks to give away, so if you'd like to be in with a chance of winning one, send a postcard with your name, age, address and pack name to:BROWNIE /Notebook Offer,.
Entries must be in by January 14, when the first 24 cards drawn from the hat will be the winners.
HAVE YOU EVER…?
Ideas for you, your Six and your Pack to try.
Held a fancy dress party?
Cooked mince pies?
Designed your own Christmas cards?
Taken part in a Pack panto?
Read a Christmas story from another country?
Made up the words and music to a Christmas carol?
Decorated a Christmas tree for the birds?
Baked star biscuits to hang on a Christmas tree?
Made a Christmas wreath?
Helped to cook the Christmas dinner?
Found out about Christmas in other countries?
Thinking of others
When Anna and Rebecca awoke, very early, their stockings were bulging.
Father Christmas had brought lovely things: tiny dolls for the dolls' house, new toothbrushes and combs, sparkling jewellery, pencils, rubbers, hairbands and lots more.
‘I love stocking time!’ said Anna happily.
‘And there's still the main presents to look forward to.’
Rebecca wasn't so sure.
‘I wish Mum and Dad would let us have them now!’ she argued.
But she knew the gifts under the tree wouldn't be touched till after lunch.
First they'd go to church because Dad was firm about remembering the real meaning of Christmas, then they'd lay the table.
Then they'd go with Dad to fetch Grandpa while Mum finished preparing the meal.
It was the same very year and the girls loved it all.
But the most exciting part came after lunch when they were allowed to pen the big presents.
‘You're very lucky,’ observed Dad, gazing at the piles of discarded wrapping paper.
‘Thousands of kids won't have as much as that in a life-time.
I hope you appreciate it all.’
The girls nodded.
‘We do, Dad!’
Rebecca assured him.
‘Thank you lots.’
‘Talking of thanks,’ said Mum, ‘today you can play with your new toys but first thing tomorrow…‘
‘Thank you letters!’ groaned Anna.
They always had to do them on Boxing Day, so that the letters went into the first possible post after Christmas.
‘This is boring ,’ grumbled Rebecca next day, ‘I never know what to put.’
‘Tell everyone how much you like their present and if it's money, say what you're spending it on,’ advised Anna, writing fast.
‘My hand's aching,’ said Rebecca.
‘I need a drink.’
As she was opening the fridge, she caught sight of Vicky coming up the path.
‘Come and see my presents!’ she said, so they went to Rebecca's bedroom.
The friends played all afternoon.
They could hardly believe it when Mum said it was tea-time.
‘Post your letters?’ asked Mum over tea.
Anna nodded, her mouth full of cake.
‘Becky?’ said Mum.
Rebecca hesitated, remembering that Mary Poppins was on that evening.
Mum would never let her watch it if she hadn't done her letters.
‘Yes,’ said Rebecca, uncomfortably aware of Anna's shocked expression.
She glared at her sister and kicked her under the table.
When Mum went to refill the teapot, Rebecca spoke first.
‘Don't dare say a word!’ she hissed.
‘I'll do the stupid letters tomorrow.
I want to watch the film tonight.’
Anna looked angry but said nothing and Rebecca relaxed.
The holidays hurtled by.
Soon it was term  time again and evening were taken up with swimming, Brownies and piano.
There was hardly a free minute.
On Saturday, Rebecca heaved a sigh of relief.
‘Thank goodness!’ she said.
‘I want to do those glass things you bake in the oven today.’
‘The ones Auntie Joan sent you?’ asked Mum.
Rebecca ran upstairs to fetch the box.
She was soon down again.
‘Mum!’ she said, ‘we've been burgled!
My presents were in the cupboard…they've all gone !’
She burst into tears.
‘Anna's stuff is still there, it isn't fair.’
‘I don't know why you're crying, Rebecca,’ said Mum.
‘You didn't like them, so why the fuss?’
Rebecca was indignant.
‘Of course I liked them!’ she exploded.
‘I loved them!’
‘Not enough to bother thanking the people who gave them, it seems,’ said Mum.
‘I met Auntie Joan today.
She had Anna's letter but not yours.
She'd been to a lot of trouble finding something original, something you'd enjoy.’
Rebecca turned scarlet.
‘As gifts aren't really yours till you've said thank you,’ Mum continued, ‘I've put them away for now.’
Mum paused.
‘And by the way, I didn't think Brownies lied.
Whatever happened to ‘thinking of others before yourself’?’
I'm sorry,’ whispered Rebecca, her eyes filling with tears.
‘I'll write the letters today.
And I'll never lie again, ever.’
‘That's all right, then,’ said Mum, kissing her.
‘Better make a start.
Try to be finished before lunchtime.’
The letters took ages but somehow Rebecca didn't find it so difficult this time.
As she began each one, Mum's words came back to her and she felt her cheeks growing hot.
Dear Aunt Grace …
Aunt Grace was old and didn't have much money, but every Christmas she sent the girls five pounds each.
Dear Uncle Mike and Auntie Sue …they had four children to think about, but had still made the effort to choose a book Rebecca would really enjoy.
Dear Mrs Woodward …she was a neighbour who didn't really need to send presents at all but she liked the girls and hadn't any children of her own.
It was afternoon when Rebecca finished.
She'd missed a chance to go skating with Auntie Joan and when she came downstairs, she found she'd missed a visit from Grandpa as well.
Normally, she'd have made a fuss about those things, but today it didn't seem to matter somehow.
Rebecca cuddled up to Mum after lunch.
‘I promise I'll think of others before myself in future,’ she said, and her Mum hugged her tight.
The Gift Bringers
In Britain children are looking forward to Christmas and especially to the presents that Father Christmas brings.
But did you know that not everyone celebrates Christmas at the same time and that it's not always Father Christmas who delivers the presents?
Although Father Christmas also delivers presents to children in Australia, he does this in the middle of summer because December is one of the summer months there.
He rides on a sleigh pulled by six white ‘boomers’ or kangaroos.
In America, Father Christmas is known as Santa Claus.
He wears a red jacket and trousers and drives a sleigh, just like our Father Christmas.
The name Santa Claus comes from Saint Nicholas, the patron saint of children, who takes present to Dutch children on December 6.
He arrives on a ship from Spain and then travels through the Netherlands on a white horse with his assistant, Black Peter.
Children put out shoes filled with hay and, if they have been good, Saint Nicholas leaves them a present.
Naughty children might find a whip in their shoe.
French children also put out shoes filled with hay.
During the night of December 5, Pere Noel feeds the hay to his reindeer and leaves a present in its place.
German children receive their presents from the Christkind Angel.
She leaves all kinds of gifts beneath the Christmas tree and manages to leave the room just before the children burst in to discover their presents.
In countries like Sweden and Denmark, presents are brought by little gnomes called Julenisse.
The Julenisse have very bad tempers, so children leave them bowls of porridge at Christmas time.
Children in Italy have to wait until January for their presents.
They are brought by La Befana — a witch who tried to follow the Three Kings to see Jesus.
She never found the baby and leaves gifts at every house where there are children, just in case the Christ Child lives there.
La Befana is the Italian version of Babushka who takes presents to Russian children.
You can read about her on pages 6 and 7.
In some parts of Russia, Grandfather Frost brings presents.
He looks a bit like Father Christmas but wears a silver coat trimmed with white fur.
Grandfather Frost visits on New Year's Eve.
Spanish children get their presents from the Three Kings.
On the night of January 5, the Kings parade through every town giving out gifts.
Children used to leave out hay for the kings' horses and wake up to find it had mysteriously been replaced by presents.
CHRISTMAS CHIMNEY
As you know, in Britain Father Christmas climbs down the chimney to deliver his presents.
Why not make a chimney of your own, fill it with sweets and give it to someone for Christmas?
Here's how to do it.
You will need
a toilet roll tube
red paper
cotton wool
a black felt tip pen
glue
Cover the toilet roll tube with red paper, glue it on and leave it to dry.
Mark out brick lines with a felt tip pen.
Stick some cotton wool round the top of the chimney to look like snow.
Stuff some cotton wool inside the chimney, fill up with sweets and put more cotton wool on top to hold the sweets in place.
Competition
This Brownie Guide doll comes complete with her very own mix and match uniform.
She wars a T-shirt, culottes and a baseball cap but can be changed into a sweat-shirt and sweat pants.
And you could win one in our brilliant competition?!
To be in with a chance of winning, just answer the following multiple choice questions about Brownies.
1 What were Brownies first known as?
2
Who designed the latest Brownie uniform?
3
In which year was the first issue of BROWNIE published?
4
Who is the President of the Girl Guides Association?
Write your answers on a postcard, together with your name, age, address and Pack name, and send it to:BROWNIE /Doll Competition,.
The closing date for entries is January 6 1992, when the first ten correct entries will each win a Brownie Guide doll.
But don't worry if you're not one of the lucky winners.
The doll, which is made by Surprise Marketing, costs just £4.95 and is available from the GGA Trading Service and most good toyshops.
PEN PALS
The following Brownies are all looking for pen-pals.
If you would like to write to one of them, please send a letter c/o BROWNIE magazine and we will pass it on for you.
Remember to include your own name and address in the letter.
Eight-year old Lisa Parsons is a member of the 4th Stanley (Christ Church) Pack in Durham.
She likes reading, tapestry, competitions, videos and collecting postcards.
Gillian Gelling is nine years old and comes from Liverpool.
She likes riding, reading, swimming and running.
Hannah Leigh is nine years old and lives in Bolton.
She likes swimming and gymnastics.
Emma Hayes would like a pen-pal from anywhere.
She is ten and likes dancing, swimming and skating.
Emma lives in Leicester.
Carol Bartlett is seven and likes tennis, swimming and painting pictures.
She comes from the 1st Torrington Pack in North Devon — just like Clare and Pippa.
Emma Lee lives in Liverpool and enjoys reading, handicraft and playing the keyboard.
Emma is nearly ten.
Nine-year-old Pippa Simmons likes dancing and would like to ride a horse.
She has two cats and three brothers.
Lottie Crumbleholme is eight and enjoys reading and playing the piano.
She comes from Weymouth.
Clare Paddon is eight and belongs to the Gnomes Six.
Her hobbies are writing, reading, playing cards and swimming.
Hannah Pretty lives in Milton Keynes and likes art.
She would like a pen-pal from anywhere.
Aimee Louise Burr also comes from Milton Keynes.
She is seven and likes swimming.
Freda and Friends
WHAT'S WRONG
1
It's the wrong time of year for blossom to grow.
2
Frogs don't lay spawn in winter.
3
Hedgehogs usually hibernate during winter.
4
Swallows migrate to warmer countries.
5
Walking on icy ponds is dangerous
6
Butterflies don't usually appear in winter.
7
Smoke from the house is blowing in different directions.
8
Penguins don't live by British ponds!
9
The rabbit is leaving dog footprints behind.
10
Crocuses don't grow in ponds.
I Saw Three Ships
This is a very old English carol.
Learn the words and tune and sing it with your Pack this Christmas.
WHAT'S WRONG?
Here's a lovely winter scene but it contains ten deliberate mistakes.
Can you spot them all?
Answers are on page 29.
BE WIDE AWAKE