

Editorial
Segregating slalom from WWR
As time rolls on, the linking of WW racing to slalom at ICF level becomes progressively more anomalous.
In the early days slalomists paddled a World Championships in slalom and then the same paddlers, using the same boats, took part in a WWR to make it more of an event, just as a K1 sprint paddler might take part in a 500m race and also take part in a 10km event at the same regatta.
Over the decades, however, slalom boats have become progressively flatter while WWR kayaks have been more influenced by sprint K1s and now, at the highest levels, few paddlers contest both disciplines.
Indeed, the management is frequently entirely separate at World Championships and it would be little less appropriate to link a slalom World Championships to a canoe sailing World Championships, say.
Of the last ten World Championships, four have seen the slalom site several hours' drive from the WWR venue and it will happen again in 1995 with Nottingham and Bala.
In the latter case WWR were rather pushed into running the event because slalom could not run a World Championships alone without a corresponding WWR event.
Perhaps this should change.
If slalom and WWR separated at ICF level, as spring and marathon have done, it would offer much greater flexibility in running World Championships.
Countries with suitable slalom sites but no suitable WWR courses would then be able to host events and smaller countries prepared to take on the WWR event but not the larger slalom event would be able to make contributions.
No longer would it be necessary to evolve an extended programme so that the highlights of each discipline should fall over separate weekends.
It would also end the inevitable comparisons between slalom and WWR in which WWR invariably seems to be the poorer partner.
Nobody now compares sprint and marathon World Championships although the former are undoubtedly the grander.
If WWR were to let go of slalom's apron strings it would inevitably help WWR find its feet.
The disadvantage from the British point of view is that Albert Woods, Chairman of the ICF Slalom & WWR Committee, would no longer head up both disciplines in the event of a split.
WWR would probably pass to another country for chairmanship but it is a move which I suspect British WW racers would be prepared to accept for the benefit of WWR as a whole.
Those with interests in both disciplines could still attend events of each separately.
Stuart Fisher 
Cover: Andy Train cruises towards the landing pontoon after taking his second World Championships 10km bronze medal in one day, a feat never attempted by anyone before, let alone achieved.
The World Spring Championships and the amazing Train performances are covered in full from page 41.
New series
In this issue we launch two new series.
Kayak control is based on Simon Dawson's work on kayak technique and questions current teaching methods.
Forres forays is the first of two series of occasional articles which will detail rivers off the beaten track in Scotland.
Late news
Ford have ordered a recall of their roofracks for the new Escort and Orion models following three incidents, one involving canoes.
New retaining bolts are to be fitted to side members.
BCU Director Trevor Bailey was drowned on the regatta course at Holme Pierrepont after a capsize from a double kayak prior to the rafting meeting on Sep 14th.
Further details in the next issue.
Undercurrents
Kayak smuggler
A paddler has been intercepted smuggling cartons of cigarettes from the USA to Canada in a kayak.
His route was across the Niagara River above the falls.
Kayak control seminars
Simon Dawson is running a series of kayak control seminars at Holme Pierrepont.
Courses on Oct 26th and Nov 9th will be aimed at paddlers above grade 2 with corresponding courses on the successive Sundays for those of SI level or above involved in coaching.
Course content includes boat shapes, matching kayak strokes to boat shape, best use of the new designs and teaching methods.
The £28 fee includes refreshments and lunch, classroom sessions and use of the slalom course for practical experience.
Ring 0602 868803 for details.
Holme Pierrepont attack
An 11 year old girl was attacked on the campsite at Holme Pierrepont early in August but she managed to break free from the man who grabbed her and raised the alarm.
Police are keeping an open mind about a possible link with similar attacks elsewhere in the Midlands.
Lincoln festival revived
Lincoln Waterside Festival is to be revived on  the 5th to mark the opening of the new Waterside Shopping Centre.
As well as canoeing, there will be a jazz band-led water pageant, tight rope walking across the River Witham, circus acts, parascending and parachute drop, steel band, model boats and orchestra performance of the Water Music with fireworks.
It is hoped the festival will become annual again.
Big bore catches the canoeists out
A Swansea man was swept two miles up the River Severn behind one of the first big bores of the autumn as he clung to the stern of a friend's canoe.
The wave was bigger than expected, although half an hour later, and on a bend at the Rea, Hempsted, Robert Diamond hit the bank in his own glassfibre craft and cartwheeled through the air before grasping the other boat.
He was wearing a wetsuit and lifejacket but seawater in the river made it icy cold and he was gasping with exhaustion as he was pulled out, suffering from a shoulder injury.
The party of three canoeists, aided by local walkers dragging the canoes, made its way over common land for half a mile to a car.
Robert was treated in hospital but discharged.
Hospital staff commended another canoeist who took a strap from his own craft to make a sling.
The injured man's canoe was rescued by a speedboat after being swept up the Maisemore channel of the river and was hauled undamaged up the 15 ft high bank.
It had been put in the water to meet the nascent bore at Newnham-on-Severn.
Rivermen were surprised at the force of the bore on a 9.3 metre tide, nearly a metre below maximum at Sharpness.
It is affected by wind, the barometer, freshwater and the position of the changing channels in the estuary.
At certain points it can reach 10 feet but a few feet is more normal.
John Hooper 
The injured canoeist is helped from the river after his ordeal.
The bore wave is seen advancing towards Lower Partington on the edge of Gloucester where the river divides into two courses around Alney Island.
Scouts from Notts, Lincs, Derbys and Leics have smashed the world record for a canoe raft of 376 held by the People's Youth Movement of Singapore last year.
After 4 attempts and 2 hours they finally got 568 kayaks strung together and held only by hands for 30 seconds before departing 5km down to Holme Pierrepont for a fun afternoon.
Incidentally, the kayaks didn't stop the fish feeding, the River Trent being a public navigation.
Another new record set this summer was 1,796 rolls in two hours by Randy Fine of Miami in June.
Access and environment
Swans on the increase
After being attacked by a swan, Anne-Marie Booth reports in Paddlers World that swans are now on the increase following the banning of use of most lead weights by anglers.
However, life expectancy on the Thames is still only four years compared with a natural figure of up to thirty years.
Breeding begins at four to seven years.
Leven dates
Dates for use of the upper stretch of the Leven in Cumbria this winter have been announced as Oct 6th and 20th, Nov 3rd and 24th, Jan 5th, Feb 9th and Mar 1st and 15th.
Up to 60 will be allowed on the river on any one day at £1 plus £5 bib deposit.
Phone bookings should be made up to a fortnight in advance on 0229 66063.
Bolton Abbey estate
The Countryside Commission were to sign a deal with the Duke of Devonshire in September to grant him Capital Transfer Tax exemption (estimated to be worth £12,000,000) in turn for large parts of this 130km 2 in the Dales becoming a public heritage centre under the Heritage Estate arrangement introduced by Leeds MP Denis Healey in 1975 to prevent the breakup of large estates (the MP himself having just become President of the National Trust's Yorkshire Moors & Dales Appeal).
This will permit the public to have much greater access to the estate, including the riverside, and Geoff Wood has asked the Countryside Commission to confirm that this will also apply to the River Wharfe itself around which the estate is located.
Wake up to the danger!
With a few notable exceptions, canoeists still seem to believe that the challenge to the Rights of Way Act now being mounted by fishermen, landowners and self-styled conservationists in the House of Lords does not concern them.
The stark facts are spelt out in a recent copy of the Independent .
The case ‘will determine whether a seventh of British waterways…(among the navigable rivers)…will remain open…access to rivers that have been used for thousands of years could become open to challenge’.
Of the 12,000 miles of rivers in England and Wales, a measly 1,700 miles of non-tidal river are open to us as of right.
Now many hundred miles of that number are threatened.
How has this grave situation arisen?
In December of 1988 a Judge of the High Court surprisingly ruled that the simplified and common sense rule which protects the footpaths of the country did not protect waterways.
This simple rule, embodied in the Rights of Way Act, which on its wording at least applies to ways by water as well as land, states that to recognize a way as public one needs only to show that it has been freely and openly used by the public for 20 years.
This was a dire situation.
If a landowner suddenly challenged your right to continue canoeing on a favourite stretch of water how would you prove that you had a right to do so?
In most cases the public rights to use that particular stretch of water would be lost in antiquity and would be prohibitively expensive to research and fight in court.
Without the Rights of Way Act the only practical solution would be to stop canoeing on that stretch and move elsewhere (and it is not difficult to imagine where this would eventually lead!)
Tremendous efforts by a handful of people, supported by donations from a variety of sources, enabled the matter to be brought to the Court of Appeal who last year unanimously overturned the disaster and returned the protection of the Rights of Way Act to waterways.
However, although the landowners were refused leave to appeal by the Court of Appeal, they petitioned the Lords directly and (no doubt because the Lords felt that this was an important public issue which ought to receive their attention) were granted leave to appeal.
Certainly it is an issue of the greatest public importance.
The difficulty is that most people seem to believe such an important issue must somehow be supported by public funds, from the Sports Council perhaps.
It is not.
Ironically, the generosity of the IWA in guaranteeing funds to enable the question of the Rights of Way Act to be taken to the Court of Appeal seems to have resulted in many believing that the issue is only the concern of the ‘powered boaters’.
It is not: it concerns users of small boats in particular.
There have been, as we have said, a few most generous exceptions: the Canoe Camping Club in particular have promised a substantial part of their fund but individual canoeists have been slow to respond.
To spell it out:
That this is a determined attempt to restrict access is obvious from the efforts being made by the opposition to raise funds to have the protection of the Rights of Way Act removed.
The CLA, anglers and conservationists have all been asked to contribute and have done so.
We are (sadly) used to antagonism from some anglers and landowners but when a leading conservation officer says (as has been reported) that the World Wild Fund for Nature's contribution of around £40,000 would be well worth while if boats were kept off one mile of water, it is hard to swallow, especially when you bear in mind the relatively few miles of water which are available to use even with the protection of the Rights of Way Act!
No public body is going to help.
Unless you or your club subscribe to the amount required, it probably will not be raised, the defence for the Act will not be mounted and many miles of river will be lost.
£50,000 is needed.
It sounds a lot but one pound from every active canoeist, or £100 from every canoe club, will go most of the way there.
Do not complain that nobody helps canoeists.
On this issue we must help ourselves!
Please send donations to R A Gibson, Mowthorpe Hill Farm, Terrington, York YP6 4QF.
Heather Smith is a member of the Yorkshire Trust and Water Heritage.
She gives the Sale, Wharfe and Nidd as examples of rivers which will be affected if the case is lost on appeal to the House of Lords.
The WWF's role
The World Wide Fund for Nature have now put substantial donations into what they call the ‘consortium’ side of the Derwent case, the landowners, anglers, bird shooters, ornithologists and others.
A WWF spokesman justified this by saying they were protecting the habitat as a whole.
Asked whether people who give to the WWF to protect such things as pandas, whales and rainforests realized that their money is also being used in this way, in particular to support the bloodsport of angling, he said he had never thought of angling as a bloodsport and donations had been listed in their magazine.
He felt angling was beneficial as anglers brought prosecutions over dirty rivers and by ‘only’ angling during the open season they permit birds to breed.
His concern on the Derwent was particularly for kingfishers and otters.
Kingfishers live quite happily on canals with powered craft passing regularly in many parts of the country.
When I last spoke to the Otter Trust they had never had a complaint against a canoeist but many against anglers.
(Anglers are presently major users of the Derwent and would remain so even if the river were reinstated for use by power craft.)
The WWF spokesman said that canoeing was not a problem but until the law is changed ‘a canoe must be treated in the same way as the QE2’ and if one were permitted to use the Derwent then so would the other.
IWA Chairman David Stevenson resigned from the WWF in protest at their action but the WWF claim that protest by other members has been limited.
Canal pollution studies at marathons
Following the success of two pilot studies earlier this year, work is now being continued and this is the marathon paddlers' chance to get involved.
Involved in what?
A study to examine the possible health effects from the recreational use of freshwater.
You may have read about phase 1 of the study in the April edition of Canoeist ; if so, please skip to the important bit at the bottom.
Those who missed it first time round, read on.
At the end of 1975 the UK adopted the EC Directive on the quality of bathing water.
This introduced maximum levels of various indicator bacteria which are legally allowed at the identified bathing waters.
After a slow start with only 27 bathing areas designated, the UK now has over 400 marine sites.
Unfortunately for the inland canoeist, the UK has no designated freshwater sites.
Recently there has been a large amount of attention (both media and scientific) directed towards bathing in seawater with a number of studies conducted around the UK coastline.
Until now the area of freshwater recreation has been sadly neglected.
All this changed in the spring when the Centre for Research into Environment & Health conducted two studies based at Holme Pierrepont in Nottingham and the Canolfan Tryweryn at Bala.
Volunteers present at the two events were taken through a questionnaire on the day of the study, followed by a shorter questionnaire a week later (by phone or post) and four weeks later (by post).
During the event, extensive water quality samples were taken to assess the degree of pollution.
Although the data from the first study are still being  analysed , initial results are promising.
These studies, which have British Canoe Union approval, are now being extended (with funding from British Waterways) to look at marathon paddlers using canal systems and this is your opportunity to take part and do your bit for science.
The CREH will be out in force at two marathon events in the coming season: Banbury Marathon — November 10th 1991 and Gailey Marathon — March 15th 1992.
The team will be headed by me, Lorna Fewtrell (Shipman in the previous article, just in case you're wondering), myself a keen canoeist.
If you have any questions please contact me at the Centre for Research into Environment & Health, St David's College, Lampeter, Dyfed SA48 7ED.
An angler removes a fish he has just landed at Old Windsor.
The first two waves of paddlers in the Royal Grand Prix had passed a couple  of minutes before.
The Thames is a public navigation here.
Climatology & Kayaking: No 1
Weather requirements for paddling…
Weather in the Alps…rivers up!
Weather in Britain…arrgh!…
UNMARKED ON THE RUSSIAN BORDER
I took the Klepper to eastern Slovakia in search of interesting, lively touring rivers, right up to the Russian border where further progress in this connection was stopped with a big ‘Niet’.
In Slovakia the main rivers are either too low or, if big enough, heavily polluted, so I decided to try the Samos River from the Rumanian border to the Tisza River and on to Tokai (the wine).
It was like a magnet.
We crossed into Rumania at Satu Mare and investigated the Samos River about 300km upstream (Somesul).
I have never seen such a filthy river winding through pleasant valleys.
They put their muck, untreated into rivers, turning them into a dirty brown evil smelling soup.
This changed little right up to the Hungarian border, so it was decided, since there was no border crossing on the river, to start this trip just inside Hungary at Csenger, 200 km from Tokai.
In order to get some value for the $30 Rumanian border visa fee, we did a frantic but exciting car trip north to the Rumanian/Russian border.
This part is pristine, untouched with vast forests, mountains and interesting people including original gypsies.
On return to Hungary we stopped one night in Satu Mare, the last big frontier town in Rumania.
The hotel there, expensive, in faded glory, rated 4 Star, had no hot water, no sink plugs, no toilet rolls and no breakfast because the chef did not turn up, probably accosting foreigners in the town square to change dollars like everybody else.
In the town there were long queues for bread and milk and even longer for petrol.
The launching of the Klepper was just inside Hungary on the fairly fast Samos River which had now more volume and was still dirty but bearable.
It took one and a half days to the confluence with the Tisza with mosquitos, heat, sometimes unbearable, and camping wild on sandbanks.
There were lots of unusual birds and fish jumping everywhere.
Beyond the joining of the rivers, now called the Tisza, the route turns north towards Russian and eventually becomes the frontier between Hungary on the left bank and the Soviets on the right.
On the way, one night while camping on the sandbanks, the river being now slow in the middle of the Hungarian plain (Pusca), we witnessed one of the most spectacular thunderstorms I have experienced.
Continuous sheet lightning made the use of a torch in the ten unnecessary.
The thunder was continuous and the heavens opened up so, nowhere to go, we were huddled in the tent waiting for the river to rise.
Well, it did not.
2 days later we got to the point which up to now is a strictly no go area for Westerners, starting at Tiszanogyores, a village about 100km from Tokai.
We are supposed to get out and obtain, somehow, transport to another village 50 river km away where the Tisza becomes Hungarian again.
There was no-one, completely deserted.
Now, we did what I believe is a British first.
We met a group of young Hungarian paddlers and asked them if we could join in their endeavour to sneak through the Russian bit towards Tokai.
‘Yes,’ they said, ‘you are welcome but you must keep very close to the left bank’(Hungarian).
This we promised and so I tell you Perestroika had not yet reached that part of the world.
There were Russian soldiers with guns on every bridge with their binoculars scanning the river and dashing to their guard boxes to report once they located us.
We saw a group of workers on the right bank working under military supervision.
One rail bridge, well camouflaged, is not  shown on any map.
After 2 days' paddling and considerable suspense at last we reached the three corner point with Czechoslovakia/Hungary.
There, as if a curtain had been raised on both sides of the river, suddenly were campsites, fishing and bathing.
From there it was a hard slog to Tokai but, once there, the wine!
I was past putting the tent up, celebrating and wondering why my arms did not drop off.
Being a glutton for punishment, a few days later we rounded it off by doing the Danube Knee bend towards Budapest.
E B Seemann paddled with Hungarians who are looking for British paddling contacts.
Write to Medgysey Balazs, Fidersz Kozponti Iroda, Fidesz Central Office, Budapest, Lendvay u 28, H–1062, Hungary, if you are interested.
Climatology & Kayaking: No 2
…
The usual weather situation…
In Britain…wish we were in the alps…meanwhile in the Alps…
No sun, no paddling!
Hungarian/UK togetherness on the Tisza
A paddle wheel ferry on the Tisza
Looking towards the Russian bit
Preparing to launch on the Danube Knee
Andy Middleton
Profile
Local boy makes good
Most outdoor centre owners have picked their venues because of the interesting geographical features of those areas.
Andy Middleton, on the other hand, was actually born in St David's.
He began paddling at the age of 10, got his first boat 3 years later, spent a week with PGL and followed it up the next year with a course at Raven's Ait.
His mid teens were spent surfing on a casual basis but when he was about 17 he got into racing surf lifesaving skis and reached 3rd in the UK, a reflection on the poor standard compared with K1 racing rather than an indication of great ability, he believes.
This led into a couple of summers acting as a professional lifesaver during summer vacations from Sheffield University.
In Sheffield he paddled whitewater with such notables as Colin Tee, Jon Gatfield and Dave Higson and also board surfed.
He managed to fit in a geography course, too.
On leaving, he went to Australia for 16 months.
Six months were spent in a gold mine as a geological assistant.
His job was to go out into the bush to take samples and he found it the most unspoilt area on Earth he has ever been to, areas the size of Wales in which no white man has ever set foot.
He also surfed all of Australia's major breaks and, on the way home, spent 4 months in Asia, including surfing one of the world's top ten waves in Sumatra, in addition to having his appendix out and catching malaria.
Back home he spent a year setting up an outdoor pursuits centre for someone near Broad haven but it didn't take off.
Meanwhile, Andy had discovered windsurfing and that he could make more money in a day teaching it  than he could in a week in his other job.
Thus, he set up his own windsurfing and surfing business at Whitesands which was to run for 2 years.
By one of those quirks of fate he was at Plas Menair for a canoeing course when he ran into Phil Eccles whom he had last seen in the Australian desert.
The result was the partnership which bought Twr-y-Felin in St David's and ran it for 18 months until Phil moved on to pursue other interests.
Astonishingly, it was not until 1986 that Andy discovered the Bitches, with which he is now closely associated.
True, he had frequently circumnavigated Ramsey Island but if the tides are used to best advantage then the Bitches will not be working as they are passed.
The first Bitches Rodeo was run in 1988 with 19 people including Gerry Moffat, Frank Goodman and Shaun Baker, the latter of whom is planning to return to competitive hotdogging, notes Andy happily.
As well as the competition there was quite a party.
The following year Channel 4 filmed the event and the video is still available from Chrisfilm & Video.
The culmination has been this year's first World Championships in which Andy took 2nd place as well as being co-sponsor with Palm.
Andy is really happy with the way the sport has developed, agreeing with Frank that it must not become stylized.
Andy doesn't want ranking events.
Numbers are now slightly down but standards are improving.
Next year there will be a big rodeo on the Bitches in the spring and midsummer one for beginners at Whitesands, like an informal symposium with free entry and a week of polo and fun competitions.
Meanwhile, the World Championships next year are expected to be run by Bob McDougall and Chris Spelius on a dam-controlled river at Tulsa.
Andy supports the inclusion of squirt boats as a compulsory class, even if it means that competitors need to train beforehand, rather than having separate events for squirt and float boats.
For his own paddling Andy has just changed from the AeroQuatic to the Dagger Crossfire and can now do brilliant 360s without paddles.
It is a disappointment to him to see the way canoeing is marketed and perceived, particularly the view that people can't be coached after a certain level.
They don't want to be able to do better tricks or be more safe.
Passive safety should be developed.
Try throwing away your paddles whilst surfing, paddling only on one side for 2km or filling the boat and trying to paddle.
One day you may need to.
It is easy to blast down a grade 5 river without much skill.
Andy would like to see canoeing increasing a lot but it needs marketing outside the trade through the national media.
We need the canoeing equivalent of the Mirror Dinghy.
The trade could do more but essentially the sport needs money put in to the get the necessary kit, accommodation and instruction.
Not one centre in Great Britain is able to make enough income to survive on canoeing alone.
People need financial motivation.
At least the recession has not hit his area.
Agreed, the weekend trade is down but residential courses have been up 10% and day courses up 50% this year.
Eskimo's Canoe Store has moved to a high street location in St David's where accessories are selling well, allowing the old shop to be converted into an office and bedroom for Andy.
One of the bestselling lines this year has been juggling balls, hundreds of them having been purchased.
Customers at Twr-y-Felin are likely to spend the evenings juggling, fire blowing or learning to tie knots, something they will remember, rather than being sat down in front of a video machine.
Andy can juggle fire clubs and no longer gets burnt.
The Foster-Rowe company is a new venture which obviously includes Nigel Foster and Ray Rowe but hides the identity of its other two partners, Andy and accountant Jim Brown.
Andy has a large input to the design side, having the enjoyment of being able to turn ideas in to reality and then use them to give a financial return.
Other people are bringing in ideas and they are rewarded with commission rather than a free sample of the finished product.
Coming soon are a new wetsuit and high cut trousers and Nigel has now finished the first sea kayak with another on the way.
There is a problem getting people to see the products but they have a mutually beneficial relationship with Palm, who are experts at handling the Gore-Tex products and are easy to get to down the M4.
Andy did some earlier work for Palm and Palm were showing their products at the ISPO exhibition.
The possibility of expanding into other areas outside canoeing is also being considered.
Outside working hours Andy still likes to paddle although there is little time in the summer.
The locals are thinly spread but Pembrokeshire Sea Canoeists, a group of about a dozen of around his own age of 31, meet up for paddles and he is a member of the board lifesaving club at Whitesands.
His wife, Sarah, was also a canoeist before they met but they now face the problem of babysitters for their two youngsters.
Nevertheless, they get on the beach, have  barbecues , go to the Bitches, take out the Canadians and consider modifying a sea double.
The older child, 3, likes to go out on a waveski, sitting between dad's legs.
If they continue to share Andy's interests the trouble will come next year when the centre run their first trip to Japan and everyone will want to go.
Eureka!
Model canoes
Playmobil have brought out two sets of canoe-orientated toys for youngsters.
They have an open canoe with Red Indiana and trapper and an Eskimo set with kayak, dog sledge and seals.
Storry stands in for Mantle
Terry Storry is standing in for Hugh Mantle at Liverpool Polytechnic while Hugh takes a year out to coach the British men's kayak slalom team (Aug, p19).
Terry has been a staff instructor at Plas y Brenin until this summer.
Miller's in liquidation
Miller's (review Aug 90, p21) have gone into liquidation, three months after moving into profit following the opening of their accommodation wing.
Chris Berry's bank changed their mind about funding the new block and pulled the plug.
Slalom Schools is now dead but the centre is on the market with a full order of bookings and re-bookings throughout next season.
The bank was the same high street bank which scuttled Alan Jones last year.
The local press in Dyfed have been in no doubt that the bank were to blame to ruining a business of the type desperately needed in the area.
Chris Berry has received from one of this customers a black cake with white icing, black roses and the inscription ‘Stuff the bank’.
Award for the future
Marne la Vallée, site of the World Sprint Championships, have instituted a new award for a French team member.
The Prix de l'Avenir — Marne la Vallée, worth F30,000 was won for the first time by kayak paddler Bernard Bregeon.
Adventure holidays in Europe
Despite a poor start to the year because of the Gulf War and the recession, Explore have experienced a sharp jump in bookings from people wanting adventure holidays.
The emphasis is on Europe and in July their bookings were more than doubled on the same month last year.
Helicopter Wings
During the years of arms embargo, the South Africans had to develop their own arms industry.
One facility used for making helicopter blades is now finding new use for producing jointless Wings which have the added benefit of being cheap to import because of the weak state of the Rand.
L Lomond canoe school
John Sinclair has set up Loch Lomond Canoe School at Balmaha, venue for the National Sailing Championships a couple of years back.
The school offers kayak and canoe courses, equipment hire (including one way hire along the loch) and cottage, B&B, caravan and camping accommodation.
Slalomists collect Elf points
The England slalom team are collecting points in the Elf Sport In-Gear promotion, the points being used to purchase equipment for the team.
Motorists wishing to donate their points to the team are asked to contact Team Manager Ian Janes.
Sponsorship
Target Europe are looking at new ways to obtain sponsorship deals for sportsmen from the point of view of what competitors can market rather than who will offer financial support, sponsorship being a business arrangement, not a charity.
The sponsorship could help competition or fun canoeists.
For more details send an A5 SAE to Target Europe (CM/AW), PO Box 1267, Eastbourne, E Sussex BN22 0ZR.
New Peak address
Peak Performance Sports Ltd are now at Unit 8, Fashion Designer Studios, 69/73 Lower Parliament St, Nottingham NG1 3BB.
The telephone number remains unchanged.
New Perception models
Hot out of the moulds from Perception are two new models.
The Kiwi II is a double version of the popular Kiwi.
At 3.9m long it is shorter than a slalom kayak but has all the features of the original Kiwi, making it ideal for family and disabled use.
A unique feature is a cockpit lid which reverses to become a cartop transporter.
Also new is the Spectrum S, a smaller version of the touring single for the lighter paddler.
Liquid packs
Liquipaks are a range of flexible liquid carriers from 11 water belt to 71 sackpack.
They have replaceable laminated foil liners and deflate as the liquid is emptied.
The largest size can be inflated with air to form a cushion, a couple of the others have storage pockets of other items and they hold liquids up to 70°C if needed for use as body warmers.
Wyedean weekend
Wyedean Open Weekend will be a major happening at Symond's Yat on 12/13th to celebrate the opening of Wyedean's Holly Barn outdoor centre with its accommodation unit.
There will be secondhand equipment sales in a boat jumble, demonstrations of equipment by Pyranha, Mobile Adventure, Ainsworth, Outdoor Leisure Supplies, Palm and Wild-Water, a film and slide show about a first descent in Nepal, a pig roast and a Bat and open canoe slalom with prizes from the manufacturers (possibly a kayak for first place).
Fuji's Quicksnap Marine is a disposal waterproof camera.
Loaded with 24 frames of Fujicolor Super HG 400 film, it costs £9.19
Just to prove that the Slovenians do not have a monopoly on canoeing competition labels on alcoholic drinks, the French came up with this pleasant number.
We can assure you that the taste of champagne is more quickly acquired than that of Kosutnik.
The Birmingham School of Canoeing celebrated their 5th birthday with a pool party for instructors and valued customers.
Greg Parkes has run the school with a selected group of part-time instructors for 5 years but next year the school will widen their range of courses and employ a full-time member of staff.
Further details are available on 0384 67896.
Manufacturers of aerofoil paddles seem to be proliferating.
Amongst those on show at Marne la Vallée were Roman blades from Spain and Albatros paddles from the USSR.
Ureflex were also exhibiting some nicely presented boats in Paris and seeking overseas dealers.
The most important development in sprint and marathon racing for some time was the introducing of starting gates at the World Sprint Championships in Paris.
Each paddler finds a V shaped cup into which he puts his bows, meaning that raft boys are not needed.
It is impossible to anticipate that start.
As the shot is fired, the gates instantly drop 800mm below the surface.
Inventor Claude Tardieu, an engineer and former rower, of Accastillage & Greements du Sud-Ouest, was reluctant to go into too much detail about the Agsostart Kano but he was keen to find buyers to recover the $100,000 it has cost to produce the 18 prototypes.
The gates seem to be clipped to the lane marker buoy wires in some way and to be operated by compressed air as bubbles rise to the surface just before the gates appear.
Reliability in Paris was perfect.
This contrasts with information volunteered by an Irishman, the accuracy of which I cannot guarantee.
He stated that the raft boys at Holme Pierrepont have habitually come from the local borstal.
A prominent Irish paddler, who shall remain nameless, was wont to drop a 50p or £1 coin on the pontoon on his arrival, thus ensuring a hefty shove in the appropriate direction, at or before the appropriate time!
Golat Youth hostel, situated 400m from the Fowey estuary up a hillside, was due to be reopened by former local resident Chay Blyth.
The hostel now has smaller bedrooms with 4 and 6 beds, improved toilets, showers and heating, new servery and kitchen and new classroom for groups.
The waterside in October
Grey seals assemble during the autumn, the cows on off-shore rocks near the sea to give birth to their young and the bulls on rocks and in inlets to establish territories for mating takes place 14 days after the births of the young seals.
Exposed rocky coasts are preferred for both hauling out and breeding and so the islands of Orkney, Hebrides, Shetland, Farne, Scilly and Man and the coasts of Dorset, Devon, Cornwall and Wales are the areas where the seals will be found.
The British population of some 52,000 is 65 per cent of the world population and so it is very important that these numbers are protected.
Never approach too closely as the cow will invariably desert her single pup if disturbed.
As it is, only a third of the pups will survive to become one year olds and females are only mature sexually after five years with the males usually holding territories after ten years.
If you can not reach rocky shore then the salt marshes around the coast can offer a wide range of interest in their plant and bird life.
The delicate purple flowered common sea lavender can be found and identified by its branched stems, strongly veined leaves and flowers tightly packed in flat-topped clusters.
Look too for the green/silvery leaves of sea purslane which has green/yellow flowers borne on short, branched spikes.
It can usually be found on banks of channels or around pools on the marshes.
Annual seablite is another plant of the salt-marshes; it turns a deep, wine-red colour in autumn and has fleshy, cylindrical leaves that have pointed tips and tapered bases.
October sees the sizeable arrival of winter wildfowl and waders to our shores.
The birds have been breeding in the Arctic regions of Greenland, Iceland, Scandinavia and Russia and travel south to over winter in Britain.
Look out for whooper and Bewick's swans, both of which have yellow and black bill colouring  rather than the orange and black of our native mute swan.
Barnacle and Brent geese are winter visitors that are similar to the Canada goose but both are smaller.
The barnacle has paler plumage than the Canada and the Brent is much darker.
Waders form vast flocks on the mudflats of our coasts and they are best observed on a rising tide as the sea pushes them up to you while you sit watching.
The very important British estuaries are under threat from various man made problems such as mariners, tidal barriers, land reclamation and pollution.
Dave Halsall 
DERRICK
It's my 40th birthday today and I was happy, until that young kid  inadvertently tipped me headfirst into the generation gap!
Books
Drugs & Sport — Lynda Badewitz-Dodd
Of 41 positive drugs tests by the Sports Council in 1990/91, up to 21 are believed to have been accidental, sportsmen who absorbed banned substances while taking medication for illnesses of various sorts.
The object of this book is to prevent this happening.
Most of it consists of a list of banned substances by brand name, IOC category, points for and against from the doctor's point of view, contained substances resulting in the ban and misuse resulting in the ban.
Altogether there must be over a thousand brands listed.
Our personal medicine stock, we note, contains diarrhoea and migraine treatments which contravene IOC regulations.
In much less detail is a list of acceptable products, a list which does not claim to be comprehensive but which included a number of medications I had not expected to see, when eventually found under headings which would generally mean more to the medic than to the layman.
The book opens with an explanation of why some drugs are banned, details of testing procedures for competitors, what happens if a test fails and how drugs are misused.
‘Once the final decision has been reached and notified to the individual concerned, the result and action should be published by the governing body to its membership.’
Such deterrent action seems obvious but there has been an across-the-board reluctance by BCU committees over the years for the membership to have been informed of punishments handed out for any misdemeanours.
One limitation of the book is that it related to UK names only.
If the competitor falls ill while abroad the book does not help.
‘If there any doubts…don't take it’ advises the book, easy to say, less easy to obey for someone in pain or distress, not so easy w hen it is considered that even too much coffee, cola drink or chocolate will register a positive result.
The book begins to date immediately as new drugs come out and as the authorities amend the list of banned substances from time to time.
Perhaps the most telling sentence in the book is ‘Remember, your own doctor or chemist may not always be able to tell you whether a drug contains a banned substance.’
The ultimate responsibility is yours.
Your knowledge (or that of your coach) of the contents of medicines must be better than that of the professionals.
Clearly this is nonsense.d
Until the manufacturers are encouraged or legally obliged to indicate on the outside of the container whether or not contents are IOC approved people will continue to take banned  substances in error.
The manufacturers are the people who are the experts on the contents and can inform the public as soon as a new product is launched.
(There will, of course, be problems where certain sports have slight variations from the IOC list but these sports will then have to consider only the variations.)
The book is invaluable but it shouldn't be.
Until the IOC, BOC or Sports Council and the pharmaceutical industry get together to clearly mark products the competitor will need to refer to it in order to be more  skilful than his GP or pharmacist.
In the meantime, when the second edition is issued it would be helpful to have the headings in terms the layman can understand rather than the more precise but less intelligible medical terminology.
East Coast of Scotland (C23) Imray Laurie Norie & Wilson
The latest Chart from Imray Laurie Norie & Wilson covers not only the east coast of Scotland from Helmsdale to St Abbs Head but also the Caledonian Canal to Fort William plus enlargements of Fraserburgh, Helmsdale and the Inverness Firth.
Scales are not usually given except as scale bars with units varying from one to another but the main chart  is approximately 1:239,300 and the Caledonian Canal is in the order of 1:80,000.
As with Admiralty Charts, a comprehensive range of features for navigating at sea are included while the canal includes such details as locks and bridges.
Particularly clear are the sector colours for the various lighthouses.
Where this range of charts scores is by including all the information on the one chart rather than having to go to other sources of reference.
Here are abbreviations, symbols, wind scales, tidal levels and constants on Dover and Aberdeen, tidal stream atlas, Morse Code and radio frequencies and times for weather forecasts.
Much of this information is held on the back of the chart, unlike the Admiralty who only use one side.
There is a bimonthly updating service available at low cost.
Wild Water Canoeing — Fred Barlow
This is an update of the author's Spur Book of Wild Water Canoeing (Books , Feb 79), often with text and drawings unchanged (one appearing twice) but with the additions of photographs.
Sadly, the one on page 17 shows how not to hold a paddle without making any such comment.
I am left with the impression that the author has updated his work reluctantly and some of his text is misleading.
I repeatedly found myself saying ‘Yes, but…
’ To give examples, he suggests that a kayak should have a jettisoning pod to prevent entrapment situations without making it clear that the buyer is unlikely to find one on the market.
He also describes the failsafe footrest and says it is required, then states the details of the relevant BS which calls for a full plate footrest.
He covers types of canoe, other equipment, basic strokes, water features, competition, rolls and rescues, touring, access and sea canoeing, really too much material in a book of this size.
Used as a revision book it can prompt and encourage some self-questioning but it is too brief to use as a teaching document.
On the reverse ferry, for example, there is no mention in the brief notes of the fact that the stern needs to point upstream, such a vital omission not being untypical.
By repeatedly mentioning the example of the access to the Duddon and naming very few other rivers which may be used he probably paints a truer access picture than he intends.
That is not to say that the book does not have its good points.
I wish I had discovered his method of undertaking glassfibre repairs with clean hands and no brush years ago.
Generally, though, he needs more space if he is to cover so much ground in adequate detail.
Spanish magazine
The independent Spanish magazine Piragüismo de las Autonomías has been running for about a year now.
A little like the French Canoë Kayak magazine in style, it features a range of activities, particularly sprint and marathon, and an interest in teams and associations at home and abroad.
Kinloss Canoe Club
Kinloss Canoe Club are a mixed bunch of desperate characters (you have to be to paddle the Findhorn in early January with 10 degrees C of frost) from all walks of life, based loosely along the inner Moray Firth coast and the town of Forres.
Why, then, Kinloss CC?
‘Cos that's where the Royal Air Force lend us a shed to store the boats and the gear.
One or two members, if plied with enough alcohol, will even admit to being in  yer actual RAF.
Although none of the present members go back more than 10 years (canoeing tends to be a young sport) the club has existed since 1952.
The Findhorn is our local river and members are on it (or in it) at least twice a month throughout the year.
To this end they have collectively built up an enormous fund of local knowledge and experience, not just of the water and its peculiar hydrodynamics but also the sides of the gorge as well, things like the best portage routes, where to escape out of the gorge in an emergency, where and how close you can get with transport, nearest telephone, helicopter landing sites, etc, a sad spinoff of being on call for river search duties in the event of tragic emergency.
We have decided to produce a series of river surveys (of which this, the Dulnain, is the first) to formalize our collective knowledge and to whet the appetite of other less fortunate canoeists for our northeast Scotland rivers.
If this initial survey proves useful and gets good feedback we shall continue and do a series on all our local rivers.
The information is stored on computer and regularly updated by our own network of river watchers, supplemented by our regular Sunday outings.
We have our own network of contacts and access arrangements (favours returned for favours done); one of our members even has the rights to one of our minor rivers.
Basically, however, it is our practice only to paddle on Sundays in the fishing season and not even then on certain rivers when the salmon are running.
(Half of our members are also fishermen so we are well informed.)
For organizations and clubs first timing it in this area Kinloss Canoe Club can always provide an experienced canoeist guide (usually an instructor) to join your flotilla and paddle along to give up to the minute on the spot information, or if you wish, to lead on the water, all at not cost, especially on the Findhorn.
It saves us having time off work for river searching.
Our man comes, of course, complete with rescue equipment, first aid kit, space blanket, etc.
To date we can get the computer and printing free, so this river survey is available for the price of the postage.
Bob Miles
To prepare these guides the club have a party walking the bank while others are paddling the river.
For a copy of the latest edition of the Dulnain guide complete with sketch maps of the major rapids, send 50p to Glenarn, Dallas, Morayshire IV36 0SA.
Forres forays
The Dulnain survey
From Inverlaidnan Bridge — OS Sheet 36, MR 865212, to confluence with the River Spey below Dulnain Bridge.
Descent Gradient — 325 ft in 11.6 miles = 28 ft per mile.
Grade — II (III) in normal water conditions.
Grade III (IV) in spate.
Water conditions are best assessed at Carrbridge.
If the rocks by the lower (concrete) viewing platform are 18 ins exposed, water conditions are normal.
If they are submerged the river may be deemed in spate.
In low conditions a shingle bar is visible between the old and new bridges.
The river is not canoeable in low conditions.
Access — Sundays only during the fishing season.
Unrestricted during the close season.
Approach the put-in site at Inverlaidnan Bridge via the minor (unclassed) road to the south of the river from Carrbridge.
Fork down to the right after 3.5 miles and go approx 50 yds to the river.
There is no direct access from the A9.
Parking is to the left at the foot of the slope.
Description — The Dulnain is an upland river with rapid changes of water conditions.
A rise and/or fall of 18 ins in 2 hrs is not unusual.
Outwith the three constrictions at Sluggan Bridge, Carrbridge and Dulnain Bridge, the river cuts an ever-changing channel in a broad boulder bed, scouring out a series of deeper fast-flowing pools joined together by racks, which is a local Dulnain fishing term for the shallow, jumbled, bouldery flow between two pools.
Racks can be quite steep and as much as ¼ mile long.
Considerable skill is required to read the water and find the deepest flow whilst a delicate paddle touch is needed to avoid scrapes.
The deep channel is rarely more than 10 ft wide in a 90 ft flow; this, combined with the speed of the flow and the length, make all racks grade I/II.
The upper river above Carrbridge flows rapidly through beautiful scenery.
The canoeing is mostly grade I racks with a few tight grade I+/II shoots; there is one grade II at Bogroy footbridge, a twisting descent over 3 rock ledges, and the photographically spectacular grade III in the centre of Carrbridge itself.
(A gallery of 20/30 spectators and photographers appear like magic on the new road bridge whenever canoes are spotted).
The middle river from Carrbridge to Balnaan Bridge is a more gentle proposition, initially fast flowing with less bouldery bed down to what remains of Dalrachney footbridge where there is a long grade I+/II rapid with several routes, all of which go.
Below Dalrachney the river levels out into long, steady-flowing, deep pools, interspersed by rough, shallow, shingle banks.
All the fallen trees on the river are stranded here, invariably in the only deep channel.
Below the old ford at Wester Gallovie the river backs up, giving a deep, sluggish flow, a serpentine course between high man-made banks.
From Balnaan Bridge to its confluence with the Spey is the Dulnain's sting in the tail.
Initially steady flowing pools and racks, the river deepens and quickens over the next ¾ mile with the racks becoming grade II rock gardens with plenty of water and an enjoyable choice of routes until the head of the Dulnain Gorge.
Immediately, for the adrenalin freaks, are the Twisted Tongue, a technically difficult Grade IV+ (vertical drop 5 ft–7 ft depending on water levels) and its Grade III+ chicken run known as the Jacuzzi Slot with entrances only 4 ft apart.
Thereafter comes 50 yds respite, then 300 yds constant grade I/II until Dulnain Bridge  where there is a deep, still pool followed by another ½ mile of continuous grade I/II leading to the old railway bridge.
The final breakout depends upon the depth of water in the Spey.
It can be a gentle paddle on sluggish water or a 25 yd shoot down a narrow rocky gut under the trees.
The island shown on the OS map does not exist.
Paddlers are then faced with the choice of going upstream for a mile to Broomhill Bridge or downstream 3 miles to Grantown-on-Spey to lift out.
The Kinloss Canoe Club experience is that downstream is both quicker and easier.
1 Inverlaidnan Bridge–Sluggan Bridge
0.6 miles, 33 ft descent = 55 ft per mile
Put in approx 200 yds above the bridge.
A small lagoon is formed by the stream between a sandbank and the rock wall.
Adequate parking is just off the road.
Break out from the lagoon into an overfall from the rack on the left and the back wave from the rock wall on right between the rocks.
There is a pool then a typical rack to Inverlaidnan Bridge.
There are 3 arches; shoot the righthand arch and go tight left between the rocks and shingle, then it is 400 yds rack to Twin Islands.
The first  two channels are very shallow, not canoeable; keep left and watch for the cutback channel (not obvious) approx 3ft wide.
Drop 3 ft into 90 degree right turn.
Hug the left bank to the rack outfall then the right bank to second the outflow to avoid very shallow water.
It is 200 yds Sluggan Bridge, a  single arch, straightforward.
2 Sluggan Bridge–A9 Road Bridge
2 miles, 40 ft descent = 20ft per mile.
From the bridge arch, a long, narrow constriction (only 6ft wide) leads around a shingle bank righthand bend.
Drop across the bend approx 15 ft into a similar lefthand bend.
Caution!
A lethal tree is growing out horizontally from the righthand bank, not visible until you are committed to the bend.
Passage is possible through the branches on the extreme left.
Then it is straightforward for approx 0.5 mile until the island.
Take the lefthand channel, hug the left bank where the deep deep flow is very narrow (approx 3ft) then there are straightforward racks to the A9 road bridge.
3 A9 Road Bridge–Carbridge
1.2 miles, 75 ft descent = 52 ft per mile
There is the usual jagged construction debris under the A9 road bridge and also on the downstream side of the adjacent railway bridge.
Of particular note is a piece of railway line which, at normal water levels, stand vertically exposed approx 4 ins above the surface.
Thereafter, there is fairly fast-flowing water curving right to the grade II rapid above Bogroy footbridge.
This comprises a total drop of about 12 ft over 40 yds.
The entry is on the extreme left between the bank and the guard rock over two nice rounded cills within a boat's length, drop approx 3 ft, then there is a 90 degree traverse right to a V shaped trough through the next cill, drop 2 ft then go diagonally right again over a small cill (1 ft), then left again between two large outcrops into a smooth chute which drops 6 ft in 20 yds into a deep pool complete with rustic chainlink suspension bridge and shelving sandy beach.
There follows 400 yds on fast flowing water to grade III falls at Carrbridge.
The drop is 18 ft in 40 yds.
Although not visible until you are in it, this fall gives clear audible warning.
It is possible to land and look in the micro eddy to the right.
The river falls over 7 2–3ft ledges in succession in an S bend between large rock outcrops.
It looks spectacular but in reality shoots very smoothly.
There is only one route, to the left down the centre of the Vs with the main flow into the deep pool between the old packhorse bridge and the new road bridge.
4 Carrbridge–Balnaan Bridge
5.6 miles, 56 ft descent = 10 ft per mile.
From the new road bridge there is a straightforward fast-flowing rack to what remains of Dalrachney footbridge (only the suspension cables remain) where the rack deepens and becomes a grade II rapid.
Visibility is good and there are any number of routes in and around the boulders.
There is almost no white water.
Below here the gradient flattens, giving long pools interspersed with shallow, coarse shingle/boulder banks.
The deep water channel needs care because of the dozens of stranded/fallen trees.
There is one sequence of note, grade I+/II, approx 200 yds below Balnastraid (a ruined croft on the left bank) where the combined gradient/channel/rack outflow produce mini standing waves with a big rock and undercut tree roots to keep things interesting.
The best route, initially, is to cross the shallows on the left into the rack then go right over the shingle/boulder bank into the mini haystacks, thence into the pool, left at the next rack and cut back right between the rock and the boulder bank to avoid the tree roots.
Shoot the next rack on the left also; watch out for the sharp rocks as you turn right at the bottom.
Straightforward pools and racks lead to the old ford at Wester Gallovie.
Caution!
The remains of an old suspension footbridge with multiple vertical wires dangles into water (in spate the suspension wires are at neck height).
You have been warned!
There follows deep, sluggish water, a very serpentine course between high banks, a 2.5 mile slog to Balnaan Bridge where the flow quickens for the last 100 yds to the modern, single, wet arch.
A good lift out/put in site is on the left at the foot of the steps with a dry, secluded changing place under the dry arch.
5 Balnaan Bridge–Dulnain Bridge
1.2 miles, 50 ft descent = 42 ft per mile.
If launching here, go through a little gate from the road, down the steps behind the hut to a second gate at the river bank, a good seal launch site, through the reeds 10 yds downstream.
Note the water gauge by the steps.
The bottom step submerged means there is good water downstream.
From the bridge there is a rack curving right; deep flow starts on the right and ends up on left then there is steady flow curving round a long left bend for ½ mile to S bend left, right, left, all grade I/II rock gardens with plenty of water and routes.
There is a straight approx 150yds long then go left into a grade II with a distinct step on the right at the bottom in the main flow.
At the wall ahead, on the left bank land and look!
There is good landing under the wall among the rocks.
Portage from here.
This fall gives no audible warning and is not visible from above!
You have been warned!
The Jacuzzi Slot, grade III+ (technical), is only 4 ft to the left of the Twisted Tongue, grade IV+.
It is important to place something or someone on the point of rock between the two entrances.
From water level as you approach through the rock garden it looks like one solid rock barrier.
Jacuzzi Slot:— grade III+.
The initial approach starts right of centre and works diagonally left through the rock garden.
The deep flow takes you this way.
The entry slot is a maximum of 3 ft wide (4 ft in spate), by approx 4 boats' length, a very fast water slide.
The first trick is to get left of the chockstone and stop in the Jacuzzi Pool, next, to pivot and line up for the exit slot which is only 2½ ft–3ft wide in a foaming pool whose diameter is only 18 ins more than a boat's length.
The final thing is to twitch left 45 degrees at the chockstone at the bottom of the exit slot to complete an unaided descent.
Any attempt to shoot straight out will rip  yer bottom out!
Twisted Tongue:— grade IV+.
This is a vertical drop of 5 ft– 6 ft, half rolling and turning 90 degrees right over diagonal slab into a fall overflow.
There is no stopper but a good depth (5 ft), the cill undercut with a huge boil.
Approach as for the Jacuzzi Slot but shoot right of the centre point rock.
The technique is to lean left (the wrong way) on entry until the 90 degree right turn is complete (or else  yer'll bash  yer 'ead on the righthand rockface).
There is an almost vertical plunge into a boil; shoulder deep is normal (ultra high support stroke?), under the flow from right, then a rear popout with pirouette left to avoid semi-submerged rocks, a piece of cake.
There is a minor cill just downstream; the headlong descent goes on with only 50 yds' respite before the 350 yds continuous grade II rapids leading to Dulnain bridge.
This takes the form of a steep rock garden with some of the rocks the size of small cottages, making for some very interesting eddies.
The last 200 yds goes best down the left into the big deep pool under Dulnain bridge.
It is possible to lift out here on the left above the bridge.
However, the gorge here is some 50 ft–60 ft deep.
It's a long way up to the road with a carry over the bridge to the nearest place you can park the car and trailer.
6 Dulnain Bridge–River Spey
1.1. miles, 38ft descent = 30ft per mile.
(Dulnain bridge — old railway bridge 0.7 mile, 33 ft descent = 47ft per mile)
(Old railway bridge — River Spey 0.4 mile, 5 ft descent = 9 ft per mile)
From the bridge pool there is continuous grade II over small cills through rock gardens until the old railway bridge.
The first four mini cills below Dulnain bridge go almost exclusively on left, as does most of the rapid until in sight of the old railway bridge then there is a good choice of routes, good fun, quite fast with few back eddies.
The old railway bridge is shallow, full of masonry and debris; take care.
From here, if the Spey is up, it's a flat water paddle under the trees to the confluence.
If the Spey is down, however, there is a final 25 yd shoot down a narrow rocky little gut under the same trees.
It's too far from anywhere to lift out at the confluence.
The choice is upstream to Broomhill Bridge (1 mile) or downstream to Grantown-on-Spey (3 miles).
As regular paddlers on the Dulnain (4–5 times a year) it's the Kinloss CC experience that downstream is by far the best option.
It's 40 minutes hard work upstream to Broomhill, even when the Spey is low.
It's less than 40 minutes down to Grantown, just floating.
The best lift out at Grantown is approximately 400 yds above the bridge; there's a nice little beach next to the minor (unclassed) road at OS MR 029265.
There are proper parking bays for the transport and trailer right next to the water.
Bob Miles 
The old packhorse bridge, Carrbridge.
The photographs were taken at a high water level.
The grade ¾ fall at the top of the Twisted Tongue gorge.
Guide
Tame Valley Canal
The Tame Valley Canal was one of the last canals to be built, running eastwards across the West Midlands from Tame Valley Junction on the Walsall Canal to Salford Junction on the Birmingham & Fazeley Canal (Oct 84 guide) at the head of the Grand Union Canal.
Although planned earlier, it was not built until 1844 by which time the Farmer's Bridge to Salford Junction section of the Birmingham & Fazeley Canal was hopelessly congested with 24 hour/day, 7 day/week working.
The Tame Valley Canal was constructed to by-pass this section and was very sophisticated with long, bold, straight sections which made use of high embankments and deep, wide cuttings, twin towpaths and brick-lined banks.
It is possible to get vehicle access to an area of rough ground at Tame Valley Junction between the Walsall Canal and the Lower Ocker Hill Branch.
Other than tennis courts and other sports facilities beyond the Lower Ocker Hill Branch the area is inauspicious.
Ocker Hill Power Station with two prominent chimneys, a sewage works and a canal surface with oil and floating debris.
Rectangular pipe bridges cross at intervals but so do the lattice arched footbridges which are an attractive feature of the Black Country canals.
The first reach of the canal is to be crossed by the retained portion of the new Black Country Spine Road, now downgraded from trunk road to local highway.
Just before Golds Hill Wharf the canal is crossed by a railway bridge with a pier on a central island in the canal.
This route has been earmarked for a possible future extension of the Midland Metro light rail transit system.
The following bridge carries the track which will form the first line of the Midland Metro, due to be opened next year.
This reach has factories which smell of cellulose paint and sawdust with fans venting across the towpath and long plastic drainpipes projecting through walls and attempting to shoot their contents beyond the towpath.
There is the usual graffiti but there are also plenty of flowers to brighten things up.
Birdsfoot trefoil accompanies blackberries and there are no less than three colours of clover, the usual white, the less common pink and a much less frequently seen deep magenta variety adding a splash of summer colour.
Algae and other weed in the canal shows it is not used too often and some patches grow right across although it is not hard to paddle through them and the lengths of wood and other floating debris.
A bridge arch carries the towpath over the entrance to Holloway Bank Wharf after a slight double bend before a 3km straight which is closely followed by powerlines.
Houses on the outskirts of West Bromwich approach close on the right beyond long grass while more wild vegetation on the left stands at the top of a high embankment with a stream, pond, college and school at the foot, the land gradually rising again to Church Hill at Wednesbury.
A short aqueduct carries the canal over a minor road before the canal dives into a deep cutting.
This ends just before the large A4031 bridge from which the canal emerges to cross over an aqueduct over a minor road with a public house below on the left and then crosses over another aqueduct over the railway main line through Birmingham.
An island divides the canal as it prepared to turn onto its most dramatic section, the kilometre long embankment which runs high across the Tame Valley, now accompanied by the Midland Links motorway, the triangle where the end of the M5 meets the M6, a unique canal environment.
The canal first crosses the western arm of the M5 on a new concrete aqueduct.
The height of the embankment can be judged by looking at the elevated section of the M6 which now runs beside the canal but which can be seen moving away to the northwest as a two tier motorway junction viaduct on spindly columns.
A stop gate provides protection as the canal approaches the aqueduct which is to carry it across the River Tame (Feb 83 guide) and between a sewage works and an electricity substation.
At the far side of the valley the motorway climbs away up to Great Barr while the canal divides round another island as it approaches Rushall Junction where it is joined by the Rushall Canal to win the coal trade from the Cannock mines.
This is now a popular cruising link and the water quality in the Tame  Valley canal improves markedly from here with the only weeds being small clumps of watercress along the edges.
The remainder of the canal also forms part of the course of the Birmingham Century Marathon.
The canal passes under the eastern spur of the M5 and then leaves the noise and traffic behind as it dives into a deep wooded cutting from where there is little evidence that the canal is passing between the housing estates of Grove Vale as the atmosphere is so pleasantly rural.
Two bridges pass high across the cutting.
The first carries the dual carriageway A4041 with a street light balanced precariously above the centre of the canal.
The other is a slim footbridge carried on the piers of what looks like a former railway viaduct.
The kilometre long cutting emerges onto a longer embankment with extensive views over the Tame valley and back towards West Bromwich.
After another island with half blocked off by Hamstead Wharf there are two aqueducts.
Spouthouse Aqueduct crosses a minor road, by which stand Dyas Take Away and a supermarket.
Piercy Aqueduct crosses the B4124.
Housing estates lie below the canal on both sides although there is a deceptive amount of greenery about.
Passing TS Leopard with its anti-aircraft gun, the canal plunges into another deep cutting.
There are frequent outcrops of red sandstone and these are sufficiently soft for them to have needed to be reinforced with sections of red brickwork in many places.
Meanwhile, the canal is edged with black bricks laid with black mortar which provides a very smart finish to the canal.
This is said to be one of the best angling waters in the Midlands although this nearly changed a year ago when a slug of pollution threatened to wipe out 100,000 fish.
The smartness is also present in the Perry Barr 1st Flight of locks which were refurbished in 1988 with new gates and attractive brickwork.
Barr Top Lock Wharf lies beyond the A34 bridge and the first 7 locks come as a 700m flight to be portaged together, on the way passing the Birmingham Alexander Stadium set in Perry Park with artificial football pitch, running track and full athletics facilities in a large, modern site.
The M6 crosses on the Thornbridge Viaduct, a viaduct which has been extensively repaired last year using a very powerful water lance to cut out deteriorated concrete, a German tool being used in Britain for the first time.
Four more locks follow, Perry Barr 2nd Flight, it just about being worthwhile to launch between locks 8 and 9.
After the A453 and its attendant petrol station it is again worth paddling to lock 11 which is set between a container terminal and a sportsground lined with poplar trees which shed their downy white seed onto the canal in profusion at this time of year.
The area around Perry Barr Wharf has several industrial areas, alternating from one side of the canal to the other.
Amongst these are two significantly older churches at Upper Witton, the first near the canal with a rather short spire and the other set amidst a cemetery although there is little peace here these days as the M6 crosses back over.
The canal has moved into a heavily industrial area for the final two locks, Perry Barr 3rd Flight, by the second of which is an old lock cottage covered with roses, defiantly holding on in its surroundings of chimneys, water towers, barbed wire, corrugated iron and half dismantled vehicles.
All is not derelict, though.
Apart from the lock cottage, there are various other places where the towpath can offer a colourful assortment of vetch, convolvulus and purple lupins, the latter seeming to thrive in the vicinity of Salford Junction.
The junction lies at the far end of Junction 6 of the M6, Gravelly Hill Interchange or Spaghetti Junction, the most complicated motorway interchange in Britain, offering freeflow routes between the M6, A38M and A5127 and also linking in various local roads.
Most of this happens in three dimensions and is best seen from this canal as roads snake through the air in all directions.
It begins gently at first, a pipe bridge, a lattice canal footbridge and an arched cable bridge, and then develops in earnest as sliproads flail through the air, the M6 crosses, the Birmingham to Lichfield railway passes through and ever more sliproads arc over until the canal passes into a large box tunnel with two towpaths below the A38M Aston Expressway before emerging into the relative simplicity of Salford Junction below the M6.
The interchange has deteriorated badly in the 19 years since completion and repair work is involving jacking up the deck of sections of sliproad still in use in order to extract the decaying crosshead beams for replacement.
Exit is best made on the right after another tunnel island and just before the junction.
This section of land lies between the canal and the River Tame and leads along to the A5127 northeast-bound where there might be room for a vehicle to pull off the road into the gateway to load up beneath the M6.
Longer term parking space may be located on the north side of the roundabout which links some of the many sliproads together at ground level, pedestrian subways having been thoughtfully provided.
Distance
From Tame Valley Junction to Salford Junction is 14km.
Transport
Gravelly Hill station links via Aston station with stations at Witton, Perry Barr, Hamstead and Bescot.
Local buses are also helpful.
Campsites
There is a campsite 15km away at Fazeley.
Youth Hostels
Birmingham Youth Hostel is 4km away.
Licence
A British Waterways licence is required, costing £1 per day.
The BCU membership fee covers use of this canal.
Canal Society
Birmingham Canal Navigations Society, F K Starkey, 101 Cherry Orchard Rd, Birmingham, B20 2LA.
OS 1:50,000 Sheets
139 Birmingham
Weather Forecasts
Weathercall.
Central Midlands, 0898 500 411.
The Tame Valley Canal leaves the Walsall Canal at Tame Valley Junction, Ocker Hill.
The canal is carried over the western spur of the M5 on a modern aqueduct.
Access and passage are not necessarily permitted and safe under all conditions.
The long straight alongside the M6, seen from Rushall Junction.
The peaceful wooded cutting at Grove Vale.
The canal runs high above the Tame valley at Hamstead.
Perry Barr 1st Flight offers a wide, easy portage down past the sports stadium.
Roses between thorns: the lock cottage at Witton surrounded by industrial premises and debris.
The first few of the many bridges which make up the Gravelly Hill Interchange complex through which the canal passes.
Would you have stopped this?
So we set a date for it, Saturday June 29th at six in the morning.
Once we had achieved this magnificent piece of organizational decision making we looked to see if, in true Teesside Polytechnic student style, we could gain anything form it financially!
John is the manager of a truly wonderful shop in Middlesbrough, Wilderness Ways.
John turned out to be fairly wonderful himself as I left his shop on Friday afternoon clutching two nice new buoyancy aids which did score heavily over our present equipment because of their possession of quick-release harnesses.
Although John felt that we were pulling a rather large practical joke his sense of humour did prove to be a lot better than most we had encountered recently.
Not only did he sponsor us, he kept referring to our escapade as ‘canoeing’; this was stretching things a bit too far.
He knew that after shooting the second eight foot fall we would be free-falling thirty-feet onto a sloping rock shelf covered with a six inch sheet of tonnes and tonnes of the River Tees rushing over it every second; hopefully (if we hit it at the correct angle) we would follow this shoot a further twenty five feet into the plunge pool at the bottom of the fall.
Now, if that's canoeing then I'm tall, dark and handsome.
One thing High-Force is, though, is a perfectly viable proposition for anyone possessing a couple of thick steamers, a fullface helmet, a padded out Topolino, a good  buoyancy aid and the ability to maintain an upright position, holding the boat at the correct angle over the third drop.
A good backup team might help as well!
What I should perhaps point out here is that seventy percent of people who have fallen from the top of the falls have died in the process.
Any potential descent party would do well to dwell on this statistic and their own evaluation of the falls rather than Paul and myself.
Friday twenty eighth of June passes without incident apart from a quick visit from the local constabulary asking us to consider what a dangerous stunt it is that we are trying to pull.
I say ‘Yes’ a lot and show them some photos of me on the Etive.
The two constables leave, looking even more puzzled than when they arrived.
My night is spent trying to sleep but my impending fame and fortune keeps my mind awake, dwelling on tomorrow's descent.
I keep rehearsing that low brace that I have been thinking about ever since we set a date for our attempt.
I wonder if it really will involve performing better than I have ever performed in a boat before.
I wonder if that final rock shelf might turn out to not be as sloping as we think it is.
I wonder if I will get away with things as easily as I have on other serious falls and I wonder what it will feel like at the bottom.
Good?
Painful?
Amazing?
I tell myself that I'll know in the morning but still I lie awake.
At six in the morning the descent party arrives at the High Force Hotel.
The police are there, too.
Paul and I converse with a lovely WPC.
She tells us how foolhardy we both are and offers me information on something called a ‘towback’ which her superiors have told her about.
I wonder if she really wants to be out of bed this morning, talking to a couple of lunatics, or not.
I decide that it doesn't much matter as we are never going to talk this girl round to our way of thinking and anyway we are not breaking the law so she can't really stop us.
Paul starts to move the boats to the top of the falls whilst I run on ahead to talk to the police at the top of the falls with the nice man from the Northern Echo.
I'd not expected to convince the police at the top of the falls that I was a very sane person, nor did I expect them to believe Paul's emergency story that we were a group of passing  Hippies taking our kayaks for a walk.
However, neither of us had expected to be arrested for behaviour likely to cause a breach of the peace’ if we attempted to get on the water above the falls; we'd blown it!
My parents had stayed over in Middlesbrough that night and they were taking me home the next day.
As the car chugged down the M1 motorway I stopped cursing my bad luck and thought of how we could have made the first descent if only we had concentrated on the job in hand and not got the press involved or told so many people all about our daring endeavour.
Ultimately there are more things in life than canoeing; unfortunately we had allowed things to become part of what should have been a purely personal outing in a boat; in doing this we had ensured that  our attempt did not go ahead.
If we try again it will be at first light with a photographer and no-one else present or maybe with just ourselves present.
If we pursue the last option then we might have a job proving that we have made a successful  descent but at least it would then truly become a purely personal outing in a boat.
We'll see.
Later on in the day I wander up to Low Force with no boat and no-one except my girlfriend and the fish trying to swim and jump up the fall for company.
I feel the wind on my face and the first drops of a summer rain shower falling on my hair.
I squeeze Sarah a little harder and realize something.
There are some people who don't care if you are a hero or not.
Neither should you.
Richard Fish
Editor's footnote:Most authorities would consider High Force to be completely suicidal and not ‘a perfectly viable proposition’.
Anyone feeling brave enough to tackle it should first talk to Lees LAO Len Smith and see if the feeling of bravado survives the experience!
LETTERS
Letters, especially brief ones, are welcomed.
The Editor reserves the right to abridge letters to suit the space available.
A letter will not be considered for publication unless accompanied by the sender's name and address.
Anonymity will be retained where requested.
Moulds wanted
I represent the 17th Waltham Forest Company of the Boys Brigade and am writing to you for help.
As a small company of 15 boys we find it hard to make ends meet.
Therefore we turn to you for help in ways to make lightweight canoes in a cheap but very safe manner.
We have tried to obtain glassfibre moulds in the past, have not succeeded and would be grateful if  you could advise us on any way that is known to you of building such a craft.
I look forward to hearing of a way out of this problem that is keeping the Boys Brigade in Waltham Forest on dry land.
KAYAK CONTROL
Forward paddling
Simon Dawson
In recent editions of Canoeist I have written two articles, one on general coaching techniques and one on blade feather angles.
Both are based on my work on Kayak Control coaching.
There was a lot of helpful feedback from these pieces so over the next few months I will try to provide a few more examples to expand this work.
The articles will not become a coaching manual.
The aim is simply to create discussion and debate about how kayaks work and the various ways we teach their use.
Although the topics will be varied there will be two overall themes, of which the first is the study of boat shapes.
For many years, both in the days of glassfibre and for the first few years of plastic, there was little variety in the shape of boats in general recreational use.
They were nearly all about four metres long, fairly high volume, with rounded decks.
It was possible to teach one single set of paddling techniques because all boats could be assumed to work in roughly the same way.
Nowadays that assumption is not longer safe.
On beginners' courses we can have adults in four metre Europas alongside kids in Rotobats whilst the bigger kids soon move on to playboats and squirt boats.
There is now a massive variety in boat shapes, needing variations in the techniques we teach.
These changes in technique with boat shape can be shown in the forward paddling style which is the basis of the first two articles.
When considering the variation of forward paddling technique with boat shape there are two factors to consider, the variation of speed with boat length and the differences in the way the boats turn.
We will consider the turning factor first.
I will start off by defining the sorts of hull to be discussed.
In the first class are touring boats, designed for long distance work on flattish water.
Examples are marathon K1s, WW racers, sea kayaks and plastic tourers such as the Mi 415.
At the other end of the scale are boats designed for use on white water, short manoeuvrable kayaks such as the Rotobat, Valeta, Stunt Bat and dancer.
It is a measure of our changing standards that 3.5 metre boats such as the Dancer, Mountain Bat and Invader are regarded as large boats today.
In 1984 the Dancer was regarded as exotically short and low volume when first introduced.
In their design these boats are firmly in the white water category.
The third category is general purpose.
Such boats are  designed for mixed flat and white water work.
Kayaks such as the Europe and Mirage are good examples here, tending to be about four metres long.
Until about five years ago most boats in general club use were of this sort.
Shorter white water kayaks are a comparatively recent innovation.
A touring boat is designed to be directionally stable.
If the paddler builds up speed and then stops paddling, the boat will drift on in a straight line.
By contrast, a white water of GP boat has to turn fast, especially into a breakout.
The hull is deliberately shaped so that as soon as it is put slightly off course the veer will increase and increase until the boat is facing the other way.
Rather than directional stability, the boats are intentionally made directionally unstable, otherwise they would be unusable on white water.
Although a touring boat is long and difficult to turn, it has a useful steering capability designed into its shape.
If the hull is tilted to the right it will steer to the left whilst it will veer right for a leftward tilt.
This feature is incredibly useful and it is a vital part of racing technique.
By using the tilt it is possible for a white water race, for example, to steer down a rapid whilst still using powerful forward strokes  rather than having to use slower sweep strokes.
A GP boat is still quite long and on flat water it is possible to use the steering by tilting effect.
For example, the BCU 3 Star practical calls for ‘tilting the boat to assist turning’.
This is a direct reference to this technique, which was written in the old days of long boats, but as the boats in use get still shorter this steering effect reduces and the ease of veering off course increases.
There comes a point when it is no longer possible to keep the  boat on course with hull tilt alone.
So, how does this factor affect paddling style?
In a touring boat we want long powerful strokes to go fast over long distances.
This is best achieved with the blade close to the hull and the paddle shaft very upright.
We will not easily be put off course but if we are we can use the kayak tilt or rudder to maintain the line without needing the paddle to steer.
As we have seen earlier, long general purpose boats react similarly to touring boats.
This is why we developed the habit of teaching trainees to paddle GP boats in a high, upright style derived from racing.
As the boats have got shorter the directional instability increased but our ability to correct it with tilt decreased.
This means that in order to paddle a straight line in a white water boat we need to include a bit of steering into the forward stroke.
The shorter the boat, the more easily the boat goes off course and the more the paddle blade needs to move away from the boat's side whilst we propel it forward.
This effect is best shown in the diagram and photographs.
I took a whole series of front views of both touring and white water paddlers during forward paddling.
(Examples are Figs 1 and 2.)
With tracing paper overlays I could measure the paddle shaft angle during the stroke in each photograph (Fig 3).
By plotting them all on one diagram for comparison (Fig 4) you can see that the touring boat tends to have an upright paddle shaft with the white water paddler much lower and flatter.
Fig 5 shows the actual blade paths.
A touring blade path is close to the hull and a white water blade path wider and further back.
The questions
At the end of any article it is normal to give conclusions, explaining what the article means in a short, pithy summary, but I want to create debate, not stifle discussion, so after each article I will simply pose some questions and let readers create their own ideas.
1.
It is generally taught that a low paddle angle and wide blade action imply poor style and inefficient paddling.
Is this correct or should we allow different styles for different boats?
2.
In a country where most of us are taught to paddle on flat water, should we insist on putting novices into white water boats which are specifically designed to veer off course and then spend millions of man hours teaching them to go straight or should we put novices into boats designed to go in straight lines?
They do exist.
3.
If a high paddle action implies speed and power and a low action steering and control then should we paddle backwards with a high or low paddle action?
When is it more important to go backwards fast than to go accurately under control?
This work on kayak technique is part of the Kayak Control Syllabus, a coaching programme for white water recreational paddlers.
For details of this programme, or of the Kayak Control seminar on October 26/27th, contact Simon Dawson on Nottingham (0602) 868803.
Outdoor Style Aqua-Pak Test 1
Thinner foam for closer encounters
The Aqua-Pak is the latest buoyancy aid to be developed purely for competition paddlers.
In this case it was designed for use by slalom paddlers in the Canadian classes, though it is proving popular with kayak users as well.
It is manufactured in Belgium on behalf of Outdoor Style from Airex foam covered with a waterproofed material, Softex 200.
The shape of the foam is designed to allow maximum arm and shoulder movement and so is cut narrow at the top and well down at the sides.
The foam on the back is thinner than that used on the front, the intention being to allow slalom paddlers (who are good enough) to pass even closer to the poles.
To make the buoyancy up to competition standards the foam is longer than used in similar models though overall the Aqua-Pak is about the same length.
The result is that the foam comes high up on the neck which is possible an advantage on the back as extra protection to the base of the neck is offered though around the front it feels rather bulky.
Ease of shoulder movement is aided by the use of 35mm wide elastic shoulder straps.
The sides are made of contrastingly coloured elasticated nylon with no foam fitted, the lack of kidney protection making it unsuitable for use in canoe polo.
To hold the buoyancy aid in place nylon straps are provided at the sides, pulling through plastic buckles plus a nylon string draw cord at the bottom.
This can be fitted with push release toggle as an optional extra.
On the water the Aqua-Pak felt comfortable with very little restriction in movement.
The only problems encountered were that I tended to catch my chin on the high foam on the front and shoulder elastic was slightly against skin.
However, both these irritating points disappeared once the buoyancy aid was soaked and are probably just due to the materials being new and stiff.
On test when it matters, ie swimming in white water, the Aqua-Pak had the advantage of being easier to swim in than many larger more bulky buoyancy aids though it was essential to have the jacket well fitting and done up properly as, like other buoyancy aids of this style, it could easily ride up the body.
To assist in getting a good fit the Aqua-Pak is also being developed in special sizes to fit ladies and juniors, a welcome trend being adopted by some equipment manufacturers.
Andy Halliday 
Suzy Throwbag Holster Test 2
Keeping your throwline on you
The Throwbag Holster from Suzy is a carrying device for the Green Slime's Rescue Throwbag, other line of  similar size or even a camera, flares at sea or other item of equipment.
Paddlers who normally carry a throwbag in a buoyancy aid back pocket will continue to do so but this holster is for those who do not have back pockets in their buoyancy aids or, indeed, bank support members not wearing buoyancy aids at all.
Slung round the waist on a webbing belt with adjustable plastic fixlock buckle, it can be worn on one hip, behind like a bumbag or in front like a sporran, the latter being the only sensible arrangement for paddling but none of them being ideal for making an exit in difficult conditions or swimming in the event of a capsize.
It is bright orange in colour with black fittings and has the word ‘Rescue’ clearly across the front.
A generous flap at the top seals with two heavy duty press studs and a tab is attached to the flap for pulling it open.
At the bottom there is a drain hole edged with a brass eyelet.
Throughout, the manufacture is heavy duty for durability.
At the back there is a horizontal belt sleeve which allows it to be attached to a belt up to 70mm wide and there is also a vertical sleeve 50mm wide which permits it to be worn on its side or slid down over a vertical post for use as a permanent fixture at a centre or clubhouse.
Another option is to thread a towline through it.
In just a few short years the throwline has become standard equipment for white water paddlers.
This holster will allow it to be carried by a few of those who presently have no means of looking after a throwline.
Prijon Seayak Test 3
Excellent for coastal cruising
Nearly a decade ago when general purpose plastic kayaks first appeared on the market all threw up their hands in horror.
Compared to glassfibre boats they were said to be heavy, slow, unmanoeuvrable and, because they bent rather than broke, dangerous.
A few centres might use them for lake paddling, it was thought, but the serious river paddler would never buy them.
Now it is the turn of the sea kayak.
‘A plastic sea kayak; you must be mad,’ was a typical  comment from a Plas-y- Brenin instructor when the Seayak appeared through the post.
He and the others repeated all the old objections to plastic as a material, heavy, slow, unmanoeuvrable and dangerous with the  emphasis this time on the middle two rather than the last.
(There is always a danger of pinning in any kayak or canoe but on rivers the chances of getting trapped in a boat are, of course, much higher than on the sea.)
I suspect that sea kayaking will go the way of inland touring, namely that modifications to design and materials will negate the most telling criticisms of plastic, and then its obvious advantage in durability will vastly outweigh its remaining disadvantages (except for competitions and long open sea crossings).
Already the keyhole cockpit and the development of high molecular density polyethylene has made plastic boats much more  escapable and resistant to folding.
Keyhole cockpits are now almost universal but high density polyethylene is still unique to Prijon and has given them the edge in plastic white water kayak design.
It now looks as though it will do the same for them in plastic sea kayak design.
Apart from problems inherent to plastic (it is not as fast or manoeuvrable through the water as glassfibre) a major weakness of the plastic used so far in sea kayaks has been its lack of rigidity.
There is nothing worse than a bendy sea boat.
This is not so much  dangerous (as it is in a white water kayak) but, exaggerated as it is by the length of the sea kayak, just plain horrible to push through the water.
Prijon plastic definitely ameliorates if not quite gets rid of this problem.
There is much less flexing both fore and aft and laterally in the Seayak than in other plastic sea kayaks.
This is important at sea where most paddle strokes are power strokes.
You do now want forward power diverted into other types of movement by the interaction of wave with hull.
The rigidity of the Seayak is noticeable but it is still a plastic boat and therefore slow and fairly cumbersome.
The former is not crucial unless time and energy efficient paddling are important (which they will be on big open crossings) but the latter is a more serious problem, particularly when trying to keep on a bearing in a big sea.
There is provision made for a rudder assembly on the Seayak but my version came without one so I cannot vouch for its effectiveness in steering.
I found cranking the boat over on its side did not help to turn it (in the opposite direction) as much as I would expect in a sea kayak.
This is probably because there is no chine on the hull, difficult to get, given the material and type of construction.
It did mean that keeping the Seayak on a bearing in a big sea was a somewhat tiring and frustrating battle.
Incidentally, the idea of putting a compass in the seat recess with a seethrough window in the spraydeck is just plain daft; apart from making you sick, looking down all the time would divert attention from where it matters, the sea.
The mounting should be on the front deck, which is where I taped my Silva compass.
It would be interesting to know whether the original glassfibre design of this boat is easier to manoeuvre and, if so, whether the hull has more of a chine.
Of one thing I am fairly certain, namely that the glassfibre Seayak will carve through waves better.
I noticed that the plastic Seayak bobbed up, over and down rather than cutting through the swell.
This allowed it to veer off course quite readily unless the steering or correction stroke was timed to strike when the kayak was perched on top of the wave.
It also made for quite a wet ride as the Seayak ‘bobbed’ downwards.
The proud deck hatches made matters worse by throwing up any water that came along the deck; they should really have been recessed.
(It should be said that their size meant packing was very easy and they were watertight.)
In calm water there was little difference in the ride compared with a glassfibre boat.
Probably the most crucial times in sea kayaking are launching and landing.
Would you rather do this on a barnacled tidal ramp in a loaded plastic kayak or a loaded glassfibre kayak?
Need I say more?
I will, to my own detriment.
While I was testing the Seayak on the west coast of Ireland I failed to pull it far enough up the beach on the night of a rising spring tide.
The result was that the Seayak went for an unscheduled underwater swim round campsite bay.
When we found it and after I had thanked every sea god for my luck and promised never to make the same stupid mistake again, I gingerly inspected the Seayak for damage.
There was none.
The Seayak is not only more robust than any glassfibre boat, it is more user friendly.
It is very stable, very comfortable (forget about the layers of foam mat to pad the seat) and sufficiently directionally stable to be a real pleasure on coastal trips.
I gave the Seayak to eight students on a Plas-y-Brenin introductory course.
None had the wobblies usually experienced by first timers in glassfibre sea kayaks.
On the contrary, they all commented on its comfort and stability.
‘A lovely smooth comfortable ride, just like a Rolls Royce,’ one said, summarizing the general reaction.
On first  acquaintance I found the keyhole cockpit did not give such a positive feel to the boat as the smaller cockpit rims of glass boats but none of the students noticed this.
They, of course, had known no other type of cockpit.
Then there was Jackie's reaction to the Seayak.
She is a steady inland and sea paddler but had never been in a sea kayak.
Her first taste was a crossing to Inishbofin where, five minutes after leaving the shore, we were into a six foot Atlantic swell.
She never looked back.
Indeed, I was far more worried than she because the Seayak she was using had no storage tanks (these are Prijon's replacement for the more usual bulkhead system, the latter being very hard to make watertight in plastic boats) and no pump.
We would have had a real problem emptying the Seayak in that swell.
X rescues or similar out because of the Seayak's loaded weight and bailing would have been a very frustrating experience beam on in that sea; a flexible hose from another boat's pump would have worked but mine was glassed in!
So, I would want to test the storage tank and pump system (and the rudder assembly) before unreservedly recommending the Seayak even for short open sea crossings.
Still, there Jackie sat, first time in a sea kayak, not just coping but relishing the hairy conditions.
We surfed that channel in half the time it normally takes and then towards the end of our Connemara trip, even  after a couple of longer crossings where she admitted she was cursing the disappearing stern of my glassfibres boat, she wanted to buy the Seayak.
‘What, the plastic pig!
No.’
I almost surprised myself with my reaction.
It may not be beautiful and certainly is not fast but it is a survivor, it stands no nonsense and it will be around  long after the thoroughbreds have thrashed themselves to death on a rocky shore.
Terry Storry  
COMPETITION
Hotdogging
Summer time is rodeo time
Augsburg Rodeo
One week after the World Stunt Boat Championship at Ramsey Island, Augsburg (Bavaria) was the next rodeo event.
The programme was a skill test for beginners and professionals, squirt competition, fun race and open canoe show paddling.
The main attractive discipline was the  hotdogging on Sunday afternoon.
World Champion Jan Kellner broke his rib during the squirt competition the day before.
Andy Middleton, World 2nd place, missed it because he had to work on Sunday so the result of the hotdogging was open until the end.
After lots of very interesting figures at the first big stopper of the Olympic Eiskanal, the winner was Boris Retzlaf.
The Augsburg White Water Rodeo was the biggest canoe stunt boat spectacle in Germany so far.
Sven Grimpe
Forthcoming events
The 1996 Olympic slalom in Atlanta is open to some question because of disputes within the USA about funding.
World Sprint Championships venues have been announced as Nyköping in 1993, Zagreb in 1995 (the political situation permitting) and Duisburg in 1995.
ICF President Sergio Orsi has expressed a wish that the World Marathon Championships should be held in South Africa in the not- too-distant future, South Africa having been provisionally readmitted to the ICF subject to ratification at the ICF congress next summer.
IDBF formed
John Warren reports that dragon boat racing took a step forward when the formation of an international federation took place in Hong Kong in June.
The constitution of the Federation, which has been formulated over the past two years, was agreed with twelve countries accepted into membership.
Mike Haslam, Chairman of the BDA and European Federation, was appointed General Secretary and BDA Secretary Merk Hauck will chair the Regattas and Technical Installations Commission.
Ketn Hayden- Sadler, Hong Kong Tourist Association Europe Director and long term supporter of dragon boat racing in the UK, will represent the BDA as Chairman of the Marketing, Sponsoring and Finance Commission.
Robert Wilson was appointed President and will administer federation business from Hong Kong.
Lu Jin-Dong was appointed Honorary President with Vice President positions being filled by representatives from Taipei, Singapore and Italy.
The first congress will be held in Singapore in June next year.
Slalom
What do slalomists want?
Abingdon Weir Slalom
The sun shone on the white water as the gaily coloured knights powered their shining craft through the foaming waters of Old Father Thames.
In other words, Abingdon Weir Slalom was blessed for the second year running with good weather and moving water.
The down side was a disappointing entry, down by around 30% from last year.
At this rate the revival of the slalom is going to be a short one.
This would be a shame and later in this spiel I have put down some thoughts on the matter.
However, first I must thank all those who helped to make the weekend happen.
First are the paddlers, that is you .
Members of both the clubs involved in organizing the slalom, Kingfisher Canoe Club and the Pathfinders, hope you enjoyed the weekend and had fun.
Thanks also to all the other organizations that helped, the Vale of White Horse District Council who allowed us to use their land, the National Rivers Authority for the use of the river, Thames Water for the use of their island and for generous sponsorship, an extra special thanks to Roger Steer, the lock keeper, for much help, kindness and understanding and to his wife for providing a seemingly endless supply of ice-cream, to Jim Croft of Slalom Sports for unfailing help and loan of computer hardware and to our local Scouts for looking after the campsite and for organizing effective first-aid cover.
We apologize for the somewhat chaotic state of affairs on Saturday and the slight lateness in some runs.
For those who didn't get to know, some of the local fraternity cut many of the lines on Friday night or Saturday morning.
This was followed by a total computer failure; only Jim Crofts's sturdy IBM original portable saved the day.
The final straw which induced almost total panic in control was the large proportion of late entries; about 10% were received before the official closing date, a further 30% before the weekend and nearly 60% on the day.
So, if anyone of you out there caught the wrong side of my tongue during Saturday, I do apologize wholeheartedly.
Slalom is meant to be fun; it fails to be so if we take it all too seriously.
What can be done to stop this decline?
Have you, the competitors, any ideas?
What attracts you to some slaloms and not others?
What changes would you like to see in the format of slaloms?
Would fun events be attractive or the chance of coaching or single boat evens (everybody must use a single design of boat) or more practice areas or multiple stage events or more varied courses with limbo gates, roll ropes and sliding starts like Paddles Up ?
What ideas have you ?
Would you like more organized social events, better food tents or what?
Contact your club representative to the Slalom Committee or, better still, write to the Slalom Exec with your ideas.
If you don't and slalom continues to be so poorly attended it risks becoming a has-been sport.
My own view, as a non-slalom paddler, is that slalom has become too specialized and is no longer in the mainstream of canoeing.
Much of the equipment used at today's slalom is of no or very limited use for anything other than slalom.
The slalom kayak is fragile, uncomfortable and with unforgiving edges.
The paddle is light and therefore not over strong; even the clothing and buoyancy aids are especially designed and often not man-enough for white water touring and too garish for quiet flat water paddling.
In contrast, the kayaks designed for the 1972 Olympics at Augsburg were also quite usable as white water touring boats, surfing and the quiet afternoon paddle with the family.
If memory serves me right, I was promoted to Div 45 paddling in an Augsburg 72, a high volume boat which I also used for many white water trips.
Perhaps it is time for the powers that be to look again at the slalom rules that allow dipping and sideways presentations.
An alternative may be two slalom series, the modern, as now, and the classic, as at some point in the past (poles assumed to reach the bottom of river).
The success of the Shepperton Jubilee Slalom indicates the potential interest.
Enough of this; one final plea to all late entrants.
Though we were pleased to see you, we would have been doubly pleased if you had entered on time , that is two weeks in advance .
You would have saved 5p (a paltry sum; any member of the Slalom Exec out there, how about double fees for all late entries in all divisions?), made my job a lot easier and enabled the slalom to run more smoothly and efficiently.
Congratulations to all promoted; to others, keep trying and good-luck next time.
Good paddling and have fun.
Martyn Green 
The trials of running a slalom
Peterborough Slalom
There has to be some way to persuade people to enter before an event.
On the closing date we had about ten entries and five judges, slightly better than last year.
When we left to set up the course the total had crept up to about 30.
The prize list was based on last year's results and optimism and the café stock on last year's shopping list and guesswork.
Both turned out to be slightly more than required.
We struggled this year with quite a lot of helpers but few with any previous experience.
The course took all of Friday to put up instead of just the morning but things improved in the evening.
Entries trickled in all Saturday plus a few just five minutes before the event started on Sunday to bring us up to just about last year's figure.
Most classes had quora although there were no Div 5 C2s and only one Div 4 C1.
The course was designed to increase the times from the 100 seconds or so we usually get at Peterborough with one section working upstream on the jet.
It seemed to work with the Div 4 winner on 129 plus 5.
As usual on the Friday night several poles became mysteriously untied, all in the same area.
However, the eddy in the pool meant that nothing was lost.
There were groups fishing all night on both banks but maybe there was no connection.
Our lack of experienced help showed up again on Sunday afternoon when we lost track of results for a while.
Next time I will avoid starting three classes in a row with a paddler number 1.
However, prizegiving was only about half an hour later than planned and we set off for home at a reasonable hour.
I must thank the judges who did a good job for us apart from three who entered, showed up for a while and were then missing when their turn was due.
I had hoped for better from Premier and Div 1 paddlers.
Thanks are also due to Mike Carter and Colin Woodgate who helped out when things got tense.
It made a big difference.
We made a small profit on the event which, in the current climate, must be quite good news.
Our club members enjoyed the weekend too, which is more important.
Alan Adams 
Marathon
International competition and relaxed gentility
Royal Marathon
The Royal Grand Prix was a prestigious race, run by the Royal Canoe Club to celebrate their 125th anniversary.
Earlier in the week their Paddling Challenge, the oldest canoe race in the world, had seen several of the overseas competitors joining in without stopping even to unload their vehicles when they arrived and being joined by a number of prominent paddlers from the past.
Now was the main race, a true International with 17 nations on the start line, something we have not seen in Britain for some time despite the fact that the entry was limited because of the following week's World Sprint Championships which caused some potential entrants to opt out.
The Princess Royal acted as patron, the sun shone and there was an atmosphere of both occasion and friendliness which was to result in a memorable race.
The senior course was from Windsor to the Royal Canoe Club at Teddington, taking in eight locks and a River Thames course which was choppy because of all the powered craft.
The six senior classes went at 5 minute intervals (each followed a minute later by a corresponding domestic class), the men's K2s going first.
Starting was as fraught as ever or even more so because of large craft wanting to come through the start line but it must be said that the cruiser operators were generally very cooperative throughout the race.
The K2s got away on the second attempt.
At Old Windsor the first group of five were Pavelka/Gots, Jannis/Jannis, Valerosi/Rossi, Ballard/Slater and Williams/Martin.
The Hungarians and Belgians broke away from the Italians and the two British crews dropped back and were being closely tailed by Folkesson/Skoldbek at Chertsey although the Swedish crew were only to get as far as Shepperton before blowing up.
Robin Belcher was paddling in Australian colours and he and partner Fraser dropped their K2 upside down into the water while relaunching from the moderately high jetty at Chertsey.
On the other hand, two crews decided to run beyond the jetty and get in through the low reeds beyond a willow tree at then end of the jetty.
Unfortunately two anglers now had all their gear spread out amongst the greenery.
While one crew got through, Jugoslavs Rodic/Kvezenic decided to retreat back to the jetty, leaving marshal John Griffiths to pacify an irate violence-threatening angler.
At the finish the Hungarians outsprinted the Belgians while Ballard/Slater did the same to Williams/Martin a couple of minutes later.
That 4th place must still have been very satisfying for Robin Williams who has now completed his transition from international slalom C2 paddler to international marathon K2.
Gustavsson made a disastrous start in men's K1 by falling in and being left behind.
The lead group approaching Old Windsor were Horak, Rasmussen, Selvick and Paul Wells plus 3 K2s, Blyth being well back in the next group of four although he pulled up to join the leading group at the lock portage.
Horak forged ahead on his own but set too fast a pace and died at Elmbridge.
By Sunbury the leading group had become Rohr, Selvick, Wells and Blyth, Hanisch and Horak not being too far behind.
After a gap, Gustavsson came through with Michael Wells and Blanc.
Gustavsson made the leading group 1.5km from the finish and went on to outsprint Blyth and Rohr for first place, a brilliant recovery from a dismal start.
Paul Wells had eased off by this point and was actually beaten by his brother who won the domestic event.
Troop/Blumenthal made a poor start in the ladies' K2 race.
This event was to see Erdodi/Baranyai way out ahead on their own.
The British crew were able to rejoin Schuck/Manfroni and Jas/Demewi at Shepperton, subsequently dropping this second Hungarian crew.
In a sprint for second place at the finish it was the German pair who had the most power left.
There were only 5 C2s, all widely spaced.
All were high kneeling except the final crew, Ralph/Crooks, the latter fresh from his seal launching exploits on Ramsey Island, a man who enjoys variety in his paddling.
On this occasion they were accompanied over the later stages by Pagon and Sellwood, the two British ladies' K1s, also bringing up the rear of their class.
In fact, Danielle Sellwood's involvement with the race had been rather more extensive, also being the designer of the race logo.
The remaining class was the C1.
Jepsen had a commanding lead.
Paddlers were then quite well spaced until Gohar in 4th place.
Three of the remaining four were working together until Sunbury when Anderson and Ferrari missed the rollers, allowing Pereira to break away but Andersen chased after him and passed him before the finish.
The juniors paddled from Elmbridge to Teddington only.
Larsen/Jensen won in K2 from the two British crews but Smith/Savage pushed them to the line.
On the other hand, the two British entries, Richardson and Hynds, worked together to take a substantial win in men's K1 with Hemmings and Gilby doing the same thing in the  ladies' K1 event in a field of only three.
There were also three C1s, two of which were British, Thomas taking a substantial win.
As competitors and spectators sat in the sunshine on the Royal Canoe Club's lawn at the finish, slowly unwinding and chatting to friends, some of whom had not been seen for quite some time, the atmosphere was a mixture of international competition and relaxed gentility.
Surely these are two major facets of the Royal Canoe Club's 125 years of existence and they were very well expressed on this occasion.
Chelmer Challenge
Chelmsford Canoe Club were due to launch a new race at the end of September, a day long relay race with 3 to 10 paddlers in a team using singles or doubles.
Based on an 8km circuit of the Can and Chelmer, teams could opt to race 40 or 80km and change over at the race centre as often as they liked.
UNESCO trophy awarded
Ivan Lawler and Graham Burns are to be awarded the Pierre de Coubertin International Fair Play Trophy in Paris on 7th.
Nominated by Danes, this is in recognition of their assistance to Nielsen/Koch in the 1990 World Championships.
They stopped to help the Danes straighten their bent rudder instead of going on to win the gold medal themselves.
Sprint
Andy Train: two 10km bronzes in one day
The World Sprint Championships
Most disrupted of the teams at this year's World Sprint Championships at Marne la Vallée was undoubtedly the Russian team.
They already had half their ladies doing maternity exercises when the coup struck immediately before the start of the regatta.
As a final problem, the French authorities refused visas for Veta and Tischenko.
While they are not obliged to give reasons, hosting of a World Championships implied acceptance of all competitors, especially two defending World Champions.
On the other hand, entries were enhanced by such WW racers as Goetschy, Profanter and Juillerat, presumably trying to win themselves Olympic places for next year.
British problems revolved round a chest muscle pulled by Grayson Bourne several weeks prior to the event.
He had rested it and was reserving himself to defend the K2 10km title.
Consequently, the other entries had to be shuffled and no entry was made for K2 500m and K4 1km.
In addition, no canoe events for 500m and no C4 events were contested.
The new course, 20km east of Paris, had competitors, racing into the sun which shone out of a cloudless sky most mornings.
The major innovation was the use of starting blocks which resulted in not one single false start in the 500m and 1km races, establishing a new standard for sprint regatta courses.
The opening morning saw the 500m heats with British paddlers being pushed into repêchages.
Simon Parsons was 6th in a fairly tough heat and Andrea Dallaway was 4th.
At the start of the C2 first heat Reneiski/Zuravski of the USSR broke a paddle shaft but still managed to finish only half a minute after the Korean pair using just the blade at the stern to secure a repêchage place.
The third heat was particularly good with Aballi/Zamora of Cuba, Marinov/Stojanov of Bulgaria and Frederiksen/Nielsson of Denmark (the latter troubled by a stomach upset) finishing within 0.3 secs of each other.
Eastwood/Thorogood were 5th in their heat as the crosswind began to increase and the K4 of Block/Burgess/Burns/Parsons were 3rd with only 2 going through.
Repêchages were in the afternoon with all British boats making it to semi finals.
The second day was largely for 1 km events, a remarkably successful day for Britain.
It was cloudy and cooler at first after overnight rain and a light tailwind seemed to blow Holmann of Norway down the course as he took long slow strides to the first win of the day, making it look easy.
Ivan Lawler had to work harder but was 2nd with only 2 to go through.
Andy Train was also 2nd in C1.
The ladies' K4 500m was slotted in at this point and although Dallaway/Davey/Eastwood/Thorogood were 8th in their heat they went into a semi final which acted as a repêchage.
The second K2 1km heat was remarkable.
100m from the line Block/Burgess were lying 4th but they seemed to find a reserve of energy from somewhere and crossed the line 1st, followed by Estevez/Marcheco of Cuba and Bobreshov/Kalesnik of the USSR in 0.8 secs.
The fifth heat had Italian, Czech, French and Norwegian crews battling it out in a line.
100m from the finish the Norwegians, Ribe/Roander, threw in the towel and eased off, cruising to 4th place.
The Train brothers were running 4th in C2 but 200m from the end they turned on the power and comfortably passed Cain/Chubaty of Canada.
The afternoon of repêchages had no British involvement, a unique situation.
The K4 heats produced some very close pairs, Finland and China, Austria and France and Portugal and Belgium.
The semi finals followed on the Friday.
Simon Parsons was last in his semi but at the line he was closing on Vekic of Jugoslavia.
The third semi was very close (0.55 secs) between Crichlow (Canada), Herbert (USA) and Vincente (Spain), the latter being lucky to get a time as he fell out of his K1 crossing line.
The ladies' K1 required a first 4 placing plus the best 5th.
Dallaway was running 4th but lost it to Goetschy by a third of a second.
The crosswind was increasing and the finish was the most exposed part of the course for this wind direction with a significant chop.
Andrea just paused momentarily 50m from the line but that was enough.
Fortunately she had the better 5th time and went on to be our first finalist for several years while Wood of Australia in the other semi not only lost her final place but also her Olympic spot.
Eastwood/Thorogood were last in their semi final.
The wind was now veering round towards the stern quarter and increasing so that 4th-placed Herst/Stafford of Canada in the second semi capsized 20m from the line and lost their final place.
The British K4 were also last in their semi.
The 1 km successes were to come to an end this afternoon.
Lawler was anchor man for his K1 semi final and Andy Train could only manage 7th in C1.
The ladies' K4 were 6th and last in their semi.
The third K2 semi had Harbold/Newton of the USA 4th 50m from the line but they made an excellent recovery to pass Angyal/Petrovics (Hungary) and the Olssons of Sweden for 2nd place, 0.03 secs separating the three boats.
In C2 the Trains were 5th in their semi, unfortunately the slower of the 5th times, but they kept the pressure on until the line and as they slowed down Andy leaned forward and patted Steve on the back, an appropriate gesture.
In the other semi final Loubenov/Slavov of Bulgaria seemed to blow up and stopped paddling 100m from the finish, finally arriving in a particularly unstable state.
The finals began with a major upset when the K1 500m title fell to Renn Crichlow.
This is the first time this major title has gone to a coloured paddler and so is of great significance to those who think that canoeing is a whites-only sport.
Crichlow stood on the finish pontoon with a grin like a piano keyboard while the Canadian team supporters made a din the like of which has never been known before from Canadians.
Slivinski took the C1 title for the USSR.
The following race was the ladies' k1, the only British finalist being Andrea Dallaway.
She was last to the line but still going well and just 5.01 secs down on winner Borchert.
The applecart was upset again in the following race when  the K2 title went to Roman/Sanchez of Spain.
It was good to see some other countries taking the golds although Poles Freimut/Kurpiewski must have been glad to have got 5th, sinking at the finish.
Palizs/Szabo of Hungary took the C2 although the French pair of Boivin/Hoyer were closing fast.
Ladies' K2 went to Portwich/Von Seck of Germany and the Germans also took the men's K4 while the Russians took the C4, a tight race considering it was a final with no preliminary rounds, 6 boats finishing in under 2.6 secs from the winners.
The men's K1 1km was won in magnificent style by Holmann, 2 ½ seconds clear of the field, Crichlow being back in 8th place.
Klementiev of the USSR took the C1 from Bouchalov of Bulgaria by a mere 0.07 sec.
The ladies' K4 was significant not so much for the Germans and Hungarians in the first two places but for the Chinese who took the bronze, their first ever World medal.
The men's K2 was notable for the ultimate in bad planning.
Nijkamp of the Netherlands spent the previous night in a Paris hospital as his wife gave birth to their first child, got back at 5am for some sleep and went on to paddle to last place.
The win went to Germans Bluhm/Gutsche.
Boccara/Boucherit of France had the next fastest time but they were seen to be wash hanging, not for the first time at this level, and a protest was upheld, posing the question why the umpires Riccardo Guala and Glyde Brytt had given white flags.
In the C2 event which followed, Andriev/Haralambie of Romania were disqualified for the same reason, the win going to Papke/Spelly of Germany.
The Hungarians won the men's K4 and the Russians the C4.
A little light relief was planned for the Saturday evening with an unofficial K4 500m race for trainers.
The 11 entries included some notable crews.
The Swiss crew was stroked by Jeremy West, the French crew included East German veteran Rudi Helm, the USSR/Italian team included masters Schaparenko and Tichenko and there was a USSR/Israeli crew, something which would have been unthinkable a short time before.
There was also a South African team.
A South African delegation had attended cautiously, unsure what reaction to expect, and were delighted with the warm response they received from most quarters.
However, the Swedish federation had yet to discuss the South Africa issue and threatened to withdraw if the South Africans raced, a sad reflection in this friendly event.
Eventually the South Africans withdrew to avoid a public squabble.
The Great Britain team were represented by Brown/Jackson/Thorogood/Williams who took a clear win, showing that they know what they are talking about but can't get the message across!
The ladies' K2 5km race was a disaster.
The problem was the Donusz/Meszaros were drawn in lane 4 while Portwich/Von Seck were in lane 20.
The Hungarians decided to take the shortest line to the German wash, totally ignoring the existence of most of the rest of the field who lay between them.
The pile up happened 200m out as the Germans were turned.
In the mêlée Eastwood/Thorogood rode up over the veneer K2 of Ning/Xu and sunk it, the Chinese holding onto the British boat for about half a minute despite some unapproved use of a British paddle.
When the British paid got away they were well at the back and could only climb to 13th, a second year in which they have been badly obstructed.
The field at least had the satisfaction of seeing the Hungarians retire before the end.
Portwich/Von Seck were the winners.
Bituleanu/Toma were in 3rd spot, being followed by Bregeon/Goetschy on the final straight when the Romanians veered right, forcing the French right over to the edge of the course.
The French protest was upheld and the Romanians disqualified.
In the C2 10km race the Trains were drawn in lane 1 and paddled right up the centre of the course towards the first turn, avoiding the jostling in the middle, reminiscent of Stephen's lone paddle at Poznan.
As they went into the turn, however, they were spun by Bulgarians Draganov/Georgiev.
This was nothing to what happened after the second turn as the French-Romanian feud continued.
Boivin/Hoyer were leading Andriev/Haralambie, clear of the rest of the field, the Trains being 7th at the head of the third group at this stage.
As they left the turn the French paddled off at a tangent and tried to run the Romanians into the landing pontoon in front of all the VIPs.
The Romanians managed to duck round the back and take up the lead as the French extracted themselves from their collision with the pontoon.
The French recovered the lead but two laps later they tried the same move in the same place and there was a collision between the two boats.
Meanwhile, the Trains were in 5th place in the second group and the lead had been taken over by Gyulay/Petervari.
Another lap saw the Romanians pull past the French and the Trains pass Balabanov/Dobrotvorski of the USSR.
The Trains made for the French wash but the Russians decided to go it alone, a tactical error.
Exit the Russians, backwards.
The fifth lap ended with a clear lead for the Hungarians, the Romanians with the Trains on their wash and, after a large gap, the Russians with the French on their wash.
We were in with a medal chance.
Another lap and the Trains were towing the Romanians.
On the final turn, however, disaster struck.
The handle of Andy Train's paddle began to come off, breaking half way through.
He couldn't apply full power and there was always the risk that it would come right off.
Fortunately it didn't although the Romanians were able to get away for the silver.
The French were back in 6th place and the applause died as they crossed the line.
Sadly, the French crowd added to the display of bad sportsmanship by jeering at the Romanians on the rostrum.
British supporters had different priorities.
Steve and Andy had brought our first medal.
The Romanians did not protest the French.
They left them the ignominy of being beaten and then ignored.
Bourne/Lawler were defending World Champions in K2 but the injury had disrupted training and the pair lacked their edge, finishing 10th.
Winners were Boccara/Boucherit, a good French win to contrast with the previous race.
Andrea Dallaway had a good start in K1 5km but was bumped and missed strokes 100m from the start.
She went on to 16th place, the winner being Josefa Idem of Italy.
The C1 race was remarkable because Andy Train entered, nobody ever having done two 10km races in one day at this level before.
It was a hot day and Andy must have started with a distinct dehydration disadvantage.
He was treating it as a training exercise and said he would not have done it if the C1 had been before the C2 as he would not have compromised the C2.
By the end of the first lap he was in the lead group, following Klementiev, Bohacs and Zereske with Bartunek already in the process of being dropped and no-one else in sight.
The German was dropped just before the end of the third lap and Andy was again in medal territory if he could hold against fatigue and the heat.
Coming out of the 4th lap the Russian and Hungarian dropped him and that is how it remained to the final straight, Bohacs eventually taking the win but Andy with an unprecedented second bronze, within a minute of the winner and nearly two minutes clear of Bartunek in 4th place.
A final significance here is that Klementiev's silver medal could possibly be the last ever to be won by the USSR.
At the time of writing, the Soviet republics are declaring independence at the rate of about one a day and it must be open to question whether the entries will come from the separate states rather than the USSR next time.
Graham Burns seems to be making a habit of trying to follow British triumphs.
He paddled to 14th place in a race won by Greg Barton of the USA.
The K4 10km race saw a monumental collision just after the start, writing off an Austrian veneer K4 and a glass Polish one, together with much ill-humoured hurling of paddles.
The Polish one went down like a battleship, the bow sliding gracefully under and the stern lifting until the stern paddler was up to his waist in water, whence it slowly rolled over.
When it was lifted out of the water it was found to have the first metre of the entire hull section missing.
Dresser/Harris/Kirk/Saunt took 10th place as the Germans achieved a final win.
So ended an interesting World Championships, the newly merged Germany on top, the USSR and Hungary doing well, some gems falling to outsider nations and a pair of astonishing bronze medals in 10km canoe events for Great Britain.
Junior World Championships
Lahti in Finland has been proposed as a 1997 junior World Sprint Championships venue.
Perhaps their timing will not need to be as accurate as that of Vienna.
Within 24 hours of the Austrian event finishing, a flood had caused the water level on the course to rise 5.5m.
Sailing
Goodchild is clear winner
Europa Cup Sailing Regatta
This year the Europa Cup was hosted by Hayling Island Sailing Club, home of the world's largest fleet of International Canoes. 40 competitors entered, including Swedish and German teams, and spectators included a Texan trying to build up a fleet in Houston.
Those on the water included Roger Nelson of the home club who now works in the West Indies and so is only able to sail his canoe one month a year.
Jamie Marston, the youngest competitor, struggled hard to make headway in a leaking canoe borrowed from the host club while Peter Weeks showed much greater confidence than a year ago when he was the youngest sailor.
Throughout the week the races started on time (except for previously announced postponements), the rescue cover was ample and markers included two conspicuous 2m black spheres which seemed hardly to break the surface, so high did they ride.
The only real snag was that venues were posted in advance to assist the spectators and so could not be changed to suit the prevailing weather conditions.
The first of the two Sailing Challenge qualifiers was on the open sea in light winds.
Jens Österlund emerged as the first Sailing Challenge contender but he was chased home by two British boats, Mark Goodchild and Mike Fenwick.
By way of contrast, the second qualifying race was run in Chichester Harbour with a warm wind blowing at anything up to force 5.
This was more to the Swedes' liking, taking 5 of the first 8 places, including the top 3.
Ola Barthelsson was the first man home so the Sailing Challenge was set to be an all Swedish affair.
Retirements included George Gyngell who ripped out his seat mountings in the lively conditions.
The third race, for the Campkin Cup, was back on the open sea in light conditions.
The most important move in the race came by accident.
As he rounded the leeward mark for the first time, Pat Marshall in 9th place found himself being covered by Simon Allen and so went off on the opposite tack to get clear of the dirty wind, followed by Chris Eyre.
It was to be a devastatingly good move, taking Marshall to the front of the fleet and Eyre to 4th place, position they held until the finish, 2nd and 3rd going to Goodchild and Fenwick.
Frank Adler had been in 2nd place at the end of the first lap, eventually dropping back to 9th, the best German result in the Quincey Cup series.
Gyngell again had seat problems and spent several hours that evening in a major rebuild, fortunately successful.
The afternoon's activities in Chichester Harbour were somewhat amusing for spectators, the Sailing Challenge contest, followed 10 minutes later by the Novices Cup.
There was steady light drizzle and virtually no wind but the ebb carried them comfortably down the channel to the first turn in front of the clubhouse, after which the doldrums set in.
It was when the novices began to overtake the experts that confirmation, if needed, came that sailing skills were not the only factors involved.
After well over an hour the race was abandoned as the fleet slowly drifted backwards out of the harbour.
Race 4 for the Eric Freeman Trophy in force 2–3 winds outside the harbour saw Fenwick over the line at the start.
He served his penance quickly and the order after one lap was Goodchild, Fenwick, Powles, Nelson, Marrs and Eyre at the front.
There was no change over the second lap.
The final circuit dropped Marrs back to 14th while  Barthelsson had worked his way steadily up from 12th after one lap to 4th at the finish, a  systematic climb through the top of the fleet but not enough to put a Swede in the top three placings, the initial group (except Marrs) not having changed throughout the race.
The repeat of the previous afternoon's races was more successful with a moderate wind.
Barthelsson was over the line at the start, put in his 720° turn and still beat Österlund to the first mark, a lead which he held until the end.
Meanwhile, Kalle Strandman was way out ahead of the novices.
In the closing stages Tony Robertshaw managed to get ahead of Peter Fothergill for the best British place, 2nd.
The Ken Davies Trophy race for the  fifth of the series was postponed until the wind rose to force 2.
It dropped again at first but eventually picked up for a lively last lap.
Strandman led most of the way but Goodchild came back steadily from 12th at the end of the first lap to win.
Sailing to form, at last, was Gyngell who held onto 3rd place despite a challenge from Fenwick who came up from right behind Goodchild on the first lap.
The final race for the Murphy Howard Cup was in ideal conditions, force 4 and another sunny day.
Mike Fitzpatrick capsized 2 minutes before the start but managed to right himself in such a position that he was first away on the gun although he was to drop back to 30th.
The two boats to take up the lead were  Barthelsson and Strandman who sailed right away from the fleet, opening up an enormous lead.
Simon Allen and Rob Michael were the next two, appreciating the heavier conditions.
The varied conditions over the week, biasing towards the lighter end, had given the sailors a good range without the Swedish walkover which  seems to have become a regular feature of late.
 Barthelsson and Strandman were in contention but Fenwich pushed them hard and Goodchild was the clear winner in both Quincey Cup and Europa Cup series with no-one close.
In the former he had two 1sts, two 2nds, a 4th and a 7th to discard, a clear indication of his mastery in this regatta.
It had been a regatta with good weather, efficient organization and interesting results, one to appreciate.
And I quote…
…a German Europa Cup sailor returning to Hayling Island Sailing Club over the invariably choppy West Pole of the Chichester Bar, ‘Ah, so  zis is vere zey cook ze seaveed .’
More canoes to contend with
Hayling Island Sailing Club have encouraged many of their Contender sailors to change to International Canoes with the remainder likely to follow.
The result is that the club's fleet is soon to be in the order of 30 canoes.
Dan Dénéréaz dies
Dan Dénéréaz, aged 70, died suddenly during the open canoe cruise on Llyn Tegid in August.
A member of the Free French Navy during the war and an enthusiast of small boats ever since, he was a regular attender at OCSG meets, at which his son, Roland, is a leading competitor.
The following day's race was cancelled as a mark of respect.
The skill test on the slalom course at Augsburg
The Augsburg rodeo included open canoes
Hotdogging in a float boat
Sally Slater, Gavin Padley, Damien Chapman, Matthew Enoch, Martin Bull, Simon Green, Robert Walsh and Ruth Goldkowski (absent) of Nottingham Kayak Club repeated last year's success in the BCY marathon and won the team championships in the slalom at Cardington.
The Seu d'Urgell slalom course
Hemmer/Loose of Germany were 2nd.
The Clough brothers of GB.
Dave Ford of Canada.
Ian Raspin was 9th.
The footbridge and scoreboard.
The lower part of the course.
Ian Wiley won the men's kayaks for Ireland again.
Bill Horsman took 9th place in C1.
C1 winner Gareth Marriott.
Andreas Kubler, one of the German C1 team.
Hearn rides the conveyor back uphill.
Pavelka/Gots lead the men's K2s into Old Windsor Lock during the Royal Grand Prix marathon.
D Cooper of Australia.
Williams/Martin portage.
Bernie Pagon approaches Molesey.
Danielle Sellwood of Royal.
Portugal's Susana Ferreira.
Blumenthal/Troop take the Sunbury rollers.
Gyursansky/Nadasdi winning the C2 event for Hungary.
Crooks/Ralph were the only seated C2 in the International class.
Belcher/Fraser, paddling for Australia.
C1 winner Stip Jepsen
Simon Parsons contests the K1 500m semi final at Marne la Vallée.
Andrea Dallaway in the 500m final, our first finalist for some years.
Knut Holmann congratulates Renn Cranshaw.
The Hungarians were here in force.
Andy Train in C1 10km.
Second medal for Train.
The last for the USSR?
Surprise win for Roman/Sanchez of Spain in 500m K2.
Boivin/Hoyer ram the Romanians again.
Notice the paddle over the bows.
Photo finish with Palizs/Szabo and Reneiski/Zuravski in the C2 500m final.
Liu/Ning/Wang/Wen after winning China's first medal.
Happy Russians at the end of the C4 500m race.
Eastwood/Thorogood over Ning/Xu's deck in the K2 5km race.
The remains of the Polish K4 are carried off after the collision.
Stephen and Andy Train on the way to their first 10km bronze medal.
Grayson Bourne and Ivan Lawler defending their 10km K2 title.
Off the start line at Hayling Island
Tony Marston and George Gyngell take opposing lines
Mark Goodchild leads the approach to a turn
A helmeted Chris Eyre
Overall winner Mark Goodchild
Home club sailor Pat Marshall
Runner-up Ola Barthelsson
Youngest sailor with a full series, Robin West
Gerhard Riemer and Peter Herbert in trouble on the marker buoy in light airs
Rob Michael enjoys himself
Tony Dixon running comfortably
Mike Fenwick meets something larger
Kalle Strandman of Sweden took 3rd place in the Europa Cup series at Hayling Island
The hardest part
As I sipped the remainder of my beer I reflected on the years that had past, the paddling trips we had done together and all the good times.
A can of Tetleys Bitter never tasted better as Jim and I soaked up the sun burning its way through the Californian coastal mist.
My tranquillity was rudely interrupted as a wave crashed down on the rocks and sent a shower of spray over us as we huddled amongst the rocks on the headland.
I opened my eyes and turned to my partner.
‘I am beginning to think we should be using kayaks after all.’
‘You are probably right but, honest, when I checked out the beach last month the waves were only two feet high!’
‘Well, it is  too late to change now; it's time to go.
The crowd will be waiting for us.’
‘By the way, which side shall we roll if we flip?’
‘I'd better switch sides; you will probably be too busy trying to keep your bow tie dry!’
As we slipped into the boat and did up the straps of the slalom C2, I ran through a quick mental check list, collect beer cans, paddle, spraydeck on, ring?
‘OK, let's go and, whatever happens, remember to smile for the photographer.’
We eased ourselves along the channel out between the rocks to the edge of where the waves were breaking and watched a few big sets roll through.
I tried to sound confident.
‘Right, once the next large one goes by we will make a dash for it to the middle of the bay.
We should be all right for a few moments as it is deeper water; we can then make for the beach, hopefully avoiding the big dumping surf.’
I wasn't convinced!
As the spray settled from the impact of our chosen wave we sprinted out from our sanctuary into the open bay.
A C2 might be a joy to paddle on a dancing rapid but out on the Pacific Ocean it behaved like a submersible beast.
Undeterred, we grunted our way over to our goal.
I turned to Jim, sitting in the back, to congratulate him on our effort, then, over his shoulder, caught sight of a larger than usual dark crest out to sea.
‘Quick, turn into it and paddle!’
We spun the boat and dug in deep with our paddles, heading for the wall of oncoming water.
I have noticed before when surfing that time seems to slow up the moment I realize I'm going to get trashed by the next wave…!
As the crest broke over my head I just wished that we had gone for plan B which was to have used a tandem bicycle for this trip.
Miraculously, we surfaced the other side of the wave only to find that we were rapidly sinking; my spray deck had caved in with the force of the water.
I frantically started to use my hands to bale out the water in an attempt to avoid the seemingly inevitable embarrassing swim in to the beach and the awaiting crowd of families and friends.
‘Quick, get your deck on,’ shouted Jim ‘I think there might be a moment's lull!’
We turned to the shore and paddled as if for our lives.
Wallowing our way into a sheltered corner of the bay, we rode rather inelegantly in on the surf.
Relieved, we leapt out of our sinking craft and dragged it up the beach to the waiting clothes- stand in the sand.
As we pulled our tuxedos over our damp shirts and straightened our bow ties we could hear the band striking up the bridal march.
Jim turned to me and grinned.
‘Well, Andy, I reckon that's the hardest part of your Best Man's duties out the way!’
Andy Halliday was acting as Best Man at British canoeist Jim Overton's wedding to Diane Jewell, held on Bean Hollow Beach in California.
The rest of the day went to plan apart from the groom having to cut the wedding cake with a chainsaw but that's another story.
Caption Competition 59
The most humorous caption to this photograph received in writing before November 1st will win its sender a Canoeist T shirt.
Please write to Canoeist Caption Competition 59,, including your own name, address and telephone number.
The winning entry will be published in the December issue.
Caption Competition 57
‘Great landslide, Moses, but can you put it back?’
Winner: Michael Davies, RAF Gatow, seconded to RAF Mt Pleasant.
We also liked Robin Tyrrell's ‘Are your sure?
That is one heck of a seal launch!’ and Colin Lavelle's ‘No kidding lads, I was just a boy when I joined the queue for that stopper!’
Other historical references included Stephen Seal with ‘Look, Noah, I don't care what you say is going to happen, these boats are not for sale!’,
Jeff Jaye with ‘I know it's difficult to get the wood, Mr Noah, but can you imagine the cost of a rotomoulded Ark?’ and Simon Dawson with ‘Shaun Baker comes out of retirement to offer advice on the last great waterfall.’
Peter Knowles' photograph was taken on location in Nepal.