

Sun for Sail
Bored with lying on a beach?
Quite the best way to explore an island in the sun is to potter round it — in a yacht, a sailing dinghy or on a windsurfer.
And we can teach you how.
Over thirteen years arranging sunny sailing holidays in the choicest parts of the Mediterranean have taught us what you like best — lots of top quality facilities.
New yachts or windsurfers join our fleets every year.
When everyone is on the water, we still have spare craft to choose from.
Our tuition is the best available; three award winning Royal Yachting Association teaching videos were produced at our centres.
Small holiday groups and plenty of good staff create a relaxed and friendly atmosphere, rich with local interest.
The formula is unique; over half our guests return — many of them more than six times.
They help at boat shows, instruct for a month or two, even join us full time.
Lots of familiar faces and hundreds of old friends are helping to develop what has become the greatest range of sailing holidays under the sun.
We're told the brochure undersells; but we like delivering holidays which are better than expected.
Guarantees
Most booking conditions are hedged with all sorts of exclusions about why a tour operator can't be held liable when things go wrong.
However, very few things go wrong with us, so we back our promises with cash in the more sensitive areas:
Flight Delay.
If you plane leaves UK 8 hours or more, we pay you.
Yacht Breakdown.
If you lose a day's sailing or more, we pay you.
Prices.
We don't add surcharges.
Nor do we discount.
The price you see is the price you pay — even if you wait for a late booking!
Since it costs us directly if things go wrong, we have strong incentives to prevent mistakes, or correct them very quickly, whoever causes them.
We can't think of a better guarantee that you'll get what you pay for.
From the SMALL WORLD holiday boutique…
Hullo, I'm Gulliver.
I'm an old hand at Falcon Sailing — it's thanks to them I know that a holding tank's nothing to do with the Russians in Prague.
It's great news that they're part of a new Small World holiday boutique — a clutch of companies backed by Owners Abroad with enthusiastic owner-managers still very much at the helm.
I've travelled with them all: had a lovely Villa in Tuscany one year through Villas Italia — I'd organised a party of 14 to come with me, but at the last moment her Mum said no.
As for Houseparties — well, I've been making friends with the villa girls who run them on islands throughout the Med; I've sailed the Turkish coast on a ‘Gulet’, and gone island-hopping in Greece on the luxurious motor yacht ‘SunSun’— they're all really floating Houseparties.
As for the winter, I've never skied any other way than on one of the Ski Whizz/Small World Chalet parties.
These ‘Holiday Boutique’ guys do produce rather explicit brochures; I mean, I threw a wobbly when I first heard about this Med plumbing lark.
Funny way to sell holidays, it must put some people off.
Still, those who make it are a great bunch — and they know exactly what to expect —‘Holidays that Satisfy’— I'll say.
CHOOSING A HOLIDAY
What?
Villa-Flotilla is yachting for novices, for families seeking a compromise, or for friends who like variety.
During the week ashore we teach novices and improvers in both Greece and Turkey.
Living afloat for the second week, you skipper your own yacht in flotilla.
‘Share-a-Yacht’ helps the budget for singles and couples.
Flotilla Sailing is a sociable way to explore while living afloat; ideal for sailors with limited yacht experience.
Choose between modern three cabin 31ft yachts, comfortable with 6 aboard, or 28ft yachts, economical for smaller crews, or perhaps luxury 34ft yacht.
Flotilla holidays suit families (even with young children) or groups of friends.
Novices may come after an ‘Introduction to Yachting’ course with Fal Sail in UK.
Singles may book ‘Pot Luck’.
Independent Charter is for experienced yachtsmen who can navigate.
Take a yacht from any of our flotillas, and cruise in company for a day or two if you wish.
Or ask for our separate leaflet.
Ideal for families or groups of friends who wish to travel further afield.
Dinghy Sailing
These two week shore based holidays include ambitious day cruises to visit distant beaches or villages.
Instructors sail with beginners, while experts sail with other guests, playing with spinnakers or trapezes.
Local sailing options include bombing on windsurfers, high performance dinghies, or catamarans in some centres.
Windsurfing
These are one or two week shore based holidays, sailing mainly in the local area, learning the sport and developing techniques, occasionally with an option to play with sailing dinghies.
Choose a resort with winds to suit your experience.
House Parties
Sociable holidays with full board where you share a large house (or a luxury Motor Cruiser) with 12 to 20 other guests.
Catering by your resident hostess.
Windsurfing and sailing options available from our resources at some resorts.
Where?
Yacht Holidays
The Ionian Cruises (Greece) offer lighter winds and shorter passages, while the Bodrum Cruises (Turkey) offer brisker winds and more excitement.
Shore Based Holidays
We have centres in Greece, Turkey and Sardinia.
Four centres have a wide range of performance sailing dinghies and windsurfers offering flexible programmes: Porto Heli, Hidri, Bitez and Cannigione.
Four other centres specialise; Paxos runs Dinghy Sailing only, while Vassiliki, Finikounda and Yalikavak specialise with Windsurf holidays.
Who Goes Where?
Beginners should concentrate on just one activity.
Choose first whether to try dinghy sailing, windsurfing or yachting.
Wind conditions in our Greek centres, and early or late season in Turkey, are easiest, though determined people can learn at any of our centres.
Experts will enjoy the stronger winds and variety of choice in Sardinia and Turkey.
Non-Sailors
Non-sailing groups are catered for in Bitez, Finikounda and Nidri, either in house parties or on shore holidays.
Non-sailing companions are welcome at any of our resorts if spare beds are available.
Dabblers
Nidri, Bitez and Cannigione have lots of sailing and non-sailing options for those who just wish to dabble, and lots of interesting excursions which can be arranged locally.
Families
‘Minders’ look after children at Nidri, while Porto Heli and Cannigione also have excellent local beaches for young families.
Singles
Any of our holidays suit people by themselves, whether 18 or 80, though Dinghy Paxos seems the favourite, closely followed by the house parties if you're not a sailor.
YACHT HOLIDAYS
Greece or Turkey
Your own five or six berth sailing cruiser, and two weeks ahead…there's no better way to explore the most beautiful parts of the Mediterranean.
With more than thirteen years experience we know how to arrange flotilla and cruising holidays to suit a wide range of abilities, experience and ambitions.
We sail in two contrasting areas.
In Greece, the Ionian Cruises have hundreds of sheltered anchorages to make sailing safe for the less experienced; there's always somewhere easy to reach.
In Turkey the strong summer winds of the Bodrum Cruises provide exciting sailing, calling for more determination and experience.
Both areas are unspoilt, the stuff that holiday dreams are made of.
There's a choice of sailing styles too.
Charter independently, sail in Flotilla, or try a week ashore followed by a week afloat — Villa-Flotilla.
Villa-Flotilla offers a course which teaches even complete beginners to skipper their own yachts.
Couples or singles may join ‘Share a Yacht’ on Villa-Flotilla, or take ‘Pot Luck’on certain Flotilla dates.
Parties of four to six will find our new three cabin yachts on two week flotillas very comfortable, while smaller crews find our 28ft yachts more economical.
For luxury try our 34ft yacht in Greece.
The Flotilla Concept
Our Staff
From a lead boat our staff arrange sailing for 8–12 cruising yachts.
the fleet skipper plans routes to suit the weather, briefs you on safe harbours and anchorages, and deals with port authorities.
The hostess tells you about shopping, places to eat, and arranges the popular social activities.
And the engineer mends anything that goes wrong.
The First Week
On the first day our staff introduce you to the yachts and their quirks.
Most days in the first week start with a chat about the next harbour, anchoring there, what's available, and the likely weather.
Some days the schedule is very gentle, perhaps only three or four hours sailing; leave in your own time, stop for a lunchtime swim, potter around a cave or whatever.
Other days have longer passages, facing brisk afternoon winds.
Many then prefer to sail together — especially if their navigation is shaky — just to find the right destination!
You'll meet in the evenings for a cook drink, a gossip, an informal meal in some improbably cheap taverna.
The Second Week
By the second week most people have sufficient confidence to sail in pairs or independently, just keeping in touch by radio.
The lead boat briefs you on several places to visit, and arranges a couple of rendezvous for social events.
Last day is often a regatta, great fun and the crowning moment of a great holiday — sociable, friendly, exciting, but spaced with periods of idyllic peace.
Villa Flotilla
A week ashore , with many sailing or windsurfing options, followed by a week skippering your own 28ft yacht in either Greece or Turkey.,
For the Novice
If you've never skippered a yacht before, but you've always wanted to, or if you have limited sailing experience, join Villa-Flotilla in Nidri.
You can learn all the skills you need on our optional four day ‘Introduction to Yachting’ curse, or your can refresh your memory with our two day ‘Brush-Up’course.
The Intermediate
If your experience of stronger winds is shaky, but you're keen to try exciting sailing, try Villa-Flotilla in Turkey.
Similar courses to those in Nidri are available, but with emphasis on higher wind sailing, ideal for those who've sailed only Villa-Flotilla in Greece.
The Compromise
Villa-Flotilla is a superb compromise for families whose interests differ.
It's amazing how many reluctant spouses become addicted after this gentle introduction.
It's also an economic option for couples.
YACHT HOLIDAYS
Flotilla or Independent
Independent Charter
If you've skippered a small yacht on an open sea passage before and you can navigate, then you may sail any of our yachts independently within a wider area — from Corfu to Zante, and up the Gulf of Patras in the Ionian, or in any of the three gulfs in Turkey.
Minotaur Charter
Minotaur Charter, our friends in Nidri, have several yachts for bareboat charter.
Three Aloa 27 provide economic sailing for small crews, especially couples.
A Feeling 850 Club gives sporty sailing in a sensitive boat for up to 6; she's very fast in light winds.
There's also a Jeanneau ‘Symphonie’, a three cabin 32ft yacht with space for 6 or 7.
Ring for a Minotaur leaflet on (0532) 675760.
You can book flights and transfers with us.
Skorpios Charter
Skorpios Charter, another friend in Nidri, has a magnificent 34ft, 4 cabin Jeanneau ‘Sun-Rise’ and a 32ft ‘Sun-Shine’.
Ring us for a leaflet and book the yacht direct.
We can offer flights and transfers.
Your Experience
The area you choose, or the type of sailing, should be limited to match your experience.
Stick within the level we advise, and you (and more important, your crew) should enjoy the holiday immensely.
Complete Novice
Join Villa-Flotilla (p8) and two of your crew pay for an ‘Introduction to Yachting’ course in the first week.
Or, two of you do the ‘Introduction to Yachting’ course in Falmouth with Fal Sail (p46) then join Villa-Flotilla or the two week Ionian Flotilla Cruise (p10).
Dinghy Sailor
If you're a dinghy sailor and you haven't lived on a cruiser before, do a ‘Brush-Up’ course, either in Falmouth (p46), or on Villa-Flotilla (p8), to learn about anchors and engines.
For Ionian Flotilla
To skipper on the Ionian Flotilla you don't need to know how to navigate.
You should be an experienced dinghy sailor (regularly sails with inexperienced crews) who has also spend at least six days living and sailing in a small sailing cruiser.
Alternatively, you must have been in charge of a yacht for at least a week, perhaps on Villa-Flotilla.
A third possibility is that two of you have completed our Fal Sail course earlier in the year.
In all cases a helper is needed, someone strong and active to pull up quite heavy anchors, while the rest of the crew should realise that living in a yacht is like living in a caravan with incredibly soft suspension — and it's sometimes difficult to hop out for a walk!
For Bodrum Cruises
Until early September you'll meet strong winds, and you'll need to sail to windward in a force 4 or even force 6 in a short choppy sea.
More experience is essential.
You should previously have been in charge of a small cruiser for at least two weeks (perhaps on a two week flotilla), and you should be confident reefing your mainsail or paddling your rubber dinghy in strong winds.
If you're not sure, do the Bodrum Villa-Flotilla.
In September and October strong winds are less frequent, and this additional experience is not needed.
Yacht Skipper
If you've skippered a yacht for at least two weeks, including open sea passages, and you can navigate (take a fix, lay a steer and a course, keep track of your position while tacking to windward) then you're experienced enough to enjoy any of our holidays.
We're also happy for you to charter independently.
Sharing a Yacht
It's not always easy to find compatible crews, so on selected departure dates (we add extra dates if there's demand) couples or singles (not threes) may book to share a Moody 31 or Oceanis 320 with five aboard, or a 28ft yacht with four abroad.
There are two schemes:
Share a Yacht
On Villa-Flotilla you have a chance to meet your companions in the first week.
We sort out compatible crews for the second week.
Pot Luck
For two week flotilla cruises — meet your companions on the quayside!
Our Flotilla Guarantee
Our yachts and their equipment are described on pages 14, 15.
We're confident of our high maintenance standards, and guarantee generous repayments if they're immobilised for a day or more.
Windsurfers on the plane
Nor is this like sailing a yacht!
Anchor for a lunchtime snack
VILLA-FLOTILLA
In Greece or Turkey
Villa-Flotilla, a week ashore with lots of shore and sailing options, followed by a week skippering your own yacht.
This superb programme, honed by ten years of experience, offers a range of options to suit the most diverse of group interests.
It's also the only holiday totally geared to send fleets of novices out on flotilla!
If you've never sailed before, go to Nidri where one option teaches you how to skipper during the first week.
This is quite the easiest way to learn to sail.
You then sail in company (with help close to hand) for the second week.
The more experienced may try Villa-Flotilla in Yalikavak, where high wind courses give the confidence needed to cope with choppy seas.
These holidays are ideal for families and groups of friends, and in high season Nidri, ‘Minders’ look after young children during the shore week.
Villa-Flotilla is a lovely way to explore the unspoilt Mediterranean…and step into an exciting new range of holidays for the future.
The Week Ashore
Your week ashore is spent in Nidri, on the island of Levkas (p38) or Yalikavak on the Bodrum Peninsula (p42).
Both locations offer lots to do, with yachting courses (which should be pre-booked), or various sailing or windsurfing extras which can be pre-booked or paid for on site, subject to availability.
Accommodation
The accommodation is good; all rooms have private facilities and use of a swimming pool.
However, standards do vary slightly, so we give the best rooms to early bookers.
In Nidri the houses are 10 minutes from Athos pool, and have balconies and simple shared kitchenettes with fridges and gas rings — adequate to prepare continental breakfast and picnics only.
In Yalikavak you'll stay in the Yenilmez hotel, with it's own pool and bed and breakfast (see p33).
Social Activities
For the whole fortnight our staff are your hosts.
They arrange social events which you're welcome to join; a first night meal together, a drinks party, a barbecue and so on.
Pay as you go; it's excellent value for money.
The Week Afloat
The week afloat in Nidri is spent with up to 12 other Cobra 850 yachts in flotilla; in six days you see most of the highlights of the two week flotilla cruise.
The week afloat in Turkey departs from Yalikavak and cruises the delightful and party protected Gulf of Güllük with up to eight with up to eight mirage 28 yachts under the watchful eye of the flotilla lead boat.
Turn round day is a bit hectic for us, so we suggest you pack your bags in the morning, leave them in our safekeeping, and disappear to explore for the day!
By 5pm the yachts will be cleaned and replenished, all ready for you to take charge.
Next day the ship's papers arrive, and you're off.
Our Guests
We make special provisions for certain guests on Villa-Flotilla holidays.
Share a Yacht
It's not always easy to find a compatible crew, so on some dates couples or singles (not threes, it's unfair on the odd one out) may book ‘Share-a-Yacht’.
During the week ashore you meet your companions and after a few discreet words the lead crew sorts you out.
We limit dates to raise the numbers sharing.
If these fill we add more dates.
It works well; many crews book two weeks flotilla next year!
Nervous Novices
Villa-Flotilla is the safest way to sample cruising for the first time.
Think of living in a yacht as living in a caravan, eating out in the evenings.
If this doesn't put you off you'll probably love it.
If you're still thinking twice, well, at worst you'll only regret one week.
But think of the fun you might miss if you don't try it.
Young Children
‘Minders’ in Nidri in high season look after children between the ages of 4–13 during the shore week for parents who have booked a yachting course, or six days sailing or windsurfing.
Full details on page 39.
YACHT COURSES
First Time Afloat?
Our yacht courses enable people with no sailing experience whatsoever to book a Flotilla or Villa-Flotilla holiday, confident they can then skipper their own yachts, a most rewarding experience.
Courses in Greece and Turkey are options for the first week of Villa-Flotilla holiday, while courses in Falmouth prepare novices for the two week flotillas.
You won't need a course if you have enough experience — see p7.
And once you've tried Flotilla we can teach the extra skills needed safely to sail to England.
Courses in Nidri are recognised by the Royal Yachting Association, and we can issue RYA Keelboat certificates up to level 3 for those who qualify.
Introduction to Yachting Course
If you're complete beginners, active, familiar with camping or caravanning conditions, and two or you pay for our ‘Introduction to Yachting’ course in Nidri, then we know you'll be safe to skipper your own yacht for the second week on flotilla.
If we're wrong we lend you a skipper during the day at no charge.
Over 2,800 people have learnt this way over the last nine years, and judging from our fan mail, it creates the most rewarding holiday many people ever experience.
We can take two people from each yacht, and course members join us afloat from 10am to 5pm each day for 4 days during the first week of a Villa-Flotilla holiday.
In that time you rehearse every skill you need to skipper a small cruiser in flotilla in Greece.
Everything is covered; living abroad and basic safety, handling ropes, starting and stopping the engine, lifting and dropping anchors, tying to and leaving the quayside.
Then there's raising and lowering the sails, what to do in strong winds, reducing sail, reefing and finally, actually sailing.
Not least there are hints on organising your new crew.
On completion you will have reached Level 2 of the RYA Keelboat Certificate.
It's an intensive course, highly satisfying, and it works very well.
It has to — some of your tutors will be the lead crew next week!
Brush-Up Course
Dropping anchor and manoeuvring into the quayside puts a good dinghy sailor who hasn't been on a small cruiser before under considerable strain.
Anchors, ropes, engines and propellers seem to have lives of their own, too often intertwined.
You can cheat quayside tavernas of their evening entertainment (and enjoy your cruise a lot more) by paying for a two day ‘Brush-Up’ course in Nidri.
You'll practise all the skills needed for anchoring and mooring under engine in a small cruiser.
You'll also learn how to live afloat safely, and tricks of seamanship to make life easier.
There isn't time to teach you to sail on this course — if your sailing skills are deficient you must take the 4 day ‘Introduction’ course.
Higher Wind Courses
Winds in Turkey are stronger.
Unless you're confident about reefing in strong winds, keeping your cool in a choppy sea, and paddling a line ashore when it's gusting, life can be a little daunting.
So our higher wind courses follow the format of both Nidri courses, but emphasise the skills needed to cope with more wind.
They're specifically designed to introduce ex-Greece Villa-Flotilla clients to cruising in Turkey.
In England — Fal Sail
Fal Sail, run by a previous staff member, arranges ‘Brush Up’ and ‘Introduction’courses in Falmouth for us.
Falmouth is one of the few estuaries in England where the tides don't interfere too much, so realistic training for Mediterranean conditions is possible.
Fal Sail also teach competent flotilla sailors to skipper yachts safely in British waters, as well as RYA ‘Competent Crew’ and ‘Coastal Skipper’courses.
Full details of Fal Sail courses and prices are on page 46.
Turn right for Sivota
Evening entertainment for quayside tavernas
THIS IS ENTERTAINMENT?
THE IONIAN CRUISES
Leisurely Variety
The Inland Ionian Sea is the ideal place first to sail a yacht.
With large areas of water sheltered from waves, safe anchorages within an hour of almost anywhere, tavernas for supper whenever you want, and the guidance of our lead yacht this area proves that sailing can be incredibly easy and great fun.
There are other choices too.
Brisk afternoon winds do blow, exciting passages are possible, and there are many coves where you can anchor alone just to relax in perfect peace.
Incredibly, even in the height of the season, it's not crowded.
There are no nearby cities, and there is so much space that the area remains unspoilt.
Our Ionian Flotilla yachts are three cabin Moody 31's (p14) launched in ‘87 and ‘88.
They're very comfortable with six aboard.
Those who want extra space and luxury try our new seven berth Moody 346, joining flotilla or sailing independently.
Couples may prefer the economy of a Cobra 850 travelling independently or with Villa-Flotilla.
Alternatively they may wish to charter an Aloa 27 from Minotaur (0532) 675 670.
You'll find details of Villa-Flotilla and our yachting courses for novices on the previous page.
Typical Cruise Log
This log is only a guide.
We adapt to the weather, and the availability of banks and shops out of season.
The area lends itself to circular tour, so you don't have to retrace your steps.
Villa-Flotilla follows a similar circuit, but without the big blocks of independent sailing.
Day 1
Met at Preveza, one hour bus to Nidri, pause at cafe for cool drink, change money and a short relax while the crew finish preparing the yachts.
Settle in at 5pm.
Welcome meal at taverna.
Discover Retsina.
Day 2
Invaluable brief on yachts, local area, weather patterns, shopping facilities etc.
Paperwork finished about mid-day, off for a gentle sail to Zaverda, cocktail party to meet other crews.
Day 3
Sailed south through magnificent scenery to Sivota; picnic en route, explored cave.
Eat ashore in one of the four highly competitive tavernas lining the bay.
Day 4
Long sail in company to Fiscardo.
Brisk afternoon wind arrived bang on time for an exciting sail.
Day 5
To Ayios Euphemia.
Many delightful coves for afternoon picnics, good winds in sheltered waters and magnificent scenery.
Arrive early for an excursion to visit the great underground caverns at Dhrogorati.
Day 6
Around the south of Ithaka, stop off at a day anchorage for lunch and a swim, then into Port Vathi, capital of Ithaka.
Good shopping in the scruffy shops of the old town, ready for some free sailing.
Day 7, 8 & 9
Three days independent sailing.
Skipper brief the possibilities.
Three boats chose Astakos, a day around the Dragonera islands, thence to the abandoned village of Port Leone on Kalamos.
Grand afternoon winds as usual and some quiet evenings for a change.
Others travelled north to Kioni, then Vassiliki, running downwind to Leone — all arrived in time for the evening barbecue.
And now for the stories — the places missed, the villages seen, the friendly locals.
As the wine flowed so the waves grew higher, the winds stronger, porpoises turned to whales and tortoises to turtles.
Day 10, 11, 12 & 13
Now for another session of free sailing — filling in the places you missed first time.
Visit the donkey and it's pigeon friend at Arkudi, and spend two days exploring the many quiet fiord like inlets on the north coast of Meganisi.
Visit Porto Atheni, and climb to a lively taverna in an otherwise timeless village still lost in the last century, rich in smugglers tales and old men sipping ouzo.
End up at Spatahori for a punch party — and a briefing on the regatta.
Day 14
Regatta day circumnavigating Skorpios, finish line by Nidri quay.
It's amazing how one's sailing improves over the holiday.
Start packing, big clean up, final meal together and prize-giving.
Swap names and addresses.
Day 15
Tidy up boats, cafe breakfast, bus to airport.
Thanks lead boat crew, the boats were smashing.
See you next year — in Turkey?
Occasionally in High Season Nidri Quay becomes crowded.
We then choose another turnout base nearby…
THE IONIAN CRUISING AREA
Hundreds of Anchorages
NIDRI-LEVKAS ISLAND
A growing small town, busy, and set in magnificent scenery with good accommodation.
A wide choice of tavernas and activities and many sandy beaches and day anchorages.
Lovely walks to excellent views over the Inland Ionian Sea.
MEGANISI
Quite simply, a cruising paradise.
Eight excellent anchorages on the north coast, two really picturesque villages to visit (Spartahori and Katomerion), great sea caves to explore and good walking.
This is unspoilt Greece at its best, and it's within range of our dinghies sailing from Nidri.
Well worth a couple of days pottering.
SIVOTA — LEVKAS ISLAND
Lovely landlocked bay.
A safe overnight anchorage, or moor to the quayside.
Four highly competitive tavernas, each beautifully set on the waterside, vie for your custom.
No shops, but bread and water available.
VASSILIKI — LEVKAS ISLAND
A pretty, green, traditional village with lots of atmosphere and lots of wind.
Tie to the quay.
Loads of fresh water; go ashore for a shower in the communal wash house!
Bakery and plenty of shops and tavernas.
A mecca for windsurfers.
FISKARDO — CEPHALONIA
A very pretty old village which escaped the ravages of the 1953 earthquake.
Little tourism, except from passing yachts.
Enough shops, good tavernas in lovely settings, many nearby day anchorages.
AYIOS EUPHEMIA — CEPHALONIA
Small village, quayside fresh water, limited shopping, tavernas (one beautifully set above the sea).
Visit the inland caves of Melissani (row along the underground river) and Dhrogorati (big enough for a concert) half an hour away by taxi.
FRIKES AND KIONI — ITHAKA
Two tiny hamlets with a couple of tavernas each.
Settled weather anchorages only, with lots of day anchorages around.
Good walking to Odysseus birthplace on the hills above.
VATHI — ITHAKA
The capital of Ithaka.
A colourful and busy small town with all main facilities set in a deep and steep sided bay.
A busy quay and some ferries make if often more pleasant to anchor to the north of the town.
ASTAKOS, DRAGONERAS & ECHINADES
A cruising area worth two or three days pottering, based on the little town of Astakos — busy and Greek with little concession to tourism and lots of facilities.
Interesting sailing around the islands, and many anchorages, some being developed.
KALAMOS & KASTUS
Quiet and remote islands, pretty villages with few facilities.
Port Leone on Kastus is an abandoned village, a favourite spot for the barbecue.
LEVKAS TOWN
A busy, scruffy town, buzzing with activity at the end of the ancient canal which separates Levkas Island from the mainland.
Lots of facilities, but few concessions to tourism.
Fascinating, but not beautiful.
ZAVERDA
A quiet little town with good facilities and an attractive harbour — and one of the best restaurants in the Ionian up the hill.
Three Cabin Moody 31's — in Spatahori
Cocktails
Sharing bread
Showertime
THE BODRUM CRUISES
Exhilarating Sailing
The Bodrum cruising area, with its regular strong winds, is ideal for those looking for more adventure.
The sailing is exhilarating; there are plenty of harbours and a good choice of longer passages.
You'll anchor among the ruins of ancient cities, on the quaysides of small market towns, in beautiful empty sandy bays, or tie to the quay of some tiny restaurant.
The variety and sense of history is unbeatable, the culture fascinating and the people uniformly friendly.
Your Bodrum sailing options are Villa-Flotilla, Flotilla and Independent Charter.
Our flotilla yachts are the highly successful three cabin Oceanis 320, ideal for Mediterranean use, which will this season cruise the beautiful and unspoilt gulfs of Gököva and Symi.
Our Mirage 28 yachts, excellent for training and short handed sailing, will be used on a new Villa-Flotilla programme concentrating on the relatively sheltered Gulf of Güllück north of the Bodrum Peninsula.
Alternatively, sail independently in any of our yachts on a route of your choice.
Typical Flotilla Cruise Log
This log is only a guide; we adapt to weather, and the availability of shops and restaurants out of season.
We acclimatise with shorter trips for the first few days, then split for free sailing, meeting up for a couple of days to brief for another long session of free sailing.
Quite a few people choose to travel in groups of two or three yachts while free sailing.
Day 1
Met at airport, change money, three and a half hour drive in the cool morning to Yalikavak.
Arrive at Hotel to breakfast, followed by shopping, a leisurely lunch, a boat brief, settling in for an afternoon siesta.
Early supper, ready for departure when the paperwork is ready.
Day 2
Around the south of the Bodrum peninsula to the busy little resort of Bitez.
Visit our two hotels for use of the swimming pool, showers and an evening cocktail party to meet the other crews.
Night out in Bodrum for some.
Day 3
Early departure for the long run south to Datcha.
Replenish stores.
Evening brief on free sailing in the Symi gulf.
Day 4, 5, & 6
Free sailing.
Bozburun, the beautiful, landlocked little harbour almost inaccessible except by sea, on everyone's itinerary.
All rendezvous back at Knidus, praying the winds won't be too strong in the morning.
Day 7
Sail together into the gulf of Gököva, meeting at Körmen, perhaps with a midday stop at Mersinçik if the winds are kind.
Evening meal together, and detailed briefing for next phase of free sailing.
Day 8, 9, 10, 11
Free sailing in one of the most picturesque gulfs in Turkey.
Rendezvous back in Çokertme where Captain Ibrahim still runs his tiny restaurant tucked beneath a range of wild mountains, and still insists on a round of belly dancing from his visitors.
Day 12
A beat west past Bodrum town and it's magnificent Crusader castle to meet for the evening barbecue at the Blue Lagoon.
A long gossip about the adventures of the last few days, with some exaggeration as the wine flows about the strength of the winds and the size of the waves.
Day 13
Tune up for the regatta, arriving at beautiful Gümüslük after a brisk beat against a force 6.
It's amazing how quickly one becomes used to the stronger winds, revelling in the rolling waves and the brisk sailing.
The evening meal together was a welcome relaxation.
Day 14
Brief for the final regatta, finishing in Yalikavak bay.
A final meal and prizegiving, in this attractive village, leaving late evening for a cool night journey to the airport.
Day 15
Take off early morning before the heat of the day, and back in England for an easy onward journey by 0800.
How can you top that for a holiday?
THE BODRUM CRUISING AREA
New — the Symi Gulf
GULF OF GÜLLÜK
Iassos
A delightful anchorage guarded by a Byzantine tower, the ruins of an old fort built by the Knights of St John, a Roman theatre, the skeleton of a hotel which was never built, and a small village.
The ruins of ancient Iassos are presently being excavated.
Gülluk
A busy, scruffy little village with good facilities, pleasant restaurants and a cargo pier.
BODRUM PENINSULA
The Bodrum peninsula is extremely rugged, with numerous day stops and lots of good overnight anchorages cleft deep into the mountainous coastline.
Only recently have new roads made many of these self contained little hamlets accessible by land.
All of the following offer restaurants and simple provisions:
Turk Bükü
A colourful fishing and farming village, embedded in weird rock formations around a large bay.
A fascinating microcosm of rural Turkish life, slowly being gentrified by upmarket villa conversions.
Great fun to explore by foot.
Gündogan
A tiny harbour at the end of a deep bay in a mountainous setting.
The sandy shore has hotel developments at one end.
Good restaurants and shopping.
Yalikavak
This deep bay has several idyllic small day anchorages along the north coast, and a busy little farming and sponge fishing village served by a tiny harbour.
Good provisions and restaurants, but beware the reef on the way in!
Gümüslük
One of the prettiest villages on the Bodrum peninsula marks the site of ancient Mindus.
Ancient marble columns and building blocks are scattered throughout the village, providing a doorstep here, a lintel there, or perhaps a few mooring posts.
Akyarlar, Karainçir, Baglar, Ortakent
This string of sandy bays to the west of Bodrum offer a wide choice of anchorages open to the south, but sheltered from the prevailing Meltemi winds.
Each is tended by one or more restaurants.
Bitez, Gümbet
Busy small holiday villages with good facilities and numerous restaurants.
Tie to one of the many wooden piers, or anchor off.
GULF OF GÖKÖVA
North Coast
High mountains border the north coast, and spaced about eight miles apart are the hamlets of Çokertme, Ören and Akbuk, each in a dramatic setting and each with a restaurant.
Gököova itself, at the head of the gulf, is a busy village with good facilities.
Gököova to Amazon Creek
The eastern end of the gulf is 20 miles of green, lush, deeply indented coast line with lots of attractive inlets, islets, bays and anchorages; a complete contrast to the north of the gulf.
Cleopatra's beach, on Castle Island, is one of the best known beauty spots of the area.
Other bays have restaurants, and yet others are quite isolated.
It's an area worth three or four days of quiet pottering.
South Coast
There are two small harbours on the south coast.
From Körmen it's possible to visit the lively village of Datcha by taxi and Mersinçk is a useful stop en route to the ancient ruins of Knidus.
Apart from two or three cafes and a restaurant or two, there is little habitation.
However, the ruins of the old city are clearly visible, stretching along the coast and over half a mile inland.
GULF OF SYMI
The Gulf of Symi (also called the Dorian Gulf) is a stunning area of steep sided inlets, small islands, remote anchorages and brisk winds.
Plenty of spots offer simple civilisation too:
Kiervasili, Çiftlik and Sogüt are quiet bays with their own restaurants.
Datcha is a lively a friendly village, highlight of a trip to the gulf, with plenty of stores and fresh water.
Bozburun , in a deep and well sheltered inlet, is worth visiting to see the busy traditional boatyard, and a base to explore the many local day anchorages.
Palamut serves in a small farming community with a tiny harbour, a small quayside restaurant and excellent locally caught fish.
OUR YACHTS
Two to Seven Aboard
Flotilla Sailing
All our flotilla yachts are easy to handle, equipped for inexperienced or short handed crews, and modified for Mediterranean sailing with holding tanks, cold showers and extra ventilation.
Headsail roller reefing and slab reef mainsails make light of strong winds; bathing ladders, cockpit cushions and sun-awnings provide essential comfort.
Comprehensive safety equipment is inspected by officials each year and we add VHF radios for further safety.
Inventories have been refined over many years to meet your needs on flotilla, and include little touches like sets of snorkels and flippers — and a pack of foodstuffs and cleaning materials to start you off.
There's a choice of yachts too, depending on which flotilla you join.
Our yachts are well maintained, so much so that we offer generous guarantees of compensation if rare failure immobilises you for a day.
Ioanian Cruises
MOODY 31
Our Ionian Flotilla has Moody 31's, launched in 1987 and 1988.
Spacious for six adults, there are three cabins, each with excellent stowage.
On two yachts a main cabin berth can be converted to a narrow double allowing seven berths for those who don't mind more crowded living.
Built to Lloyds standards, with added ventilation and other changes to suit Mediterranean conditions, these tough English yachts are very popular.
Cruising chutes are available as an optional extra.
COBRA 850
The Cobra 850 is our Ionian Villa-Flotilla yacht.
Suitable for four adults (and a squeeze for five) it has excellent stowage, a simple layout and 6 ft 1 ins headroom in the main cabin.
It is a tough boat with a robust engine and simple controls — just right for a novice, or short handed sailing.
MOODY 346
Those who like more luxury will join the Ionian flotilla or sail independently on our superb three cabin Moody 346.
This very popular yacht, new in 1989, has seven comfortable berths, and luxuries include hot and cold pressurised water, anchor windlass, fridge, stereo cassette player and cruise chute as an optional extra.
We won't mediate in disputes about who occupies the enormous after cabin.
Flotilla Inventory
So that you know what not to bring, here's the inventory for flotilla yachts.
Yachts chartering independently also have binoculars, extra charts and a Pilot Book.
Cruising chutes and Windsurfers are available as optional extras on some yachts.
Handbook
Operating notes for yacht equipment, plus harbour notes and diagrams for the cruising area.
Navigation
Steering compass, charts, plotter, dividers, pencil, eraser, torch.
Moody, Mirage and Oceanis have had compasses.
Safety
VHF transmitter/receiver, lifejackets for everyone aboard, 2 adult harnesses, and child harnesses on request.
Lifebuoys, offshore flares, two fire extinguishers, first aid kit.
Bosun's
Sail ties, pliers, adjustable spanner, screwdriver, shock cords.
And (more important) the engineer next door.
Sailing
Roller reefing headsails and slab reef mains.
The rest is comprehensive; we don't want to lose the boats through inadequate ground tackle or warps!
So you've got all the anchors, warps, fenders buckets, bilge pumps, boat hooks, scrubbers and sponges you'll need.
Tender
Inflatable dinghy, with pump and oars.
Domestic
Gas cooker, cooking utensils, spare water carriers, kitchen equipment for the number on board, including ice box, icepacks, corkscrew, cleaning equipment, glasses as well as mugs, food containers, cutlery and more — comprehensive.
No fridges (except the 346); they use too much power and are too unreliable on smaller yachts.
Bring your own Pimms.
Living
Cold fresh water shower.
Sleeping bags (full length zips) and cotton liners or sheets.
Pillows, pillowslips, two tea towels.
Bring your own face and beach towels.
Leisure
Snorkels and masks, sun awnings, cockpit cushions and windscoops.
Preparation
When you arrive on board everything will be clean and ready for you.
Full fuel, water, spare gas and a starter pack of kitchen supplies will be there, together with fresh bed linen and tea towels.
Food and drink are the only extras you'll need, and there's plenty of time to buy those.
Stowage is limited, so travel light and don't forget to pack your kit in a soft bag!
The Backup
New yachts suffer from teething problems, and older yachts need lots of tender loving care.
Either way, things do go wrong and need to be fixed.
Tell us quickly.
We're prepared.
If our flotilla engineer can't fix it, our base workshops have their own stores, manned by skilled staff ready to back him up.
Our Guarantee
If a yacht on flotilla breaks down and cannot travel due to a major failure which is not your fault, and a substitute is not available, we pay for each 24 hrs or each full sailing day (1000 to 1700) the yacht is immobile.
There are a few conditions; you must have been sailing within the area or bands briefed by the flotilla skipper, timing starts when the lead boat acknowledges the failure, and you must return to UK with a report signed by the flotilla skipper detailing the circumstances.
For Moody and Oceanis yachts we pay £120 per day, for Mirage and Cobra yachts £80 per day.
Bodrum Cruises
OCEANIS 320
The new three cabin Oceanis 320 on our Bodrum flotilla, also available for independent charter, is purpose built by Bénéteau for Mediterranean cruising and has superb ventilation.
We have added deep reefs to match it to our cruising grounds.
Six adults live aboard in reasonable comfort when the main cabin berth is used as a double.
Cruising chutes are available as an optional extra.
MIRAGE 28
Our 5 berth Mirage 28's in Turkey have superb sailing qualities, ideal for villa flotilla and tuition.
They're easy to sail short handed in strong winds, so they're excellent value for couples.
Like all 28 ft yachts, they're all right with 4 aboard, and a squeeze with 5.
Two yachts have a six berth for those who are short of cash, short of luggage and who don't mind a crush.
DINGHY SAILING IN THE SUN
Five Centres for Choice
This is our twelfth year arranging highly successful Dinghy Sailing Holidays in the sun.
You'll live ashore, sailing by day and enjoying village life by night.
Sailing varies between our five centres.
Each offers a different mixture, ranging from ambitious day cruising, through gentle local pottering to sizzling high speed catamaran sailing.
Choose one to suit your ambitions.
These are active and sociable holidays, mostly for two weeks, for 30 to 40 guests at a time.
They are ideal for those who wish to learn to sail (over half are beginners), people holidaying by themselves (over half do), and couples, experts or groups of friends who enjoy good company, sailing in a wide variety of dinghies, with the opportunity to explore beautiful coastlines by sail.
Above all, these holidays are great fun.
Over half our guests return, some four or five times, bewitched by the charm of our resorts.
Many have tried other companies; they say our tuition is unbeatable, while our discreetly organised approach offers the widest possible freedom to choose between really interesting sailing activities.
The Sailing
Sailing
The sailing is interesting, with winds far more predictable (and warmer) than in England.
Choose between doing your own thing, or joining our programme of instruction and day cruises.
These explore the coastline, with picnics in remote coves, visits to tiny fishing villages, and expert coaching on a spinnaker handling and trapeze work to add a pit of spice.
Day cruises are in more stable dinghies, sailing in company for safety.
They start with an instructive morning chat so you know what's going on.
Skip the chat if you prefer to bomb on catamarans, zoom in Lasers, potter on Toppers or totter off Windsurfers in the local area.
Occasional regattas liven up the local sailing.
Activities vary between resorts; our multi activity centres are most flexible.
We take about a two hour break for lunch and a swim, and there's a non-sailing day each fortnight.
You'll need the break.
Standards
We were the first tour operator with overseas centres recognised by the Royal Yachting Association (RYA) for tuition.
This means the boats, equipment, operating methods, safety standards and staff are examined and approved annually by the highest UK National Authority.
Staff
We don't stint on the staff; they're hard working and incredibly patient.
They love their jobs (many have been with us well over four years) and learning with them is fun.
They arrange crews, sailing one per three beginners for the first week; for the second week they coach on request.
Dinghies
Plenty of staff means impeccably maintained dinghies.
When everyone is sailing there are still unused craft ashore, so there's lots of choice.
Some centres offer lots of high performance dinghies, catamarans and windsurfers, other centres rely more on sturdy three many wayfarer dinghies, safer on long sails in the open sea.
Many of our dinghies (Wayfarers too) are modified for trapezes, and most carry spinnakers.
Indestructible Toppers complete the package.
Instruction
Beginners
Beginners (or those wanting full instruction) pay a supplement of £15.
For this you receive the RYA Dinghy Handbook, a Logbook, and up to six days tuition.
We run RYA National Dinghy Certificate courses, level 1 to 3, at Nidri and Bitez.
We instruct without formal RYA courses at Paxos, Porto Heli and Cannigione so that we don't hinder the flexibility of these holidays too much.
At all centres we complete your logbooks at the end of the holiday, and most beginners are happily sailing on their own by the second week.
You've Sailed Before
Coaching is available to anyone on request during their second week.
It's sometimes limited if the winds are strong and we have only a few experienced sailors on holiday.
However, there are briefings on spinnakers, trapezes and sail tuning, and local sailing in high performance dinghies at Nidri, Porto Heli Bitez and Cannigione.
Porto Heli and Cannigione additionally offer catamaran coaching.
Strong winds and some racing provide further challenges.
Bring your own crew if you wish, or sail with others on the holiday.
We're good at diplomatically arranging crews, and we find many couples prefer separate boats!
Choosing a Centre
Paxos
This specialist centre has superb long distance cruises in Wayfarers ideal for the more adventurous, though other sailing is limited.
Social life is excellent.
It's ideal for singles, good for novices, and no good for children.
Porto Heli
A flexible mix of dinghy sailing, catamarans and windsurfing conveniently based on a family run hotel with half board.
Lighter winds ideal for novice or intermediate, and lots of other things to do.
Ideal for families.
Nidri
A fabulous location with good accommodation and swimming pool.
Lighter winds are idea for novices and there's windsurfing too.
‘Minders’ look after younger children while parents sail.
Bitez
Family run hotels in exotic surroundings with a swimming pool make a convenient and easy social life for singles.
Exciting high season winds and a flexible mix of sailing and windsurfing options are ideal for experts.
Novices come in the early and elate season when winds are lighter.
Cannigione
A good chance of exciting winds and a wide range of dinghies, catamarans and windsurfers make this a paradise for more experienced sailors, while there's a sheltered corner and a shallow sandy beach for families with younger children.
Stars compare each centre under different headings.
They're all great; one star is completely acceptable; you're comparing five of the best dinghy sailing centres in the Mediterranean!
Social Life
With small groups and a shared activity it's easy to get to know people.
We arrange social events to explore the area about every third night — a welcome meal out, a pizza and punch party, a trip to a distant restaurant, a barbecue on a moonlit beach, a disco evening, and so on.
You're welcome to join, sharing costs.
Our Guests
Age
Active people of all ages enjoy these holidays.
Most seem to be between 20 and 55, though some are younger and many experienced sailors are older.
Children
Children under about 14 don't enjoy long day cruises, so we recommend they join dinghy holidays with good local sailing options; Porto Heli, Nidri or Cannigione are best.
Paxos isn't suitable for under 14's.
Singles
Over half our guests come by themselves.
Sailing is a natural mixer, and in the relaxed atmosphere of our holidays it's easy to make many friends.
Non-Sailors
Non-sailing companions are welcome.
They join all the social events, and when room is available pay only the shore holiday rate.
Health
As in all active sports you pick up bumps and bruises, so we insist on medical insurance.
Asthma, heart conditions, diabetes or epilepsy may expose you to special risks with watersports in the heat.
Speak to your doctor.
As long as you tell us, and don't travel against medical advice, we can accept your booking.
DINGHY SAILING IN PAXOS
The Sociable Option
Half way between Corfu and Levkas lies Paxos, one of the prettiest islands in the Ionian.
Seven miles by three, with only 3,000 inhabitants, it's small, but has everything a visitor needs.
Besides the principal village of Gaios there are two tiny fishing villages and several hamlets tucked in the shady olive groves.
The east coast has more bays, coves, villages and anchorages to visit than there are days in your holiday, and the west coast has dramatic cliffs, sea caves and a spectacular rock arch to explore.
An hour's sail to the south is Anti-Paxos, with brilliant turquoise bays of fine white sand and two beach side tavernas.
Our base, Gaios, is a perfectly sheltered little harbour.
Dazzling white houses surround three sides of ‘The Square’.
The harbour quay, lined by picturesque fishing boats and visiting yachts, forms the fourth side.
This square is the social centre of a very sociable little village.
Filled with care tables, colourful awnings and the blossom of oleander trees, it's the place to stop, chat and plan the evening's activities.
The easy atmosphere and lively evenings make Paxos our recommended dinghy holiday for those who enjoy a really active social life; it's ideal for people by themselves.
The Sailing
The Programme
These are two week holidays for 30 people at a time.
The programme is built around a series of day cruises, building up to some long and ambitious trips exploring the islands in Wayfarer dinghies, so every morning starts with a briefing.
Morning winds may be light, but afternoons are usually brisk, with exciting open sea sailing in force 3 to 5 for many days each holiday — let down by only the odd day of paddling!
Nearly every fortnight we sail right round the island, visiting the west coast caves and picnicking under great cliffs.
And from June to early September we sail to the barbecue on Anti-Paxos, where many stay the night, sleeping under the starts on the fine white sand beach.
We've got some old sleeping bags…
Tuition
We teach beginners safely to sail their Wayfarers in the open seas around Paxos.
We don't run RYA certificate courses here, since that would hinder your ability to explore the island.
However, beginners receive their RYA log books, we keep them up to date, and by the second week nearly every one can safely skipper their own Wayfarer.
Coaching on trapeze and spinnaker handling completes the package.
The Fleet
10 Wayfarers (600 metres from Tula) 6 Toppers (Moggonisi bay, 7 min by boat)
Accommodation
Tula's
Our dinghy sailors live in ‘Tula's’, a quiet and comfortable block of apartments on a narrow and picturesque little street just 150 metres from the village centre.
The roof terrace serves for morning briefings, some social events, and a quiet sunbathe when the sailing and social life wear you out.
The Rooms
All the apartments are well furnished with spacious balconies, shower rooms with wc, and an entrance hall with kitchenette, fridge and simple cooking facilities.
Six central apartments are four bedded, with two twin bedrooms, each opening onto the balcony.
Four side apartments have more privacy, with a twin bedroom and a separate living room with two divans leading onto a balcony; there's a £20 per head supplement when these are used by a couple.
Singles
If you're booking alone, we can put you ‘Willing to Share’ into either a two bed or four bed apartment.
Doctors, please make sure we know your gender!
Alternatively, we can allocate up to three rooms as singles for your sole use for a £55 supplement; these rooms will have shared facilities.
Ambitious Day Cruises
Social Life
The village square of Gaios is a unique ingredient in the local social life.
It's a large, informal, open air lounge, with all the fascination of village life buzzing around.
It's a natural gathering place, whether for pre-dinner cocktails, after supper coffees, or morning breakfast.
It's the place for decisions; whether to have an early night, a session at the disco, or a gossip at a late bar.
And there's plenty going on.
There are three late night bars and two excellent discos in addition to a wide choice of tavernas and cafes.
Some are unforgettable.
Theo's bar is on a soft sandy beach at Moggonisi — just dance into the sea if your too hot.
To help things along we provide our usual framework of social activities, sharing costs between survivors.
Other Things to Do
If you feel like a day or two off sailing there's enough to do.
There are many pleasant walks through the cool olive groves leading to abandoned villages, hilltop windmills with lovely views, or tiny coves among the cliffs of the west coast.
Scooter hire (check your insurance cover!) and small motor boat hire are available, as well as boat trips to Anti-Paxos or around the island.
Ferries run day trips to Corfu and Parga, and two water ski boats tout the various beaches for custom.
Tied to the quay of some tiny restaurant
Revelling on the rolling waves
Revelling
LISTED BUILDINGS
Moody 346
Enough dinghies?
Oceanis 320 at Cokertme
I LIKE THEE DIPLOMATIC CREW ARRANGEMENTS
Exploring beautiful coastlines by sail
Gaios, with Tula — left, with blue awning
I'M NOT SHARING WITH YOU 'TILL I KNOW YOUR GENDER
Coaching on spinnaker handling
The brilliant turquoise bays of Anti-Paxos
Dramatic cliffs and caves to explore
The open air lounge
DINGHY SAILING IN PORTO HELI
Plenty of Variety
For twelve years the friendly Hotel Rozos has hosted successful Sailing holidays at Porto Heli.
Page 39 tells you about the village and the fascinating possibilities for exploring classic Greece.
On this page we just talk about Dinghy Sailing, but this is a very flexible centre, where it's easy to mix in some windsurfing — see page 27.
Porto Heli has a large, nearly enclosed bay, and steady winds in which it's safe to leave novices to romp for hour upon hour with little restriction.
Intermediates, too, find this the ideal location first to tangle with performance dinghies and catamarans.
About twice a week, groups of more stable dinghies sail to nearby islands for a picnic and a swim, or visit some tiny taverna along the coast for lunch.
Rozos Hotel, with its convenient position and easy social life, offers a flexible holiday for those who like lots of choice.
It's a great place for families, who either potter locally or sail together on day trips away.
The Sailing
The Programme
Of the 60 people at Rozos, about half sail on the dinghy programme.
New arrivals are welcomed each week by the old hands, since most stay for two week holidays.
One week holidays are available in early and late season.
Local sailing offers lots of variety and freedom, and sampling many types of exciting dinghy in steady conditions is a major feature.
Morning chats introduce the options; righting drill, tailchasing in Lasers, knotting with spinnakers, knitting with trapeze wires, tacking Hobie cats, and threading it all together with a local regatta.
Alternating with the local programme are day trips away for anyone who's keen, visiting Kosta or Maistraki for a swim and a taverna lunch, sailing to Spetse town to explore ashore, or anchoring off Blue bay or White church bay for a lazy picnic.
Instruction
Instruction is informal and tailored to individual needs.
With steady winds and plenty of space, Porto Heli is uniquely suitable for novices to learn by doing, and the perfect place for intermediates to develop performance sailing skills.
Novices start by practising the rudiments with an instructor, and after righting a capsized dinghy, they're off in something small and safe to ‘have a go’.
Plenty of coaching from our motor safety boats and daily chats on theory help.
Some novices choose to sail with more experienced sailors, but by the end of the week most have the confidence to help a more exciting dinghy.
Intermediates have a weekly cycle of chats on spinnakers, trapezes, catamaran handling and performance sailing techniques, and with practice and a little coaching rapidly develop their skills.
Equipment
The following dinghies are kept on the hotel beach, together with lots of windsurfers:
9 Leaders (Light and stable 2/3 man dinghies.
3 with spinnakers) 2 Seafly (Larger, ideal for a family) 5 420s (trapeze and spinnaker) 2 Fireballs (trapezes) 3 Lasers (lively single handers) 2 Hobie 16s (2 man speed catamarans) 4 Toppers (single handers)
Accommodation
Hotel Rozos
Dinghy sailors, windsurfers and those just on shore holiday all stay half board in Rozos, described on page 39.
Singles
Singles may book ‘Willing to Share’ at the normal holiday cost just make sure we know your gender.
We can sometimes reserve a suite room for single occupancy for a £55 supplement; suite rooms share facilities with another room, and don't always have a balcony.
Children?
Children from about 8 upwards find the local sailing and windsurf mix at Porto Heli almost ideal, and if a family wish to join a day sail, we recommend they take one of the Seafly dinghies.
Those too young for sailing still enjoy pottering around the beach and paddling around on old windsurfers, though a parent should stay to look after them and keep them from the nearby road.
The hotel bungalows are ideal for families with very young children.
DINGHY SAILING IN NIDRI
The  Novice's Option
This is our eleventh highly successful year running Dinghy Sailing in Nidri.
Page 40 tells you more about the lively village and things to do there — yacht instruction, windsurf holidays, casual sailing, child ‘Minders’ and so on.
On this page we'll just talk about Dinghy Sailing; any non-sailors or windsurfers in your party should read the relevant pages.
With scores of nearby anchorages and sheltered waters, Nidri is a superb centre from which to explore.
Groups of Wayfarers sail away most days, visiting nearby islands for a picnic and a swim, or stopping for lunch at some tiny taverna.
Sheltered from the stronger north west winds, local sailing is always an option too, and we run RYA certificate courses within the framework of the holiday.
More experienced sailors enjoy the lively Lasers dinghies, local windsurfing, and independent day cruising in Wayfarers.
Athos' Hotel, with its swimming pool and comfortable accommodation, makes Nidri our recommended centre for those who like a little pampering while they sail.
It's also great for families: ‘Minders’ give younger children their own holiday while parents sail away for the day.
The Sailing
The Programme
These are two week holidays for just over thirty dinghy sailors at a time.
A safe, sheltered sailing area allows us to weave tuition into a programme of day cruises.
We visit the timeless villages of Meganisi, stop to picnic on the prosaically named ‘beach north’ or ‘beach south’, orbit Skorpios (gawping at Onassis' green lawns), or anchor off brilliant white beaches on the Greek mainland.
The first morning of ‘local sailing’ is mis-named; much time is spent in the water learning to right a capsized dinghy.
But this leads to local sailing on more lively dinghies between bouts of strenuous sunbathing round the pool — or a dabble in windsurfing.
We round off the holiday with a regatta.
Instruction
If you're keen on achieving RYA Certificates this is our best resort, offering formal RYA courses up to level 2, or level 3 if there's enough wind.
Courses are well integrated with the day cruising programme, so you don't lose any of the holiday atmosphere.
There's lots of time too to practice on single handed Toppers — an ideal way to gather confidence and experience.
Most novices are close to level 2 by the end of the week, so we then start coaching more advanced techniques, spinnakers and trapezes, for the more experienced.
Equipment
Moored by the hotel are:
14 Wayfarers (all with spinnakers, 3 with trapezes) 12 Toppers 3 Laser Fun (lively 2 man dinghies) 15 Windsurfers
Accommodation
Athos Hotel
Our dinghy sailors all stay in Athos Hotel, one of the most comfortable houses in Nidri, and the only one with its own fresh water swimming pool.
It's fully described on page 41.
This is the social centre of our dinghy sailing holidays; the spot for morning briefs, a cooling aprés-sail dip, or a pre-supper sip.
Singles
Singles may book ‘Willing to Share’ at the normal holiday cost just make sure we know your gender.
We can also book twin or double rooms in nearby houses for your sole use for a £55 supplement.
These rooms may have shared facilities.
Bear in mind that Nidri is popular with families in the high season.
Children?
We recommend children under about 11 should join ‘Minders’, when they'll get a little local sailing, and you'll enjoy your day knowing they're being looked after properly.
Those below about 14 will love bombing around on our Toppers, but will sometimes get bored on longer day cruises, so we ask you to sail together as a family with under 14's aboard.
Of, if you wish to sail as a family, consider a shore holiday, hiring a Wayfarer for a week, p40.
But please don't ask us to crew your young ones up with other adults…many are teachers, meant to be on holiday!
DINGHY SAILING IN BITEZ
The Windy Option
This is our seventh year sailing from the wide bay of Bitez.
Page 42 tells you more about the resort, casual sailing and the distractions of Bodrum.
This page just describes Dinghy Sailing.
But this is a flexible and convenient resort where it's easy to dabble in windsurfing for a day or two, and easy to choose between local culture, local sailing, or long day cruises.
Our day cruises visit sandy and colourful beaches, served by camels, restaurants, and small children who appear from nowhere selling dishes of fruit.
Fishing boats crammed with people putter past in high season, patting tom-toms and chanting Turkish songs.
They're all friendly, and fascinated by the way our dinghies plane past in clouds of spray in the strong afternoon winds.
These winds make Bitez our recommended centre for those keen on developing more advanced sailing skills — trapezing, strong wind sailing, bombing in Lasers or struggling with windsurfers.
But a good enough reason for coming is just to sample the friendly local hospitality and exotic food.
The Sailing
The Programme
Of the 80 guests in Bitez, about 30 are dinghy sailors who arrive once a fortnight for a two week holiday.
Bitez offers exciting day cruising, but it takes two weeks to acclimatise most people to the strong winds!
About five or six days of the holiday you'll sail away to visit hot springs, sandy beaches, the city of Bodrum, small villages or remote restaurants.
After a two hour pause to explore, swim and eat, the return journey will almost always be a brisk and adventurous sail, exhilarating enough to satisfy the most experienced sailor.
However, these day trips can be tiring, so there's always a local sailing option in Bitez bay.
Lasers provide the excitement.
Or else try charging around rudderless in Wayfarers, wobbling on windsurfers, toppling off Toppers, or just tippling in the bar watching our safety boats tending the tipped.
Instruction
We run RYA certificate courses to level 3 throughout the year, and novices will find early and late season delightful.
A novice needs a determined approach to learn when big winds are blowing in the high season, but the rewards of perseverance are great.
Equipment
Moored in front of the hotels:
10 Wayfarers (all with spinnakers, 3 with trapezes) 4 Laser Fun (lively 2 man dinghies) 6 Topper (indestructible single handers) Umpteen windsurfers (p34)
Accommodation
Hotel Sah or Yali Han
You'll stay bed and breakfast in the Sah or Yali Han hotels, described on page 43.
Half board in the Yali Han is a recommended option, especially in May when few other restaurants are open.
Meals are part of the holiday social life, and such good value that it makes little difference if you drop out for a day or two to eat locally.
Bar Service
As well as half board, the hotels tempt you with breakfast extras, mid-day hot snacks and a social session of tea and home made cakes after sailing.
These are totted up on your room bill.
Pay every few days.
DINGHY SAILING IN CANNIGIONE
For Exciting Variety
Cannigione (p54) offers exciting variety for the dinghy sailor, with unusual wind patterns and a wide range of other sporting opportunities.
This page describes just dinghy sailing, but it's easy to windsurf too in this multi activity resort (p35), while the beach is shallow and safe, ideal for young families, with a daytime babysitting service available.
When the wind is strong, which it can be for several days in a row, sailing is brisk but safe in the local sheltered area.
However, north of the quay the wind will be a couple of forces stronger, with planing under jib alone quite in order — conditions strictly for the expert!
At other times the steady day breezes are idyllic for exploring the whole estuary in any of our range of performance dinghies, catamarans or windsurfers.
The conditions make Cannigione our recommended centre for those who want to develop sailing skills, whether on dinghies or catamarans, perhaps learning to windsurf when the wind drops.
Accommodation
Accommodation is in one or two bedroom apartments, about 300 to 400 yds from the sailing beach.
A full description is given on page 45.
The Sailing
The Programme
Of the 40 guests at Cannigione, slightly less than half book their first choice as dinghy sailing.
New arrivals are welcomed each week by the old hands, since most stay for two week holidays, though one week holidays are available in early and late season.
Local sailing has variety, and sampling performance dinghies in exciting conditions is a major feature.
Morning chats crew you up for righting drill, tailchasing in Lasers, bombing in Dart catamarans or practising with trapezes, while novices practice on Toppers in the local area.
Instruction
Coaching is informal and tailored to individual needs, though novice instruction may be interrupted occasionally by stronger winds.
Coaching from our motor safety boats and daily chats on theory help the more experienced sailors develop their skills.
Equipment
The following dinghies are kept on our sailing beach, together with lots of windsurfers, and used by not more than 20 dinghy sailors:
20 Wayfarers 4 Laser Fun (lively 2 man dinghies) 2 Darts (2 man speed catamarans) 6 Toppers (tippy playthings) Umpteen windsurfers (p35)
WINDSURFING IN THE SUN
Seven Centres for Choice
Each of our seven Windsurf centres is different, but all offer warm water, predictable winds, high quality equipment, excellent tuition, and a sociable way of life in lovely places.
Add eleven years experience, stir gently, and you have some of the best windsurfing holidays money can buy, whether you're novice or expert.
Active swimmers of any age can join in, well, over 9 anyway.
Nidri or Porto Heli.
Schools of beginners spend lots of time in the water at first, but who cares when it's warm?
RYA recognised tuition helps you get on top of it (so to speak) and then you're an addict, ready for the more exciting winds, short boards and high tech rigs in our windy resorts.
And there's no waiting; each centre has more boards than people, more rigs than boards, and an interesting programme of activities which you're welcome to join.
These are sociable holidays, with from 25 to 50 guests on (or in) the water.
They're ideal for people by themselves, and everyone enjoys the framework of social activities we arrange.
More than half our guests come back, some many times, addicted to windsurfing, reliable winds, and our informal style.
The Windsurfing
Programmes
Some resorts are ideal for novices, with lots of other things to do and a lively social life.
Other resorts are dedicated to the more experienced sailors, with strong winds and unrivalled opportunities to try out a wide range of quality boards and sails.
And some are flexible, with fun and opportunities for dinghy sailors or non-sailors too.
So programmes vary.
Most are two week holidays, but there are one week holidays in early and late season.
We provide a full sailing programme with rescue cover at least six hours a day; we don't allow sailing in strong winds without rescue cover, so if level 5 sailors (can carve gybe) wish to sail outside normal hours they must arrange alternative rescue cover.
One day a week we provide only rescue cover, this only for experienced sailors; this gives us time to keep both boards and staff in good condition, and it's a good time for you to explore.
Boards and Rigs
At our windy centres, in addition to one long board each (necessary for light winds and racing), we have enough shorter boards (260 to 300cm) to put more than half our guests on the water at a time, and there are always more rigs than boards.
Most are Hi tech and RAF sails, ready rigged and fully interchangeable — the luxury of instant swaps!
Lists are given for each centre.
Persona Equipment
We have buoyancy aids for everyone, and enough harnesses and harness lines to introduce newcomers to their use.
But you'll feel more at home in your own kit, so bring it along.
Include a summer or shortie wetsuit and bootees.
Novices don't need any specialist kit, though sailing gloves help delicate hands, and you'll feel more comfy with a wetsuit in April and May.
Own Boards
We don't recommend bringing your own board; although some succeed, the airlines won't guarantee carriage, local customs don't always allow temporary import, and our transfer buses don't have room.
Instruction
Standards
Our tuition is recognised by the Royal Yachting Association (RYA), who produced their two award winning teaching videos in conjunction with us.
So our boards, sails, operating methods, safety boats and staff have been examined and approved by the highest UK national authority.
You, too, can examine us — through the videos!(see p53).
We run RYA courses from novice level 1 to funboard level 4, depending on the resort.
FUNBOARD WARNING
Once a year even the most reliable wind pattern fails for eight days or so.
You will then complain about everything in sight — including the wind which we have difficulty controlling.
So be it.
Lack of wind can damage your patience.
Beginners
Learning means lots of falling in, so you must be able to swim 25 yards.
But with lots of others in the same hot water it's great fun.
Conditions in Nidri or Porto Heli are ideal, with lighter winds and flat water.
Both are completely geared to novices, with plenty of other distractions if walking the plank doesn't suit.
On two or three afternoons of the first week winds may be a little daunting; don't be put off.
The reward comes when you first survive a stronger puff without falling.
From then you progress quickly.
By the second week over 95% of our novices are tacking back and forth, dying for the thrill of a stronger puff, hooked for life.
Beginners can also learn in other resorts.
Try Bitez in early or late season or Vassiliki, Finikounda or Cannigione, remembering that some afternoons are too windy for comfort.
The Rest
Once you can sail round a triangle (level 2) you learn best with lots of practice on the water in winds of the right strength.
So select a resort to suit your ability, listen in to our talks, and join the coaching sessions on the water.
We'll take you through the RYA scheme.
One plea; don't join the carve gybe sessions before you can waterstart and use footstraps and harnesses.
Our Guests
Singles
Over half the people on our windsurf holidays come by themselves.
Our social and sailing activities create a friendly, relaxed atmosphere in which it's easy to mix with others on the party.
Non-Windsurfers
In all resorts we reserve places for non-windsurfing friends, who pay only for a shore holiday.
Once these places are sold we regret we have to charge the full holiday rate.
Age & Fitness
Active people of all ages enjoy these holidays.
If you can climb stairs carrying your own luggage, and you can swim 25 yards you're a candidate.
But you do collect bumps and bruises falling off windsurfers, so we insist on medical insurance.
Asthma, heart conditions, diabetes or epilepsy expose you to special risks, and we don't recommend you windsurf with any of these conditions.
Choosing a Centre
Porto Heli
A flexible mix of windsurfing, dinghy and catamaran sailing conveniently based at a family run hotel with half board.
Winds ideal for novices, and lots of other things to do.
Good for families.
Nidri
Ideal for novices, and plenty of other activities.
A fabulous setting and lively village with a good social life for singles; ‘Minders’ look after young children in high season.
Finikounda
A new small specialist resort for windsurfers only, satisfactory for novices and ideal for intermediates.
Appeals strongly to those who love unspoilt Greece and don't mind more simple accommodation.
Vassiliki
Famous Greek location with morning winds for novices and afternoon winds for experts, therefore very good for mixed ability groups and families.
Good beach for non-sailors.
Yalikavak
Delightful village, Hotel with swimming pool, and exciting high season winds appeal to experts, intermediates and non-sailors too, especially those who like unspoilt Turkey.
Yet buzzing Bodrum is only 25 minutes away.
Bitez
Family run hotels in exotic surroundings with a swimming pool make convenient and easy social life for singles.
Exciting high season winds look after intermediates, experts and determined novices, while sensible novices have a go in early and late season.
Cannigione
Flexibly run multi-activity centre in an unusual destination.
Sessions of brilliant winds all season attract experts, while intermediates enjoy the spaces between.
Novices keep to the sheltered area.
Catamarans and dinghies add spice for all rounders, while self catering and safe beaches are ideal for young families, especially with the day baby sitting service.
Stars compare each centre under various headings.
One star is fine; you're comparing seven of the best centres in the Mediterranean!
WINDSURF NIDRI RYA
Recognised for Novice Tuition
With a well organised windsurf beach, lots of other things to do and an active social life, Nidri is an excellent resort for less experienced windsurfers, especially those travelling on their own.
It's also good for families with varying interests, though the dinghies do sail from a beach about 1200 metres away.
Young children join ‘Minders’ in high season, and non-sailors love walking or exploring by caique.
Page 40 tells you more about Nidri and activities which may suit other members of your party — dinghy sailing, casual sailing, children's holidays and so on.
This page explains facilities for the windsurfer holidays described on page 24.
The Windsurfing
The Programme
About 20 guests arrive each week for two week holidays, with some one weekers in the early and late season.
Windsurfing is run from our own beach at the north of Nidri village.
With a good area of fine pebbles, patches of shade, areas of sun, a fresh water shower, a big barbecue grill and a neighbouring taverna it's got everything you need for a comfortable day, and a few pleasant social evenings too.
The sailing area has lots of variety.
Once you're up and going, it's possible to sail across the bay to a little chapel, or round the local island.
Morning and afternoon chats, regular instruction sessions and water games when the winds drop, all aim to addict you to windsurfing in the most pleasant way possible.
It's in our interests — you'll come back for more!
Winds
Winds at the beach are perfect for novices, with enough stronger breezes to satisfy early intermediates, especially a short distance out to sea.
Fun board winds are too rare for experts, who should go to another of our centres.
Tuition
Beginner/Intermediate
Nidri is our best resort for novices, and an RYA recognised teaching centre.
The large area of flat water and lighter winds are ideal for RYA level 1 and 2 courses, which teach you happily to sail triangular courses and enjoy puffs of stronger wind.
And once you've got the hang of it, you'll be off with the intermediates, sailing round nearby islands, practising flare gybes and joining the regattas.
Equipment
If you're windsurfing in April and May you'll be more comfy if you beg or borrow a wetsuit, otherwise you won't need any special equipment.
Equipment on site for 42 guests in 1990 is listed; it's always being updated.
56 Boards.
26 Tiga (Funcup II and Speed)
30 HiFly (300 cs & 750 cs)
100 Sails.
25 Hyline novice sails
30 Hyline power head
15 Tiga Funline 5.5, 6.0
30 Gaastra Fun Foil 5.5, 6.1
Accommodation
Houses
Windsurf guests stay in Aspasia, Feredinos, and Avra, class ‘B’ houses (see p41) close to the northern windsurf beach.
All rooms are modern, with private facilities and balconies.
Some have access to fridges.
Views and positions do vary a little, so it's best rooms to early bookers.
Singles
Singles may book ‘Willing to Share’, or, subject to availability, we'll reserve a room for your exclusive use for a £55 supplement.
WINDSURF PORTO HELI
Informal Tuition for Novice or Intermediate
From the sandy beach in front of Hotel Rozos we organise a very flexible mix of windsurfing, dinghy and catamaran sailing.
Page 39 tells you more about half board in Hotel Rozos, other things to do, and the fascinating possibilities for exploring classical Greece; here we just talk about the windsurf facilities.
The convenient beach and steady winds are ideal for less experienced windsurfers who like a lot of freedom to do things in their own time, or to try other sports.
The arrangements are ideal for families or groups of friends with differing interests, including non-sailors.
People on their own enjoy the relaxed and friendly atmosphere of the hotel.
The Windsurfing
The Programme
Of the 60 guests in the hotel, about half join the windsurf programme.
New arrivals are greeted each week by old hands, since most stay for two week holidays.
One week holidays are available in early and late season.
Days start with a morning chat, and most windsurfing takes place in the large bay.
However, competent windsurfers do have the chance to join dinghy groups when they sail away to other beaches.
Winds
In the settled summer weather, winds are light most mornings, say force 2, increasing to 3 most afternoons, with occasional failures.
The mix is ideal for novices and early intermediates, with an occasional fun board wind to give intermediates some good thrills.
However, these fun boards winds are not frequent enough to recommend the resort to experts.
In early and late season (May and late September) winds are less predictable and sometimes strong.
Tuition
Beginners and Intermediates
Tuition at Porto Heli is informal, but follows RYA practice, and is suitable for novices.
The large bay and steady winds make this centre ideal for practising at your own pace, with our staff ready to assist when you're ready for the next step.
This system suits level 2 and 3 intermediates perfectly; many will become proficient with harnesses, and there are good opportunities to try a wide range of boards.
Equipment
The equipment listed was in use in 1989 for a maximum of 30 windsurf guests.
We're always replacing and updating, so there will be changes.
Most sails are kept ready rigged, ready for action, and all rigs are interchangeable.
29 Longer Boards 7 Vinta 370 3 Tiga Fun Cup 2 Mistral Competition 2 Mistral Maui 2 HiFly Nova 3 Klepper (306, 304, 204) 3 Tiga Speed 2 Bic Bebop 5 Chipper, Ypsi, Panther
6 Fun Boards 2 Tiga Swift (320) 1 ea Wayler 320 Pro, F2 Comet Tiga Jybe, Cougar
89 Sails 6 Junior Rigs 3.8 35 Power head 3.5–6.5 sq m 48 Full batten 3.8–7.3 sq m Makes include Mountifield, HyLine, Gaastra, Mistral, Topsail, Telltale and others.
Local sailing in Porto Heli Bay
Novices learn by doing
420 Dinghy
Lots of choice
Athos Hotel — social centre for our Dinghy holidays
Planing past in clouds of spray
Trips to camel beach
Beach salesman
I KNEW I SHOULD HAVE STAYED IN THE BAR!
Sah Hotel & pool
Darts, Lasers, Windsurfers…
And Wayfarers too
More boards than people
Learning how…
And now hooked for life
Leisurely beach lessons
Serious Carve Gybe practice
A well organised windsurf beach
Pause for lunch
Minder at work
First the demonstration…
…then the practice
Followed by lunch at Maistraki
Or a picnic
WINDSURF FINIKOUNDA
An Intermediate Resort in Unspoilt Greece……with long sandy beaches
The south west Peloponese is a fertile farming area blessed with a series of long, wide sandy beaches and long afternoon sessions of steady cross shore winds.
One of these beaches, framed by a cluster of small white houses, is Finikounda.
Opened last year, it's proved to be a delightful new windsurf resort, an hour and a half from Kalamata airfield.
The village is intimate.
You'll soon know all eight or ten shops.
Taverna menus are rare, but half way through the holiday you'll know the cooks, their kitchens and their favourite dishes.
Two tavernas are unusual.
One provides hot foot — at a gentle pace from a cliff top site with lovely views.
The other provides amazingly quick service — from an incomplete concrete house frame in a backstreet.
Other tavernas stray across the beach to the water's edge offering idyllic surroundings and cool wine instead.
Regular summer visitors return from far afield year after year, camping in the bay next door or staying in one or the two small hotels.
But farming comes first, so when the irrigation is on, the water's off, and when the harvest is busy, mum's not available to sweep the rooms.
This has kept mass tourism at bay.
Our arrival last year made little difference.
Finikounda will remain a superb resort for any windsurfer who loves the idea of a holiday in unspoilt Greece.
The Windsurfing
The Programme
Of the thirty six guests, about half change over each week.
Newcomers are welcomed by the old hands, and each morning starts with a chat to outline the day's programme on the windsurfer beach, about 800 metres west of the village.
It's quiet spot with plenty of shade and its own bar.
One or two mornings a week we sail upwind to another beach, basing ourselves on a campsite taverna for the day, and once a fortnight we take a day off.
Sailing days offer RYA instruction sessions from level 1 to level 3 five days a week, with free sailing other days.
4 Topper dinghies are available for anyone who'd like a change.
Winds
The resort is well south, with a long sunny season starting by the end of May and lasting into October.
Normal winds are cross-shore, starting light in the morning and picking up around mid-day.
From early June to mid September these afternoon winds regularly reach force 3 and 4, sometimes more, blowing for four or five hours at a time.
Conditions in our windsurf bay are fine for novices, if a little gusty some afternoons.
Further out they're steady and ideal for intermediates.
Experienced sailors enjoy the persistence of the winds, but most of the time they'll be using 6m sails.
Tuition
Novices
Mornings are ideal for our RYA level 1 and 2 courses.
Everyone goes out on longer boards with the biggest sails they can handle, either sailing around the windsurf bay till the winds become gusty, or sailing upwind for lunch at the long beach.
Novices who learn quickly will find this a most satisfying resort; by the second week they'll be able to move on to intermediate classes.
Others will need small sails in the afternoon, and may sometimes have to retire ashore as the wind picks up.
Then it's time to play with the topper dinghies!
Intermediates
Force 3 afternoon winds are ideal for harness practice.
When they reach force 4, we run footstrap and waterstart sessions.
Either way, this is the ideal resort for level 2 or 3 sailors, who need long periods of moderate winds to develop their skills.
Big Winds
Winds of force 5 and more do blow, but not often enough to advertise this as a big wind resort.
Our staff go off duty at 17.30, and in a god wind they'll got out to play.
Those whom our staff judge as being able competently to carve gybe and water start may continue sailing till safety cover finishes.
Accommodation
We couldn't persuade the two small hotels in Finikounda to give up their regular clients, so we've booked spacious room in four village houses.
All rooms have private shower and wc, most have balconies, and some have shared kitchenettes.
Rooms are allocated according to which week you come, and it's best rooms to early bookers.
Singles
Singles may book ‘willing to share’, in which case they'll be given one of the more spacious twin rooms at no extra charge.
Sole occupancy of one of the rooms without balcony is possible for a £55 supplement.
Non-Sailors
Non-sailing friends are welcome, subject to availability.
Other Things to Do
Buses connect Finikounda with the nearby towns of Pylos, Methoni and Koroni, and the city of Kalamata is only an hour and a half distant.
All the picturesque seaside towns with ruins of old castles or monasteries to visit, busy shops catering for local needs, and few tourists.
Car Hire is also possible, and a tour round the deserted villages and dramatic marble mountains of the Mani peninsula never fails to impress.
Social Life
The village tavernas are the social life of Finikounda, with good and varied food compared to many Greek resorts.
It's just a matter of selecting which one to meet at, and if you overslept when the decision was made, wander round till you find the group.
After supper there's a choice of sticky cakes, coffee and exotic icecreams at a couple of beachside cafes, or late drinks and 70's rock at the Louis' blues bar — if he's the guy who opens it again this year.
The local disco opens in June…
We add our usual framework of activities which you're welcome to join.
These include welcome cocktails, a pizza and punch party, a beachside barbecue and farewell meal.
We share costs, but the cost of living is very low in this out of the way corner of Greece.
Equipment
The equipment listed is for 26 windsurfer guests in 1989.
Sails are kept ready rigged, ready for action, and all rigs are interchangeable with all boards.
When visiting the neighbouring bay, only a limited number of rigs can be carried along, so choice will then be more restricted.
34 Longer Boards 18 prima 16 Tiga Funcup 14 Intermediate Boards 14 Tiga Swift 10 Short Boards 8 Tiga Power Gybe 2 Custom 70 Sails from 4.2 to 6.1 sq m 20 Power head (4.2) 24 Dual Batten System (5.0) 26 Full Batten & RAF 5.2–6.1 Makes: Neil Pryde, Gaastra, Hyline, Topsail
Dinghies
Four Toppers complete the scene at Finikounda.
We don't provide formal dinghy instruction, but novices pick up a lot just by sailing out and back when the winds are light.
Those who already sail have an exciting time trying to stay upright when it's really blowing.
Finikounda — windsurfer beach off right
OK GULLY, THIS TIME GO FOR IT!
Select your rig…
…and off you go…
…to visit a busy nearby beach
WINDSURF VASSILIKI
Mornings for Novices
Afternoons for Experts
Our Vassiliki centre on the island of Levkas (p40) is at Ponti, a tiny hamlet at one end of a mile long beach.
Ponti boasts two tavernas, a sandy beach, just waist deep, perfect for teaching beach and water starts.
Shopping is at Vassiliki, a small, colourful fishing port at the other end of the beach.
Vassiliki is kept fresh and green throughout the year by abundant fresh water springs.
The harbour quay, shaded by plane trees and filled with tables, is the village social centre.
Waiters scurry to and from their cafes and tavernas, weighed down by great trays of food and drink, tripping over cats and noisily claiming right of way over passing cars.
Gnarled old men ignore the chaos sipping coffee and chatting with fishermen as they untangle their nets.
Visitors relax over their evening meals, enjoying the free floor show in the warm evening air.
Most visitors come to windsurf.
Morning winds are light, and fine for novices, but it's the afternoon winds which make the bay famous.
They're undoubtedly the strongest in the Ionian.
The combination is ideal for an expert taking a holiday with a novice.
The Windsurfing
The Programme
50 windsurfing guests stay at Ponti, with room for up to 12 non-sailing friends.
Holidays change over once a fortnight, except in May and June when there's space for some one week holidays.
Once a fortnight there's a day off, and another day has safety cover for free sailing, but no tuition.
The programme and tuition are dominated by the daily wind patterns.
The Winds
The famous Vassiliki wind starts with a light onshore in the morning, ideal for novices, then switches in the afternoon to a brisk cross-shore blast, ideal for experts.
From mid-June to mid-September this blast lasts for two to six hours, blowing force 4 to force 7 for over 60% of the afternoons and that includes the odd period when it's flat for 4 to 6 days.
Moving away from the main season reduces the chances of a windy afternoon.
This Vassiliki wind is spectacular, but if you want more hours of strong wind each day, or a higher percentage of strong wind days, we'd recommend Turkey or Sardinia.
Tuition
Mornings for Novices
The light mornings are ideal for RYA level 1 and 2 courses.
Everyone goes out on longer boards with the biggest sails they can handle.
It's a time for experts to be patient, practising tricks, joining the light weather races, or just sunbathing.
Over lunch there's safety cover only.
Afternoons for Experts
Wait for the wind shift after lunch.
Sometimes it's as late as 1600, which creates a log-jam of toppled novices somewhere down wind.
Usually it's earlier; level 2 sailors retire in an orderly fashion to the bar to watch the fun, level 3 sailors catapult off long boards right, left and centre learning where not to put their weight, while level 4 sailors leap onto short boards for serious carve gybe practice — joining our RYA fun-boards courses if they wish.
Late Sailing
Four out of five of our guests are worn out by 17.30, when tuition finishes.
If the big winds are blowing and you bribe them right, our staff may prolong safety cover to allow those who can competently carve gybe and water start to continue sailing.
Equipment
The equipment listed is for 50 windsurf guests in 1990, but during the year there will be updates and replacements.
Sails are kept ready rigged, ready for action, and all rigs are interchangeable with all boards — an unrivalled opportunity to try to a wide range of sails with a wide range of boards.
50 Longer Boards 16 Prima (new) 20 Tiga Funcup 6 Tiga Speed 8 Tiga Swift 34 Short Boards 10 Tiga Power Gybe 6 Tiga Gybe 4 Tiga 280 Slalom 4 Tiga 260 10 Custom boards (various) 115 Sails from 3.7 to 6.4 sq m 24 Power head (40, 6.4) 45 Full Batten (3.8–6.1) 42 RAF or Camber (3.7–5.7) 4 Junior Rigs Makes: Neil Pryde, Gaastra, Shockwave, Topsail, Mountfield, Tushingham, Tiga, Hyline.
Accommodation
We have two houses in Ponti.
Room standards are good, but the views vary.
Best rooms go to those who book earliest.
Cosmos Pension
Our windsurf centre, is right one the beach in Ponti, 20 minutes walk from Vassiliki.
It's a lovely setting, and exceptionally convenient.
Rooms all have private facilities, and balconies with superb views.
Two balconies face the tubes and plumbing mysteries of the solar heating system; to enjoy the great views from these you have to stand, or sit on a very, very high chair.
Decoration and hot water supplies are typically Greek; adequate and unreliable.
Most room shave twin beds, and smaller rooms have double beds.
Nico, our host, serves cool drinks and limited snacks in the bar downstairs till supper time.
Two nearby tavernas serve more substantial meals.
A shaded patio overlooks the garden, well planted with colourful racks of equipment and sails, and the garden leads straight onto the beach, mainly sand with a few patches of pebbles.
Antipas
Antipas is just 150 metres from Cosmos, in the centre of Ponti.
All rooms have private facilities, most have balconies, though all you may see is the wall of the house next door, and there's a big shared fridge.
Singles
Singles may book ‘willing to share’, in which case they'll be given one of the more spacious twin rooms at no extra charge.
Sole occupancy of a smaller room is possible for a £55 supplement, subject to extra rooms being available.
Other Things To Do
It's fun to explore Levkas island.
Island buses leave from Vassiliki three times a day, travelling to Levkas town and Nidri.
Car and scooter hire can also be arranged to visit the magnificent white sand beaches of the west coast, and local water ski-ing is usually possible in the high season.
Travelling further by ferry to visit the islands of Ithaka and Cephalonia is possible from about June.
Social Life
Much of the social life evolves around the patio at Cosmos, where decisions are taken about which taverna to visit for supper, and whether or not to meet later at a bar or disco.
The low cost of living makes such evenings a real pleasure.
Most of the season you'll be with the same group of people for the whole fortnight, which creates an excellent social atmosphere.
We add our usual framework of activities which you're welcome to join, sharing costs.
These may include a welcome meal for newcomers, a sunset cocktail cruise, a night out in Nidri, or a visit to beautiful Sivota Bay.
Our beachside barbecue is always one of the most popular events, and there's no better place for it than Cosmos!
Of course, those who join for one week holidays won't see the whole range of our social activities.
Cosmos — in the light morning wind
Tiga in the afternoon
Spoilt for choice
Well dressed local
Well dressed windsurfer
WINDSURF YALIKAVAK
In Unspoilt Turkey
Good Funboard Afternoons
Yalikavak is for funboard sailors looking for a high probability of good steady winds.
Topper dinghies, a delightful village atmosphere and unspoilt surroundings are major attractions for non-windsurfing friends.
In early and late season the strong winds become less frequent, and it's then good for novices.
The village has a tiny harbour, the busy centre of a local farming and fishing community.
It's set in a large bay, about two miles deep and one mile wide, on the north west corner of the Bodrum Peninsula.
Bodrum itself is easily and cheaply accessible by minibus, p42 tells you more.
Yalikavak until recently was at the end of a dirt track, so it's genuinely unspoilt with lost of character — something becoming very rare on the South West Turkey coast.
Small cafes and restaurants ring the quayside; grocery and hardware shops are scattered around.
Busy backyard workshops fabricate wood, metal, glass fibre and stone, while tailor and cobbler make clothes and shoes to order.
Visitors come by yacht, or stay in one of the three small hotels on the beach north of the village.
Our windsurf centre is the Yenilmez, a hotel with its own swimming pool about half a mile from the village.
The Windsurfing
The Programme
There's room for 30 windsurfers and lots of non-sailing friends at the Yenilmez.
The sailing programme is dictated by the winds.
A long, narrow spit of land shelters the bay from most of the swell, and creates a large safe area ideal for short board sailing.
If afternoon winds are light it's fun to cruise along this spit visiting the beaches and anchorages along the north shore.
The Winds
Bitez and Yalikavak have similar funboard winds most afternoons.
Compared to Vassiliki, the windy season is longer and more intense, lasting from the beginning of June till late September.
The afternoon blast starts around one o'clock, and is more frequent than in Greece.
Blowing right to left across the beach, and slightly on shore, it quickly reaches force 4 or more on about 65% of the afternoons in season, including the odd flat patch when nothing blows at all for six or seven days.
Moving out of main season, the frequency of stronger winds drops.
Tuition
Novices
Mornings are usually suitable for novices, but unless they're determined people, novices are better off coming in early or late season.
October is idyllic.
The Rest
We run RYA level 3 and 4 coaching sessions when the good winds are in.
Those first learning to water start or carve gybe are best off in the flat water to windward by the spit.
Those developing their techniques will enjoy the chopping water a little downwind — excellent if you're first starting to get airborne.
The Equipment
The equipment listed is for 30 windsurf guests in 1990, but during the year there will be some updates and replacements.
Sails are ready rigged, ready for action, and all are interchangeable between all boards.
31 Longer Boards 8 Tiga Fun Cup 12 Tiga Spirit 8 Tiga Swift 2 HiFly 500 1 HiFly 750cs 28 Short Boards 10 Tiga Power Jybe 8 Tiga 289 4 Tiga 260 6 Custom various 70 Sails from 3.8 to 6.1 sq m 20 Power Head 4.0–5.8 32 Full Batten 3.8–6.1 18 RAF 4.2–5.2 Makes: Neil Pryde, Gaastra, Mouseloft, Topsail, Hyline
Types: Fully battened and RAF sails include slalom, wave and speed sails
Dinghies
Four Toppers complete the scene.
We don't provide formal instruction, but novices pick up a lot by sailing out and back in light winds.
Those who already sail have an exciting time trying to stay upright when it's really blowing.
Accommodation
Yenilmez Hotel
The Yenilmez Hotel is right on the beach in the middle of Yalikavak bay, about 15 minutes walk from the village.
The 24 rooms are spacious and all have private facilities.
Breakfast is included, and served in the poolside restaurant and bar.
Lunch and supper are also available, and there are stunning sunset views out to sea.
Loungers around the pool (salt water) provide a good perch for watching the action, and the rig and board storage area is just over the road on the beach.
The Beach
The beach itself is of fine pebbles.
It used to be an access track, but a replacement road now runs inland, improving the place immensely.
Bar the occasional donkey and camel, there's very little traffic.
The sea bottom is stony, so we strongly recommend you always sail with something on your feet.
Singles
Singles may book ‘willing to share’, in which case they'll be given one of the more spacious twin rooms at no extra charge.
Sole occupancy of a room is occasionally possible, but the supplement is £100.
Non-Sailors
There's plenty of room for non-sailors at the hotel.
Other Things to Do
The village is fascinating; the sort of place the press have been raving about for the past four years when they talk about ‘unspoilt Turkey’.
We love it.
Apart from the village, there are interesting walks around the northern peninsulas to neighbouring bays, returning through fertile farmland.
A day in Bodrum is a must, especially market day.
Dolmus (the cheap share taxis and buses) leave the village square for Bodrum from time to time.
Some times are predictable; some times you just wait till they're full; other times we arrange a group.
It's a scenic 25 minute drive costing about 40p.
Other charms of the peninsula are described on page 42, and many organised excursions are available.
Social Life
Much of the social life evolves around the poolside, where decisions are taken about where to eat for supper, and whether or not to meet at the terrace bar in the village afterwards.
The incredibly low cost of living makes such evenings a real pleasure.
The friendly atmosphere is ideal for people by themselves.
We add our usual framework of activities, which you're welcome to join, sharing costs.
These may include a welcome cocktail party, a Turkish night, an evening meal together in a restaurant high above the bay, or a visit to beautiful Gümüslük bay.
The barbecue is always one of the more popular events, though where we do this depends rather on whether the wind has dropped or not!
The resort is not really suitable for children or teenagers, since they won't have much company; Bitez is better.
Late night bars have arrived, but there's no disco yet.
The village reminds us very much of Nidri ten years ago, before foreign tourists arrived.
The Yenilmez Hotel
With its own pool
Katie's battle flag
RYA Level 3 & 4 coaching sessions
It's choppier downwind towards the village
WINDSURF BITEZ
Powerful High Season Winds
Lots of strong winds and flat water make Bitez the best choice for funboard sailors who might want to spend lots of time practising carve gybes.
Options are many; bomb on funboards or join races, play with dinghies or sweat in Turkish baths, struggle to water start or fluff a duck gybe.
Funboard winds last well into September, becoming less frequent as the month passes.
Then the resort comes into its own for novices.
It's a fine bay from which to see Turkey, offering a unique combination of culture and activity.
And with dinghy sailors sharing the base it's easy to book a mixed holiday, some people windsurfing, some dinghy sailing, and some just lazing.
Page 42 tells you more about the Bodrum peninsula, Bitez, and the two delightful hotels we use, but this is a convenient resort where you live right on the beach, enjoying a friendly style of service that's difficult to fault.
The Windsurfing
The Programme
40 windsurfers share with 30 dinghy sailors and non-sailing friends, in this flexible resort where it's possible for windsurfers to sail in Toppers or Lasers, and where the dinghy sailors can easily dabble in a little windsurfing.
Some one week windsurf holidays are available in early and late season.
The Winds
Yalikavak and Bitez have similar wind patterns to Vassiliki, but the daily wind arrives much earlier, it's more persistent and more frequent.
Mornings are fairly light, and the day breeze picks up around mid-day.
About 65% of the afternoons in season have good funboard winds of force 4 to 6.
In a bad season there may be one or two breaks in the wind pattern lasting four to seven days.
Before early June and after mid-September the frequency of strong winds drops and October has ideal weather for novices.
Tuition
Novices
May, September and October are ideal months for novices, though we do run level 1 and 2 courses through the whole summer for the more determined.
It's not easy to learn in the strong afternoon winds of the high season unless you're pretty fit.
The Rest
This is a superb funboard training resort from June into September, and we run RYA coaching courses up to level 4 throughout the season.
Flat water in the local bay is ideal for water start and carve gybe practice, if a little gusty for first steps with harnesses.
Beyond the immediate headland in the wider bay the wind really steps up and is quite steady, and together with choppy water gives more demanding sailing.
Equipment
The equipment listed is for up to 40 windsurf guests in 1990, but during the year there will be updates and replacements.
Sails are kept fully rigged and ready for action, and all rigs are interchangeable with all boards.
This is one of those great chances to compare lots of boards and sails in good winds.
43 Longer Boards 16 Tiga Fun Cup 4 Tiga Spirit, 8 Tiga Swift 10 Prima 3 HiFly 500, 2 HiFly 750 24 Short Boards 12 Tiga Power Jybe 6 Tiga 280, 2 Tiga 260 4 Custom boards 81 Sails from 3.8 to 6.1 sq m 20 Powerhead (4.0–5.0) 40 Fully battened 3.8–6.1 18 RAF & Camber, 4.2–5.7
Makes: Neil Pryde, Gaastra, Lodey, Mouseloft, Hotwave, Tushingham, Hyline, Topsail etc
Types: Slalom, Wave and Speed sails throughout the size range
Dinghies
6 Toppers and 4 Laser Fun dinghies are shared with dinghy sailors.
Accommodation
Hotel Şah or Yali Han.
You'll stay bed and breakfast in the Şah or Yali Han hotels, described on page 43.
Half board in the Yali Han is a recommended option, especially in May when few other restaurants are open.
Meals are part of the holiday social life, and such good value that it makes little difference if you drop out for a day or two to eat locally.
Bar Service
As well as half board the hotels tempt you with breakfast extras, mid-day hot snacks and a social session of tea and home made cakes after sailing, totted up on your room bill.
Pay every few days.
Singles
Singles may book ‘Willing to Share’ for no extra cost.
sole occupancy of a hotel room is sometimes possible for £100 for two weeks.
Kept fully rigged, ready for action
Hi, Ben
Safety watch.
We'd like to use the Minaret…
WINDSURF CANNIGIONE
Variety of Winds & Activities
Cannigione offers exciting variety, and the best chance for windsurfers to find strong winds, especially in early or late season.
There's a large area of shallow water off the beach, ideal for practising water starts or quickly recovering from a fluffed gybe, so it's an easy place first to develop funboard skills.
The area and its unusual wind patterns are described on page 44.
Cannigione is idea for expert windsurfers who want to try dinghy sailing, or intermediates and experts who are gamblers enough to trade the possibility of 6 days howling wind with the equal possibility of being hit with 8 days of pleasant summer breezes!
Windsurf intermediates or novices will enjoy themselves immensely if they're to stick to the sheltered area when the winds are stronger.
And there's plenty to do for non-sailing friends.
The beach is really shallow and safe for young families.
The Windsurfing
The Programme
Of the 40 guests at Cannigione, slightly more than half sail mainly on the windsurf programme.
One week holidays are available in early and late season.
The activity on any particular day is dominated by whether the strong wind is in session or not.
Strong Winds
Strong wind sessions can blow for 2 to 6 days in a row, day and night.
Conditions are then demanding; the wind blows across the estuary, so the immediate local area has an offshore wind and flat water, great for carve gybe and waterstart practice.
But only half a mile away you'll be in force 5 to 7 and choppy water, excellent if you're a fit expert.
Day Breezes
Gaps between strong winds can last for 4 to 8 days.
Light winds blow into the estuary, increasing most days to reach a pleasant force 3 or so.
Conditions are then idyllic for novices and intermediates — or learning to sail dinghies if you haven't tried that before.
There are also many excellent excursions, described on page 44.
Tuition
Coaching is informal and tailored to individual needs.
Conditions are ideal for novices when the strong winds lay off, but may be interrupted if a windy session sets in.
Coaching from our safety boats, and daily chats on theory, help the more experienced.
Equipment
The following was new in Cannigione in August ‘89, to be used by not more than 20 clients.
As usual, all rigs are fully interchangeable and ready for instant swaps.
12 Longer Boards 6 Tiga Club II, 6 Tiga Spirit 4 Intermediate Boards 4 Tiga Swift 16 Short Boards 8 Tiga Power Jybe 4 Tiga 280, 4 Tiga 260 42 Sails from 3.7 to 7.0 18 Full Battened (3.0–6.4) 16 RAF (3.7–5.4) 6 Novice sails (4.0–5.5) 2 Junior rigs
Make: Neil Pryde, Wave, Slalom and speed types.
Dinghies
For a change of pace, sailing dinghies and catamarans are available.
Page 23 has a list.
WHAT GOES UP…
Time out
Airborne in nearby Porto Pollo
Swap with a Dart?
Shallow beach, really safe for youngsters
HOUSEPARTIES ASHORE
Not as active — but still sociable!
This brochure is full of sociable holidays for the hyperactive; Houseparties are sociable holidays too, but more for people who prefer unusual places, good company, a hefty novel, good food and perhaps just a dabble at watersports.
They're a happy choice for people by themselves.
Run by our sister company within the Small World holiday boutique, Houseparties are modelled on the famous Ski-Chalet parties invented by Small World thirty years ago.
About 12 to 16 people stay in a large villa run by two English girls.
They feed you a daily breakfast, an occasional salady lunch with wine, and a three course dinner, also with free wine, six nights a week.
All this is included in the holiday price.
With Windsurfing
Two Houseparties are just a stone's throw (if you've got a powerful catapult) from our windsurf centres at Nidri on Levkas, an Finikounda in the Peloponese.
The Torba houseparty, with its own swimming pool and bar, is only 20 minutes by Dolmus from or Bitez or Yalikavak centres on the Bodrum Peninsula.
So, from any of these you can ‘have a go’ at windsurfing for the odd day or two while enjoying the good food and good company of the Houseparty.
Best of both worlds?
In Unusual Places
There are Houseparties on several other Greek islands, in Menorca (with its own pool and tennis court), on the Algarve (own pool), and at a lovely location in Kenya on Diani Beach, where once you've gawped at the game there's a centre to distract you with windsurfing, SCUBA diving and sailing just a few yards through the palm trees.
In the Mountains
There are even mountain Houseparties in the French or Swiss Alps.
These are more active.
Based on some of our Winter ski chalets, there are options for mountain biking, rafting, paragliding, rock climbing and horse riding — even windsurfing, on a lake.
Invigorating stuff…
In the Snow
Which perhaps brings us full circle back to the Ski Chalet holidays run by ‘Ski Whizz/Small World’ in France, Austria, Switzerland and the Dolomites.
Skiing is just like windsurfing, except the water's been freeze dried, spread around a mountain side and bashed into submission.
Instead of a wind, think slope; instead of waves, think moguls; instead of being towed by a safety boat, think ski lift.
Not much difference really, except single plank ski-ers are more rare.
HOUSEPARTIES AFLOAT
Big Boats With Skippers and Cooks
These are Houseparties that move by motor from one idyllic anchorage to another, often visiting places only ever seen by yachtsmen.
Pass the time with a little watersports, lie back and enjoy the peace, or wander ashore to explore some off beat village.
‘SunSun’ in Greece
‘SunSun’ is a 16 berth motor yacht (8 twin cabins, all with own shower and wc) which runs as a floating Houseparty.
Based at Symi, near Rhodes, she cruises the islands of the Dodecanese.
Combine a week ashore at the Symi Houseparty with a week afloat, or luxuriate aboard for two weeks.
If you're keen on water and other liquids, ‘SunSun’ carries a waterski boat, windsurfers, sailskiffs, a canoe and a bar.
Turkey by Gulet
Gulets are traditional pine built Turkish vessels, driven by motor, perhaps steadied by sails.
They cruise the area covered by our flotilla yachts, the Gulfs of Gököva and Symi (p13 tells you more).
Take a week ashore at a Torba Houseparty, followed by a week on board with 8 to 14 other guests, visiting the harbours that others can't reach and playing with two windsurfers aboard.
The Turkish crew provide food and free wine.
A salady lunch with wine
Villa Effy — with blue shutters — Finikounda
Diani Beach, Kenya
Torba — with pool
‘SunSun’, with waterski and windsurfers
Gulet
One idyllic anchorage to another
NOT NOW DEAR I'M LION SPOTTING
WHICH COUNTRY?
Three Cultures to Choose From
With many types of sailing holiday spread around different resorts in Greece, Turkey or Sardinia, it's difficult to avoid boring you with repeated descriptions.
So while specialist resorts (the ones just offering a sailing or a windsurfing holiday) have been described on earlier pages, the bigger resorts which offer a choice of non-sailing holidays too are described in this ‘Places’ section.
We start with a summary of each country.
Greece
The British tourist knows Greece as a sunny country with unshaven but friendly natives, an informal and inexpensive life style, quaintly erratic plumbing and some magnificent classical sites.
Our resort areas are typical, but away from mass tourism.
Village life still revolves around the squares, the quaysides and the tavernas.
The pace is slow, so slow that lots of things are unfinished.
Taxis don't turn up, buses stop for a chat, conversations are left handing.
Houses have only half a storey too…
It's all part of the charm, a charm that brings hundreds back year after year to escape frenetic perfection for a few weeks.
Porto Heli and Nidri are described on the next three pages.
Each provides a wide choice of sailing and non-sailing activities.
Three specialist resorts are described earlier:
Paxos (p19) is home for 30 Dinghy Sailors who cruise ambitiously around this tiny island.
Full of character, Paxos has an easy social life, ideal for people on holiday by themselves.
Finikounda (p29) is that rare gem, a farming and fishing village of great charm blessed with miles of quiet sandy beaches.
Mass tourism started in 1989 when the first 340 Windsurf guests arrived.
Vassiliki (p30) is a famous windsurfing bay on the south coast of Levkas island.
Our beachside centre hosts 50 windsurfers and their companions.
Turkey
Turkey has some of the greatest historic sites of the world, good beaches, a long summer season, good food, and (unusual for the Mediterranean!) really energetic people with a fine sense of service — which helps overcome the occasional power cuts and plumbing disasters.
Our resorts, in the quieter bays of the Bodrum Peninsula, are little affected by recent developments.
Travel by shared taxis (aptly called ‘Dolmus’, translates as ‘stuffed’) makes the whole peninsula cheaply accessible.
Visit another beach for the day, buy cheap designer labels in the hectic markets of Bodrum, or watch carpet weaving in quaint inland villages; the more you Dolmus the more you'll appreciate the culture contrast between East and West, and the more you'll enjoy this fascinating country.
Bitez , a small holiday bay on the Bodrum Peninsula, is described on page 42 and 43.
It offers a wide range of sailing, windsurfing and non-sailing holidays.
Yalikavak (p23), also on the Bodrum Peninsula, is a specialist windsurf resort.
It's also an unspoilt farming and sponge fishing village of great character.
Our beachside hotel has a swimming pool, an excellent spot for windsurfer and non-sailor alike.
Sardinia
The Italian Island of Sardinia, little known to the British tourist, offers uncrowded resorts, spectacular scenery, brilliant white beaches with emerald clear water and excellent food.
Shopping, food, restaurants and discos are all stylish, putting Greece and Turkey in the shade.
Of course, style does add a bit to costs, so our self catering apartments are popular with those on a budget.
However, this is undoubtedly the island for those who wish to travel somewhere unusual for a change.
Cannigione
(p44) is a multi-activity centre, excellent for families, running both Dinghy and Windsurf holidays, together with plenty of activities for non-sailors.
St. Peter's Castle, Bodrum
Cafe — ready for custom
Sardinia — Costa Smeralda
PORTO HELI
Dinghies, Windsurfers and Classical Sites
Porto Heli is a multi-activity centre, running a flexible mix of Dinghy Sailing holidays (p20) and Windsurf holidays (p27) in the style developed by Brian Amstutz and Groves Sailing over the past eleven years.
Non-sailing friends and sailors will find lots of other things to do as well.
About 125 road miles from Athens, the village is tucked into one corner of a large bay, almost completely enclosed by gentle pine clad hills.
Shops, tavernas and cafes face a quay busy with caiques, fishing boats and visiting yachts.
Around the bay, houses give way to occasional sandy beaches and a few hotels.
The bay itself is a large natural safe sailing area, about a mile across, the perfect spot to play safely and with great freedom on windsurfers or exciting performance dinghies.
Beyond the bay and within easy sailing distance are attractive pine fringed coves, quiet sandy beaches, isolated waterside tavernas, small seaside hamlets and the island of Spetse.
This is an area of contrasts.
Old houses in the centre of Porto Heli compare sharply with smart new buildings nearby.
The peaceful bay couldn't be more different from bustling, crowded, scruffy Kranidion, the local hilltop market town.
And great classic sites are within easy reach.
These differences are easily explored from Hotel Rozos, our windsurf and sailing centre.
Other Things to Do
Porto Heli is ideal for sampling some of the best of classical Greece.
Local buses go to Kranidion (worth a visit in its own right) and Kostas.
Hydrofoils leave Porto Heli each morning for Piraeus, returning in the evening, so day trips to Athens visiting the Acropolis, the old quarter of the Plaka and the National Archaeological museum are easy.
Coaches leave Porto Heli to visit Mycenae, Nauplion and Epidaurus, including the classic Greek plays during the Epidaurus festival.
The island of Spetse is within easy reach.
Locally there are good walks through pinewoods to the headlands with their panoramic views of the Spetse straits; one route takes you past the excavations of ancient Porto Heli.
Boats and ferries potter the local coves and islands if you haven't done enough pottering in our own craft.
Also available for hire locally are:
Waterskiing (tuition) Paragliding Jet Ski Tennis Car Hire Coach Excursions
Hotel Rozos
The Hotel Rozos is our sailing and social centre.
Nikos, the owner, has developed an informal and relaxed style of service over the last eleven years that'll make you feel quite at home.
Maxine, the receptionist, runs a small shop and tries to keep the sand at bay as our sailors trudge it into the bar in exchange for that badly needed cool drink.
Half a mile from the village, just across the road from its own beach, and with magnificent views across the bay, the Rozos is beautifully placed.
The social areas are ideal; a cool and light breakfast room adjoins the bar, leading out onto the vine shaded terraces where our briefings are held.
Most rooms have private baths or showers with wc, and generous balconies with perfect views across the bay.
Spacious doubles, twins or three bedded rooms are available.
Four pairs of rooms at the side of the hotel each share a shower and toilet, and three of these have access to a balcony; these suites are ideal for families.
Five bungalows in the rear garden of the hotel have double or triple bedrooms with doors leading to a patio, a shower room with wc, and an entrance lobby with an additional bed (and a fridge and sink!), these are fine for families with small children.
Singles may book any rooms ‘willing to share’, and if three people occupy any room, each pays £7 per week less.
Meals & Social Life
Half board is included in the price of your holiday.
Continental breakfast or coffee and tea, fruit juice, rolls with butter and jam, is taken at the Hotel.
Evening meals are taken at taverna Rozos (guess who owns it) next door.
These informal evening meals create a large part of the social atmosphere, and Nikos' three course set menu is good, covering a wide variety of Greek dishes over a typical fortnight.
The hotel bar, close to the sailing action, provides cool drinks throughout the day, pre-dinner cocktails, after dinner coffee and late night drinks too.
Pay as you go.
Beneath the taverna is a well soundproofed disco for the nightbirds, and there are other discos around the bay.
Hotel Rozos
Head for heights?
Catching supper
Welcome Buffet at Rozos
LEVKAS/NIDRI
A Myriad of Islands to Explore
Levkas Island, well south of crowded Corfu, is only half an hour from Preveza airport.
It's green, mountainous and wildly scenic.
Visitors are discerning yachtsmen, rich Athenians and those lucky people who have found the island by accident — or diligent searching.
There's variety; sandy beaches, scruffy towns, timeless villages and pretty harbours are linked by rather random buses.
Steep cliffs guard empty white sand beaches along the west of the island.
To the east there's a myriad of small islands easily reached by local ‘caiques’— converted fishing boats.
One is Skorpios, home of the Onassis family; other islands are capped with neat white villages seemingly from another century.
The area is best explored from Nidri, a busy new village with three convenient beaches and comfortable accommodation.
The setting is stunning — in a green and fertile bowl backed by stark limestone mountains.
Cafes and tavernas enjoy lovely views past a colourful quay, busy with local craft and visiting yachts, to green islands silhouetted against sea and distant mountains.
Nightlife revolves traditionally around the many tavernas, but several late bars and a couple of discos compete for your later custom.
At Nidri you'll find Dinghy holidays (p21), Windsurf holidays (p26) and Yacht holidays (p8, 10) as well as holidays for non-sailors — or people who just want to sail occasionally (this page).
Casual Sailing
Wayfarer Weeks
Experienced dinghy sailors (our D4 code, p55) may reserve a ‘Wayfarer Week’ on booking.
This is 6 days on the water with your own Wayfarer for either the first or second week of your holiday.
Prove you can safely right a capsized dinghy and anchor off a rocky beach, and we'll let you loose to cruise in the areas covered by our safety arrangements for each day.
For two weeks of Wayfarer sailing you should join our dinghy sailing holiday, p21.
Windsurf Weeks
Experienced dinghy sailors (our D4 code, p55) may reserve a ‘Wayfarer Week’ on booking.
This is 6 days on the water with your own Wayfarer for either the first or second week of your holiday.
Prove you can safely right a capsized dinghy and anchor off a rocky beach, and we'll let you loose to cruise in the areas covered by our safety arrangements for each day.
For two weeks of Wayfarer sailing you should join our dinghy sailing holiday, p21.
Windsurf Week
If you can swim 25 yards, reserve one ‘Windsurf Week’ when you book.
This is 6 days of windsurf activity from 1000 to 1300, and 1430 till 1730, tuition included, for the first or second week of your holiday.
Sailing is from a beach by Athos Hotel; a good spot for beginners, so stronger winds for the experienced are rare.
For a small administration fee we can issue those who qualify with RYA certificates.
Local Hire
If you'd occasionally like to potter around the bay on a windsurfer or small dinghy, hire by the hour or day from the beach by Athos Hotel.
Tuition is limited, so we don't recommend this for novices.
12 Toppers, 3 Lasers and 10 HiFly 300 Windsurfers are usually available 6 days a week.
Accommodation
Eleven years as the principal tour operators in Nidri enable us to choose the best accommodation in town.
All rooms have balconies and private showers with wc.
‘A’ category houses have superb waterside positions, and are only available for those living two weeks ashore.
‘B’ houses are the same standard, but not on the seafront.
Athos Hotel
‘A’.
Our best property, for those on shore holidays or dinghy holidays.
Yachts, Dinghies, Windsurfers, Beaches & ‘Minders’
Athos has a fresh water swimming pool and a lovely waterside setting just seven minutes walk from the town centre.
Rooms are well furnished, twin bedded, with private showers and balconies.
Accommodation is bed only, without room service, but breakfasts, snacks and drinks are served at the poolside patio or in the lounge/bar.
Views from the patio are unbeatable…but you won't believe that till you've been there.
Gregory's House
‘A’.
Gregory's, for those on shore holidays, is in a quiet spot right on a good swimming beach.
There are lovely views of the Inland Ionian islands through the beautifully kept garden.
Rooms are twin bedded, all with balconies and private showers.
Six rooms out of ten face the sea.
Breakfasts are available.
This popular house fills very early with people who return year after year, so book very early for a front room.
‘B’ Houses
Sophie's, Kosta, Steriotis, Avra, Aspasia and Feredinos are ‘B’ houses, allocated mainly according to which activity you're booked on.
We don't guarantee any particular ‘B’ houses.
In all cases, the best rooms go to early bookers.
‘C’ Rooms
Rooms with private facilities and balconies further inland, but still within 250 metres of the sea and easy reach of shops and cafes.
Sometimes the balconies are smaller or loos more cramped than our ‘B’ rooms.
These rooms are usually offered to those requiring sole occupancy.
Minders for children
From 4 July to 12 September we run ‘Minders’, a child care service in Nidri, which looks after children from 4 to 13 years old who are living ashore with parents; ideal for parents who want a holiday, especially if they're sailing.
‘Minders’ is great fun.
From 9.30 to 5.30pm, 6 days a week, we smother the children with suncream, take them for walks, supervise those that can swim as they play in the water, feed them and entertain them with games.
There are water games for swimmers on our old sailboards, and occasionally joyrides if Toppers or Windsurfers are unused.
Not more than 8 children per resident minder ensures sound supervision.
We host one evening meal a week for the children, spoiling them rotten with chicken and chips and looking after them from 7.30 to 9.30 pm.
‘Minders’ is free for those who've booked Villa-Flotilla or Dinghy Nidri.
For others it costs £18 for six days.
We also ask you to contribute to a kitty which pays for the children's food and drinks.
We suggest children bring plimmies, towels, waterproof suncream, sunhat, clothes to get wet in and dry change to cover them up.
A sense of humour and a small soft rucksack or carry bag to hold all this paraphernalia are useful.
Clothes should be marked.
Some tinies will find the pace busy, and will enjoy their evenings better if you pick them up early one or two days a week.
Other Things to Do
Levkas and its neighbouring islands reward explorers richly.
Walkers find a waterfall at the end of a butterfly haunted gorge, abandoned hilltop villages, hamlets where old ladies sit on their doorsteps spinning wool, and boatyards where the adze is busier than the plane.
Lots of boats and ferries tour the islands, and many excursions are available.
Local buses are cheap and good fun too.
If you can't read enough Greek to decipher the destination they're even more fun.
Local sources provide the following:
Waterski Jet Ski Parascending Motor Boat Hire Bicycle, Scooter and Car Hire
So Nidri has something for everyone, whether you're on the shore week of the Villa-Flotilla, just lazing in the sun, or trying to satisfy a family — all of whom have different interests!
Nidri village and bay
Athos, with pool
or Gregory, on the sea
Minders at work
WOULDN'T MIND THAT MINDER
BODRUM PENINSULA/BITEZ
Where East Meets West
Dominated by its massive crusader castle, Bodrum is the lively centre of peninsula life.
Hectic and colourful weekly markets attract farmers and traders from local villages, backstreet blacksmiths and workshops buzz away making anything from brass paraffin lamps to yacht spares, while busy quaysides look after a thriving local yacht charter industry.
A good museum in the castle is stuffed with antiquities, while a Roman amphitheatre overlooks all.
Busy tourist shops sell quality leather goods, carpets and strikingly cheap cotton goods.
Exploring is easy.
‘Dolmus’ are incredibly cheap shared taxis which roam the many quiet bays, beaches and villages of the peninsula.
You soon meet the locals — and their livestock!
There are trips by water dolmus too, and longer coach excursions to the great antiquities of Epheseus.
More important, the ‘Meltemi’, a consistent and strong high season wind from the north west, provides great excitement for sailor and windsurfer alike from June to mid September.
Bitez
Just 10 minutes from Bodrum is the small resort of Bitez, a multi-activity centre offering Dinghy sailing (p22) and Windsurf holidays (p34), as well as accommodation for non-sailors.
Several low rise hotels, backed by quiet citrus groves, are spaced around the half mile bay.
Restaurants, cafes and a couple of seasonal shops line part of the shore, some of which is made up into sandy beaches.
Narrow wooden piers with sunbathing platforms stretch into the clear sea, host to visiting water taxis and yachts.
The bay is safe for windsurfers and performance dinghies, even in strong winds.
It's also a natural base for ambitious day cruises along the coast in tough Wayfarer dinghies, or equally ambitious trips by dolmus into the hectic variety of Bodrum.
Social life revolves mainly round the hotels, though dedicated night owls may retire to the late bars, or visit the bright lights of Bodrum and the spectacular ‘Halikarnas’ disco.
Accommodation
Yali Han and Şah
Next door to each other, and right on the water's edge, the family run ‘Şah’ and ‘Yali Han’Hotels look after our guests with a friendly style of service that's difficult to beat.
The beach itself is nothing special, more of a shore-side track, but the Şah swimming pool is shared, and both hotels have good sun lounging areas with bars, ideal places to relax between energetic bouts of sunbathing or windsurfing.
There's a mid-day snack service, while late afternoon tea and cakes seem essential refreshment to salt encrusted dinghy sailors recovering from a hairy sail.
Pre-dinner cocktails are popular, after which those on half board retire to the Yali Han terrace for their evening meal, an informal affair where you can join the others, or re-arrange tables to suit yourselves.
Rooms
Rooms in both hotels have private facilities, and about half have their own balconies or open onto quiet terrace areas.
The rest open onto common sunbathing terraces or a common access balcony.
People used to lots of space will find the rooms rather small, though adequate for a sunny climate.
Standards of service are very high, with twice weekly linen changes.
Water heating occasionally fails if it's cloudy or you shower later than the rest.
Best rooms go to early bookers.
Singles can be booked ‘willing to share’, or if space is available, sole use of a room costs £100.
Meals
Accommodation is bed and breakfast, with the option of half board.
Breakfast is self service; bread, butter, honey or jam, cheese olives and copious quantities of aromatic Turkish tea are available.
Coffee, juice, yoghurt and eggs are available as extras.
For the majority who book half board, main meals are mostly in the evening and served on the Yali Han terrace.
Occasionally evening meals are swapped with lunches to allow evenings out.
The cuisine is Turkish and excellent, including specialities you won't find in local restaurants.
Menus vary through the fortnight, and include a starter, a main dish with green salad and a sweet.
Half board must be booked beforehand, but at £25 a week (payable locally) it's excellent value, highly recommended, and part of the social scene.
At that price it also really doesn't matter if you drop the odd meal to try a local restaurant!
Pay for mid-day snacks, afternoon tea and cakes, bar drinks and wine as you go.
Casual Sailing
Apart from our full time Dinghy Sailing and Windsurfing holidays, we have a few windsurfers and single handed dinghies which may be hired locally by the day, the half day or the hour subject to availability.
Sailing is confined to the local bay, and we show you how to rig and stow the craft.
There's no other instruction, so you should already be able to sail or windsurf.
This package meets the needs of those booked on shore holidays who'd just like to dabble occasionally on the water.
Other Things to Do
Exploring the peninsula by dolmus is great fun.
Search for a car or jeep with the name of your destination, climb in and wait.
For tens of pennies it'll take you to any one of 20 odd bays or villages in the area.
Carry a local map; it helps.
Boats from Bodrum quayside do the same thing, though it's difficult to tell if you're letting yourself in for a one way job, or a round trip including a meal at some distant restaurant!
Visit Bodrum on market day, a lively occasion when whole streets are given over to selling spices or fruit, day old chicks or melons, and the most colourful variety of vegetables.
Finish with a Turkish bath, complete with refreshing massages, or visit the museum and Roman amphitheatre.
There are coach excursions to the great classical site at Epheseus (a long and rather expensive day by Turkish standards), and visits to carpet making villages where you'll have a fascinating glimpse of Turkish country life.
Available in season are:
Water ski Parascending SCUBA diving (not covered by insurance) Horse riding Car hire Jet Bikes (in Gumbet)
Yali Han
Şah swimming pool — windsurf briefing!
Bitez Bay — a few low rise hotels & restaurants, that's all
Dolmus — means ‘stuffed’
Market day in Bodrum
SARDINIA/CANNIGIONE
Somewhere Different — With a Touch of Style
Cannigione, at the head of the Arzachena Gulf, is a centre for Dinghy (p23) or Windsurf (p35) holidays in the north east corner of Sardinia.
The area is particularly green and beautiful.
Rugged granite has been carved by strong winds into fantastic shapes, and hundreds of tiny bays and inlets hide small holiday developments.
Offshore, there's a maze of islands, many uninhabited.
Olbia, a busy coastal town, serves the area with an airport.
The gulf is a wide inlet about four miles long, half a mile at its narrowest, lined with many sandy beaches.
We sail from a shallow, sandy beach in the sheltered head of the gulf, just south of Cannigione.
Cannigione is a quiet little town with a fishing harbour and quay, three small supermarkets, a bank, a post office, and a scattering of other shops, restaurants and cafes.
There are good swimming beaches each end of town with shallow sandy water, ideal for young families.
We chose the area for its sessions of powerful westerly winds, winds which crowd nearby Porto Pollo with Europe's top windsurfers.
Windy ‘sessions’ blast day and night across the gulf for 2 to 6 days at a time, or even longer in the early and late seasons.
Beyond the town quay the strength reaches force 4 to 7 and more during a session; and it's not so strong.
These windy periods are interspersed with breaks from 4 to 8 days when regular sea breezes blow into the gulf at force 2 to 3, with the odd day when the wind fails.
So' if it's not blowing your tune, try something different; there are lots of alternatives.
Other Things to Do
Take a trip to Corsica!
Picturesque St Teresa di Gallura on the north tip of Sardinia is the departure point for regular ferries to the spectacularly sited old town of Bonifacio.
Or take a boat to Maddalena Island from Palau, and see some of its innumerable bays, channels, coves and promontories.
Maddalena Island from Palau, and see some of its innumerable bays, channels, coves and promontories.
Maddalena is set in an archipelago of seven islands, one of which, Budelli, has an amazing pink beach.
Whole day cruises explore the islands once a week from Cannigione, and yacht trips are available too.
Scuba diving is available locally for about £20 per day, and we're told there are many interesting wrecks to dive to if you're experienced.
Our recommended insurance doesn't cover diving, and please don't dive in the three days preceding your return home.
Golf is available at the magnificent Pevero Golf Club at Porto Cervo.
Listed as one of the 30 best courses in the world, day membership costs only £25, and gives use of the superb club house, bar, swimming pool, showers and changing rooms as well as the 6,800 yd course.
Tennis courts in Cannigione can be hired for about £5 an hour from early June.
Also available for local payment are:
Yacht and Catamaran trips Water ski (novice and monoski) Car Hire Mountain Bike Hire Minibus to Porto Pollo Baby Sitting
Children
Self catering apartments, a shallow and safe sandy beach, and a baby sitting service make this an ideal resort for families with young children.
Dinghies, Windsurfers & Lovely Beaches
Accommodation
Our accommodation is in holiday apartments set in pleasant grounds about 250 to 400 years inland from the sailing beach, and about half a mile south of the town centre.
There's a choice of one or two bedroom units, furnished individually by their owners.
All have a balcony or patio, and a shower room with bidet, basin and wc.
A kitchen area with cooker and fridge leads off the living room, which could sleep two extra if you're prepared to  sacrifice space and privacy for economy.
If you book ‘willing to share’ we'll put you in a two bedroom apartment occupied by four.
If you come with a group of friends or family, three in a one bedroom apartment is quite comfy.
Food
One of the great pleasures of an Italian holiday is the food.
Whether you're eating out or buying a take-away, heating frozen meals from the supermarket or knocking up a fresh pasta and salad in the apartment, quality and variety are excellent.
Italian ice-creams and coffee are imitated the world over, and there's no better start to the day than fresh rolls and croissants.
However, a good fish meal with wine will cost as much as in England, and eating out is a lot more expensive than Greece (though a lot better!).
Those on a budget will choose self catering or take-away some of the time, or when eating out will stick to more economic and filling pizza and pasta dishes, or the rosticceria selling tasty spit roast chickens.
Social Life
We arrange two or three social events each week, which you're welcome to join if you wish.
They include a barbecue, a pizza and punch party, a rendezvous at a local restaurant, and perhaps a salad buffet at one of the apartments.
— We share costs between those attending.
Tall Ships race — off Porto Cervo
Waterski
Cannigione, in the Gulf of Arzachena, is particularly green and beautiful
One or two bedroom apartments
Brilliant white beaches
Shallow, safe for children
FAL SAIL
The English Connection
Phone (0326) 313208
Fal Sail is a Royal Yachting Association (RYA) recognised sailing school, based on Falmouth, which teaches yacht sailing in one of the most beautiful estuaries in England, the Fal estuary.
The Fal is Cornwall's answer to the Ionian sea, quite the easiest place to learn, well away from crowds, with lots of picturesque anchorages.
Courses prepare novices to skipper on Greek Flotilla holidays.
It's run by an ex flotilla skipper using 28–33 ft yachts.
You'll start and finish in Falmouth, living on board, and all meals are included.
You'll help cook and wash up all part of the course!
Instruction Courses
1.
Introduction to Yachting
5 Day Course.
In 5 days novices learn enough to skipper a yacht safely on an Ionian flotilla.
No previous experience is required.
Everything is covered; living aboard, basic safety, handling ropes, working the engine, anchoring, plus mooring Mediterranean style, handling sails, reefing, and even sailing the yacht!
Your holiday abroad should follow within a few months while your memory is fresh.
You'll need a companion on flotilla, so plan to do the course together.
2.
Brush Up
2/3 Day Course.
Competent dinghy sailors, or those with limited cruising experience, learn to handle anchors and engines for Mediterranean style mooring, ready for skippering on the Ionian flotilla.
Or; if you've skippered in Greece, learn about tides and weather for UK sailing.
3.
Competent Crew
5 Day Course.
The RYA beginners course covers basic skills, including pilotage using Admiralty charts.
Successful completion earns a certificate.
4.
Introduction to Yachting/Competent Crew
7 Day Course.
This covers syllabi of 1 and 3 above.
It's hard work but very satisfying — the most popular course.
5.
Day Skipper
5 Day Course.
This course equips you to skipper by day with some confidence, but you need previous experience; you should have sailed 5 days on a yacht, with 4 hours night sailing and 100 miles logged.
You need to understand tides and principles of navigation.
Day skippers will be able to skipper a yacht in Turkey.
Coastal Skipper
5 Day Course.
A course for those who've sailed at least 10 days on a yacht, including 8 hours at night and 200 miles logged.
You will also have completed the RYA Theory certificate, or you'll have a sound working knowledge of navigation.
You'll learn the skills and techniques needed safely to skipper a yacht on coastal and offshore passages by day and by night in UK waters.
More Sailing
Ring (0326) 313208 for more information on any of the following:
Weekend Cruises
Explore the estuary and improve your skills.
Bareboat Charter
A selection of yachts.
Cruise in Company
A mother ship accompanies a small fleet of yachts; sociable, good for the less experienced.
Day Sailing
Dinghies and 18ft gaff rigged day boats; shore accommodation too.
Ladies Only
Sometimes it's easier when there are no men around grabbing the action.
Winter Sun
Canary Island and West Indies cruising
Fal Sail Prices
Booking Conditions
Your contract will be with Fal Sail, and you'll book direct with them.
Select your course, then ring (0326) 313208 to check availability.
Fal Sail will hold an option for five days to allow your booking form and non-returnable deposit (£60 per person) to reach them.
They will confirm the booking by sending you an invoice and detailed joining instructions.
The balance is due 8 weeks before the course starts.
If Fal Sail have to cancel your holiday after sending confirmation, you'll be offered a choice of alternative dates or a full refund.
Singing the booking form shows that you believe yourself and your companions to be physically fit and healthy to take part.
Fal Sail should be informed of any medical treatment being received, any disability, or whether you are affected by epilepsy, angina, asthma, diabetes, giddy spells or any heart condition.
I MUST HAVE GONE OFF COARSE DURING THE NIGHT!!
TRAVEL
It's a Pain
Flights
Our resorts are off the beaten track; to reach them we fly to offbeat airfields with skimpy facilities, or we take unfashionably long bus drives from better known airports.
Think of yourself as a traveller, not a tourist; the results are worth it.
At peak season weekends airports are appallingly crowded, and flights more prone to delay.
So our major programmes use off peak flights; Monday nights to Dalaman, and Wednesday mornings to Preveza.
This strategy has worked well for two years, reducing delays suffered by our passengers.
We've been told to take off times, but if there's one certainty, they'll be rescheduled by a few hours before the season starts.
Your ticket package will show the planned departure time; turn up for this.
Although we have night or day flights from Manchester, Glasgow at Gatwick, it's impossible to arrange that all of these are timed to suit yacht turn-rounds, elusive Greek ferries or the available coaches.
Some flights don't start till June anyway.
To smooth overseas travel, each holiday has its own flights.
This means your ideal flight may not be available for your chosen holiday.
Please trust our selection; it makes your overseas journey shorter, sweeter and more efficient.
Delays?
Some flights are delayed, a few for a long time.
Apart from choosing off peak travel less likely to be affected, these delays are outside our control, but we do our best to help.
What do we do?
First, we try to keep you informed.
However, on a bad day chaos reigns, and nobody can predict a likely departure time.
You won't like this lack of information.
Nor do we.
Delays cost us and the airlines a lot of money, so we'll be beavering away to solve your problem as quickly as possible.
please be patient, and please don't disappear to do your own thing after you've checked in; this might prolong the delay.
If you're stuck overseas for the night, or if you're waiting in UK overnight and an early departure has been ruled out, we provide whatever accommodation we can, and take you to it.
This may mean two or three sharing a bedroom.
Occasionally in UK beds are just not available; in this case the worst delayed flights get priority.
We won't provide food vouchers, though the airline may choose to do so independently.
However, if you write to us on your return we compensate you for outbound delays as follows:
8 hr — £10; 12 hr — £20; 24 hr — £30; 36hr — £40; 48 hr — £50
Since the money comes direct from us, and not an insurance company, we really do have a stake in minimising your inconvenience.
IONIAN TRAVEL Wednesdays
Gatwick to Preveza, 3hr 15min A300 Airbus and Boeing 737, Dan Air.
Leave 0930 and 1000, land back at Gatwick 1600 and 1630
Manchester to Preveza, 3hr 40min Boeing 727, Dan Air.
Leave 0830, land back at Manchester 1600
Preveza is a military airfield designed to handle 30 arrivals from one internal flight a day.
Our Airbus unloading (or leading) 300 souls creates a weekly chaotic scrum; it's all worth it for the short onward journey to resort.
Transfers Preveza to Nidri: 1hr by coach Preveza to Vassiliki: 1hr 30 by coach Preveza to Paxos: 1hr 30 by coach, 2hr by ferry, 3hr 30 total
TURKEY TRAVEL Monday Nights
Gatwick to Dalaman, 4hr Boeing 757, Dan Air.
Leave 2345 Monday, land back at Gatwick 0815 Tuesday am Manchester to Dalaman, 4hr 40min Boeing 757, Air 2000 Leave 2330 Monday, land back at Manchester 0900 Tuesday.
Glasgow to Dalaman, 4hr 50min Boeing 757, Air 20000.
Leave 2035 Monday, land back at Glasgow 0640 Tuesday am
Dalaman has currency exchange and duty free facilities for both inbound and outbound passengers.
We use night flights for five big reasons:
a.
You get an extra day in resort
b.
Long coach travel is during the cool early morning
c.
UK airports are uncrowded with fewer delays
d.
Travel to and from the UK airport is easier
e.
They're cheaper!
Transfers
Dalaman to Bodrum/Bitez 3hr by coach
Dalaman to Yalikavak: 3hr 25 by coach
FINIKOUNDA Wednesdays
Gatwick to Kalamata, 3hr 15min Boeing 737, Dan Air.
Leave 0830, land back at Gatwick 1500
Kalamata is a friendly little airport with limited passenger handling facilities and no duty free.
Transfers Kalamata to Finikounda: 1hr 30 by coach
PORTO HELI Mondays
Gatwick to Athens, 3hr 15min Boeing 757, Air Europe.
Leave 0750, land back at Gatwick 1540
Athens is a crowded international airport with limited duty free facilities for departing passengers.
Transfers Athens to Porto Heli: 3hr 30 coach drive, plus a pause en route 
SARDINIA Saturdays
Gatwick to Olbia, 2hr Boeing 727, Dan Air.
Leave 1100, land back at Gatwick 1600
Olbia is a well organised airport with duty free facilities.
Transfers Olbia to Cannigione: 40 min by coach 
Provide what accommodation we can, and take you to it
LOCAL INFORMATION
When to Come
This guide to the season is based on eleven years direct observations of our resorts.
Year to year there are variations; summer may start two weeks late, or two weeks early, or tentatively…and once or twice a year the weather goes into a sulk for a few days and refuses to co-operate with us.
There are some certainties.
The sun in Turkey is more reliable, and the season about a month longer, than in Greece.
And outside the main season, weather is like a typical English summer; mostly sunny, with a few wet and cold days.
This is when Sardinia has its most persistent winds.
But with a warm welcome, warm sea, and low prices — who cares?
Early April
A moderate English summer arrives.
Green islands brilliant with spring flowers, olive groves lit by dancing fireflies, welcoming people, fresh citrus fruits and occasional periods of unsettled weather.
Cold at night.
Sea warmer than UK at its best, at least 19 degrees C.
Mid-May (Late April in Turkey)
Good English summer arrives.
Unsettled weather becomes infrequent in Greece, and rare in Turkey, but winds are still fitful.
Nights still cool.
June
Brilliant sun, warm seas, pleasant air temperatures, warm nights.
Prolonged swimming possible.
Profusion of fresh fruits — plums, pears, and the first melons.
Regular north west winds starts.
July, August, till mid-September.
Hot sun, seas really warm, regular north west winds.
Fresh figs, melons, peaches.
Villages busy from late July to late August.
Late September, October
Warm, sun not so burning, really warm sea (up to 22–24 degrees C) and cooler evenings.
North west winds become sporadic, except in Sardinia, where the Mistral settles in.
Unsettled periods possible in Turkey, and likely in Greece.
The Winds
The Windy Season
In Greece and Turkey regular north westerly winds, at their best from late June to early September, provide excellent sailing.
Lighter in the mornings, and the quirk of the terrain amplifies Vassiliki winds in the late afternoon!
Turkey winds start two or three weeks earlier, continue two or three weeks longer, and are more frequent and persistent than those of Greece.
Spring and Autumn
Sardinia provides strong winds in early and late season.
In Greece and Turkey the regular winds are less frequent and may fail.
They may also be interrupted by a period of unsettled weather — when the winds blow from anywhere at any strength!
In April and after mid-October the winds are unpredictable and sometimes dangerously strong.
Wind Table
We've averaged statistics on the windy season from three resorts over the last six years.
The table shows the number of mornings and afternoons that winds blew at various strengths over a 14 day period.
The legend explains what each strength means.
Wind was measured at 11.00 and 15.00 each day, but only counted if it kept up for an hour or more.
Predictions from these tables will let you down once or twice a year when a session of light wind invades for a few days.
Before mid-June, and after mid-September (except in Sardinia) the frequency of strong winds drops, and the increase of light days slowly increase.
From brief observations Finikounda is similar to Bitez, but one force lighter throughout.
Nidri and Porto Heli are similar to each other.
Food and Drink
Our Greek holidays (except in Porto Heli) are ‘non-catering’— fend for yourself.
Eating out is convenient and economical.
Continental style breakfast from any cafe just over £1; try yoghurt and honey too.
Lunch is often a picnic, easily bought from a local store.
And an evening meal in a Taverna is the social life.
Tavernas are very informal, simple quality, great fun, and often in the most beautiful settings.
Each has its own speciality — spit roast lamp, veal in lemon sauce, stuffed peppers or whatever — so it's worth trying several.
All offer charcoal grills; pork, chicken and fish are common.
Timing and service are chaotic, but since this raises wine consumption it may be policy.
Reliable wine is excellent value at £1–£2 a bottle.
The owner's home brew is much cheaper but an acquired taste; the more you acquire, the less you taste it.
Too much, and the taverna starts dancing.
The owner may tip you when you pay — with a glass of local brandy, or even ouzo.
Since the whole experience, food and all, costs less than £5 a head, nobody complains that it's in the open air.
Amazing value.
Turkish food is good and stylishly served, even in the smallest restaurants, so our Bitez holidays include the option of half board.
Breakfasts are simple; bread cheese, honey or jam, some olives and copious servings of aromatic black tea.
Coffee, fruit juices and eggs are often available, but usually charged as extras.
Mid-day snacks or meals are cheap, a dish of food for £1–£2.
Evening meals usually start with a cold fish; favourites are tuna or bean salads, chef's special concoctions of vegetables in season and ‘Berek’(small crispy pancakes filled with herby meat or cheese).
Main dishes, usually with green salads, include stuffed peppers, aubergines or tomatoes, or all sorts of kebabs flavoured with multicoloured sauces and spices.
Fish is expensive and not common, while pork is rare in a Muslim country!
Sweetmeats, cakes or puddings follow…the variety has been highly praised by our guests over the last five years.
Wine is about £2.00 a bottle.
Lager style beer at 50p a half litre is useful for putting out the fiery effects of ‘Rahi’— anis flavoured blowtorch fuel.
Or perhaps a 25p glass of Coke is better?
Tummy upsets are fairly common, and we believe many stem from the local water supplies, so please drink only bottled water.
Italian cuisine is so good we don't bother to comment, but you'll find some hints about catering in Cannigione on page 45.
Accommodation
Mediterranean accommodation holds a surprise or two for the novice.
Showers spray everywhere, creating soggy toilet paper and slippery floors.
Paper blocks the drains, so it goes into a little box.
Water is scarce.
Hot water is even more scarce and depends on the weather, or whether or not a fuse has blown.
Towels are tiny, sheets are short, and decoration skimpy too.
But good weather means you're out of doors, so these quirks don't matter.
You'll walk sand and grit into the room by the shoeload; keep it out of the bed (it's worse than biscuit crumbs) and don't curse the landlady for not sweeping more often.
She'll be away at a family wedding or funeral for a few days.
More established resorts improve a lot on these standards, but perhaps offer less local colour and charm.
If such shortcomings irritate you seriously, you should steer clear of small Mediterranean resorts of the type we offer; become a tourist, not a traveller.
One last item: you can't judge accommodation standards by holiday price.
Our most expensive holiday is in cramped accommodation with shared facilities, no hot water or cleaning and no linen change; it's a yacht.
Our cheapest holiday has large rooms with private facilities, spacious balconies, fridges, regular linen changes and daily cleaning…a holiday ashore in Nidri.
What to Bring
All sailors throughout the year need light, waterproof anoraks to protect them from the chilling effect of light spray in strong winds.
Any windsurfers (except novices) will need summer wet suits and shoes to protect them from wind chill.
Novices will find plimsolls and sailing gloves useful.
Otherwise, very little is needed.
Dress is informal, and storage space often limited, so you'll be more comfortable travelling light.
Those on yacht holidays have even less storage space, and should pack in a soft rucksack is useful for carrying picnics, towels and spare clothes.
Early season is often colder than people expect, so bring warm clothes for May and after the end of September.
Car Hire
Car Hire is possible in Bodrum, Nidri, Porto Heli and Cannigione.
Vehicle standards are variable.
Hire costs between £25 and £30 a day for a Group A vehicle, depending on season.
A valid UK driving licence is needed, and we strongly recommend you insure against collision damage when you hire.
Payment in Turkey may be made by credit card.
Scooter Hire
Most holiday injuries we see are caused by scooter accidents.
We don't recommend you hire them.
If you insist on doing so, wear tough full length trousers and shirt to minimise gravel rash, and make sure your chosen insurance allows treatment for low cc scooter hire injuries — ours does.
Money
Turkish Lira
It's easiest to buy Turkish Lira on arrival at the airport in Turkey, using either cash or travellers cheques.
Exchange is also possible at banks at Bodrum and Marmaris.
Keep your exchange receipts to change back un-used Lira when leaving from the airport.
In 1989 the exchange rate was TL3800/£1, but inflation is high and this changes rapidly.
Greek Drachmae
You can buy Drachmae in UK before departure; do so.
Take English cash or travellers cheques for the balance of your needs, and change money on arrival in resort.
In Finikounda there are no banks, but we make exchange arrangements for you.
Exchange rates in 1989 were around 260 DRx/£1, shifting slowly up.
Italian Lire
Banks in Cannigione are as accessible as those in an English country town, so bring enough Lire to survive the weekend and any public holidays that may spring up.
At 2200–2400/£1 exchange rates have been fairly steady for a few years.
Local Spending Budgets
Spending by our 1989 clients is listed below for two week holidays, excluding gifts, but including all other things such as moped and car hire, food, drink and excursions.
80% spent between the limits below:
Yacht Holidays
(Min £75, Max £240)
Villa-Flotilla Nidri £125–£200 Villa-Flotilla Bitez £100–£190 Turkey Flotilla £100–£180 Greek Flotilla £100–£180
Shore Based
(Min £75, Max £260
Porto Heli £75–£170 (half board) Paxos £130–£220 Nidri £140–£230 Vassiliki £120–£210 Bitez £75–£140 (half board) Bitez £125–£240 (b & b only) Yalikavak £125–£210 (b & b) Cannigione £230–£340 Finikounda £120–£190
Holiday Prices Include…
•
Flights from Gatwick
Airport taxes, Security charges.
See ‘Supplements and Rebates’ for Manchester and Glasgow departures and own flights.
•
Transfer , airport to resort and return.
•
Accommodation
Two to a room, 13 nights in Turkey, 14 nights all other resorts.
Detailed facilities are described on each holiday page.
•
Food
Breakfasts are supplied in Turkey, and half board at Porto Heli. •
Sailing Representatives are on the spot all the time in all resorts.
If your package includes sailing or windsurfing, they'll organise it.
•
Social
Access to social events and excursions organised exclusively for our clients by our staff in addition to normal resort facilities (pay as you go).
•
Sailing or Windsurfing Holidays
Free use of our equipment on site for at least 12 sailing days in Turkey, and 11 sailing days in other resorts (5 sailing days minimum for one week holidays).
Those booked to dinghy sail have priority for use of dinghies; those booked to windsurf have priority for use of windsurfers. •
Marine Insurance covering injury or damage you may cause to third parties with our equipment.
Not Included
•Local Expenditure — cost of food, drink, and entertainment will vary by country and holiday type (see budget guides on page 49).
•Food — except breakfast on shore based holidays in Turkey, and half board at Porto Heli.
•Travel Insurance.
It's a condition of booking that you have medical insurance valid for our watersports activities, including a 24 hour call service for repatriation to UK if necessary; local hospital care is primitive.
Our staff are trained to administer the policy on page 53, which costs £17 per person for 18 days.
You may substitute another if its cover for watersports and sailing is equivalent or better.
Shore-Based Options
•
‘Wiling to Share’
There's no supplement for the few single rooms available in some resorts, but they are soon filled.
If you're on a sailing or windsurf holiday you may still book without a supplement if you're willing to share with someone on the same holiday.
Note your age and gender on the booking form and we'll match you as best we can.
•
Single rooms
Single people on non-sailing holidays, or anyone requiring single occupancy of a double room, must pay a supplement.
Sometimes we can find a room in a nearby house for a lower amount, reflecting either less space or more simple facilities.
•
Infants
There's only a £15 charge for infants under the age of 2 on departure if they travel on your lap and share a bedroom with two others.
Some cots are available in Nidri and Vassiliki for about £10 per week payable locally; we can request these, but can't guarantee availability.
•
Children
There's a £30 reduction for children under the age of 12 occupying a twin bed in a room on a two week holiday (£15 for one week).
•
‘Minders’
‘Minders’, our child care service in Nidri for those between 4 and 13, is free for Dinghy Sailing and Villa-Flotilla clients.
Windsurfing and non-sailing clients pay a supplement of £18 per week per child.
Supplements and Rebates
•
Flights
Check availability.
•Manchester (to Preveza and Dalaman only) + £20 •Glasgow (Dalaman only) + £25 •Provide your own flights?— 21 Jul–9 Sep — £120 •Other dates — £60
•
Accommodation
Supplements per person 2 weeks:
Single use of twin room, Greece +£55
Single use of twin room, Turkey +£100
Dinghy Paxos, apartments for 2 +£20
Porto Heli, 2 in a bungalow +£20
Rebates per person 2 weeks:
‘B’ rooms Nidri -£10
‘C’ rooms Nidri -£15
Children under 12 (2 weeks) -£30
Children under 12 (1 week) -£15
Cots, per week (Nidri and Vassiliki) pay on site +£10
‘Minders’, per week, per child (Windsurfing and non-sailing clients) +£18
Food
•Bitez half board per week (book here, pay there) + £25
Sailing or Windsurfing Holidays
Dinghy instruction for novices +£15
Windsurf logbook (pay on site) +£3
Windsurf handbook (pay on site) +£3
Travel Insurance per person for 2 weeks +£17
Local Hire
Local hire is possible for those on shore holidays who can go ‘there and back’, and just wish to potter locally for an hour or two.
We show you how to rig the craft, but regular instruction is not provided.
In Nidri and Bitez there are usually plenty of Toppers or windsurfers available by the hour, and maybe a Laser or two.
Expect some waiting during busy periods, and to guarantee a day or half day on the water you should book a day or two ahead.
At other centres we cannot guarantee the availability of equipment or staff, so this facility is not reliably available.
Prices are set in local currencies.
The following table is a sterling guide to low and hide season (5 July–15 Sep) rates.
Prices to Book Sailing Options
These are prices to book extra sailing options for the first week of a Villa-Flotilla in Nidri or Yalikavak, or Shore Holiday in Nidri.
Options must be reserved when you book, and paid with the holiday.
Only one windsurf or Wayfarer week may be booked; for two successive weeks book the local sailing holiday.
We're pretty flexible on site and don't charge for swaps with anything available of similar value.
Prices for Yacht Holidays (2 weeks) £'s per person NO SURCHARGES!
Yacht Prices Include…
•
Flights from Gatwick
Airport taxes, Security charges.
See ‘Supplements and Rebates’ for Manchester and Glasgow departures and own flights.
•
Transfer airport to resort and return.
•
Yacht with full fuel, gas, water, clean linen (no towels), a small starter pack of consumables and all necessary charter papers.
Local taxes.
On flotilla, shared use of windsurfer.
Services of local yacht support staff for repair and briefing, and flotilla Guarantee, repayment if you lose use of yacht on flotilla due to serious breakdown (p15).
Yachts available from 1300 in Turkey, 1700 in Greece.
Sailing starts next day when papers and briefings are complete (half a day's work).
Return by 1700 on last sailing day.
(Timings approximate).
•
Marine Insurance covering injury or damage you may cause to third parties with one of our yachts, and accidental losses or damage to the yacht itself over the amount of £320.
You will be liable for lesser amounts but you may insure against this (see ‘Loss of Damage Insurance’ under ‘Yacht Options’).
•
Villa-Flotilla
Two to a room, with ‘Minders’ in season for young children in Nidri.
Cobra 850 or Mirage 28 Yacht, five and a half sailing days (first half day for papers and briefing).
Not Included
•Local Expenditure.
Not included in the holiday price is local food, drink, entertainment and spending money.
See the budget guides on page 49.
•Travel Insurance.
It's a condition of booking that you have medical insurance valid for our watersports activities, including a 24 hour call service for repatriation to UK if necessary; local hospital care is primitive.
Our staff are trained to administer the policy on page 53, which costs £17 per person for 18 days.
You may substitute another policy if its cover for watersports and sailing is equivalent or better.
Yacht Options
Independent Charter
When sailing independently in any yacht you'll be responsible for port dues and paying for top up fuel.
Our Moody, Cobra, Oceanis and Mirage yachts have the local support of flotilla lead yacht.
If they sail independently we have to pay additional yacht insurance and keep a shore based engineer on call to support you.
To cover this there is a £20 per head supplement for independent charter of yachts allocated to our two week flotillas.
If you're travelling outside the area in which the flotilla is sailing it may take time to reach you, so our flotilla guarantee does not apply.
•
Windsurfers
Yachts on flotilla share the use of windsurfers.
Excepting share a yacht or pot luck boats, those who wish to use them carry them.
Two are available for each two week flotilla, and one for Villa-Flotilla.
If more boards are available at the time of booking, you may hire one for your exclusive use while living afloat.
•
Cruising Chutes
Cruising chutes may be booked as optional extras for the Moody and Oceanis yachts.
•
Yacht Cleaning can often be arranged at the end of your cruise.
Booked and paid on site.
•
Loss or Damage Insurance
YOU may pay a non-refundable premium per yacht to insure against any claims for accidental loss or damage to the yacht or its equipment.
If you don't pay this insurance we'll require a security deposit from you.
•
Share a Yacht and Pot Luck
For Share a Yacht (Villa-Flotilla) holidays, prices per person are based on the four person rate.
Pot Luck (Flotilla) prices are based on the five person rate.
Then there's a supplement over the four or five person rate to cover our risk that one or two berths may not be filled, and to cover the extra administration effort needed to handle four (or five!) separate sets of paperwork instead of just one.
Departure dates are marked.
•
Infants
There's only a £15 charge for infants under the age of 2 on departure if they travel on your lap and share a bedroom with two others, but they don't count as a person when you're working out the yacht prices.
•
Under 12
There's a £30 reduction for children under the age of 12 occupying a bed in a twin room on a Villa-Flotilla holiday, or for children under the age of 12 booked on a Flotilla holiday.
Supplements and Rebates
Flights
Check availability.
Manchester (to Preveza and Dalaman) + £20pp
Glasgow (to Dalaman only) + £25pp
Provide your own flights? 21 July–9 Sep -£120pp
Other dates -£60pp
Yachts
Independent charter of Flotilla yacht + £20pp
Pot Luck (Flotilla) + £15pp
Share a Yacht (Villa-Flotilla) + £15pp
Cruise Chute (per yacht) + £50
Windsurfer, 2 weeks exclusive use (Flotilla) + £80
Windsurfer, 1 week exclusive use (Villa-Flotilla) + £40
Cleaning (end of cruise) + £25
Children under 12 — £30
Loss or Damage Insurance
Non-refundable premium Per yacht + £30
Pot Luck or Share a Yacht + £7pp
Security deposit (held by Falcon Sailing, repaid less retentions) Per yacht Pot Luck or Share a Yacht + £70pp
Villa Flotilla only
Single use of double room + £25
Shore week, courses and sailing see previous page
Travel Insurance per person for 2 weeks + £17
Travel Insurance
It is a condition of booking that you take out travel insurance covering emergency repatriation and holiday cancellation.
We have arranged a policy suitable for the watersports we provide with certain Underwriters at Lloyds through T.L. Ireland & Co.
(Insurance Brokers) Ltd.
Our couriers are trained to administer this policy.
All persons are automatically covered for insurance unless they write ‘NO’ in the box provided on the booking form.
The applicable premium per person (set out below) must be added to the deposit.
An outline of the insurance policy is given below and you will be issued with full details of the policy when we send you your booking confirmation.
Discounts:
1.
Infants under 2 at time of departure are covered without cost when travelling with an insured person.
2.
Children under 12 at the time of departure are covered at 50% of the above stated premiums.
Summary of Cover
Section A
Cancellation/Curtailment of Holiday.
Cancellation charges up to the full amount payable.
Includes cancellation due to accident or illness to members of the party, close relatives or business colleagues; redundancy; jury service; cancelled leave orders for HM forces; and pregnancy (but not if delivery is due within 75 days of departure)
Section B
1.
Personal Accident — £15,000 Payable in respect of loss of life, limbs, eyes or permanent total disablement.
Temporary total disablement for 52 weeks: £50 per week.
2.
Medical or other expenses — up to £1,000,000 per person insured Including repatriation to UK and Europe
3.
Baggage and Personal Effects — up to £1,000 per person (Limit £200 any one item, pair or set)
4.
Temporary Deprivation of Baggage — Additional cover up to £100 to cover up to £100 to cover essential hire of personal effects following at least 24 hours baggage delay, or purchase of replacement items within the above sum insured of baggage/personal effects.
5.
Money and Travellers Cheques — up to £200 per person 6.
Personal Liability — Up to £1,000,000 in all, any one person 7.
Travel Delay — If your arrival in the resort on the outward journey, or at your UK destination on the return journey, is delayed for any of the specified reasons for more than 8 hours, you may claim £30 plus £15 for each subsequent completed 8 hour period up to a maximum of £105 in all.
8.
Hospital Daily Benefit — up to £500 in all.
You can claim £20 for each complete day spent as an in-patient in a hospital outside the UK.
9.
24 Hour Emergency Service — In the event of a serious medical emergency, advice and assistance is available at all times from Medi-Care.
Further details and the telephone number will be sent with your summary of insurance.
General Warranty (Important)
It is a condition that, at the time of insurance becoming effective, the insured person has not booked his/her holiday contrary to medical advice nor is aware of any circumstances which could reasonably be expected to give rise to a claim.
Inception of insurance:
Section A: From time of payment of premium
Section B: From Day of planned departure
Excesses:
Section A: excludes the first £15 of each and every loss of deposit claim and £25 in respect of all other claims.
Section B: sub-sections 2, 3, & 5 exclude the first £25 of each claim under each section.
Other Insurance
Other Travel Insurance
If you take travel insurance from another company, make sure there are no critical watersports exclusions.
Please also be aware that our staff will not be able to answer particular questions about your cover, nor advise about your particular claim procedures.
Sailing Insurance
Third Party.
Our marine insurance covers injury or damage you may cause to third parties with one of our yachts, dinghies or windsurfers, assuming you aren't negligent.
Damage/Loss.
On a flotilla holiday you may accidentally lose equipment or damage the yacht.
Our marine insurance covers such damage or loss after the first £320.
To cover costs for the first £320 you may either pay us a non-refundable damage/loss excess waiver of £32 per yacht (£7 each for a Share a Yacht or Pot Luck), or lodge (direct with us, not through a travel agent) a security deposit of £320 per yacht (£70 each if sharing) at the time of making your final payment.
Unless you tell us otherwise, we'll invoice you for the damage/loss excess waiver.
Falcon Sailing Travel Delay Guarantee
Occasionally flights are delayed.
This is completely outside our control, but if you're affected, write to us on your return and we'll compensate you for outbound delays as follows:
This payment is in addition to what our Insurance company or, if applicable, your own company would pay if your outbound journey is delayed.
Shows
Come and chat with our staff first hand at any of the following shows;
London, Earls Court, National Boat Show, 4–14th January
London, Earls Court, International Holiday Show, 16–18th February
Birmingham Boat Show, Exhibition Centre (NEC) 17–25th February
London, Crystal Palace, Dinghy Show, 3–4th March
London, Wembley, Wind and Surf, 8–11th March
Bristol Boat Show, 12–21st April
Ipswich, East Coast Boat Show, 16–20 May
Southampton Boat Show, 14–21 September
Videos
Holiday Videos
On a single VHS 180 tape —‘Sun for Sail’— we have recorded three short programmes illustrating most of our holidays.
The first programme, updated for 1990, shows the scope of our yacht holidays; the next section brings to life our range of Windsurf and Dinghy holidays.
The third programme shows dinghy sailing and windsurfing at Porto Heli and Cannigione.
Tapes are available for £10.00, including postage.
Training Videos
Three RYA teaching videos, produced at our centres over the last three years, are now standard teaching texts used in a number of countries.
All our 50 minute programmes, backed by their own booklets, and presented with a nice sense of humour.
‘Stand Up for Fun’, filmed at Nidri, quickly introduces novices windsurfers to essentials, leading to the use of footstraps and harnesses.
‘Beyond The Barrier’, filmed at Vassiliki, is essential viewing for windsurfers read to learn water starts and carve gybes — without wasting too much time under water!
‘All at Sea’, filmed on our Moody 31s in the Ionian, demonstrates for novices all the skills needed to skipper a small yacht in easy conditions.
Order Form
BOOKING CONDITIONS
Financial Security
Your contract will be with Falcon Sailing, a subsidiary of Owners Abroad plc, holders of the Air Travel Organiser's Licence (ATOL) number 230; protects you financially.
We're also members of the Association of British Travel Agents (ABTA) number 68342; this guarantees our standards of trading practice.
Booking
Bookings must be made in writing on our booking form and accompanied by the deposit, or made by telephone using credit card.
The contract between us will be created either: a.
When we send written confirmation, or b.
When the credit card company confirms payment after a telephone booking.
If you book by telephone, we'll send a completed booking form for your signature.
This must be returned within five days, otherwise we reserve the right to cancel the contract.
Your written confirmation includes an invoice for the balance due.
Check details carefully.
Our responsibility is to provide you with the holiday we confirm, and this may not include special facilities which you request but which we cannot guarantee.
Prices — No surcharges
The price of your holiday is fully guaranteed and will not be subject to any surcharges.
Payment
The holiday balance must be paid by 8 weeks before departure.
If you are booking within 8 weeks of departure you must pay the full cost of your holiday immediately.
If we don't receive the balance on time your holiday may be cancelled, and the cancellation charges set out below will be payable.
If you pay through a travel agent, they'll hold money on your behalf until a contract is created (see above), after that the money is held by the travel agent on our behalf.
Changes by You
If you wish to change details of your booking, let us know as soon as possible.
If we can accept the change, there will be an administration fee of £10 per person (£25 per person if it is also necessary to re-issue travel documents), plus any additional charges due.
Changing dates, numbers travelling or holiday type are major changes which we may have to treat as cancellation and subsequent re-booking.
Cancellation by You
Cancellation must be made in writing by the person who completed the booking form and sent to Falcon Sailing at the address below.
Cancellation will be effective on the date we receive it.
We suggested recorded delivery for your own protection.
A cancellation fee will be charged whose amount depends on the period before departure date in which you letter is received.
It is expressed in the table below as a percentage of the total holiday cost.
This compensates us for the cost of processing your booking, advertising your holiday for sale, and reflects the risk that the holiday may remain unsold.
Cancellation under certain circumstances is covered by the travel insurance policy we offer (p53), in which case you can recover cancellation charges through them.
The insurance premium is not part of the holiday price, and is not recoverable.
Changes by Us
We plan your holidays many months in advance, and minor changes to flight times, properties or holiday activities sometimes arise: we reserve the right to make such changes.
In the rare event we have to cancel your holiday or make major changes (different resort, airport of arrival or departure, or more than 12 hour change to schedule flight time) we'll tell you a soon as possible.
In that event you have the following options:
a.
if a change, accept the change
b.
to cancel, and receive a full refund of all money paid to us
c.
choose an alternative holiday, subject to availability.
If the reason for change is completely outside our control (for instance, caused by such events as war or threat of war, riots or civil strife, terrorist activity, industrial disputes, natural or nuclear disasters, fire or adverse weather conditions) then the options above are the limit of our liability.
If the reason for change is not one of the preceding, and there are less than 8 weeks to your departure date, then we will credit you with 10% of the cost of the changed holiday (if less than 14 days to departure, this will be raised to 20%) to be used in the purchase of any other Falcon Sailing holiday within 24 months.
Our Liability to You…
We accept full responsibility for the quality of your holidays as confirmed to you, and if you have a justified complaint (whether it's our fault or not) and you have followed the complaints procedure, we will pay you reasonable compensation.
If negligence on the part of our staff, agents, suppliers or their employees results in the illness, injury or death of you or any of your party, we accept full liability.
The exceptions are airlines or carriers by sea, which are subject to international conventions which limit liability.
…and Your Liability to Us
You will indemnify us against any claims made against us for damage or loss caused by members of your party to accommodation or through negligent use of equipment.
If the conduct or behaviour of any member of your party causes distress or threatens danger or damage we reserve the right immediately to withdraw all their holiday facilities, including the provision of accommodation and flights, with no liability to refund any part of the price received for that person's holiday.
Experience for Sailing in Yachts
For yacht holidays, please assess the descriptions below against the sailing experience of your party.
Put the highest code letter which their experience includes against each name on our booking form, and add ‘H’ if appropriate.
SK You have been in charge of a small sailing cruiser making occasional open sea passages for at least two weeks.
You can navigate, and you have supervised inexperienced crews.
F1 You are an experienced dinghy sailor who regularly sails with novice crews and who has also spent at least six days living and sailing as crew on a small sailing cruiser.
F2 You have been in charge of a small sailing cruiser for at least a week.
F3 You are an experienced dinghy sailor who regularly sails with novice crews and you will have completed a Fal Sail ‘Brush Up’ course earlier in the year.
F4 A minimum of two of your crew are fit and active and both will have completed a Fal Sail ‘Introduction to Yachting’ course the same year you're taking the holiday.
C You're fit and active and capable of lifting a 20kg anchor, or, you have sailed as crew on a small sailing cruiser and you have helped to run the yacht.
P You know it's like living in a moving caravan, but you're coming along anyway!(not acceptable for shared yacht bookings)
H Your health and fitness are deficient in some respect.
You are aware that you will be out of touch with immediate medical facilities, you have spoken with your doctor and understand the risks involved.
If you tells us about your condition and accept the risks, we're usually quite happy to accept your booking for all yacht holidays except Pot Luck or Share a Yacht.
Yacht Crew Requirements
For Independent Charter or Turkey Flotilla: One SK, and one F or C aboard.
For Villa-Flotilla or Ionian Flotilla: One F and one C
For Villa-Flotilla with Introduction to Yachting Course: Two C
Sailing Holidays
Our sailing staff have complete discretion to control or limit sailing activities according to local conditions and their assessment of your sailing experience and ability.
We accept cruising yacht bookings on condition that the levels of experience described on your booking form are correct.
If your experience is overstated your marine insurance will be invalid and you will not be permitted to sail unless we can provide a staff member to complement your crew strength; this will cost you £40 a day.
Our care and supervision does not absolve you from responsibility for rigging and inspecting the equipment you use, and controlling your risk of accident or injury while using it.
We therefore accept sailing and windsurfing bookings only on condition that each member of your party accepts responsibility for any of their own injuries suffered unless these arise from our proven negligence.
Experience for Dinghy or Windsurf Holidays
We can plan our staff and equipment better if we know your sailing or windsurf experience beforehand: we don't ask experienced sailors to teach (unless that's what you want to do!)
Please put the appropriate number against each name on the form.
Dinghy Sailors:
D1 Paid for instruction.
D2 Have sailed, not in charge, instruction not needed.
D3 Have been in charge, but need competent crew.
D4 Experienced dinghy skipper, used to novice crews
D5 RYA Instructor, RYA Level 5 certificate, or equivalent.
Windsurfers:
B1 Novice, but can swim 25 yds.
B2 Can sail a triangle and cope with stronger puffs of wind.
B3 Can beach start and flare gybe, can use footstraps and harnesses
B4 Can water start and carve gybe, used to 295 boards.
B5 Reliable water start and carve gybe, used to sinkers.
Health:
Certain health conditions (heart asthma, diabetes and epilepsy) create dangerous conditions when you're dunked into the water unexpectedly.
This is likely to occur when you sail a dinghy, and it's frequent when windsurfing.
If you have any such health condition, consult your doctor.
We can accept your booking only if you tell us about your condition, and your doctor does not advise against the activity.
Complaints & Disputes
If you have a complaint while on holiday you must tell your local holiday manager and ask him/her to put things right.
If the solution is inadequate ask for a ‘resort report’, write your complaint on this form, and obtain the manager's comments and signature.
If on return you wish to follow up the complaint, forward a copy of this report to us not later than 28 days after the end of your holiday, amplified by a cover letter stating your preferred solution.
Disputes arising out of, or in connection with , this contract, may, if you wish, be referred to arbitration under a special scheme which, though devised by arrangement with the Association of British Travel Agents, is administered quite independently by the Chartered Institute of Arbitrators.
The Scheme (details of which can be provided on request) provides for a simple and inexpensive method of arbitration in respect of costs.
The scheme does not apply to claims for amounts greater than £1,500 per person or £75,00 per booking form.
Nor does it apply to claims which are solely or mainly the respect of physical injury or illness or the consequences of such injury or illness.
The rules of the scheme provide that the application for arbitration must be made within nine months of the date of return from the holiday, but in special circumstances it may still be offered outside this period.