

Long Road To Recovery
Later this month Sam Torrance will set out from his home in Largs to embark on no less than his 20th season on the PGA European Tour.
The popular Scot might not relish the thought of another 10 months on the road, but at least he departs his home in the West of Scotland secure in the knowledge that he has overcome the chronic putting problems which at one time threatened to end his career.
Throughout the late 1970s and early 1980s Torrance was one of the most successful competitors on the burgeoning European Tour.
After winning his first two Tour titles in the Piccadilly Medal and the Martini International in 1976 he was to record a further nine victories in the space of the next nine seasons.
During that time he never finished lower than 24th on the official Order of Merit and was a regular member of Europe's Ryder Cup side.
Mention of the Ryder Cup brings us to the highlight of Torrance's career thus far.
That came in the momentous contest at The Belfry in 1985 when it was the Scot who holed a curling 15 foot birdie putt across the final green to beat Andy North and to clinch the match for the home team.
Torrance's putt remains one of most lingering memories of the ‘80's, which is rather ironic because putting has never been one of the strongest parts of the Scot's game.
Torrance is renowned as one of the game's finest strikers, but has had troubles on the greens since he came out on Tour in 1971.
In 1987 Torrance won the Lancia Italian Open and qualified for the Ryder Cup team for a fourth successive time, but on his own admission his problems on the greens were becoming worse.
He was still hitting greens with monotonous regularity, but on the putting surface his touch had deserted him.
He was the latest in a long line of seasoned golfers to contract the yips and as a direct result slumped to 51st place on the Order of Merit.
He became so desperate at one stage that it crossed his mind to give up the game altogether.
Starting on page 8 in this issue is an account of how Torrance managed to cure his problems with the help of the broomhandle putter which has become his trademark.
It was a long and difficult process, but one which has been so successful that it will be a major surprise if Torrance doesn't qualify for the Ryder Cup at Kiawah Island in September.
The 17th at Letchworth may look like a picture postcard, but it's not a pretty sight to the members.
The club is one of many that has been made unplayable by the winter weather
Alistair Nicol talks to Sam Torrance, a man with…
A New Lease Of Life
Sam Torrance's magnificent ending to last year, highlighted by his victory in the Mercedes German Masters, can be attributed to several factors.
The most significant, of course, was his new, elongated putter.
That 48½inch long weapon, described by some as a monstrosity and others as an affront to decency and the Royal and Ancient game, has, according to Sam, done no less than salvage his entire career.
However, other factors also played major roles in the revival of a brilliant career often blighted by putting lapses and finally threatened by the universally feared yips.
A settled domestic life with two year-old Daniel and the lovely former actress Suzanne Danielle provided the supremely talented Scot with a secure and solid base from which to plan his survival from decline which saw him slump to 51st in the 1988 Order of Merit.
His 1988 position was his lowest in 14 years.
And it hurt.
He jointly led the European Tour's Greens in Regulation statistics that year, but his putting was so horrendous that he was almost totally incapable of converting the countless birdie opportunities set up with excellent tee-to-green play.
It was a shattering experience for the man who will long be remembered for holing the 15 foot birdie putt to beat Andy North and clinch the historic 1985 Ryder Cup success at The Belfry.
‘It was heart-breaking,’ said Sam, now 37 and one of golf's most experienced practitioners.
‘I reached such a low ebb that there were many times when the last thing I wanted to do was to go out and play golf.
I simply did not want to play and confess that I was close to giving up completely.
I had no idea what else I might do, but I just did not want to play tournament golf.
It really was that bad.’
Early in 1989, Sam, his father and several other Tour members of the Bob Torrance School of Golfing Excellence, spent a working holiday in Florida.
One day he picked up one of the elongated putters used to such devastating effect on the fabulously rich US Seniors' Tour by such as Orville Moody, a notoriously fragile performer on the greens until he turned 50.
Torrance toyed with the new putter.
He liked the pendulum principle, but was still uncomfortable with the top of the grip anchored to his chest.
He decided to persevere and to experiment a little.
He then hit upon the idea of holding an extended putter just under, and sometimes just touching, his chin.
He had one made up, used it for the first time in the 1989 Jersey Open and finished joint fifth, 5-under par and only two behind play-off victor Christy O'Connor Jnr.
That convinced him he was on the right track and within a few months some alert marketing men in the Wilson Sporting Goods Company were equally impressed.
They patented the Sam Torrance Putter and Sam signed a contract.
There was a lengthy getting-to-know-you period between Sam and his often ridiculed broomhandle putting implement.
Most of the comments came from ill-informed spectators.
Torrance suffered the jibes and in those early days of his experimentation there were often queues of fellow pros lining up on the practice putting greens of Europe to have a go themselves.
Few of his peers scoffed, but even fewer followed his example of actually taking it on the course.
One of the most scathing remarks passed during that summer's controversy over whether or not the revolutionary putter contravened the Rules of Golf came from American legend Arnold Palmer.
When asked if he had ever tried it, Palmer retorted grimly: ‘Only in the privacy of my bathroom.’
Sam Torrance was unimpressed by such dismissive reaction.
He was sure it would work for him and his doggedness was rewarded, when, after using the new tool for a mere six months, he retained his Ryder Cup place and ended the 1989 season in 11th place on the money list with more than £188,000.
En route to amassing that sum, the second highest of his career, he passed the £1 million mark in career earnings.
Although winless since 1987 and suffering all sorts of mental anguish both on and off the course, Torrance was eager for the 1990 campaign to start.
During the winter he had been heartened by the success of the diminutive Peter Senior.
He went back down under at the end of ‘89 and ran away with the Australian Order of Merit with three wins — using a Sam Torrance putter.
Senior's success strengthened Sam's belief that he was definitely on the right line.
He did not make the most auspicious of starts to the season, but, as the year went on, that majestic swing — the envy of almost everyone in golf — was as regal as ever.
For month after patient month Torrance ticked over, convinced in his own mind that one of those days his putter would get hot and he would win again.
His patience was sorely tested in the NM English Open at The Belfry in August.
During the third round Sam drove the short par-4 10th green and his eagle putt hung on the lip for almost 25 seconds before dropping into the hole.
That was deemed to be 15 seconds too long, Sam was penalised one shot then bowed out in a play-off to old foe Mark ‘Jesse’ James who gunned him down by holing an outrageous downhill put on the self-same green the following evening.
However, come the Mercedes German Masters at Stuttgart in early October, Torrance was still striking the ball magnificently and, as he had warned for months, the putter came good.
After an opening 70, he used his putter only 50 times in the next 36 holes when he shot 65–64.
A closing 73 gave him victory by three shots over Bernhard Langer and Ian Woosnam who finished with a blistering 62.
The win was worth £75,000 to the Scot who ended the year tied second in the Volvo Masters at controversial Valderrama to hoist his year's earnings to a career-best £248,203 and 7th place in the money list.
So what does 1991 hold for the man who has survived several years of mental agony and still found the strength to come smiling through?
‘My win in the Mercedes German Masters was my first for three years,’ he said at home in Largs where he finds peace and solace with son Daniel and Suzanne.
‘Occasionally I wondered if I would win again, but deep down I never really doubted I could.
‘You see this long putter really has saved my career.
I am astonished more people don't use it, I really am.
And this is not a sales pitch just because I have a contract with Wilson to make the clubs.
It really is so easy to use.
The putter itself does all the work and that takes a load of pressure off the rest of my game.
Now it is three months’ rest and come the start of the 1991 season I'll be ready to go again, more confident than I have been for a long time.
‘The Ryder Cup.
of course, is high on the priority list.
I see no reason why I should not be at Kiawah Island in Captain Bernard Gallacher's team in September.
After all, I made the 1989 side after using the new putter for only six months.
I now know it is the one for me.
‘And naturally, like every golfer, I'd love to win The Open at Royal Birkdale.
I love the course and won the Lord Derby Under-25 title there away back in 1972.
Generally, however, I am just looking forward to another good season — and I think I'll make it because I have never been so settled or contented in my life.’
ALISTAIR NICOL is golf correspondent of the Scottish Daily Record .
Sam shares a laugh with Suzanne Danielle, who has been a major factor in his return to form
‘I reached such a low ebb that there were times when the last thing I wanted to do was to go out and play golf.
I was close to giving up completely…
Discovering the long putter has changed Torrance's career.
If not for it, he might not be playing golf now
ENVIRONMENTALLY FRIENDLY?
With the R & A calling for 700 new courses in England and Wales to meet the demand, Charles Arthur asks the important question: ‘Is golf good for the environment?’
At a time when the political parties have all released bulky documents stuffed full of environmentally-friendly policies, when any washing powder that can't say it's CFC-free and untested on animals and made from biodegradable phosphates is likely to be left on the supermarket shelf, golf's ‘green’ credentials seem pretty strong.
There's nothing in golf courses, clubheads, shafts, balls or clothes that could create holes in the ozone layer.
Playing golf is unlikely to kill Scandinavian fish or pine trees by causing acid rain.
Golf doesn't create nuclear waste and (19th hole stories apart) it doesn't kill whales.
In fact, if you could put the game in a packet and onto a shelf, think of all the labels you could put on it: ‘CFC-free!’,
‘Requires no batteries!’(except in golf carts), ‘Contains no detergents!’ and ‘Keeps houses off beautiful land!’
About the only thing you wouldn't be able to say about it is that it ‘washes whiter’.
So surely golf is accepted as an environmentally-friendly game?
Surprisingly, that's not how Friends of the Earth see it.
When I called them for their view, the spokesman for ‘Countryside and Land matters’ was somewhat iffy.
‘There's no simple statement that it's all bad or good,’ he said.
You mean it could be bad?
‘It's clearly bad to construct a golf course somewhere where there is an existing habitat, or grassland.
There's very few of them left.
Construction on those sites is virtually always bad.’
The adverse effect is on animals and vegetation that had been quietly getting on without golfers.
There are many such places in the UK.
A number have special protection because of the rarity or delicacy of their occupants.
These are known as ‘Sites of Special Scientific Interest’(SSSIs), and are defined by the Nature Conservancy Council (NNC).
There are 5,300 in the UK covering about 16,270 square kilometres — or about 7% of the land.
(We'll come to the NCC).
But Friends of the Earth hadn't quite finished yet; there was something else about golf they didn't like — the cars.
Not the electric ones driven around courses, but the ones you drive to the course.
‘A golf site generates car travel,’ the spokesman explained.
Car travel contributes to the greenhouse effect (global warming caused by burning fossil fuels such as petrol) and pollution generally.
‘The location should be well-placed with respect to the population, rather than off in deep countryside.
It should be in the most accessible areas possible, but it's very rare that such land will be available, or released for land development.’
It's even rarer than you might think.
Planning departments in local councils up and down the country are being overwhelmed; for example, West Sussex County Council currently receives an application to build a course each day.
‘Almost all are turned down very quickly,’ said a planning officer from the council.
‘A lot of them are planned for areas in the South Downs, which we really don't want.
It's a walking area; there are a lot of ramblers and hikers there.
It would be a brave walker who would walk across a fairway, even if there was a public footpath.’
The footpaths have precedence.
After all, they were there first.
But the council planning officer agreed with Friends of the Earth: ‘A golf course does distort the environment.
It doesn't look the same at all if you compare a finished course to the original landscape.’
The story is the same further north.
In the Humberside area, the demand, in terms of planning applications for courses, is also heavy.
‘But they're often excuses for houses,’ explains an executive officer from Humberside County Council.
‘They're trying it on with the application.
‘For example, we recently looked at one that had come in where it just happened that the course staff needed two dozen luxury executive residential homes to accommodate them, with a lovely view of the 18th, of course .
It's just a shadow for residential planning applications.
They're testing us out, seeing how far we'll go in granting them permission to build.’
That's something Friends of the Earth agrees with: ‘It concerns us that recently a lot of proposals for courses have luxury houses or hotels with them, getting permission to put buildings where they might not otherwise have been.’
However, the spokesman added, ‘I'm not opposed to golf per se.’
And it is important to realise that the reason environmental pressure groups are more vocal and, apparently, finicky about these matters is because the environment doesn't speak for itself.
Instead, you just wake up one day and find your groundwater is poisoned from the toxic waste site up the road, or that your country is covered in houses you don't like.
The environment is the issue.
‘It's much more important than it used to be,’ concedes Martin Hawtree, Secretary of the British Association of Golf Course Architects (BAGCA).
‘Interest groups are more vociferous at the planning stages.
Nowadays we have to take into account what the NCC says, and the local and naturalist considerations.’
His own company is working on a project in East Dorset to establish a course with heathland areas on what used to be agricultural land.
That has involved consultation with the Dorset Naturalist Trust, the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds, and ‘other bodies’.
‘We're vacuuming up the debris on the land and mulching it again,’ Hawtree explains.
‘But the whole thing is…well, it's politically sensitive in the planning stages.’
Still, no-one I spoke to in any organisation could name any cases where environmental opposition alone has stopped a course being built.
Two are under pressure, however, Chelsford Highland Park, where ecological objections have led to a public enquiry, and Leigh Grounds in Hampshire where the NCC refused to sell woodland lying in the centre of a proposed course.
The woodland is a SSSI.
The planners are trying again, designing around the SSSI.
However, BAGCA insists that golf and nature can, and do, go together well.
‘The classic case is in Kent’, Hawtree says.
‘There, about 40 SSSIs are on golf courses.’
(In fact, of the top 50 courses in Britain, half contain SSSIs)‘So people there are aware that courses provide some unique habitats.
There's less confrontation with ecology.
Golf isn't anti-ecology.’
The NCC agrees, pretty much.
It collaborated with BAGCA and the R&A last year to produce a book,On Course Conservation — managing golf's natural heritage , aimed at course designers and club committees.
(The NCC publishes it and provides it free from its Peterborough Headquarters.)
The book contains chapters such as‘Playing a round with nature’(presumably it plays off scratch), as well as a roll call of courses which have worked with the environment in their design and management, namely Royal Troon, Royal St. David's (in Harlech), Tenby, Lindrick (in South Yorkshire), Gleneagles (which provides a habitat for, amongst others, kestrels, partridges, pheasants and roe deer), Luffenham Heath, Sundridge Park, Royal Birkdale, Woodhall Spa and Western Gailes.
(When you're playing on any of those, the NCC notes that bunkers are popular with reptiles such as slow worms, lizards and snakes.
‘It can provide them with a place to bask in the sun because the sand warms up quickly,’ it comments.
Probably it would be a good idea to read up on free drop rules before the round!
Can you drop two clublengths away if you're close to a poisonous animal?)
Once the course is built, there's still the lingering problem of looking after it.
Even this can be ‘ungreen’, mostly through the use of pesticides and fertilisers.
The NCC says that, ‘unnecessary inputs of fertilisers and pesticides…can in the long run be storing up trouble for the future…’
The trouble is that the chemicals can leach into local water tables, a factor that takes on added importance following the British Medical Association's claim in October 1990 that most of Britain's tap water is contaminated with pesticides, albeit at very low levels.
As Friends of the Earth comment: ‘There are alternatives available, and it's been shown that heavy treatment with chemicals is unnecessary.
It was done on courses where there were demands for a uniform surface.’
(What the NCC calls ‘the Augusta effect’, caused by clubs trying too hard to emulate what they see on TV.)
Hawtree says that pesticides are, ‘less used than they were.
Fungicides have still got to be used, but there is an increasing tendency to use organic fertilisers.
And it's preferable to have a golf course rather than agricultural land which might be heavily dosed with chemicals six times a year, which is more than the average course.’
The NCC rounds off its booklet with a list of 10 guidelines for course developers: survey the site, evaluate it, defuse any local notions that golf is anti-conservation, allow plenty of room in the design, avoid sensitive areas in the lay-out, take care of drainage sites, don't bother designing the rough at the start (it'll become clear anyway), plant native species, manage the land sympathetically, and keep people educated about what you're doing.
Ian Dair, who led the writing of the book for the NCC, was quite chuffed a few months after publication when the American Association of Golf Course Architects requested a copy.
Not long after he got a letter from them.
‘They said they were very impressed,’ he recalls.
Then he read further down the letter.
‘They said they were so impressed — and now that green issues are moving up their agenda, they've become aware that they have to run themselves in a green way — that they are committing three million dollars into researching ‘golf and the environment’, and appointing an ecologist to lead the research.’
Gulp!
Three million dollars?
On research ?
‘We could take a leaf out of their book,’ says Dair, mildly.
‘Their entire research budget is five million dollars.
But I don't think that the home associations have got that sort of budget.’
No, not quite.
But it's clear that no amount of research will answer what seems at the outset to be a simple question, that is, ‘Is golf good for the environment?’ the reply has to be, ‘It depends.’
It depends how it's introduced and how it's handled subsequently.
It can be good or it can be bad.
Just like playing the game itself, it seems.
Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) protecting animals and vegetation cover 16,000 sq.
km. of the UK.
Friends of the Earth want more protection, claiming golf courses distort the environment.
Some clubs have been party to the ‘Augusta effect’— using chemicals to emulate greens seen on TV.
This duck obviously has no objections to The Belfry's greens.
WIN A FANTASTIC TRIP FOR TWO TO THE RYDER CUP AT KIAWAH ISLAND, SOUTH CAROLINA IN OUR GLENMUIR COMPETITION.
Glenmuir and Golf Monthly are delighted to present this fantastic opportunity to savour the drama and excitement of the Ryder Cup at first hand.
At the magnificent new venue of Kiawah Island in South Carolina, the winner and a partner of his or her choice will experience a thrilling battle between some of the world's top golfers.
This latest encounter between the two sides promises to be more exciting than ever before.
Europe will be attempting to repeat its last Ryder Cup performance on US soil, a magnificent 15–13 victory at Muirfield Village in 1987, while the US team will be looking to use its home advantage to win the Cup for the first time since 1983.
Glenmuir, which has become synonymous with top quality golfwear, is offering exclusive to Golf Monthly readers the first prize of tickets for two to this unique spectacle, held this year from the 25th to the 29th of September.
The trip includes airfare, accommodation, car rental and admission tickets to the golf course for all practice and match days.
The first 20 runners-up will also receive a fabulous prize — Glenmuir Ryder Cup sweaters as worn by the European Ryder Cup team.
Sam Torrance, Gordon Brand Junior and many other top players have selected Glenmuir as their outfitters.
And the European Ryder Cup team and the PGA have all appointed Glenmuir as exclusive suppliers of shirts and pullovers.
For a chance to win one of these exciting prizes, simply list who you think will be in the 12-man European team for the 1991 Ryder Cup at Kiawah Island.
Put your selection on the coupon with your name, address and daytime telephone number and send it to PO Box 501, Leicester LE99 OAB.
The closing date for entry is Thursday 28th February but the draw will not be made until the day after the team itself is selected on 26 August.
The first prize-winner should be prepared to travel to Kiawah Island at one month's notice.
THE MYSTERY MAN
Lorne Rubenstein talks to Wayne Levi, four-time winner on the 1990 US Tour and million dollar gambler
Believe it or not, Wayne Levi is a personality.
Okay, you're sneering.
Get serious, you're saying.
Levi?
The guy whose visor reads ‘Ground Round’ after a low-rent steak house in upstate New York, that part of America where he was born and raised and still hangs his hat?
Levi, the fellow whose clothes are so ordinary that Payne Stewart wouldn't use them for dusting his furniture.
Levi, the 37 year-old journeyman pro whose swing hardly seems a model of elegance?
That's right, Levi.
We speak here of a man who has just completed a season in which he won four USPGA Tour events and more than $1,000,000 to finish second on the money list behind Greg Norman.
We know, then, that he can play a little— after all, nobody has won as many tour events in a year since Bob Tway in 1986 — but we didn't know he could make an audience laugh, or that he had such an offbeat approach to the game.
And neither do you, for Levi has never played in an Open Championship, although in a thoughtful moment he will say that he may have erred in not entering for the Old Course last year, and that now he may well play The Open.
Good, then, but who is this man?
Maybe we should look into the mind of this 37 year-old upstart, this down-home, regular guy.
Meat and potatoes, not scallops and prawns.
Here goes, then.
Levi has just won the Canadian Open at the Glen Abbey Golf Club near Toronto last September, the final win of his magnificent season.
He was amused by it all, and to be sure, amazed.
And he had a good time with the assembled newshounds, especially when one got him off and running with a question about how he felt about winning a national championship.
Was it special?
‘Yeah, that's right, it's a great feeling to win a national championship,’ Levi answered.
‘You know, I always wondered what it would be like to be a Canadian, growing up just across Lake Ontario from Toronto.
I figured that I didn't have much of a chance to be the best player in the US, the country being so big.
Then again, Canada's pretty big, too, isn't it?
Maybe I'd have needed to be born in Rumania or Poland to be the best player.’
Come again?
Let's go back to the beginning of the Canadian Open week for a further insight into Levi's make-up.
It's Monday night and he's watching a National Football League game.
Trouble is, he's scheduled to play in an outing on Tuesday in Toronto.
No problem.
He watches the ball game —‘I couldn't miss the (New York) Giants; they're my favourite team,’ he would say later — sleeps a few hours, then drives 250 miles to Toronto.
He also happened to have a wager on the outcome of the football game.
After all, Levi admits to more than a passing interest in things financial, shall we say.
He gambles on football, thinks Las Vegas is heavenly and isn't averse to extensive investment in the stock market.
But where does golf fit in?
Answer: Levi has said he plays professionally only so that he can indulge his other interests.
He might also have added that he plays the game rather well.
In fact, his colleagues know that if Levi is challenging, they had better play their best golf.
He's not likely to give away shots down the stretch.
So it was that Levi worked his way down the last holes at Glen Abbey.
He seemed to be whistling his way along.
He had said the day before that if he won the Canadian Open, ‘Great, but if I don't, no big deal.
Sure I'd like to win, be a four-time winner this year.
That would be pretty good.
Tomorrow's the day, though.’
It was, too, even if Levi might not have noticed until late in the round.
He said he wasn't going to think about who might win, or what score would be required.
Levi didn't look at the leaderboard from the 7th hole until he was on the fairway at the 13th, when he noticed he held a two-shot lead.
And he never looked back.
Okay, he did get nervous around the par-4 17th, which he bogeyed after flying the green, but then again he likes to be nervous.
He's that kind of guy; he likes the action.
‘Sure I felt nervous,’ Levi recalled.
‘It was adrenalin.
That's the fun.
I always try to make myself a little nervous, so that I can perform.’
His bogey at the 17th meant that he held but a one-stroke lead heading into the 18th, a par-5 over water that is reachable in two shots.
But he wasn't going to risk going for the green in two — he's a gambler, but he's not stupid, not with a one-stroke lead — and so he hit a wedge for his second shot short of the lake and then a 155-yard 9-iron directly over the flag for his approach.
‘I knew it was going a long way, I was so pumped.
And I went right for the flag.
If I was going to lose the tournament, I was going to lose by going right over the flag, not to the left or the right.
But I'd have jumped in the lake if I'd lost.
Let's face it, if you can't make par on a par-5 to win, you ought to be shot.’
One more small item about that Canadian Open.
Levi wanted to win four tournaments in a year, didn't he?
He had said so during the week.
So what did he do with his final, winning tap-in-putt for his par-5 on the 72nd hole?
He  backhanded it in, left-handed!
‘I did that because my wife hates it when I backhand putts.
So I did it to bother her.
She'll crucify me.
She'll have the number of the psychiatrist when I get back.’
Well, what do you expect?
Levi is a gambler, right?
‘It's the tension,’ he says, ‘the thrill.
I'm not a heavy gambler, but I do enjoy a sizeable bet and waiting for the result.
I'm not a big dice or card thrower, just football and baseball.
When I go to Vegas I bet on college and pro football and baseball.
I know a lot more about it, and I don't think I've lost more than once or twice in 12 times at Vegas.
I have a sense of who's up for the game, how guys feel, how they're going to play.
And I love the action.’
Levi had plenty of action this past season, especially for someone whose career seemed at least arrested, if not in decline.
He had won eight events and nearly $2,000,000 in his 12 years on the US Tour.
But he hadn't won since the 1985 Georgia-Pacific Atlanta Classic.
Still, this wasn't a fellow to give up easily.
Those who knew him in the early 1970s in Florida remember a young man who beat balls at night after working a day job.
He planned to play the Florida mini-tours, did so without much success, tried some events in and around New England in the summers, bounced around some more, then finally got his USPGA Tour card on his third try.
Levi and Bob Mann won the 1978 Walt Disney World National Team Championship.
Up to 1985 he took at least one US Tour event a season, except for 1981.
Then came the drought, and when he did win again in 1990, it was in Atlanta, where he had last won in 1985.
He did so with a short birdie putt on the last hole.
‘It's been five years since I won,’ Levi said after the round, ‘five years of struggling.
The last time I won was here and I had that on my mind most of the week.
I told myself going to the 18th today that if I could birdie it I could win the tournament.’
And birdie it he did, the climax to an emotional last round in which he smashed his putter on a trash box after three-putting the 11th hole.
Levi told himself to get on with it.
He could have folded instead, but he's a gambler, right?
Stress and hardship often make the gambler go.
Next week came the Centel Western Open, two weeks later at the Butler National Club in Oak Brook, Illinois.
And he did so by having to fend off none other than Tom Watson, who had won three times at Butler National.
But now Watson was looking to win again on the US Tour.
He hadn't done so since 1987, but he did get within three shots of Levi on the back nine.
When Levi walked off the 15th green, somebody told him, ‘Watson's gonna get you.’
Levi responded.
‘No, he's not.’
Watson didn't get Levi.
Levi got him, and the field.
Watson dropped shots down the stretch, while Levi completed a round of 69 that sealed a four-shot win over Payne Stewart.
Two wins now.
Still, who was Wayne Levi?
Did anybody know him?
Did anybody think he would win once, never mind twice in one year?
He didn't have a classic swing and he seemed so laid-back, so much the, well, regular guy.
No silly plus-fours for him just for effect and image.
No loud noises about the state of the USPGA Tour to grab attention for himself.
He was the golfer nobody knew.
Maybe he didn't even know himself, or at least what his capabilities were.
But Rick Christie, a golf professional in Tampa, Florida, and a friend of Levi's, said not too long ago that he should win half a dozen tournaments with his consistent swing.
That's when Levi reassessed himself, as golf observers were being forced to do, during the season.
‘What are you going to do?’
Levi asked after his win at Butler National.
‘The general public doesn't know how good I am.
The media doesn't, either.
Inside, I know I'm good.’
No kidding.
Three weeks later Levi won again, the Greater Hartford Open.
‘This is for everyone who thinks I can't play,’ Levi said into a CBS camera after nailing a 3-iron into the last green to ensure his two-stroke victory.
Still, nobody mentioned that Levi was dominating the USPGA Tour, or that he was the best player in America at the time.
It sounds ridiculous, doesn't it?
Wayne Levi is the best player in America?
Get real.
But, but, he did win four tournaments, he did finish second to Norman on the money list, and he did end his season with a startlingly brilliant final round, an 8-under par 63 at the Champions course in Houston to give him third place in the rich Nabisco Championships.
That was three better than the next best round of the day.
Levi's closing holes at Houston were indicative of the kind of year he had.
He holed from 50 feet to birdie the 17th hole.
Then he almost holed his 160-yard approach on the 18th, where the hole was cut over a bunker and just a few feet onto the green.
What a week it had been: 75-71-67-63.
‘I shoot for the flags,’ the gambler said.
‘I don't play safe too often.’
But there is one area in which Levi has played safe.
Or maybe it's because golf isn't the be-all and end-all to him.
He likes to take time off to be with his wife Judy and their four children.
‘I enjoy talking about things other than golf, I love just sitting around and doing nothing, watching TV, going into the kitchen, walking around a while and watching the stock market.
It drives my wife crazy, but I love doing nothing.
Funny how a guy who loves doing nothing is accomplishing so much.
Okay, so it's silly to refer to Wayne Levi is a fresh new face in golf.
But how about a fresh older face that nobody knows, a fresh older face that belongs to a fellow who never thought he would win seven or eight tournaments in his career, and who says he is in awe of his 1990 season.
The rest of us might also stand in awe of his season.
It was that good.
So is he.
LEVI'S WINNING WAYS
1990 Money List Position: 2
Prize-money: $1,024,647
1990 Tour Victories:
Career Tour Victories:
‘I guess when I show up for the Majors I'll be a little more popular.
I'll have to perform, I can't be missing cuts.
Then again, I can't let all that hype that goes with winning get to me’
Mark Roe on Tour
NEW YEARS RESOLUTIONS
Christmas happened, but I somehow missed it.
While all you fairweather golfers were fattening yourselves for the spring sunshine, I was running 15 miles a week in an effort to gain the necessary fitness for a 27-tournament season.
I have realised that I am no longer a spring chicken by tour standards — 28 in February — and the wrinkles are starting to appear, so, to prolong my career and my enthusiasm for the game, I am cutting down.
It's all too tempting to play week in, week out because the prize-money is fantastic at every tournament, but I know now, after six years on Tour, that it is a false economy and that 10 good weeks are better than 20 average ones.
My New Year's resolutions have all been hopelessly abandoned, so I've decided to make up some new ones for the 1991 Tour:
1.
Never to three-putt again (should last until the 1st green in Dubai — if there's anything left of it).
2.
Never to tell a press man the truth again (they can only turn a lie into an unplayable one)
3.
Not to fly home from any of my tournaments on Friday night (Saturday morning will do).
4.
Not to ask for any more appearance money.
5.
Not to shed any more tears of frustration over the pace of play on Tour (I got some lead boots for Christmas).
6.
Never use the word ‘if’ again in conjunction with its partner ‘only’.
7.
Never to throw food at John Paramor again (I didn't get one free drop last season).
8.
To hit all my bad shots down the side of the fairways where the lines of spectators are the deepest.
9.
To cut my expenses down from £30,000 to £750 (by carrying my own bag and staying in youth hostels.)
10.
Not to dream of playing at Valderrama again (I'm tired of waking up in a cold sweat).
So, these are my ‘Ten Commandments’ for 1991, but the cracks are already appearing.
I know many of the other tournament professionals will be feeling the same apprehensions and anxieties as myself before the circus begins, but it always has been the same from day one, and believe me it doesn't get any easier.
Will Nick win more Majors?
Will he do the Grand Slam?
Will his wrists survive the season?
Will Woosie win a Major?
I hope so.
But it's hard on Tour when you're a long way from home and the only creature comforts you have are a television, a telephone and a McDonald's around the corner.
I'll stop moaning now because it's going to be a great season.
I'm going to make my first million — mainly because my wife Jane has already spent it!
And believe me, plenty of new stars will emerge.
I've picked my Ryder Cup team to face the Americans — Baker, Boxall, Claydon, Davis, Lane, Lee Mclean, Montgomerie, Mouland, Roe, Way and Williams.
Team attire for the match will be silver space-suits (if they dare turn up).
Seriously though, look out for a couple of new faces in the team — maybe more — and some new first-time winners on the 1991 Tour.
I have a very good idea who they will be and the bets are already placed, so for a bit more inside information, watch this space.
THE GOOD, THE BAD, AND THE AWFUL
Robin McMillan finds the best and worst golfers on the US Tour.
The wonderful thing about the USPGA Tour's year-ending statistics is that a quick perusal leaves you with a crystal- clear picture of what transpired in the previous year: Which players improved the most; which were at the top of their games; who won what and where, and when, and how.
And if you believe that, you'll also be pleased to hear that Tranmere Rovers have signed Toto Schillaci.
But the stats do indicate certain things, such as that Tom Kite was the worst putter on Tour last year (at least among those with more than a golf game), that Mark Calcavecchia was the best all-round player in America, his critics be damned.
The Norman situation is quite interesting.
No sooner had the Bush Administration declared Norman-bashing a national pastime than all the year-end ‘Norman's won only one Major and so has Jeff Sluman’ stuff started to appear.
The big gun in the critics' arsenal this year was Wayne Levi and his four triumphs.
Levi, it was offered, is a better golfer than Norman.
Of course, the same was said of Bob Tway when he won four in 1986 (including one that Norman should have won) and that notion disappeared faster than Lord Lucan.
I've often wondered why Norman, if he is such a dreadful player, is always used as a bench mark for other people's success.
At any rate, the most prominent critic was Nick Seitz, the editorial director of Golf Digest and its sister publications.
This is not the first time Seitz had pondered what Digest calls ‘the Norman puzzle’.
In the March 1989 issue of Digest , Seitz posed the question, ‘Is Greg Norman Overrated?’ replaced Jeff Sluman's name with the like of Alf Padgham (which I'm sure was not intended as an insult to the Padgham family) and concluded that Norman was, indeed, overrated —‘for now’.
Norman, understandably, was not amused.
This time Seitz, in an otherwise logical column, took Norman to task for going to a sports psychologist and suggested that Levi was ‘probably’ a better ‘all-round’player.
Without abandoning the principle of honour among thieves, let's look at those two points closely.
Seitz asks readers if they could imagine Ben Hogan or Arnold Palmer ever going to a sports psychologist.
Good question.
But if I were Ben Hogan, and a Bob Hamilton or Willie Goggin chipped in to beat me in The Masters, a Walter Burkemo holed a sand shot to swipe the PGA, a raw rookie — pick one — holed a 7-iron to beat me somewhere in Florida and then the like of a Bud Holscher or a Shelley Mayfield holed yet another sand shot to steal yet another victory, then I'd not only be scouring the Fort Worth Yellow Pages looking for the nearest shrink, I might even think of tossing myself under a freight train in the nearest marshalling yard.
I'm not sure that Hogan or anyone else at the top of the game could have withstood such punishment without seeking help.
As to Levi being a better all-round player, let's go to our year-end statistics.
Norman was fourth on the tour in driving distance.
Levi was 130th.
Norman was 54th in driving accuracy, hitting 68.1% of his fairways; Levi was 44th, hitting 69.1% Unless my maths is skewered, and there is every chance that it is, Levi hit one more fairway than Norman every eight rounds.
Norman was 33rd in hitting greens in regulation; Levi was 44th — a narrow margin, but a margin in favour of the Australian nevertheless.
Norman was 19th in putting (putts taken on greens hit in regulation); Levi was 124th.
Norman was sixth in total putts; Levi was 132nd.
Norman was 25th in sand saves: Levi was 40th.
Norman led the Tour in sub-par holes; Levi finished 41st.
Finally, Norman had an adjusted scoring average of 69.1; Levi's was 71.09.
That's two shots per round worse.
From a better all-round player?
Okay, okay, okay, statistics don't tell the whole story.
Mea culpa.
Levi won four times, Norman only once.
Let's look at it another way, it would be folly to compare Levi's Hartford victory to Norman's win at Doral — who's to say which is a tougher tournament?
I'm no great fan of Norman.
The next time he makes me stand in the rain when I need answers to questions, he may well be treated to a proverbial Glasgow kiss, but I do wish those who choose to criticise him (and, given his superb all-round game, his one Major title does deserve scrutiny) would give some consideration before they complain.
Enough of Norman.
What about poor Tom Kite?
He hasn't won any Majors, and just when he revamps his swing to win a little distance, his putting deserts him.
Kite, one of the few golfers to have had any success with switch-hitting on the greens, came out this year with a compact whip-and-zip to his swing that made him look like one of those little mechanical Arnold Palmer golf games that were so popular in the 1960s (and have recently surfaced again).
The new motion didn't get Kite much more distance — about five and a half yards, on average — but it did contribute to his rising from 29th on Tour in hitting greens in regulation to third.
Once on these greens, however, Kite stumbled badly.
He took 1,813 putts on every green he hit in regulation, which was 135th best on Tour.
It has long been stated on these pages, that the relationship between GIR and average putts on GIR gives the best (but not perfect) indication of who is having problems with the putter.
Kite's numbers are about the worst we've seen in years.
But not quite.
Even worse last year was Rocco Mediate, who may be able to mediate, but he sure can't putt.
Big Rocco was second on Tour in GIR, but 165th in putting.
Maybe Rocco's just hitting to the centre of the greens all the time.
But if that's the case, he's obviously so accurate that maybe he should try hitting them close for a change!
Some other problem putters are Fred Couples (25th in GIR, 104th in putting); Gil Morgan (12th in GIR, 116th in putting); and Billy Ray Brown (23rd in GIR, 137th in putting).
Calcavecchia finished 147th in driving accuracy last year, but swept past much of the field to finish 33rd in hitting greens in regulation.
How did he do this?
Well, it helps if you miss the fairways as far from the tee as Calcavecchia does — he finished 12th on Tour in driving distance with an average poke of almost 273 yards.
Excuse me?
Did someone say ‘square grooves?’
A more impressive performer in the same area was Joey Sindelar, who was 49th in driving distance and 123rd in driving accuracy, but 44th in hitting greens.
Or how about Jim Thorpe, who was 106th in driving distance, 158th in driving accuracy — yet 33rd in hitting greens.
Wait a minute.
Did I read that correctly?
Jim Thorpe, who stands six feet tall, weighs 14½ stone, a man who looks like he's hitting little plastic kiddies' clubs when he stands over the ball, was 106th on the Tour in driving distance ?
Hmmm.
Maybe he is hitting little plastic kiddies' clubs.
On the other side of this coin we find Chip Beck and Lanny Wadkins.
Beck was 33rd in driving accuracy but 147th in hitting greens, a starting pair of numbers from a pro who is reputed to hit the irons more solidly than anyone else on Tour.
Wadkins was 40th in accuracy and 100th in hitting greens.
Look no further than driving distance to find this pair's problem.
Beck was 125th on Tour, Wadkins 146th.
I can't figure out Scott Verplank at all.
Verplank was 104th in driving distance, 61st in driving accuracy, 109th in hitting greens and 175th in sand saves, yet he finished an applaudable 19th in sub-par holes.
The only clue I can find lies in his putting.
Verplank was 17th on Tour on greens he hit in regulation — which wasn't a lot.
It would appear that whenever Verplank did hit a green, he drained the putt or came close.
So you figure that he either hit his approaches stiff — or off the radar screen.
Paul Anziger led the sand saves category this year.
This is becoming about as routine as Cal Peete leading driving accuracy, which he did again this year, hitting 753 out of 900.
Unfortunately, he was never heard from again.
Which brings us to perhaps the most phenomenal yearly stats I have ever had the pleasure of analysing.
Phenomenally bad , that is.
They came from Rick Todd, a Canadian now making his home in El Paso, Texas — Trevino country — presumably because he studied golf at the University of Texas-El Paso and decided to stick around, although you can't help but notice that he couldn't have settled much further from Canada if he'd tried.
Todd was 75th on Tour in driving distance, and that's about as good as it gets.
He was 128th in driving accuracy, 180th in sand saves, 192nd, which is to say dead last, in sub-par holes (percentage of eagles and birdies), 191st (or second-to-last) in scoring average, dead last in both putting on the few greens he hit in regulation and in total putts (which means that when he missed a green, he seldom got it up and down), and dead last again in shooting birdies on par-3s, par-4s and par-5s.
For those keeping score, that's rock bottom in 6 of 10 categories.
And it gets worse.
Of the 25 tournaments Todd played, he missed the cut in 23.
He made the cut in the Phoenix Open, by a stroke, and eventually finished tied for 70th, which earned him $1,773.
He also made the cut in the Deposit Guaranty Classic, which is a ‘grabbing’ tournament played opposite The Masters in which it is nigh impossible to miss the cut.
Todd was six strokes off the lead at the half-way mark, but promptly shot a 77 in the third round and eventually finished 71st, earning $594.
Those two cheques accounted for Todd finishing 265th on the money list, lower than anyone else who played a full schedule.
And do you know what?
I love this guy.
Talk about a glutton for punishment.
If this was a Western, he'd be bloodied and limping and full of hot lead — but still on his feet.
This is a man they couldn't put down — Arnold Schwarzenegger in ‘The Terminator’…the guy in the white hat in ‘Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid.’
No matter how dismally he fared, he kept coming back for more.
There should be a prize — the ‘Rick Todd Award’— for the most tenacious bad golfer on the PGA Tour.
And I'll tell you something else.
He's probably a better all-round golfer than Greg Norman.
There is no shortage of Greg Norman critics, although he is still used as a bench mark for other people's success.
Tom Kite revamped his swing for more distance and then his putting touch deserted him.
Mark Calcavecchia finished 14th in driving accuracy, but it helps if you miss the fairways as far from the tee as he does.
As usual, Calvin Peete was the most accurate driver.
Jim Thorpe: using plastic kiddies' clubs.
Scott Verplank putted well — when he hit a green.
Rocco Mediate may be able to mediate, but he can't putt.
A Short Cut to Better Golf — Part 8
CONFIDENCE STARTS WITH BEING POSITIVE
Many golfers state that golf is ‘just a matter of being confident.’
Unfortunately it isn't that simple.
Such thinking comes from a belief that swing technique has nothing whatsoever to do with playing well.
However, if your swing clearly doesn't work because you have failed to grasp the basic fundamentals, no amount of ‘confidence’ will remedy the situation.
Confidence is the result of good shots and they come from good technique.
One way to instil confidence is to start with a positive attitude and this starts the moment you step up to the ball.
In other words you should have a set procedure of shot visualisation prior to making the swing.
Stand some four yards or so behind the ball, look down the ball-to-target line and try to see the ideal shot in your mind.
If you can visualise the shot there is a strong chance your body will respond and make a good swing.
The diagrams show a tee shot situation on a par-4 hole which dog-legs to the left for the shot to the green.
The positive thinking golfer, Player A has picked out an aiming point at the end of the fairway.
This is highlighted on the diagram (A) and that tree has become the aiming spot for the direction of the ball fight.
More importantly, it becomes the focal point in the player's mind.
Such a positive attitude will override any negative thoughts.
There's no guarantee that you will hit the perfect shot, but using this procedure gives you a stronger chance.
Compare this to the golfer in diagram B. He has not taken such a positive approach to the same tee-shot, and has failed to stand behind the ball-to-target line before addressing the ball.
He has no specific aiming point as a result.
Failure to think positively means that negative thoughts have come into his mind.
Rather than focus on the spot where he wants the ball to land, the fairway bunker and the trees are uppermost in his mind.
With the mind and body so negatively programmed, this golfer is unlikely to produce his best swing.
Remember that ‘confidence’ is the final link in the chain.
A positive attitude, as shown here, is a prerequisite to each and every stroke played around the golf course.
USE JUST ONE KEY SWING THOUGHT
Golfers often state that they cannot concentrate on all their swing ideas at the same time.
There's nothing revolutionary in that.
It is simply impossible to remember umpteen different thoughts in a swing that lasts less than two seconds.
Your first priority is to identify exactly what it is you are trying to achieve with your golf swing.
This should ideally be part of a course of lessons from a skilled teaching professional if you are to use your time and effort efficiently.
If you are beginning the game, changing your swing technique or just practising constructively, your learning capacity will have limits.
You can only realistically learn one point at a time.
Your mind can only focus attention on one area of the swing until it becomes muscle memory and works naturally.
If you arrive at a practice ground or driving range with a whole jumble of ideas, you have little chance of achieving positive results.
The lesson, then, is always have one positive swing thought to focus on while practising, and persevere with that until you can achieve it successfully.
You should apply the same idea when playing, If you arrive at the course early to loosen up and hit some practice shots (which can only help your golf), try to establish your ‘thought for the day’.
You might find that ‘head steady’ is a good, uncomplicated swing thought, or ‘keep the backswing slow’.
Which shot you choose will depend on the individual as this is a personal thing.
The most destructive thing to do is to take complicated swing theory or swing movements onto the golf course.
You are bound to fail.
If you are changing your swing technique around to improve your game, it should never necessitate not playing on the course.
However, there are times to leave practice ground ideas where they belong and play golf with your present swing, plus one simple key thought for the day.
THE RELEASE ACTION — HOW IT AFFECTS THE CONTACT
The downswing basically comprises two movements, one following the other.
The arm swing which pulls the club into the hitting area becomes the release action, the transition point being at about ten o'clock with the club shaft position, although this will obviously vary from player to player.
The release action describes how the hands, wrists and lower arms combine to return the clubface to the back of the ball at speed.
This one area of the swing is obviously critical to the ball's flight, because you will either capitalise on all the swing movements that have preceded this, or you may destroy all the good that went before.
The basic problem with this aspect of the technique is that the movement occurs very quickly, so you could be excused for being unsure quite what has happened.
However, the trick is to watch your ball flight for clues.
The release action involves three factors controlling the ball's flight:—
1.
Directional control (clubface position)
2.
Solid contact on the clubface
3.
Distance
A good, well-timed release action will return the club to the position it was in at address.
It is therefore correct that the address should preview a good impact position.
The role of the hands then is to return the clubface squarely to the ball.
This is one area of the golf swing that simply has to be learned correctly if you are ever to play golf to your full potential.
The diagrams show the effect of a good release action.
The clubface effortlessly squares up to the ball-to-target line for a straight ball flight.
The clubhead returns to brush the ground, therefore striking the back of the ball solidly.
Lastly, the quality strike and good downswing sequence combine to create maximum distance, which is most clearly seen in the wooden club shots.
A poor release by comparison will leave the clubface open, causing a weak slice.
The failure of the hands to unfold downward enough causes a succession of topped or thinly contacted shots.
Finally, poor release dissipates clubhead speed because the downswing sequence is not correctly completed, resulting in short tee shots with the wooden clubs.
THE UPHILL PITCH
A successful pitch played from an upslope demands a careful assessment of the shot before you even stand to the ball.
Don't automatically reach for the pitching wedge or sand iron as you would if the lie of the ball and stance were on level ground.
The upslope will increase the loft of the club, sending the ball steeply into the air.
Such a shot is very difficult to judge and, therefore your better club choice may be a No.9 iron or even a No.8 iron.
Of course, the final club selection is also based on the position of the flag on the green, and how much green you have to work with.
Each situation is different, so visualise the shot in your mind before selecting your club.
A steep upslope around a green leaves you no option but to ‘punch’ the swing into the slope, cutting the follow-through very short.
This point accepted, you must still accelerate the clubhead through impact and not quit on the shot.
The address position is formed with the weight set more to the left side, leaning into the slope in order to gain stability and balance.
The hands should be pre-set slightly forward to encourage a descending strike.
The swing is mostly from the arms, with the body kept steady to maintain balance.
(See Diagram A).
After impact, the club will hit the grassy upslope, and the arms will ‘give’ to allow the club to follow the slope (Diagram C).
This is a shot worth practising because it takes confidence to know you can hit this shot quite hard and the ball still might not pass the flag.
The effect of the slope on the loft of the ball will take a while to grow accustomed to.
The sin, obviously, is to leave the shot well short of the hole.
DON'T FORCE THE LATE HIT
Golfers the world over want to hit the ball further.
Not only is a solidly struck drive a great shot to play, but it can also be translated into lower scores.
In searching for greater distance, golfers will try absolutely anything, ranging from the latest clubs to weight training, from a fuller shoulder turn in the backswing to a wide arc through the ball.
The constant objective has led many players to try to copy the leading golfers in the world.
Beware of swing sequences that show the late hit of the hands, as illustrated in Diagram A. This position at halfway in the downswing may be ideal for the skilled or powerful player, because the hands and lower arms will still release early enough to return the clubface squarely to the back of the ball.
If such a position were copied by a club player less skilled and using a less powerful hand-and-arm action, the clubface would stand little or no chance of squaring up on impact.
The result would be a shot which curves away to the right, as shown in Diagram B. In addition, such a late hit combined with a normal release would often top the ball as the hands arrive at impact ahead of the clubhead.
If you set out with the idea of generating more clubhead speed by delaying the hit or the release of the hands, you must balance this with a much faster hand and arm action through impact.
Instead, remember your swing objective.
You are simply trying to return the clubface squarely to the back of the ball with clubhead speed.
You should work towards establishing the moment at which the hands start releasing in the downswing, while at the same time keeping your swing objectives uppermost in your mind.
It's clearly destructive to your game if your attempt to gain distance instead results in sliced and topped shots.
It is impossible to isolate the exact moment at which the downswing of the arms becomes the release action of the lower arms and hands prior to impact.
It's also a fairly pointless exercise, too.
However, as a reasonable guide, most club golfers would achieve best results in initiating the release with the club shaft at 10 o'clock, as shown in Diagram C. This is most likely to return the clubface squarely on impact (Diagram D).
TURN SHOULDER AT 90 DEGREES TO THE SPINE
Most golfers are fully aware of the importance of the basic fundamentals involved in taking the address position.
If you can aim squarely, hold the club correctly and form a good stance, then you give yourself the best chance to strike the ball correctly.
A good swing is a product of a good address position.
A poor set-up means you are bound to fail.
The stance incorporates body alignment and body posture.
These two factors will dictate your swing shape and direction.
At address, you should aim the shoulders along a line parallel to your ball-to-target line.
The posture is set by angling the body forward from the waist and flexing the knees to keep the weight even between toes and heels.
Balance is a result of good alignment and posture (Diagram A).
As the backswing progresses, the shoulders turn around the spine angle which is pre-set at the address position.
Think of this shoulder turn as exactly that, and avoid any idea of a tilting action.
At the top of the backswing, note how the left shoulder has turned and is now in front of and slightly underneath the chin.
By keeping the shoulder turn at 90 degrees to the spine angle, your body posture will remain constant throughout the swing (Diagram B)
One of the best exercises you can use to develop this important body turn movement is to place a club behind your neck and hold it in position with your hands.
Adopt your normal posture by angling forward from the waist and sitting slightly through the knees.
Simply turn 90 degrees each way with the shoulders, concentrating on maintaining your spine angle and keeping your head steady.
CHECK THE TARGET BY ROTATING THE HEAD
As we have outlined, every golf shot you ever play on a golf course — and on the practice ground, too — demands that you adhere to a set routine, never until you have gone through that routine.
Your routine will have a specific order.
Once you have stood behind the ball and visualised the shot, you will probably aim the clubface first, then hold the club and finally adopt the stance.
Once in the set-up position, you will need to check your alignment by rotating your head towards the target.
Maintain your upper body alignment and posture while checking, as shown in Diagram A. Try to avoid lifting the head and upper body in order to confirm your alignment because this will turn the body towards the target, and re-setting the correct position is difficult.
Once you have established your body posture, remember to rotate the head to see the target.
PUTTING — THE SYSTEMATIC APPROACH
You should develop a putting routine that never varies on the greens.
You will notice that most tournament professionals have such a routine, although their individual mannerisms will differ.
Assess the direction first
The line of putt is the first consideration.
At this point the speed of the putt is almost irrelevant.
Use your imagination to ‘see’ the ball rolling along a line you consider is correct.
Try to anticipate what the ball will do, especially if the greens are contoured.
This is most important with approach putts where the intention is to leave yourself an easy second putt as opposed to going boldly at the hole.
Experience on a variety of putting surfaces is the only way to learn this judgment skill.
Watch your playing partners' putt if it is on a similar line to your own.
Secondly, add the distance
Once you have anticipated the direction, you now assess the distance of putt, plus the relevant allowances for upslopes, downslopes and speed of the putting surface.
You are relying upon experience to judge the roll, but use the information available by looking at the contours of the green.
Applying the systematic approach
You now have an aiming point in your head for the direction.
Precede every putt with a practice stroke or two.
The value of the practice stroke is to rehearse the distance of the putt.
You should be trying to match a certain backswing length to a specific length and speed of putt.
The practice stroke need not involve any thought of direction because the aim has previously been established.
Now you address the golf ball, concentrating only on aim until the clubface position has been established.
The concentration itself is solely on distance.
Try this putting idea as it can ease the difficulty of computing distance and direction together once you have addressed the ball.
RELIEF FROM LATERAL WATER HAZARDS
A lateral water hazard is defined as such when the Committee considers it is impracticable to drop a ball behind the hazard as Rule 26–1b states.
Generally speaking, lateral water hazards run parallel with the line of play of a golf hole and they should be clearly marked with either red stakes or red lines.
A ball is deemed to be in a lateral water hazard if it lies between the parallel red stakes marking the boundary of the lateral water hazard, whether or not the ball lies in the water or on the surrounding bank.
The ditch may be completely dry in summer months, but the rule still applies.
OPTION No.1.
The first option is to play the ball as it lies.
It may not actually lie in the water, but it still lies within the boundary of the lateral water hazard.
Remember not to ground your club at the address position as this will incur a two-stroke penalty in stroke-play or the loss of a hole in match-play.
OPTION No.2.
You may return to where the original stroke was played and, under a one-stroke penalty, play another ball.
If the original stroke was played from the teeing ground, the ball may be re- teed.
OPTION No.3.
The third option is to drop the penalty of one stroke, as far back as you wish, keeping the ball's entry into the hazard (marked B) between the spot on which the ball is dropped and the hole.
The ball may be dropped at any point along this line.
Of course, these are the same three options for a ball in a regular water hazard, but from a lateral water hazard there are an additional two options.
Options 4 and 5 allow you to drop on either side of the lateral water hazard, not nearer the hole and within two club lengths of the point marked B, where the ball first entered the hazard.
For this rule you would use a point marked C as the reference to measure two club lengths if the ball is dropped on the opposite side of the hazard.
Again the penalty in each case is one stroke.
PUTTING THINGS INTO PERSPECTIVE
Lewine Mair talks to LPGA star Cathy Gerring about her love-hate relationship with professional golf.
Cathy Gerring, who pocketed the first prize of £500,000 in the recent World Championship of Women's Golf at the exquisite Urban Cely course near Paris, is a golfer apart, a player who sparkles with or without her clubs.
As Belle Robertson, the sextuple Scottish Champion would say, this new star of the LPGA circuit has that brand of ‘cheek and desire’ given to very few.
In Europe Laura Davies has it, as has Florence Descampe and, in amateur golf, Helen Dobson.
There is perhaps no better illustration of Cathy's ability to seize her chances than that one attaching to one of her practice sessions at Jack Nicklaus' Muirfield Village, the club where her husband is the head professional.
On looking up between shots, the Solheim Cup player found that her companion on the practice ground was none other than Nicklaus himself.
She stood back to watch the great man from behind and, in watching, became progressively more fidgety as she itched to comment on his alignment.
Nicklaus, sensing that she had something on her mind, offered an encouraging, ‘Don't be afraid to speak up!’
Whereupon, the 29 year-old Mrs. Gerring launched into her theory that he had his club open at the address at the same time as his body was facing well left of the target.
Nicklaus took note of Cathy's instruction, and later gave her the credit when he found himself back to his old form in that week's skins' game.
The best of Mrs. Gerring did not emerge until a year after the birth of her son, Zachary, in 1988.
It was less a matter of some technical revelation than the fact that, after a difficult first 18 months with Zachary, this once fiery soul learned to put things into perspective.
Zachary needed as many as three operations on his ears and further surgery on his adenoids.
‘At the end of that,’ she asks, ‘how could I justify getting upset at a duffed shot?’
On the course, she stands out for her softly, rather than aggressively, spiked hair, a finish with the driver which, like Arnold Palmer's, tells you precisely how much she has given to the shot, and an unusually generous attitude towards the opposition.
Again she is the reverse of self-centred off the course.
To everyone's amazement, she rushed to the defence of the driver who, in ferrying her to and from the course at Cely, had been so late on the second day as to put her in real fear of missing her starting time.
He had been sacked by the sponsors when finally he arrived at the course.
Then, half an hour later, he was taken away by the police for the way in which, in his bid to make amends, he had gone through a red light.
On learning of his plight, Cathy, a graduate in criminology from Ohio State University, had gone at once to speak out on his behalf.
Her caring approach on the course has its background in the golfing upbringing she had from her father, Bill Kratzert, who, like her husband and her brother, is a professional.
‘From the word go,’ she says, ‘my father impressed on me that there is nothing finer than to beat someone playing well.’
Held back for a long time by wild hitting, she has accepted in the last 12 months that there are occasions when she must suppress the urge to attack everything flat out.
It was at the 9th hole in the second round of the World Championship of Women's Golf that this recently acquired touch of caution came into its own.
Having caught the left rough off the tee, she was shaping to hit the kind of second shot over trees and lakes which would have had Laura Davies drooling.
Her husband, who was carrying her clubs and who, in golfing terms, is very much of the conservative half of the partnership, had refrained from protesting, presumably on the grounds that his wife had been playing well and was ‘up’ for the shot.
Just at that moment when everyone was crossing their fingers on her behalf, so she looked up and told Jim that she felt she would do better to play out at an angle.
This she did, knocking her ball down to that stretch of fairway fronting the green before chipping to 2 feet and making off with a par.
However, there were a handful of occasions at Cely when her husband's restraining influence was very much a factor.
When she was about to remonstrate after hitting a less than perfect iron aboard the 7th green in the final round, Jim put up a salutary hand by way of saying ‘stop’.
She took heed, going on to match par at each of the 7th, 8th and 9th holes on her way to an outward half of 32 which more or less sealed her title.
That she has a personal panel of instructors is something which has allowed her to escape with fewer hours on the practice ground than most.
‘At the end of the round,’ she exclaimed with disarming honesty, ‘I'm tired, hungry and want to go home.’
In truth, it is very much a love-hate relationship she has with the circuit.
She was elated at having pocketed some £400,000 over the season and at the thought of playing in the Solheim Cup, but, also confessed to disliking the life in general and the travel in particular.
‘What worries me most,’ she said, ‘is what all this rushing around is doing to Zachary.
I myself had a wonderful childhood playing with friends at home and I want the same for him.’
As she was seeing things in the wake of her Paris win, she plans to compete for three or four more years before having a second child and giving up the tournament scene.
It wouldn't, she promised, be a difficult decision.
Maybe not, but one suspects that it will be one which those who have the interest of the LPGA Tour at heart, could find hard to take.
There aren't too many Cathy Gerrings on Tour or even in the pipeline.
Gerring is elated at having pocketed some £400,000 over the season
Gerring's more cautious approach is paying off.
‘There is nothing better than to beat someone playing well,’ she says.
SO YOU WANT TO BE A PRO…
Jane Carter discovers that life on a WPG European Tour isn't always as easy as it seems
It is about this time of year that life at the headquarters of the Women Professional Golfers' European Tour gets a little hectic for Membership Secretary Marion Davies.
Not only is she busy sending out subscription forms to the existing 220 members, she is also coping with the dozens of enquiries from amateurs all over the world looking to turn professional.
It is currently a relatively simple matter to become a member of the European Tour.
Unlike the men's Tour, or indeed the LPGA in America, prequalifying has not yet been introduced, although many agree that the day is not too long in coming.
The attraction of nearly £2 million in prize-money and nine months of travelling throughout Europe is proving too strong for many, and the Tour receives dozens of telephone calls and letters from girls wanting to join the paid ranks.
They are naturally delighted that their Tour is at last receiving world recognition as a viable and attractive way of earning a living.
It was only 10 years ago that the prize-money was less than £80,000, but it has taken giant strides forward and the future looks even brighter.
But would-be proettes should be warned to think carefully before taking such an important step.
Life is not as glamorous as it is cracked up to be on Tour.
Although the players at the top are earning vast sums of money, there are many girls who are barely making a living.
Life always rewards the winners.
The better you are the more you win, and, consequently, you face less pressure and so it becomes easier to win.
It is a vicious circle which takes some breaking, as many girls on Tour would be the first to admit.
Marion, who has worked at the Tour for the past two years and recently took over as Membership Secretary, says: ‘We are pleased that so many girls want to join our Tour, but we are also anxious to ensure that they have thought through all the consequences and they are sure that they want to be a professional.
Once the forms are in, then they lose their amateur status and probationary members are on trial to make sure their play is up to standard.
If it is not, then they are asked to leave for a year and are in a state of limbo, unable to play on the Tour and unable to play in amateur events.’
The Tour is continually revising its membership rules.
Probationary members must be more than 18 years of age and an amateur must hold a current handicap of 1; if already a professional, she must be supported by a reference from her professional golf association or Tour.
A player must serve a minimum of 12 consecutive months before becoming a full member.
Even if she manages to get through her first probationary year, life is not an easy ride for full members either.
Performance records are judged on the same criteria as above.
If they fail to meet the playing average, they are told to ‘go away and practise’ for the next four weeks and are unable to enter any tournaments.
It is certainly a tough lesson, but one which seems to work as the scoring averages are improving season by season on the Tour.
Executive Director of the Tour, Joe Flanagan, says: ‘It is not a pleasant task to tell a girl that she is off the Tour for the next four weeks, or in a few cases, a whole year.
They can no longer play in our events or amateur tournaments and just have to go and practise and play whenever they can.
‘I am sure it must be one of the most frustrating things to have to go through, but we have to maintain standards as a Tour, and that is why it is vital that a player is sure she is capable of meeting the performance requirements before joining us.’
It is knowing that you are capable enough which is the difficult thing.
A look at a player's amateur record is some indication of her calibre, but even that is no certainty of success.
Players with impeccable amateur records have struggled to make a living as professionals and no-one is quite sure why.
It is noticeable that opportunities to play in 72-hole stroke play events on the amateur circuits are few and far between, whereas a professional will play week in and week out on the professional circuit.
A good round followed by a poor one often means a missed cut, and it is very difficult to put two rounds together on consecutive days if you have not been used to doing so.
The Tour tries to create opportunities by staging ‘open-events’ and allotting places to amateurs invited by the sponsor or who qualify under the relevant handicap rules.
These are very popular on the continent and a number of players take advantage of the opportunity to match themselves against the professional to see just how good their game is over 72 holes of stroke play.
One thing is certain, the pressure of playing in an amateur event, even for your country, is never quite the same as playing for money.
It is clear that for a girl to have any chance of succeeding, she must play the Tour in some style.
If she is staying in a comfortable hotel, has a caddie to look after her needs at the golf course and can travel on the packages arranged by the Tour's travel operators, then she is more likely to be able to devote her full concentration on her golf.
Her only worry is paying for it all.
Even leading a relatively simple life on Tour would have cost around £12,000 in expenses alone if a professional had played in all 21 events last season.
Often you can fork out several hundred pounds getting to an event abroad only to miss the cut and earn nothing.
The answer to financial worries is to get a sponsor, but they are very few and far between as a glance down the players' attachments will show you.
Flanagan said: ‘We try wherever possible to put girls in touch with potential sponsors.
We often get enquiries from companies which may not have resources to sponsor a tournament, but are anxious to become involved with women's golf, so we suggest a player sponsorship.
It is entirely up to them who they choose, but we try to pinpoint likely candidates such as professionals from the country or area of the sponsoring company.
It can make life so much easier.
They often give a girl a car or money towards travelling expenses and can help to relieve some of the pressure which builds up when every shot you hit or every putt you miss can cost you money.’
When all is said and done, the attraction of earning a living playing a sport you enjoy is a strong one and it is not hard to understand why some players have to try to make it on the Tour.
Even if not successful, it can still provide some fantastic experiences which will hold a player in good stead for some other career in the game of golf.
Any amateurs who may be thinking of turning professional should contact Marion Davies at the WPG European Tour, The Tytherington Club, Macclesfield, Cheshire SK10 2JP.
General Enquiries in no way affect amateur status and all are treated in confidence.
Life on Tour can be filled with anguish for even the most experienced and successful players.
Helen Alfredsson ruminates over another loose shot, while Florence Descampe and Corinne Dibnah find it hard to contain their emotions.
A QUESTION OF FINESSE
Lewine Mair reflects back on the Solheim Cup and finds that there isn't as great a divide in women's golf as the matches led us to believe.
Although there are girls who talk glibly of how they intend to reach the top of the women's professional game by the age of 25, and from there move on to marriage and a family, the Solheim Cup served as a salutary reminder that no-one should expect quick results.
In truth, the statistics forthcoming from the winning American side at Lake Nona were such as to suggest that there is no profession in which a girl will take longer to reach her peak.
The eight players who made up America's team ranged in age from Cathy Gerring, 29 to Pat Bradley in her 40th year.
All eight have concentrated on golf and travelled from one tournament to the next since leaving college, while only two of them, Cathy Gerring and Nancy Lopez have got married along the way.
In other words, women's professional golf is a career which calls for far more in the way of personal sacrifice than most are prepared to acknowledge.
Another point to hit home was that in those cases where girls are prepared to give up everything to play on the Tour, they might as well do the job properly.
The American circuit is nowadays so tough that its players mostly have no option but to work if they want to hang on to their players' cards.
They simply cannot afford to sit back when, each year, some 300 youngsters are straining at the leash to get into their midst via the Qualifying Schools.
In Europe, where there is as yet no such depth, it is all too easy for the professionals to get complacent.
Indeed, it is not uncommon to hear a tournament player of four or five years' standing confess that she has not yet given herself a fair chance.
Those who during the week at Lake Nona took the opportunity to ask questions about the running of America's LPGA circuit, are convinced that it is to the players' advantage that they leave the running of the association to its staff while they themselves concentrate on their golf.
The LPGA, for instance, does not have the equivalent of the WPGET's Tournament Committee, a body which writes a report on every event played on the European calendar.
It is a largely pointless exercise and one which, as you would suspect, hardly helps to foster good relations between staff and players.
Vivien Saunders, who founded the Women's Tour in Britain, will tell you that it was always thus: ‘In the early days we were advised by the PGA that ours should be a democratic organisation and that the players should have a voice.
‘In retrospect, we should never have allowed that to happen.
Instead of promoting a situation in which everyone is itching to do something positive for the good of the Tour, we merely ended up with a handful of players who did nothing but complain.’
Vivien is not alone in thinking that the European professionals are making a mistake in looking for the same privileges and superstar treatment that is nowadays meted out to their American sisters.
The Europeans, she says, have not begun to pay their dues as the Americans did in the '60s and early '70s.
‘At that time,’ recalls Vivien, who was the first British player to try her hand on the American Tour, ‘the LPGA needed all the publicity and good will it could get.
As a result, the players were sent ahead to the various tournament sites to give clinics to members and generally to whip up interest.
‘It didn't matter whether you were at the top of the money list or at the bottom.
You were expected to pull your weight in this direction and there was no question of anyone getting paid.’
One would have to say that the standard of dress on the European Tour is nowadays not too far removed from that in the States, bearing in mind that the climate on that side of the Atlantic makes it easier to look the part.
In truth, there were those in the American camp who admitted that they had to bow to the Europeans where the Solheim Cup uniforms were concerned.
However, some of our Tour players should aim to be better ambassadors.
For instance, some of those members of the WPGET who went to support their colleagues should have thought twice about attending clubhouse functions in shorts and T-shirts.
With regard to the golf played by both teams in the Solheim Cup, it is worth reiterating that the American Captain, Kathy Whitworth, had no hesitation in saying that the Europeans were on a par with their opponents in terms of technique.
‘There is no reason why they should not be,’ she said, pointing to how they had access to precisely the same teaching methods.
If anything, the Europeans were the longer and stronger off the tee, while they were no less accurate in that department.
The winning American margin — 11½–4½ — was chiefly the result of finesse on and around the greens.
As Catherine Lacoste de Prado observed at the time, the Europeans must become far more aggressive in this area.
The players knew it for themselves.
Indeed, it was a subject which Alison Nicholas and Laura Davies brought up the following week as they watched Ian Woosnam going for his putts in the World Cup at the nearby Grand Cypress Resort.
Nor was Vivien Saunders, who recently won her second British Coach of the Year award, being wise after the event when she talked of how, in her teaching, she emphasises nothing so much as that a youngster should attack the hole.
‘This lack of attack,’ said the former British Open Champion and Curtis Cup golfer, ‘has always been a big British failing.
It's something we must put behind us and the time to start is in winter conditions.
In other words, NOW.’
‘The Europeans are on a par with the Americans in terms of technique.’
Kathy Whitworth
BIGGER AND BETTER
Elspeth Burnside looks at how the growth of the women's professional circuit has revitalised the amateur game.
The success of the European women's circuit is producing a new breed of amateur golfer — young, super-fit, full-time players who travel the world in pursuit of their sport.
A British international cap has long been regarded as the ultimate achievement for the amateur golfer.
But since the emergence of the Women Professional Golfers' European Tour 12 years ago, it is more likely to be thought of as a stepping stone to a lucrative professional career.
Last year's Great Britain and Ireland Curtis Cup side reflects the new, youthful image.
Six of the side — Julie Hall, Helen Dobson, Elaine Farquharson, Catriona Lambert, Kathryn Imrie and Linzi Fletcher — are all some way short of their 25th birthdays, while Helen Wadsworth, 26, and Vicki Thomas, 36, are hardly in the  Methuselah class!
Of the group, Dobson and Imrie have already passed over to the paid ranks.
How many more will make the shift before the 1991 WPG European Tour gets under way in April?
For those who remain on the amateur circuit, three international events, all taking place in Britain, will be the highlights of the 1991 season.
A five-strong British team will contest the Commonwealth Tournament at Northumberland Golf Club from 6 — 8 June; Great Britain and Ireland take on the Continent of Europe for the Vagliano Trophy at Nairn from 20 — 21 September, and the four Home countries will be among the line-up for the European Team Championship at Wentworth from 10 — 14 July.
The Commonwealth Tournament, which includes sides from Canada, Australia and New Zealand, takes place on a four-year cycle, and Britain has not lifted the trophy since it lasted hosted the event, at Ganton, in 1975.
Liz Boatman, who played professionally in the States before being reinstated as an amateur, captains the side for a second time and is delighted at the way the growth of the pro circuit has revitalised the amateur game.
‘More girls are now attracted to the sport as they realise they could have a career in golf,’ she stated.
‘As a result, the standard of competition, the number of tournaments and the list of entries are all constantly escalating.’
However, pleasure at the growth of the amateur game is slightly tempered by an inevitable feeling of what you gain on the roundabout you lose on the swings.
‘We lose so many girls to the professional ranks it means we are constantly having to start again as regards team selection,’ continued Mrs. Boatman.
The knock-on effect of the advancement of the women's game has also led to refreshing developments at girls' level.
Training squads and programmes are now part and parcel of the structures within each of the national associations.
In Scotland, a major drive involving the county associations, which included the setting up of regional training squads has already paid dividends with the emergence of teenage players of the calibre of Myra McKinlay and Janice Moodie.
McKinlay won the British Girls' Championship as a 16 year-old in 1989, and Moodie, 17, claimed the British Under-18, Scottish Under-21 and the Wilson PGA Junior Stroke Play titles in a glorious August last year.
Both girls represented their country at girls' and senior level last season, and must be in line for an appearance at the European Championships at Wentworth in July.
The new, fresh faces will also have the nine-strong line-up for the biennial Vagliano event at Nairn in their sights this year, and it will be hoping to help the home side lift the Trophy for a fifth time in succession.
Selection for the team events will be based on results in the ever growing events' list.
The British Women's Amateur Championship, at Pannal in June, remains the top event on the calendar, while the amateurs also relish the opportunity to rub shoulders with the pros in the British Women's Open in August.
The 1991 amateur circuit will  kick off in traditional fashion with the Roehampton Gold Cup next month, while established tournaments like the Astor, Wentworth and Critchley Salvers, the St. Rule and Helen Holm Trophies, plus the ever-growing list of 36-hole ‘open’ tournaments, make life as an amateur a carefully planned operation.
Sally Hepburn, Tournament Secretary of the Ladies' Golf Union at St.Andrews has an annual meeting with her neighbours, the Royal and Ancient Golf Club, to sort through the maze of men's and women's British amateur events, and admits that it is a task that grows harder each season.
‘Trying to fit everything into the calendar without having any major clashes is the biggest problem I face each year.’
Mrs Boatman will certainly not be expecting her potential charges at Northumberland to be chasing all over the country in search of titles.
‘The players must pace themselves.
There is no way they can play all the tournaments,’ she insisted.
The appointment of Bernard Gallacher as British National Coach three years ago, was another boost for the women's game —‘He has done a great deal of good,’ confirmed Sally Hepburn — and the LGU was delighted when the Wentworth professional agreed to continue his duties this season, despite the distraction of captaining the European Ryder Cup side at Kiawah Island in September.
And, in this modern era, the squad sessions are not restricted to instruction on technique.
Diet, general fitness, golfing psychology and sports injuries all feature among the discussion topics and have their part to play in the overall picture.
‘The standard of women's amateur golf is certainly improving all over the country,’ continued Sally Hepburn.
‘Our success in events like the Curtis Cup, and the development of the pro circuit, have all helped to create greater interest and more women are taking up the game.’
The changing complexion of women's golf raises doubts as to whether the amateur game will ever again witness the like of Belle Robertson or Mary McKenna, who made seven and nine Curtis Cup appearances respectively.
In the modern era, players of their calibre would surely have followed the professional trail.
However, as the WPGET ventures into a 13th season, it is pleasing to reflect that it has been lucky not just for some, but for the majority of women golfers, both amateur and professional.
COPING WITH SLOPES
Jane Forrest explains how to play from sloping lies.
Playing from sloping lies causes problems if you don't feel comfortable at the address position.
The secret of playing these shots is to adopt the stance you are comfortable with.
If you try to change your swing, you are making the shot much more difficult.
Allowing for the differences in stance has far more chance of success: then it is just a question of deciding which way the ball will fly from certain lies.
If the ball is below my feet, or I am playing from a downhill lie, the ball will fly to the right, so I aim left and allow the ball to cut into the target.
The opposite applies if the ball is above my feet, or I am hitting from an uphill lie.
I am more likely to hit the ball to the left, so I just allow for this to happen and I don't have to make any swing changes.
When playing from downhill and uphill lies, I tilt my shoulders so that they are parallel to the ground, putting more weight on my lower foot.
This adjustment compensates for the slope and allows me to swing normally.
These lies also alter the loft of the club; a downhill lie will make a 5-iron into a 4-iron or even a 3-iron, whereas an uphill lie makes the club more lofted.
So I allow for this when selecting which club to play.
If the ball is above my feet, I grip down the club to feel more comfortable.
When the ball is below my feet, I bend over a little more.
Often the way you naturally stand to the ball is correct as your body automatically adjusts to the slope.
It is more a matter of knowing you are correct and believing it.
If you are confident and you feel comfortable, you will swing positively and smoothly.
GET INTO GEAR
Jane Carter reviews some of the latest equipment and clothing
EQUIPMENT
Tommy Armour is proud of its top-of-the-range ladies' clubs, the 845s Silver Scot, and having tried a set I can understand why.
As an 11-handicapper who does not play quite as often as she would like, I found the clubs gave me more consistency and greater ‘feel’.
A great deal of this is down to the fact that the sweet spot is in exactly the same position throughout the set.
Therefore, less consistent players are likely to find a more forgiving result when they ‘miss’ the sweet spot.
The clubs can be custom-fitted to the individual, which is another persuasive selling point, and I liked the way they sat at address and the fact that they were easy to align.
They are not cheap, but they have features that the better player wants and the average player needs.
The 845s Metal Woods complete the set and again I found that their perimeter-weighting seemed to improve my accuracy.
Tommy Armour may not be a manufacturer that immediately comes to mind, but its clubs are well worth considering for players of all levels.
For further information, contact Tommy Armour Golf (Scotland) Ltd or your nearest stockist.
Wilson has catered for lady golfers for the past 60 years, but the current range for ladies is its biggest yet.
All the Wilsons ladies' clubs incorporate features designed to help women players improve and enjoy their game.
These, say the company, include shorter, more flexible shafts, lighter swing-weights, thinner grips, extra loft and a lighter overall weight of club.
In addition to the Patti Berg range are ladies' versions of the 1200 Gear Effect with special cosmetics, and a modified X-31 model with graphite shaft options.
For further details on the Wilson range for ladies, contact your local golf professional.
CLOTHING
ONE UP GOLF, based in Loughborough, has produced a coordinated range of shorts, culottes, trousers, skirts, shirts, sweatshirts and knitwear for summer 1991.
It has used the ‘in’ colours for the summer — gold, olive, turquoise, pink and navy — and many of the styles feature appliqué embroidery to give it that feminine look.
There is also an emphasis on checked fabrics, matched with plain colours.
Most of the garments are made in 100% cotton and are therefore practical and washable, as well as being highly fashionable.
For more details of its range and local stockists, contact One Up Golf.
Teenager Barbara Sleeman made an explosive start when she decided to open an exclusive ladies' golfwear company, ON THE GREENS.
She broke her shoulder as a human cannonball on Noel Edmonds' ill-fated ‘Late, Late Breakfast Show’, and she had no sooner recovered from that when a car accident delayed the venture for another two years!
‘It was probably a blessing in disguise,’ admits Barbara, now fully fit and based in Oxfordshire.
‘I had ideas, but no experience.
I've had plenty of time to prepare!’
As she lists some impressive firsts since On The Greens was finally launched two years ago.
Harrods accepted its first design collection in its first year.
And On The Greens was the first to sponsor both teams selected by the English Senior Ladies' Golf Association.
INSTRUCTION
Women wanting to learn how to play golf or to improve their game can receive instruction from a new video featuring Diane Barnard, one of Europe's top players.
The tape, entitled Golf For Women, also features Diane's coach and mentor Nigel Blenkarne, and takes lady players through all the basic shots from tee to green.
The duo stress the need for the correct equipment, clothing and etiquette on the course, but, above all, show how the game can be great fun if played properly.
The hour-long tape is available through golf pro shops before its nationwide retail release next March.
The Curse of the Late Hit
Ken Adwick dispels the notion that ‘late hitting’ is good for your game.
The late hit is supposed to be an asset.
But it is really a curse.
The trouble is that the finest tournament starts appear in photographs to be hitting late.
In reality, they are not and the camera is lying.
In fact, the problem for the vast majority of amateurs is that instead of thinking about hitting late, they should concentrate on hitting sooner.
If the club golfer, having read that late hitting is desirable, deliberately seeks an action he is in trouble.
Late hitting is the most natural way of striking a golf ball.
But it is the wrong way if you wish to improve.
The right side gets busy too soon and turns from the top of the backswing.
There is a stiff-wristed action and movements become wooden and lack flow.
There are two forms of late hitting, one where a player is deliberately trying to achieve it, and the other where the player does not realise he is hitting too late.
In the main it is the superstar golfers that the camera catches in the classic position halfway on the downswing with the hands almost in the hitting area and the clubhead still up by the right shoulder.
It is one of the most dramatic action pictures in golf.
But these photographs are misleading to the amateur who forgets that he is looking at a ‘frozen’ action captured part of a swing.
He then tries to emulate this so-called late-hit position.
This produces a stiff action within the swing, followed by disastrous results.
It is impossible to play good golf simply by studying a series of action pictures.
You have to understand the swing first.
It is an error to base your play on ‘frozen’ action shots.
Such pictures can be classed as ‘tips’.
We have all been given golf tips at some time or other while playing, and some tips do work.
But in this instance they highlight only one phase of the star's action.
And the picture which is usually the most eye- catching is of the champion halfway on his downswing with his wrists fully charged (in a cocked position).
It is wrongly called the ‘late hit’.
You can call it a delayed action, if you like, but it is never the former.
Hitting late occurs when a player has almost turned his hips and shoulders towards the target, with his hands past the ball.
At the same time the clubhead has still to make contact.
That is the fault of the average club man.
Such a position makes the player hit across the ball from out- to-in.
But there is no relation between what I call ‘delayed action’ and the ‘late hit’.
My teaching has always been that the way to good golf is the get the clubhead to the ball in time.
That is…sooner .
How do you get to the ball in time?
There is only one person who can make that happen — and that is you.
When a high-speed camera is used, it produces an action picture which gives the impression of illustrating a posed position.
That is particularly misleading on the halfway back to the ball position.
It would be more advantageous to study an action picture which has been captured at a lower camera speed.
You would then see that the clubhead and most of the shaft are ‘blurred’ giving an increased sense of speed.
From the blurred picture you can see the vital point when the clubhead is catching up with the hands.
That fact is missing from the high-speed photo.
Too many club players look at a star man's ‘delayed action’ position and try to copy it.
Unfortunately, the handicap golfer does not have the handspeed to get the club to the ball soon enough and almost any bad shot can result .
What the high-speed camera doesn't show as it freezes the action is that the top pros have the skill to make the clubhead catch up with their hands and arrive at the same time at impact…as when at address.
However, through misguidedly trying to reproduce the ‘delayed action’ position, the handicap player's hands will arrive at the ball well in front of the clubhead with the clubface open.
When this happens, the shot is either pushed or sliced out to the right with no distance.
This hand-in-front action, but with the clubface square at impact, is actually desirable when playing the wedge or punch-type shot into a stiff breeze (the club loft has been reduced).
It is done to keep the ball low, and can increase backspin, almost as is the clubhead is being dragged through the shot.
If you see a picture of a golfing great with his hands well in front of the clubhead at impact, you can be sure that he is either playing the type of shot I have just mentioned or he could be squeezing the ball out of a tight lie.
My purpose in this series, however, is not to write about specialised shots, but rather to put the spotlight on faulty shots, and explain how to overcome them.
To get into the correct impact position, the clubhead must start to accelerate right from the commencement of the downswing .
Release it, let it go, and the hands turn on full power from waist-high to impact.
You cannot release the clubhead too soon.
This is not hitting from the top.
That is the subject for another article.
The hips at impact have started to turn towards the target, but the right shoulder is still back and out of the way.
At the most it is parallel to the intended line of flight.
This proves that a good player's clubhead will beat his body back to the ball and will arrive in time.
Always feel you are going to wait for the club to arrive and keep your head behind the shot.
Or, as Henry Cotton would say, ‘Hit past your chin.’
There is no need to consciously cock the wrists on the way back.
In a free swing this will happen.
They will cock to their maximum at the start if the downswing and if no effort is made to make the clubhead catch up,they will remain in this position through impact.
If you attempt to swing with  stiff-like wrists there will be no flowing motion.
It is then that the ‘late hit’ I have described will happen and a bad shot will be the punishment.
So late hitting is a myth, yet I still get pupils coming to me who adopt a ‘late-hit’ position.
The only reason for a backswing is to take the club far enough to gather sufficient speed to hit the ball an appreciable distance.
It is the same as swinging an axe to chop down a tree.
It's the distance the axe is swung back (without overdoing it) that allows power and speed to be gathered on the way down to impact.
When the handicap player copies the picture and ‘freezes’ his movement, he might as well only swing back as far as that.
His wrists are in a cocked position and he has no time to release the clubhead with any force.
Invariably, he will hit the ball at the speed his shoulders are turning.
The subject of wrist-cocking could use a little explanation.
It takes place automatically when the clubhead is swung correctly to the top of the backswing, but the wrists do not cock fully until they are on their way back to the ball.
The reason has to do with the change of direction and increasing the swing-weight.
The clubhead is changing from going up to coming down and the resultant force is so great that the wrists break more fully…if you're relaxed.
What you have to remember if tempted to copy any ‘late-hit’ pose, is that the professional will move his clubhead through almost half a circle while his hands may only have moved about 18 inches from the right to left thigh, and then only because he has already got the clubhead moving fast.
That is beyond the ability of most club men.
It is much better if the player knows subconsciously all the time where the clubhead is and makes sure that it gets to the ball at the same moment as the hands — a similar position as when at address.
If you try ‘late-hitting’, then you will develop maximum clubhead speed long after impact, and you will probably suffer from a slice.
As for the man who is hitting too late as an involuntary natural action, the usual causes are a steep start to his backswing, turning into the shot too soon — usually caused by slogging, swaying to the left during the downswing, a stiff-wristed action, and not releasing the clubhead soon enough — with hands arriving forward of the ball.
The cures include starting the clubhead back low to the turf on a gentle curve.
This sets up a desirable chain of movements so giving a correct position at the top of the backswing which allows the player to swing the clubhead back to the ball on the right path, that is, from inside-to-straight, or as a theory has it, from in-to-out.
To avoid turning the body into the shot too soon, swing the clubhead from the top of the backswing so that it moves, as just mentioned, from inside-to-out, and make sure you release the clubhead along that line.
CHECK POINTS FOR LATE HITTING.
1.
Don't attempt to copy action pictures ‘frozen’ by the high-speed camera.
2.
Check to make sure your basic set-up is correct before starting your swing.
This is important.
3.
Check the start of your backswing.
The clubhead must start on a gentle curve low to the turf.
4.
Check your downswing.
Make sure that you are swinging the clubhead from in-to-out.
5.
Check for sway.
Your body must not sway to the left during the downswing.
Slogging could be the cause.
6.
Check commencement of the downswing.
Release the clubhead from the start for maximum speed at impact.
Hitting late occurs when a player has almost turned his hips and shoulders towards the target, with his hands past the ball.
The transition from backswing to downswing is similar to a stagecoach driver whipping his horse team.
It is natural that the change in direction from upswing to downswing, plus the swing- weight of the clubhead, will automatically cock your wrists.
It is a natural ‘flail like’ action and has to be neutralised by getting the clubhead back to the ball simultaneously with the hands.
WHIPLASH
A blurred picture taken with a slow-speed camera shows that the clubhead has, indeed, caught up with the hands at address, a fact that the high-speed camera fails to detect.
This is a common fault of players who try to delay the hit: the hands arrive at the ball well in front of the clubhead with the clubface open.
The result is either a slice or a pushed shot.
The backswing can be compared to chopping down a tree with and axe; power and speed come from the distance the axe is swung back.
The good player will be in the same position at impact as he was at address (above left), while the bad player's hands will be well forward of the ball at impact (above right).
Letters TO THE EDITOR
WALKING TO SUCCESS
SIR — The late, great Mr. X, of whom there has never been a more acute analyst of the golf swing, was always emphatic about the ‘right shin post’, as he described it, being an essential requisite of a good swing.
This is now widely accepted, but Mr.X, strangely, never pursued it further with reference to the anatomy of the individual golfer.
I have a very observant Afrikaans friend, a medical doctor, also a great admirer of Mr.X, who maintains that all top-class golfers walk on the insides of their feet, thus enabling them to maintain the right shin post without effort, as against the bandy-legged player, who finds it very difficult to keep his right knee firm on the backswing.
In fact, I cannot think of any great golfers afflicted with legs divergent from the normal.
The only ones who might qualify are Ian Woosnam and Sam Torrance, but he wears such baggy trousers that it is difficult to see.
What price a higher handicap for those of us of the bow-legged persuasion.
PAYING FOR THE PRIVILEGE
Sir — Mr. Edminson's letter ‘Equal Play, Equal Pay’ in the November 1990 issue airs the possibility that one way for clubs to find extra subscription income would be to increase the ladies' subscriptions, or, in his words, to ask them ‘to make a more equitable contribution to their golf club's finances’because of their increased activity.
I know of numerous lady golfers who would be delighted to do this, indeed who would be happy to pay exactly the same as the full male members, provided, of course, that they had equal rights on all days of the year.
Mr. Edminson refers also to many of today's lady golfers as being professional ladies earning good salaries and who are therefore well able to pay for the privilege of playing golf two or three times a week.
I, and they, would agree, but such ladies have to be able to play at the weekend.
They are no more able to play during the week because of their careers than men in the same line of business.
Unfortunately for such ladies, a great many clubs operate restrictions over lady members playing at weekends.
This is where the inequality lies.
My suspicion is that the male committees which control the majority of British golf clubs deliberately keep ladies' subscriptions lower than men's in order to have the excuse to maintain the inequality.
The majority of lady golfers meekly tolerate, or even encourage this.
Non-career golfing ladies still comprise a majority of lady members and it probably does not make much practical difference to them not to be able to play on a Saturday or Sunday morning since they have access to the courses at all other times.
To the career ladies in the minority, however, it is thoroughly depressing, particularly when they see numerous retired gentlemen occupying starting times on Saturday and Sunday mornings who have played several times during the week as well.
Some of us younger males unable to play much during the week have similar views on this topic, but that's another story.
Swilken Letter of the Month
INDIANS INVENTED GOLF
Sir — Mr. Jones was correct in claiming that Indians invented golf, although it was, however, the Asiatic and not the Red variety.
This was revealed in March 1990, at the AGM of Ruiru Sports Club, Kenya, by the retiring Captain, Professor K.L. Ormand, and an edited version of the disclosure follows:—
A rough translation of the ancient subscript word ‘pur’ is ‘to hide from’.
Thus the word ‘purdah’ means ‘to hide the women from’.
Ninth century records show that the Maharajah of greater Delhi had a very fine harem of 18 young and nubile wives, who lived in an enclosure of about 20 acres.
Most of his land was flat, except for 18 raised grassed platforms where each wife took tea (note original spelling).
The remaining fixture of the harem was the clubhouse, a building used by the eunuch to keep spare clubs and illicit alcohol.
The wives were a suspicious lot and hid the trinkets and baubles, given to them by the Maharajah for services rendered, from each other.
Each wife secretly dug a hole in which she placed her most valuable possessions.
The hole was known as a ‘pur’.
If the hole contained three items it became known as a pur-3, four items a pur-4, and so on.
As a result of over investment in the Japanese aphrodisiac market, the Maharajah fell upon hard times and suffered from a chronic liquidity crisis.
But, being, a cunning old devil and a bit of a peeping tom,(a purvoyeur), he knew where every valuable had been hidden and late one night he removed everything leaving the holes empty.
On discovery the following morning, the wives were extremely angry and frustrated and broke into the clubhouse, selected a club each and in groups of twos, threes and fours began to search for the Maharajah.
These ladies in full flight scared the pants off the eunuchs who were standing guard on their tees, and who immediately dropped their balls and scarpered with the wives in hot ‘pur’ suit.
The first wife to reach the tee exclaimed, ‘Ugh — what's this disgusting object!’ and promptly took a swipe at it with her club.
Thwack — the ball soared into the air and dropped into the nearest empty hole.
‘Beat that,’ challenged the first wife and the game of golf was born.
Each month the winner of our Swilken Letter of the Month Award receives a beautifully crafted Swilken 19th century replica putter.
GET ORGANISED
Sir — In response to your feature on ‘Course Crisis’ in the December 1990 issue, may I explain what Club Link is doing in this problem area.
It is not enough to simply issue handicap certificates to non- club golfers in the hope that it will solve all of their problems.
This keen and ever growing group within our sport needs regular social golf, competition play and the opportunity to show that club membership is not a necessary requirement for good manners and golf etiquette.
Club Link organises weekly golf days for its members, providing regular social golf with the added benefit of competition play, something non-club golfers cannot enjoy elsewhere.
We do operate a handicap system and certificates are only issued by qualifying at our golf days.
Golf clubs can rest assured that our members are of a standard as suggested by their handicap certificate and not being confronted with a ‘worthless piece of paper.’
This, after all, must surely be the crucial factor when visiting established clubs.
We have certainly found no objection to our society or in the manner we play.
There are plenty of places to play, if you are organised, well disciplined and have a genuine love of the game.
REMEMBERING FRED
Sir — I write in tribute to Fred Daly, the only Irishman to win the Open Championship and certainly one of Erin's finest sportsmen.
He was not only an outstanding golfer, but was one of those rare breed of men possessing the gift of total empathy with all who came into contact with him.
My earliest recollection of Fred was when, as a schoolboy, I watched spellbound as he returned to his home in Belfast holding aloft the old Claret Jug, signifying his victory at Hoylake in 1947.
Everyone associated with the game will know of the numerous titles won by Fred Daly, but possibly many will be interested to know of his achievements in The Open.
He finished second to Henry Cotton at Muirfield in 1948, fourth to Max Faulkner in 1951 at Royal Portrush and twice third to Bobby Locke at Troon and Royal Lytham.
Regardless of all his achievements and fame, he never changed in attitude and throughout his years until his retirement remained loyal to Balmoral Golf Club in Belfast.
If there is a life hereafter, then surely we will find Fred Daly strolling down an Elysian Fairway, whistling in his own inimitable style, his gallery enthralled by the perceptible body sway on the backswing before launching a colossal drive from the tee, enchanted by the purity of his iron play and driven to distraction by precisely 32 lifts of the putter blade from the back to the top of the ball before he sends it with authority into the cup.
Thanks for the memories, Fred.
Ireland is very proud of you.
THE END OF AN ERA
Sir — It was with deep sadness that I heard of the death of Fred Daly, to date the only Irish winner of The Open.
I am sure I am only one of many who will sorely miss this happy-go-lucky golfer.
I was fortunate to see Fred play on many occasions and really admired his carefree style of play, carefree and yet he was probably one of the best iron players I ever saw.
What a contrast to today's robotic, serious-faced professionals diligently pacing to the nearest foot the distances between ball and flag.
Gone are the days when professionals used only their eyes and judgment to decide on club selection.
Unfortunately the game is taken far too seriously these days.
Although the financial awards are great, it is a shame that today's professionals don't appear to be enjoying their sport.
Perhaps the cooler attitude and the rigours of endless hours of practice are the reasons why so many top players find themselves in extended slumps and periods of burn out.
I would much rather see a return to the carefree approach by the like of Ballesteros and Lyle.
If they would only return to playing with their undoubted flair and to enjoying the game as they once did.
I will always have fond memories of watching Fred Daly jauntily striding down the fairways, whistling away and enjoying every aspect of the game.
He was, I fear, the last of an era.
Where are the Fred Dalys of today?
He will always be remembered as one of a kind, a rare British winner of The Open who will be missed by all in the world of golf.
PETER McEVOY
Making The Grade
1991 is a big year for amateur golf.
For the first time Great Britain and Ireland will defend the Walker Cup on home territory.
The match is to be played at Portmarnock Golf Club near Dublin and irrespective of what happens in the pro game this will be one of the main events in the golfing calendar.
In preparing to start my personal campaign for 1991, my mind goes back to Peachtree in Atlanta in August 1989.
Amazingly, the euphoria of the moment when Jim Milligan secured his vital ½ point is still there to be savoured.
All I have to do is to think about it.
Memories are wonderful things in this respect.
Despite this instant recall, however, a lot of water has flowed under the bridge since we lifted the trophy.
It is interesting to reflect on the members of the team and their fortunes since that afternoon in the draining Georgian heat.
The most prominent performer has been Russell Claydon.
He very predictably won the Rookie of the Year award for his performance in finishing 28th on the Volvo Tour in 1990.
He was run very close in the contest by Steve Richardson (29th), who failed to make the Walker Cup side of 1989.
I was never in any doubt that Russell would be successful as a pro and I don't believe we have seen anything like the best of him yet.
He must have his eyes on a Ryder Cup spot.
I, for one, would not bet against it.
Our most successful player at Peachtree was Eoghan O'Connell, a young Irishman who has a future which ought to be the equal of Claydon's.
Eoghan continued to play some amateur golf and then turned professional last summer.
In a very few appearances on the mini tour, he accrued sufficient money to gain his card for the 1991 Volvo Tour.
He should expect as good a season as Russell Claydon.
He was my foursomes partner for a few years in international golf and there is no better way to assess another's playing ability.
I rate him very highly.
Garth McGimpsey, Jim Milligan and myself have all stayed amateur.
I say all, but really it is a sign of the times when only 30% of an amateur team are committed amateurs.
Jim Milligan played a full year in 1990 and gained a place in the Eisenhower Trophy team in New Zealand.
The British and Irish teams was unsuccessful in this event, and this is the first international event not won by a British team for a very long time.
I am sure, however, that Jim will be back competing hard for a place in the Walker Cup side at Portmarnock.
Garth McGimpsey had a sound year with consistent rather than sparkling results.
As his peers will tell you, however, he is a class player, and there are few enough of these in amateur golf.
He was omitted from the Eisenhower Trophy side, a decision which, I suspect, the selectors now regret.
Having played in the previous winning Eisenhower Trophy team with distinction I think he can feel hard done by.
I decided to have a year off myself and played a bare minimum to remind myself of which end of the club to hold.
The rest of the Peachtree side have had a mixed time.
Not one of them has won a card to play on the Volvo Tour.
This is pretty much a disaster at this stage in their careers, and more so when one sees that contenders for places in the 1989 team like Philip Price of Wales, Darren Clarke of Northern Ireland, Keith Jones of Wales and Englishman Roger Wincheater, all won their cards.
It almost certainly suggests that the remaining members of the team have under achieved.
Andy Hare missed gaining his card by 3 shots, so at least he had a good go at it.
But Stephen Dodd, Neil Roderick, Craig Cassells and Darren Prosser all made less successful attempts and not one of them completed all six rounds at Massane in Montpelier.
Now it is quite possible that these players could all bounce back through the mini tour, or through invitations gained in 1991, but it does indicate what an unpredictable game golf is.
It is a very short leap from euphoria to despair and back again.
I understand that the Portmarnock match is to be all-ticket, and while in one way this is a bit of a pity, it is also understandable.
The Irish are so enthusiastic about their golf that you could find crowds of unmanageable proportions if there was not this control.
Anyone who has been to watch the Ryder Cup at The Belfry will know what it is like to be in a large crowd when there are only four matches on the course.
I am a bit worried about Nick Faldo.
I have a theory about British sportsmen.
The more they are cosseted and pampered, the worse they perform.
Tennis is the best example of this.
Plenty of money for the unsuccessful, lots of coaches, plenty of interviews on how tough it all is and no results at all.
Golf, to date, has avoided this, largely due to Ballesteros, Woosnam and others emerging from humble beginnings through their own efforts.
Coaches are popular in the US but this, by my theory, is the reason for their fall from grace as the world's greatest players.
While Faldo has been very successful with David Leadbetter, I am more concerned by the specialist looking after his wrist.
Is this the start of a Martina Navratilova type of entourage?
I certainly hope not, as this could well signal problems for the King of Major Championships.
He has managers, physios and a coach.
What is next?
Take my advice Nick — start to collect your own practice balls again, do your own yardages and spray a little‘Ralgex’ on your wrist.
Time is Up for the Chauvinists
True equality is finally on the way.
‘Or is it?’ asks Jock MacVicar.
Sir Denis he may be but I fancy the measures being poured in the big rooms have been even more liberal (small ‘l’, of course) than before.The Thatcher Years have been splendid ones for a goodly number of golf members throughout this Royal and Ancient land of ours.
Many of them placed their cross opposite her name unhesitatingly, and with a firm hand, for an entire decade.
Then came the men in the grey suits and she was gone.
Today there is little sign of the feminine touch in the Cabinet at Westminster.
The sound of resolutely clicking heels in the corridors of power have been silenced.
And behind closed doors and shuttered windows the boys in the big rooms are celebrating.
If a woman can be relieved of her job as the nation's nanny and replaced by a Chelsea fan, the possibilities are endless.
The ‘90s could be the decade when the Empire strikes back.
All this talk of equality.
It was a load of nonsense.
Be away with it.
For those among us who hanker after the ancient Greek order of men being gods and women slaves, the news has been most encouraging.
The moment to strike may not be so far off.
If women insist on playing a gentleman's game, why not banish them to their own 9-hole course and their own wooden shack?
It was good enough for them in the old days, and it will be good enough for them again, especially with THE woman out of the way.
All this equal rights tosh we have had to endure surely is at an end.
‘Another large one, old boy?’
The celebrations are well under way.
‘Certainly, and since you mentioned the perfectly ludicrous notion of equal rights, what about these other bounders we have allowed into the club in the last few years?
You know the ones I mean, those other minority people.’
But wait.
Danger looms on the other side of the Atlantic.
No, I did not mean that Dan Quayle is about to leap to his feet to make a key-note speech, or that Clive James is considering a follow-up television interview with Mrs Reagan.
I refer to the lively campaign being waged in the United States which is affecting many of their best-known golf clubs.
All clubs which refuse to allow those from minority groups — and that includes women — from becoming members are being removed from the championship rotas of the PGA Tour and the United States Golf Association.
It has affected the famous and the influential.
Tom Watson, for example, resigned from a Kansas City Club because a Jewish businessman was unsuccessful with his application for membership, while the Augusta National has been obliged to accept a black member in order to continue as hosts of The Masters.
So far the campaign has not crossed the Atlantic.
But what America does one day, we usually do a few days, weeks or months later.
It is coming, brothers.
It is coming.
Put away the whisky bottle, unlock the doors and open the windows.
The march of the matriarchal society may have been stopped here in the United Kingdom, but it is but a temporary halt, a moment in time.
Our American sisters are on the move, and they are an unstoppable force.
Sorry, chaps.
Our time is up, or very soon will be.
We ought to have known it from the moment Mrs Thatcher was made a member of the Order of Merit, one of the top 24 in the land.
Good grief, that's better than the Ryder Cup Captain, Bernard Gallacher, did last year.
At least we have one consolation to cling to.
Sir Denis will be able to have his round of golf from now on without the hassle of sneaking clubs out the side exit of Number 10.
TIME IT RIGHT
Vivien Saunders suggests three ways to improve your timing.
Timing is crucial to all players.
Particularly for those who cut or slice the ball, any tendency to try to hit too hard is often disastrous.
Perhaps the most crucial part of the golf swing is the change of directions at the top of the backswing.
The feeling in the backswing has been one of turning the back to the target, and hopefully with a feeling that the right hand is going to generate power through impact.
The danger for almost all golfers is that the right side tends to be dominant at the start of the downswing.
All too easily the hands move out a couple of inches from their position and then attack the ball from the outside.
The real menace is the right shoulder, which at the top of the backswing adopts a potentially powerful position.
The right shoulder needs to be held back and kept out of the backswing as long as possible.
The most common error from the top of the backswing is for the right arm and shoulder to push forward, for the right side to unwind prematurely, and for the cut across, out-to-in action to be set.
There are several concepts one can use to delay this unwind.
The correct feeling should be one of turning away, holding the right side back and ‘whooshing’ the clubhead into impact.
Here are the various key thoughts that I use with pupils to try to produce the right action.
It is worth seeing which one means most to you and then experimenting to produce the correct inside attack into impact.
THE THREE HORSE RACE
My first concept, particularly for using a driver, is of a three horse race.
It is all about timing the action, curbing any tendency to try to hit too hard, and waiting for the clubhead.
When you slice the ball, particularly if trying to hit too hard, the body wins, the hands come second and the poor old clubhead trails through third, usually in a wide open position.
The correct feeling must be one of turning away sufficiently and then staying turned away, holding the right side back and making the clubhead win the race, followed by the hands and with the body action then pulled through in third place.
Players who slice the ball tend to win with their shoulders and players who hook the ball tend to win with their clubhead.
THINKING OF THE ATTACK
My first approach with almost all players is to focus on the direction of the attack.
The slicer who unwinds the body too early will attack the ball from out-to-in.
I always try to make him more conscious of taking the club away on the inside with a shallow path by turning, not by pulling it in with his arms.
The thought is then to attack the ball on the same inside, curved path.
Drawing a curve on a driving range mat with chalk can be a great help.
Try to make the clubhead follow the chalk mark.
The ball is then put in position, perhaps just ahead of centre, with the same feeling of trying to follow the chalk mark.
The danger for players who swing out-to-in is that they often have a feeling of swinging in-to-out.
The chalk mark emphasises the fact that the attack is a curve both in approaching the ball and beyond impact.
Another way of approaching the attack on the ball is to put a small obstacle in the way of the downswing.
A paper cup, empty coke can or washing-up liquid container placed in the right position will explain to even the most ardent disbeliever that their swing really is out-to-in and not the most beautiful inside one they thought it was!
Position this about 12 to 15 inches behind the ball and just outside the line directly back from the target.
After a few attempts, which often result in catching the ball off the toe, the player begins to feel how necessary it is to turn away fully in the backswing and to bring the club down on the correct path.
I like to work at what happens through impact because this is more realistic to take out on a golf course.
Avoid complicated thoughts of pulling down at the start of the downswing unless all else fails.
HITTING ALONG THE HIPS
Another way of feeling the lag of the right side is one of turning away and then trying to stay turned while the attack on the ball takes place.
A good concept is to turn and then feel that you attack the ball along the line of the hips before allowing the legs and body to release through into a full turn.
The feeling to emphasise is of a three-piece action.
Turn away, swing the arms and club and then pull the body and legs through.
Don't let the body and legs pull the club, but instead try to make the club get there first on the right path and the body be pulled on through into the finish.
The feeling of hitting along the hips will often produce the right kind of action, with the hips and body unwinding much earlier than the player imagines.
A similar exercise which will only work with a low handicap golfer is one of trying to stay back on the right side a little longer, and to be slightly flat-footed with the right foot through impact.
I must emphasise that this is only for the very good golfer .
For the average club golfers it is not the right exercise because it emphasises the shoulders too much.
The feeling for the good player who tends to have an aggravating fade with tee shots, is one of turning in the backswing and then almost trying to sit on the right foot until the moment of impact, the club getting there before the body unwinds.
The feeling is that the clubhead gets through beyond impact and literally does pull the right foot and right leg on through to make a finish.
PULLING DOWN FROM THE TOP
Personally, I don't like the exercise of feeling a definite pull down from the top of the backswing.
I feel this often leaves the clubhead behind so that it never catches up.
My own way of working with this is to make players practise with the left hand only.
They swing to the top of the backswing and then practise with the left arm bouncing the club up and down a few times so that there is a feeling of taking control of the downswing and the right shoulder not wanting to push.
The correct feeling in the arms from the top of the backswing is one of leaving the right shoulder where it is and moving away from it.
Correctly speaking, from the top of the backswing, the space between left arm and right shoulder should immediately widen, without the left arm seeming to be jammed onto the right shoulder and the right shoulder pushing it.
A good practice exercise is to make three-quarter swings, feeling that the left arm swings to the right shoulder and then away from it, and additionally then feeling that the arms swing to the right shoulder and then to the left shoulder.
The whole aim and object of these thoughts is to leave the right shoulder passive at the top of the backswing and make the arms and club swing away from it.
Practising with the left arm alone certainly does give the feeling of left side dominance, and for the good player is a way of making the right shoulder seem unimportant.
The whole feeling of producing the correct inside attack is one of turning away, curbing the power of the right side, and then timing the hips so that the clubhead pulls the body through rather than the body pushing it.
VIVIEN SAUNDERS is the professional at Abbotsley Golf and Squash Club, St.Neots, Cambridgeshire.
Trying to hit the ball too hard could result in a slice.
The body leaves the hands and clubhead trailing in a wide open position.
Feel the lag of the right side by staying turned while attacking the ball.
Don't let the body and legs pull the club but instead try to make the club get there first.
Practising with the left arm alone gives the feeling of left side dominance.
The body should not push the club through, the correct feeling should be one of curbing the power of the right side so the clubhead pulls the body through.
JOHN INGHAM At Large 
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
Another American, Tom Watson, winner of five Open Championships in Great Britain, recently stood up to be counted — unlike many golfers who can't even spell the word prejudice.
Particularly popular with the Scottish galleries, guitar- playing Tom resigned from Kansas City Country Club after a businessman was denied membership, apparently because he was Jewish.
‘I can't live with that because my family is Jewish,’ said Tom, born in Kansas 41 years ago.
So has the club changed its policy, or even cynically taken in one Jewish member?
Incidentally, I hear the admission of one black member to the once all-white Shoal Creek Golf Club in Alabama, did not satisfy everyone because protesting T-shirts are doing a thriving business there.
Debarring people from golf clubs for reason of colour, or religion, seems weird to normal people, but nobody accused golfers of being normal, did they?
Anyway several clubs in America, such as Butler National, near Chicago, refuse women and blacks.
So it became the first PGA Tour venue to lose a tournament because it doesn't conform to the anti-discrimination rule laid down by the United States PGA.
We shall hear more about this worldwide problem, despite attempts to suppress it.
However, I plead guilty in one respect because when Japan's Shinjiro Kuwabra, manger of SC Properties asked me what I thought about Japan's giant Cosmo World buying the four courses in the Pebble Beach area, I nearly forgot myself.
PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT
Just as Jose-Maria Olazabal burst into tears for letting squeaky-clean David Frost ‘steal’ the final Bophuthatswana Sun City million with a last-hole birdie, I was thinking about 50 year old Angela Uzielli, winner of the Daily Telegraph Woman of the Year Award.
According to Lord Deedes, and her husband John who now only plays off 6-handicap, she continues to do the dishes with Fairy liquid and is only mildly interested that tabloid writers are concerned about the injured wrist of Nick Faldo, which threatens to dictate sports pages throughout 1991.
But big golf today, as we know, is in America, where the sun shines.
The boys are out there now, practising.
‘Sometimes,’ said Ben Hogan, ‘things tried in practice fall apart when tension is put on…’
Just think, in the August 8 issue of Life magazine you could read the whole Ben Hogan ‘secret’ for 20 cents, written by the Great Man himself.
Since those days, American golf influences has been colossal, but, in regards to teaching, they have all — including Mr Hogan — gone back to old-time Scottish basics, or to Harry Vardon.
‘The better swing you have,’ wrote Hogan ‘the more definitely you become a hooker.’
He then describes how, by cupping the left wrist at the top of the swing, he eliminated the hook, aided by fewer left-hand knuckles, and practice.
Anyway, let's leap away across the Atlantic to the Palace of Golfing Dreams because, frankly, they don't give a toot about anything, other than next weekend's 5-hour fourball…
BAD FOR BUSINESS
American seem amazed that the wife of Denis Thatcher, the famous left-handed player, is no longer the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom.
But they are more amazed that a British lawyer George Taylor, founder of the World Organisation for the Abolition of Golf, should write to another significant politician, namely Mikhail Gorbachev.
Old George thinks, correctly, that golf is a ‘drug-like sport’, but then maintains that businessmen in the West damage the economy by spending too much time hitting imperfect shots, and too little time behind their desks.
But Mr Gorbachev was probably too busy working on ways to overcome food shortages to regard the building, near Moscow, of an 18-hole golf course as a threat.
QUICK FIX
Over-fed American weekend duffers lead every world statistic when it comes to golf.
They hit more air shots, put more balls in water and their sales resistance to quick-fix ‘cures’ is zero.
But what catches the eye, while lane-changing to avoid the gaudily clad in day-glo outfits, is the ease with which you can buy boron-graphite shafts at just 13 dollars a go.
Although well-made clubs ought to last a lifetime, I have already owned 16 different sets and tried more than that number in a futile search for The Touch .
I shall never surrender.
In the United States there's a come-hither in every downtown golf store.
Now you can paint your golf ball with a newly created high-tech chemical which guarantees 30 extra yards.
Ten dollars, plus tax.
And if you slice, try the revolutionary no-slice teepeg which costs just one dollar — each.
I'm not above all this, still boasting about my San Diego built glass-shafted driver which on a good day hits with a snap.
However, I can't afford the full set.
While American Hackers may be bad, others aren't too clever.
The English still play golf for exercise, while Scottish amateurs, whose inner conceit about inventing the game holds them back, mostly suffer from little inclination to practise.
But the Welsh, because they haven't won a Major professional event, keep proving themselves by winning Amateur Championships.
Meantime, the Irish stay sober to win professionally, but their club amateurs can't wait to get back to the 19th hole.
Of course, this is mostly exaggeration, just as it is to suggest that most French club members are merely posers or that the Italians are concerned at keeping talented youngsters off the course unless they have royal blood, or at least one Ferrari.
However, our editor asks me to look in at the United States; so be it.
MISSING A PAST MASTER
With career winnings of over two and a half million dollars, Johnny Miller, 1976 Open Champion, is now 43, the father of six children — and no longer listed among the world's top 200 players.
His business today includes course architecture and not, it seems, teaching the game he played with such flair.
This is sad because his lessons were fun.
I remember he once told me not to move the head too much as it weighs 22lbs.
Some wag asked if he could prove it!
Charming.
Miller's arrival as a star started with a final 63 to snatch victory in the 1973 US Open at Oakmont.
And at this time of the year, he won three desert tournaments in a row, and eight 1974 events.
But his clubs blazed most effectively when he put Nicklaus and Ballesteros into second place at Royal Birkdale.
Maybe we shall have to wait until he's 50 to see him again, as a Seniors' Champion.
It seems that on Tour someone asked Lee Trevino who was the leading money-winner.
Lee cracked: ‘My ex-wife!’
Tom Watson can't live with racial prejudice.
Angela Uzielli with her Woman of the Year Trophy
Americans are amazed at the wife of Denis Thatcher.
Will we ever see him again?
19TH HOLE
Worldwide News & Results Round-up
TREVINO'S IN THE MONEY
The US Seniors' Tour may outstrip the USPGA Tour in terms of waistlines and average age, but no-one expected its leading money winner to also claim higher earnings.
Before the New York Life Champions tournament at Dorado Beach, Puerto Rica, Lee Trevino was some $70,000 behind USPGA money leader, Greg Norman.
Therefore, he needed third place or better to hurdle Norman's total of $1,165,477.
Incredible as it seems, the result was almost inevitable.
In addition to his seven victories this year, Trevino has claimed seven runner-up spots and he duly added an eighth at Dorado.
His $95,000 runner-up cheque gave him a clear $25,000 margin over Greg Norman.
It is a remarkable achievement for Trevino, in his first season on the Seniors' circuit.
In over 20 years on the USPGA Tour his earnings only totalled some $3.5m, with his best year being 1980 with $380,000.
Trevino admitted last year that he could not wait to become a Seniors' Tour player and, as he predicted, the lack of similar calibre players has allowed him to dominate, winning almost $300,000 more than Mike Hill, second on the money list.
Perhaps the only other Seniors' player who could stymie a Trevino rampage next year is Jack Nicklaus — if he wants to, that is.
In 1990 — also his first year on the Tour — Nicklaus restricted himself to just four tournaments and won two of them, collecting $340,000 in total.
But with Nicklaus rumoured to be planning a quiet 1991, the Lee Trevino money-making machine looks set to roll on.
WORLD CHAMPIONSHIP EXTENDS SEASON
This year's Johnnie Walker World Championship adds another $1m to the professional tournament purse and further extends the players tournament schedule.
Following his recent victory in the inaugural Asian Classic in Hong Kong, Nick Faldo remarked on what a ‘long hard slog’ he felt 1990 had been.
He also declared he would be taking a two- month break from the game, as has Ian Woosnam.
With the scheduling of the 1992 Asian Classic — in Thailand for the first time this year — for January 30, and the new World Championship for mid-December each year, the professional golf season now effectively covers 12 months, involving more travel than ever before.
The Asian Classic in Thailand will be held from January 30 to February 2 1992 and will open both the European and Asian Tours.
It will be an official European event with Order of Merit status and will have a substantial increase in prize-money over the Hong Kong event.
A field of 150 is expected to enter.
Only 26 players will qualify for the World Championship, either by winning one of the Majors or one of the official events on the European, Japanese, Australian/New Zealand or Asian Tours.
The balance of the field will be selected from those Tours' leading money winners.
Despite being scheduled at the end of a long golfing year, the size of the Championship purse should ensure the participation of those eligible to enter.
The Championship is to be held on December 19–22 at the Tyrall Golf Club in Jamaica.
The prize money ranges from $525,000 for the winner to $50,000 for last place.
HARRY BRADSHAW
Harry Bradshaw, who died in December at the age of 77, was probably as well known for the manner in which he failed to win the 1949 Open as his considerable success elsewhere.
In that Championship, at Royal St.Georges, Bradshaw lost in a play-off with Bobby Locke — after driving his ball into a broken bottle earlier in the tournament.
With no referee available for a ruling, he decided to play the ball where it lay in the bottle.
He could only score 6 on the hole and scored 77 in that round.
In the ensuing play-off, he was beaten by 12 strokes.
Although he did not win The Open like his fellow Irishman Fred Daly, who also died recently, Bradshaw achieved a number of notable victories.
Among others, he was a member of the victorious Ryder Cup team at Lindrick in 1957, won the Irish Open Championship in 1947 and 1949 and the Irish Professional Championship 10 times.
BIRDIE BLITZ BREAKS DUCK
Englishman Wayne Stephens gained his first professional victory in the Nigerian Open, the first event of the new season's Challenge Tour.
Stephens set up his victory with a second round 64, a course record, and a final round which included only 19 putts.
With 11 holes to play, Stephens' overnight four-shot lead was cut to two, but birdies at the 11th, 12th, 13th, 15th and 17th — where he hit an out-of-bounds wall behind the green, then holed his pitch — put the result beyond doubt.
The 29 year-old Jersey professional, a former assistant to Tommy Horton at Royal Jersey, shot a closing 66 to win by six shots.
Despite his current good form, Stephens was one of the players who missed out on a Tour card at Montpelier last year.
So, too, was runner-up Chris Platts, who shot a fine final round 68 to finish two shots clear of David Jones, Roger Winchester — who did win his card at the Qualifying School — and local player S. Okpe.
The tournament was played over three rounds as a result of local government elections and the imposition of travel restrictions.
GOLF INSURANCE
A new insurance scheme  targeted specifically at golfers is now available at just £15 a year.
Launched by Trinity Insurance, Caddysure is aimed at the many golfers who have little insurance cover other than limited extensions to household policies.
The package provides worldwide, 24 hour cover for lost or damaged equipment, protection in the UK in the event of personal accident, liabilities to third parties and even a ‘hole-in-one’ cover to buy a round of drinks at the 19th.
Contact Trinity Insurance on 071 623 4571.
WHO NEEDS 'EM?
The desperate need for more golf courses in the UK has already become a hot potato within the sport, but Keith Wright, Secretary of the English Golf Union, added fuel to the fire recently by claiming the way to satisfy the golf boom was to build courses for the average 18 handicap golfer.
Speaking at the Golf International 2000 seminar at Sandown Exhibition Centre, he claimed designing and building anything other than these types of facilities would not help Britain's congested courses.
‘Who needs championship courses?
We don't,’ he claimed.
‘There are adequate championship courses in Britain and many of them are in the top hundred in the world.
The boom in golf is player-led, with more young people coming into the game and many older people also taking it up.
But he warned that poorly constructed facilities were presenting problems for the industry in the future.
He called on the industry to create minimum standards for design and construction so that developers knew what they would get for their money.
The Chairman of the Sports Council, Peter Yarranton, concurred and called for the expansion of pay and play facilities to at least 30% of all future developments to allow ‘sport for all’.
He also called for existing club members to provide greater public access to their clubs.
COMPUTER BOOKING
A new computerised booking system for golf courses was recently demonstrated in Fife.
Intended to relieve pressure on the most popular courses, the system should be up and running this spring.
The ‘Golfnet’ system will link courses across Fife, enabling golfers, both local and visiting, to make a firm booking for an available starting time on any course in the system.
Representatives from over 25 courses and 20 hotels attended the recent demonstration by the Scottish Development Agency.
Centralised booking is also set to make an impact on popular holiday golf regions as well.
A new service for golfers on the Algarve coast aims to take the hassle out of booking tee times on holiday courses.
From early next summer, bookings will be possible at Faro Airport.
Alternatively, it is possible to book before you depart from the UK.
Contact: Algarve Activities, 50, Edlestone Rd., Crewe.
AUSSIES STRIKE OUT
Australians made their mark on the 1990 tournament statistics of both the European and USPGA Tours.
Craig Parry won the PGA European Tour stroke average award with a 48-round total of 69.62.
He also finished second in the greens in regulation category with an average of 75%.
Meanwhile, Greg Norman, perhaps surprisingly considering his money winning position, won the scoring leaders statistic on the USPGA Tour with an average of 69.10.
He also won the par breakers category and finished fourth on driving distance with an average of 277.6 yards.
Ian Baker-Finch also featured, finished fifth in the putting averages with 1.754 putts per hole.
A CRYING SHAME
Jose-Maria Olazabal rarely comes up short on birdie putts, but then never before had he putted for $700,000.
That was the amount on the line on the 72nd hole at the Sun City Million Dollar Challenge, when Olazabal left an eight-footer two inches short and his line was dead centre.
As Olazabal stood watching in virtual disbelief, South Africa's David Frost made his seven-footer for the birdie and a one-shot victory over the Spanish star for the $1 million first prize, Frost's second straight triumph in the event.
Olazabal had to settle for the runner-up cheque of $300,000, but moments later he uncharacteristically broke down and wept as he was being introduced by tournament host Gary Player to about 12,000 spectators on the 18th green at Sun City.
Player told the crowd that Olazabal was the best young player in the world and that he was quite impressed with the way he had scored so well while playing so poorly.
‘This is what Jack Nicklaus used to do,’ Player continued.
‘He could have a bad week swingwise and still win by five shots because he'd somehow make the best of his opportunities, no matter how limited they were.
This is the hallmark of greatness and what I saw in Nicklaus I now see in Olazabal.’
It was then that Olazabal wept, made no speeches and quickly and quietly left the course without speaking to the press.
His clever course management in the wake of continuous swing problems had made Olazabal a huge favourite with the Sun City galleries, many of whom rated him the superior of Seve Ballesteros, a two-time winner of the event.
And Olazabal almost rewarded them with a victory.
He had a two-stroke lead over playing partner Frost with two holes to play before the defending champion pipped him at the post with birdies on 17 and 18.
Starting the final round in fourth place on level par, three shots behind co-leaders Frost, Bernhard Langer and Steve Elkington, Olazabal swung into contention when he made a 15-foot putt on the par-5 9th hole for the only eagle in the tournament.
After scattering his drives throughout the first three rounds, he began to find the fairways.
Then, in a startling turnaround, Langer and Elkington, holding the joint lead and playing last, both bogeyed five straight holes — from the 11th through the 15th — and fell from contention.
Olazabal's 69 was the best of the day with American Robert Gamez, and the Spaniard's best of the tournament.
JUNIOR STRIKES GOLD
Robert Wilson from John O'Gaunt Golf Club has become the 40th recipient of the Gold Award in the Golf Foundation Merit Award Scheme.
Robert, aged 16, had his first lesson at the age of five and joined the John O'Gaunt club when he was 10.
His handicap is currently four and he won the 1990 Peter Townsend Trophy at Porters Park Golf Club with rounds of 73 and 72.
This trophy is a national event and is awarded to the best scratch score by a player under 16 years of age.
FALDO WINS MAJOR AWARD
Nick Faldo has won the Ritz Club Golfer of the Year Award for his victory in The Open Championship and his second successive US Master title.
Faldo received £4,000 for the Golf Foundation and the PGA European Tour Benevolent Trust.
He also won two of the eight Ritz Club monthly awards, one for each of his Major victories.
These, together with the golfer of the year award, result in a total of £140,000 being won over seven years for the two organisations.
TOP OF THE CLASS
Vivien Saunders, one of Golf Monthly's teaching professionals, has won the golf category of the Coach of the Year Awards.
Presented by the British Institute of Sports Coaches, the awards recognise the value of good coaching in the successes of sporting individuals and teams.
In addition to weighing up the results and achievements of the coach's pupils, the Institute also judges nominees on their standards of personal and professional behaviour, which reflect on the whole practice of coaching and the sport itself.
Vivien is currently the professional at Abbotsley Golf and Squash Club and, among other notables, has coached the last three women British Amateur Champions; Joanne Furby in 1988, Helen Dobson in 1989 and Julie Hall in 1990.
REAL GOLF
Golf Monthly readers might be interested in a recently published book,Real Golf .
It is a compilation of articles by the late Eddie Park, most of which were published in Golf Monthly .
Put together by his wife as a memorial to her husband, it charts the development of golf courses in this country and expounds Park's views on good course management.
In the main, he is critical of the trend towards over-watering and over-feeding, and explains their detrimental effect on the condition of British courses.
This book is a must for everyone involved or interested in course management and aficionados of the history of the game in this country.
YOU'RE THE TOPS, WOOSIE…
Richard Boxall and Ian Woosnam in festive mood at the annual PGA European Tour Dinner held in London just before Christmas.
Woosnam later received the Tour's Harry Vardon Trophy for finishing top of the Order of Merit.
The putts failed to drop, but the rears didn't as Jose-Maria Olazabal finished runner-up to David Frost at Sun City.
GOLF SHOP
PRO-MAT TEES OFF
Greensward Sports and Leisure Surfaces is launching a range of products aimed at enhancing facilities at driving ranges and golf clubs.
Target Greens are designed to produce more realistic targets for the golfers.
They are manufactured from artificial grass that is sand based so that they are more receptive to well- hit shots.
Ranges will be offered up to three Greens for virtually the same price as one, with each installed at the required distance.
The company is also introducing the Pro-Mat, a synthetic tee area made from a tough turf fabric that has a special backing for durability.
Available in a number of dimensions, the mat is guaranteed not to delaminate.
Greensward also makes putting surfaces, either tufted or carpet, for the practice area, and spike-proof surfaces for locker rooms and walking areas.
ALL MAPPED OUT
For the golfer who is planning a holiday abroad, a new range of golf maps is now available.
The maps are based on the well- known Michelin series and courses are indicated by a numbered flag relating to a key giving the address and phone number.
They cover around 400 courses in France, 300 in Ireland and 500 in Austria, Germany and the Benelux countries.
Available from Rowhex, 60, Victoria Road, Swindon, Wiltshire.
SN1 3DJ.
NEW RAM WEDGES
Ram is expanding its range of clubs with the introduction of the new Tom Watson Cobalt 53, 55 and 58 degrees wedges.
Ram has also introduced the Tom Watson Troon Grind.
Basically a fairway wedge with a thin sole and only 2 degrees bounce, designed to perform well from tight lies.
PRIZE COLLECTION
A new range of presentation gifts designed to appeal specifically to golfers and golf clubs was launched in 1991 by sports awards specialists, Colborne Trophies.
The Colborne Golf Collection includes some 20 items ranging from bronze figures to tee wallets.
Details of the collection can be obtained from the Colborne Trophies catalogue.
Contact David Brown.
NEXT MONTH
IN SEARCH OF A MAJOR
Jose-Maria Olazabal won four tournaments in 1990, including a momentous victory in America.
Will 1991 see him take the final step to greatness?
PREPARING FOR THE NEW SEASON
Bob Torrance reveals how to make the best out of your practice sessions.
Vivien Saunders tells you how to tune your mind for the season ahead.
Mike Palmer gives you a step-by-step guide to making a fast start in 1991.
IS GRAPHITE THE SHAFT FOR YOU?
Shaft technology has improved dramatically.
We look at what's available.
PLUS
We look forward to the 1991 PGA European Tour Season.
Watch out for the March issue of Golf Monthly.
On sale on February 14.
(All articles are subject to possible amendment)
OUT of BOUNDS with Osman
Charity, charity, charity, charity, charity.
Even the most hardened skinflint or the most radical social thinker would have to admit that, in general, charity is a ‘good thing’.
However, we must also recognise that some charitable acts are distinctly peculiar.
Some people, for example, lie in bath tubs full of cold baked beans for days on end, while others, and this is where our interest lies, take part in Celebrity Golf Tournaments.
These events provide an opportunity for dozens of actors who were famous in the '70s, ex-motor racing drivers and Eddie Large to enjoy a golfing day-out while earning a bob or two for good old charity.
Everybody is happy.
Well, not quite.
I'm not happy.
I have no objection to raising money, but I must admit I hate Celebrity Golf Tournaments.
With this in mind I travelled to Woburn for the Superstars' Celebrity Challenge.
Here's the story of my exciting day out.
As with all visitors to such events I decided, first to look for my old pals Brucie and Tarby, the funniest men in golf.
The howls of laughter from the first tee told me my heroes were about to start their round.
As I had expected their conversation was an example of golfing humour at its best.
Here it comes, chuckle fans…
B: Shall I drive off?
T: No, stay and have a round of golf!!!
Where's my tee?
B: You drank it in the clubhouse!!!
I think I'm going to take a 3-wood and hit this low and flat.
T: If you want it flat you should use an iron!!!
B: Your trouble is you stand too close to the ball.
After you've hit it!!!
It was at this point that I left to seek medical help for fear I would split my sides.
Leaving Tarby and Brucie to their jovial banter, I eventually sought out some celebrities.
It didn't take long to find them.
In the very next group I chanced upon that guy, you know the one, he used to read the weather on TVS a few years back, grey hair, quite tall, you know, John something.
I wasted no time in talking to the man…
Me: Hello, John.
K: Um…it's Ken actually.
Me: Yeah, right.
You're my favourite TVS weathercaster of the early '80s, you know.
K: Thank you very much.
Would you like my autograph?
Me: No thanks.
How's the golf going?
K: Well I started the round in a bit of a depression.
But that's clearing up now and the prospects for the rest of the round are looking brighter, with a maximum score of 90, slightly higher than the seasonal average.
Once a TVS weatherman, always a TVS weatherman, as they say in the business.
Still, there was more to see, and who should I stumble upon next but those entertaining and talented Parliamentary opponents, Neil Kinnock and John Major…
NK: May I ask my Right Honourable friend what club he intends to use on this hole?
JM: I refer the Leader of the Opposition to the answer I gave on the 345-yard par-4 8th.
NK: May I also ask the Right Honourable Gentleman which way the wind is blowing?
Before this razor sharp satire became too cutting and brought down the Government, I decided to ask Neil and John a few questions…
Me: How's the round going, Neil?
NK: I'm currently 4-over par.
That's fully six shots worse than under the last Labour administration.
My biggest problem, though is that every time I hit the flag, John charges me £450.
Me: Why's that, John?
JM: Pole Tax!
Me: The opinion polls are showing that the next election will be a close struggle.
What do you think John's prospects are?
NK: I think I have as much chance of winning a Major as Major has of winning.
Me: And what do you say to that, John?
JM: I think that that's a very clever pun and must have taken you ages to think up.
Me: Cheers.
I trudged home thinking about my day.
I'd got a lot of autographs; Kenny Lynch, Gareth Hunt, that bloke who used to be in The Sweeney, Tim Brooke-Taylor, Rachael Heyhoe-Flint.
I'd got them all.
But I can't say I'd changed my mind about Celebrity Golf.
There must be more painless ways of raising money.
Now, where are those cold baked beans