

THIS MONTH
LETTER FROM THE EDITOR
A decade of change for the Princess of Wales
It was ten years ago that the Prince and Princess of Wales began their courtship.
To a few of us it may seem like only yesterday, but to the Princess, I suspect, it has been a long decade, for she has completed a most extraordinary metamorphosis.
Constantly in the full beam of the media spotlight, she has transformed (some might say effortlessly, but they'd be wrong) from ‘Shy Di’ to ‘Dazzling Di’to ‘Caring Di’.
Whether she has yet reached the glorious state of fully-fledged butterfly remains a matter of interesting debate, but one thing is certain: each stage of transition has not only affected her personally, but has sent repercussions throughout the Royal Family and, most specifically, has completely changed the tenor of her marriage.
In 1980, when Prince Charles introduced his charmingly unpolished bride-to-be to the media, and hence the world, he effortlessly held the centre stage.
By 1985 he had been relegated to a place in the wings while his wife, now a media star, glowed.
Five years on, they have reached an uneasy compromise of separate stages, each with its own cast of characters.
It is this fascinating shift in power that forms the basis of Hugo Vickers' compelling article about the Waleses.
Vickers, one of the most trusted Royal writers and a regular contributor to Harpers & Queen , has been absorbed in his subject since the age of twelve.
‘Some people liked trains, but for me it was Royals.
I started keeping cuttings even then.
There was something very appealing about going through the papers with a pair of scissors in your hand and then sticking your clippings into a book.’
His extraordinary personal library of cuttings, plus his first-hand knowledge —‘I have been lucky enough now, of course, to be able to talk to them and to those who know them well, and to see inside their homes’— makes Vickers one of our foremost Royal watchers.
Since writing his Book of the Royal Wedding , published in 1981, he has been amazed by the evolution of the Princess of Wales.
‘It's such a Cinderella story: she was so very young when she was first plucked from obscurity and hurled into the limelight and yet her transformation has been so quick.
I don't believe she will ever go through such a dramatic period of life again.’
Read more of Vickers' unique account on page 160.
Contributors to this issue
PHILIP HOARE (Portrait painters, page 144) is 31 and the author of Serious Pleasures , a biography of the aesthete-recluse Stephen Tennant to be published by Hamish Hamilton in May.
Hoare was born in Southampton, and received education at no fewer than three Catholic establishments, leaving the last with an arts degree and red spiky hair.
He subsequently managed various (unsuccessful) rock groups, and ran his own (moderately unsuccessful) record label.
His obsession with the social history of the Twenties and Thirties led him to Wilsford Manor, Tennant's home, in 1986, where he wooed the eremitic inhabitant with chocolates and orchids.
ARABELLA ASHLEY (Portrait painters photographs, page 144) and her dog and best friend Clem, have been together for the last four years photographing features for Harpers & Queen .
She trained as an interior photographer and is the creator of the original furnishing catalogues for Laura Ashley.
She fell into the world of photography when she stumbled by chance across some equipment in the cupboard of her student flat.
DIANA SCARISBRICK (Jewellery, page 96) is an art historian and Fellow of the Society of Antiquaries.
Her interest in jewellery began when she collaborated on the exhibition of rings at the Ashmolean Museum in Oxford in 1978.
From rings she went on to study and catalogue collections of cameos and other jewels from antiquity to the present.
She has written on the relationship between jewellery and clothes in Jewellery (1984) and her most recent publication Ancestral Jewels (André Deutsch, 1989) records historical pieces which are still in private hands.
LUCRETIA STEWART (Vietnam, page 180) was born in Singapore and lived in China as a child.
She was too young to join the forces in Vietnam, but really wishes she could have been there and is now doing her utmost to make up for it.
She is now the commissioning editor of the quarterly magazine Granta .
VICKI WOODS (Pamella Bordes, page 184) started her career as a sub-editor for Harpers & Queen and has since worked at the Radio Times, Tatler and the Daily Mail .
She now lives in the longest village in England with her husband and two children, Sebastian and Octavia (Octavia because she was born in eight minutes).
She works for American Vogue where she is a contributing editor, and is a proud member of The Academy Club.
Overwhelmed by Pamella's beauty, she remembers what Mark Boxer once said to her: ‘Darling, you are much better the way you are now; at 40 even the most beautiful women fall apart.’
PARKINSON'S LORE
Norman Parkinson started his career on Harpers 54 years ago.
We will remember fondly his talent, and his sartorial eccentricity
‘Parks’ as the photographer Norman Parkinson was known to every model of the last 50 years (a good many of whom he discovered), was one of the great fashion photographers of the century.
His breezy, irreverent pictures brought life and fun into the staid, pre-war world of the fashion photograph.
Parks got his start and learnt his technique on pre-war Harpers Bazaar .
His association with the magazine started round about 1936 with a call from Alan McPeake, the brilliant art director of Harpers Bazaar at the time.
‘Would you like to work for us?’ he asked Parks.
‘But I only work in my studio,’ Parks replied.
‘Go out and buy yourself a camera to use outdoors, and be over here in Grosvenor Place at three o'clock tomorrow afternoon.’
We will let Parks tells the rest of the story: ‘I went along Piccadilly to the Westminster Photographic Company.
‘Do you have a camera, a second-hand, for about £12, that I can hand-hold outside?’
They did.
‘The following afternoon I was to be found in Green Park near Buckingham Palace with two ‘smart’ ladies in tow, the Hon Mrs This and That, and I had to photograph their hats.
This is exactly what I did, leaning against some statue or other.
I enjoyed myself, and the prospect of a new career.
Taking my leave, I headed off for the developing tanks at my studio.
I could not believe my eyes as every film, one after the other, that I lifted dripping from the hypo, was totally and absolutely blank.
At that instant I learnt a lesson I have never forgotten: never, ever use a camera that you have not tested,’
For the remainder of the Thirties, Parks developed his unique talent for catching beautiful women in mid-air, as it were, and the pictures that appeared in the pages of Harpers Bazaar at the time represent an important stage in the development of naturalistic fashion photography.
But Parks also took memorable portraits for Harpers Bazaar of subjects such as the surrealist patron Edward James, and of Noël Coward, who had some words of advice for the young photographer.
At the time, Parks admitted he affected ‘sandals, rather a lot of leather and suede, and a mid-calf length cape made from blood-red Harris Tweed’.
When Noël Coward viewed this apparition, having just received and been pleased with his portrait-photograph, he said, ‘Parkinson, your photography is very good, but you will learn that people who have talent dress like stockbrokers’.
Parks did have talent and right to the end, which came after he had shot his final roll on a Town & Country sitting, he never, ever dressed like a stockbroker.
We salute a truly great photographer.
‘Parks’(left), and some of his naturalistic fashion photographs from the Thirties
PROPERTY
Restoration drama
First we ignored the Georgian houses of Spitalfields; now too much attention may ruin them, says DIXIE NICHOLS
Watching a demolisher's ball and chain smash into the face of an early Georgian building would now make a great many people feel sick.
But in the Sixties we didn't feel that way.
We were pleased to see the oppressive, grimy terraces pulled down to make way for something bright and modern.
Those Georgian buildings were slums; we felt it was wrong that anyone should have to live in them.
Back in the Sixties it was only architectural historians who cared; their educated eye could discern the elegance brought low by decay.
They knew that, like the Dickensian waif, a good wash and new clothes would reveal an angelic face.
Douglas Bain, secretary of the Spitalfields Historic Buildings Trust, recalls discovering the area in 1961.
‘The atmosphere was quite extraordinary.
Staring across the glistening cobbles, all I could see in every direction was early Georgian domestic architecture…each house drab, but dignified, untouched virtually in all its details.’
Bain had discovered Spital Square on the brink of demolition and in spite of bursting into tears in the Mayor's parlour, he could do nothing to stop its destruction to make way for market expansion.
So he hired a lorry, bribed the demolition men to let him cart away the finest doorcases, moulded corner cupboards, cornices and chimney pieces and stored them in a London County Council Historic Buildings warehouse at his own expense.
When he came to reclaim them, every single one had been lost or sold.
How easy the task of saving Spitalfields must have then seemed — merely a matter of money (thought unfortunately its would-be saviours didn't have any).
In those early days Bain worked out that the 23 houses most under threat could have been rescued and restored for £240,000.
Now you could just about buy one wreck for that sort of money.
It was not until the setting up of the trust in 1977 (it was conceived at an Irish dinner party at Clandeboye House in County Down) that money for such projects came into reach and the banks would even listen.
So, under the care of the trust, Spitalfields lifted up its grimy face.
Previously it had been an area of Bengali sweat shops which nobody in their right mind wanted to know about.
Before that, sectarian East End Jews, refugees from Tsarist pogroms, had set up their workrooms as tailors and furriers.
The houses were subdivided by the Jews and then subdivided again by the Bengalis.
Beyond the little men were the big-time boys who ran the area, once Jewish, now Bengali, who asked and answered no questions.
Money and loyalty alone counted, usually in that order.
Spitalfields emerged on the crest of a style wave in which everything Georgian became fashionable.
The New Georgians were born — a class of intellectuals desperate to get their hands dirty.
The cry was ‘throw away your fountain pen and take to the paint-scraper’.
The women took to old corduroys and sports jackets alongside their men folk.
Builders were treated as craftsmen and learnt to work alongside this new generation of client, who treated them as a fount of all wisdom.
It was a time when the builder carried a Filofax and the client a pocketful of nails.
The first comers even became attached to the fruit and vegetable market with its all-night commotion.
Coming home late, they felt safe.
They took comfort from its changing face, which made it seem like the heart-throb of the area.
They had a soft spot for its mid- morning scene of desolation, the familiar down-and-outs warming themselves at their bonfires of pallets on the lorry park, street cleaners ineffectually sweeping piles of rotten fruit and a pecking order of scavengers collecting their portion of the spoils.
Today the romance of saving Spitalfields has soured, even for its greatest devotees.
They have been in some ways too successful.
Style pages cover Spitalfields stories regularly, to the extent that now only people with money can afford to live there.
Wealthy people buy the houses from the Trust, employ builders to do the restoration and move in when all is ready.
The new wave are bankers, management consultants, or expatriate investors.
The first settlers did it all for themselves, sharing the camaraderie of the market café where they could go in their filthy work clothes and get help and advice from the other settlers.
That's over now: the first settlers are moving on, either because they have children, or to regain the excitement of the early days by moving to Whitechapel or Dublin, where only bulldozers are interested in sunken Georgian houses on their uppers.
At best Spitalfields will survive as a kind of Hampstead-in-the-city.
It will be an immensely expensive residential enclave in the shadow of glittering office blocks rising above endless shopping emporia with fountains and plazas.
Stylish city workers will use its fashionable wine bars and tourists will visit its heritage centre.
At worse the beautifully restored Georgian houses will accommodate only offices.
Already they have taken over Artillery Lane and are marching down Elder Street.
The saddest thing of all is that it is hard to see how a different outcome was ever possible.
It must be very hard for those fresh-faced New Georgians to realise that in their wake comes first the ruched blind, then the office use, followed by a bevy of Sock Shops, Tie Racks and Knickerboxes.
The Saving of Spitalfields is published by the Spitalfields Trust and distributed by SAVE, 68 Battersea High Street, SW11, price £14.95 (inc p&p).
Dan Cruickshank bought a nightmare on Elder Street ten years ago an has lovingly restored it to a dream.
The house was built in 1727.
Dan gives talks to the Spitalfields Trust and to the Georgian Society and writes books on the practical aspects of restoration, preserving a heritage for eight-year-old Isabel, his daughter.
His Life in the Georgian City is published on 27 March (Viking £25)
CALENDAR OF EVENTS
On Location
Harpers & Queen and HRW Antiques cordially invite readers to an exciting interior design workshop at their Clapham showroom, 4A Kings Avenue, SW4.
At HRW Antiques experience and expertise in fine art and interior design combine to provide an interesting selection of antique furniture and furnishing objects all within one location.
Items are imaginatively displayed within room settings, enabling you to visualise them in your own home.
Join Harpers & Queen On Location on Tuesday 3 April from 6.30 until 9pm for an evening with our experts.
Our speaker, William Lorimer, Director of Furniture for Christie's, St. James's, will discuss what to look for when buying furniture.
Next, Henrietta Gelber of Spencer-Churchill Designs and Ian Henderson-Russell of HRW Antiques will be available to answer questions on the use of antiques in interior design.
The remainder of the evening is yours to browse among the antiques and chat with the experts.
There is a limited number of places available for our workshop.
Please telephone Joanna Gill at Harpers & Queen (439 5568) to reserve your place.
If you are a mother-to-be or planning on becoming one in the near future join Harpers & Queen On Location on Wednesday 11 April for our Maternity Workshops at Harrods, Knightsbridge, SW1.
Meet the experts from Harpers & Queen, Clarins and Harrods, as well as maternity wear designer Elaine Coleman from DUO, who can help you look and feel great during your pregnancy.
Gone are the days of hiding your bump under a tent dress — today's maternity clothes are both comfortable and fashionable!
During the workshops we'll show you how to flatter your ever-growing figure.
The skin care expert Clarins will tell you how to take care of your skin during and after your pregnancy, and will be giving mini treatments and consultations throughout the day.
Author Linda Seward will be signing copies of her new book,The Baby Box , which is full of tips for the new mother and includes a memory book, birth announcements and thank you cards.
There will be three workshops during the day at 11.00am, 1.00 and 3.00pm.
To obtain your invitation please ring Joanna Gill (439 5568).
A limited number of places are available.
Harpers & Queen and Marie Soskin Designs, 163 Draycott Avenue, SW3, cordially invite readers to a special evening to view the Marie Soskin Haute Couture and Ready-to-Wear collections.
Join us on Wednesday 25 April from 6 to 8pm for a private evening of informal modelling of Marie's beautifully designed clothes.
All the fashions shown on the night will be available to order in time for the spring and summer social season.
To receive your invitation to our evening please ring Joanna Gill (439 5568).
A limited number of places are available.
Laurent Perrier, Harpers & Queen, Shiseido and Harrods cordially invite readers to a Champagne Affair on Tuesday 1 May from 6.15 to 8pm.
Join us in Harrods' Georgian restaurant, Knightsbridge, SW1, for an evening bubbling over with information on champagne.
To begin the evening Laurent Perrier will conduct a champagne tasting, educating us all on the finer points in choosing champagne.
During the tasting Highland Spring mineral water will be served.
Next, Joan Oliphant-Fraser the Dame of Champagne and author of the book The Champagne Diet will discuss the benefits of drinking champagne daily to stay happy and healthy.
We will also demonstrate the perfect exercises to complement the Champagne Diet.
Finally, to send you home to feeling totally relaxed, Shiseido will demonstrate the art of Shiatsu massage.
Just three minutes each day of a shiatsu facial massage will relax, revitalise and re-energise you.
To receive your invitation to our Champagne Affair please ring Joanna Gill at Harpers & Queen (439 5568).
STOP PRESS
All eyes are on Sloane Street this month with two new shop openings to make the already fashionable street even more so.
Mid-month look for the new Karl Lagerfeld shop at 201 Sloane Street and Krizia at 205 Sloane Street, SW1.
Another eye-opening event is happening at the Prescriptives counter exclusively at Harrods from 9–21 April.
Find out how to use your eyes as your best accessory during the Prescriptives ‘Have You An Eye For Colour’ promotion.
Using their custom-blend facilities Prescriptives can create a compact of four eye colours which flatter your individual skintone and meet your daily fashion needs.
Visit the Prescriptives counter for advice from the colour experts — for your eyes only!
MONEY
Your fees too big?
Following the birth of a child the next step after breast-feeding is school fees planning.
LORNA BOURKE advises treading carefully.
There are three topics that in my view should be banned from current dinner party conversation — house prices, school fees and breast feeding.
The latter is a purely idiosyncratic personal aversion.
But we have all endured the archetypal house price bore —‘You won't believe what we paid for our house in Normandy…’.
With house prices tumbling by the week, the scope for one-upmanship in this field has become severely restricted — only to be replaced by the school fees bore.
As a financial writer one is frequently cornered for advice on these matters.
In the interests of preserving my sanity, here is my definitive opinion on this subject, never to be referred to again.
According to the Independent Schools Information Service (ISIS), the annual cost of boarding fees for a thirteen to eighteen-year-old son ranges from £3,600 to £8,400; for a daughter, £1,800 to £6,000.
And those are 1989 prices.
As a friend with three children at public school put it, ‘My last term's bills totalled more than the price of the wife's new care’.
It may well pay to consider moving house, to an area where the local state schools are good — at least up to age thirteen — and to embark upon fee-paying education at a later stage.
For those committed to independent education from the start, the difficulty, apart from finding the money, is to pick your way through the minefield of professional advice.
The situation has improved since the implementation of the provisions of the Financial Services Act.
This requires all independent financial advisers (IFAs) to give ‘best advice’.
There are two golden rules about school fees planning.
First, whether you are investing a lump sum or saving from income, you can never start too soon.
Secondly, most of the fancy school fees plans are designed to make money for the financial institutions which put them together, and for the intermediary or agent who sells them.
What you should be looking for in any savings or investment plan — whether the object is to provide school fees or cash for some other purpose — is investment performance and low charges.
To give you some idea of how important investment performance is, Charles Walker of London & Capital Group, which specialises in school fees planning, did the following calculations.
‘The average parent is probably paying something like £4,000 a year today for a thirteen-year-old attending a fee-paying school, day or boarding.
Assuming a 10 per cent escalation a year in school fees, if you wanted to provide fees for a new-born infant in thirteen years’ time, you would have to invest £200 a month in a Personal Equity Plan (PEP).
‘This assumes that the investment managers are making an average return of around 13 per cent a year — which they should be able to do, given that a PEP is effectively a tax- free fund.
But if the investment performance is only 8.5 per cent a year, the monthly cost over the lifetime of the plan rises to £275 a month.’
Assuming that the contributions are made during the five years the child is at a fee-paying school the difference in total cost works out at £43,000 at an investment return of 13 per cent, compared with £58,320 at 8.5 per cent .
High initial charges, annual charges and early redemption or withdrawal penalties from insurance-type schemes can also massively affect the returns on your outlay.
Whether you are investing a lump sum or saving from income, most financial advisers would agree that the vehicle with the lowest charges and the highest potential investment return is either a PEP or a unit trust regular savings scheme.
In addition, both have total flexibility.
You can stop and start contributions to suit your personal circumstances, you can add lump sums (in the case of the PEP up to the current maximum of £4,800 per person, per year) and there are no penalties whatsoever if you want to get your money out at any stage in the proceedings.
‘The trouble with the traditional with-profits endowments and deferred annuities which most school fees planners use is that they are inflexible, with heavy penalties for withdrawal, and the charges are high,’ Walker says of the schemes.
‘Some parents like a degree of certainty, which the purely equity-based schemes don't offer,’ says Anne Feek of the School Fees Insurance Agency.
SFIA runs probably the largest educational trust, providing school fees for some 12,000 children.
It offers two schemes — one in which the benefits are guaranteed and another in which the benefits are notionally linked to an investment fund, and may, therefore, fluctuate.
‘In recent years the investment-linked scheme has shown a better return — around 15 or 16 per cent over the past five years,’ says Feek.
‘It really depends on the number of years for which the money can be invested before the fees become payable.
On average, people come to us with only fours years to go before they need the fees, which does not give long for performance.’
One thing is certain: this is not an area for the amateur and it will pay to take professional advice.
Most independent financial advisers will claim to offer school fees advice among their services.
Where school fees planning and education are concerned, you can never start too soon
MEDIA
Write on
Publishers would sell their grannies for a bite at Nelson Mandela's autobiography, but does it exist?
RICHARD PRESTON investigates
For those who make their money from other people's names, there is little doubt about this year's most desirable property.
Nelson Mandela is the kind of celebrity that agents, publishers and film-makers dream of: a man whose seventieth birthday party filled Wembley, who outstrips Mother Theresa as a universal symbol of virtue and who has backstreets named after him 6,000 miles from home is not a difficult commodity to package.
(Winnie has already been seen to have star potential — Harry Belafonte wants to make a TV miniseries about her.)
Imagine, then, that Mandela had written down the story of his life, and that the manuscript was for sale.
You might, were you in the celebrity business, react like literary agent Ed Victor: ‘If I were the agent I would step on some jugulars to come home with $5 million for world-wide rights to the book and the film.’
And this would be no messy, muck- raking tale of bed-hopping.
‘Everyone would feel good.
People love to spend money, it gets their adrenalin flowing, and with Mandela's story the charitable juices would be flowing too.’
Rumours of the dream book first took hold at last year's Frankfurt Book Fair, the famously gossipy gathering of the publishing clans.
Wandering the stalls was South African attorney Ismael Ayob, who has represented the Mandelas for the last twenty years.
He hinted that there was a Mandela autobiography, and that it could be published if Mandela were released.
Publishers and agents heard Ayob and were excited.
The longest running rumour about the book started to spread soon after Frankfurt.
It said that US publishers Random Century had signed the book for publication by Random House in the US and Ebury Press in the UK, with a sale of serial rights to the Mail on Sunday for £250,000.
The story only waned in popularity when Mandela was released: why hang on to the book, if it existed, at the time when it was most likely to sell?
Others who spoke to Mr Ayob hoped they might be party to something big.
Steve Savage of Grafton met him several times after Frankfurt.
‘The deal fell down party because there were a lot of unanswered problems — chiefly whether there was a book at all.’
Literary agent Xandra Hardie was offered a meeting with Ayob in London a week after Frankfurt.
She, too, saw her lucky number looming: ‘I dreamt of being dressed in silk and satins, and on the side of the angels’.
But the meeting came to nothing.
‘The oddest thing was that he seemed to have no interest in Mandela at all.
I was celebrating the fact that the publishing world was keen to speak about what kind of book it was and his response was always to talk only about money.
I sent him a fax the next day and never heard from him again.’
Since Mandela's release the issue of who might market his life-story has become unclear, but Mandela himself must be aware that his name carries enormous money-making potential.
Peter Straus of Hamish-Hamilton, and Giles Gordon, respectively editor and agent to Fatima Meer, whose Mandela biography Higher Than Hope was published in Britain the week after his release, both happily dismiss the possibility of an autobiography.
‘What existed was a manuscript he began in prison about twenty years ago,’ Gordon says.
‘But it was lost — walls were built over it, the paper had disintegrated.’
According to Straus, Mandela has said he has no plans to write anything —‘the only book he had anything to do with was ours’.
Yet those with a nose for the perfect story are not so easily dissuaded.
Paramount made a bid for the film rights following publication of Fatima Meer's book, and a film treatment has gone to Mandela via Meer.
Soon after Mandela's release another Ismael, Fatima Meer's nephew and like Ayob a lawyer, was being faxed daily by an American publisher bidding for an autobiography.
Peter Snyman at Random Century says that a third South African lawyer telephoned him offering the autobiography (he also says that his company never signed a contract with Ayob, though they did try to work out a deal).
No one denies that if the story became available it would be seized but, while an autobiography would have been an automatic bestseller at the time of his release, would it still be wonderful if one or five years' time?
(Bantam, who have bought Nigel Lawson's memoirs-in-progress, could face a similar problem: great book the day he walked out of the Cabinet, but a year from now?)
A market for an autobiography undoubtedly exists: Gorbachev's Perestroika has sold millions around the world: Michael Jackson's autobiography sold over 350,000 in hardback for Heinemann; even Denis Healey's memoirs are in their sixth reprint at Michael Joseph.
A Mandela book might attract many of these readers, but only if he wants to write it.
The desperate conviction of the publishing trade that famous people are somehow obliged to write for it may well lead to nothing more than four-figure fax bills.
SPENDING
A SCENT IS BORN
Everything had to be perfect for M. Lacroix.
So the Gypsy King sang, Sylvie Guillem danced, the lemon trees swayed — and all for love of a scent.
NICOLA SHULMAN joined the party
From the outside of the Opéra-Comique in the 9th arrondissement of Paris, you could see through the windows on the ground floor to where vast bales of orange and pink and purple cloth were being unwound by workmen, laid out and cut into huge rectangles and squares.
Inside, the room was bathed in a chic and sickly light, so sickly and so chic that it gave the impression of being a chartreuse light (chartreuse is this year's chic colour; its sickliness needs no introduction from me) although it was in fact pink.
It was pink because pink is the colour of Christian Lacroix's first own-label scent, C'est la Vie.
It is not so much that the stuff itself is pink (the stuff itself is chartreuse, as a matter of fact) but that everything connected with it and surrounding it is: its packaging, its bottle-top, the invitations and programmes for its launch at the Opéra-Comique — its vie , if you like, is en rose .
No ordinary pink this, either, but a pink of a hallucinogenic vividness — Schiaparelli pink, you might say, although you probably wouldn't because it would make you extremely unpopular.
Nor is it an easy pink to obtain: in order that pink light should frame the shape of the little opera house and its windows all glow pink, 2,000 light bulbs were removed and replaced with others which workaday electricians' pink not being the thing at all— had all been painted in the requisite shade by hand.
But this was nothing: many things that are hard to obtain had been obtained in honour of this scent.
Lemon trees, for example, in great profusion and heavy with fruit at a perfect point of ripeness, had been chopped down to line staircases and balconies for it.
Sylvie Guillem, the exquisite prima ballerina, had been procured to dance for it; chanteuses of international renown were to sing for it; the Gypsy Kings would be there to serenade it at the top of their lungs.
‘No way could it be a regular launch,’ said Marina Issaf, who was in charge of this party and was here at the opera house to watch the rehearsal and check the decorations.
‘No way.
It had to be a celebration.
It was not just launching a perfume, it was giving birth to a perfume,’ said she, who had definitely seen the shape of the bottle but still chose to stick with this metaphor.
‘So Christian found Alfredo Arias, who was a director he loved.
And Arias said, ‘I know exactly what I'm going to do.
We will have fifteen different acts, illustrating the emotions of life.’
No tears,’ added Marina.
Nine hundred guests, dressed to the hilt, arrived to cheer Christian on in his hour of parturition.
Among this lot, the emotional trawl was a bit more of a mixed bag.
Prevalent among the emotions on view were: self-satisfaction amongst those who had received their C'est la Vie gift box, which included a baroque heart-shaped brooch estimated to be worth about £120 and, amongst those whose boxes had gone astray, resentment (which gave the first group an opportunity for a bit of schadenfreude , which, emotionally speaking, is always a big hit).
There was astonishment also at what Sylvie Guillem could do with her legs, and excited suspense was also manifested over the question of whether Inès de la Fressange was coming or whether she had been deemed to be too much associated with Chanel and had therefore, in spite of being a close personal friend of Christian's, been unceremoniously dumped.
But predominating over the entire emotional range was a pervasive charge of mercantile curiosity as to how much the whole thing had cost and how many bottles of the stuff they would have to sell just to recoup the cost of the launch.
Needless to say, nobody knew, but the bidding went up in units (people do like a nice round unit for this type of speculation) of £500,000.
After the performance, most people had the same idea: make their way from their actually more but socially less exalted levels of red and orange and purple down to the pink VIP level.
Here, at a round table, Christian Lacroix was seated with his wife, Sylvie Guillem (now changed into a ballgown of great splendour and so contrived, with such shortness at front and fullness at back, as to make the wearer look like an emu), and a number of stock Parisian luminaries, like Guy and Marie-Hélène de Rothschild.
They were all eating miniature versions of proper food — a sliver of lamb like a lark's tongue, a single braised spinach leaf, a mushroom tart no bigger than a cuff-link — like guests in a doll's house, and trying to ignore the fact that the area around their table, which might have provided space for twelve to stand at a pinch, had now about 300 people in it.
New emotions were beginning to show, notably aggression and fear of suffocation.
A foot above Madame Lacroix's nodding and smiling head, a fight broke out between two photographers.
There were so many people in the room that you could not pass a needle between them, so how it was that the Gypsy Kings, carrying large musical instruments and followed by a television crew, came to arrive at the dinner table unmaimed, must remain a mystery for ever.
But they did, and commenced, with no messing about, with ‘Bamboléo’.
The people at the table looked like beleaguered tourists in the kind of restaurants where people come and play violins in your ear, that is to say, horribly embarrassed and as if they were wondering how much it would take to make them go away.
Mademoiselle Guillem looked as if her nerves were about to snap.
Happily, she was led away to cut the cake somewhere quieter.
As for the rest, they were on their chairs whooping and dancing and having a high old time, which is what, I think, was intended.
Christian Lacroix's C'est la Vie dress: Sylvie Guillem wore it on the night
Main picture: Les Onze Danseurs de Molly Molloy flutter round as garish pink butterflies at the Opéra-Comique
Left: Les oiseaux espagnols flap their feathers for the celebration.
Below: Marie Seznec, Lacroix's peach model leans on the peach-coloured cake
Above: Marie Seznec, Monsieur and Madame Lacroix and a Lacroix model stand to attention in the squashed Opéra-Comique
Left: a Lacroix creation on the catwalk.
Far left: lemon trees, perfectly ripe, lined staircases and balconies in honour of the scent
CARS
Easy rider
THE COUNTESS DE BORCHGRAVE finds the BMW 325i convertible thrilling to be in and easy to drive.
She shows Raffaella Barker why
Wrapping her sable coat close about her slender form, Countess Dominique de Borchgrave slides into the driver's seat of the BMW 325i convertible and, with a manicured finger, presses the button to lower the electric roof.
The car quivers in well-bred anticipation as Dominique adjusts the mirrors and touches up her lipstick before engaging first gear and dashing off down Sloane Street from her Knightsbridge flat.
The car is the most powerful model in the BMW 3 Series and, like all of these small BMWs, is popular with women drivers, either as a company car or a runabout for collecting children and shopping.
Its looks are a selling point, particularly to women, and Dominique is quick to appreciate this.
‘This car is sex on wheels,’ she purrs in heavily accented English.
‘There is something animal about her, she is alive in my hands.’
The car's liveliness is counter-balanced by its extreme safety: there is plenty of top quality metal to protect passengers from possible collision damage.
The solidity gives security at high speeds which is matched by comfort and a surprising degree of quiet when the roof is up.
The car seems equally at home eating up motorway miles and nipping around a traffic-logged town.
‘She is a tiger,’ shrieks Dominique, racing off from traffic lights, thrilled by the acceleration (0 to 62 mph in 8.7 seconds).
Dominique whisks across Battersea Bridge.
‘She is so smooth and voluptuous to drive,’ she gasps slowing for road works.
Although Dominique remains in happy ignorance of mechanics, she appreciates the fabled BMW ride, all bumps ironed out by immaculate suspension, reliable road holding and a six-cylinder engine.
Waiting in a traffic jam the engine turns over so silently Dominique has to rev to make sure the car hasn't stalled.
‘I drive a Renault Boston,’ she said.
‘The things I look for in a car are power steering, central locking, heating that works and a stereo.
It must be reliable and able to live outside.
I have never changed a tyre or looked under a bonnet.
BMW is aware that women have different priorities to men when buying a car, but don't patronise.
All preferences are catered for, from high performance to an easy-to-operate convertible roof.
Dominique has her own priorities.
‘I like a car to look good, which to me means feminine and elegant.
This car would be perfect for me if it was a hatchback, as I need that for work.’
Dominique runs Borchgrave PR — an agency which organises parties.
‘I need the space to collect flowers from Covent Garden market and for my luggage when I drive to Belgium to see my mother.’
In fact, this compact car has plenty of boot space, and easily contained a travel cot and weekend bag.
However, the space seems to have been taken from the back seats which are very cramped for adults but fine for children.
As a measure of the car's enduring versatility, the photographer tells of a glamorous grandmother he knows who drives a dark green one.
Dominique is shocked, but agrees that it is a car everyone can enjoy, ‘although my mother would have a heart attack in it’, she adds with glee.
Coaxing the car through London, Dominique longs for the empty roads of Europe.
‘This car would love the autoroutes through France,’ she said, and I am reminded of Françoise Sagan, who motors from Paris to Nice without recourse to the brakes, such is her command of the gear-box.
Sweeping into Battersea Park, the anti-lock brakes show to advantage as the car pulls up in a flurry of leaves.
Dominique gets out and sits on the surprisingly long bonnet.
‘Everything about this car is absolutely first class,’ she says.
Anyone who has driven any BMW will tell anyone who hasn't that the cars inspire envy on the road.
People take malicious pleasure in cutting in on them and burning them off at traffic lights.
Nonetheless a BMW is worth the irritation — and in particular this model.
It is a car in which driving becomes a pleasure rather than a necessity; much thought has gone into providing conveniences such as a service interval indicator (which tells you when you car needs servicing) and an automatic check panel (to make sure you don't run out of oil etc).
While these features are not aimed specifically at women drivers, there is no doubt that they will appeal to the less mechanically minded buyer.
Dominique has mastered all the controls without recourse to the manual, a tribute to its designers.
‘The dashboard is very straightforward and solid,’ she says.
The dials are plain without looking cheap and all controls are easy to operate.
The angling of the control panel towards the driver helps one to reach everything while driving, without having to let concentration waver.
We swoop back across the river, squeezing between lorries and taxis with aplomb.
‘She's not as wide as she looks,’ says Dominique excitedly, pausing a hair's breadth from a bus.
Weaving back towards Knightsbridge, Dominique becomes enraged at the traffic.
‘This car is wasted in London where they all drive so badly.
She needs the freedom of Paris,’ she says, reaching the peak of indignation.
We find ourselves in no time back in the square where she lives.
Parked outside her flat, the 325i gleams, its perfect lines embarrassing the cars flanking it.
Dominique uncoils herself from the driving seat and extracts herself elegantly.
She walks up to her front door, a picture of sophistication in her Armani suit.
With a little more driving practice, they would make a perfect couple.
A convertible Countess: Dominique usually drives a Renault Boston, but was immediately seduced by the animal attractions of this BMW
‘The car is wasted in London.
She needs the freedom of Paris’
QUEEN'S COUNSEL
Books
JASPER REES spots parallels between Hanif Kureishi and the hero of his challenging first novel
It is hard to take Hanif Kureishi at his word.
The scriptwriter of My Beautiful  Laundrette  and Sammy and Rosie Get Laid has written his first published novel which, like the two films, is plump with challenging statements about class, race, and sex.
And yet when pressed on any of these issues he says, ‘I don't want to say anything.
I hope The Buddha of Suburbia doesn't say anything at all: it just tells a story about growing up.’
The pivotal early scene in The Buddha of Suburbia (Faber & Faber, 2 April, £12.99) started out as a short story in the TLS .
In it, the young Anglo- Asian hero, Karim, engages in some heavy petting with a white male school friend, then takes a breather in the garden, where his Asian father is making love to his friend's single- breasted mother (cancer has claimed the other breast).
Whatever Kureishi may claim, minorities and special-interest groups have their say in his work.
Like Karim, Hanif Kureishi was born of a Pakistani father and an English mother and brought up in the London borough of Bromley.
Thus far The Buddha of Suburbia is autobiographical: thereafter Karim and Hanif go their separate ways, only getting back on to the same tracks when they both flee north of the river to west London.
Karim drifts uncertainly into an acting career, appearing as Mowgli in an experimental production of The Jungle Book , then joining a company which puts on an even more experimental production about class, race and sex.
The play takes him to New York, where he does some more drifting, before returning to London, older but still young, wiser but still carefree.
Hanif, meanwhile, has been chained to his desk since his mid-teens hammering out novel after novel, all of which are rejected by publishers.
He turns more fruitfully to plays, becomes writer in residence at the Royal Court, adapts Brecht for the RSC and Kafka for Radio 3, turns out two screenplays which Stephen Frears films, is nominated for an Oscar for one of them, and finally succeeds, in his mid-thirties, in getting a novel published (its adolescent predecessors have been burnt four years earlier).
The Buddha of Suburbia is a jaunty unambitious novel — a far cry, doubtless, from those early works, which Kureishi incinerated ‘for fear that anybody would read them and know things about me’.
And yet he later admits that the new novel is ‘emotionally autobiographical in lots of ways.’
One of those ways is the manner in which, as artists, Kureishi and Karim confront their membership of, and ambassadorial loyalty to, two different races.
When he plays Mowgli, Karim's skin is deemed too pallid and he is forced to wear black-and-white minstrel greasepaint; cast as a downtrodden immigrant in his next part, he caricatures Changez, his fat, idle and ugly cousin-in-law, who arrives from India halfway through the novel.
In both cases he faces the same moral dilemma which Kureishi has often encountered as a reluctant spokesman for the Asian community.
‘The questions that are asked of me by Asian people sometimes are the questions that are asked of Karim when he portrays Changez as a characters in his own play,’ he explains.
‘How dare you show our people in this way?’
My answer to that is that I don't feel that my job is to do PR.
You wouldn't be able to write anything with any merit at all if you were constantly trying to portray certain groups in a favourable light.’
Although he has no patience with unassimilable Asian culture, Kureishi's work also identifies what he calls ‘a spiritual vacuum’ in suburban London.
The Buddha of Suburbia is about filling that vacuum, which Karim's father does by leaving his wife for his single-breasted girlfriend and setting up as a Bromley guru, or escaping from it, which Karim himself does by moving north of the river in search of new mainly sexual, experience.
In a sense, this is typical first-novel fare, and it reads like a first novel, with its attendant flaws — the heavy imbalances and visible seams.
Karim's narrative voice is for the most part naive, but when the blinding light of some tremendous truth flashes before him, the voice of his creator is doing the prompting.
‘I never really solved that problem,’ Kureishi admits.
‘It was technically too tedious.
At times he is wise beyond his age, but I just wanted to write whatever popped into my mind at the time.’
Kureishi is unrepentant about at least one of the novel's structural crudities: ‘I like writing about group sex,’ he explains, ‘because it is a good way of getting all the characters together.’
When the orgy scene becomes the focus for a persistent line of questioning about ‘research’ and autobiographical authenticity, Kureishi proclaims in a town crier voice, ‘It all happened to me.
And much more.
It happened every day.’
In conversation this is a rare moment of levity, as he describes himself as ‘a bit of a miserable bastard’.
His face, to be sure, is not built for mirth: framed by luxuriant, shoulder-length black hair, his chubbyish cheeks curve round into a pinched mouth which makes him resemble Roshan Seth, the Indian actor who played the hero's vodka-sodden father in My Beautiful  Laundrette  .
Kureishi is pleased by the comparison, as he says Seth's haughty looks find favour with women.
Glumness apart, he nonetheless would like to be thought of as a comic writer and indeed, though its themes are class, race and sex, what most impresses about The Buddha of Suburbia is that it is full of humour.
‘I like writing about group sex — it's a good way of getting all the characters together’
Hanif Kureishi: whatever he may claim, minorities and special interest groups have their say in his work
Theatre
MATT WOLF looks forward to Ian McDiarmid's Volpone, and to Serena Gordon in Look Look by Michael Frayn
‘A lot in it remains undiscovered,’ Ian McDiarmid says of his current lead role in Volpone , the 1606 satire that is Ben Jonson's most frequently performed play.
Accordingly, each decade seems to offer up a banner production of it.
At the National Colin Blakely and Paul Schofield played the lead in 1968 and 1977 respectively, and the RSC mounted the major production of the Eighties with Richard Griffiths and Miles Anderson.
McDiarmid considers Volpone ‘our great classical comedy’ but nonetheless the play can have its longueurs, which is why his first instinct seems absolutely right — to knock an hour off its length, thereby distilling a Jonsonian energy rarely felt on stage.
Volpone reunites McDiarmid with two former colleagues and friends: his Mosca, Denis Lawson, was a drama school classmate and ‘double-act’ at the Royal Scottish Academy; his director, Nicholas Hytner, was a fellow associate director at the Royal Exchange, Manchester.
More recently, of course, Hytner has become the internationally acclaimed director of Miss Saigon , but he claims that he doesn't want just to be a director of musicals, or only of anything else for that matter.
What's important is that I still go on working with old friends like Ian McDiarmid at small theatres like the Almeida.’
Two weeks later comes the West End début of an actress who has been brightening the fringe and television sets for several years now: 26-year old Serena Gordon.
Last year, she was the yuppie careerist Marion in Steven Jeffreys' award-winning Valued Friends at Hampstead and went on to lend credibility to the Royal Court's fairly ludicrous Sleeping Nightie .
In April she opens alongside Stephen Fry, Robin Bailey and Margaret Courtenay in Look Look , Michael Frayn's first fully original play (as opposed to his Chekhov adaptation,Wild Honey and The Sneeze ) since his 1984 Benefactors .
In synopsis the new play sounds rather like his best-known work,Noises Off .
Once again, the setting is theatrical, and the perspectives are varied — Act I presents the audience at a play; Act II shows the characters in the play, and yet even they are not what they at first seem, as Frayn offers both the lines they are delivering and the thoughts they are actually thinking.
‘It's terribly difficult, I keep having to read it again to try and work it out,’ Gordon says by telephone from New York, where she is enjoying the acclaim for After the War , last summer's Frederic Raphael TV series for Granada in which she played the Raphael alter ego 's wife.
While in Manhattan, she's been to the theatre to admire Tom Hulce's new play, and had time to ponder the prospect of her imminent year-long London run — her lengthiest stage engagement to date.
‘I'll be watching the seasons change out of my dressing-room window: I'm doing it to test my patience,’ says Gordon, disappointed only that her love of travel must be momentarily put on hold.
‘I'll take long journeys on the Circle and District lines.
I'll take my passport and go to Ongar.’
Serena Gordon, preparing herself for a year in London —‘I'll take my passport and go to Ongar’
Television
This Spring, BBC2 is televising a Primetime production of one of the great theatrical stagings of the 1980s — Trevor Nunn's landmark production of Othello , with Willard White in the title-role, Ian McKellen as Iago, and Imogen Stubbs as a more than usually childlike Desdemona.
Like his celebrated 1976 Macbeth , which teamed McKellen and Judi Dench, Nunn's Othello was deliberately small-scale and intimate so as to shift the emphasis away from overripe declamation and directorial grandstanding and back to the fevered pulse of the play.
The result revivified at once this potentially most over familiar of works, pulling audiences into the tortured, erotic geometry that defines its central quartet.
For television, Nunn has pruned 40 minutes off its four-hour plus length and he says a further twenty minutes may still come out.
But the small screen, he insists, has not compromised his intention — to ‘show once and for all that Shakespeare wrote a domestic tragedy as coherent and layered as anything Chekhov wrote under the same banner’.
If anything, TV should enhance the value of those unspoken moments so rendingly charted in this production, and it will preserve three near-definitive performances which too few people were able to see last year either at Stratford or the Young Vic: operate singer White's sweet-faced Moor, shiningly simple acting about which many London critics were unduly patronising; McKellen's sweaty and furious Iago; and Zoe Wanamaker's unforgettable Emilia, a belated voice of conscience and wisdom in a household destroyed by passion.
MATT WOLF
Music
Many-talented campaigner Maya Angelou has written the lyrics for King .
PATRICK O'CONNOR meets her
There cannot be many lyric-writers who have begun their careers in the theatre by dancing Scheherazade in a strip-club in Los Angeles, gone on to appear at La Scala, Milan and then to play the title-role in Mother Company .
But then there isn't anyone else like Maya Angelou.
Born in St Louis 60 years ago, she speaks eight languages, and has published five volumes of autobiography, beginning with I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings , several collections of poetry, plays and both music and lyrics for a number of songs.
Dancer, singer, actress, teacher and diplomat, her work is infused with an anger born of a deep knowledge of pain and oppression — racial and sexual — but much more than that with humour and wisdom.
On meeting her, it seems natural to want to sit at her feet.
Now Maya Angelou has written the lyrics for Richard Blackford's musical King , celebrating the life and work of Martin Luther King.
This is probably the first time that someone who was acquainted with the central figure of such an enterprise has taken part in its creation: as if Tim Rice had known Eva Peron.
‘I was young and hot then’, she says, talking of her dancing days in LA, and later in the famous European tour of the 1950s of Gershwin's Porgy and Bess that took her to La Scala.
Although she no longer performs, except as a lecturer (she is professor of American Studies at Wake Forest University in North Carolina), she still likes to sing, ‘When I've had a couple of glasses!’
She has had a hit song with Roberta Flack and worked on material for, among others, Marvin Hamlisch and Spencer Jones.
Although she always wanted to be a writer, the theatre has claimed a lot of her energy (she has been nominated for an Emmy and a Tony award).
‘I really wanted to dance all my life.
I have a grand-niece, my brother's granddaughter, and two Saturdays ago I went to see her dance in Denver — and she danced just as I've always wanted to dance.’
She makes a languorous gesture with her arm.
‘She's very very black, pretty, you know, with a tinge of blue?’.
Her eyes flit an almost imperceptible challenge at the white man sitting opposite her to agree that indeed the darkest of dark is the most beautiful.
Her voice is deep, with the tones of a viola.
She punctuates her conversation with snatches of song, hummed through closed lips, then recites slowly some of the words she has written.
I asked if, in re-reading King's works for his project, she had been surprised at what she had found.
She leans forward resting her elbows on her knees, as if about to recount an anecdote.
‘I would have thought that I knew him fairly well, but in writing the lyrics I found depths I had never contemplated.’
She agrees that in order to give a political or ideological message in music, it has to be almost abstract.
She would like an audience to identify with something within themselves, but she hates the idea of King being canonised.
‘I tell you, media and even historians have made him bigger than life, but if you remove a person from accessibility, then you can't emulate them.
I don't want young people to think, ‘Oh that's Martin Luther King — I can't be like him’.
We show some of the tatters, his humour, his romantic erotic love.
Impatience even — which is a blight threatening us all the time.’
She believes that his speeches will still be read and listened to in 100 years.
‘Prejudice is a burden which confuses the past, threatens the future, and renders the present inaccessible’, she has written.
So it is important now to go on fighting the battles, once so hard-won.
‘It's amazing, and really very sad, that we have such poor memories.
I think that living is just so damned hard!’
In her latest collection of poetry (to be published by Virago in May) she has written,
‘Midwives know that birthing is horrible
And dying is mean
And life's a bitch in between’.
I asked her to sign a copy of All God's Children Need Travelling Shoes for me.
‘I like that book,’ she said, as if talking about someone else's work.
‘Joy’ she wrote and then her name.
One of Maya Angelou's own pleasures is listening to great voices.
When young she admired Victoria de los Angeles and Jusi Bjoerling, but found their singing so moving that ‘I'd start to weep, the body can hardly stand it’, and so would sit at the back of the hall.
She rates Simon Estes, the great Wagnerian baritone who is to take the title-role in King , on the same level.
‘Estes is in that class.
When you hear his voice, it's as if something's creeping up your cheek.’
Coretta Scott King will be sung by Cynthia Haymon, Glyndebourne's Bess, and the production will be by Graham Vic.
It will be fascinating to see if, in paying tribute to a ‘human and accessible’ martyr,King can also attract audiences of Lloyd Webber proportions.
King opens at the Piccadilly Theatre on 4 April.
Dancer, singer, actress, teacher and diplomat: the versatile Maya Angelou
Film
The Krays evokes the brutish power of the notorious underworld twins.
BRIAN MASTERS was appalled but riveted
After watching this film I have overthrown an ideal I have cherished and protected against every attack for more than 30 years: that in no circumstances should a man be murdered by conscious decision of the State in revenge for a murder he has himself committed.
If Ronald Kray really was as vile as he is herein depicted, he should have been put to death and swiftly forgotten.
It is a tribute to the makers of The Krays , to its director and cast, that it should have such a profound effect.
It does not manufacture heroes.
Nor does it sanitise the violence.
Even ‘violence’ is too familiar a word, used to describe the acts of football fans or punches from pickets.
When you see our Ronnie slicing the lips and nose from a man he has taken a dislike to, and relishing it, then you know what violence really is.
Still, I do not believe these scenes of cruelty are there to titillate or entertain.
They reflect quite accurately the rough intimidating East End world which nurtured the Krays and made their brutish power possible.
East London during and just after the war is lovingly portrayed, with an eye and ear for detail which strike a nostalgic chord.
The milk bottle on the kitchen table, the women knitting and despising their menfolk with brilliant bitter humour, the crowded nights in the Underground station, all capture that incomparable spirit of the Londoner, and one of glorious Londoner in particular— Vi, the courageous mother of the Kray twins.
Violet Kray is the heroine of the film, and she is played by Billie Whitelaw with a warmth which is completely credible and endearing.
She gave her twins absolute love and loyalty, and received in return their respectful obedience.
She deserved better than that they should grow into thugs, and they ultimately let her down by disappointing her dream of two perfect boys.
Director Peter Medak makes the camera focus on Vi's fierce motherhood, so one understands this was a world dominated by women.
Another lingering lament of Auntie Rose (Susan Fleetwood), seated in the armchair face to camera with no gimmicky cuts, is hauntingly moving.
And so is the searing shot of Kate Hardie's painful panicky frustration on an endlessly mirrored staircase.
Miss Hardie as Reggie Kray's hopeless little wife, so imprisoned by mindless subservience that her suicide is awesomely logical, is quite astonishing, and the camera spots all its subtleties.
Peter Medak uses his camera not as a spectator but as commentator, even as mediator.
As the twins, Gary and Martin Kemp are faultless, as powerful in imitation as the Krays were in life, and as thick.
Gary Kemp's portrayal of the homosexual psychopath Ronnie is utterly chilling; we are not shown what he does in bed, but it cannot have been much fun for his boyfriend.
Martin Kemp is the handsome human and redeemable Reggie, goaded out of his shred of decency by his mad brother, who watches him murder McVitie in a terrifying frenzy of anger and brotherly affection, stabbing the inert body long after life has left it.
In almost every way The Krays is a film to be commended.
But it needs some kind of explanation.
There are other mothers who bring up boys in wartime without their being brutalised.
What went wrong?
What is the real source of such vicious emotional death?
Philip Ridley's otherwise excellent script does not pose these questions.
Perhaps he is out to entertain after all.
Art
George Costakis owns the world's most distinguished private collection of Russian avant-garde art, and 22 important works from it are being offered for sale at Sotheby's on 4 April.
Costakis was born of Greek parents in the USSR and lived there in various protected diplomatic capabilities until 1977, quietly collecting the great art of the 1920s which Stalin had declared decadent and unacceptable.
Optimists in the West have suggested that he was allowed to make acquisitions undisturbed because certain powerful figures recognised the importance of the work he was collecting; others have said that only by keeping his activities entirely secret was he able to amass this extraordinary body of paintings.
In 1977, he bought passage from the USSR by ‘donating’ to the Tretyakov all the paintings from the collections that they wanted; the remaining ones he took with him to Greece and retirement.
Now he is selling a handful of prize works to establish prices for the rest, which he hopes to sell to a major museum.
This work by Liubov Popova is among the high-points of Sotheby's sale, estimated at £1,800,000 to £2,200,000.
Andrew Solomon 
As the twins, Gary and Martin Kemp are faultless
Opera
Opera-goers who never venture past the Watford Gap are missing out, urges RUPERT CHRISTIANSEN
Nicholas Payne is one of the inspirational architects of two of the major achievements of post-war British music — the Welsh National Opera and Opera North.
These organisations (along with Scottish Opera) have lifted the taint of ‘provincialism’ from the popular notion of the quality of opera in the regions and taught their big London brothers a thing or two about the imaginative use of limited resources, the building of new audiences, and the ways of making opera without ‘great’voices in a theatrically potent and exciting experience.
Payne has, since 1982, been based in Leeds as general administrator (operatic parlance for ‘managing director’) of the Opera North, although at the moment his name is being much whispered in connection with higher things in foreign places, such as the Metropolitan Opera in New York.
In his present incumbency he takes a company into its twelfth season this spring looking remarkably solid and healthy.
Originally masterminded by the Arts Council as a branch of the English National Opera, it is now completely independent and in steadily expansive mood.
Among its assets are the Grand Theatre, its charmingly over-decorated and atmospheric Leeds home, with an Italianate intimacy to its horseshoe-shaped auditorium; an orchestra and chorus, young in heart, age, and sound, who seems to get better every time I hear them; and a musical director, David Lloyd-Jones, who has done twelve years of sterling service and will be promisingly succeeded in August by Paul Daniel.
Many of our finest singers — such as Josephine Barstow and John Tomlinson — have given memorable ‘star’ performances for Opera North; others, like Sally Burgess and Helen Field, have developed their repertoire here, in productions which, if lacking in the radical Central European flavour promoted by the Welsh National Opera, are rarely less than good-looking and intelligent.
The company tours throughout the north of England, and opera-goers who never venture past the Watford Gap simply don't know what they're missing.
Payne's operatic path to Leeds began in the late Fifties with a teenage passion nurtured on legendary performances like Callas's Sonnambula , the Visconti-Giulini Don Carlo , and Nilsson singing Wagner at Bayreuth.
He read English at Cambridge —‘actually I spent most of the time reading opera’ and went on to become one of the first crop of the Arts Council's pioneering Arts Administration course, which was ‘a bit Heath Robinsonish then, but still a wonderful grounding’.
He did a further two years' apprenticeship at Covent Garden, and then six years back at the Arts Council in finance department.
‘I was a troubleshooter: it taught me a lot about dealing with people.’
Having been sent to investigate the Welsh National Opera, he was offered a job as their financial controller and subsequently established a world-beating team there with an old friend, the company's general administrator Brian McMaster.
He didn't want to leave Wales to take the supremo's reins in Leeds.
‘But I had to go: it would have been so wet to have said no.’
What makes him so good?
First, he has a scholar's knowledge of, and passion for, opera — he writes many of Opera North's programme notes, and very good they are too.
Second, he has a rare and profound understanding of how to relate the exigencies of budgets to the exigencies of opera production (which is like relating fire to water).
‘You can't control finances unless you control policy,’ he claims — a principle on which he has provided Opera North with well-balanced books which do not depend on churning out Bohème and Carmen every night.
Nevertheless, like everyone else in the business, he needs more money.
His dealings with the chief sources of Opera North's subsidy, the Arts Council and Leeds City Council, are happy enough, and he has successfully scotched a dismal plan to merge with Scottish Opera, but he worries that Leeds lacks a ‘coherent cultural policy’ of the sort that Birmingham and Glasgow have committed themselves to.
‘I fear that Leeds is going to get badly left behind.’
Payne wants Opera North's second decade to bring it more office space, a scheme through which the company could apprentice young artists, and some sort of studio auditorium for more experimental work.
At the moment, he simply can't afford any of them.
For a similar reason he has also been forced to cancel the long-cherished project of staging the British première of the Bernd Alois Zimmermann's epic Die Soldaten — a production which would have focused international attention on Opera North at a point when it is clearly ready for such exposure.
He has, however, been able to fill the gap in the schedule with an almost equally intriguing unknown quantity, an opera by the Danish symphonist Nielsen called Maskarade .
The season also sees Jerome Kern's marvellous musical Show Boat , Verdi's rarely heard Jérusalem and a brave double bill of Ravel's Schicchi , directed by Martin Duncan, at Leeds Grand Theatre.
Payne is too wise to the lightning-like unpredictability of operatic disaster to be smug about these exciting prospects, but they certainly make Opera North look increasingly like a company entering its prime and not to be missed.
Opera North's Nicholas Payne, who boasts scholarly passion and financial know-how
AMERICA
The brotherhood of Van
For most of the time, the people of Fort Worth are content to ponder their Van Cliburn autographs, but when it comes to the piano competition held every four years in honour, they don ten-gallon hats and yip.
ANDREW SOLOMON caught the fever
The Van Cliburn Piano Competition is the focus of both the cultural and the social life of Forth Worth; founded not by Van Cliburn but by a Texan piano teacher in honour of the local hero.
And hero he is.
The Duke of Wellington, returning from his triumphs, could not have been greeted with greater celebration than was Van Cliburn after he won the Tchaikovsky piano competition in Moscow in 1954.
The event gave him a place in world headlines, and he was the first classical pianist to win a platinum disc for sales exceeding a million copies of a single record, for his recording of Tchaikovsky's first piano concerto.
In Forth Worth, people line up to be photographed with Van; they collect first copies of his recordings; they drive past his house and tell stories about what they suppose may be going on inside.
They quote his off-hand comments and remember the rhythms of his anecdotes.
In quiet moments, they wonder what it would be like to have such genius as his.
Van lives with his mother, the 92-year old Rildia Bee Cliburn, and Tom Zaremba, a professor of mortuary science at Wayne University.
Rildia Bee is easy to spot from any distance because she always wears floor-length dresses of silk brocade and a mink stole — which, air-conditioning or otherwise, is not necessarily the obvious choice of outfit in Fort Worth.
She was Van's piano teacher right up to the Moscow prize, and will tell at the drop of a hat the story of his childhood promise, which first manifested itself when Van was a tender lad of three.
Rildia Bee had finished giving a piano lesson to a student who was experiencing difficulty with some rather complicated passages in a sonata, and the student had left the house.
Suddenly, Rildia Bee heard the piece being played exquisitely in the next room, and beheld her own tiny to perched on the bench playing an instrument he had never before touched, and playing it already with transcendent genius.
The Van Cliburn Piano Competition is now often called the most important piano competition in the world.
From hundreds of auditions, held throughout the world, the board chose 38 competitors.
Each of these played two recitals in the preliminaries.
The jury, also a an international body, then selected twelve semi-finalists, each of whom played a quintet with the Tokyo String Quartet, and a recital which had to include a piece commissioned by the board for the competition, and of which, therefore, there was no standard interpretation.
The six finalists then played two piano concertos each with the Fort Worth Symphony.
And at the end of two short weeks, the final judgements were made, and the prizes were delivered.
Well before arrival, each competitor is assigned to a host family, and to be a host family is a tremendous prestige.
In Fort Worth, families vie for places as hosts, and then cheer for the competitors assigned to them.
They take them to museums; they give them cars to drive around town; they introduce them to everyone worth knowing in Texas.
There are often, among the competitors, girls from Eastern Bloc or otherwise under-privileged countries who have been brought up to believe that a monumental talent requires total dedication, who have been told that great minds do not fuss about small externals, who have been led to suppose that for a great genius to be a plain Jane is only appropriate.
The illusions of such young women are rapidly shattered by the grandes dames of Fort Worth.
Before their anxious eyes, these innocent girls see the much-beloved skirts of black bombazine they brought from home consumed in flames.
They see their long lank locks clipped from their heads in short order.
During the hours they had set aside for practising, such girls are whisked off to Neiman-Marcus, where they are instructed on the difference between Bill Blass and Geoffrey Beene with a degree of rigour reminiscent of their earliest scale-drumming days.
Appropriate shoes are also purchased, as are other accessories.
Make- up artists are brought in to transform the faces of these girls; their hands are slapped away from beige foundation, and the sleek colours of Chanel bring the glow of affluent youth to faces that have for more than twenty years caused most men to avert their gazes in dismay.
It does not stop there.
At the last competition, one host family, horrified by the condition of their guest's teeth, spent thousands and thousands of dollars having extensive dental work done before the finals.
If a pianist is particularly charming and quite gifted, his failure to win the competition need not trouble him; money is raised privately among local citizens, and he is given his own Carnegie Hall recital, perhaps, or his own scholarship to the Conservatoire in Paris, with a living allowance to provide for ‘a minimally decent standard of living’— a phrase used in Forth Worth to describe what British people might call an upper middle-class lifestyle.
Though the personal hospitality from the host families forms the base of the Van Cliburn, there is also hospitality on a grander scale.
Everyone who is anyone in Fort Worth throws a party for the competition, either for the jury or for the competitors — who are permitted to mix only as they are eliminated.
The same people appear at party after party.
At the centre there are a handful who hold important roles at the Cliburn, and those who always have the calm look of those who have taken on difficult jobs and remain, despite myriad new crises, absolutely in control: Susan Tilley, chairman of the board of the Van Cliburn Foundation; Mildred Fender, the social chairman for this year's competition; Richard Rodzinski, director of the foundation; and John Giordano, chairman of the jury.
I arrived on Saturday night, and the next day attended a small Sunday lunch at the home of Mildred Fender.
The hostess swept her hand vaguely through the air at a flying insect.
‘Will I never be rid of that witch doctor's moths?’ she asked irritably.
Everyone in Forth Worth collects something, primitive sculpture; but almost everyone has Mexican or American Indian folk art, and these collections form a standard topic of conversation.
Mildred had bought a mask which featured hair made from uncarded sheep's wool, and which had produced moths only after hanging for a year on the landing of her staircase.
We talked about the moths for a bit, and then someone asked what she had done with the mask.
‘I threw it out,’ she said, in a tone of slight disgust.
‘You shouldn't have done that,’ said a tall woman.
‘Every time you get a mask, Mildred, you should put it in the deep freeze.
I have heaps of them there, right next to the hamburger meat.’
On Monday, there were eight hours of concerts, all semi-finals.
Everyone goes to the concerts.
Everyone.
Men with top-level executive positions arrange in advance to take two weeks off to attend the Van Cliburn; habitual meetings of all description are deferred; women leave their housekeeping entirely in the hands of their housekeepers.
Foolish indeed is he who supposes that the music is only an excuse for the parties; not only does everyone go, but everyone has opinions.
People root for pianists as though they were football teams, hoping that one will really make the most of the commissioned piece, trying to nobble the judges at parties to announce that someone's interpretation of Brahms has changed their hearts and souls.
At a party on Monday night thrown by George Ann Carter — wife of the late Amon Carter, whose father built the Amon Carter Museum — I spied a group of blonde teenagers in Valentino who could easily, in different outfits, have been cheerleaders; they had the regular features of the all-American girl from the heart of the USA.
They were speaking with great energy to one another, and laughing.
About clothes?
Boyfriends?
I drew near to hear one of them say, ‘He was murdering the Ravel!
Murdering it!’
And in response, irritably, ‘That Kevin Kenner you like so much is like a classical version of Liberace.’
The next day there were more semi-finals.
In the Van Cliburn Café, people whispered to one another that Pedro Burmester was a sure favourite, that Jean-Efflam Bavouzet had redeemed a poor recital with a brilliant performance with the Tokyo String Quartet, that the Russians would win, that Benedetto Lupo was a talent of incredible scale, that the Chinese lacked passion.
When the semi-finalists were announced, late that night, there were cries of dismay and delight, tears shed, hugs exchanged.
On Wednesday came the masterstroke of entertainment, a party reported to cost some $12,000 which revealed definitively that the people of Fort Worth have a sense of humour about themselves.
Mr Carroll W. Collins requested the pleasure of our company for a ranch party, in Western dress, at Texas Lil's Diamond A Ranch.
As rain threatened, the members of the social committee dutifully telephoned all 300 guests to move the party to the coliseum in town; they moved Texas Lil as well.
At Van Cliburn's party the previous week, each guest had received a gold watch with the insignia of the competition inscribed on its dial.
At this party, each guest was given a bandanna version of the flag of Texas.
Mildred Fender was in sequins with large feather earrings and a ten-gallon hat.
The delicate fabrics of Christian Lacroix had been put aside, and all Texas society emerged in jeans, plaid shirts and in big hats, in blue frilly blouses and canvas skirts, repeating over and over again: ‘You see!
We're just ordinary Texans at heart.’
The Soviet juror, who had looked distinctly peevish since the beginning of the competition, was dressed in an acre of denim, and kept firing two silver pistols into the air and crying, ‘Bang, bang!’
The following evening, the finals began (after a ‘French picnic’ buffet for the competitors, hosted by Julie and Angelo Otero, and an elegant dinner at the Museum of Modern Art).
Everyone discussed favourites.
Everyone argued about the jury.
The next day (after a party at Neiman-Marcus for the competitors to meet agents, and a reception at the Kimbell Art Museum), there was another stunning performance, and then a party in honour of Rildia Bee, at which people lined up to talk to her as though she were Santa Claus.
‘Is Mrs Cliburn sitting at that end of the room?’
I asked someone, since the crowd was so dense that one could not see the tiny figure in mink and brocade.
‘She's set up there like a part of the Rameses II exhibition,’ came the answer.
Rildia Bee held court, charming and charmed, while Gisella Tect, baker extraordinaire, cut the wedding cake Van had bought for the party, as lovely as the wedding cakes he always has at parties for his mother, a wedding cake made, of course, by Gisella Tect herself.
‘They're just the prettiest cakes on earth,’ a Van Cliburn patron explained to me.
‘They're prettier than cakes that aren't wedding cakes.
We all eat wedding cakes from Gisella Tect.
She's a wonder.
And Van just loves her cake.’
The last of the finals was on Saturday night (after a luncheon at the Rivercrest Country Club), with works of Chopin, Brahms and Rachmaninov that we had come to know and love; and there must have been 700 people at the Forth Worth Club party afterwards.
Only with an effort did those who had been to all the other parties locate one another and separate themselves from the mob.
Many of them left early, to be well rested for Sunday lunch at Martha Hyder's which was certainly the prettiest party of all.
Tired but happy, the usual crowd circulated with glasses and smiles.
On the terrace —‘we call it the stoa’, Martha's social secretary informed me — the finalists, in a nervous group, reclined in Bugatti sofas.
On Sunday afternoon came the awards ceremony.
Van Cliburn made a stirring speech about the nature of inspiration, but the tenor of the whole thing was like an athletics award ceremony.
When Alexei Sultanov, a nineteen-year-old from the USSR, was finally declared the winner, he rushed up on stage and lifted his trophy over his head and yipped with glee and the people of Fort Worth stood and clapped as if they had been seized with divine ecstasy.
In the eyes of all good Texans, Alexei Sultanov that day took his place in history.
Should Alexei Sultanov find himself, in 40 years, all washed up, he will need only to go to Fort Worth to find all the tribute due to a Van Cliburn winner in the prime of life.
Whether, at the tender age of nineteen, he will be able to withstand the gruelling concert tour he has won remains to be seen; Radu Lupu, who won the competition in 1966, accepted the trophy but turned down the year of free promotion and international débuts.
All was soon forgotten as we trooped off first to a reception thrown by the Count and Countess de Vogue, and then to the Worthington, Fort Worth's grand hotel, for dinner and dancing.
Attired once more in our black ties, we swung the night away.
Everyone was there: the host families, the pianists, Mildred Fender, Susan Tilley, Richard Rodzinski, John Giordano, Dudley Moore, the judges, the people who had thrown the parties, the people who had gone to the parties.
At my first event in Fort Worth, I had held on to the few people I knew as though for dear life, terrified at the thought of being stranded in this great wilderness.
At this party, I rushed around like a student on the last day of school, confronting over and over again people's incredulity and dismay at my impending departure, assuring them that I couldn't believe I was leaving, exchanging addresses and agreeing to keep in touch until the end of time.
Such situations are, of course, always a bit artificial.
But Texas hospitality does not perish even when conditions are adverse.
About a month after the finals of Van Cliburn, I ran into Van Cliburn himself in Moscow, where he was making his great return concert at the personal invitation of the Gorbachevs.
Installed in the grand suites of the National Hotel were Van and Rildia Bee, and Tom Zaremba, and Susan Tilley, and a multitude of other friends from Fort Worth.
There I found nurses in tow, and the pilots who had flown the private jet, and a crew of translators, and some inscrutable domestic staff.
Van had brought with him a microwave oven, enough basic food supplies to open a supermarket, American toilet paper, American Kleenex, French mineral water, and a host of other civilising supplies.
There were more than a thousand roses arranged in his suite.
After his big concert, Van invited dozens of Soviets back to the hotel, where we ate chocolates and caviar and drank local champagne.
Rildia Bee kept saying what a nice country it seemed to be, and she grinned like Christmas.
Susan Tilley patted her impeccable coif and conceded that it had all turned out really well, and smiled her friendly, competent smile.
Tom Zaremba took photos of everything and told anecdotes about Morocco and laughed and poured more champagne.
Richard Rodzinski talked about Poland, and his wife observed that we were very lucky to be treated like this in Moscow, and they both laughed too.
In the street outside the hotel, a crowd cheered and cheered; periodically someone would go on to the balcony and throw roses down to the assembled admirers.
Everyone agreed that the Gorbachevs were lovely people.
Only someone who has been in Moscow can fully appreciate that it is a city in which the warmth and intelligence of the people sometimes compensates for a basic implacable drear which, however submerged, remains the dominant backdrop to all pleasures.
Moscow is a grey city; comfort there is always tied to power, and power too frequently to abuse of power.
I love Moscow, and I think its beauties are many, but I think also that only the Van Cliburn coalition, casting its own magic so thick around itself that all the world becomes a glittering study in delight, could make one feel that it is the happiest and nicest and most cosy-comfortable spot on earth.
Among the thousand roses, and Texans were once more the hosts, and the Soviet translators, diplomats, piano teachers, students, sweet elderly ladies with worn gloves the guests, visitors to a country more foreign, and in some ways more wonderful, than almost any they might visit if they were able to get passports.
Alexei Sultanov will play with the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra at the Royal Festival Hall on 22 March.
A lunch party at the home of Gordon and Beverley Smith, charming and accomplished Fort Worthies
The people of Forth Worth clapped as if seized with divine ecstasy
Everyone agreed that the Gorbachevs were lovely people
FIRST-STOP FASHION
TROUSERS SUIT
This spring, trousers are making a big comeback, walking into even the most formal occasions.
Worn with crisp white shirts under loosely tailored jackets, in classic shades of navy, white and neutral, these are the creases to bare.
SHOPPING BAZAAR
Sue Crewe discovers painted Easter eggs, lethal candlesticks and the world's most expensive tea
Who hasn't ever surreptitiously shredded a glossy green leaf, overcome by curiosity as to whether a plant is real or not?
This massacre of the innocents I blame on The Silk Plant Company whose trees, plants and flowers are so lifelike, one can be forgiven for doubting the real thing.
They have three shops in London: 164 Old Brompton Road, SW5 (pictured above): 186 Fulham Road, SW10, and 75 St John's Wood High Street, NW8, where there is a lush forest of ficus, hibiscus and bamboo and the ground is carpeted with mounds of roses, blossoms and spikes of buddleia.
Prices start at about £1 for a single bloom, £15 for pot plants, and £70 for trees.
Top whack would be £1,400 for a 14-foot ficus.
The name of the shops is a little misleading; many of the plants are made from synthetic materials and scores of people have stooped to smell the waxy lilies only to find that they are plastic through and through.
Laura Ashley has a particularly good spring and summer range for children up to the age of twelve, with styles that are attractive without being prissy.
The boys' collection includes a navy cotton drill suit, the top of which is a ticking-lined bomber jacket.
For girls, there is a range of stripy cotton jerseys, and a fetching white cotton cricketing jersey that can be worn over a neat pair of white cotton drill bermudas or a cotton jersey skirt.
Is there no stemming the tide of impeccably tasteful prints?
Wherever one turns there seems to be an inexhaustible supply of old-fashioned roses and Piranesi urns, most of which are mounded and framed a little more elaborately, shall we say, than their modest charms seem to merit.
If all this bland fare has dulled your appetite for the prints it is time you reminded yourself how glorious they can be by a visit to THE LUCY B CAMPBELL GALLERY, 123 Kensington Church Street, W8.
Recently moved from Holland Park, the gallery specialises in seventeenth, eighteenth and early nineteenth-century prints and here you can find the extraordinary and the exquisite; pictures that are touching and others that are bizarre.
The gallery also sells a small number of original paintings, most of which are decorative and quirky, such as this study of a hen and her chicks by Anna Pugh, who paints with a mixture of oil and emulsion and charges between £1,000 and £2,000.
These strange and beautiful candlesticks balance motionlessly on their needle-sharp points, generating excitement by the very fragility of their inertia.
Designed by Jason Shulman, these grandly original pieces are available in both copper and nickel for £240 each from Joseph, 26 Sloane Street, SW1.
Joanna Wood, 48A Pimlico Road, SW1, is one of those shops that sells charming fripperies, the sort of place where you can be sure of finding the very thing for someone who would prefer to buy their own toaster but who would love to be given a  Limoges breakfast set or monogrammed shoe-bag.
Pictured above is a beautiful hand-painted wooden egg which, at £71.50, is at the expensive end of Joanna Wood's large collection of Easter eggs, chickens and bunnies.
With a barrel like a stick of lime and licorice candy and a clip in the shape of a pelican's beak, this particular fountain pen isn't short on identity and, as it writes smoothly and reliably, is no mere style item.
The Souveran 400 by Pelikan costs £65, and is one of the medium-priced pens in the range.
Its Woosterish appearance conceals some white-hot technology, such as an airtight ink-chamber which is guaranteed not to leak in an aircraft cabin.
Pelikan pens are available from Harrods, Selfridges and specialist pen shops.
Of 80 world-wide Ikea stores, England has two; one at 255 North Circular Road, NW10 and another at 910 Europa Boulevard, Warrington.
The basic principle of these vast Swedish furnishing stores is to provide self-assembly furniture in self-service flat packs, thereby keeping prices to the absolute minimum.
Bulkier things like sofas can be delivered or whisked away on a rented roof-rack.
Looking like a Legoland space station, Ikea also provides supervised nurseries, free parking, restaurants and endless loos.
What the stores sell is extremely good value, functionally designed and occasionally inspired furniture: attractive pieces for a very modest outlay.
The lacquered fibreboard coffee table above costs £20, the metal and glass table lamp £17.70.
Skilfully used, a fabric border can pull a room together just as effectively as swagging everything in sight with the same chintz.
Additionally, as the border can edge a plain and inexpensive material, it can be an economical way of achieving a rich and interesting look.
Up to now, most borders have been French imports, but this year a company has come into being which designs and manufactures borders in this country.
BORDERLINE, I Munro Terrace, SW10 (823 3567), has brought out a small but ravishing collection.
Some of the borders are designed to be cut out and appliquéd on to a host fabric, while others are an integral part of a plain background material.
The company will also have a range of enchanting embroidered and woven ribbons copied from Victorian pieces found in antique shops.
Pictured is a ruby red velvet with a cream parrot tulip border, it is also available in sapphire and forest green and costs about £40 per metre.
Strip borders range from 18 to 38 cms in width and cost from £7 per metre.
HARRODS is the least practical shop in the world, and this spring the top people's store is laying out the trading mats with élan.
They have been collecting goodies from all over the globe, with no trouble or expense spared, and have recently announced that they have just paid a world record price for a rather small amount of tea.
What this means to you or me is that if we happen to fancy a cup of the most expensive tea in the world, we would have to hurry off to Knightsbridge this month and shell out £35 for a quarter of a pound of Indian brew named Castleton.
Harrods sent me a tiny twist of the stuff and I can report that when made it is extraordinarily clear and pale.
The leaves are spectacularly large and green but frankly not worth doubling your mortgage for.
Penhaligon's story has all the ingredients of a Victorian melodrama.
Founded by a Penzance barber in 1870, the exclusive range of ‘toilet requisites, perfumes and pomades’ were a huge success, and the St James's premises were quickly patronised by royalty and grandees.
Unfortunately the barber's immediate heir was feckless and dissolute.
Instead of getting on with the business of making toilet water, he spent his time on the racecourse and worse.
Despite the undeniably quality of the product, the firm couldn't weather the wastrel's dissipations.
By the 1970s the business had dwindled to near extinction, before being rescued by a clever and resourceful lady called Sheila Pickles, who bought what remained of the enterprise and discovered she had acquired a wealth of recipes and formulas.
These she followed and the renaissance of Penhaligon's was underway.
With four shops in London and others in York, Bath and Chester, two Royal warrants and a range of delightful fragrances, the story has a happy ending.
Pictured is a 100 ml bottle of Violetta eau de toilette, costing £19.
For further information and details of the mail order service, telephone 606 5355.
JEWELS
Roll away the stones
DIANA SCARISBRICK reveals exquisite tokens that celebrate Easter with grand gestures
Fabergé eggs appeal as much now as ever.
Besides grand presentation eggs Fabergé produced quantities of grape-sized Easter pendants.
Most are egg shaped, made of enamel and decorated in a variety of designs.
A dark green nephrite elephant bought by Queen Mary for £3.15s at Fabergé's London branch before Easter 1912 is now on sale at Wartski, 14 Grafton Street, W1 (01-493 1141)— for considerably more.
There is an excellent selection, illustrated above, at Ermitage, 14 Hay Hill, W1 (01–499 5459), is owned by Alexander von Solodkoff.
One bears the Romanov double-headed eagle, another the cipher of the Grand Duchess Elizabeth.
Prices of eggs at Ermitage range from £5,000 to £25,000.
Kutchinsky, 73 Brompton Road, SW1 (01–580 9311), has a special line in modern versions which are available from £175 to £1,000.
Their workshop has craftsmen trained in the Fabergé tradition.
At the International Jewellery and Watchmakers Fair in Basle from 19 to 26 April, Kutchinsky will be launching a new Premier wrist watch.
Designed in a substantial, out-of- doors style the dial can be dressed up with diamonds at your request.
The watch is British made except for the movement which comes from the best Swiss supplier.
The ladies' version, in 18 carat gold (above) is £4,900.
Hugh Tait has taken the lead in trying to distinguish between fact and fiction when it comes to fakes and forgeries.
He is an expert and his Catalogue of the Waddesdon Bequest in the British Museum (1986) he has laid the foundation for the subject of a new exhibition, ‘Fake?
The Art of Deception’ at the BM from 9 March until 2 September.
Tait has brought together an intriguing group of Spanish betrothal pendants.
They represent (below) a spaniel on a cornucopia — symbols of fidelity and prosperity — and are first recorded in a drawing by a Barcelona goldsmith in 1603.
One pendant formerly in the Astor Hever collection — is by Vasters, the others were acquired in Spain before 1870.
While they are on view he hopes to establish which of the pendants are genuine, which of them are fakes and what are the distinguishing factors.
Animals are frequently presented in one form or another at Easter time, either carved or in chocolate, engraved or jewel encrusted.
Cartier, of 175 New Bond Street, W1 (01–528 7419), has produced the ultimate in opulent creatures with a fine strutting cockerel brooch.
His gloriously coloured plumage is emblazoned with 169 diamonds, 44 sapphires, 31 emeralds, three round rubies and two pear-shaped rubies, all set in eighteen carat gold.
At £25,000 he won't be secreted under everybody's egg cosy at breakfast on Easter morning, but it is good to know that the best is there if you can afford it.
It was Easter when Wallis Simpson was given some ‘awfully nice stones’ whilst on holiday with the Prince of Wales in 1931.
The custom of giving jewels to people as Easter presents continues today.
Kiki McDonough of 73 Elizabeth Street, SW1 (01–730 0248), is presenting a collection for Easter inspired by the amethyst, much appreciated in Victorian and Edwardian times.
She has given this rich stone a 1990s look by setting it in delicate modern mounts for necklaces, earrings (above), and rings.
Jennifer's Diary
Flashback
The first five items here had to be held over to make space for the 1990 Social List in the March issue…
Paul Gunn's Exhibition at Ramster, near Chiddingfold
One Friday evening, I drove down to the lovely old house, Ramster, near Chiddingfold, where artist Mr Paul Gunn and his charming wife Miranda had invited friends to the first night of an exhibition of Paul Gunn's most recent landscapes, and to drinks and supper.
Ramster, which belonged to Miranda Gunn's grandmother the late Hon.
Lady Norman, and then to her mother Lady Burke, is a charming old family house with plenty of space.
There is the Brick Hall, which makes a super picture gallery, the Big Drawing Room, and the adjoining Long Hall, where places were set for dinner at one long table for 160 guests!
Huge log fires were burning in the open fireplaces in both the Long Hall, and the Big Drawing Room.
Here hung two very fine portraits, and a large picture of Paul Gunn as a child with other members of the family, painted by his famous father the late Sir James Gunn, who was one of our finest portrait painters.
The pictures in Paul Gunn's exhibition were all landscapes, most beautifully painted in oils.
They included scenes in London, in and around Peking, the garden at Ramster, beaches in New Zealand, Cap d'Antibes, where the Gunns have a house on Miranda's uncle Antony Norman's La Garoupe estate; Barbados, Provence, and Venice.
There were seventy- five paintings in the exhibition and by the time I left, which was quite early as I did not stay for dinner, most of the pictures had a little red sold label.
Paul and Miranda Gunn had their charming young family to help them look after the guests; their two sons Mr Munro Gunn who works at John D. Wood, and Mr Marcus Gunn who had just got home from Paris, where is working at the Paris Business School; also their two daughters Miss Petronella Gunn, who is studying at Bristol University; and seventeen-year-old Miss Rosie Gunn, who is a member of the Junior British Eventing team, and last year competed at Lausanne, where she won the award for the highest placed British rider.
Incidentally, Paul Gunn has paintings on view in the Brick Hall Gallery, by appointment only, all the year round.
The number is Haslemere 4422.
Five Years of Successful Private Enterprise
Some weeks ago, I went to a most exciting block of modern flats called Waterside Point, near Battersea Bridge, that only opened last year.
Here, Mr. Christopher Lawrence-Price had kindly lent his charming first floor flat to Miss Deborah Bennett, to give a little party to celebrate the fifth year of successfully working on her own in marketing and public relations.
Deborah's first job was as a bright-eyed teenager, working for Jocelyn Stevens on the merchandising side of Queen Magazine , in the late sixties.
Later she worked on merchandising and public relations for Estée Lauder in England for ten years.
Among friends who had come to wish her further success were Mr Bernard Leser the head of Condé Nast in America, who had just flown in; Earl and Countess Alexander of Tunis, the Hon.
Rupert Carington, and his very attractive Italian-born wife Daniela Carington; Mr Michael Balston, Lord Kenilworth, Count Fritz von der Schulenburg, Miss Alison Price, and quite a few others.
Reception at Garrard for Elizabeth FitzRoy Homes
Lady Tanlaw and the Countess of Euston were joint hostesses at a reception held in aid of a reception held in aid of the Elizabeth FitzRoy Homes, in the magnificent showroom of Garrard the Crown Jewellers.
The event was sponsored by Mann Egerton, and the Chinese restaurant Zen generously donated the food.
During the evening designers Jean and Martin Pallant of Motcomb Street showed their Spring Collection of afternoon and evening dresses.
The Elizabeth FitzRoy Trust provides small family homes for the mentally handicapped; it also organises special holidays for the physically handicapped.
There are now 10 homes caring for 163 people, and the funds raised during the evening went towards the building of an 11th home, for 12 young people with profound multiple handicaps.
Anyone wishing to send a donation may do so to: The Countess of Euston, Elizabeth FitzRoy Homes, Freepost, Haslemere, GU27 2BR.
The Diamond Ball for SANE
After a delightful dinner party with young friends in their lovely Phillimore Gardens home, I went on to the Lancaster Hotel, where the Diamond Ball, which was an inaugural ball for SANE (Schizophrenia A National Emergency) was taking place in the hotel's new ballroom which I was told seats 1,400 guests.
The place seemed packed, and the ball was going with a tremendous swing.
Lady Tryon, who is one of the trustees of SANE, was Chairman of the ball, and looked very attractive in a dress with a black velvet top and a very full red satin skirt.
In spite of running a home in the country, and being the mother of four splendid children, including twins, and running her Kanga dress business not only in Beauchamp Place, but worldwide, Dale Tryon finds time to work and take an active interest in this good cause, for which Lord Mottistone is the Chairman.
Other members of the committee are Sir Campbell Adamson, Mr. Charles Bracken, Mrs. Gillian Waddington, and Sir Ralph Halpern, who was at the ball accompanied by his pretty daughter Miss Jennifer Halpern.
I also met Lord Tryon, who is, I know, very proud of all his wife's achievements.
De Beers were very generous in their sponsorship of this ball.
By the time I arrived the Diamond Theme Display, and the Guards Band and Marching Display, had already taken place.
Also the auction, and the raffle, for which one of the prizes was a diamond bracelet.
As a result of this splendid evening, around £80,000 was raised for SANE, whose headquarters are at 120 Regent Street, W1A 5FE.
Caledon-Newman Marriage
One of the happiest parties I have been to for a long while was the one at Claridge's given by Mr and Mrs John Newman, to celebrate the marriage of their daughter Miss Henrietta Newman to the Earl of Caledon, son of the late Earl of Caledon and the late Mrs Denis Alexander.
There had been a candlelit Service of Blessing in the tiny church at the bride's home Compton Chamberlayne in Wiltshire, the previous day.
The young couple looked so happy, Henrietta wearing a lovely pale grey silk organza Valentino dress, as they received their guests, around 400 of whom came to wish them happiness.
The first friends I met were the bridegroom's half-sister Lady Tana Focke, with Mr Paul Focke, and their two very attractive teenage daughters Diana Focke and Victoria Focke.
His other relations present were his stepmother Elisabeth Countess of Caledon, his sister Lady Jane Alexander, with her fiancé Mr Andrew Dobbs; and his cousins Earl and Countess Alexander of Tunis.
The Mandarin Oriental Hotels
I recently had news of the Mandarin Oriental Hotels Group, who give perhaps the best service to customers of any hotel group in the world.
They had just announced an excellent six months, with profits up by 31 per cent.
The MOHG now have a brilliant Chairman in Mr Simon Keswick, who although still in his forties, was the very successful head of Jardine Matheson in Hong Kong for two periods, so knows the Far East and the location of the group's hotels so well.
They also have a young and go-ahead American managing director in Mr Robert Riley, who I met in the autumn.
The latest projects of the MOHG are a joint venture for the refurbishment and management of the Bella Vista Hotel in Macau; seeking a really good site for a grand luxury hotel in New Delhi; and in Malaysia, a joint interest has been acquired in a site for a potential new hotel.
There has been extensive remodelling and refurbishing of suites in the Garden Wing, the River Wing, and the Authors' Wing of the Oriental Hotel, Bangkok.
In 1989, for the ninth year running, the Institutional Investor voted the Oriental, Bangkok, the Best Hotel in the World; the hotel received the same accolade from the Business Traveller , and from Euromoney magazine, and Executive Travel magazine's readers voted the MOHG the Best Group catering for the Lone Woman Traveller!
Sadler's Wells Royal Ballet Royal Gala Performance
Mrs Alexander Hehmeyer from Chicago, who is President of Sadler's Wells Association Inc (USA), which was founded in 1980 to raise funds to support the work of Sadler's Wells, and to develop cultural exchanges of performing companies between the US and Sadler's Wells, very kindly invited me to go with her and her husband, to a Royal Gala performance at Sadler's Wells.
This was to see the Sadler's Wells Royal Ballet dance Les Sylphides , and The Two Pigeons , at a performance commemorating the life and work of the late Sir Frederick Ashton, who gave us so many wonderful productions.
The evening was honoured with the presence of Princess Margaret; and very generously sponsored and presented by Digital Equipment Company, who have been the Sadler's Wells Theatre's main sponsor since 1986.
The money raised by this Royal Gala was going towards building the Frederick Ashton rehearsal studio above the Lilian Baylis Theatre adjoining the Sadler's Wells Theatre.
The Royal Gala was the beginning of a drive to raise £250,000 to get the project finished.
The Sadler's Wells Royal Ballet is now one of the very best in the world.
The romantic ballet Les Sylphides , which I always enjoy, with choreography by Mikhail Fokine, opened the programme.
The leading roles were danced by Roland Price who danced so well; Karen Donovan, Sherilyn Kennedy, and Yannick Stephant.
After the interval we saw The Two Pigeons with Sandra Madgwick, Michael O'Hare, Anita Landa, and Chenca Williams in the leading roles.
The large orchestra was very well conducted by Ormsby Wilkins, who, like the two ballets, received great applause.
Princess Margaret wore a pretty blue silk evening dress, and sat in the front row of the circle.
Sitting beside her in the first half were the managing director of Digital Equipment Mr Geoffrey Shingles, and the Chairman of the Sadler's Wells Trust Professor Gerald Manners; and in the second Mr Richard Martin director of Corporate Affairs at Digital, and Mr Jeremy Isaacs the Director of the Royal Opera House.
During the two intervals presentations of those running the Sadler's Wells Royal Ballet, and those generously supporting it, on both sides of the Atlantic, were made to her Royal Highness.
On arrival at the theatre I was met by Mr and Mrs Alexander Heymeyer, the latter was originally Scottish and born on the Isle of Skye.
Soon we went in to our seats.
I had a lovely seat in the front row of the circle, beside Sir Roger Falk, a most entertaining companion who was Chairman of the Sadler's Wells Foundation for ten years, and is now Vice-President of the Foundation, for which Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother is patron, and Princess Margaret is President.
Sir Roger was still recovering from a bad car accident just before Christmas.
Others I met were Mr Richard Martin, the Hon.
Mrs Wills, who was in attendance on Princess Margaret; Lady Wilkinson, and Sir John Leigh.
The Bluebird Ball
One of the most important events in the teenage calendar is the Bluebird Ball, for 14–18 year olds, held annually in aid of the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children, at the Savoy Hotel.
This year's Chairman was Mrs Rupert Frank, who had the support of her husband, and two of their three sons Frederick and Alexander Frank at the ball, which went with a swing from the start.
Thee were plenty of amusements for the young guests, including a palmist who proved very popular; also a tombola, which was most efficiently run by Mr and Mrs John Pearce, helped by four of their five children.
Juliana's Discotheque played for dancing in the Lancaster Room, and Bojolly's in the Abraham Lincoln Room; both were packed.
Committee members present included Mrs Carolyne Courage, who brought a bus load of young friends with her son Marcus, who was celebrating his birthday at the ball; Madame Bernard Giraud, who brought a party of eighteen-year-olds; Mrs Hugh Taylor, and her daughter Alexandra; Mrs Diana Wildman, and her daughter Vicky; Mrs Henry Wilson, and her daughter Samantha; and Mr and Mrs Charles Lewellyn, and their daughter Sophie.
Mrs Claudio Abado was another who had worked hard towards making the evening a success, but was unable to be present.
Among the other young guests were Alexander Soskin, Mark Emerson, Alexander Adam, and Andrea Campbell.
The young men were turned out and the girls looked very pretty, some of them in microscopic skirts!
The only sadness was that they all appeared to smoke like chimneys.
The air was so thick with smoke that one could barely breathe!
Why do parents not try harder to stop their children being so silly?
Royal Ascot 19th–22nd June 1990
I have received the following from Her Majesty's Representative at Ascot.
He wishes to announce that there will be a limited number of Royal Enclosure vouchers available for New Applicants for Friday 22nd June only, of the Royal Meeting.
New applicants wishing to apply for these vouchers should write to Her Majesty's Representative, The Ascot Office, St James's Palace, SW1A 1BP, before 31st March, stating the full name of those members of their family who require vouchers, together with their ages if between 16–25 years.
Sponsorship forms will then be sent which should be signed by a sponsor who has been present in the Royal Enclosure for at least eight years.
A ballot will be held and all new applicants will be notified of the result by mid May.
Previous holders of Royal Enclosure vouchers should apply in writing in the usual way before the end of April, stating their full names and ages if between 16–25 years, who have not been granted Royal Enclosure vouchers previously.
They will require a sponsor who has been present in the Royal Enclosure for eight years.
Vouchers if granted, will be valid for the Friday only, of the Royal Meeting and should be applied for before 31st March.
In the Enclosure ladies will wear formal day dress with hat which must cover the crown of the head.
Gentlemen will wear morning dress with top hat, or service dress.
The White Knights Ball
The White Knights Ball, in aid of the Order of Malta Volunteers, who work with the sick and handicapped, is held annually at Grosvenor House.
The funds raised go towards the volunteers' work in 140 countries.
This includes a leper colony in Africa, and sick pilgrims in Lourdes.
It is the oldest order of Chivalry in the world, founded in 1099 to care for the sick and wounded soldiers in the Crusades.
Today, the OMV also takes care of the less privileged, and the handicapped.
One of its principal aims is to make sure that those with disabilities can lead lives that are as normal as possible.
The Order has its headquarters in Rome, with the first Englishman for 700 years, Fra Andrew Bertie, as the Grand Master.
Mrs Owain Williams, who has been Chairman of this ball for the last three years, looked very pretty in black velvet.
Her party included the President of the British Military Order of Malta Lord Craigmyle, and Lady Craigmyle; and the Honorary President of the OMV Maj.-General Viscount Monckton of Brenchley, and Viscountess Monckton; and his sister the Hon.
Lady Goulding, who has done such incredible work for the needy in Dublin, and is a Founder Member of the Central Remedial Clinic which specialises in helping children with cerebral palsy.
Other patrons in the party included Miss Ann Ryan, Mr Owain Williams, the Abbot of Downside Dom John Roberts, and Mr and Mrs John Monckton.
The hard working ball organisers Miss Fiona Halpin, Miss Georgina Rapinet, and Mr Peter de Soissons, were present; also the Hon.
Adam and Mrs Macmillan, and Mr and Mrs Michael Rapinet were among others enjoying this excellent dance, which, Lord Craigmyle said, was ‘Fun for everyone and funds for pilgrims’! the Slaughter House Seven played during dinner; and after the auction, which was most efficiently conducted by the Chairman of the OMV Mr Stephen Macklow-Smith, Mr Dick Ritchie of Continental Airlines, who had donated the top prize which was a trip for two to Houston, Texas for a week, said a few words.
Then there was dancing to the Wendy Roberts Band, and the William Bartholomew discotheque.
Anyone wishing to make a donation, send it to: Stephen Macklow-Smith Esq, Order of Malta Volunteers, 43 Carlton Hill, London NW8.
PML Day at Ascot
I don't very often go to National Hunt racing, but I went to Ascot one Friday, and had a most enjoyable afternoon.
Before racing started, I lunched with Her Majesty's Representative colonel Sir Piers Bengough and Lady Bengough, which was a very happy start.
It was also most comfortable in the Members Stand, which was so uncrowded one had plenty of room to move around easily.
The racing was of quite a high standard.
The third, fourth, and fifth races were generously sponsored by PML, Munns & Sons Electrical, and the First National Bank PLC.
The first of these, the Munns Electrical Hurdle Race, for which there were ten runners, was won by the odds-on favourite Calabrese , owned by Mrs Ann Fagan, trained by Mr Nicky Henderson, and ridden by Richard Dunwoody.
After the race Mrs Fagan was presented with the trophy, a set of three cut glass decanters, by Mrs Alan Munns, whose husband is managing director of Munns who were sponsoring a race at Ascot for the first time.
Before the race, Mrs Munns judged the best turned-out horse, which she told me she was also doing for the first time.
Next we had the big race of the day, the PML Lightning Novices Steeple Chase, worth over £10,000 to the winner.
It was very disappointing that there were only three runners.
The joint favourite Mr Michael Buckley's The Proclamation fell at the fourth fence, which was a nasty blow to his many supporters and he had been heavily backed.
This left the other joint favourite Mr John Poynton's Young Snugfit , and the outsider Cashew King , who was well ridden by Thomas Wall, came away to win easily.
In this instance that old racing saying: ‘Back the outsider of three’ was certainly true!
After the race the joint owners received their trophy from Mrs Peter Lawton who was accompanied by her husband, a director of PML Consultants.
The third sponsored race, the First National Steeple Chase, was a handicap with eleven runners.
The winner was the bottom weight and possible Grand National runner Zuko , owned jointly by Mr Stanley Powell and Mr Ken Jaffa, ridden by Mark Perrett, and trained by Mr Stan Mellor, who beat the top weight Mr Jim Joel's Ballyhane , who was giving the winner 25 pounds, by seven lengths.
I did not see the trophy presented this time as I had to leave before the last race.
Besides my kind luncheon host and hostess, I met the Marquess and Marchioness of Abergavenny, he succeeded the late Duke of Norfolk as the Queen's Representative at Ascot, a role he carried out most effectively for ten years, during which time he suggested many improvements that her Majesty agreed should be carried out.
John Abergavenny handed over to Piers Bengough in 1982.
I also met the Marquess of Hartington, who, since he took over as Senior Steward of the Jockey Club in July, has worked extremely hard and is already greatly respected in that role; also Mr and Mrs Johnny Henderson who were shortly off after a business trip to Australia via Bangkok, and home via Dubai, where alas, they arrive after I will have left: Mr and Mrs Malcolm Kimmins, he was one of the stewards; the Hon.
Mrs Nicholas Beaumont, whose husband is Clerk of the Course, and whom I only saw in the distance; Mr and Mrs Oliver Sherwood, Major and Mrs Peter Wiggin, Mr and Mrs Tim Dawson, Mr Harry Middleton, Mrs Colin Ingleby-Mackenzie, Colonel and Mrs Tommy Wallis, and their daughter Mrs Charles Baker; Mr and Mrs John Guest, Mrs Tom Scott, Mr Peter Dimmock, and Mrs George Beeby.
Relais et Châteaux Hotels Luncheon
The British Branch of the Relais et Châteaux Organisation held a reception and luncheon at Claridge's.
Here guests were greeted by the Chairman of the British Branch of the organisation Mr Tim Hart and Mrs Hart; they are the proprietors of the superb Hambleton Hall on Rutland Water; Mr and Mrs Martin Skan, owners of the Chewton Glen Hotel, in Hampshire; and a director and the general manager of Claridge's Mr Ronald Jones, who was delighted that Claridge's had been elected a new member with the top award of a purple shield, denoting the splendour of a palace, with exceptional service.
Wholly deserved by this truly great hotel!
The other three new British members are The Capital, in Basil Street, whose owner Mr David Levin was awarded the yellow shield for exceptional comfort.
The third award, also a yellow shield, was given to Mr and Mrs Peter Smedley of beautiful Ston Easton Park, near Bath.
The fourth award, a Relais Gourmand Red Shield for an exceptional restaurant, went to Mr John Burton-Race, the chef and patron of l'Ortolan Restaurant, Shinfield.
The French Ambassador and Vicomtesse Luc de la Barre de Nanteuil, Monsieur Regis Bulot, who is the Chairman of the Relais et Châteaux Organisation, Lady Conran, and travel writer Miss Wendy Arnold were among those present.
Others enjoying this fabulous luncheon were Mr Simon Courtauld, the very attractive Mrs David Levin, and Mr Martin Hale formerly with Claridge's, now the youthful Director of Lowell's Hotel, New York, which has recently been made another new member.
The Laurent-Perrier Champagne Award for Wild Game Conservation
Laurent-Perrier certainly made a splendid effort towards Wild Game Conservation when they started their £5,000 awards in England in 1984.
The annual award is to promote and encourage imaginative projects and management of wild game conservation and its habitat.
These awards, which are open to any individual or group in the UK, are now cherished by landowners.
In 1989 there were over twenty entries.
Vicomte Bernard de la Giraudière, Chairman of Laurent-Perrier International, started this award in France, where it proved most successful for several years, before they generously brought the idea to England.
The panel of judges in England this year were .
The prizegiving which took place at Apsley House, by kind permission of the Trustees of the Victoria & Albert Museum, and the duke of Wellington, started off with two speeches: firstly Vicomte Bernard de la Giraudière, who welcomed the prizewinners and other guests.
Then the Duke of Wellington, who made a most interesting speech on imaginative farming and game conservation, in which he deplored the massacre of nearly tame reared pheasants, and said that landowners and farmers should look to quality rather than quantity when shooting pheasants.
His Grace then presented the prizes.
The first prize of £3,000, a case of Laurent-Perrier Champagne, and a diploma, was awarded to Mr John Wilson of Ixworth, Thorpe, Suffolk.
He won the award for the regular habitat improvements made on his 1,680 acre property, where he and his keeper alan Smith four years ago gave up rearing pheasants, and built up wild birds, both pheasants and partridges, which have gone from strength to strength.
They did this by developing game crops, game spinneys, small woods, and unsprayed or carefully sprayed headlands.
The latter have produced wild flowers and butterflies which are of great interest to visitors and school children.
John Wilson, whom I last met some years ago with his wife on a trip to the Seychelles, thanked His Grace, and paid tribute to the support and enthusiasm of his wife, Alan Smith his hardworking keeper, Peter Pask the farm manager, and his farm staff.
He thanked Laurent-Perrier for their generous award, and said it would be spent in building the ‘Laurent-Perrier Hide’ to overlook the wild fowl area, and to be used as a classroom to educate children in wild game, wild flower and butterfly conservation.
The second prize of £1,500, a case of Laurent-Perrier and a diploma was awarded to Mr James Ogilvie and his staff at the Forestry Commission's 125,000 acres at Kielder in Northumberland.
James Ogilvie could not be present to receive the award, so it was handed to Dr Robert McIntosh, the manager.
One of the two third prizes was awarded to Sir Anthony Milbank for the Barningham estates, County Durham, who also could not be present.
The other shared third prize of £500 was awarded to Lord Tollemache for his Helmingham estate in Suffolk; he happily was present with his beautiful wife, and received his award from the Duke of Wellington.
There were a few other awards given.
After the awards, guests enjoyed a delicious hot buffet luncheon proved by Laurent-Perrier.
Among those I met were the Duke of Wellington, who has his London home in part of beautiful Apsley House, which with all its treasures he presented to the nation some years ago; Vicomte and Vicomtesse Bernard de la Giraudière, and Mr Richard Nicholson the Vice Chairman of Laurent-Perrier UK, and his charming wife; Mr Malcolm Innes, Mrs Piffa Schroder, Mr John Grant of Rothiemurchus, the Hon.
Sir Charles Morrison, Mr Simon Parker-Bowles, and Norman Squires, and his wife, the latter was enjoying her first visit to London!
He is keeper to the fifth prizewinner Mr Alistair Haywood, and they came with Mr and Mrs Haywood.
Others present included the Earl of Swinton, and his wife Baroness Masham; all the other judges and their wives; and some of those who judge the Laurent-Perrier awards in France, including Monsieur Bernard Magniny, and Monsieur Hervé Nagelmackers, and their wives.
1st September is the closing date for the 1990 Laurent-Perrier Champagne Award for Wild Game Conservation.
Birthday Celebrations
The 150th anniversary of the birth of the Reverend Doctor Thomas Bowman Stephenson, founder of the National Children's Home, the 120th Anniversary of the NCH, and the 80th Birthday of the present Chairman of the NCH, that most beloved personality Viscount Tonypandy, have all been celebrated cleverly in order to raise money for the National Children's home.
This charity does magnificent work for children, caring for over 11,000 of them each year; today they run 200 projects, about which I have written in previous diaries.
I went to several events in 1989, the last one of which was a delightful evening of music, song and dance, at St James's Palace in the presence of the Duchess of York.
Viscount Tonypandy was present and made a brief speech of welcome.
Also present were Lord Romsey, Patron of the NCH Birthday Year, and Lady Romsey, looking beautiful in a red evening dress; the Principal of the NCH the Reverend Michael Newman, Mr John Gray the Director of Advocacy of the NCH; and the Chairman of the evening Mr Derek Hunt.
Among those who generously gave up their evening to help the NCH and perform on the tiny temporary stage were: Nerys Hughes, Angela Rippon, Susan Rees accompanied by May Parry; Penelope Keith, Robert Powell, Tamsin Little, accompanied by Vanessa Latarche: Wayne Sleep who gave a perfect performance on a tiny stage; he was accompanied by Mark Latimer; young Xan Blacker, also accompanied by Vanessa Latarche, Cor Meibion Gwalia, and Shirley Anne Field.
After the performance supper was held in three of the State Rooms.
Among others who came to support this good cause were the French Ambassador and Vicomtesse Luc de la Barre de Nanteuil, the Hon.
Sir Angus Ogilvy, who is Vice-President of the NCH; Lady Soames, another Vice President Sir Bryan Nicholson, and Lady Nicholson; Mr Robert Bourne, a most interesting and enterprising young man, and his wife Shirley Anne Field.
Also Mr and Mrs Nicholas Saint, Mr and Mrs John Lelliott, Lady Henrietta St George, another Vice president of the NCH; and Mr and Mrs John Taylor, and Miss Elizabeth Gage, wearing some of the beautiful jewellery she designs.
As a result of this evening over £100,000 was raised for the NCH.
Although the Birthday Celebration year is over, the good work of the NCH must go on.
So to celebrate Lord Tonypandy's eightieth birthday, the NCH George Thomas Society has quite recently been formed.
The First NCH George Thomas Society Dinner and Lecture
A short while after the evening at St James's Palace, I was very kindly invited to the First Annual NCH's George Thomas Society Lecture, held at the Cafe Royal.
It was for Fellows and Members of the Society, and the lecture was given by the Prime Minister Mrs Margaret Thatcher, a Fellow of the NCH's George Thomas Society, who was absolutely brilliant.
The chief sponsors of this evening were British Videogram Association, while Moët et Chandon kindly donated the champagne for the reception; Grants of St. James's kindly provided the wine, and Evian provided the mineral water.
Viscount Tonypandy sadly could not be present, so Mr Neville Shulman Vice President of the NCH and Chairman and Fellow of the NCH's George Thomas Society presided.
Before dinner the Reverend Michael Newman said Grace, and before coffee Mr Shulman proposed the Loyal Toast, then we had the lecture right away.
Looking wonderful, wearing a blue and silver brocade dress and jacket and a beautiful pearl necklace and earrings, the Prime Minister spoke with great sincerity for about 45 minutes, so I cannot begin to record all she said!
Among the points she made were the need for care of children, the importance of supporting the NCH, which was doing such a wonderful job for children in need; and the necessity of seeking out the fathers who abandon their children and making them pay maintenance.
She also paid tribute to those who have done so much to help children, and mentioned Miss Esther Rantzen and her Childline.
After the lecture Mr John Gray, who is also a Fellow of the NCH's George Thomas Society, made a brief speech of thanks.
To join the NCH's George Thomas Society, write to the NCH, 85 Highbury Park, N5 1UD.
Among others at the dinner and lecture were Lord Romsey, Mr and Mrs Stephen Moore, he is Chairman of BVA and CBS; the Duchess of Roxburghe the Patron of NCH Scotland; the Hon.
Sir Angus Ogilvy, Viscount Marchwood the managing director of Moët et Chandon; the famous negotiator of the world oil prices Sheikh Ahmed Yamani; Madame Taman Al Aubaro, the chief charity commissioner Mr Robin Guthrie; the Earl of Stockton the Patron of NCH in the North East: Mr and Mrs K. J. A. Fraser, Mr and Mrs Derek Nimmo, Miss Esther Rantzen, and her husband Mr Desmond Wilcox; Miss Angela Rippon a Vice President of NCH; Mr George Walker, and many more.
Leaving Party for Griselda
I went for a very short while to the Royal Academy of Arts for a leaving party being given for Mrs William Kerr, who firstly as Griselda Hamilton-Baillie then as Griselda Kerr, has worked so hard on the public relations staff of the Royal Academy, since 1972.
Now she is retiring to devote more time to her family.
Griselda Kerr, who has such a cheery smile and a warm heart, welcome everyone, standing beside the President of the Royal Academy Mr Roger de Grey, who later honoured her by making her a Trustee of the Royal Academy.
He presented Griselda, as a leaving present, with a voucher to buy an item from the RA Summer Exhibition which opens on 9th June.
Among those present were Mr John Raisman the Chairman of the Board of Trustees, Griselda's husband Mr William Kerr, and their enchanting children three-year-old Robin who shook hands with everyone, and Cordelia who preferred to stay with her father.
Also Sir Simon and Lady Hornby, Sir Edward Ford, Sir Philip Powell, Sir John Quinton, Mr and Mrs Tusart Lipton, Miss Janet Fitch, Mr David Rutherford, Mrs Mary Schwarzburg-Gunther, and Sir Nicholas Goodison.
Skender-McTaggart Wedding
Mr Nicholas Skender married Miss Julie McTaggart at the Greek Orthodox Church in Moscow Road; Archbishop Gregory of Theatiron and Bishop Timotheos officiated, and King Constantine of the Hellenes was the best man.
Afterwards there was a reception at the Hyde Park Hotel.
Here the bride and bridegroom received the guests with her parents Mr and Mrs John McTaggart, who divide their time between their Scottish castle and their home in Athens.
The bride's elder brother Mr Donald McTaggart was also in the receiving line.
The bride, who is an exceptionally pretty girl, looked lovely, wearing a full-skirted Victorian dress made of ivory wild silk, trimmed with lace; she wore white flowers arranged in the shape of a tiara in her hair.
She was attended by five children, Katherine Dunn, Antonia Poole, Mariella and Nathalie Tsavliris and James Moss.
The bridesmaids wore very pretty dresses also made of ivory wild silk with pale pink sashes and circlets of white flowers on their heads.
The page wore an ivory silk shirt and trousers with a blue cummerbund.
After the reception, the guests were piped in to a buffet dinner.
At the end of dinner, King Constantine proposed the toast to the bride and bridegroom, then the dancing began.
Queen Anne-Marie of the Hellenes was present; also Crown Prince and Princess Alexander of Yugoslavia, the bridegroom's father Mr Anthony Skender, Mr Nicholas and the Hon.
Mrs Scott, Mr and Mrs Alan Barnes, Mr and Mrs Nicholas Egon, Lt.-Colonel and Mrs Richard Morrissey Paine, Mr and Mrs Andrew Tsavliris, Mr and Mrs. Panagiotis Lemos, General and Mrs Michael Arnaoutis, Mrs Kay Carivalis, and her sons Mr Isidore and Mr George Carivalis, Mr and Mrs Richard Stillwell, and many other friends from abroad.
Forest Mere for a Few Days
Thanks to the wonderful invention of fax machines, which enable my office to send me the proofs and layouts to read and check, I was able to slip away to Forest Mere Health Hydro for six days.
During this time I lost 8 ¾ pounds and came away feeling a new woman!
Forest Mere, which is owned and run most luxuriously by the Savoy Group, really is the most wonderful place in the world to revive one after a tiring period, and remove any aches and pains.
At least that is what it does for me!
They have a new, quiet, charming, and very well qualified resident doctor Doctor Booth, who has made a special study of excess weight, and whom I found full of sound advice.
Otherwise their wonderful staff seemed the same as ever, headed by Mrs Julie Hughes who runs the place so well; Miss Barbara Hopkins, who has been there since Forest Mere opened, and is invaluable in seeing you have every comfort in your bedroom.
As I had requested, I had Pauline for massage; I always find she gives me the best massage I have anywhere in the world.
If only I could find a masseuse as good as Pauline in London, I would be happy!
Robin Tavistock's Fiftieth Birthday Party at Woburn Abbey
One Sunday, I went to one of the best planned and happiest birthday parties that I have ever been invited to.
This was to celebrate the fiftieth birthday of the Marquess of Tavistock, who nearly two years ago was desperately ill, following a mammoth stroke.
Thanks to a brilliant surgeon, and good nursing; also untiring care and encouragement twenty-four hours a day from his devoted wife Henrietta, and their two elder sons Lord Howland and Lord Robin Russell, happily he has survived and made a miraculous recovery.
Well over a hundred friends had been invited to luncheon at Woburn Abbey, but they were sworn to secrecy, and asked to arrive by a special route, so that no one went past the house.
It was hoped to keep the party a complete surprise for Robin Tavistock, and it succeeded quite brilliantly!
The party was really planned and given by his two elder sons Andrew Howland and Robbie Russell, who decided to keep it very simple, like a children's party.
When guests arrived at the Sculpture Gallery there was a barrel organ playing merrily on one side of the entrance, and a clown on stilts on the other side.
Inside there was a young man riding a unicycle, with balloons and decorations everywhere.
We all gathered in an area where a bar had been arranged, the house party guests being the last to arrive.
We were then asked by Andrew Howland to please keep absolutely quite when given a sign.
The moment came, and in walked Robin and Henrietta Tavistock; his expression was one of sheer amazement, and when he saw his father the Duke of Bedford, whom he thought was at his chalet in Méribel, I saw tears of emotion flood his eyes for a moment.
Ian Bedford had stayed at Claridge's the previous night to keep the secret.
As Robin said to me later, ‘suddenly to walk in and to see a sea of faces, all of whom I knew well, was the most tremendously stirring moment.
He had come down to the gallery to join the houseparty, he thought simply to look at a new sculpture, before they all returned to the house for luncheon.
After greeting his father, Robin proceeded slowly round the room greeting friends.
Then we all went into the main gallery for luncheon.
This had been cleverly decorated.
Half way across the gallery, high up, was a colourful banner banded by evergreens saying Happy Fiftieth Birthday, Robin , with a profusion of multi-coloured balloons around the walls, and one every table were bowls of flowers surrounded by children's festive bags of sweets, crisps, Polos, Smarties etc., with coloured paper napkins fanning out of every glass.
It really was such a happy, festive setting.
Congratulations Andrew and Robbie!
On Robin Tavistock's table, where I was honoured to be seated, was a superb square birthday cake, iced in Robin's racing colours, with fifty tiny candles in miniature gold candelabras.
There were tables of ten arranged right through the gallery.
No one was placed except the nine of us who were sitting at Robin's table, and we were just asked quietly when we went in ‘to go to the table with the birthday cake on it’.
Guests helped themselves from a buffet where a hot luncheon of delicious children's food was served, included sausages, goulash, and open baked potatoes with a pat of butter inside.
This was followed by a row of cold sweets, including trifles, blancmanges, jellies, or a choice of cheeses or both for some of the younger, still-growing guests!
There were no speeches, but just before Robin Tavistock cut his birthday cake, which had been moved to the middle of the gallery, the Hon.
David Sieff asked us all to join in drinking Robin's health, to which Robin replied in two sentences welcoming everyone and saying he hoped we would all come to his 100th birthday party!
I had the good fortune to sit between Ian Bedford, whom I have known since he was a teenager; and David Sieff, so I never had a dull moment!
Also sitting at Robin's table was the brilliant surgeon Mr Alan Crockard who operated on him in 1988 to save his life.
Earlier, a minibus had been sent to Eton to collect the Tavistocks' youngest son Lord James Russell, and some of his young friends including Viscount Lumley, whose parents the Earl and Countess of Scarborough were staying in the houseparty at Woburn, as were Viscount and Viscountess Chelsea.
The Winter Ball
This year's Winter Ball in aid of the Conservative Party marginal seats, was a very special one, as it celebrated its Ruby Anniversary.
The ball took place in the Great Room at Grosvenor House.
Here the decor by Miss Judy Nicholls of Images was a Renaissance theme, with gold-fringed swags and banners of ruby silk tied back with gold rope, and a canopy of sparkling lights suspended over the dance floor.
Lady Walters, looking very pretty in a pale blue sequinned satin dress was the very able Chairman of this year's ball.
She received the guests with the Prime Minister Mrs Margaret thatcher, who is the Patron of the Ball, Lady Thorneycroft, who is the President of the Ball and Mr Denis Thatcher.
They were later joined for dinner at Top Table by .
After a delicious dinner, Lady Thorneycroft proposed the Loyal Toast, then the Chairman Lady Walters made a speech thanking her team for all their hard work in making the evening such a tremendous success.
The Prime Minister then made one of her dynamic speeches, in which she referred to the collapse of Communism in Eastern Europe, but she warned that, to retain our freedom, we must maintain an enduring defence system.
It had given us stability for the past forty years.
After the speeches there was an auction most efficiently carried out by Jeffrey Archer, who had generously donated the Albert Goodwin print of the Houses of Parliament, which fetched £33,000!
Then Lady Walters and Miss Rosamond Wynn-Pope who is the indefatigable honorary organiser, and has run this ball so efficiently for the past fifteen years, drew the winning tickets for the raffle.
The first prize was an Atlantic blue Rover 820 Fastback, most generously given by Sir Philip and Lady Harris.
There was also a tombola, and dancing to the Dark Blues, and to Gibson's Discotheque.
Others enjoying this very good ball included , and many more.
Portakabin British Services International Alpine Ski Championships
The 58th British Services International Alpine Ski Championships were held for the second year running in Megève.
The British Army, Navy, and Air Force Ski Challenge Cup was first competed for in 1914 in Villars, Switzerland.
In 1972 members of the international armed forces based in Western Europe were invited to join in and Brigadier Graham Hollands, who is the very able Chairman of the Championships, is shortly hoping to include a Russian team!
The Italian Team has won nine times in the past ten years, but this year the British Army Team ran them a very close second.
There were also teams from America, Australia, France, Germany, Switzerland, and Spain, and for the second year there was a team of exceptionally courageous British disabled skiers led by Mr Mike Hammond and Miss Sue Hatch.
Portakabin, manufacturers of portable buildings, were once again the major sponsors of the event and the managing director Mr Patrick Shepherd and his wife Chris, were present along with other representatives from Portakabin.
They had also supplied the very colourful ski suits worn by the officials!
Silk Cut sponsored the British Army Team, and Courage the brewers sponsored the Ladies' Special Slalom event; Mr Quentin Williams of Courage also brought out a group of their representatives.
The officials included Squadron Leader Ian Sweet, who was the Championships' Secretary and the race commentator; Major Martin Leach, the technical delegate Mr Richard Berry, and PR consultants Colonel Geoffrey Godbold, and Major Hutch Hutchinson.
The Italian team Scuola Militare Alpina won the overall British International Ski Championships, Alpini  Giuseppe Ballerini being their greatest prize-winner.
He won the Men's Open Giant Slalom, the Special Slalom, and the Portakabin Men's Challenge Cup.
The British Army Team won the British Inter-Services team Championships Cup, and the Moët et Chandon salmanazar.
Lt. Hugh Hutchinson won the RAF inter-service Slalom Challenge Cup, the Robert Redhead Downhill Cup, and the Duchess of York Trophy for the Men's Overall Champion.
He was also the British Men's Combined champion.
Mr Mike Hammond won the Duchess of York Trophy for the British Disabled Overall Champion; Corporal Craig Bonnington won the Zach Freeth Giant Slalom Trophy; and the Hill Samuel Trophy for the best British newcomer went to Captain Jonathan Stichbury.
The Wilkinson Sword was won by the British Army Ladies' Team, and team member 2nd Lt. Tana McQuoid, who as a newcomer to the Championships, swept the board.
She won the Biffo Betts Giant Slalom Trophy, the Tony Gregory Trophy, the Courage Special Slalom Trophy, the Ladies' Combined Open Champion, the Eric Henry Trophy, the Pat Magill Trophy for the best newcomer, and finally, the Duchess of York's Trophy for the Ladies Commonwealth Overall Champion.
A truly amazing achievement!
Among those watching the Championships were the Deputy Supreme Allied Commander Europe (SHAPE) General Sir Brian Kenny the President of the Army Winter Sports Association; Air Chief Marshal Sir Patrick and Lady Hine, he is President of the RAF Winter Sports Association; Air Vice Marshal Sandy Wilson, Captain Sally Holt, Maj.- General and Mrs John Wilsey, and Colonel Robin McQuoid, very proud of his daughter's successes.
A number of parties took place during the race week, including a very good champagne reception most generously given by Mot et Chandon at the very comfortable four star Hôtel le Manège, which reopened in December under a dynamic new young management.
The highlight of the week was the Duchess of York's one day flying visit.
She is Patron of these Championships and, despite the imminent arrival of her second child, she attended the final afternoon's racing and the prize-giving which took place in the Palais des Sports, and presented some of the prizes.
The Mayor of Megève Monsieur Gérard Morand made a brief speech and presented Her Royal Highness with a picture.
Brigadier Graham Hollands thanked the Duchess of York for honouring the Championships with her presence.
Her Royal Highness who was looking radiant, assured everybody that she would be back on skis at next year's Championships.
A Royal Gala Concert and Dinner at the Spanish Embassy
I was kindly invited by the President of the World in Harmony, Princess Irene of the Hellenes, to a Royal Gala concert and Dinner at the Spanish Embassy, in aid of World in Harmony UK, and the Anti Drug Foundation, Madrid.
The aim of World in Harmony is to help people in need all over the world, often by channelling huge agricultural surpluses, to those in need.
The two charities have worked successfully together, advancing occupational therapy in the drug detoxification centres.
Queen Sofia of Spain, who is Patron of both charities, came over from Madrid for the Gala, and looked lovely in a pink taffeta dress; she sat in the front row of chairs beside her brother King Constantine of the Hellenes, and near Queen Anne-Marie and Princess Irene of the Hellenes, and the Spanish Ambassador and Señora Puig de la Bellacasa.
The start of the evening was the famous Spanish opera singer Victoria de Los Angeles.
Accompanied by Manuel Garcia Morante, she sang superbly for over an hour, and gave everyone the greatest joy.
Victoria de Los Angeles, who has sung all over the world, has had wonderful recording successes with twenty-two complete operas, and forty recital discs, that have together sold over five million records!
The concert took place in the main long reception room of the Embassy.
After the concert, guests went into the garden which had been completely tented over for supper.
At the end of supper the Earl of Gowrie auctioned six items which raised another £20,000 for the charity.
Besides those I have mentioned others present included Mr and Mrs Panagiotis Lemos, she was one of the hardworking joint Chairmen of the evening with Baronne Jacques de Mandat-Grancey; Lady Russell, who was the honorary Present; her daughter Lady Boothby, who showed off some of the lovely jewellery that was auctioned; Mrs Anastasios Nomikos, who was Vice President, the Countess of Lichfield,.
This delightful evening raised approximately £60,000 for the two charities.
Farewell to a Great Ambassador
The morning after I had been to this party at the Spanish Embassy, I received an invitation from the Spanish Ambassador and Señora Puig de la Bellacasa to go to their Farewell Party.
Alas I had to refuse as I will be away in Palm Beach on that date.
Everyone will be sad at their departure.
José and Paz Puig de la Bellacasa have both done so much good for both Spain and Britain since he was appointed to the Court of St. James's in 1983.
His Excellency has been one of the best Ambassadors Spain has ever sent us, and his very dear wife has given him so much support.
They have made a host of friends who will greatly miss them.
José Puig de la Bellacasa returns to Madrid to  fulfil an important post in the Royal Household, and I wish them many years of good health and happiness in their own country.
I hope that they will come back to visit us often.
Five Days in Dubai
An account of my recent visit to Dubai will be in my next diary.
Diary Dates
On 4th April from 10am–4pm, the Friends of St Stephen's are holding an Easter Fair in aid of the New Westminster and Chelsea Hospital, in Fulham Road, at St Luke's Church Hall, Chelsea.
There will be a great variety of stalls.
On 6 April, 4–6pm the Palace of Westminster All Party Ladies Committee, are holding a Children's Easter Party in aid of the Westminster Medical School Research Trust, in the House of Commons.
Tickets £10.00 from the Research Trust,
On 10th April, the Unforgetaball for the 14–18 age group, in aid of the Kensington Branch of Save the Children, will take place at Le Palais, Hammersmith.
Black tie should be worn and members of the SCF will be supervising the evening.
Tickets £17.50 from   On 2nd May, the Gulls Egg City Luncheon, in aid of Cancer Relief Macmillan Fund, will take place at the Clothmakers Hall, in Mincing Lane EC3.
There will be gulls' eggs, smoked salmon, and Stilton.
It should be a most enjoyable luncheon.
Tickets £30 from  
On 2 May the Game Conservancy Ball in aid of Game Conservancy, will take place at Grosvenor House.
There will be an auction, a tombola, and dancing to the Three B Band.
Tickets to include dinner and programme £60 from  
On 9th–13th May, the Royal Windsor Horse Show will take place in the Home Park, Windsor.
This is always one of the best horse shows of the year.
There will be the best hunters, hacks, ponies, polo ponies, driving including the Harrods International Driving Grand Prix, as well as jumping.
Also the Hungarian Pusztas, and the spectacular Drive of the King's Troop Royal Horse Artillery.
There will be floodlit sessions of the show on Friday 11th, and Saturday 12th May; and on Sunday 13th, the Evening Floodlit Equestrian Extravaganza ends with a fabulous fireworks display at 10.05pm.
On 16th May, from 11am–5.30pm, the International Fair in aid of the British branch of the International Social Service, will take place at Kensington Town Hall.
This is one of the better fairs with a wide range of goods to buy from worldwide.
Nearly all wives of the Ambassadors at the Court of St James's take charge, or work at a stall.
On 16th May, the Pavilion Opera will perform the Sotheby's production of Verdi's Rigoletto , in aid of the London branch of the British Red Cross Society, at Syon House, Isleworth.
Tickets to include the opera, and a light supper and wine £80 from Appeals Office,
On 18th May, Juliana's Summer Ball, in aid of the NSPCC, will take place at the Natural History Museum, Cromwell Road.
Tickets to include dinner £55 from  
On 19th May, the Mapp and Lucia Ball, to commemorate the 50th Anniversary of the death of E F Benson, will take place at the Reform Club.
The Guildhall Viennese Ensemble will play until 10.30pm; then the Rainbow Dance Orchestra will take over and play for dancing.
There will be a brief entertainment at midnight.
Many of the tunes will belong to the twenties, thirties and forties.
Tickets to include champagne reception and buffet supper £57.50 from   
At Logiealmond Lodge, Perthshire.
Viscountess Stormont wife of the Earl of Mansfield's heir, with their children the Hon.
Isabella Murray and the Master of Stormont.
A Passion for Perfume
Guy Robert, master parfumier from Paris, is coming to Harrods in April.
His aim?
To create for the lucky few a special fragrance, a perfume as individual as we are ourselves.
Have you ever dreamed of a unique perfume created especially for you; your own custom-made scent, as fresh, floral or exotic as your mood?
Do you long to be enveloped in a subtle cloud of indefinable mystery, a Proustian aroma particular to you, not the immediately recognisable impact of such and such a brand?
This month an extraordinary event takes place at Harrods.
For two weeks from 9–21 April, the distinguished French parfumier and ‘nose’ Guy Robert will be in the store.
Using an extensive collection of pure perfume essences, his unrivalled skills and unerring taste he will advise Harrods customers on fragrance and help them to realise a unique perfume of their own.
Harpers & Queen met the maestro in his own home, a chic but highly individual apartment in the smart seizième district of Paris.
He spent his youth in Provence where three generations of his family had already devoted themselves to the arcane mysteries of perfume business.
The young Guy was introduced to the perfumer's skills by six months in Grasse with first hand experience of the magical ingredients of perfume.
As well as the intense flower fragrances of the South of France, he used  cardamom from India and Sri Lanka, the frankincense resin from south Arabia, the rare Yuzu lemon from Japan with its wonderfully refreshing combination of lemon and lime, patchouli, sandalwood and the whole spicy spectrum of Central America.
This exotic pot pourri stimulated his own love of natural things and his unquenchable interest in perfumes.
During his long and eminent career he has created memorable fragrances of the great houses of Hermès, Dior, Gucci and Rochas as well as untold, and unacknowledged, contributions to the huge international perfume market.
He created the first Mary Quant perfume and a fragrance for the distinguished British designer Jean Muir.
His most recent success is Amouage, now successfully launched in Harrods.
It is a unique liaison of French sophistication and haunting exoticism, and in its delicate crystal bottles, possibly the most valuable perfume of all.
Harrods have invited Guy Robert to London to share his skills with their customers.
In the heart of the elegant perfumery department on the ground floor at Harrods, Guy Robert and his small team of perfume specialists will be available for consultations and Personally Created perfumes.
There are two chic consulting areas decorated in cream and maroon, glassed off for privacy.
The Perfumer must first find out what the customer likes or dislikes.
The Perfumer will then test one or more of the eight basic perfume modules, the basic building blocks of perfume which Guy Robert has created in Paris and which are displayed in rich glass jars.
These cover the whole range of moods and the customer selects the one she likes best.
The perfumer then must skilfully build a more complicated scent by the addition of attars or essences such as patchouli, carnation and the myriad ingredients of a fine fragrance.
It is a slow but fascinating experience, to watch your very own perfume coming to life as you sit entranced within this magical space.
30ml of your own perfume are prepared and bottled in an elegant glass bottle with its own cream silk and maroon case.
The Perfumer completes your personal formula card to facilitate re-ordering, and variations are suggested and notes on adapting the perfume to different strengths.
Each consultation will last up to 30 minutes.
For priority appointments at Harrods between 9–21 April with Guy Robert or one of his specialist team, please telephone 01–730 1234 ext. 3630.
The fee for personal consultation and blending 30ml of your own unique fragrance is £300.
Larger sizes are also available including a magnificent 400ml bottle in a superb leather case which will retail for £2,000.
Guy Robert at home in Paris.
He has recreated the mood of his beloved Provence in a lyrical mural of clustered vines.
He surrounds himself with a considered disarray of natural objects; piles of logs for the open fire, wooden rustic chairs, a chinese screen and antique rugs thrown over the parquet floor.
Tibetan tobacco pouches and other exotic mementoes bear witness to his extensive travels.
A great bunch of gypsophila, daisies, freesia and roses sits in seemingly haphazard, but considered, disarray.
It is a suitable environment for the great parfumier who creates perfumes as complex and sophisticated as his own experience.
Guy Robert will share his skills with us when he creates perfume as our own particular poetry.
BEAUTY BAZAAR
Light fantastic
Kate Shapland advises on the faintest complexion washes and complementary bare-faced eye and lip colours
We have finally come to realise that the fine texture of a beautiful English rose skin needs only a translucent wash of colour to promote its much-envied natural radiance.
Towards the end of the last decade, a generation of innovative, treatment make-up bases in skin-flattering shades emerged, geared to covering the skin with an imperceptible film of colour while simultaneously hydrating and protecting it.
For the cream of the 1990's treatment foundations, investigate Mary Cohr's Hydro-Protein Fluid Foundation and Bourjois' Teint Naturel Fluide.
Both of these incorporate the anti-oxidant vitamin E, and vitamin A; in the case of Mary Cohr's Fluid Foundation, the vitamins are derived from evening primrose oil, the principal ingredient in the Hydro-Proteine complex.
Fluid Foundation also contains moisture-retentive vegetal extracts and nourishing natural silk proteins to help maintain epidermal hydration levels and the suppleness of the skin.
The latter proteins are also responsible for the exceptionally smooth consistency of all the Hydro-Protein cosmetic treatments in this extensive collection.
Hydro-Protein Fluid Foundation glides effortlessly over the skin and can be lightly set with a brush of Hydro-Proteine Loose Powder.
Bourjois' Teint Natural Fluide is available in three shades, including Naturel and Rose.
Grace Kelly colours
This season's eye and lip colours take their cue from the current international designer collections.
Across the globe, from Paris to New York and London to Milan, designers have injected fresh energy into drab winter wardrobes with clean, light colours such as ivory, camel and mint.
Response from the beauty houses has been twofold.
Some regard this bright new direction as a welcome opportunity to splash a little-light hearted colour back into our palettes.
At Guerlain, Dominique Szabo's philosophy, that make-up colours should correspond with dress, is share by Mary Cohr's Artistic Director, Michel Limongi.
Christian Dior's International Creative Director, Tyen, closely follows seasonal fabric trends when compiling a new beauty collection.
So, to complement fashion's new image of purity, a refreshing mixture of feminine pastels have surfaced which are reminiscent of the soft, sexy shades worn by Grace Kelly in the 1950s.
Application of the cooler colours requires care and deft precision.
Versatile fleshy pinks, such as Estée Lauder's muddy Early Pink or lighter Coral Shell (from the new Signature Eyeshadow Triads); Cosmetics à la Carte 's Pale Prawn and Dust matt eyeshadows, and the palest pink from Shiseido's Rose Opal Triple Eye System compact make good bases for colour.
Used alone, they can be dressed up with a bright dash of kohl or mascara; try Revlon's Wild Violet Eye Shaper and Pencil and Chanel's new Aqua Violine Mascara Aquaresistant, and the Lilac or Periwinkle mascara shades from Christian Dior's new Mascara Parfait collection.
Pink makes a particularly strong statement this season.
In Chanel's new Les 4 Ombres ‘Tumultes’, a gently sparkling pinky-beige Porcelain acts as an anchor colour to the other pastels in the palette, which include violet shade Nuit and a brown-violet Taupe.
The same can be said of Christian Dior's exquisite new five-colour eyeshadow compact Fiction where the key colour, a putty-oyster called Light, is surrounded by gentle shades such as Lavender and Pearl Grey.
Grey and pink work well together, especially for blue eyes; try Givenchy Beauté's Pink and Smoke Eyeshadow Duo from the Rose Toccata collection, or Guerlain's more intense Nectarine et Indigo due from the Harmonie en Sol range in their Diapason collection.
Down to earth
At the New York collections beige, yellow and cream neutrals showed new strength, particularly in the collections from designers Isaac Mizrahi, Caroline Roehm and Donna Karan.
And make-up artists such as Kevin O'Clyne (for Isaac Mizrahi) and Marie-Josée (for Perry Ellis) used natural, sunburnt tones to create a fresh-faced look for their catwalk models.
Some of the beauty houses are continuing to advocate the pared-down look for make- up this season, believing that yesteryear's easy, earthy tones still best complement the white clothes in fashion's New Age Movement.
Lancôme's L'Origine collection is probably the best example of this; it offers a choice of four natural, harmonising eye colours in different intensities.
Bois du Cedre Duo Jeux d'Ombres combines rich mulberry with dark ochre, while Brun de Sienne comprises coffee and chocolate shades.
Brun Kohl, and Brun and Noir Keracil mascaras will complete the look.
Other subtle, country hues to look out for are the Alabaster and Mushroom Duo Signature eyeshadow box in Estée Lauder's 1990 make-up collection; Shiseido's Pearl and Onyx Triple System Eyeshadow shades from the Subtle Contrasts collection; and for the eyelashes, Guerlain's new treatment Starcils mascara in shades Brun and Noir.
Grace Kelly: pale, pastel perfection
Sun-kissed radiance for Donna Karan's models: use a powder such as Givenchy Beauté's new Sun Prism
HEALTH AND BEAUTY
NEW WAYS TO SLOW DOWN AGEING
WITH INSIGHT INTO STRESS, NUTRITION AND COSMETIC DEVELOPMENTS, AGEING CAN BE A DYNAMIC PROGRESSION INTO LIFE AND NOT A SLOW RETREAT
Recent research has dispelled much of the myth and mystery surrounding the ageing process.
New discoveries have opened up all kinds of possibilities for holding back the march of time.
Scientists now suggest there are essentially three kinds of ageing.
Chronological ageing simply describes the ticking of the clock, which no one can prevent.
Intrinsic ageing refers to the inevitable changes built into tissues like skin which are largely determined by genetics.
Extrinsic ageing stems from repeated or persistent injury to the body tissues leading to a kind of degeneration that makes us older than our years.
The major age accelerators are thought to be stress, inactivity, chemical pollution, exposure to harmful sun-rays, cigarette smoking, alcohol and a deficiency of the essential nutrients.
Together, intrinsic and extrinsic ageing will determine apparent age.
Very simply, if you wish to be your biological age, it is vital to avoid or counteract the factors contributing to extrinsic ageing as much as possible.
By finding ways to reduce stress, for instance, according to many practitioners it is possible to look ten years younger, your quality of life will be enhanced and the benefits will also manifest themselves in longevity.
The good news is that it is never too late to embark on the pursuit of youth.
Frances Partridge, born in 1900.
Friend of Lytton Strachey and new house model for Issey Miyake
Sophie Leigh-Pemberton, born in 1985.
Friend of Leonora Oldfield and aspiring ballerina
tissue of lines
The passage of time is indelibly traced on the surface of the skin.
Or is it?
KATHRYN HUGHES investigates
During the Eighties the cosmetics industry invested millions in developing skin-care products which claimed to halt or even reverse the ageing process.
Each year, the focus of attention seemed to shift as research scientists continued to gather new information about the skin's natural regenerative processes.
Speeding up cellular turn-over; zapping free radicals; strengthening intercellular cement, all in turn seemed to hold the key to a younger, fresher complexion.
So dramatic were the claims for some of these anti-ageing products that there were rumblings to the effect that such powerful preparations ought to be classified as ‘drugs’.
Sensitive to the disastrous marketing implications of such a move (imagine needing a prescription for your favourite skin cream) manufacturers have recently been shifting their attention to the uppermost levels of the epidermis where any improvement in texture or tone, no matter how impressive, is still deemed to be ‘cosmetic’.
Miracle wrinkle smoother
It should come as no surprise that just at the time when manufacturers were becoming cautious in their claims about what their creams could do, a pharmaceutical superstar in the form of Retin-A burst into the firmament.
This Vitamin A derivative had for years been prescribed to acne sufferers, but it was not until the mid-Eighties that reports began to filter through from the States about its miraculous ability to smooth out wrinkles caused by exposure to the sun — a process known as photo-ageing.
Given the essentially privatised nature of the American health care, a vast consumer/patient demand for the product soon led to its widespread prescription as an excellent anti-ageing treatment.
The backlash, when it came, was harsh.
Claims that Retin-A worked by provoking a mild irritation and swelling in the skin, as well as permanently sensitising it, could not be easily dismissed.
Indeed, critics even suggested that the main action of Vitamin A Palmitate, a chemical cousin of Retin-A frequently found in anti-ageing creams, was to ‘puff up’ fine lines by causing a mild but chronic inflammation.
Now that the dust has had a chance to settle, certain incontrovertible facts about the way in which Retin-A works need to be taken on board by anyone considering using the product.
In the first place, Retin-A has only been proved effective on those wrinkles which have been caused by sun damage rather than the inevitable march of time.
Moreover, according to Dr John Voorhees of the University of Michigan Medical Centre, who has carried out clinical trials on the drug, Retin-A needs to be used on an open-ended, on-going basis if the improvements are to be maintained.
There again, there can be no doubt that the initial six weeks of using the product are unpleasant — the skin does peel, feel tight and look red.
Thereafter you should see a certain refinement of texture (caused, in fact, by a thinning of the skin) together with a noticeable reduction of wrinkles; the fair-skinned may also notice a certain pink flush.
Of paramount importance, however, is the fact that the skin becomes extremely vulnerable to ultra-violet light and needs to be protected by a sunblock at all times, even in the depths of winter.
In addition, any products applied to treated skin are more likely to cause an unpleasant reaction — a particular problem since sunblocks contain a high number of potential irritants.
Following these discoveries one of the most noticeable trends in skin care over the next few years looks set to be the development of products which are specifically ‘Retin-A compatible’.
Just such a range is Rejuvenage, already available in this country, which aims to provide Retin-A users with a simple cleanse-tone-protect programme; the range builds in a moderate sun protection factor while excluding any ingredients which might cause irritation to the highly sensitive skin.
Professor Albert Kligman, director of the Ageing Skin Clinic at the University of Pennsylvania, sees this pattern of treating the skin with a combination of high-powered drugs and low-tech skin care as an omen for the future — the days when cosmetic products strained to imitate the actions of a prescription-only medicine, he believes, are well and truly over.
Diane Miles, marketing manager of Lancôme, identifies the shift as taking place at the level of presentation rather than formulation: ‘There are very positive signs that consumers are becoming bored and frustrated by claims for anti-ageing creams which are couched in over-technical language.
In the future I think we will see manufacturers choosing to emphasis the naturalness of the ingredients and the simplicity of the product's application and use.’
Feigning youth
The last two years of the Eighties saw a glut of products which aimed to fight the ageing process by boosting the skin's metabolism, thus enabling it to carry out its own regenerative programme more effectively.
Each manufacturer approached the task in a slightly different way, but basically each product endeavours to provide the epidermal cells with the nutrients needed to mimic the performance of younger, more efficient skin.
Kanebo's La Crème, for instance, uses bio-technology — which encompasses such processes as cell fusion, tissue culture and gene manipulation — to bring together some of the most important anti-ageing ingredients from the natural world and the research laboratory.
Other interesting youth-preserving ingredients which work together to promote cell rejuvenation and boost capillary circulations (functions that grow sluggish with time) are apricot essence B15, and a form of vitamin E called Tocopherol nicotinate, derived from polished rice.
From Kanzou, a traditional herb used in China for 4,000 years comes glycyrrhizine, a substance that helps alleviate damage and inflammation inflicted by the sun's ultra violet rays, cold and dryness.
Vichy has recently made a breakthrough with the introduction of its ‘night renewal cream’, Régènium, which contains ingrafted collagen.
Collagen has long been known for its hydrating power and as a source of nutrients for the skin, but its penetration into the epidermis has always been limited by its high molecular weight.
What Vichy has done is to graft hydrophilic collagen into lipidic chains, allowing it to pass into the epidermis to perform vital energising work.
Estée Lauder's latest launch, Time-Zone, looks set to continue this preoccupation with dry skin as one of the first and most uncomfortable signs of an ageing complexion.
Using a more powerful cocktail of bio-tech moisturisers, Vitamins A and E together with deHydrocholesterol, Time-Complex aims to ‘re-programme’ the skin so that it starts to behave with youthful efficiency.
The buzz word of Nineties skin care may well turn out to be ‘liposomes’.
First used by Christian Dior and Lancôme as a high-performance delivery system for vital active ingredients, the thrust of technology over the next ten years looks set to refine the principle further.
Liposomes are microspheres of vegetable phospholipids whose structure is identical to the skin's intercellular structure.
Encapsulated within the aqueous core of the liposome are active ingredients that improve cellular cohesion and re-establish the optimum moisture level in the epidermis.
Their layered structure and microscopic size 100 times smaller than a skin cell — enable the liposome to penetrate into the epidermis easily and integrate with the intercellular tissue.
For instance, RoC's Myosphere uses a liposome transport system in order to carry the active ingredients, myopeptides, into the epidermis where they began to work on flagging cellular nutrition.
The most recent exponent of liposome technology is L'Oréal, which recently introduced its best-selling European line, Plénitude, into this country.
Plénitude Action Liposomes, the star product in the range, penetrates the inner layers of the epidermis and at the same time allows the lipidic ingredients to nourish the upper layers of the skin.
The surface dimension
A clutch of products recently launched indicates the way anti-ageing technology is likely to develop in the future.
Far from looking at ways of working deep in the dermis, scientists have recently turned their attention to the most superficial layers of the skin, where the tiredness and dullness associated with ageing show up first.
Christian Dior's Icône, for instance, aims to tackle ‘cutaneous dryness’— that unpleasant combination of tightness and ashiness which tends to appear as we get older.
Orthokeraten, the active ingredient of Icône, works to boost the process by which the epidermis renews itself every 28 days.
The result is an epidermis which is better able to mimic the softness and freshness of younger skin.
Two other recent products aim to improve the way in which light is reflected from the skin.
As skin ages, it loses its ability to ‘throw back’ light; the result is a complexion which seems to lose its youthful colour and tone.
Chanel's Prévention Active, designed to be used every morning by the over 25s, works to boost the light-reflective capacity of the epidermis by slowing down the formation of free radicals and boosting the microcirculatory network which is situated between the dermis and the epidermis.
Shiseido's Wrinkle Smoothing Concentrate works on the principle of an optical illusion.
This light emulsion contains an ultra-fine powder ingredient which sits on the skin and alters the rate at which light bounces off it: the result is a complexion which refuses to look or act its age.
Prevent damage by always using a sunblock.
Nourish the skin to enable it to rejuvenate.
‘Liposomes’ is the buzz word of the Nineties
‘Choice is the great blessing of old age’: Carol Phillips' testament of youth
Carol Phillips is the brains and inspiration behind Clinique, chief executive yet little-known compared to other queens of beauty.
She is also living proof that stress and hard work need not necessarily be ageing.
At 67, she only looks 57, and she has the vitality of a mere 30-year-old.
When we met, Carol was paying a fleeting visit to Paris.
Her schedule was hectic.
Despite flying from New York the previous evening, she had spent all morning in meetings and was due to be photographed both by French Vogue and Elle that afternoon.
There simply wasn't time for lunch and she worked straight through.
‘I realise that in many ways I have been extraordinarily fortunate, and I never stop counting my blessings.
I get a tremendous kick from the creative aspect of life, and I think it is this that keeps me so well and full of vitality.’
Carol Phillips's creative talents were recognised when she joined American Vogue 47 years ago as special projects editor.
Feeling there was a gap in the market between what was good advice on skin care and what the public was being given, she interviewed leading New York dermatologists and wrote a very honest feature entitled ‘Can a Great Skin be Created?’
The piece generated enormous interest, especially at the Estée Lauder Corporation.
With Lauder's backing, Phillips created Clinique, working on the now famous three-step regime — cleanse, clarify and moisturise.
She determined from the start never to introduce new products unless they were really warranted, and she has stuck to this resolution in the face of increasingly fierce competition.
Her latest product, Daily Eye Benefits, bears this out.
It disappears without trace on the skin and, because it contains hydrogels, highly absorbent substances which hold 1,000 times their weight in water, it reduces evaporation of moisture from the skin dramatically.
Daily Eye Benefits boost microcirculation and so coaxes excess fluid away from the eye area in order to reduce puffiness.
Phillips believes that in the Nineties women will become increasingly intolerant of cosmetics companies making wild claims for their products and instead will look for individuality.
‘Clinique started 22 years ago on the basis that individuals have unique lifestyles and needs.
We all crave individuality.
I see its loss as lying at the root of many current social problems.’
Now that Carol Phillips is no longer involved in the nitty gritty of running the company, she is devoting more of her time to the service area of Clinique.
This month she is visiting Britain for the first time in years.
She feels this new freedom to travel and pursue her own areas of interest contributes to her seemingly unflagging energy.
‘I now have a great deal of choice about everything I do, which is the great blessing of old age.
Ageing is full of mercies.
The Eighties were not a particularly good time for the young.
Many people pursued their materialistic goals too far and found themselves short- changed.
Now they are looking for other ways to make their lives more fulfilling and satisfying.
I am very optimistic.
The Nineties belong to those who can talk straight.
I for one am really looking forward to that.’
AMANDA COCHRANE
Pressure point
Whereas age is inevitable, stress is not — and it is possible to live without it, says ALIX KIRSTA
The key question is now no longer whether stress accelerates ageing — there is a growing medical consensus that it can do so and often dramatically — but how best to prevent it.
Increasingly, doctors are acknowledging the link between prolonged stress and the development of degenerative conditions such as hypertension, cardiovascular disease, strokes, cancer and arthritis.
At London's Charing Cross Hospital, consultant cardiologist Peter Nixon has devised a rehabilitation programme incorporating a wide range of physical and psychological stress management strategies.
The most disturbing aspect of stress is its tendency to undermine the body's normal capacity for rest, thus hastening ageing, yet without initially producing any dramatic symptoms.
Consistent outpouring of such stress chemicals as adrenalin, noradrenalin and corticosteroid hormones leads to the suppression of T-cells, the front line combatants within the body's immune system.
The immune system, is also the body's first defence against ageing.
One salutary study linking stress to accelerated ageing comes from the Canadian Institute of Stress in Toronto.
Between 1981 and 1988, over 1,000 people took part in a Body Age Study in which a principal objective was to determine the degree of difference between people's chronological and biological ages.
Following a range of physical tests, the majority of the participants (mostly in their thirties and forties) tested, on average, ten years older than their real age (though sometimes much more).
Just as significantly, when assessed by an independent panel of judges, most subjects appeared facially far older than they actually were.
According to Dr Richard Earle, director of the IOS, accelerated ageing is most likely to set in between 40 and 50, with women ageing faster during this decade than men (an average of eighteen years compared to fifteen).
The most heartening find, however, was that over 90 per cent of participants who undertook an intensive five-month stress intervention programme managed to reduce their biological ages by an average of twelve years.
Apart from its immunosuppressive action, prolonged mental and physical arousal resulting from stress can generate a cycle of numerous biochemical processes that seem to hasten ageing.
The risk of oxidative damage to cells and tissues is directly related to the amounts of free radicals produced by the body, which are increased in particular by smoking, heavy drinking, processed foods, highly polluted environments and drugs.
A natural by-product of the body's oxidative processes, free radicals are highly reactive toxic molecules which have been implicated in the onset of many degenerative conditions because of their ability to damage cells and disrupt the bodily functions.
Among these, cross-linkage and disintegration of body protein, including the collagen fibres within connective tissue, hardening of the arteries and peroxidation of normal blood lipids are most likely to result in premature ageing.
Smoothly synchronised endocrine function, an intrinsic factor in determining youthfulness, is also notoriously liable to become unbalanced through stress.
According to leading stress researcher Dr Malcolm Carruthers, stress chemicals directly inhibit testosterone production in men, causing such classic signs of ageing as constant tiredness, depression, and impotence.
By prescribing carefully monitored, low doses of testosterone and encouraging male patients to adopt such proven stress management skills as autogenic training, he maintains that such symptoms can be rapidly and completely reversed.
Women, who apparently thrive on stress, display typically aggressive ‘type A’ behaviour, which often includes becoming ‘hooked’on vigorous exercise, hormonal imbalance which can eventually lead to irregular periods and weight loss resulting in an early menopause, brittle bones, thinning and wrinkling of the skin, and falling hair.
While HRT may help to protect older women against osteoporosis, effective stress management and dietary supplements including calcium, vitamin D and Boron are extremely valuable in guarding against premature oestrogen and bone loss.
Although it is still popularly assumed that men are more prone to fall prey to the ravages of ‘burnout’ due to overwork and unhealthy lifestyle, all the evidence now points to women, especially aged between 35 and 50, as today's prime targets of stress.
The fact that the number of very young women now smoking and consuming alcohol has steadily increased gives grave cause for concern.
Add to this the alarming phenomenon of benzodiazepine addiction — nearly three-quarters of Britain's 3 million tranquilliser users are women — and the growing trend for women to seek counselling or psychiatric care for emotional distress, and the picture becomes grimmer still.
According to stress therapist Hilary Gray, for many of today's professional women, such transitional crisis periods as reaching one's thirties or turning 40 can bring anxiety, doubts and conflicts.
Younger women, on reaching 30, often find themselves in conflict over whether to marry, have children, or combine motherhood with a career.
‘These women usually live healthy lives, eat well, exercise, don't smoke or drink — but fear of failure and anxiety about the future puts them out of touch with their bodies.
They are unable to relax because of a constant need to remain in control of their emotional responses and thought processes,’ she explains.
For the older 40-plus age groups, often high-flying career woman who have remained childless and perhaps unmarried, the principal sources of despair and anxiety are very often an inability to accept that they are nearing the end of their reproductive years, coupled with the fear of growing old and being lonely.
By combining the use of massage, aromatherapy, music, movement, breathing exercises and deep meditation, Hilary Gray is able to help women emerge from these cries more confidently and positively, and with a sense of enhanced physical well-being.
Encouraging women to first express and then try to ‘let go’ of their previously suppressed fears and anxieties — usually through visualisation techniques and helping them to attain very deep states of relaxation — can, she maintains, eventually eliminate phobias, depression, psycho-sexual and reproductive disorders, as well as more general tiredness and tension.
Given that much stress originates in the mind, indeed largely within the subconscious, it follows that the greatest potential for reducing pressure lies within our mental creativity.
The power of autogenic training and transcendental meditation to induce altered states of consciousness and lower or reverse the fight or flight response, encouraging both physical and mental rest and regeneration, is now well documented.
Lowered pulse, heart and respiratory rate, reduced blood pressure, lactate and cholesterol levels are just some of the health benefits experienced by those who regularly practise these techniques.
But for those who are unable or unwilling to put aside the time to meditate regularly, or who are more conscious of bodily stress, such techniques as acupuncture, postural integration and taking dietary supplements may also prove effective antidotes to the ravages of time.
Osteopath Janet Hutchins combines a variety of manipulative techniques, including Shiatsu, to correct spinal dislocation — a major source of tension and fatigue.
She is often able to trace such complaints as severe, almost suicidal, depression, headaches and defective, blurred vision, to misalignment of the upper cervical vertebrae, which in turn places constant pressure on major nerve centres.
Women are today's prime targets of stress
Stress chemicals can hasten ageing
Deep relaxation can eliminate depression
Vital elements
Vitamins and minerals are essential in the battle against ageing, advises AMANDA COCHRANE
Some foods appear to have a positively energising and restorative influence on the body.
Fresh vegetables and fruits (ideally organically grown), game, fish, poultry, cereals, nuts, seeds and natural yoghurt form the basis of a youth-sustaining diet.
Anti-ageing supplements are special preparations packed with vitamins and minerals valued for their protective and regenerative properties.
Increasingly essential are the anti-oxidants — vitamins A, C, E and the mineral selenium, which bolster the body's natural defence against disruptive free radicals.
Generated in the body as a result of radiation, chemical pollutants, medicinal drugs and stress, free radicals can damage cells and tissues bringing about premature ageing.
Seaweed — such as nori, dulse and kelp.
Rich in easily assimilable vitamins, minerals and trace elements which are essential for the thyroid gland.
With age this gland can become sluggish, resulting in weight gain, dry, lifeless skin, lacklustre hair and poor circulation.
Chlorella growth factor.
Cellular extract of a primaeval blue-green algae with concentrated nucleic acids (DNA and RNA).
Loss of energy, a growing fatigue and physical deterioration may be due to breakdown of the body's own RNA and DNA, encouraged by high level stress.
A good source of chlorella growth factor is Wakasa Gold, available from  .
Pine extract.
An extract from the bark of the conifer Pinus Pinnaster has been found to possess exceptional anti-oxidant properties.
Pycnogenol is available from Nature's Best,.
Amrit kalash.
A 6,000-year-old preparation made from rare herbs from the forests and Himalayan mountain-sides of India, it is one of the most effective free radical scavengers.
Available as a treacly paste containing Indian pennywort, sandalwood powder, liquorice, cardamom and cinnamon, and as tablets with black musale, butterfly pea, Indian wild pepper and elephant creeper.
Gingko biloba.
An extract from the leaves of an ancient tree indigenous to China, reputed to help maintain the brain's blood and oxygen supplies.
Bio-harmony.
Concocted by Dr. Yuki Niwa, head of the Immunology Institute in Japan, this is a mixture designed to mimic the protective effect of the body's natural anti-oxidant enzyme, superoxide dismutase.
Jason Winter's xian.
A supplement based on the herbs and spices prescribed by the physicians in Tibet to promote good health and stamina in old age.
Available from Pennine Marketing,.
PAINT ME I'M YOURS
Sitting for a portrait painter is a kind of surrender — here a misplaced eyebrow, there a chin you never knew you had.
Like couturiers and coiffeurs, your portraitist has power — to massage your ego or expose your flaws.
Either way, the lure of the canvas remains completely irresistible (just ask Mr. James).
PHILIP HOARE meets today's purveyors of posterity and discovers what they will do to you
The art of portrait painting is thriving.
The Royal Society of Portrait Painters reports a threefold increase in commissions in the past three years alone and artists themselves testify that it is indeed a seller's market.
Yet photography is a much more immediate and less expensive way of having one's likeness preserved for posterity: why is it fashionable to spend hours sitting motionless for Emma Sergeant when Snowdon could snap you in a mere 40 minutes?
Many portraits nowadays are corporate commissions and some would say this in itself makes for dull viewing.
The days of the truly great power portrait, the majestic Victorian and Edwardian canvases that hang so solemnly in the darker corridors of the National Portrait Gallery, have long since gone.
Only regimental commissions (numerous enough to oil the wheels of many a portraitist's agency) continue the heroic tradition.
Even the custom of painting portraits of the principals of the Oxford colleges has lapsed — the deans are now immortalised in photographs.
What is needed now, in the last decade of the twentieth century, is an entirely new approach to portraiture.
The National Portrait Gallery does its best.
The annual John Player Portrait Award comes up with some inspiring work.
Last year's with its themes of altered perspective, large canvasses and ‘interesting’ subjects, was, as ever, of mixed quality.
The furore raised by the 1988 winner, Alison Watt, whose reward was the sitting given by the Queen Mother, exemplifies problems a portraitist faces.
In her admittedly bland, yet rather touching view of the Queen Mother, Alison Watt included her trademark, a lone tea-cup, which brought forth the scorn of critics like Brian Sewell, who called it ‘a hideous jumble’, making the Queen Mother look like ‘an ancient pensioner waiting for her 100th birthday telegram from the Queen’.
As Max Beerbohm correctly complained, so few people look like themselves.
Having decided to take the plunge and get yourself ‘done’, there are a number of routs by which a would-be sitter can approach a likely artist.
One's best friend's cousin's daughter might well be at a loose end after leaving art college.
Or you may be a personal friend of Lucian Freud — lucky old you.
But if you fall into neither category, then you will have to recourse to one of London's talent pools.
The first to be consulted would be the National Portrait Gallery's list of contemporary portraitists, an archive kept by director Robin Gibson, who has files and picture references on as many current painters as possible.
This may be seen by appointment only.
Robin Gibson says it is consulted on average about once a week by prospective sitters and stresses that the gallery does not act as an intermediary between the artist and the client.
Then there is the 39-member-strong Royal Society of Portrait Paints which operates from the Mall Galleries where it holds its annual exhibition.
Here the customer can browse through picture boards devoted to each artist, selecting a style and price to suit, much as one might choose an haute couture outfit.
Rated portraitists include Daphne Todd, Michael Reynolds and Carlos Sancha.
A third choice might be the commercial firms, such as the New Grafton Gallery, which has a portrait centre stacked with albums.
They have more than twenty portraitists at the moment, including Jeffery Courtney, Peter Greenham, Carel Weight and John Whittall.
Such places operate as bureaux where clients can be put in touch with artists and offer this service free of charge.
Fees vary enormously from artist to artist, and start around £200 for a drawing, going up to £30,000 for a full-length ceremonial portrait.
the most desirable portraitist of modern times must be Lucian Freud, certainly the one with the highest integrity rating.
Sadly, his agent, James Kirkman, fends off the futile inquirer with the enthusiasm of a royal bodyguard and indignantly informs you that Freud has only ever painted ‘family and friends’.
One family never at a loss when it comes to finding portraitists is the Royal Family.
The Queen is painted, on average, three times a year, always by commission from some organisation or other.
Buckingham Palace stresses that this is the one and only way to paint a Monarch.
Other members of her family have different ideas and those actively interested in art, like Prince Charles, will personally commission young unknowns.
Indeed, he remains the one royal personage whom portraitists most want to paint.
None of his portraits, however, has yet reached the market value of his mother's Annigonis, whose other works now fetch upwards of £18,000 at auction.
To get Emily Patrick to paint you, the first thing to do is to brush up on your telephone manner.
‘I have to like them on the phone,’ she says.
Politeness is a virtue: ‘I hate the ones who just presume you're going to begin tomorrow.’
One call that did not have to pass this test came in 1986, when Emily painted the Princess of Wales for the Royal Hampshire Regiment, of which the Princess is Colonel-in-Chief.
‘The regiment saw an exhibition of my work and they commissioned it — which was very brave of them, in a way, as I'd done very little before that.’
She was ‘vetted’ by a lady-in-waiting at two meetings before the sittings themselves.
‘You do have to be polite and well-behaved, and loyal to the Royal Family as well, otherwise you could abuse it terribly.’
Emily had six sittings at Kensington Palace.
‘They were the fun part, because she was lovely and just such a giggle.’
But she found it hard to work, with all the distractions of the household.
‘At the end of each sitting I seemed to produce nothing, so I had to hide it (the canvas) and carry it facing me, so all the butlers wouldn't see it.’
Emily asked the Princess not to look at the work in progress, ‘and she was very good about it.
I don't think she was that interested in the process, not being a painter.’
Even Prince Charles, whom she expected to make inquiries, did not.
‘Perhaps he was too polite to ask.’
Another recent royal portraitist is the amiable and down to earth Yorkshireman, Tom Wood.
He won second prize in the 1985 John Player Award, and his commission to paint the Prince of Wales came when Charles saw an exhibition of his work in Halifax last year and asked for a portrait for his private collection — a rare honour for any artist.
The artist had three sittings at Highgrove, each supposedly an hour in length, but each of which in fact lasted throughout each of the three mornings.
The sittings were ‘brilliant.
He was very sensitive, intelligent, sweet.
We talked a lot about art — he couldn't have been a better sitter.
He just left me to it.’
The picture tries to portray Charles ‘as he is at the moment — someone who cares about the world around him, somebody who has become a very caring person.
That's not false, not something he puts on, that's there and when you meet him it really does come across very strongly.
He cares about the country he's going to inherit.’
A Tom Wood is more than just a portrait.
His are primarily paintings, compositions in which he includes other objects with ‘a universal symbolism that's not precise — people have got to arrive at their own interpretation,’ he stresses.
‘The way you read the picture will be affected by the way you think of Charles anyway.
My view is not the definitive view — it's my experience of him.’
It's a return to sixteenth-century symbolism — with a vital difference.
‘What I'm trying to do is not to revive that, but to use the conventions in a modern context; flexible, fluid symbols, which can be read in numerous ways.’
Hence the head in profile in his Prince of Wales portrait, ‘a symbol either of Charles attempting to acquire wisdom, or of being watched continuously, in his everyday life — by the media, or even by tradition’.
The looseness allows ‘a much greater interplay of ideas.
I have a belief in my spectators,’ he says, optimistically.
Royal portraiture appears to be a barometer of the state of the art.
If so, then seasoned royal painter Richard Stone's approach is terrifyingly methodical.
Stone produces initial sketches as ‘discussion documents, carefully screened in order that they see what I want them to see’.
A contract is drawn up in which a specific number of sittings are requested and the details of the projected picture are set down.
‘Sometimes people will say, mid-way through a portrait, that they want the dog in it too.
Well, dogs are extra, OK?
I have to run my day — it may should absolutely awful — as a businessman's day.
I have my first sittings at 8.30 am, and then I have my meetings; I dictate in the afternoon to my secretary, and I might work on till midnight.
One gets so much inspiration in letters from one's bank manager.’
A prospective client is also given the all important price list, which qualifies Stone's pictures in square inches — from £2,000 for a head, to £30,000 for a full-length portrait.
This son of a Colchester postman, and a royal portraitist at 22, is now on his fourth portrait of the Queen, and has painted Princess Margaret and the Queen Mother.
His paintings are realistic to the point of photographic reproduction, which is perhaps why his work is so popular with American tycoons and the like.
To his Californian and Texan clients, a portrait is a ‘very significant statement’.
They see themselves as ‘great founders of dynasties, transforming future generations because of their wealth.’
Even here, people have become ‘possession-oriented’, wanting to ‘document work and family.
People are proud of what they've got: house, family, children, furniture.
If my client has a Hermès tie, he will wear it — it's a recognisable outfit, the distinctive signs of wealth.’
Her Majesty must spend a sizeable proportion of her life in front of canvas.
She has also been painted this year by Howard Morgan, for Unilever.
Working in an airy and beamed studio, the artist is a diffident contrast to his work with its well-heeled family groups and bare shoulders in luscious evening dresses.
He feels that the resurgence of portraiture heralds the return of a Renaissance-style patronage — and with it, etiquette and courtesy in the arts.
Loathing the expressionism and abstractions that surround him during his time at Newcastle, where he studied in the late Sixties, he believes ‘you have to pick up the traces.
Values that were thrown out should matter.
They did once, and should be looked for again.’
In respecting past values, Morgan could be accused of regression.
He argues that his work is not Edwardian in projection, that his pictures borrow something from other eras, but have a buoyant vitality that is of their own time.
His opinions, he knows, are not shared by fellow portrait painters — he goes so far as to describe ‘the rest’ as producing ‘old hat, boring, herd-of-sheep painting’, too preoccupied with imbuing a portrait with the sitter's character.
Howard Morgan remains disarmingly dismissive of his talent.
‘I don't know where it comes from.
As for my work,’ he concludes, ‘posterity may bin the lot.’
Posterity is already evaluating Emma Sergeant's work, adding noughts to original commissioning prices as her portraits come up for auction.
She lives high above the Embankment with her husband and a bull terrier, in a flat decked with the spoils of Eastern expeditions.
Our conversation is interrupted by a Continental call, with Emma talking back in rapid Italian, lapsing occasionally into English.
She returns to the kitchen table to address my question: ‘Portraiture now?
Very sad.
Boring, repetitive, neo-fascist’, is her unequivocal opinion.
‘In America they're more honest about their failure to produce a good figurative artist.
I went there once and was offered two shows in the spring.
I went back in the autumn and they said ‘Oh, figurative painting's out of fashion now.’
I laughed — I didn't feel offended.
This country can't do that.
We all live in chintzy little boudoir rooms and we can't hang Rothkos on our walls.
People want imitation Bernard Dunstans and little feathery bits of painting which look like a painterly painting and aren't too upsetting or dramatic.
It's very difficult to find someone who draws or paints with passion, someone who makes monuments, who's just honestly in love with what they're observing.
Most portrait painters have a bunch of demons on their backs, and they're so terrified that they're not doing something innovative, terrified it's not exactly like the model.
There comes a point where you have to say, ‘I don't care about the model, all I care about is that I'm painting.’
If you think like that, you'll conquer the world, but it's taken me ten years to discover it.’
Katharine Church has been painting portraits all her life, and at nearly 80, has come to the conclusion that women portraitists are handicapped both by marriage (in her case, to Anthony West, son of Rebecca West and H. G. Wells), and by the subjects they are ‘allowed’ to paint.
She thinks women are traditionally and unfairly given children to paint, because they seem able to ‘deal’ with them: ‘they think they'll be more ‘at home with a woman’.’
‘The trouble with portraits is you never know where they go,’ she says.
Katharine finds her commissions in the oddest ways, especially now that she is sequestered in deepest Dorset.
‘One day a man knocked on my door, and asked to be painted in a nearby churchyard, ‘to symbolise the desolation of my life’, he said.
Well, I couldn't do that, but I painted a watercolour of the churchyard and put him in front of it, and painted that…
I've no idea who he was, or where he came from.’
Diccon Swan paints in a terraced house in Brixton.
Heavily realistic portraits are done in oils, working from photographs.
Recent sittings have been more than a little dramatic.
A commission to paint Comic Strip comedian Rik Mayall ended rather abruptly when Mayall asked for fuel of an alcoholic nature during his afternoon sitting and, on learning that the artist voted Conservative, began doing Hitler goose steps around the room.
‘Absolutely like his character on TV,’ remembers Swan.
The sitting was abandoned by Mayall, although Diccon went on to finish the picture — it subsequently won the senior award in the Irish National Portrait Painting Contest.
Swan agrees that there has been an embarrassing decline in portraiture, which he ascribes partly to its labour-intensiveness: ‘Someone like Millais was earning the equivalent of two to three million a year.
When you're doing that you can actually spend a lot of time on pictures.
Most people don't have enough time to do that now — you're just not paid enough.’
But then, the past is always impressive: ‘Those nineteenth-century portraits were so strong.
I was at the Royal Academy this year, and the portraits there were almost universally vile.
They really were so thin .’
Celia Ward has her own theories as to why that might be so.
Like many others, she blames the lack of instruction in the colleges: ‘Because abstract, semi-abstract painting is the norm, the teaching of realistic, effective painting, whatever you'd like to call it, isn't taken so seriously.
It still goes on, but not with the same rigour.
This is a problem a lot of young portrait painters have.
To draw a figure looking relaxed or with movement in it you've go to be able to draw the nude very well.’
Celia is easy-going about her sitters, and thinks that the English are not particularly vain when it comes to portraits: ‘I find people are often very nervous about how they look, and not at all arrogant.
What I have trouble with is painting people's houses — the English are vain about their houses.
I've been asked to straighten up all the lampshades.
If someone's dress or tie were askew, no one would dream of asking them to move.’
Sarah Raphael is painting Clive James at the moment, and has no need to rearrange furniture in his Barbican pied à terre.
An intense young woman, passionate about her are — and perhaps less passionate about being regarded as a ‘portraitist’— Sarah kicks out against preconceived notions of current portraiture.
‘All our lords and ladies require is flattery, which is why painters get fed up with it.
Portraiture has a namby-pamby ‘not-quite- serious-art’ reputation, because of what's wanted of the painters.’
She is pessimistic about the future.
The current boom is portraiture will end, she thinks, when the cuts in art education begin to bite, cuts which Sarah sees as ‘scandalous’.
The present crop of portrait painters is uninspiring: ‘Have you been to any degree shows?
Then you'll know what I mean.’
She blames art fashions: ‘It's very ‘in’ to care about art and painting, like restoring Victorian fireplaces, it's just fashion, it doesn't mean anything.’
The Alison Watt controversy amused her: ‘I'm much more suspicious of people who don't ‘fail’,’ she says.
‘It's not just to do with surface.
If Alison Watt, poor little sausage, had measured the Queen Mum from ear to ear, and got everything in the right place in the same picture, people would probably tell her she was a genius.
She was obviously not trying to be very accurate.
Any painter can get a likeness.
The problem for a portrait painter is the incisiveness of your observation — how deeply you choose to look into your subject.
Stanley Spencer said that when you paint a face, it's like crawling across the landscape of that face.
It's how deeply you crawl into that dip of the eyelid and nose.’
Perhaps part of the reason for the upsurge in portraiture is due to the fact that there are so many talented young women painting now.
Indian Jane Birley agrees.
‘Englishmen are a rather unemotional species,’ she maintains, ‘and women are struggling to overcome that.
They know just how hard they have to try.’
She is perfectly at home among the painterly detritus of her St John's Wood studio, the walls of which are lined with ancient reference books about art, the legacy of a former tenant.
She drags on a low tar cigarette —‘I'm just learning to smoke’— and wipes her hands on much-wiped jeans.
Indian Jane prefers to paint young women, especially those with a ‘vacuous look’.
‘Men are very bad at sitting, too fidgety and craggy looking.
But I do like shirts and ties,’ she says, and finds herself changing women's clothes endlessly, like a cut-out doll, trying different combinations.
She loves the confidence of her sitters, being a ‘fiendish gossip’, and finds she knows ‘who's doing what to whom’ very quickly.
‘Painters are great gossips,’ she says, ‘because they don't go out much, but hear all these secrets.
It's so exciting.’
Glasgow's bars are a long way from London café society, and what fascinates Scottish painter Hugh Byars is the humanity behind the faces.
‘In the sixteenth century, doctors thought they could tell a person's health by looking into their eyes — I like to see a man's soul’; such souls as he finds in the Saracen's Head and other pubs.
Only now, after the sell-out success of his first one-man show at Glasgow's Barbizon Gallery, is he moving out of his back bedroom into a studio proper.
Since leaving Glasgow School of Art, where his contemporaries were Ken Curry, Steven Camberwell and, Steven Conroy, his work has developed into rough-hewn and expressive impasto, all long noses and pained profiles.
Hugh Byars agrees with whoever it was who said ‘that portrait painting is the Mount Everest of art, with all those difficult footholds and crevices.’
Byars' sketchbook is in his head, as he trawls the streets for suitable sitters, ‘a dark world, of incredible characters, their stories, dreams and imagination’.
City streets have also provided Matthew Carr with material, though now he has abandoned his old habit of pulling people in off the pavement, ‘as it can be taken the wrong way’.
He can't understand why this particular art is suddenly fashionable, ‘unless it's entirely due to Thatcher’, something he finds quite worrying.
High society is an equivocal attraction to Matthew Carr.
‘The idea of getting out of bed to paint these people kills me’, he says.
So why does he do it?
‘For the money.
It's the only think I know how to do,’ he confesses.
But he is pleased with his latest commission to paint Isaiah Berlin.
Carr is agent-less; his mentor and first agent was the legendary Robert Fraser (the man handcuffed to Mick Jagger in the Richard Hamilton painting) and, since Fraser's premature death, Carr has hardly trusted another.
His commissions vary wildly, from Clare Mosley, a Venus in furs, to Rasta kids and, in between, his Oxford historian father Raymond, academically dry in a superb composition, with greyhound.
One job, to paint an ambassador's wife in Paris, ended in a shouting match after she had altered the canvas overnight, painting in crude alterations to the eyes and mouth.
Matthew, quite understandably, left the next day.
Glasgow is rapidly becoming a Mecca for buyers of figurative painting.
Lesley Banks isn't sure if she likes the idea, but admits that the buzz around town has certainly opened doors for her.
Lesley produces portraits of her friends and associates, which, with their detailed urban backgrounds, tell stories of riches to rags (From Bearsden to Partick ), of hope (Portrait of a Cyclist ), and An Artist's Life (for a Spectator competition, an ironic kitchen-sink composition).
They are lucid pictures, with a definite northern light, and a predilection for possibly unflattering profiles — a result of uncommissioned work: ‘No one ever thinks their nose is that big.’
At 26, Lesley has yet to receive many commissions, and would charge around £600 for a portrait.
It would be a bargain.
Sarah Stitt is possessed of the same huge eyes that she likes to paint in her huge-eyed portraits.
Ex-St Martin's (where she was often the only student in the life room), she has been painting for five years, mostly commissions which come from friends.
Successful pictures include Viscount Althorp as a Teddy Boy, the Puck-ish actress Sarah Sugarman, and an evocative portrait of Emma Paolozzi.
Being ‘self-willed’, she favours larger-than-life pictures, ‘which reach into the interior’.
They are also quite intimidating, as they confront sitters with three-foot icons in their own image.
Indeed, they are larger than life.
Sarah's dream sitter would be Benazhir Bhutto, whose beauty and wide eyes would well suit her style.
The ‘thirtysomething’ syndrome seems responsible for many of her commissions — one woman has ordered a picture of her husband ‘because he's a successful, handsome man’, and she wants to ‘get him while he's till good-looking’.
She finds actors particularly good to paint, partly because of—‘dare I say it?’— vanity.
The worst to paint are insecure people, either outwardly or inwardly, ‘you can feel that they are uncomfortable with themselves’.
It is a trait she rarely sees in the very young.
David Poole is hopeful for the future of an art with which he has become so closely involved.
As president of the Royal Society of Portrait Painters, with 40 years of art study behind him, Poole is well placed to draw some conclusions on the art.
His own monumental oils — portraits such as the Archbishop of Canterbury, symmetrical and sculptural, or his five-figure composition for Jesus College, Cambridge, depicting Prince Edward at supper, discoursing with friends — reflect his Renaissance fervour.
To him, the new spirit in portraiture is not a question of money: ‘I had probably one of the wealthiest people in the country finally admit, ‘With all that I have, I can't buy good taste’.’
Poole's work is much in demand, and he does not come cheap.
But he will not cut down ‘on thinking time’, and admits to being ‘bloody-minded’ about the process.
Poole has done many royal portraits: Prince Philip, Princess Margaret and the Queen.
In January he began work on a portrait of the Princess of Wales and seeks to offer something more serious than their media image.
Indeed, David Poole sees the distinction between photography and portraiture as vital to the latter's resurgence.
Only by realising that a painting is much more than one facet of a face, that it is a distillation of a multitude of images of a person, have recent audiences come to see its worth once more.
A photography, after all, has a great capacity not to look like its subject: ‘I've hundreds of photographs of the Queen that look nothing like her.’
Poole is worried by the ‘Englishness of English art — it's so middle-class’, and tries to paint ‘deficiencies in character’, if they are there, confessing to have portrayed at least one arrogant captain of industry in his true light.
He seeks ‘technical ruthlessness’ and ‘critical penetration’, and thinks the idea of a special relationship between sitter and artist is much overplayed.
Such assertions ‘drive me insane’, he says, ‘the honesty is all that matters.
The ‘rapport’ can't matter.’
David Pool has little time for the mystification of artists and their art, and his sole intent is to see the momentum of improvement roll of regardless of fragile egos.
‘Remember,’ he warns as a parting shot, ‘if any two painters agree — one of them's a liar!’
The Royal Society of Portrait Painters' annual exhibition is at the Mall Galleries, The Mall, SW1, 11–21 May 
Clive James and Sarah Raphael in her studio.
‘I think so much of her great gift that I'm ready to sit still for hours on end’
Left: Emma Sergeant: ‘Portraiture now?
Very sad.
Boring, repetitive, neo-fascist.’
Below: Mark Emblem, with his portrait by Sarah Stitt
‘Sometimes people will say, mid-way through a portrait, that they want the dog in it.
Well, dogs are extra, OK?’
Right: Richard Stone paints with photographic exactness.
Below: Indian Jane Birley finds men too craggy and fidgety to paint
Katharine Church in her Dorset garden: the strangest people knock on her door
‘Most portrait painters have a bunch of demons on their backs’
The not-yet famous five sit in the Chelsea Arts Club bar.
From left to right: Howard Morgan, Celia Ward, Diccon Swan, Emily Patrick and Sarah Stitt
‘All our lords and ladies require is flattery, which is why painters get fed up with it’
Matthew Carr contemplates another day's painting.
‘It's the only think I know how to do’
High society is an equivocal attraction.
‘The idea of getting out of bed to paint these people kills me’
Far left: Richard Stone's realism appeals to dynastic-minded Texans and Californians; left: Clive James by Sarah Raphael.
Below right: Katharine Church's 1960 portrait of Susannah Debenham, now Mrs Alexander Chancellor; Tom Wood's symbol-laden, ‘caring’ Prince Charles (1989).
Below left: Glasgow artist Hugh Byars paints ‘a dark world’; fellow Glaswegian painter Lesley Banks's uncommissioned ‘Portrait of a Cyclist’
BAROMETER
‘Would it be illegal to…?’ is the most frequently asked question these days at the Columbia Business School: students say it helps them to identify future white-collar criminals.
And talking of white collars…all accountants in Hong Kong are already taking a position on 1997.
According to a private survey, at least 80 per cent are intending to leave the colony by the end of 1990.
Could this be the year of the rat ?
Green and common?
What is billed as the First Green Consumer Exhibition opens its doors at The Royal Horticultural Halls between 24 and 28 May.
Many sea-green incorruptibles will be there, but might this commercial fair be the first harbinger of green over-kill?
Meanwhile, American toy manufacturers, never loath to merchandise subliminal trends, have decided that mermaids are Big Bucks, ecologically speaking.
Mer-doll and T-shirt opportunities appear to be limitless; making balance-sheet splashes are Disney's The Little Mermaid and the upcoming Cher movie Mermaids — a tail story in which she plays a single mother of two who leads a less-than-respectable love life.
Even McDonald's is getting in the swim of things by giving away plastic mermaids with kiddy hamburgers .
Making waves in London is the predicted new male fashion trend christened the Urban Surf Look — the hot news for spring.
Featuring bright hooded sweatshirts worn under suit jackets, teamed with baseball caps and baseball boots, young fashionables in search of the Endless Wave will be seen in full regalia around Soho this spring.
And talking of trends, chic Americans realise that even in a retail recession all things Soviet still make the cash registers ping.
After the Soviet Army watch comes Welltris, the Video Rubik Cube, a computer game demanding that tumbling squares be manipulated into solid rows.
Expect Siberian Scrabble next, the coolest game of all.
On the subject of Siberia, New York restaurateurs, for long masters of the speedy dispatch of unknown customers to Outer Siberian non-chic zones, have dreamt up a new curve.
When you call to book a table, even if you are a Name, you are asked who your guests are.
If you have assembled a no-name dinner, you are immediately consigned to the gastronomic gulag .
Haute couture , haut prix: labelled couture like Schiaparelli and Chanel has increased 1000 per cent in the last five years.
Prices will go up further at a 70-piece sale this June at the Théâtre des Champs Elysées.
If you own an important couture dress and want to sell it, call Madame Vaudoyer on 010 331 42 27 73 21.
The Flirting Course for Beginners starts in March.
For £60, Melanie Wein and her mother Natalie offers you six hours of tuition in eyelid flutters, pouting lips, slick chat-up lines and how to make yourself wanted .
No news on the post-graduate sessions yet.
Lessons take place at the Course Centre, 13 Loraine Road, N7.
Even chewing gum has become New Age — witness ginseng, that sine qua non of the Sixties spaced-out set, now available in chewing gum format from health stores.
Ginseng bubble gum will come next, for the fin de siècle beach blanket set .
Diary dates: the fiftieth anniversary of the death of E. F. Benson, creator of Mapp and Lucia, will be commemorated with a Grand Ball at the Reform Club on 19 May 1990.
Tickets, £57.50 per person, from The Tilling Society,.
The Royal Windsor Horse Show at Home Park, Windsor is from 10 to 13 May and tickets are from £5 to £17.50.
The box office number is 0753 860633.
Royal flush
Ten years ago this summer, Lady Diana Spencer became blushing public property.
Since then we have made of the Waleses what we want: one day, perfect couple with the world at their feet; the next, an ill-matched pairing of opposites.
HUGO VICKERS considers the state of the union
The Lady Diana Spencer who had reporters camping on her doorstep ten years ago was a fascinating mixture of fresh and vulnerable, shy and glamorous.
Had she not been swept into the world of royalty, she would probably have developed like her sisters, the kind of county girls who underdress, but look smart when they need to.
One of them shops unrecognised and unaided at Sainsbury's in the Cromwell Road.
The general run of shoppers would not believe that the two girls came from the same family.
But the Royal Family transforms its young brides, and Diana Spencer, like the Duchess of Kent and the Duchess of Gloucester before her, was happy to be transformed.
The change was not purely physical, not simply a matter of dress.
Being in the public eye has an effect on the comportment too.
There is a subtle correlation between stardom, self-confidence and sex appeal, just as the responsibility of leadership can give stature to a politician.
The transformation of Diana Spencer occurred in St Paul's Cathedral.
On the day of the wedding, just for a short while, all strife was laid aside.
The police thanked the public, the public thanked the police.
The bride went into the cathedral with her head down, and came out with her head up.
Lady Diana Spencer with her ‘shy Di’ look disappeared for ever.
Diana, Princess of Wales took her place.
Her importance as a future Queen Consort naturally attracted a great deal of attention in 1980 and through to that summer of 1981.
Until then, newspaper coverage of the Royal Family had been in a fairly lengthy decline.
I have kept books of such cuttings since 1964.
Before Diana I could survive on about ten books a year.
Now it is more like two dozen.
Magazines such as Majesty and Royal Monthly would have had little hope of survival in the 1960s or 1970s.
Now they popped up and duly flourished.
The early joint appearances of the Prince and Princess of Wales and their travels together confirmed that the public approved of the Prince's choice.
When the pair split into two lines, the crowd was looking over Prince Charles's shoulder for any glimpse of the Princess.
He became like a male ballet dancer — a support to lift up his glamorous partner and help her turn beautiful pirouettes.
Whether this boosted his morale or irked him is unclear.
He should have taken great pride in having so very much pleased the world with his choice.
He was a man to be envied.
Yet one disagreeable cynic observed the adoration and commented wryly: ‘It seems to me that he's the only man in London not in love with her’.
On the other hand, I remember seeing them dancing together at a ball shortly before the birth of Prince William.
She had eyes only for him; as they twirled around, they were joking together, and were clearly very much in love.
There were various breeds of girl that Prince Charles could have married.
One was a foreign princess, of the type of Princess Marie-Astrid of Luxembourg.
By eschewing such girls he avoided a lot of foreign in-laws and chatter in disparate tongues, and the misunderstandings that are inevitably worsened by not quite speaking the same language.
There was also the possibility that he might have aspired to the kind of girl that his father clearly admired — a highly-trained twentieth-century girl, possibly American, possibly with executive experience.
But Prince Charles did not appear attracted by anyone from that world.
Instead, the Prince of Wales veered right back to the domain of his grandfather, King George VI, and more specifically to the beloved fields of Sandringham; to that life where the wellington boot has priority alongside the gun, and the frozen kale field, in which the King was never happier than to spend several distinctly cold and uncomfortable hours.
To find out about the world of his bride, the Almanach de Gotha can be laid aside in favour of King George VI's gamebook, that book in which he recorded with pride the bag of the day and the names of his friends and companions in sport — The Duke of Gloucester, and the Fermoys, Althorps, Felloweses and Bowes Lyons.
The Prince has an interesting confusion in his character.
He is a man who is by nature a Windsor, but who has tried hard to be a Mountbatten.
To say that he has the qualities of his mother and grandmother is to misunderstand.
He has their virtues translated into masculine form.
He is perhaps rather like his paternal grandfather, King George VI.
He is gentle, honest, loyal and dutiful.
He is more cultured, more thoughtful, has led a more normal life.
He has never suffered from the traditional shortcomings of young princes.
He is not wild in the way the Duke of Windsor was wild, nor headstrong like Princess Margaret.
He does not mix in dubious company like Prince George (the late Duke of Kent).
In the tradition of the Queen he has a confidence in the knowledge of duty fulfilled.
He is a better man than his two younger brothers, and he is different from his sister.
The Princess Royal has many qualities.
From early childhood she was fearless.
Show her a horse and she happily mounted it.
Show her a tree and she climbed it.
Not so Prince Charles.
He was shy.
He knew the dangers of the equine temperament.
He was afraid of falling off.
And yet he conquered these fears, so that in the fullness of time he became a spirited steeplechaser and a keen rider to hounds.
This is where he is ultimately more admirable than Princess Anne.
Like many sons, Prince Charles was in awe of his father, a man of handsome mien who seemed more naturally at ease with the world than he would ever be.
There is a streak of subconscious insensitivity in Prince Philip.
He can be a bully.
Even when he is at his most appreciative, there is always the faint suspicion that he might suddenly turn and deliver some withering comment.
When Cecil Beaton went to photograph the Royal Family in 1960, he found the eleven-year-old Prince Charles overawed by the atmosphere, ‘as if awaiting a clout from behind, or for his father to tweak his ear or pull the tuft of hair at the crown of his head’.
Prince Charles had to grow out of this.
Although Gordonstoun and Australia had an effect on his character, it was at Cambridge that he began to develop into the man he now is.
The Navy may have given him an air of commanding responsibility, but it was his year running the Queen's Silver Jubilee Appeal in 1977 that finally made him his own man, and not his father's son.
Prince Charles declared as early as 1969 that his choice of bride would not be easy.
Talking to journalist Brian Connell, he said: ‘You have got to choose somebody very carefully who could fulfil this particular role because people like you, perhaps, would expect quite a lot from somebody like that and it has got to be somebody pretty special.’
In 1974, Prince Charles enlarged on this theme in conversation with Kenneth Harris.
He thought compatibility and interests which could be shared and understood were of prime importance.
He said: ‘If I'm deciding whom I want to live with for 50 years — well, that's the last decision in which I would want my head to be entirely ruled by my heart’.
Much was made at the time of the Prince's engagement of the youthfulness and consequent innocence of his bride.
In American and Canada journalists asked shamelessly: ‘Is she a virgin?’
More importantly, I think, his bride needed to have a character of such irrefutable dignity that such questions were irrelevant.
The field was limited but it was not limited solely to Lady Diana Spencer.
The difference between her and the other girls was that she actively wanted the job.
Lady Diana Spencer first met Charles when he was dating her sister Sarah in 1977.
No doubt, as in all fairy-tale romances, he paid but scant attention to the younger sister, at that time little more than an awkward teenager.
But she certainly noticed him; she also saw her sister blot her copybook, no doubt unintentionally, by being quoted — or misquoted — in the press.
Following a skiing holiday with Prince Charles early in 1978, Lady Sarah, then 23, announced: ‘I don't want to be the next Queen’.
Diana learned at an early age that there were strict rules that had to be adhered to if she aspired to marry the heir to the throne.
It was a help that in the same year, 1977, Robert Fellowes left Harvey & Ross, the discount brokers, to become the Queen's assistant private secretary.
And that the following April, he married Diana's sister, Lady Jane Spencer.
Diana can be spotted at the back of a royal group at the wedding reception.
Just three years later she would have precedence over most of them.
When Diana was a little older she used to go and stay with her.
It was there in the summer of 1980 that she became a serious candidate to be the Prince's bride.
Between that time and the proposal in February 1981, she had to fend for herself, undergoing an exhausting trial by endurance, hounded day and night by the press, who virtually besieged her flat.
During these weeks Prince Charles cannot have been other than impressed by her handling of the press and by the public reaction to her.
Equally the press, almost as a whole, had decided that it liked the girl.
It would have been very hard for him to have suddenly dropped her after all she had endured.
And there were other pressures, including a poignant photograph of her in one of the tabloids surrounded by little hearts published on St Valentine's Day.
The message to Prince Charles was clear: ‘Get on with it, Sir’.
The engagement was announced on 24 February 1981, a few days after the two had consoled each other after the sudden death of the Prince's horse Allibar.
The bride-to-be began to shed her engaging shyness and emerge in a new light.
On her first royal engagement with Prince Charles — at Goldsmiths Hall — she wore a deep plunge black Emanuel dress.
Lady Diana Cooper (then in her eighty-eighth year) who attended the event, said in her inimitable way: ‘Wasn't that a mighty feast to set before a King!’
It is my belief that Diana approached matrimony with a more open mind than her husband.
There was an interview in the summer house of Buckingham Palace with Andrew Gardner and Angela Rippon, broadcast shortly before the wedding.
In it, the Prince was asked about his forthcoming marriage.
It was clear that he judged marriage — at least partly — as an additional burden in an already busy life: ‘It is the most difficult thing, I think, trying to work out how you can have a family life as well as all the public demands that there are.
I tend to lead a sort of idiotic existence of trying to get involved in too many things and dashing about; and this is going to be my problem — trying to sort of control myself and work out something so that we have a proper family life.
It isn't easy.
There's so much to be done.’
When Angela Rippon said: ‘After Wednesday you will have a wife by your side.
That's obviously going to make a difference to you,’ he commented: ‘Well, it's marvellous to have a lot of support’.
Meanwhile the twenty-year-old girl at his side said softly: ‘Better like it’.
And they smiled and he took her hand.
It seemed that she was saying: ‘Here I am and I will do whatever I must, attend functions, support the various trusts and so on.’
What, then, was the effect of her arrival on the scene?
The cynical might say that all the Prince needed was a mother for a future heir.
Some certainly saw her as a kind of human sacrifice, albeit a willing one.
Constitutionally the Princess of Wales has no position or set duties to perform.
She is not a counsellor of state, for example.
She can use the role in any way she likes.
There would be every justification for her to stay at home most of the time and only emerge on joint engagements with her husband.
She could be merely an appendage or she could ‘do her own thing’.
In this case the girl was only twenty.
As with all young people she had to make something of herself before she could offer anything to anyone else.
The image was the first thing that changed.
Prince Charles may have acquired a good aristocratic county girl, well steeped in the ways of Sandringham life, and at home in the kale fields and on the grouse moors.
What soon became clear was that he had also acquired a modern-day glamorous superstar.
Princess Di — the National Dish was the title of an irreverent book in 1984 that examined this phenomenon.
That book portrayed her as an insecure child, who had overcome her unhappiness at the time of her mother's elopement by zealously nursing her younger brother.
Her marriage to Prince Charles gave her a new security, not only in giving her status, but also because she could at first rely on him as something of a father figure, or at any rate a slightly square older brother.
The press built the Princess of Wales into a romantic heroine, and there was inevitably a backlash.
It was only a matter of time before those who had created her sought to destroy her.
It was suggested that she hated the wet and dreary Balmoral holidays, that she suffered from anorexia, that she had quarrelled with a number of the Prince's household and staff, that she was only interested in clothes, that she was a lover of discotheques and neglected her husband.
It appeared that Princess Anne was not one of her admirers, and though Princess Anne's views were at this time usually rather criticised this was something for the press to get its teeth into.
But however often these theories have been mooted they have never been adhered to for long.
From time to time the press throws mud (not literally but in its columns) at Princess Margaret, Princess Michael of Kent and latterly at the Duchess of York.
That mud seems to stick.
Similar mud-slinging exercises have been tried on the Princess of Wales, but somehow the mud does not stick.
The Princess of Wales survives attacks because she is glamorous, lovable, a devoted mother of her two boys, because children adore her and she has a natural affinity with them, and because she bravely enters fields which command respect (shaking hands with AIDS victims for example).
Above all, we still find the role of Diana as glamorous heroine appealing.
I suspect we always will.
The Princess learned a lot from her husband about how to talk to the members of the general public.
Each Royal has their own ‘trick’ of how to make the person they are talking to feel good.
The Queen is very quick at picking up a clue and following it through without giving the game away.
For example, anyone presenting someone to her should give her half the story: ‘This is so-and-so.
He's won a prize.
What was it for?’, and within two minutes the prize-winner will be believing that she knew all about him and had indeed been specially looking forward to meeting him.
The Duke of Edinburgh has a different line.
He asks people what they do and repeats it back to them.
‘What do you do, then?’
‘I'm the man who stokes the boilers’‘Ah, you're the boiler-stoker are you?’
The man will swiftly think that the Duke knew all along.
Somehow hearing it from the Duke's own lips bestows upon his chosen occupation a form of royal blessing.
It all happens very quickly, like a sleight of hand.
The Prince of Wales is an expert at getting on to the person's own level.
Child of the Sixties, and lover of the Goons, his natural sense of humour veers a little towards the jokiness of Private Eye .
He is expert at a disarming variety of self-mockery, as his fortieth birthday speech in the Birmingham tram shed demonstrated beyond doubt.
The Princess of Wales is equally quick-witted when it comes to the brief royal encounter.
I once watched her approach an elderly politician.
She began with light-hearted repartee, but then quickly realised that the politician was more interested in the problems of Northern Ireland.
They were soon deep in a well-reasoned conversation about these, particularly as they related to young children growing up in the environment of strife.
Presently she turned to the politician's companion and rounded off the meeting with an entertaining discourse on the curious food they had just eaten.
She was quick to find mutual grounds of interest, and good value was given all round.
It is true that if someone talks to intelligent people regularly and is well informed and advised, then much is absorbed.
The Princess of Wales may not have been quick to learn at school — possibly because her lessons did not interest her much — but she has certainly made up for lost time since her marriage.
The truth is that her life before marriage was not particularly interesting.
Teaching at a kindergarten, looking after an American baby boy and sharing a flat with three other girls is by no means as stimulating as meeting Anwar Sadat, President of Egypt, or dining at the White House.
Both the Prince and Princess of Wales are in the happy position of mixing with well-informed people, who are prepared to spend time informing them.
One of the duties of a Princess of Wales is to produce an heir.
With very little effort Diana brought two fine young boys into the world, Prince William within a year of marriage and Prince Harry in September 1984 (and are there more to come?).
Dynastically this is important, because it means that the Queen now has four male heirs in direct succession, all in good health.
It also means that there is very much less chance of Prince Andrew occupying the British Throne.
He fulfils the role of second son quite adequately in my view, and I trust he will not be summoned to a higher station in life.
A year or so after Prince Harry's birth, there occurred a rather uncomfortable interview with both Waleses in discussion with Sir Alastair Burnet (in November 1985), in which it appeared that their roles had been totally reversed: the Princess had become articulate, while the Prince appeared almost monosyllabic.
Unlike the summer house interview of four years earlier, they were defensive and ill at ease.
There was little rapport between them, and they fended off Sir Alastair's gentle prodding with denials that were more the style of the Buckingham Palace press office.
The Princess found herself having to explain that she was not ‘domineering’, but ‘a perfectionist with myself, but not with everybody else’, and that she was Princess Anne's ‘biggest fan.
I could never cram in what she does in a day’.
As for Prince Charles, having declared that he kept an open mind on the subject of complementary medicine, he gave a dissertation on the recent allegations that he had taken to the occult: ‘I do not play with a Ouija board.
I don't even know what a Ouija board is.
Nor do I try to get in touch with Lord Mountbatten, and I would not necessarily want to.
I might as well say it; I am fed up with people writing to me and saying: ‘Don't touch the Ouija board; it's bad for your health’.’
The Prince had expanded his interests considerably by 1985, and had already made his famous ‘carbuncle’ speech.
He had come to the conclusion that the Queen was unlikely to abdicate (nor is there a hint that he would like her to), and that therefore he had to make his mark as Prince of Wales rather than as King.
A long-time adherent to the general principle that he should look around and see areas where he could help, or stir up some kind of improvement, he had lately become more willing to risk controversy.
In the uncomfortable interview he said: ‘I think it is part of my job to stir controversy, as long as it is not party political controversy.
I just feel sometimes that I can throw a rock into a pool, and watch the ripples create a certain amount of discussion.’
In this new role the Prince clearly found his wife's presence something of a hindrance.
If they were on a joint engagement and he was trying to make an important speech, he found it irksome that the following day the papers were more exercised with the length of her hemline than his words.
Thus he made sure that when he wanted full attention, he was on his own.
For this reason there have been fewer and fewer joint engagements in recent years.
However, it must also be recalled that the Prince always hoped that as time went on and his wife's interests expanded, she would become a figure in her own right, carrying out independent duties.
Clearly this is something that the Princess also wanted to do.
When not being a mother or supportive wife, she has taken on numerous appointments in areas that interest her.
It began with a love of children, but recently she has been making important speeches about the role of the family as a whole, and the dangers of drug abuse.
She has been seen visiting AIDS victims in hospices, and shaking hands with them, thus dispelling the fear of infection by touch.
She has even made a solo visit to the United States.
Unlike Prince Charles she does not have to make such an instant mark.
She can establish grounds of contact, and continue them either as Princess or later as Queen.
The Princess has been pre-eminently successful in the creation of an independent role for herself.
She has never been cited as tactless in the way that Princess Michael has.
She has never stepped out of line.
There is never the feeling that in any way she is exploiting her position for her own good.
Whereas the role of executive princess touring the troubled countries of the Third World has gone to the Princess Royal, there has lately been much written on the theme of the Princess of Wales as ‘caring princess’.
Her spontaneous telemessage to the mother whose baby was abducted and her dance with an old-age pensioner at Toynbee Hall are but two examples of this.
This is not of course a sudden transition.
It is a gradual one.
And much of how this appears is the decision of the newspaper editors.
At times they find it more amusing to portray her as a disco-Princess.
But then they realise that a new line is needed.
During the middle years of their married life, and before Prince Charles becomes King, it is right that the paths and interests of the Prince and Princess of Wales should diverge somewhat.
Diana has a duty to bring up her own children and give them as normal a life as possible for as long as possible.
Charles must use these years to make his mark and dabble in things that he may have to surrender when he succeeds to the throne.
Prince Charles is more respected and better loved than he realises.
The same is true of the Queen.
In a sense the Queen is eclipsed in the public mind by the presence of her mother, the Queen Mother being a universally loved figure.
The Queen's quiet and consistently efficient carrying out of her royal duties is not perhaps as easy to relate to as the more relaxed and smiling image of the ‘Queen Mum’.
Only later on will the Queen be the focus of full attention rather in the way that Queen Victoria was in her latter years.
As Sovereign, the Queen holds considerable authority within the Royal Family in her role as ‘head of the firm’.
Besides being able to dispense jewels and to purchase properties for her off-spring (Gatcombe Park for the Princess Royal, and the new Sunningdale home of the Yorks), she is also the fount of honour.
In this respect she is not as generous as her predecessors.
The Duke of Kent had to wait until his fiftieth birthday for the Garter, the senior ranking Duke of Gloucester (at 45) is still waiting.
The Duchess of Kent did not receive the GCVO until sixteen years after her marriage, the Duchess of Gloucester received hers last year after seventeen years.
The Princess of Wales has no GCVO yet, though she was admitted to the Royal Family Order (the small ribbon brooch worn on the left shoulder) soon after her marriage (before November 1981).
And, interestingly, of all the Royal ladies, Princess Michael and the Duchess of York have not been accorded that privilege.
The Princess of Wales looks forward to being a Lady of the Garter one day, and if precedent is followed, her appointment will depend on Prince Charles when he becomes King.
At that time, his status and stature will magnify considerably.
At the same time the focus of attention will be on him.
Unlikely as this may now seem, there will be more interest in Prince Charles than in his wife.
He will have a certain power and extensive influence, and his Queen will fall into a more supporting role.
For better or worse, it will be a turning point in their marriage.
It was only a matter of time before those who had created her sought to destroy her
The cynical might say that all the Prince needed was a mother for a future heir.
Some certainly saw her as a kind of human sacrifice.
Prince Charles is more respected and better loved than he realises.
The same is true of the Queen
NOW VOYAGER!
The chic traveller thinks white but packs New Age Beige for Egypt.
The sassy ease of the brief cotton stretch dress, the modernity of the new stretch shorts sit tight under the curvaceous hour-glass jacket.
The smartest suit is cut in shapely arcs, the perfect A-line dress worn as a tunic over the shortest straight skirt, or jaunty and sleeveless in re-styled Courreges homage.
Evening, too, takes on an easy, sportif glamour — the season's bomber is carved from de-luxe shantung; golden embroideries blaze magnificently on natural linen.
SALON MUSES
These are the women who live for haute couture.
Photographed here in the salons of their preferred designers, they sparkle in the de luxe discretion of the £7,000-plus ensemble.
MADAME PIA DE BRANTES-PEARSON became the first ever client for dear friend Christian Lacroix's fledgling couture house when she married the impossibly handsome Christopher Pearson in July 1987 wearing Lacroix's shell pink taffeta meringue.
MADAME BETTY CATROUX, wife of the taste-shaping decorator François, is a long-time friend and continuing inspiration.
MADAME HÉLÈNE ROCHAS, totem of French style and widow of the innovative couturier Marcel Rochas, and inspiration for his enduringly popular scent that bears her name, wears number 44, a black grain de poudre smoking jacket with white satin revers and slightly flared skirt; white satin blouse; white kid shoes with black heels.
BRAZILIAN BOMBSHELL MADAME ANDREW ADELLA divides her time between London, Paris and the South of France; and her attention between her husband Guy and her three ravishing children.
Here she wears number 72, a black silk crêpe hooded sheath dress and black satin shoes.
The dazzling, witty and terrifyingly chic MADAME ARIANE DONDOIS brings her superb taste to play most often in the arena of serious antiques.
Here she wears number 79, white silk crêpe evening gown with gazar bodice and flying panels of chiffon.
‘You like my necklace?
In 1925 ten women spent a year on it, and two went blind in the process!’
‘I love absolutely everything that Saint Laurent does: it is almost a sort of national pride’
‘I think we need to see a leg.
I know Emanuel, he made this split skirt for a very good reason!’
Missing Saigon
Vietnam will not sleep — either in world events, or in the minds of those sent out there twenty-five years ago as war correspondents.
For many of these, memories of the country are so haunting that the real world has lost is charm.
LUCRETIA STEWART asks why the killing fields strike so deep a chord
Twenty-five years after the first American soldiers went into Vietnam, fifteen years after the falls of Saigon and Phnom Penh, the issue of Vietnam — Vietnam was America's war; now it belongs to the world.
As controversy rages over the forcible repatriation of the Vietnamese boat people from Hong Kong by the British, and the United States and Britain continue heated exchanges on that and other related matters, such as the possible role of the Khmer Rouge in Cambodia's future, it becomes increasingly clear that Vietnam's legacy is not confined to those who lost and won the war.
Politicians, diplomats, aid workers and journalists of almost every nationality have all been dragged into the confusion and misery that are the aftermath of the Vietnam war and the American bombing of Cambodia.
Politics aside, the Vietnam industry is a profitable one, not least because many of the correspondents who covered the war — and there were literally thousands over the ten-year period — have remained obsessed with it.
Among names that immediately spring to mind are those of Sydney Schanberg, the former New York Times correspondent who was in Phnom Penh at the time of the fall, and whose subsequent search for his Cambodian assistant, Dith Pran, was documented in Roland Joffé's film The Killing Fields , who arrived in Indo- China at the age of 21 and was there from 1970 to mid-1975, first with Agence France Presse, then as a stringer for The Sunday Times — when all the other journalists were getting out, Swain was either brave or foolhardy enough to fly back into Phnom Penh in time for its fall; William Shawcross who, along with many others, covered the Vietnam war for The Sunday Times and who subsequently became obsessed with the fate of Cambodia, an obsession that resulted first in Sideshow , which exposed the role of Nixon and Kissinger, and then in The Quality of Mercy , a study of the work of the Red Cross in Cambodia; John Pilger, the British-based Australian journalist whose work on Cambodia may have had little concrete effect but has at least helped to ensure that the tragic country will never disappear into oblivion; Philip Caputo, who went initially to Vietnam in March 1965 as a 23-year-old Marine officer with the first US combat group sent to Indo-China and returned in 1975 as a correspondent to report on what was left of the war.
In 1977 Caputo published the superb Rumour of War which documented his own combat experiences in Vietnam; subsequent novels by Caputo revealed as much about his own problems in leaving Vietnam behind as anything else.
Another writer who is inseparable from the Vietnam war experience is Michael Herr who spent just under a year there from 1967–1968 for Esquire .
The collected articles were published as Dispatches (now recently re-issued in a ‘schools’ edition, which says something about how the book is regarded).
Herr also worked on Francis Ford Coppola's Apocalypse Now (1979) and wrote the screenplay for Stanley Kubrick's Full Metal Jacket (1987).
Journalists who shared Herr's enthusiasm for the whole experience, if enthusiasm is the word, tend to quote with wistful nostalgia one particular line from Dispatches : ‘I think Vietnam was what we had instead of happy childhoods.’
Not everyone responded positively to Dispatches .
The poet James Fenton, who was stringing for The Washington Post and who must have cut an unlikely figure riding into Saigon on a victorious Viet Cong tank (described in The Fall of Saigon , first published in Granta 15 and then included in All the Wrong Places ), wrote a savage review of the book in the New Statesman describing Herr as a ‘shooter’, rather than a reporter for Esquire .
Richard West was another veteran correspondent who attacked the book.
Then there is Edward Behr, author of Anyone Here Been Raped and Speaks English?
At the time of the war already an experienced journalist in his forties, Behr reported on Vietnam for Newsweek between 1967 and 1971.
Recently he has acted as consultant on the hit West End musical Miss Saigon (transfer to Broadway expected soon), the story of a love affair between a GI and a Vietnamese bar girl which has been condemned by some critics as exploitative.
Though Behr didn't profit directly from his work on the show, he may get to write the book of the show.
When you pause to consider the knock-on-effect of all this, it can make you feel quite dizzy.
Take one simple example: in 1975 journalists Sydney Schanberg, Jon Swain and photographer Al Rockoff were holed up in the French Embassy in Phnom Penh trying to come up with a way of preventing Dith Pran being taken by the Khmer Rouge and to get out of there alive.
They failed in the former endeavour but succeeded in the latter.
In 1979 Schanberg learnt that Pran had survived and escaped from the horrors of the Khmer Rouge camp.
In 1980 Schanberg wrote a piece for the New York Times Magazine called The Death and Life of Dith Pran .
In 1984 British director Roland Joffé made The Killing Fields , based on their story.
An American actor called Spalding Gray had a bit part, but this didn't prevent him from developing a one-man act about the making of the film called Swimming to Cambodia which was made into a film in 1987, directed by Jonathan Demme.
Gray also published a book by the same title in which he managed to spell Jon Swain's name incorrectly.
That just about sums up the book, but the Vietnam/Cambodia industry goes on.
Since 1968, there have been over 60 films (with at least a further four coming out early this year) made about the Vietnam war, all carefully examined in a recently-published volume called Hollywood's Vietnam .
The title itself gives pause for thought.
But then how many films have there been about two World Wars?
How many paperback thrillers are still being churned out about the horror of Hitler's Germany?
How many fictional concentration camp butchers are still on the run in the jungles of the Amazon?
There seem to be two main differences here and the first undoubtedly influences the second.
The Vietnam show is playing to an audience comprised of the generation that was there, and therefore much of the art/entertainment arising out of the Vietnam war seeks to explain or expiate, to purge and to apologise.
And it is this that also characterises the responses of most of the correspondents who covered either Vietnam or Cambodia or both.
Sydney Schanberg put it as follows, ‘You don't, as the psychiatrists say, ‘get closure’.’
Another journalist, the political columnist Alexander Cockburn, once told me that, on balance, he was relived not to have reported on Vietnam because he had observed that those who had, found it difficult to leave the subject alone.
Kipling wrote: ‘We've only one virginity to lose And where we lost it there our hearts will be.’
If the first experience of battle can be seen as a loss of one kind of virginity, a blooding, then many young men lost their virginity in Vietnam.
Michael Herr says, ‘I had an absolute raving love affair with the war, but my other love affair was with America, not with Indo-China; it was with American energy, which I've been criticised for, but that's how it happened’.
Others, like Jon Swain and photographers Tim Page and Don McCullin, will admit to finding the war with its helicopters and guns exciting to the point of compulsion.
Even twenty years later Tim Page could say ‘All war is glorious’.
But what exactly was the appeal of Vietnam?
The combined attractions of Indo-China and war seem to have proved irresistible to many who were there and the younger they were, the harder they fell.
In the second part of his autobiography Ways of Escape , Graham Greene writes of an earlier period, ‘…in Indo-China I drained a magic potion, a loving-cup which I have shared since with many retired colonels and officers of the Foreign Legion whose eyes light up at the mention of Saigon and Hanoi’.
And Jon Swain, whose incurable romanticism had led him before Vietnam to enlist in the Foreign Legion, when asked to summarise his feelings said, ‘It's another woman, isn't it?’
‘It's the only war where the correspondent was king,’ is Ed Behr's view.
‘A great big playground’ is how William Shawcross has described it, saying, ‘…all the correspondents were given unlimited free joy-rides on all the military's magnificent machines’.
‘People did enjoy themselves but they're not permitted to say that,’ says Michael Herr.
‘If you didn't die yourself, that only added to the spice because it was so heightened, it was so endlessly dramatic and exciting.
You're high all the time except for those periods when you just crash because your adrenalin has left you.’
And to be far away from home and in a situation where life had to be lived as if each day was your last must have intensified every sensation.
For many correspondents, particularly the younger, less experienced ones, the war appeared to offer the opportunity to behave like ‘real’ men, to confront real dangers, to be real heroes.
Since the last World War, soldiering, as a profession, had lost its romantic appeal, but in Vietnam the journalists were given the chance of acting out fantasies about themselves, war, love and death.
The inherent exoticism of the place can have only added to its allure and, for those whose tastes tended in that direction, the soft purring caresses and total availability of the bar-girls must have seemed irresistible.
John Swain, describing returning to Phnom Penh after a thirteen- year absence, wrote wistfully of the now vanished maisons flottantes (floating brothels) and the old Café de Paris cyclo-girls who would coo ‘Aller avec vous ce soir, Monsieur’.
‘They had nothing to measure up to this particular experience — they were relatively inexperienced in life as well.
The whole scene, the bar scene, the prostitution scene, the whole sex scene was enticing, shocking and, at the same time, fascinating but, above all, it was new, and they had no frame of reference with which they could measure it,’ says Ed Behr.
Sydney Schanberg, like Behr, was older than some of the other correspondents when he went to Vietnam in 1972.
On his brief visit to Cambodia he met Dith Pran for the first time, but his longest stretch was from the beginning of January 1975 until the fall of Phnom Penh in April of that year.
‘I became,’ he says, ‘hooked on Cambodia for any number of reasons.
It was a country that he had no control over its destiny and needed the world's attention.
I felt a very real empathy for it.
The major attention then was focused on Vietnam and there were very few people covering Cambodia, which also appealed to me as a journalist.’
Schanberg didn't return to Cambodia until last summer, fourteen years later, when he accompanied Roland Joffé for the première of The Killing Fields in Phnom Penh.
‘I didn't want to go back under controlled circumstances,’ he explained, ‘I wanted to get on.
You can't live there in your mind.’
Arguably, however, many do and have done for years.
I watched Schanberg in Phnom Penh struggling almost schizophrenically to divorce himself from the celebrity that he had become over the years and re-enter the personality he had had before.
One member of the audience thought that he was Sam Waterston or vice versa and commented on how much he had aged.
Cambodia made Schanberg but it may also have  marred him.
Part of Schanberg's problem in achieving ‘closure’ has undoubtedly been the degree of exposure that The Killing Fields has brought him.
Another figure who often seems to have no identify aside from Vietnam is Tim Page, who has, in a sense, never been able to leave that country.
Page, as it is always known, remains enthralled by the country, returning to it frequently to photograph and document the Vietnamese struggle to return to normality.
Though Page is a very fine photographer, he has never really bettered the work he did in Vietnam.
Philip Jones Griffiths, a Magnum photographer who has been going to Vietnam for 23 years, say, s ‘We used to joke that you can take the photographer out of Vietnam but not Vietnam out of the photographer’.
Don McCullin also found moving on difficult, although it was breaking with war, rather than Vietnam, that was his main problem.
In a recent television programme on the subject of war photography (presented somewhat predictably by William Shawcross — the Vietnam industry may cast its net wide but it has its favourite media starts and Shawcross is one of them).
Larry Burrows, who was killed in 1971 in a crash over Laos, offered an attractive contrast to McCullin and Page.
All three had worked extensively in Vietnam but only Burrows demonstrated the kind of maturity and compassion that one would hope for.
In fairness to all three photographers, much of the interview material was old (to include footage of Burrows) and McCullin, and Shawcross pointed out, has since grown up.
But there he was describing the feelings he then had about war: ‘…
I like being in a war and I like being there because it's a great adventure for me, but my duty is to be there for a reason, not just to have a bloody good time…
I wouldn't like to go through a year without being in a war because I feel as if that's my yearly hang-up.
I know it sounds a bit sick in the head, but it's not, it's not really sick…anybody who does daring things, they couldn't suddenly stop doing them…
But I'm getting a bit bad really because I'm looking forward to doing two wars a year, and if I start looking forward to doing two or even more a year I'm not going to survive.’
‘Page,’ says Shawcross, ‘adored Nam.
He was drugged on it all, just like many GIs who were dead to the world they were killing’.
Page himself, in a depressing interview filmed in Saigon in 1968, said: ‘Maybe I dig the violence…
I dig violent music [The Doors’‘Light My Fire’ is howling in the background]but you gotta remember that this is still the East.
There's still a lot of soft oriental things going on here.’
But, as James Fenton wrote in a piece about The Killing Fields published in Tatler , with specific reference to Al Rockoff: ‘More or less the only thing you do is try to get as close as possible to people who are killing each other— and take photographs of them.
That's not a way of life.
It's more like a dependency.’
And Michael Herr said in Dispatches , ‘There's no way around it.
If you photographed a dead Marine with a poncho over his face and got paid for it, you were some kind of parasite.’
Larry Burrows, Don McCullin and Tim Page all photographed dead Marines and their friends, comrades and enemies.
But what did they really get out of it?
Burrows ultimately got death, but, before he was killed, he said in an interview, ‘Do you have the right to carry on working and leave a man suffering?
To my mind, the answer is ‘No’.
You've got to help him…
So often I wonder whether it's my right to capitalise…on the grief of others, but then I justify my own particular thoughts by feeling that if I can contribute a little to the understanding of what others are going through, then there is a reason for doing it.’
Whatever people like Page may have felt or thought they felt about the Vietnam war, it is difficult not to regard them as much its victims as its predators.
For a start, many of them, like the soldiers, where young — and, well, innocent.
Both Mccullin and Page were badly wounded, the latter was left with a steel plate in his brain.
Though Michael Herr has in many ways done well out of Vietnam, he says: ‘I think I paid a lot of dues; Neil Sheehan [author of A Bright Shining Light ]paid a lot of dues; Don McCullin paid a lot of dues; Larry Burrows paid all his dues.
Anybody that could read Dispatches and believe that I didn't suffer anything, I don't know what they're reading.
I could have made a real fortune becoming Mr Vietnam, I could have hit the lecture circuit, I could have spun it out into a fabulous little industry, but that's not interesting.
Life's too extraordinary just to write about that over and over and over again and to be so attached to that pain.
It's the vanity, the ego of the attachment to that experience that I find depressing in so many people.
It hurt so good, but it's unrefined and unrefining.
I don't ever want to write about it again…
I can't work up any authentic emotion any more.’
Ed Behr says, ‘You had a lot of people who were very young and very inexperienced, who showed up with a couple of cameras and there they were.
Some of them made it and a lot of them didn't, and the agencies, particularly the photo agencies, exploited these people mercilessly.
They'd hire them for a couple of months and then if they worked out they'd keep them on, paying them a pittance, and if they didn't, they'd say ‘sorry’ and the guy would go away.
There was one abominable story of a young man to whom this happened, a freelance journalist, who'd been taken on by one of the agencies on a temporary trial which hadn't worked out.
He was on his way out and he met someone even more inexperienced than him who'd just come in.
They started drinking that evening and the man who'd been fired started talking about life in Vietnam and posing as a veteran, and he said to the other one, ‘The only place to go after hours is Tan Son Hut airport because they have marvellous chinese soup there’ and they wanted to sober up.
So the guy who'd been fired took one of the cars from the agency and he got on the wrong road; they'd forgotten about curfew, probably they were too drunk and they didn't stop when a South Vietnamese barrage challenged them.
A Vietnamese soldier opened fire and shot the guy through the eye.
And then there was all this problem of who was going to pay for him for the rest of his life because he was a vegetable.’
In Oliver Stone's excellent film Salvador about war and journalists, one of the characters says, ‘You got to get close to get the truth.
You get too close, you die.’
— Last November, while walking down a street in San Salvador, David Blundy, the Sunday Correspondent's American correspondent, was killed by a sniper.
Life mirrors art.
Being a war correspondent is a genuinely dangerous job, just like they portray it in the movies.
In Swimming to Cambodia , Spalding Gray describes John Swain on the set of The Killing Fields saying, ‘What a lovely war!
What a great war!
You know you're not going to get shot!’
But the chance of getting killed is one of the factors that makes the war correspondent's job as compelling as it is.
Nobody wants to die but a brush with death makes you feel more intensely alive than ever.
It is difficult to analyse precisely the attractions, if it is not grotesque to call them such, of the Vietnam war.
It was clearly more guns than girls.
To paraphrase L. P. Hartley, both the past and Vietnam are other countries as they did things differently there.
It is that very distance that has allowed the memory of Vietnam to take on such a glow of nostalgia.
It is a long way away and we were all young then.
Chroniclers of war: the Vietnam vets
TIM PAGE, photographed above in Vietnam, started work as a photographer in the country in 1963 at the age of twenty, and worked there intermittently until 1969. he has since been back six times — in the early Eighties for The Observer , and more recently to research his book Ten Years After .
He believes that the definitive Vietnam movie has not yet been made, and will not be made until relations between the US and Vietnam are normalised.
He is now married and lives in Kent.
WILLIAM SHAWCROSS, opposite page, never lived in Vietnam, but went there for The Sunday Times six times between 1972 and 1983.
His fascination with Cambodia led to the writing of Sideshow and The Quality of Mercy .
He lives in London.
JON SWAIN, above right, was in Indo-China from 1970 to 1975, first for Agence France Presse, then for The Sunday Times .
He is now Far Eastern correspondent The Sunday Times , based in Hong Kong.
ED BEHR, middle right, reported from Vietnam for Newsweek from 1967 to 1971, and has recently been a consultant to the producers of the musical Miss Saigon .
SYDNEY SCHANBERG, bottom right, was The New York Times's correspondent in Phnom Penh at the time of its fall.
His subsequent search for Dith Pran was documented in The Killing Fields .
‘The American government is still fixated by the loss of the war.
We are still punishing the Vietnamese long after it is clear they were not victors in any real sense.
America is used to being the big boy who never loses — we punish those who make us look weak’
‘Do you have the right to carry on working and leave a man suffering?’
Vietnam survivors: DON McCULLIN was a photographer in the country for most of the war, and now lives in Somerset.
The poet JAMES FENTON worked in Vietnam as a stringer for The Washington Post and continues to write about the Far East.
MICHAEL HERR, photographed in Vietnam by Tim Page, was there from 1967–8, then wrote Dispatches .
He lives in London
The prime of Miss Bordes
Where were you the day they found Pamella Bordes?
She was in Bali, in a hut, with cuts on her face and body when a reporter knocked on the door.
In the weeks that followed she was besieged, chased, persuaded, listened to and written about, and when the Daily Mail had finished its serial she went back to being whatever she was before.
VICKI WOODS met Miss Bordes 1990, the reconstructed version
Everyone knows about the editors in Pamella's life.
Andrew Neil of the Sunday Times (the one she did it with): Donald Trelford of the Observer (the one she didn't do it with) and Peregrine Worsthorne, former editor of The Sunday Telegraph (the one who criticised the one she did it with, and who was sued for his criticisms, and lost).
Dog often eats dog, in Fleet Street, but not usually with such Rottweiler slaverings and over so many column inches.
Andrew Neil is very litigious for an editor (‘Randy Andy Gets a Grandy’, you may remember, as The Sun put it in January), so although Pamella told me lots of…interesting things about him, I'd better tread carefully.
She did tell me that when she first saw him, he reminded her of her grandfather back in New Delhi.
Long-nosed and sort of fatherly-looking.
Anyway, she's seen him in his true colours now, she sniffs, and she's lost interest in him completely.
Completely!
(Me: ‘Did he tell you you were beautiful?’
Her: ‘Day and night’.
Mr Neil left Pamella with a Moulinex food-mixer, you may recall, to remember him by.
Auberon Waugh lambasted the idea of a food-mixer as a love-token in his Sunday Telegraph column.
Pamella thought that was very gallant of Mr Waugh.
It's in storage now, she says.
Donald Trelford (Pamella: ‘He's so funny!
Tiny little thing that he is!’) has faded out of her life as smoothly as he shimmered in and left her a Cartier pen which she seems to have mislaid.
And Peregrine Worsthorne has left her the word ‘embonpoint’, which he used in court, among other circumlocutions, to describe her appeal.
Surely you mean ‘bosom’, Mr Worsthorne,’ said Andrew Neil's barrister wearily.
Pamella has embraced the word, and uses it a lot.
How do you like my embonpoint? she teased Harpers & Queen 's fashion editor as he hooked her narrow, flat-chested, model-sized body into a Jacques Azagury bustier for the picture.
So there we are.
That's enough editors for anyone, really, isn't it?
I'd have thought so.
But it isn't quite.
There's a fourth editor in Pamella's life.
Tougher and more tenacious than the other three; more streetwise (and Fleetwise) than the other three.
And — though she's never met him — he's the only one of whom she's reluctant to speak.
Step forward Sir David English of the Daily Mail .
Knight-editor of the most professional paper in the history of Fleet Street, the only upmarket tabloid, the newspaperman's newspaper, the one that (according to its current advertising) is only read by the Better Bred.
Sir David English bought Pamella's story (reputedly for £150,000, though who knows) in the teeth of opposition from the world's press.
(Well, I say the world's press, but the fiercest opposition, by the end, was from Today , edited by the shrewd young Ulsterman David Montgomery.)
Once his employees had acquired every detail from her piecemeal, hysterical tale he had it checked, rechecked and run over by his lawyers until every line was publishable (not an easy task, considering the litigious nature — and ample means — of some of the supporting characters).
Pamella didn't tell me any of this.
She's not allowed to talk about it.
When he got Pamella's story, Sir David English read it.
And when he read it, he didn't quite like it.
(I have to say I wasn't in the room with him thought I was working at the Daily Mail at the time.)
So sleazy , Pamella's tale, featuring as it did madams, whores, procuresses, cash payments, unusual sexual practices, Arabs.
Sir David English probably disliked it for two reasons.
One is that he is rather clean and tidy and polite and fastidious as a person; the sweatier, wilder, rawer, dirtier areas of human sexuality do not appeal to him at all.
The other reason is that Sir David is well aware that the sort of low-grade ‘sex scandal’ which is grist to the mil of the News of the Screws will not do in a paper that speaks to the Better Bred.
Scandal is one thing.
Mindless sexual tittle-tattle is another.
Upmarket readers generally scorn to read about somebody we've never heard of having it off with somebody else we've never heard of.
Who cares?
Pas moi, darling.
It's a different matter, though, when one of the protagonists is somebody we've very much heard of and wouldn't mind sitting next to at dinner: a secretary of state, for example, or a dishy actor.
And it's a very different matter if you can start tracing sexual spider's webs that link fabulous-looking women with men who ought to be unrelated: secretaries of state on the one hand and (say) drug-dealers, gun-runners, con-men, terrorists or Russian spies on the other.
Then you have a real story.
Oh, ho, ho.
The sort of story where ministers resign and governments wobble.
There wasn't much that was gently-bred about Pamella's tale or much to wobble governments.
There was a period, mind, during March last year, when it looked as though there just might be.
The film Scandal was being hyped through the papers at the time, and reminded everybody (everybody in newspapers and public relations, anyway) of those dear dead days of yore when Christine Keeler and co were weaving their sexual spider's webs from Defence Minister to Jamaican playboy via Russian spy.
God, the excitement!
The fourth editions and specials that rolled off the presses until dawn every day…
They were entrancing times.
And here we all are in the boring old Eighties with nothing going off but Edwina Currie's eggs.
Then, suddenly, bam!
Here comes the News of the World with…
Oh!
I don't believe this!
A lotus-eyed beauty, a grande horizontale with five fat address books filled to the brim with transcontinental names!
Some of them wait for it — Tory names!
Strike a light — it's too good to be true!
Oh, she looks great !
Look at that mouth !
Get the picture editor in here!
We've got to get t her!
Ohmigod, can this be the big one ?
Well, it wasn't the Big One, though there's no harm in trying.
While Pamella flung a few things in a suitcase and scrambled off to Bali tout de suite , Fleet Street fanned out to play cherchez la femme .
Some ‘Keeler-type’ stories rolled on to Page One for a bit, all accompanied by fabulous pictures of Pamella.
The ‘Minister of the Crown’ role was hung on little Colin Moynihan for a day or two while everyone tried not to laugh; he was, after all, only just over five foot tall and Minister for Sport and he had, after all, not slept with Pamella, only been with her at the Winter Ball.
The ‘Russian spy’ role was hung (briefly) on blood-boltered number one banditman Colonel Ghaddafi himself but…erm, Pamella hadn't even met him, either.
OK, OK, keep trying!
Bugger the Sports Minister!
What we want is — the Foreign Secretary!
The Chancellor!
The Home Office!
Somebody!
Keep at it!
And find that bloody girl !
The bloody girl was in Bali, hiding, and trying to come to terms with being exposed in the News of the World .
It's horrid being exposed.
Pamella got the bang on her door on Saturday 11 March.
‘Pamella Bordes?
I'm from the News of the World .
You met my colleague Stuart White at the Hilton, I believe.’
‘Your colleague?
Your colleague ?’ said Pamella, bemused, trying to remember who Stuart White was, and then, when it came back to her who Stuart White was, and what he'd given her (£500) and what she'd done (which wasn't much) and what he'd done (which she doesn't remember being precisely, exactly, what he later said that he'd done) she very rapidly saw what they meant, screamed, shut the door and hit the phone.
She made some fast telephone calls and fled to Paris.
Next day, Sunday, 12 March, the EXCLUSIVE screamed out in the News of the World .
And from Paris, she went on to Bali.
It was in Bali that the editors in Pamella's life faded right away into the background.
Editors are one thing with their charming manners and their bunches of flowers, but their minions, the hard men, the pack, the exposers, are quite another.
A Sun executive on holiday in Bali, praising the Lord of Christmas and his birthday rolled up together, jumped up in a restaurant and Gawd almighty!
It can't be — Pamella!
She ran, jumped on her girlfriend's motorbike and they roared off to the house in the middle of the ricefields where they were staying, the bike slewing around in panic.
They crashed.
‘There were these headlights coming up behind us and we tried to brake, but we hit a dog and I was thrown across the road and my arms and legs hurt and there was all blood everywhere, it was horrible.’
Villagers arrived and helped them both to a local hospital —‘a filthy hospital with no sanitation — we begged them to use a clean needle.
They stitched up my face, very crudely, and then we rang a friend of this girl, who drove us back to her house and we lay and took pain-killers.
My limbs were managed and there was grit embedded all over my body, it was so painful, I couldn't go to the loo and the Balinese maid had to give us sponge baths.
I couldn't eat, because of the cuts, couldn't drink — they were feeding us milk through straws — and my face was beginning to get septicaemia as we lay in this hut with just this little oil- lamp, and the mosquitoes at night would come and sit on the wounds, and I couldn't stop thinking about what was going to happen next in my life, and we had no newspapers and I didn't know what was happening and I couldn't cry because it pulled the stitches.
And we got a radio and heard the world news.
Very bad reception.
But I heard ‘Pamella Bordes has been discovered by a Sun reporter on the island of Bali’ and I said, My God, now they know where I am, they'll come down and get me.
And the next thing I know as this banging on the door!
‘Pamella!
Pamella!’
It's that woman from the New of the World shouting ‘We know she's here!’ and I was just freaking out, hiding, under the bed, everything, and I peeped out through this little hole and saw…all these people !
They surrounded the house completely.
The pack.
They'd arrived from all over the world.’
Pamella spent four days under siege while the pack sat outside and merrily divvied up the 24-hour doorstep into shifts.
They took turns to go back to a hotel to sleep, and came back to take their places on watch and yell ‘Pamella!
Pamella!’ and offer bids.
Her friend, eventually, arranged for a lawyer, Tim Taylor, to be flown to Bali to sort things out.
Pamella had to get to him, though.
‘I had to get past the pack; I had to escape.
We had paid some money to the police to look after us and they were also taking money from the journalists, and giving us their news, and ours to them!
But this young one, a very spiritual guy, like a leftover from The Deer Hunter with a black headband and black jersey, said he wanted to shoo these journalists; he had a revolver with him all the time, he is licensed to kill and he says he'd shoot them if they came near, and I said ‘No, please don't do that, I'll get in more trouble,’ and he said, ‘I ‘ll just hit them in the knee.’
He said, ‘I'll get you out tonight,’ and he gave me some of his stuff — black polo-neck, black pyjamas.
He said he had a van down the road, and my heart was beating, beating.
We crawled through the bushes; real ambush stuff, straight down the road, into the van and drove very fast.
They didn't even see me give them the slip!’
Pamella's lawyer arrived on the island, and the two met.
Now began the real fight for the story, the exclusive, the Kiss ‘n’ Tell, which was mostly played out long-range from London, where the editors snarled and the home-side pack were still running around looking for defence ministers or Gorbachev or Cabinet luminaries.
The Daily Express was by this time in pole position, but the Mail and Today were coming up fast on the inside.
‘I had to get to hospital.
The nearest hospital is Hong Kong.
They knew I was catching the plane; they came running in from all over the place with their big zoom lenses and what they want is: the butterfly's wings are broken, so let's get a picture of her face.
And they come: ‘Pamella!
Pamella!
Pamella!’ and I'm just freaking out and hanging on to Tim Taylor, trying to get to the plane, and I'm wearing this scarf on my head to cover my face and they had pulled a straw — they said this!— for who was going to tear the veil from my face and this fat guy got it and ripped it, pulled my hair, poked me in the eye — I was physically assaulted!
I didn't know what to do!
And we're hanging on to each other trying to get on the plane.
They've all booked a seat on the plane, too.
Boy, are they smart.
They get on, they would not sit down, the pilot says I'm not going to take off unless you take your seats.
We are in the First Class with Alan Frame of the Express , and all the monkeys are in the back.
The minute the seatbelt sign goes off, they're up in First Class.
Pamella!
Pamella!’
It was at the hospital in Hong Kong that the deal was struck.
As the aircraft landed and the pressmen poured out, they were met by a hoard of local photographers.
Off they sped to hospital, followed by the (by now) multi-racial and swollen pack.
‘And I am put in this ward under observation because I am suspected of having heart murmurs and also I am having surgery on my face.
The doctors are appalled by the press, everybody is appalled; the nurse is freaking out and saying she will not take me to the operating theatre because they will take my picture and harass me; she is terrified somebody is going to hit her, so in the end my lawyer wheels me because nobody else dares.
The minute I come out — click, click, click.
The Hong Kong press criticises the British press, but they themselves are hiding in the lavatory of the operating theatre!
Waiting to take exclusive shots!
I went to have a cardiogram and there is a guy hiding behind the curtains!
The doctors are freaking out.
Paul Henderson of the Daily Mail is in charge now and he is pushing against my door from the inside, but Today are their rivals, and outside the door is a man from Today in bell-bottoms and platform shoes.
And Henderson is pushing the door from here, and the Today man is pushing from there: ‘Let me talk to her,’ he is saying, and Henderson is panting and pushing the door, saying, ‘That's enough , that's enough , she is with us now’.’
From that moment on, everything that happened to Pamella for the next month or so is a closely-guarded secret.
The Mail senior staff who stuck with her in Hong Kong and whisked her round the world to safe houses can't talk; Pamella can't talk; her lawyer Tim Taylor can't talk.
A tabloid photographer ran the Mail team down at Cliveden (Cliveden!
I ask you!), where he put on a wetsuit in order to infiltrate the sewers and popped up with another long lens to take her picture.
He was spotted, though, and didn't get a hit.
So the story, the dearly-bought exclusive, the story that had looked for a moment — just a moment — like Christine Keeler Mark 2 arrived on the desk of Sir David English, Pamella's last editor.
And he saw in an instant what it was, and what it was not.
But he had it, and they'd lost it, so he ran it.
He edited the thousands of words himself, sleeves up and headline brain working overtime, until it was wrestled into shape under Lynda Lee-Potter's byline as a very Daily Mail kind of story, where men and men and women are dangerous.
Woman as Spider Who Eats Her Mate.
‘What Pamella Tells Us About Men of Power,’ ran the headline.
And what is that, pray?
‘(They) are not necessarily men of judgement.’
In the Daily Mail , Pamella's story became the tale of a ‘sickeningly self-obsessed, utterly immoral and unashamedly amoral…call-girl’, ‘an avaricious, manipulative woman with a beautiful face…a pathetic figure whose life can now only be on a downward slope.’
What there are plenty of are judgmental adjectives: Pamella, the naughty thing, is ‘degraded’, ‘sick’, ‘sleazy’, ‘corrupt’, ‘scheming’, ‘pushy’, ‘thick-skinned’, ‘shrewd’, ‘disturbed’, ‘seriously disturbed’, ‘squalid’.
But — lest you sicken of squalor, gentle reader, and forbear to read any more of the horrid stuff — you are kept going with upmarket, upbeat physical descriptions.
Pamella is ‘beautiful’, ‘polished and well-gowned’, ‘stunning’, ‘stylish and fashionable’, ‘clothed from head to toe by Yves Saint Laurent’, with ‘absurdly innocent eyes’, her face ‘a placid mask of Eastern innocence’.
The men she meets, whether named or unnamed (most of the Arabs are unnamed: everyone gets muddled by Arab names), are ‘Men of Power’.
I watched this placid mask of Eastern innocence being photographed by David Bailey.
She loved it.
She loves ‘modelling’— the stylist fussing about, the clothes, the whole caboodle.
She wants to do more of it, though she is too old at 27 and too short (five foot six and a half) for catwalks.
Anyway, she looked as beautiful as a rose in her tube dress, arching her neck, turning her flowerlike head, pouting professionally, smiling.
David Bailey, crouching behind the camera, said, ‘Come on, girl.
What I want from you is something you haven't given anybody else.’
Pamella's grim broadened and she said, ‘Now I wonder what that could be?’
And we all laughed.
In full drop-dead couture kit, Pamella is knockout, stunning.
Incredibly sexy.
Without benefit of make-up and designer clothes, she looks like a twelve-year-old boy, the way most models do: fresh-faced, scrubbed, clean-limbed.
Her voice is an intriguing mixture of chi-chi singsong and hard, inside-track transatlantic, so the effect is Peter Sellers meets Gordon Gekko.
She is both ingenuous and sophisticated by turns.
And her listener feels both protective and irritated by turns.
What does she feel about the media mayhem that whirled round her for months last year?
She's partly awed by it, and partly cocky, saying on the one hand the sorts of things anyone would say (‘I couldn't believe it, all those pictures, all those words, all those newspapers’) and on the other hand she says, in drawly, party-sophisticate tones, ‘Isn't it funny how men defend their clubs?’ or ‘Anything could happen now…
I might write a book, I could be in a movie, I could become a photographer, I might sing…‘
I asked Pamella why she thought the press had treated her story with such virulence.
She shrugged, and said she didn't know.
Later, I asked her again: hadn't she been somewhat shattered by their tone?
By the virulence?
She leaned forward and said, ‘What is the exact meaning of ‘virulence’, please?’
I thought that was very endearing.
I asked her what she was going to do now.
She said, ‘The devil has left me.
I threw my address books away.
All of them.’
She says that she wants to be a wildlife photographer.
I also asked her what she had to say about her old life.
She said, ‘Why is there such hypocrisy?
What is this charade?
There are women who will do it for a glass of champagne!
A Valentino dress, a Chanel handbag, £5,000, a gold American Express card, and some of them for nothing!
Where do you draw the line?
What is this — bullshit?
There are women who live with their husbands and they hate their husbands and do it once a month so their Amex cards don't get cancelled.
There are one-night stands!
In journalism there are people who'd do it to get a story!
To become from whatever — subeditor to editor!
How can you judge somebody else?
I know girls who say, ‘Oh, I've never done it for money, but he'll give me this and that’.
I mean I've done it for love!’
I thought that was pretty endearing, too, though specious.
But as my Lancashire aunty used to say flatly: there's two kinds of lasses, never forget.
But men?
They're all t'bloody same.
‘The devil has left me.
I threw my address books away.
All of them’
DESIGN
BLACK MOODS — NEUTRAL STATES
Black mixed with white or cream is the new neo-colour for fabrics; neutral colours, too, are defined for success.
Here, black has come up from the streets and into the drawing room; overleaf, neutral tones assert themselves.
Neutral tones, once considered suburban and dull, are now heralded by many designers as the colours of the Nineties.
But forget the ward beige: try parchment and pearl, coffee and cream — this is the stuff schemes are made on
The composition of Number Eight
Surrounded by pianos, friends and eclectic clutter, Sir Lennox Berkeley and his wife Freda lived in a late Georgian house in Little Venice until his death last Christmas.
MIRABEL CECIL investigates the tastes and lifestyle of a great composer
Sir Lennox Berkeley died last Boxing Day.
He was a private man, and these photographs show where he was happiest — at home in Little Venice with his wife Freda, their three sons and, of course, his pianos.
If this house were a score it would sing of all that is best in modern music.
For over 40 years, music has been played, taught, written and hidden away here: the manuscript of Benjamin Britten's only piano concerto, dedicated to his close friend Lennox Berkeley, was recently unearthed in the bird's eye maple cabinet in the study.
On the Portland maple cabinet, and in the study too, are pictures of the three lodestars of Lennox Berkeley's musical life — a miniature of Mozart, a postcard of Nadia Boulanger under whom he studied in Paris for five years after graduating from Oxford in 1926.
‘She was very formidable,’ recalls Freda Berkeley, ‘she often used to come here.
Though devoted, Lennox was frightened of her right to the end — she was always ‘Mademoiselle’ to him.’
She died ten years ago, aged 92.
As well as composing, Lennox Berkeley taught composition on the Broadwood piano in the study: among his pupils were Richard Rodney Bennett; John Manduell, now head of the Northern College of Music; and John Tavener who, in a recent broadcast, remembered how his lessons were often interrupted, sometimes by Nicky, the Berkeleys' youngest son — whose football might make an unscheduled appearance through the window, to Lennox Berkeley's gentle consternation — or by Freda coming in with some latest gossip which would send the tutor ‘running for the gin cupboard’.
This was how Lennox Berkeley liked to compose and to teach — amidst the va et vient of domestic life.
The Berkeleys found the house soon after their marriage in 1947.
The romantically handsome musician met the vivacious half-Russian Freda Bernstein, twenty years his junior, during the second World war.
He was then 40, and was sharing the mill at Snape with Benjamin Britten.
Anne and Heywood Hill, of the bookshop in Curzon Street, lived at number 10 Warwick Avenue and told them that the lease next door was for sale.
When, as a very young bride, Freda Berkeley first visited the house in what was then a quiet corner of Little Venice, ‘I fell in love with it.
The barrister who lived here then had painted everything cream.’
She paused.
‘I knew I didn't want to live in a cream house.’
She didn't.
Heywood Hill's brother-in-law, John Hill, who ran that most individual of decorating firms, Green and Abbott of Hanover Square, provided the wallpapers.
For the drawing room he printed golden lyres on what has now faded to a gold background, bands of crisp white ivy leaves on brown paper in the study, with dark green stripes on a green background for the dining room.
After Heywood and Ann Hill left the house next door, Lady Diana Cooper moved in; ‘semi-detached but wholly attached’ is how she described herself and the Berkeleys.
‘Freda- through-the-wall’ was her nickname for her neighbour whom she frequently invited in, particularly when she had to cope with a sticky social situation.
‘She was very, very shy,’ says Freda Berkeley, ‘and when she had people she didn't know very well, she'd ask me round to help.’
Lady Diana lived next door from 1960 until her death 26 years later.
Freda Berkeley misses her and another neighbour, the writer Patrick Kinross, who lived two doors away.
From him the Berkeleys inherited Georges, a French-Cockney man- servant.
If you were lucky enough to be invited for *Eight at Number Eight', you would sit at the dining table under the inscrutable gaze of Duncan Grant's tabby-cat; this cat was painted at Charleston during the First World War, and bought by the Berkeleys many years later for £75 from the Lefevre Gallery.
The dinner service, too, was bought when the Berkeleys first married and is still miraculously intact; it is Wedgwood's ‘Napoleon Ivy’, reproduced from the ivy-leaf pattern used by Napoleon on St Helena.
After dinner, guests drifted up the steep basement stairs to the Bechstein in the drawing room to sing: at the last party I was at, Lennox Berkeley's contemporaries, many in their eighties, and friends of their three sons, sang tunes like ‘A Nightingale Sang in Berkeley Square’ and ‘Tea for Two’.
Anther favourite picture hanging in the dining-room is a drawing of two reclining nudes by the Japanese artist Foujita.
‘Lennox loved those voluptuous ladies from the moment he saw them,’ says Lady Berkeley.
He was almost colour blind and saw pictures in shapes rather than colours.
Much of the pretty china and furniture was found by chance: Freda spotted the rocking-horse, who stands in the basement awaiting her grandchildren, in a scrap-cart being pushed down the street outside.
‘I said to the man ‘Where are you going with that horse?’ and he said, ‘How much will you give me?’
I said, ‘A tenner’— and that's the history of the horse!’
Encounters such as this, the generosity of their friends, the friendship of artists and the Berkeleys' belief in buying what they liked when they could afford it, gave the contents of the house its individuality.
Boris Anrep, for instance, whom the Berkeleys used to encounter when they stayed with Maud Russell at Mottisfont, gave them the model he painted for the mosaics which were intended for the apse of Westminster Cathedral (it stands on the chest of drawers in their bedroom) and Hugh Honour and John Fleming gave them the marble hermaphrodite which reclines on the top of a bookcase in the study.
Comfortable, colourful and cluttered, everything in the house was used and enjoyed by the Berkeleys, their family and friends.
While their three sons were young, a favourite treat was being taken by their father, one by one, to Paddington Station to listen to the Great Western Railway Band which played there on Sunday mornings.
Now the boys have their own homes and Freda Berkeley is moving.
But surely their successor will hear faint strains of a Chopin ‘Nocturne’ drifting softly out from Number Eight across the canals of Little Venice.
Above the marble mantlepiece in Lennox Berkeley's study hangs and eighteenth-century mirror ornamented with gilded Pan pipers.
On the mantlepiece are photographs of Berkeley's piano teacher Nadia Boulanger (extreme left), and to the right of the clock, Berkeley's one-time neighbour Patrick Kinross with Edward VIII (then Prince of Wales), Berkeley himself and (extreme right) Maurice Ravel
Far right: a picture of Lennox Berkeley as an Oxford undergraduate in the Twenties, and below, the musician's favourite picture of his wife, Freda.
Right: the bust of Berkeley sculpted by Etienne Millner for the composer's seventy-fifth birthday
Right: on the dining table is a composition commissioned from the potter Gill Bent by Sir Lennox's son Julian Berkeley and Anthony Scotland.
The composer is at the piano playing to his wife who is sitting in her favourite armchair.
His nickname for her was ‘Mousa’ and she called him ‘My old Tom’
Left: a Victorian arrangement of butterflies, beetles and moths, a jug by the potter Gill Bent and a snake-handled majolica vase in the drawing room.
Right: numbers eight and ten Warwick Avenue; number ten belonged to Lady Diana Cooper.
Far right: a picture of Lake Alverna by an unknown artist hangs in the drawing room
DOUBLE VISION
To John Harwood ‘ideas are emetic’; to Sarah Stewart anything is worth painting.
Neither is bound by convention, both were meant to succeed
Untrammelled by the tyranny of one period or a single discipline, John Harwood is a designer whose work is multifarious.
He could well have made a throne for a Medici or a table for the Brighton Pavilion, and he will surely be making pieces in the 1990s that will be starting in their modernity.
Now aged 38, Harwood has been making things, perfecting techniques and designing for the last twenty years but is barely known outside a small group of cognoscenti.
He attributes this to the ‘I know a little man’ syndrome, but one gets the feeling that he is a little weary of being other people's secret.
The raw materials inspire sneaking feelings of doubt and mistrust but emerge as objects of design
The roll-call of clients is indeed impressive and includes captains of industry, design mandarins, movie stars and fashion queens.
What he has done for them is as various as the media he uses.
For one he has created an office, for another a library and for a third a single piece of furniture.
He is as interested in perfecting a paint finish that is redolent of a medieval misericord as he is in capturing the ephemeral nature of a Polaroid in the lines of a perspex chair.
John Harwood is irreverent about his work and impatient with the awe that surrounds traditional techniques: ‘I'm not into technique for technique's sake.
I'm not doing it out of tradition but necessity, and these things shouldn't take too long.
I like things to go through my hands; things are transitory, ideas are emetic — it's enough to get them out.
People take materials for granted and they deserve a little more thought.
They tend to see with their ears and accept things that they are told are acceptable,’ he says.
For the first time in his career, John Harwood now has premises where the public can see his high standards for themselves.
His shop-cum-showroom is somewhere you can buy an object, perhaps a picture frame, a clock or a faux-book box, but is also a place where you can commission pieces.
He would like customers to be inspired by what they find and to collaborate in the design of what they want.
He is justifiably proud of what his workshop can achieve.
‘Where else can you go if you want a Fortuny water-gilded room?’ he asks.
Where indeed?
S.C.
Autonomy is at 1A Hollywood Road, SW10 (01-352-2149).
Sarah Stewart is a real Southern belle from Jackson, Mississippi, with long blonde hair and a magnolia drawl.
She is an applied artist, producing witty and colourful furniture, screens and floor cloths: her raw material could be an unpromising kitchen chair, c1955, with plastic leather seat and sturdy legs, or perhaps a chain-store chest of drawers of dubious design.
To these pieces she applies flourishes of paint in mad swoops of colour — a chair looks as though it has been wrapped in a Mexican Indian blanket, a small table is covered in a riot of pattern, full of references to Memphis — the Milan school and Tennessee.
Prices start at around £150.
It is all very far removed from that school of painters who specialise in washed-out stencilled flowers and garlands painted on the sides of distressed pine chests.
Her end product may be a highly decorative seat where once a junk shop kitchen chair stood, but it is also functional art, and the fact that it is three-dimensional gives it an element of involvement that is often missing from a flat canvas.
Having painted as a child, Stewart began to experiment at college (the American College of London) by applying patterns to everything in sight, from folding screens to lamps, and floor cloths to cutlery handles.
On graduating, she travelled — in Mexico, Madrid and Mississippi — and now she is back here to transform our drab little lives, or at any rate our drab furniture.
Some people take furniture to her that they don't like or are tired of and want transformed into a work of art; she optimistically feels that no piece of furniture is totally without hope.
Other commission new pieces from her.
Inventive, original and often very funny, Sarah Stewart's work will be seen in abundance from now on.
Indeed, The Conran Shop (naturally) is already stocking some furniture, various galleries have bought pieces, and she will have her own show in the summer: the least that one would expect from a girl who, when just a Southern bellette, covered with paint and pattern her mother's hairdryer.
C.C.-M.
Sarah Stewart can be contacted at 56 Redcliffe Square, SW10 (01–370 5831).
The address for Antique Designs Ltd printed in the March issue should have read 277 Little Road, SW6.
An escalation in taste: John Harwood, a Botticelli angel who entertains a coterie of followers in his workshops on Saturdays
Screen goddess: Sarah Stewart is Jackson, Mississippi's gift to design.
Her design transforms a worthless kitchen chair into a work of art
PRIVATE COOK
Fear of frying
Lambs' brains, fishes' eggs and raw scallops, reminiscent of ‘eye of newt, and toe of frog’, are redeemed only by plenty of garlic to keep the devil way.
JULIAN BERRY shares some frighteningly good recipes
Cookery writers, like parrot fish, come in many hues; in their shoal you can discover a miscellany of dietitians, bacteriologists, vegans, conservationists, ethnicists, internationalists, pure foodists, even ruralists, but rarely do you find thespians .
And yet presenting food is all to do with drama.
It's a production that is inescapably an extension of your personality — like dress or décor.
Would you delegate your appearance to your tailor or your interior to the nearest decorating company?
Some do, but equally for effect.
In The Sea, The Sea , Iris Murdoch's characters cook with unconcern: ‘Soon I shall have lunch: the remains of the corned beef with plain boiled onions.
(Plain boiled onions are another dish fit for a king.)
I finished the red cabbage last night.’
In contrast, the best thespian cook I know is Francis Bacon.
He allowed himself to be filmed on television absent-mindedly pouring a bottle of Petrus into the stew.
This says as much to me as any artfully contrived moussette.
So, as I enjoy the opportunity to create a modest tremor in the bourgeois breast myself, I have decided to present a few recipes that might be described as ‘frighteners’: recipes that are totally delicious but fringed with menace.
They mostly involve fish because for some reason deep sea menace is more devastating, although the cerebral and digestive organs of land-based creatures still rate as moderately terrifying.
My children have helped most sensitively with the calibration of my scarometer.
Brains-with-burnt-butter-salad
Serves 8
6 lambs' brains
6 oz butter
red wine vinegar
frisé lettuce
capers and chives (or parsley)
Court-bouillon:
bouquet of herbs
1¾ pints water
onion
2 tbsps red wine
12 peppercorns
For this favourite first course, you need to select, and keep refreshed and cool, a strong lettuce like a frisé.
This is best laid out on the plates whilst the brains are being simmered.
The key to this recipe is the discovery that butter and vinegar are in themselves a vinaigrette so you should burn rather more butter than normal to coat the salad as well as the brains.
But first of all, soak the brains for four hours (lambs' or calves'), changing the water every 30 minute, and pick off any skin or blood vessels.
Then prepare a court-bouillon by simmering the ingredients for 30 minutes, cooling, and straining into a fresh pan.
The brains themselves only need the lightest poaching for a quarter of an hour before being lifted out of the court-bouillon and set on the beds of lettuce.
The butter should be burnt to a mid- tan, sprinkled over the salads, and then the same pan used for quickly boiling four tablespoons of vinegar.
This is also sprinkled over the salads, to be followed by capers and some chopped chives or parsley.
Serve at once.
Raw Scallops with Walnut Vinaigrette
4 scallops per person
1 lemon per scallop
lettuce
Vinaigrette:
1 tbsp walnut oil
5 tbsps groundnut oil
2 tbsps lemon from the marinade
black pepper
An alternative salad is made by using raw scallops.
These need to be large, totally fresh and generously served (four per person is better than three).
Having prepared the scallops by removing their skirts and intestines, leave them to marinade for at least five hours, preferably overnight, in pure lemon juice.
Then arrange the raw scallops, quartered, on a bed of lettuce and make the walnut vinaigrette using some of the lemon juice and a mixture of walnut oil and a non-scented oil such as a groundnut.
For a grand and frightening starter, this theme can be extended, and a large platter created, covered with a base of lettuce, and then heaped with delicacies like lambs' brains, scallops, squid stew and crab meat.
In this case, each ingredient can be served in its own sauce with a generously garlicked mayonnaise alongside.
Black Squid Stew and Mash
2½ lbs squid
6 peeled tomatoes
4 tbsps olive oil
tomato paste
2 medium onions
chilli paste
4 cloves garlic
2 glasses red wine
fresh herbs
4 large potatoes
crème fraîche Very few English cooks understand how to prepare squid.
These creatures have the unfortunate habit of getting stuck down inside, so an important task is to reach to the bottom of their torsos and to remove any sand or rocks.
When doing this last summer, I found to my amazement a whole langoustine who sadly had not been trained to crawl backwards.
To prepare squid cut off and save the tentacles, remove and then chuck the head, pull out the perspex-like spine, chop the body into half-inch strips, and wash all the parts scrupulously in lots of cold water.
Include the ink sacks in the cooking.
The meat should be dried before entering a thick saucepan whose bottom is generously coated with best quality olive oil.
The stew is made first by first stir-frying onions, garlic and squid for a few minutes, and then adding tomatoes, tomato purée and wine.
The secret is then only to stew the squid for another five minutes or so, to remove the squid and leave the rest of the ingredients to simmer and reduce until a thick black sauce is produced.
This should be spiced with a little chilli paste, and poured over the squid which you have kept just warm.
The dish is then sprinkled with chopped fresh herbs such as tarragon.
It is irresistible served with mashed potatoes using crème fraîche for milk.
Saffroned Mussels with Shell Pasta
Serves 6 to 8
2 quarts mussels
3 oz flour
½ bottle dry white wine
powdered or natural saffron
1 large onion
1 lemon
2 cloves garlic
parsley
3 oz butter
shell pasta
I have a streak of economy in me, even when contemplating how to épater les bourgeois, and recipes that make their sauce out of a stock made at an earlier stage tend to appeal most.
Saffroned mussels with pasta came to me when moules marinières, intended as a first course, suddenly had to feed a houseful.
You cook the moules as for marinière: moules marinières is prepared by scrubbing the mussels, rejecting any that do not close when knocked against the sink, whilst allowing the finely chopped onion and garlic to thoroughly soften in the wine in a large pan for which you have a close-fitting lid.
Add the mussels, turn up the heat, and leave them to steam with the lid shut just until they are all fully open.
Strain and save the juice and remove the mussels from their shells.
I like to use shell-shaped pasta, not just for its marine association, but because it holds the juices and envelops the mussels so well.
For the sauce you make a roux, taking a knob of butter, an equivalent weight of flour and the saffron, and dissolving them in a bain-marie; then add some of the warm mussel juice slowly, stirring all the time.
The roux should be cooked and stirred gently until all traces of the flour taste have been removed and the resultant thick sauce can be poured over the mussels and the cooked pasta.
Adjust the flavour with black pepper and squeezed lemon, sprinkle with chopped parsley and serve immediately.
Brandade
Serves 8
1½ lbs dried cod
2 oz butter
½ pint olive oil with a large clove of crushed garlic
nutmeg
2 lemons
½ pint single cream
This, my favourite dish, can make a first course, a main course, or survival rations for a transatlantic sailing race.
It smells slightly of toe-rag.
I designed my kitchen to complement its Gothic flavour.
My children will have already guessed that I am referring to a brandade.
To make this purée of salt cod, brandir (stir or crush with energy) the fish, having first soaked it for at least 24 hours, simmer it for 20 minutes and remove the bones and fins but not the skin.
With the fish in a large casserole, slowly add warm olive oil and garlic from one pot and cream from another.
Pounding is done with a large wooden spoon.
The key is to keep the fish just warm to avoid over-heating, and to veer towards a too solid rather than too oily mixture.
Season with pepper, nutmeg and lemon juice, and serve in a warm dish.
Stay out of the kitchen: Julian Berry chops squid in the presence of calves' brains and the head of a conger eel
DRINKING
Break for the Bordeaux
HARRY EYRES cautions about the practice of buying wine en primeur and advises on the recent form of the best Bordeaux châteaux
Bordeaux has never had it so good.
Polo parks (one was constructed recently at Châteaux Giscours), marble bottling halls (Michel Delon's at Léoville-Lascases is so highly polished that workers have been issued with special boots), Versailles-style formal gardens with sunken cellars provide the spectacular icing on the cake of wealth accumulated by the leading châteaux over the last decade by the simple expedient of charging much more for their wines than it costs to make them.
Nature, the global warming effect or a claret-loving god has contributed to Bordeaux's boom by granting good-to-exceptional vintages in 1981, 1982, 1983, 1985, 1986, 1988 and 1989.
Such a string of successes is unprecedented in the history of the region.
Looking recently at some vintage notes on the early nineteenth century, I was struck by how many were classified as ‘useless’, one ‘the worst possible’ and another ‘so bad that proprietors in desperation left grapes hanging on vines’.
One good vintage in five was about par.
The other secret of the Bordelais' success has been a method of selling the wine the summer after the vintage, while it is still in the barrel, not to be shipped to this country for another year.
So-called en primeur selling is one of the most amazing confidence tricks ever pulled.
Somehow, the châteaux owners have been able to persuade us that it is in our interest to pay for the wine before it has been bottled and to finance its cellar maturation, which in the case of the better wines takes from ten to fifteen or even twenty years.
No on really knows how a wine is going to turn out until it is bottled — even then, claret's development is notoriously fickle.
There was a good case for en primeur buying in the late 1960s and early 1970s, when prices were extremely low.
There still is a case for it where wines are very limited in supply, like Ausone in St Emilion or the tiny new superstar Le Pin in Pomerol.
But now, when even quite modest châteaux start at over £10 a bottle, with duty, shipping and VAT still to pay, it seems quite obvious that the main beneficiaries from this system are the château-proprietors themselves.
En primeur buying has been touted as a particularly attractive kind of speculative flutter, with the guarantee that the investment can never lose its liquidity.
Americans bought heavily in the 1982 vintage of big, rich, opulent wines; certain Business Expansion Scheme companies, making use of a tax loophole finally closed by Nigel Lawson in 1987, invested an estimated £5 million to £10 million, mainly in the fine but uneven 1983 vintage.
This has failed to move significantly in price over the last two years; people who bought 1983 en primeur in 1984 should have left their money on deposit instead.
This cautionary tale does not seem to have deterred the punters, who have bought copiously in the vintages 1985 (charming, forward wines), 1986 (a classic vintage for the Cabernet Sauvignon grape, and thus for wines like Latour and Mouton-Rothschild) and 1988 (sometimes combining the charm of 1985 with the concentration of 1986).
Now the 1989 market is opening to trumpet blasts of hype about the vintage of the century, expected price rises and heavy worldwide demand.
1989, the earliest vintage since 1893, with grape sugar levels the highest in living memory, has certainly produced some deep, complex, ripe wines.
All the same, it is far too early to say whether it is the vintage of the century or even of the decade.
My advice would be not to follow the Gadarene rush if the prices are significantly higher than last year's (around £300 per dozen for the first growths).
You can always buy at auction later.
Enough cavilling and cautioning.
Bordeaux does produce the world's most civilised red wines, at their best representing a marvellous equipoise of body and delicacy, power and elegance.
Here are my notes on the recent form of the top châteaux:
Margaux set the pace for most of the 1980s.
The 1983 was the best wine of the vintage, so in a lesser year was the 1987.
The 1986 is very deep and powerful, the 1988 more elegant.
These superb wines represent a classic combination of power and finesse.
Mouton-Rothschild made some of the most stylish wines of the 1980s, especially the superb 1986.
I thought the 1988 rather light.
Look out for the special pencil-lead aroma.
Latour makes splendidly consistent, powerful wines, dominated by the blackcurrant and cedar character of Cabernet Sauvignon.
Very good in lesser vintages.
Haut-Brion makes rich supple wines which seem to mature early.
They keep their quality remarkably well, however.
Lafite is the great enigma.
The 1985 is very charming and beautifully balanced, the 1986 seemingly in a quite different style — chewily tannic and concentrated, but unpredictable.
Other recommended châteaux are Pichon-Lalande, Pichon Baron (from 1986), Ducru-Beaucaillour, Cos d'Estournel, Léoville-Lascases, Léoville-Barton (especially good value), Beychevelle, Talbot, Giscours.
Merchants offering 1989 clarets en primeur include Adnams, Berry Bros, Justerini & Brooks, Hungerford Wine Company, Lay & Wheeler and Tanners.
The verdant vineyards of Château Mouton-Rothschild, home of the 1986 vintage that was part of the en primeur rush
TRAVEL
The court of Versailles
With its statue-filled parks and gruesome history, Versailles is the alternative French weekend destination.
JOHN HATT photographs its sights and offers a comprehensive, crowd-avoiding guide to the palace, town and surrounding châteaux
Is Versailles a good destination for a long weekend break — an interesting alternative to Paris?
I thought it worth a try for three reasons.
First, it might combine the benefits of French provincial charm with access to the capital.
No fewer than three railway stations offer a fast service to Paris; and at night it takes only twenty minutes to drive from the town's centre to the Etoile.
I imagined a morning's stroll through quiet streets, gazing at patisseries, and then being able to nip up to Paris to visit the Musée d'Orsay or to see a major exhibition.
Second.
Many of us are more refreshed by greenery than concrete.
At Versailles you can walk for ever in the enormous park and gardens; if you hire a car, there is instant access to countryside, and a mass of sights, including Chartres Cathedral, lie within half an hour's drive.
Third.
To understand and enjoy Versailles, several days are necessary: rather than make several trips from a Paris base itself, it is better to stay in the town.
Apart from the immense scale of the palace, there is the statue-filled park and the Grand and Petit Trianons within it.
Also, to see as much of the main palace as possible it is necessary to take several guided tours (such as for Madame du Barry's apartments, Madame de Maintenon's suite, and the King's private apartments) which are often available only at awkward times on specific days.
For those who haven't been to Versailles for many years, there is now much more to see.
Many of the state rooms have been dramatically restored and refurnished, and the sensational Opera House can once again be visited.
By careful timing, which is possible during a longer stay, you can avoid most of the crowds.
I managed to be in Galerie des Glaces (which really is one of the wonders of the western world) just before closing time, entirely alone with the evening sun slanting through its tall arched windows.
The success of my Versailles experiment partly depended on the characters of its hotels.
Because the most celebrated of these — the Trianon — was at first full, I was put into the second-best, the Novotel.
This proved to be charmless and too far away from the palace, necessitating a dull walk along a busy road.
As there were no nearby cafés I was forced to eat breakfast in the hotel.
This was a lamentable start to the day.
The ham was desiccated, the scrambled eggs congealed, and the fruit juice fermented.
It was self-service, and guests carried their food on little plastic trays to mucky tables, where they ate to the accompaniment of strident pop music.
After a few days of the Novotel, I was able to move to the Trianon, a magnificent Edwardian building, well placed right on the edge of the park.
At night I could hear owls hooting, and the stupendous palace was only three minutes walk away.
The Grand Trianon and the Petit Trianon were only slightly further.
My spacious room was infinitely more cheerful than the sunless box in the Novotel but, it must be admitted that, probably because the hotel has captive custom for most of the year, it isn't perfect.
The telephone didn't function for two days; the mattress was uncomfortable, and the hot water was prone to run out.
Nor is the best use made of the building's magnificent proportions, and much of it, including the bunch of fake flowers in the hall, is dowdy.
Nonetheless, breakfast in the wide- pillared corridor was a peaceful delight.
Staying so close to the palace will enhance your enjoyment, enabling you to make many mini-trips in between reading about the extraordinary life of its court.
The most enjoyable book is Nancy Mitford's The Sun King unbeatable entertainment.
When reading it on the spot, along with Memoirs of the Duc de Saint Simon , the visitor becomes entirely absorbed in the bizarre life of Louis XIV, a monarch who spent all his time in public, and yet allowed no man — except his brother — to sit down directly in front of him.
Without reading some history it is impossible to have any true conception of the life at court.
The British, perhaps because they are jealous of the splendour at Versailles, are fond of recounting how the courtiers used to relieve themselves in the passageways.
Nancy Mitford, who was punctilious about research, denies this.
She writes that, indeed, when there were balls or fêtes, there was sometimes a queue for the public lavatories, and then a rich bourgeois might pay a nobleman's servant as much as four louis d'or to be conducted to his master's privy.
Versailles wasn't unique in depending upon the chamber-pot or the chaise percée for sanitation.
Most country houses and palaces did so until the twentieth century.
Nancy Mitford remembers arriving at Buckingham Palace to be presented (in 1923) after a long wait in The Mall.
She was in urgent need of relief, and the only possibility was a chamber pot behind a screen in the ladies' cloakroom.
But some of the habits of court do appear strange to us.
Saint Simon describes how Louis XIV's adored granddaughter-in-law, the Duchesse de Bourgogne, was standing in conversation with the King, while a maid lifted her skirt from behind and discreetly gave her an enema.
Sometimes the duchess held the syringe all the way through a play, claiming it prevented her getting a headache in the stuffy theatre.
Some aspects of court life were even stranger than this.
When the Dauphine had just given birth (in front of numerous ambassadors, foreign princes and courtiers), a sheep was skinned alive in her bedroom so that the exhausted mother could be wrapped in its fleece.
When a member of the royal family died, their lords and ladies-in-waiting were obliged to stay by the bed while the head was sawn open and examined.
Then the body was butchered and the heart was handed on a silver salver to one duchess, while the entrails were handed in a silver bowl to another.
One wonders quite how Jennifer's Diary would have described these scenes.
Most medical practices were based on a fearful quackery, and most of the doctors were butchers or cranks.
Monsieur de l'Orne, who was fashionable for 50 years and was the King's first doctor, used to say, ‘Why do fish live to such a great age?
Because they are never subject to draughts’.
So he spent his days in a sedan chair draped with blankets and lined with hares' fur to ensure that no air could percolate.
When obliged to venture out, he covered himself with a Morocco robe and mask, and wore six pairs of stockings along with several fur hats.
He slept in a type of brick oven, surrounded by hot water bottles, and lived on  sheep's tongues and syrup of greengages.
He always kept a clove or garlic in his mouth, incense in his ears, and a stalk of rue sticking out of each nostril.
His ideas appeared to bring some benefits: he lived to the age of 94 and at 87 married a young wife.
She died of exhaustion within a year.
The town of Versailles is disappointing.
Certainly there are plenty of magnificent seventeenth- and eighteenth-century streets; but it suffers from being planned as an adjunct to the palace.
Although this planning took place so long ago, 300 years has not been long enough for the town to develop a soul.
It has an arid, empty feel, not helped by having two centres, each with its own church.
The inhabitants are known for being bourgeois, inward- looking, and conservative.
The most common graffiti is ‘Vive le Roi’.
The bourgeois women consider it flash to appear too attractive: they scorn make-up, their haircuts are severe, and their clothes tend to be dark green or beige.
When they feel especially daring, they might wear a paler shade of beige.
The nearby town of Saint Germain-en-Laye provides an extraordinary contrast.
Two minutes in its unplanned, crooked, medieval streets reveal that it is a more vibrant, cheerful and successful place.
The centre is full of every type of shop — patisseries, piano shops, old- fashioned bootmakers, and flamboyant grocers — all much more attractive than their equivalents in Versailles.
Nearby stands the massive castle built by François I, now one of the best archaeological museums in the world.
It was this castle that Louis XIV relinquished for Versailles.
In a dusty guidebook of the region I noticed an intriguing photograph of a small, pseudo-Renaissance building, the château of Monte Cristo.
It was built in 1846 by Alexander Dumas, author of The Three Musketeers .
Although some of the house has been spoilt, I thoroughly enjoyed my visit, enhanced by a delightful guide who is still in love with the long-dead author.
Her obsession with him extends to the jam which she makes entirely from blackberries picked in his garden.
So many and so extraordinary were the stories she told me that our trip around his tiny château lasted for more than an hour and a half, with not a boring moment.
Many of the stories were unbelievable, but when I later checked them, all were true.
Dumas was a quarter black: his father's mother was a slave in Santo Domingo.
The French still use the word ‘negre’ for a ghost-writer because Dumas quite openly used other authors to help him with his colossal output.
He was a generous and profligate host, often keeping open-house.
When the château was complete, he hosted a dinner for 600 guests.
And, when burying himself in work, he left several bowls of gold coins outside his room, with a note saying ‘Please help yourself to those coins, but on no account disturb me’.
On the first floor of Monte Cristo is a Moorish room with its white plaster entirely embellished with the most intricate Arabic patterns.
The story of its origins is characteristic of Dumas.
The French government had wanted to publicise their new colony, Algeria, and therefore approached the arch-publicist Dumas, who was delighted to accept.
He liked making semi-state visits to foreign countries, and because he liked wearing medals — especially on unsuitable occasions — enjoyed being decorated by foreign governments.
If he wasn't given a medal, he asked to be given one.
If he wasn't given one, he bought one.
On this occasion, he grew bored with the idea of Algeria, and to the consternation of parliament commandeered a French warship to take him to Tunisia.
Here the Bey of Tunis was building himself a superb mausoleum.
Dumas grew jealous of the workmanship and insisted on the Bey lending him the best craftsmen, saying ‘you need that room only after your death, but I need your craftsmen while I am alive’.
Thus, while the stucco was engraved at the château of Monte Cristo, the Bey's mausoleum was delayed for an entire year.
After the tour round the châteaux, I was taken to Cazaudehore la Forestière, a restaurant in the forest outside Saint Germain-en-Laye.
My local host, the tourist authority, had promised the food would be superb.
The collection of Swiss-style buildings that constitute the restaurant and hotel are not especially beautiful, but the other omens were good.
A cat sits in the front door obstinately blocking the path of arriving customers.
The lavatory has real towels, not a hot-air dryer.
An impressive madame, wife of the owner, stands continuously in the corner of the restaurant, surveying every aspect of the culinary stage management, and the sommelier has been working with the family for 38 years.
I ate foie gras de canard, cassolette de homard au riz sauvage, suprême de canette de Challans au chou croquant, followed by tarte au soufflé de pomme.
Although I'm not especially interested in food, and would never drive more than ten miles for any culinary feast, the lunch was so perfect, so many times better than anything we ever get at home, that it induced in me an unlikely surge of ecstasy.
Could one of the glorious wines have been spiked?
After all, the owner knew I was writing for Harpers & Queen .
However, the wine must have been amphetamine-free, because the resulting doldrums never arrived, and I remained in a state of euphoria for the whole of the afternoon.
The Palace: It is worth knowing that there are musical evenings in the Royal Chapel (where all the court's religious ceremonies took place, including the marriage of Marie Antoinette).
These take place on Saturdays.
Get there in advance to bag a seat in the front rows; these have backs, unlike the benches behind.
It is also worth seeing Les Grandes Eaux, the weekly fountain display — ask for a timetable.
Timing: I went in mid-October, when the crowds aren't bad and the trees are beautiful.
June is apparently the worst month, because of children's school outings.
Avoid Tuesdays when many coaches arrive as a result of so many museums being closed in Paris.
Excursion and an interesting hotel: My most enjoyable rural excursion was to the beautiful (inside and out) Château of Dampierre, a ducal residence surrounded by lakes.
On 10 October I was the only visitor, but beware — it shuts from 15 October until 1 April.
Avoid its hideous Parc Floral.
One of the duke's groundsmen advised me to reconnoitre a nearby converted abbey which has recently been turned into a hotel.
It is a cluster of medieval stone buildings situated on the edge of a Monet-style lake in a wonderful valley.
(It ma be are more crowded in the summer.)
It had previously been a Rothschild mansion, and some of the best suites still have bathrooms with boiseries etc.
A room is about £75 a night, up to £260 for a suite of four rooms.
Unless prepared to make an excursion, you would be trapped into eating in the hotel.
I can't vouch for this hotel but it looked wonderful for a romantic weekend.
Château de Monte Cristo: It can only be visited on Saturdays and Sundays.
Restaurant: The restaurant outside St Germain is Cazaudehore La Forestiè re.
Ask for a table by the window in the older restaurant.
The owners showed me the hotel rooms, which looked extremely pleasant and had pure cotton sheets.
You will need a car to get about.
The châteaux of Monte Cristo, build in 1846 by Alexander Dumas.
Middle: the Grand Trianon.
Bottom: the magnificent Vase of Peace
The Marble Courtyard, party of one of the world's most stupendous places
TRAVEL NEWS
Volcanic island
Lanzarote, the eastern-most of the Canary Islands, is best known for its weird volcanic scenery and laval surface which barely supports a scrubby vegetation.
The island, say its detractors, has been devoured by the time-share touts and developers.
Less known are the inland regions, where single-track roads meander through stark valleys where vines, planted singly and each surrounded by a protective wall of lava rock, struggle to produce the excellent local vintages.
Arrecife is small and surprisingly unspoilt, with a cheerful, flower-filled esplanade where an old fashioned roundabout operates all hours to children's delight.
Meon Holidays owns a number of villas in the central village of Oasis de Nazaret.
From the Villa Elena you can see no fewer than eleven extinct volcanos and a distant view of the sea, only slightly marred by smoke belching from an industrial plant two miles away.
The Villa Elena costs from £545 for two weeks for three people sharing.
This includes a four seater car and departures are from Gatwick and Manchester.
Details from Meon Holidays, College Street, Petersfield (0730 64811).
Anna Karenina
Visiting Russia by private train is the latest tour on offer by Abercrombie and Kent.
The spacious railway carriage known as The Anna Karenina is available for charters by private groups of two to eight passengers, allowing an extensive tour of Russia in considerable style and comfort.
The ‘Golden Ring’ is an eleven-day journey from Leningrad to Moscow, travelling through the ninth and eleventh-century fortified towns that sprang up in the central and north- eastern regions of Russia.
The towns illustrate the best of early Russian art and architecture.
The train makes frequent stops at points of interest along the route and at each stop the train is met by a local, English-speaking guide and comfortable car or limousine.
The saloon carriage, The Anna Karenina, was built in East Germany in 1983 for ministerial use.
It is now exclusively for travel by Abercrombie and Kent passengers.
Accommodation on board is in three cabins, there is a fully equipped bathroom and a saloon for dining and relaxing in.
Meals are prepared by the chef on board using fresh ingredients which are bought daily.
For further details telephone Abercrombie and Kent, Sloane Square House, Holbein Place, SW1 (01–73 9600).
Reef encounters
Until recently, the secluded Cockatoo Island in Western Australia had only been visited by iron ore miners and nineteenth-century pearl fishermen.
Its village of pink bungalows, originally built for the miners, is now an exclusive holiday spot.
A bungalow on Cockatoo Island costs £121 per night for two.
The wilderness retreat of Seven Spirit Bay on the Northern Territory's Coburg Peninsula is the homeland for Australia's Aborigines.
Seven Spirit Bay is a unique development based on ecological criteria: it fits into the habitat and provides the Aborigines with a living without destroying their lifestyle.
Seven nights' stay will cost £1,500.
For further information contact the Western Australia Tourist Commission, Western Australia House, 115 Strand, WC2 (01–240 2881) for Cockatoo Island, and the Northern Territory Tourist Commission, 4th Floor, 393 Strand, WC2 (01–836 3344) for further details of Seven Spirit Bay.
Drawing the line
When staying in a hotel, make as few telephone calls as possible.
Business Traveller recently published a letter from someone who stayed in the Inter-Continental hotel in Kinshasa.
He was charged $65 for a call that never got through, and the Inter- Continental has since confirmed that ‘for technical reasons, charges for all international calls out of Zaire commence as soon as the line rings, as opposed to when the party telephoned actually picks up the receiver’.
Rostov the Great, Moscow, one of the many sites to be seen from Anna Karenina
RESTAURANTS
Kung foodies
Age-old Chinese customs meet European ingredients and eating styles in Nouvelle Orient cuisine.
AISLING FOSTER investigates
Frontiers have fallen in restaurants, too: international design open-faced service, plus an adaptation of good European ingredients and eating styles has swept away clear divisions between eating East or West.
Sri Siam, 14 Old Compton Street, W1 (01–434 3544) is a good example of this Nouvelle Orient style.
Inside, the atmosphere is upbeat and as tripped architectural space provides a backdrop to the rainbow silks of the staff.
We were placed near the window, with a good view of the mixed bag of Saturday night diners and the tatters of old Soho still peddling ‘Live Shows, Double Acts’.
The menu looked promising, though apart from some florid copywriting, a language barrier with our friendly waiter made us none the wiser about his specialities.
First came fish parcels, like deep-fried versions of those lacy lavender bags you put in underwear drawers, with a pungency of lemon grass suggesting a similar taste.
The fried bean curd put one in mind of oriental griddle cakes and needed the hot sauces to extract their inscrutable flavour.
An excellent sliced sirloin which followed was more familiar.
This had been cooked with mint, lime and enough coriander to give a sneaky kung fu blow in the back of one's throat.
My guest's shellfish also left a fiery bite but was unfortunately drowned in a sauce combining sweetness of coconut milk with a sort of bathcube flavour.
When he left to powder his nose I noticed a change of mood on the street: the club across the road had suddenly gone dark, and into the brightness of our window fitted uniformed police escorting angry ladies into vans.
The scene was so exciting that I failed to sympathise with my grey-faced guest who returned with tales of third world conditions in the gents.
I suppose it takes years for two cultures to achieve perfect harmony.
Our bill, including a bottle of ‘87 Sancerre, was £51.75 with service.
The Blue Elephant, 4 Fulham Broadway, SW6 (01 385 6595) has brought the jungle to London in an imaginative series of bamboo-roofed spaces broken by walls of trellised greenery and even a lacquered bridge with a real stream trickling under it.
The theatrical bustle of the place is increased by armies of beautiful women in green silk sarongs and young men dressed like dashing versions of clog dancers.
We began with fried scallops and chicken satay, both of which showed strong influences of the parent restaurant in Brussels: the scallops were particularly good, plumped with generous amounts of butter and crunchy garlic.
These were swept away to be replaced by lamb Massaman and sesame king prawns.
Everything looked so propitious it took a few minutes nibbling to realise that the lamb had been cooked to the point of anonymity and the prawns, although big and fat, were so bland they tasted more like good bread rolls than fish.
However, we discovered that if one ate the prawns with the cinnamon meat sauce and mixed in lots of stir-fried manage-touts the results were marvellous.
After a delectable passion fruit sorbet, our bill with wine from a reasonable, though largely French, wine list came to £66.75 with service.
A move across cultures for lunch at China Jazz, 29 Parkway, NW1 (01–482 3940) just around the corner from Camden Market, an ocean liner of a place with a cool Thirties feel; all bright steel, pale wood and black granite, overseen by punky waiters in designer bow-ties.
As the name suggests, the restaurant offers live music in the evenings, and food in which ‘additives, preservatives and artificial colouring are unheard of’.
Only the lunchtime crowd lowered the tone — a rather conventional assortment of estate agent types in their shirtsleeves complete with mobile telephones cocked at their elbows.
We began with a selection of starters, including delicious soft shell crabs, tiny spring rolls and some more anodyne prawns deep fried in rice paper, whose combined oiliness made us hanker after a wedge of westernised lemon.
Next came a leg of Szechuan duck, which our attendant shredded at the table with all the panache of a French waiter filleting a sole.
With great ceremony, he rolled a portion with some shredded vegetables and sweet HP-ish sauce inside two tiny pancakes.
The result was an exact compound of parts, no more, no less, and we had not the heart to continue the troublesome process for ourselves.
Next came fried squid.
The creature looked wilder and woollier than any I've met in seas round about, its suckered and flock-piled textures giving more chew and less taste than one would have expected.
The aubergine had a bit too much flavour — sea spice — which my guest, still preoccupied by bathrooms, thought carried a top note of Harpic.
Our cheery waiter seemed genuinely concerned at our inability to eat it, and tried to encourage us: ‘You no like aubergine?
Is a good Chinese vegetable, you know?’
Well, why not?
New Zealanders hijacked the Chinese gooseberry as their very own Kiwi fruit.
Our bill, with tea and Perrier, came to £31.40 without service.
Pulling the plug
Evelyn Grubb ponders much-talked-about restaurants
KENSINGTON PLACE
Kensington Place is conspicuous for bagging as much space on the west of Kensington Church Street as a chandelier shop, two antique shops and an exotic travel agency on the east.
And because this is an expensive area, and because the whole of the restaurant's roadward flank is glass, it is the ideal spot for those who are rich, and keen to show it.
Unfortunately, in the pull-your-belts-in early Nineties this breed is on the decline, and a disproportionate number of the clientele are now American.
Tom and I were led through the mock-Thirties-liner interior to a table in a rather draughty corner, and were brought freezing spritzers, black bread and tempting French menus.
I started with crunchy buschetta soused in green olive oil and spread with tapenda — delicious, but at £4.25 expensive for peasant-cuisine-come-to-Kensington.
Tom's smooth, light, wobbly chicken and goat's cheese mousse was strangely mixed with jam.
He was happier with this, though, than with his rather over-pan-fried John Dory, which was dry and turned up at the edges.
But my barely-seared, griddled calves' liver with beurre rouge was tender and perfect, and came with fat, greaseless chips.
We ended by sharing paradisal soupçons of almost every pudding on the menu.
Open Monday to Saturday, 12 noon to 3.14 pm; Sunday, 12 noon to 4pm; Monday to Saturday, 6.30 pm to 10.15 pm.
About £65 for two.
TALL ORDERS
The greeter was grouchy at seven; I hate to think how nettled she was by ten.
We hung up our own coats, ordered G and Ts and settled into the menu.
The idea is to order everything you want to eat at the same time, then work your way through the tower of baskets.
Hot pesto bread sounded good, but the pesto was like mayonnaise.
This was a sauce made with pesto, the waitress explained, not a pesto sauce.
Spicy meat balls with puntalette were tasty but they looked rather lifeless and microwaved; the sauce could have been a lot more lively.
Christopher started off with prawns cooked in coriander, ginger and garlic, accompanied by a close cousin of the Hellmans family.
A mushroom disguised as an onion bhaji with flaking batter was a mouthwatering morsel, but not really a dish in its own right, more an interlude before the chicken à la British Airways, both accompanied by more Hellmans relatives.
A quiver of anguish passed along my spine as I came to the last dish.
Beside my compôte of berries was a creamy mass.
It couldn't possibly be…a frisson of relief as I realised it was crème fraiche and not you know what.
The prunes were good but with three extra stones in the juice Christopher wondered who might have been there before him.
Open Monday to Saturday, 6pm to midnight; Saturday and Sunday, 12 noon to 4 pm.
About £35 for two.
CELESTE
APRIL 1990
Aries * (21 March to 20 April)
Now that the Sun is passing through your own birth sign, you are certain to be at your most forthright, purposeful and ready to go into battle at the slightest provocation.
What took place towards the very end of March should have made you realise that this is very much a time to hold you fire when dealing with important professional issues.
Certain individuals may have overstepped the mark and still seem to imagine that you are either too insecure or emotionally confused to retaliate, but you will achieve a great deal more by remaining aloof this month, especially around the 4th and 15th when the Sun is challenged by Neptune and Saturn.
However, a decisive full moon in your opposite sign of Libra on 10 April is likely to bring about the greatest changes in your life and even mark the end of one long-standing involvement.
Taurus * (21 April to 21 May)
Unfortunately you now appear to be experiencing a rather peculiar phase in which nothing seems to go according to plan and all you can do is bide your time and wait for others to come to their senses.
Not perhaps what you want to hear, particularly when you know that so many obstacles could be removed if loved ones or colleagues would be more honest and alter their stand just a fraction.
Your only course of action this April seems to be to avoid any further confrontations and concentrate on professional interests or projects specially designed to exploit your creative abilities, as very shortly after the full Moon in Libra on the 10th there should be a beneficial alteration in your work.
You still have a number of financial commitments, and this appears to be an ideal time to ensure that you are adequately reimbursed for your time and talents.
Gemini * (22 May to 21 June)
As the Sun is passing through that part of your solar chart traditionally related to hopes, you should now be in fine fettle and not unduly affected by others' lack of support.
Unfortunately, a rather upsetting aspect to the revolutionary planet Uranus, which takes place on 30 March, seems likely to bring a disagreement over finances to a head — and therefore your first priority this April must be to salvage what you can from a rather costly alliance.
The 4th and 15th are bound to be days when the tide of fortune may appear to turn against you.
No matter.
The full Moon on the 10th marks the end of a cycle and all you have to do is accept the fact that, to some extent, you have been rather naïve.
You certainly appear to have reached a major turning point in your career and must now think about severing unprofitable ties.
Cancer * (22 June to 22 July)
With the Sun now passing through the independent sign of Aries and over the mid-heaven point of your solar chart, you should be at your most outgoing, ambitious and not unduly concerned if a major alteration takes place in the working pattern of your life.
However, this is not a time for complacency because, although in many respects you are in control of your own destiny, there are certain obstacles to be surmounted before you have a completely free hand.
It is a simply a question of reassuring partners or close companions, rectifying the mistakes made approximately six months ago and capitalising on property or other assets.
The period around the time of the full Moon on the 10th will necessitate a certain amount of soul-searching on your part, but the time has come to regain your self- confidence and live how and where you wish.
Leo * (23 July to 23 August)
What transpires around 30 March when the Sun in Aries makes a disagreeable aspect to the revolutionary and unpredictable planet Uranus will, it seems, cut you to the quick, and make you realise that there are certain individuals who will never be on your wavelength.
And, unfortunately, the situation is likely to remain rather explosive and uncertain until the full Moon in Libra on 10 April brings to light all the information you require to force a showdown.
Then, however, you really must be prepared to stick to your principles and beliefs because throughout the coming months you simply have to know whom to trust and who must be shown the door.
Sadly, it seems difficult for you to keep partnerships or close relationships steady at the moment.
A major domestic upheaval seems unavoidable soon after the Sun changes signs on the 20th.
Virgo * (24 August to 23 September)
Immediately after the Sun changed signs on 20 March it began to form what is an adverse aspect to the revolutionary planet Uranus in Capricorn.
Consequently, you seem to have experienced a testing period in close personal ties and in joint financial arrangements, and during the first three weeks of April you will come to realise that a day of reckoning or a major upheaval was unavoidable.
In many respects you are only being asked to do what ought to have been done around the time of your last birthday.
April is bound to be a month of far-reaching changes for you, and after all the cards have been laid on the table around the full Moon on the 10th you will feel completely relieved and at peace with yourself.
Make any necessary payments around the 15th, in the certain knowledge that you won't be out of pocket for long.
Libra * 24 September to 23 October)
Between the 1st and the 19th you are liable to be preoccupied with partnership matters.
Although you may be perfectly entitled to take others to task and even issue a number of ultimatums, you ought to be more concerned with plans designed to give you the kind of personal or professional recognition you seek and deserve.
You have a reputation for evading the issue, but before the end of April you ought to become a bigger fish in a decidedly bigger pond.
The influence of Jupiter currently in Cancer and passing over the mid-heaven point of your solar chart is quite awe-inspiring but somewhat difficult to harness.
Because of what transpired in the latter part of 1989, seldom has your insight been so penetrating and accurate, and between now and August is a time of unrivalled opportunities for you to make your mark.
Scorpio * (24 October to 22 November)
April doesn't have to be a month of trials and tribulations or agonising over career or professional matters, if you are prepared to make some snap decisions and take what transpires towards the very end of March as a signal to go even further out on a limb.
The full Moon in Libra on the 10th is bound to shed fresh light on complex situations and enable you to astound those who believe that you are too insecure to compete.
You now realise that you have accepted a secondary role and sacrificed too much, whilst three of the planets in Capricorn signify that, regardless of the consequences, you must break out.
Therefore, this could well be a month of highly charged meetings and discussions with relatives, close companions and colleagues, but by the time the Sun enters your opposite sign of Taurus on the 20th you should be a free agent.
Sagittarius * (23 November to 21 December)
Because Saturn, Uranus and Neptune in Capricorn are now challenged by the Sun in Aries, you are urged to do your sums this April, read all the small print and then take the initiative over joint financial arrangements or business affairs.
What comes to light around the 4th, 10th and 15th may give you quite a jolt.
However, if you are to protect and preserve all you have worked so hard to achieve, then you simply have to face up to certain harsh realities.
The sad part about the whole sorry affair is that you appear to have been badly let down by those who by rights ought to feel indebted to you, but with the Sun in Aries and that part of your solar chart related to affairs of the heart you are bound to win some kind of moral victory, and even if you do decide to make a settlement this month you should still feel you really have much to celebrate.
Capricorn * (22 December to 20 January)
It looks as though March comes to a close on an emotionally chilling note because the revolutionary planet Uranus, passing through your own birth sign in April, is adversely aspected by the Sun in Aries on the 30th.
You must still be very much preoccupied with domestic matters and seriously considering your long-term position.
What transpires around the 4th and 15th should give a much clearer picture of what needs to be done.
Some of your future arrangements are no longer viable and you may be losing out on what is attainable by resolutely refusing to change your outlook.
Even if the full Moon in Libra and at the mid- heaven point of your solar chart on the 10th brings about a complete break from the past, both professionally and personally, it will remove the dead wood which has prevented you from living life to its very fullest.
Aquarius * (21 January to 19 February)
You appear to be experiencing a similar situation to the one which occurred last October.
Now, however, the Sun in Aries, at odds with your ruling planet Uranus, as well as Saturn and Neptune in Capricorn, the most sensitive area of your solar chart, signifies that intrigue and intimidation are forcing you to make a complete break from the past.
This might sound rather alarming and ominous.
But in fact what takes place this April could well mark the beginning of a whole new era or cycle for you, as once the Sun has entered Taurus on the 20th you will come to realise that what others are determined to acquire has no place in your long-term scheme.
Therefore, refuse to be browbeaten or discouraged, especially around the time of the full Moon on the 10th, and devote more time and attention to your general health and wellbeing.
Pisces * (20 February to 20 March)
The latter part of March appears to be something of an uphill battle, and no doubt you will continue to feel nonplussed because of others' outrageous demands over finances or business associations.
After you have dealt with another series of confrontations around 4 and 5 April, you should begin to feel that it was all worthwhile, as you now know who to trust and what must be done to recoup your losses.
The full Moon in Libra on the 10th will enable you to use your remarkable intuition and ingenuity to the full.
Emotionally you seem to be playing against time these days, and astounding loved ones.
After the Sun changes signs on the 20th, it will immediately begin to make what is considered to be a disturbing aspect to Pluto in Scorpio.
Consequently, even long-standing travel plans or arrangements may have to be postponed or cancelled in early May.
TRANSATLANTIC CHRONICLE
Porno Coons and the etiquette guide
In Manhattan a fellow dashes about claiming he is the grandson of Balenciaga.
He is a dandy-looking dude too, with slick black ponytail and, always, a full-length mink coat.
He is making assorted claims, and all sorts of young actors and actresses are following this pied piper around town.
‘Warning: Watch out for this pip,’ said a newspaper the other day.
A hoax is a hoax, of course, but it seems different when the phoney says he is Balenciaga's grandson.
Somehow, it bodes well for the couture.
Everyone wants to be somebody here and, once they are, they usually want to be somebody else.
Jeff Coons, one of the young bad boys of current art, wants to be porno star next.
He says he is making a movie with Italian sex kitten La Cicciolina, who was elected to the Italian parliament in 1987.
Coons has started working out daily in a pumping iron gym, and enrolled himself in acting classes.
‘I am transforming my body,’ he says, ‘into a vehicle for greater communication.’
At long last, the green season is coming!
The Academy Awards unfold in Los Angeles with Swifty Lazar's annual do at Spago, then it's spring across America.
Time to write a poem, go for a swim, take diet pills.
New York's new Health Commissioner is a sight.
The good news is he is 35 years old.
The bad news is he weighs just under 30 stone at press time, down fourteen stone from his previous weight.
It's very New York that he is the choice for health guru; it couldn't happen anywhere else; it's the way the macrobiotic cookies crumble in this city that never sleeps.
‘I haven't been up so late since Studio 54 closed,’ confessed socialite Nan Kempner during a recent encounter.
She had been up until dawn, wearing gold Yves Saint Laurent couture at the 50th anniversary dinner-dance benefit for the American Ballet Theatre.
Blaine Trump, wrapped in Christian Lacroix chiffon, organised the social portion of the night, held inside a balloon-filled tent at the Lincoln Center.
All the usual social suspects were there, including Princess Firyal of Jordan, who had just returned from Acapulco where she visited Ricky and Sandra di Portanova in their permanent tent.
Kelly Klein wore the pears husband Calvin Klein had given her.
Startlingly white on skin bronzed on holiday in St. Bart's, the pears once belonged to the Duchess of Windsor.
Missing from the fête, however, were new billionaires Saul and Gayfryd Steinberg.
They went to Egypt to celebrate Gayfryd's 40th birthday.
Egypt, you might care to note, is the current ‘in’ point of destination for the Chiffon Set.
Last year it was India.
Mortimer's, meanwhile, remains the choice uptown watering hole, and its staff are having a bit of a laugh at Hollywood.
Producers for the television miniseries People Like Us , based on Dominick Dunne's novel, recently nixed the notion of filming at Mortimer's, although the boîte is the basis for a place called ‘Clarence's’ in the book.
The producers flew to New York to check Mortimer's out, then decided it wasn't ‘glitzy’ enough for their purposes.
‘I'm flattered,’ said Mortimer's owner Glenn Bernhaum.
Old Money, or America's reasonable facsimile, doesn't work in Hollywood.
‘Viewers don't understand it,’ explains Ann Lambert, costume designer for the series.
‘The Old Money look isn't ‘film exciting’,’ she adds.
‘Nouveau riche is more interesting to look at, but of course boring to talk to.’
The old Guard does emit some strange signals.
Consider Sydney Biddle Barrows, the former débutante arrested in 1984 for promoting prostitution.
Because she ran an escort service in New York, Sydney was nicknamed ‘The Mayflower Madam’.
Her ancestors came over on the legendary vessel.
Lately she has been working as a $10-an-hour dresser at local fashion shows and answering phones at an aerobics studio.
That is, until her new book,Mayflower Manners , hit the bookstands.
For the record,Mayflower Manners is available from Doubleday at the relatively light price of $14.95.
But don't be misled, the book will most assuredly sink in a hot tub.
‘What is more embarrassing: using the wrong spoon, or saying the wrong thing in bed?’
Sydney asks.
The etiquette guide, written with the help of one Ellis Weiner, seeks to sort out such intimate matters for us.
We learn how to ring up an escort service, where to keep our condoms (‘in a convenient drawer or box’) and to offer our bed partner the choice of swallowing during fellatio because that's just ‘good manners’.
Furthermore, when visiting our local dominance and submission sex club, we are warned that ‘master/mistress never initiates eye contact with another's slave’.
There is also a section devoted to the polite ways of ‘playing around between the classes; you don't have to be British to know that a great sexual attraction exists between people not like us’.
Come in London.
Me thinks another pilgrim is trying to make a buck.
Besides, no one I know has had sex since Studio 54 closed.
Dominick Dunne nixes the nouveau riche at Mortimer's
Princess Firyal (left) went camping in Acapulco with Baron and Baroness di Portanova (far left)
(below) Calvin and Kelly — casting pearls before Kleins
La Cicciolina: a soft touch for Jeff Coons?
The Boston Tea Party: Sydney Biddle Barrows advises on all sorts of etiquette
Nan Kempner proves that now there is life after Studio 54