

GARDENS
EDITORIAL
Small is beautiful is almost an article of faith in Britain.
The quality of even our grandest scenery owes much to its intimacy of scale.
If we want to find true wilderness we must go abroad.
Our institutions and our conglomerates are modest in size when set alongside General Motors.
It is not surprising, therefore, that when the National Trust announced that it had recruited its 2 millionth member last autumn, rejoicing was not unmixed with the occasional grumble that the Trust had become too big; in other words there was a presumption by some that such a large membership must inevitably be accompanied by the onset of unwieldiness and bureaucracy in the organisation itself.
This is not, however, a presumption that stands up to examination.
No organisation with a growth rate as rapid as that of the Trust over the past decade can afford to ignore the risks associated with size.
Not only its membership but the range and geographical spread of the Trust's responsibilities require administrative structures of increasing sophistication to co-ordinate policy and practice, to control resources and to handle the work effectively.
Without effective principles of delegated authority and planning, it would be easy to fall prey to the classic faults inherent in large bureaucracies: an over-extended chain of command, proliferation of paper and a committee-ridden process of decision making.
It would be idle to pretend that the Trust is wholly free from some of these faults; few organisations are.
They are, however, the exception rather than the rule.
The Trust's management is aware of the dangers, and seeks constantly to ensure that growth is matched by clear, flexible procedures which promote vitality and experimentation, by a healthy eagerness on the part of the managers to manage, and above all, by the delegation of responsibility right through the organisation.
These attributes, so essential to good management, must be underpinned by a clear policy framework and a skilled, well-trained staff.
Consultation in the creation of policy is essential, but it should not become such an end in itself that decisions become imprisoned in a wheel of endless debate.
That path leads inexorably to procrastination.
The Trust is fortunate that its regional structure was conceived and laid down in the 1971 Act of Parliament.
It has served, and continues to serve, the Trust well.
Decisions, when they need to be (for example, over new acquisitions), can be taken with a speed that surprises those used to the ways of public authorities.
A primary aim of regional organisation is that staff develop an intimate knowledge of the coast, countryside, historic houses and parks for which they are responsible.
It is also essential that they are part of the community, getting to know the members, donors, tenants and volunteers who play a major role in the work of the Trust.
These objectives have to be worked for; success is neither universal nor taken for granted.
One of the Trust's most precious assets is the experience, skill and commitment of its staff; this has its reward in the standards of upkeep and presentation of the properties, and in the enjoyment which the members and wider public, in their tens of millions, gain from them each year.
A few examples of recent projects undertaken in different parts of the country may help to illustrate the innovative nature of much of the Trust's work, and the care that is taken to respect the integrity and character of each property as well as to enhance the benefit that each one can offer to the nation.
First, the Trust's long-term programme of footpath restoration in the Lake District was internationally recognised last year by the award of DX Nostra's prestigious Medal of Honour for the repair of the ancient packhorse route over Sty Head Pass in Borrowdale.
At the other end of the country, the fine survival of a sixteenth-century park at Morden Hall in South London has been converted by the Trust, with generous support from Merton Borough Council, into an environmental centre which has greatly stimulated the interest of the local community, particularly schools.
A complete contrast is the restoration work on the landscape park at Berrington Hall in Herefordshire, where many of the eighteenth- and nineteenth-century features and vistas have been uncovered or reintroduced.
Inevitably, one is spoilt for choice, but a final example can be found on the Ceredigion coast of Dyfed, where, with 50 per cent grant aid from the Countryside Commission, the Trust has established a farm conservation scheme which aims to help farmers restore and maintain landscape features and re-create wildlife habitats.
There are many ways in which the large scale of the Trust's operation can be turned to the advantage of its conservation purposes.
As a major national organisation, commanding massive public support, the Trust's influence in Whitehall is strengthened.
Judiciously deployed and when necessary publicly stated, its views on environmental topics are listened to and have been effective in connection with recent Government proposals and legislation as they affect the Trust.
But it is the breadth of the Trust's accumulated experience and the integrated management of its properties that is its most important contribution.
It is this achievement which commands the respect, indeed the envy, of other countries, especially our European partners, not to mention wholehearted support in Britain.
It could not have come about if the Trust had ever said to itself ‘it is time to stop growing’.
Without growth there is no vitality.
The important thing is to harness growth to self-knowledge, a ready acceptance of change, swift-moving business practice and sound judgement.
This will continue to be our watchword in the years ahead.
Angus Stirling, Director-General 
News
Annual General Meetings 1990 and 1991
Results of elections to Council and a report on the proceedings at last year's Annual General Meeting held on Saturday 3 November in Llandudno are included in the Annual Report for 1990, which is circulated with this issue of the magazine.
Minutes of the meeting are available from the end of March on application to the Assistant Secretary, 36 Queen Anne's Gate, London SW1H 9AS.
The 1991 Annual General Meeting will be held on Saturday 2 November in the Central Hall, Westminster.
Should a member wish to put forward a resolution for discussion at this meeting, is must be signed by not less than ten members of the National Trust who have been members since 1 January 1990 or earlier and must reach the Secretary at 36 Queen Anne's Gate, London SW1H 9AS not later than 15 June .
Work at Waddesdon
In October last year Waddesdon Manor in Buckinghamshire closed for essential repairs and maintenance.
The National Trust and the Trustees of Waddesdon Manor had come to the decision that it would be in the best interest of the house for as much work as possible to be carried out at one time, and the range of the repairs is such that the house cannot be reopened until April 1993.
However, from 27 March until 21 December this year, visitors will be welcome in the garden and the aviary, and the tea-room and shop — which have been moved to the stables — will also be open.
The work being undertaken is extensive.
Lead and slates on the roof of the house have to be replaced, and stonework above the cornice needs to be repaired.
Inside, the electrical wiring has to be removed, the hot-water and drainage systems have to be overhauled, and the new fire-detection system completed.
Rooms on the first floor, not hitherto seen by visitors, are to be remodelled and mounted with French panelling formerly owned by Baron Ferdinand de Rothschild.
This apartment will be available for use by Lord Rothschild and his family, but he wishes it to be shown to visitors at other times.
In addition there are plans to improve the lighting of the works of art and to clean a number of paintings, including The Garden of Love by Rubens.
There will be more displays relating to the Rothschild family and a first important addition will be the long-term loan of seven panels painted by Leon Bakst which depict the story of Sleeping Beauty, with members of the Rothschild family and their friends as the characters.
The panels were commissioned by James A. de Rothschild for his London house in St James's Place when he and his wife came to live in England after the First World War.
Work is also being done in the garden.
The terrace parterre is to be restored to match its appearance during its heyday before the First World War, and an extensive programme of tree planting is under way to replace the losses of recent years.
There are plans to illuminate the outside of the house so that it will be possible, from time to time, to admit visitors after dark and to hold evening functions.
A new car-park is being built further away from the house, so that visitors will no longer have their first impressions spoiled by large numbers of vehicles.
For the disabled and those who do not wish to walk, there will be buses to bring visitors from the new car-park to the front door.
The years of closure will be very busy ones, and at the end of them the building will have been returned to sound condition, and the garden restored, for the commencement of Waddesdon's second hundred years.
Developments such as the restoration of the new apartment and the introduction of architectural lighting will be carried out in the spirit of the Waddesdon tradition.
All in all, there will be much to interest the visitor in 1993.
New Chairman for the Trust
The new Chairman of the National Trust, Lord Chorley, is a man with a deep affection for the countryside, for mountains and for the Lake District in particular.
At Cambridge Roger Chorley was President of the Mountaineering Club, and he went on to achieve legendary ascents of peaks in Pakistan and Nepal.
His climbing days were cut short in 1957 when he caught polio in the Himalayas, but he remains a dedicated walker and has since served as President of the Alpine Club and on the Mount Everest Foundation.
Lord Chorley brings a marvellous range of talents and interests to the National Trust.
Professionally, he is a chartered accountant, a former senior partner of the energetic firm Coopers and Lybrand with valuable contacts in the City.
His accountancy skills have been demonstrated on the Trust's Finance Committee, where he devised the ‘Chorley formula’ for calculating the endowment needed by a newly acquired property.
He has worked on financial aid programmes in developing countries of Africa and Asia.
He has considerable scientific knowledge of most aspects of the environment.
He recently chaired the Government's Committee into Handling of Geographic Information, an examination of the use of computers to store, in digitised form, all the data contained on a map.
This is the sharp end of modern cartography, a revolution in processing geographic data for practical uses.
This scientific enthusiasm was invaluable during his three years as President of the Royal Geographical Society and it has earned him a place on the National Environmental Research Council.
Lord Chorley inherited his title from his father, who was a law professor at the University of London and who joined Attlee's Labour government.
Roger Chorley, however, has no party allegiance.
He sits in the House of Lords as a cross-bencher and is active in debates, particularly on environmental issues.
Service on many government bodies and on committees as varied as the British Council and the National Theatre gives him a wide range of contacts and a knowledge of the workings of Whitehall.
Having worked closely with Roger Chorley in the Royal Geographical Society during the past three years, I can attest to his tremendous energy, initiative and perception.
He and his wife Ann were unstinting of their time in attending lectures, functions and committees and they won the affection and admiration of a great many people at all levels.
John Hemming
Saving Snowdonia
In October last year the National Trust launched one of its largest ever countryside appeals.
At a ceremony attended by the appeal's President, film and theatre star Anthony Hopkins, who was flown in by helicopter courtesy of British Gas (Wales), an inscribed half-ton riven slate gatepost was put in place in the beautiful Nant Ffrancon pass, creating both a symbolic and practical ‘gateway’ to National Trust lands in Snowdonia.
The appeal aims to raise £2 million over the next five years both to preserve the countryside and to finance education work in the area.
It is seen as being a vital component in the effort to regenerate the rural economy in North Wales.
FFA on Tour
Following the success of ‘The Broad Horizon’ exhibition at Agnew's in London last autumn, the Foundation for Art is looking forward this year to new ventures beyond the capital.
These include a loan exhibition of paintings by Edmund Fairfax-Lucy at Mompesson House in Salisbury for the 1991 season and, in Wales, an exhibition on the theme of Welsh gardens which is being co-organised by the Davies Memorial Gallery, Newtown.
The latter will be shown at Erddig (5 August to 1 September), at the Davies Memorial Gallery (6 September to 6 October) and at the National Museum of Wales in Cardiff (December to January).
Illustrated here is Edmund Fairfax-Lucy's Silver Gilt in the Hondecoeter Room, Belton House, Lincolnshire , from the exhibition at Mompesson House.
Raising Money for the Trust
Readers of The National Trust Magazine will know from the annual summary of the Trust's financial position how much more difficult it is becoming to find the resources required to carry out the Trust's broad conservation responsibilities.
Every year the gap widens between what the Trust raises from traditional sources of income, such as farm rents, investments and membership subscriptions, and what is needed to maintain properties, pay staff salaries and acquire new properties.
Even that substantial source of income, admission fees to properties, is shrinking in relative terms as more and more people become members of the Trust and gain free entry.
One of the great pleasures of visiting National Trust properties is the extent to which commercialism is carefully controlled.
Although the income generated by tea-rooms, shops and plant centres is of great importance to the Trust, it is vital that their presence should not be allowed to interfere with ‘the genius of the place’.
So as not to spoil needlessly the houses and gardens entrusted to its care but still find the money required to look after them, the Trust is continually looking for ways of raising funds which do not have an impact on the properties.
This is the reason for the periodic letters asking for contributions to such appeals as the repair of Igtham Mote in Kent or for the restoration of Stowe Landscape Gardens in Buckinghamshire.
Members can also support the trust by buying mail-order goods from the gift catalogue.
Trust supporters have recently been invited to consider applying for a Midland Bank/National Trust credit card (see page 9), the income from which has benefited a wide range of projects.
The Trust has also received funds form the Homeguardian insurance scheme, which was created especially for National Trust Enterprises by Frizzell (see page 2) and which has already generated over £300,000.
Research among members indicated such a positive response to Homeguardian that the Trust is considering developing a motor insurance scheme, again especially created by Frizzell.
The Trust is well aware of the undesirability of sending too many offers to members through the post.
Apart from the wish not to annoy members or waste money on postage and printing, the Trust does not want to be anti-environmental in its use of paper.
It is therefore investigating ways of updating its membership system and replacing it with a more sophisticated means of holding members' names, addresses and other information, the idea being that in future members receive only what interests them.
It is hoped that members will continue to support the Trust as generously as they have done in the past, in the knowledge that by responding to information mailed to them they are making a contribution to the Trust's work.
Elections to Council 1991
The Council of the National Trust is made up of people with a wide range of interests, occupations and ages.
If any member wishes to nominate a candidate for election to the Council, please write to the Assistant Secretary at the above address for a nomination form and guidance note.
Nominations must be supported by three members of the National Trust and must reach the Secretary not later than 15 June .
Banking on Barclays
As part of its £11 million programme of support for a wide range of community activities, Barclays Bank has pledged £150,000 between 1989 and 1991 to fund Young National Trust Theatre, a professional Theatre-in-Education company.
Last year the YNTT attracted over 10,000 school-children to participate in a drama exploring Victorian attitudes to environmental issues at nine National Trust houses around the country.
The YNTT also stages a number of beach shows in Devon and Dorset last August.
This year's YNTT production,A Land Fit for Heroes?, is set in the 1920s.
The company will work with schools at Polesden Lacey in Surrey, Charlecote in Warwickshire, Killerton in Devon, Dunham Massey in Cheshire, Wimpole Hall in Cambridgeshire, Stourhead in Wiltshire, Chirk Castle in Clwyd and Ormesby Hall in Cleveland.
Barclays' support of the National Trust continues to include a secondment of a Donations Administration Manager based at the Trust's head office and the annual 48-page full-colour booklet Information for Visitors with Disabilities , which the bank is sponsoring for the sixth year running in 1991.
Copies of the 1991 YNTT programme and the free booklet Information for Visitors with Disabilities may be obtained from the National Trust, Dept YND, 36 Queen Anne's Gate, London SW1H 9AS on receipt of a stamped addressed adhesive label.
National Trust Acquires Slieve Donard
The National Trust has just purchased Slieve Donard in the Mourne Mountains which, at 2,746 feet, is the highest mountain in Northern Ireland and one of the most famous landmarks in the province.
The new acquisition comprises 1,300 acres, including the northern slopes of Slieve Donard, Thomas's Mountain, Millstone Mountain, Slieve Commedagh and Shan Slieve.
The horseshoe of mountains overlooks the seaside resort of Newcastle in County Down, and the view is immortalised in Percy French's song ‘Where the Mountains of Mourne Sweep Down to the Sea’.
The path to Slieve Donard provides one of the main access routes into the Mourne Mountains and the Trust now faces the challenge of dealing with footpath erosion, particularly on the steeper slopes.
The Trust will be drawing on its experience of upland erosion and repair work in the Lake District; it will also be liaising with the many bodies which take an interest in the Mournes, including Down District Council, the Mournes Advisory Council and the education and library boards.
The acquisition would not have been possible without the help of the National Heritage Museum Fund and discussions are continuing with the Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland regarding a grant towards endowment costs.
An appeal will be launched later this year to raise funds for the upkeep and maintenance of this key property.
Gardens by Design
Gardens, said Gertrude Jekyll, ‘may either be fashioned into a dream of beauty, a place of perfect rest and refreshment of the mind and body — a series of soul-satisfying pictures…or they may be so misused that everything is jarring and displeasing.
To learn how to perceive the difference and how to do it right is to apprehend gardening as a fine art.’
The process of ‘learning how’ is the subject of a new national distance-learning course, ‘The Art of Garden Design’, which begins in September following a successful pilot scheme in the National Trust's Mercia and Severn regions last year.
Run by the Open College of the Arts in association with the Trust, ‘The Art of Garden Design’ aims to introduce the principles of good, small-scale garden planning through a series of practical activities.
Students will work on a broad range of projects in their own homes, and once a month they will be invited to attend tutorials to discuss their work with other students and obtain guidance from qualified tutors.
The emphasis of the nine-month course is on practical design skills.
Each month students will explore a different aspect of garden design, beginning by establishing the different functions which a garden is to fulfil and moving on to study access routes and boundaries, changes in level, colour theory, designing for seasonal variation, and the use of water and architectural features.
Tutorials will take place at centres across the country, and nearby National Trust gardens will be used as case studies.
The course will also look back at garden history and explore some of the ways in which budding designers can learn from the great designers of the past.
The fee will be in the region of £180.
For more information please contact the Open College of the Arts, Houndhill, Worsborough, Barnsley, South Yorkshire S70 6TU (telephone 0226 730495).
North of the Border
An extensive tree-planting programme throughout Scotland has begun in commemoration of the Diamond Jubilee of the National Trust for Scotland this year.
Using mainly species native to Scotland, such as silver birch, Scots pine, aspen, rowan and cherry, the planting will be phased over three years with a final target of 100,000 trees.
The programme involves new planting or replanting of woodlands and the planting of individual trees or clumps for amenity purposes.
It is hoped that, in addition to grant aid from government agencies, the project will be funded by donations from the National Trust for Scotland members and benefactors.
Neptune Round-up
The skies above London were ablaze with a spectacular firework display on 23 October last year.
The event was a gala concert at the Royal Festival Hall to celebrate the Silver Jubilee of Enterprise Neptune, the National Trust's appeal to save our unspoilt coastline.
Sir Charles Groves conducted the English Sinfonia and the programme included cellist Robert Cohen and soloists Benjamin Luxon and Linda Fennie, all of whom gave their services free of charge.
The gala was just one event which helped Enterprise Neptune raise over £2 million in its Silver Jubilee year.
Thanks to the many National Trust members and friends, companies and charitable trusts who contributed to the appeal, a further six miles of endangered coastline are now safe from development and six more miles are in the pipeline.
Among the acquisitions completed in 1990 are almost a mile of coast at Penparc Farm in Dyfed and a further three-quarters of a mile at Horden, County Durham.
But Enterprise Neptune has not drawn to an end with the successful completion of its Silver Jubilee year.
The threats to our coastline are mounting, and it is increasingly important they Neptune has the funds available to purchase vulnerable coastline when it comes on the market.
Among such coastal properties currently under negotiation are three-quarters of a mile at Hunt Cliff, south of Saltburn in Cleveland, and land at Polruan, at the entrance to the Fowey Estuary on the south coast of Cornwall.
Contributions to both of these acquisitions have been made possible through a joint promotion with the Kellogg company of Great Britain.
Since December last year, 36 million packets of Kellogg's Cornflakes have invited consumers to make a donation to save a foot of Britain's coastline.
A personalised scroll, a car stickers and a copy of the book Investigating the Seashore are among the benefits enjoyed by people who have taken up the offer.
It is hoped that over £100,000 will be raised for Enterprise Neptune in this way.
Neptune now looks forward to another successful year when it is hoped to raise a further £1 million to save Britain's unspoilt coastline.
Midland's Affinity with the Trust
Only six months after the launch of the affinity card in April last year, the Trust and Midland Bank announced that over 36,000 National Trust Visa cards were in circulation.
After handing a cheque for £27,000 to Angus Stirling, the Trust's Director-General, at Stowe Landscape Gardens in Buckinghamshire, Mr Kevin Gavaghan, Marketing Director of the Midland Bank, added a further £57,000 which represented the first of the £5s and 5 pences generated by cardholders.
This money will be spent on renovating two field barns in Upper Wharfedale, North Yorkshire, and on the Aberdulais waterwheel project in South Wales (see below right).
An additional £74,000 has since been transferred to the Trust, making a magnificent total of over £380,000 generated by the affinity scheme in only six months.
The first time each card is used, the National Trust receives £5 and for every transaction thereafter 5 pence goes to the Trust.
A savings account option also generates £5 on a minimum £5,000 balance.
More National Trust projects will be supported by income from the scheme throughout 1991; the appeals for Stowe Landscape Gardens and Biddulph Grange Garden in Staffordshire have already benefited.
Leaflets are available from all National Trust shops, regional and head offices and branches of Midland Bank.
Environmental Audit Completes First Phase
The first phase of the Trust's Environmental Audit, announced in the summer 1990 issue of the magazine, has now been completed and a programme has been approved which should result in the principles of environmental protection being more firmly entrenched in the Trust's activities.
One aspect of this commitment is the agreement that future formal plans and statements of policy will take account of environmental impacts and that staff job descriptions and training will reflect similar considerations.
Among the areas chosen for detailed further study is the management of waste, including materials such as paper, glass and sewage.
More effort will be put into recycling, and the practice of siting recycling skips at Trust properties may be extended.
A survey will be carried out of sewage disposal systems and it is highly likely that major expenditure will be necessary.
Transport will also feature in the next stage of the audit.
For vehicles run by Trust staff the emphasis will be on maximising fuel efficiency and minimising damaging emissions.
The use of public transport will be promoted where possible for both staff and visitors.
In addition, energy audits will examine the efficient use of energy in buildings.
Energy generation from renewable resources, such as wind or water, can help conserve fossil fuels and reduce emissions of pollutants; the Trust has embarked on a number of schemes to exploit renewable energy, as at Aberdulais (see below right), and will assess properties for their energy-generating potential.
Agriculture can have a major environmental impact; as about 40 per cent of Trust land is farmed, a survey is being conducted which will look in particular at effluent disposal, water quality and the use and disposal of agricultural chemicals.
On a more domestic level, the management of Trust offices and properties will be reviewed to reduce the use of resources such as paper, and potentially harmful materials, such as cleaning chemicals.
The object of the exercise is to ensure the wise and efficient use of natural resources throughout the Trust.
The challenge is to continue to conserve Trust properties for the long term while rapid changes re taking place in the wider environment.
Free Entry Day
This year's Free Entry Day will take place on Wednesday 15 May when many National Trust and National Trust for Scotland properties will be offering free admission to all visitors.
The event is generously sponsored by Lloyds Bank plc.
To obtain a list of participating properties please write to Free Entry Day, The National Trust, 36 Queen Anne's Gate, London SW1H 9AS.
Holidays with the Trust
After last year's successful National Trust cruise to the Baltic, which raised £43,000 for Enterprise Neptune, the range of holidays on offer has been expanded for 1991.
An exciting and varied programme of forty-two special-interest holidays both overseas and within Britain has been designed exclusively for the National Trust.
Rouen and Impressionist Normandy, Mozart's Vienna, Madrid and the Treasures of Castile, New England in the Fall and a cruise of the Rhine are just a few of the overseas holidays available, while the UK Breaks give people the opportunity to study in depth a subject or area such as Historic Houses of Wessex or the Gardens of Mercia.
The Trust will receive a donation for every holiday sold and in 1991 the two major garden appeals for Biddulph Grange in Staffordshire and Stowe in Buckinghamshire will be the beneficiaries.
This year's cruise will visit the Norwegian fjords; all profits will once again be donated to Enterprise Neptune.
For details please contact the Travel Trade Office, The National Trust, 36 Queen Anne's Gate, London SW1H 9AS.
For those who would rather keep both feet firmly planted on dry land, a National Trust self-catering holiday cottage might be the answer.
The National Trust Holiday Cottages 1991 brochure includes information on nearly 200 cottages, the facilities on offer and how to book.
To obtain a copy please write enclosing a cheque or postal order for 50p to National Trust Enterprises (Holiday Cottages), PO Box 101, Western Way, Melksham, Wiltshire SN12 8EA.
If you would rather let someone else do the organising, and if tours of gardens planned and led by a knowledgeable National Trust volunteer appeal, please apply for details from Mrs Elizabeth Sargeant, 77 Middle Street, Stroud, Gloucestershire GL5 1EA.
The 1991 programmes focus on the Cotswolds and Somerset and all profits are donated to National Trust gardens.
Use of Dazomet
On page 223 of The National Trust: A Book of Gardening by Penelope Hobhouse, Peter Cartlidge, Head Gardener at Wightwick Manor in the West Midlands, describes the use of dazomet in his rose garden.
Since the book was compiled, government legislation has made the use of dazomet by amateur gardeners illegal; it is now approved only for use by professionals.
Waterpower at Aberdulais
For over 300 years the famous and powerful waterfall at Aberdulais in West Glamorgan has provided energy to drive the wheels of industry.
A major project is under way to reintroduce the waterwheel and turbine in order to harness this great natural resource once again.
The electricity generated in this new hydro-electric scheme will be sold to the National Grid; power to service the site and to provide floodlighting for the spectacular gorge and falls will also be produced by what will be one of the largest electricity-generating waterwheels in Europe.
Planting for Biddulph
Suttons Seeds are working with the National Trust to help complete the restoration of the Victorian garden at Biddulph Grange in Staffordshire.
For each Supastart Plantlet pack ordered by National Trust embers, Suttons will donate £1 towards this major project.
Supastart Plantlets are small plants which are well rooted into individual blocks of compost.
They grow fast when transferred into trays or pots in the conservatory, greenhouse, cold frame or on a window ledge, prior to setting out in the garden a week or two later.
Each pack contains thirty-five young plants.
The varieties offered are the very best F1 hybrid types and will give outstanding results.
Those available are Impatiens Accent Mixed (Busy Lizzie) at £6.75 per pack, Pansy Universal Mixed at £6.55 per pack and Polyanthus F1 Crescendo at £7.45 per pack.
Orders for Busy Lizzies must be received by 25 March (delivery mid-late May), for Polyanthus by 19 April (delivery mid-late July) and for pansies by 15 May (delivery early-mid August).
All orders will be acknowledged and all plants are despatched first-class post.
Please refer to the advertisement on page 14 for ordering details and coupon.
Events
This year will see the customary range of National Trust events taking place, with concerts, country fairs and fëtes-champëtres among the attractions on offer (see page 15).
Surely one of the summer highlights will be a tour of National Trust sacred sites by Phoebus Cart, a theatre company set up by the Royal Shakespeare Company leading actor Mark Rylance.
Phoebus Cart, which comprises actors, dancers, musicians and technicians drawn from the RSC, the Scottish Ballet and other national companies, will perform Shakespeare's comedy The Tempest , with Mark Rylance himself directing and taking the part of Prospero.
On a somewhat more profane note, stars Paul Jones and Elaine Delmar will be appearing in a series of open-air concerts dedicated to the work of Cole Porter, with the title Let's Do It .
They will be sponsored by Southern Comfort which, like Baileys Irish Cream whiskey, is part of the International Distillers & Vintners group.
Together they have provided a record events sponsorship of nearly £100,000, sum which will enable the Trust to stage eighteen concerts.
curiosities
Once again we were inundated with replies, the majority of them correct, to the Curiosities competition featured in the last issue.
Some of the wilder suggestions included a ticket puncher, a herb chopper and a concertina.
The winning entry came from K. A. Normanton of Winchester, who receives a copy of In Search of Neptune: A Celebration of the National Trust's Coastline for identifying the item as a nineteenth-century scarificator or automatic ‘leech’ for blood-letting.
The instrument would have made several incisions at the same time, having a set of twelve razor-sharp curved blades that are retracted below the slotted surface of the base and, when in place on the skin, fired by a trigger-release mechanism.
The depth of the cut could be adjusted by means of a turn-screw which drew back the base plate.
A preheated cupping glass would then have been placed over the wound and the cooling action of the air inside would have produced a vacuum capable of sucking the blood out.
The automatic ‘leech’ and many other less gory but equally fascinating items can be seen at Snowshill Manor in Gloucestershire.
If you can identify the object pictured here, please write your answer on the back of a postcard with your name and address and send it to Curiosities,The National Trust Magazine , 36 Queen Anne's Gate, London SW1H 9AS.
The first correct reply selected on April 16 will receive a copy of The National Trust Guide , published by the National Trust at £18.95.
The winner's name and a description of the object will appear in the summer issue of the magazine.
The competition is not open to National Trust employees or their relatives.
Gardens Galore
Throughout 1991, which has been chosen as the National Trust's Gardens Year, the focus of public activity will be on the many splendid and varied gardens in the Trust's care, ranging from the tiny town garden of Fenton House in Hampstead to historic landscape gardens such as Stowe in Buckinghamshire or Stourhead in Wiltshire.
The Trust owns probably the greatest collection of outdoor plants in the world, including no fewer than twenty-six national plant collections, such as Catalpa at Cliveden in Buckinghamshire, Hedera at Erddig in Clwyd and Crocosmia at Lanhydrock in Cornwall.
The key event of Gardens Year will be the opening in May of Biddulph Grange in Staffordshire, a unique Victorian garden which has been painstakingly restored by the Trust after years of neglect, but all over the country there will be talks, walks and gardening demonstrations, as well as music, picnic days, plants sales and the chance to quiz National Trust gardeners about your gardening problems.
The National Trust stand at the Chelsea Flower Show between 20 and 24 May will take its inspiration from the Chinese Garden at Biddulph Grange and there will be the usual display of gifts, publications and an information point dispensing up-to-date brochures and events lists.
The Trust's gardens are constantly changing, with the gardeners having to pit their wits against the uncertainties of plant growth and climate, exploiting to the full the limitations imposed by soil and site.
Some of these developments are covered in a full-colour newspaper,News from National Trust Gardens , which will be published in May.
The paper is free to National Trust members, so for your copy please send an A4 stamped addressed envelope (27p stamp), clearly marked with your membership number, to News from National Trust Gardens , The National Trust, PO Box 101, Melksham, Wiltshire SN12 8EA.
Although the newspaper will not be available until May, please could members apply as soon as possible to help with gauging print quantities.
Letters
Madam
The tendency to submit resolutions to the AGM on minority and often eccentric issues seems to be growing.
Small groups of members take advantage of the Trust's facilities to propagate their fads and obsessions.
They waste time and money when their sole interest is to secure the maximum publicity for their causes.
Is it not possible for the Council to devise rules to eliminate such resolutions which have little or no relevance to the purposes and work of the national trust?
An instance of the mentality of these activists can be seen in a letter to the autumn number of the magazine from Malcolm Shifrin, who asks how he can influence the great majority of members who do not vote.
The fact that they do note vote suggests that they are indifferent to the issues on the agenda.
Surely most people join the National Trust not to further some obscure and cranky cause (special societies already exist for these causes) but rather to help in the enjoyment of places of beauty in this country.
Yours faithfully,
Madam
May I please correct one or two small inaccuracies in Rumer Godden's interesting article on Lamb House (The National Trust Magazine , autumn 1990)?
Firstly a couple of minor quibbles.
There still remain some good sections of our town walls, the most substantial being in Cinque Ports Street; and Rye Foreign is a specific hamlet near Peasmarsh.
A footnote to Miss Godden's article states that, of the bomb-destroyed Garden Room, only the wall facing on to the street has been rebuilt.
This is not the case.
There is indeed a large plaque commemorating Henry James (and, it should not be forgotten, a more recent small one to the memory of E. F. Benson and his brother!) set into the garden wall, but this wall in no way attempts to reproduce the elegant lost façade of the Garden Room.
A. C. Benson was Master of Magdalene College, Cambridge, and not Magdalen in Oxford.
I don't know of his 26-volume autobiography which Miss Godden asks about, but his 180-volume diary provided the material for a 400-page biography by David Newsome, entitled On the Edge of Paradise: A. C. Benson, Diarist .
Yours faithfully,
Book News
No reader of this magazine can have failed to note its theme is gardens, and a clutch of gardening titles are to be published this year as part of Gardens Year.
The National Trust is producing a Gardens Handbook to enlighten on matters horticultural and historical, opening times and seasonal interest, plant sales and facilities in 150 of its prime gardens.
This invaluable paperback will be published on 16 May at £3.95.
Visiting gardens and afternoon tea are the perfect complement for one another, so it is no coincidence that the Trust will be publishing The National Trust Book of Tea-time recipes on 18 April at £7.95.
The author, Jane Pettigrew, has taken traditional recipes from Trust properties all over the British Isles and combined them with a fascinating account of the development of tea-drinking in this country, ever since Catharine of Braganza brought over a tea chest from Portugal as part of her dowry on her marriage to Charles II.
One of the Trust's early summer glories is the rose garden at Mottisfont Abbey in Hampshire.
In An English Rose Garden Graham Stuart Thomas, who designed the garden in the 1970s, explores the origins of the roses at Mottisfont and explains how their particular qualities were used in his designs.
This handsomely illustrated book will be published by Michael Joseph on 25 April at £16.99.
Period Gardens by Patrick Taylor, published by Pavilion on 18 March at £20, describes the history and restoration of a dozen classic gardens, including five in the Trust's care: Westbury Court in Gloucestershire; Claremont and Ham in Surrey; Erddig in Clwyd; and Mount Stewart in Northern Ireland.
From Pavilion also comes another title in the Gardening Guide series:Lawn & Ground Cover by Stephen Lacey was published on 21 February at £12.95.
One of the aims of the National Trust's publishing programme is to provide a range of books reflecting the wide variety of the Trust's activities.
Part of the Trust's work in recent years has been the compilation of surveys of vernacular buildings and landscapes.
Susan Denyer, the Trust's Historic Buildings Representative in the North-West, has drawn on these surveys to write Traditional Buildings & Life in the Lake District which will be published in May by Victor Gollancz at £18.99.
She has used the many traditional farms and farm buildings owned by the National Trust in the region to give a reflection of everyday life over the past three centuries.
In Balloon over Britain Angelo Hornak takes a mystery tour in a hot-air balloon, photographing landscapes, prehistoric sites, castles, abbeys and historic houses and parks.
The result is a stunning book, published by Walker Bros on 28 March at £15.95.
In The Butterflies of Britain and Ireland , published by Dorling Kindersley on 21 March at £16.99, Jeremy Thomas and Richard Lewington illustrate with the help of exquisite, full-colour artwork the development of each butterfly from egg to fully formed stage.
In the Acorn Modern Classics series, published by Victor Gollancz, comes a new titles,Lanhydrock Days by John Banfield, in which a group of children take a tour through the history of the famous Cornish house.
It is published on 11 April at £8.99 hardback and £3.99 paperback.
The National Trust looks after one of the largest collections in the world, and these works of art, plus other great and important collections in the British Isles, are described by Bruce Arnold in the fully illustrated Art Atlas published by Viking Penguin on 28 February at £25.
Viking Penguin has also produced a revised edition of the Manual of Housekeeping , the National Trust's ‘bible’ of household conservation by Sheila Stainton and Hermione Sandwith.
Finally, since the launch of the Trust's own imprint, its trade distribution has been organised by Victor Gollancz.
On 1 January, Hodder & Stoughton took over distribution in the trade; sales through the Trust's own retail outlets and catalogues will continue as before.
Margaret Wiles, Publisher
Reviews
The English Town by Mark Girouard (Yale University Press, £19.95) and Life in the Georgian City by Dan Cruickshank and Neil Burton (Viking, £25.00)
The English Town is the counterpart of the author's famous Life in the English Country House .
It looks through the buildings which make up English towns and cities at the processes of life which produced and used them, and so attempts to explain them in human terms.
Applied to towns the length and breadth of Britain (including London), from medieval guilds and corporations who built markets and town halls, through eighteenth-century assembly rooms and public walks for ‘parading’, to the promoters of nineteenth-century variety theatres, not to mention every stage of houses in towns, this is a prodigious feat of generalisation.
But the story is made more vivid by judicious descent into detail, never more so than when identifying individual residents of Broad Street, Ludlow, in a painting of 1765.
And the sumptuous pictures will satisfy the most avid architectural enthusiast.
Life in the Georgian City has the opposite virtues of microcosm: it is an intensely intricate study of London houses and the way they were lived in.
By getting to grips with such details as whether tradesmen negotiated with the servants at the front door or down the area steps, how the speculative system which produced most of London's houses between 1700 and 1830 worked between landlord, builder and tenant, how builders skimped on brickwork and laced their masonry with pieces of wood, how the proportioning of windows in façades and interior details were worked out, and how water supplies entered houses and were stored (in decorative lead cisterns usually prominent in the basement kitchen), it gives an extraordinarily vivid sense of contact with the life that created London's Georgian world of squares and terraces, all of which is heightened by effective quotations form the impressions of foreign visitors.
John Chesshyre 
Enterprises News
Several new lines have been introduced by National Trust Enterprises this year to tie in with Gardens Year.
You can add a touch of floral style to your correspondence with the attractive Lady Margaret stationery pictured here.
The illustrations, based on the garden at Chirk Castle in North Wales, were drawn by Lady Margaret Myddelton, the former owner of the property.
The range comprises notelets (£1.95 per pack of ten), gift wrap (60p per sheet) and a stationery folder holding twenty sheets of paper and ten envelopes, both with a flower motif (£4.95).
Also new this spring are two packs of tree notecards in which botanical drawings illustrate the life cycle of four British trees: oak, copper beech, field maple and ash.
Each pack of ten cards and envelopes featuring two designs costs £1.95.
A new addition to the popular farm-animal range is sure to please younger members of the family.
The nine-inch melamine-type shallow plate (£1.45) complements the four existing farm-animal mugs (Cow, Hen, Pig and Duck) and the children's stationery range of notebooks, gift wrap with matching gift tags and stationery folder.
These and hundreds of other gifts are available now by mail order and, if you are still unsure which present to give this spring, why not consider a National Trust gift voucher?
In £2, £5 and £10 denominations with a choice of five attractive cards, National Trust gift vouchers are redeemable against nearly all shop merchandise.
There are now nearly 200 National Trust shops around the country, and the town shops, which are open all year round, are taking on a new look.
Many are being refitted with the same smart new decor which will make them easier to spot on the high street.
The property-based shops, most of which will re-open at Easter, will continue to be decorated in character with the building and garden to which they are attached.
A new tea-room has opened in York at 30 Goodramgate and operates six days a week (excluding Sundays) all year round.
Other new openings this year include the restaurant at Biddulph Grange Garden in Staffordshire (from 1 May), bringing to 105 the number of National Trust restaurants and tea-rooms.
Finally, for keen gardeners there is the opportunity to recreate at home what you have seen in National Trust gardens.
A number of properties are now selling plants, many of which have been propagated in the Trust's own nurseries.
Properties with plant centres include Blickling Hall in Norfolk and Castle Drogo in Devon.
To order any of the gifts featured above or to obtain a copy of the gift catalogue, please telephone National Trust Enterprises on Melksham (0225) 705676.
GARDENER'S VIEW
Lanhydrock is set on a hillside facing north-east over the valley of the River Fowey.
Of all the National Trust gardens in Cornwall, it is probably the least favoured climatically; the coast is some nine miles away which reduces the maritime influence and the south-west corner of Bodmin Moor is even nearer.
Late frosts can spoil a wonderful display.
The soil is good deep loam with a ph of 4–5. making it ideal for acid-loving plants.
Another important factor is the shelter belt which protects the garden from the south all the way around to the north.
A large part of this was destroyed in the 1990 gales, but fortunately we had underplanted wherever possible and the magnolias which are such a feature of the garden survived remarkably well.
Although we have no record, the Magnolia Grandiflora from the United States that clothe the wall of the north wing of the house must have been some of the first plantings of magnolias at Lanhydrock; I would guess that are now well inside their second century.
On the opposite side of the courtyard there are more of the same variety, planted in 1968.
The first records of plantings are three M. campbellii mollicomata and two very majestic M. veitchii (campbellii × heptapeta ).
These five were planted by my predecessor, George Potter, during his first year here in 1933.
During his time as Head Gardener he planted several M. soulangeana and after the Second World War he also planted M. kobus, M. mollicomata, M. sinensis, M. stellata and M. acuminata .
Then George Potter retired in 1966, leaving this nucleus of magnolias, we felt it was a good foundation to build on, although we were careful to make a selection rather than a collection.
We now have approximately 180 magnolias at Lanhydrock and of these there are some 120 different species, hybrids or cultivars.
We have kept records of their planting dates, source of supply whether grafted or raised from seed and as many other relevant factors as could be noted.
There are many varieties with exciting names; for example,M. soulangeana ‘Burgundy’ and ‘Sundew’and some of the M. loebneri crosses (kobus × stellata ): ‘Snowdrift’, ‘Willow Wood’, ‘Neil McEachern’and ‘Merrill’.
The modern Gresham hybrids raised in California have gorgeous names like ‘Heaven Scent’, ‘Rouged Alabaster’ and ‘Royal Crown’.
Also within the collection are the outstanding new cultivars raised by Messers Pickard of Canterbury: ‘Pickard's Ruby’, ‘Pickard's Opal’ and ‘Pickard's Garnet’.
In June and July M. watsonii is notable for its upwards-facing creamy white flowers and prominent crimson anthers, not to mention its almost overpowering fragrance.
Perhaps some of the most treasured are those raised from seed, like M. kobus seed collected from Kalmar on the Baltic Sea coast of Sweden by Lenarth Jonsson — a magnolia fanatic like myself.
I have also received five M. dealbata seeds collected in Mexico via Lenarth Jonsson; all five germinated and one of these is now some eight feet tall and has a special place at Lanhydrock.
The remainder of the seedlings have been taken to good garden homes as far apart as Tresco on the Isles of Scilly and the Isle of Bute in the north.
A magnolia which has become world renowned and is given pride of place at Lanhydrock is M. ‘Albatross’(cylindrica × veitchii ).
A chance seedling has become a spectacular pure white profusely flowering tree.
Two more chance seedlings,M. sprengeri diva ‘Lanhydrock’, a very striking reddish purple, and M. mollicomata ‘Peter Borlase’, an unusual colour of the deepest rose, are now some twenty-three years old.
It is rare at Lanhydrock for there not to be a magnolia in flower.
During a mild winter they often start flowering in early March, and M. grandiflora still has the occasional few flowers in December.
Peter Borlase is the Head Gardener at Lanhydrock in Cornwall 
A Gardener's World Tour
National Trust gardens are living libraries where, armed with a good reference book and a sense of adventure, one can roam through the world at large’
ROY LANCASTER
One of the most handsome and unusual trees growing in the Dell at Bodnant in Gwynedd is the umbrella pine (Sciadopitys verticillata ), a native of Japan where it is now rare and increasingly threatened by man's activities, principally logging.
Botanically, it is a one-off with no obvious affinities and no immediate allies; all that we know of its ancestors (from fossil evidence) is that they were once common over a much wider area, as near as Germany for instance, during the mid-Tertiary period approximately 30 million years ago.
Both its generic name Sciadopitys and its English name refer to the strap-shaped leaves which are arranged in whorls like the spokes of an umbrella, although it must be stressed that it is not a true pine.
At seventy-five feet, the Bodnant specimen is one of the two tallest in Britain and presents a splendid sight with its dark conical habit and spire-like crown.
The species was first successfully introduced to Britain independently in 1861 by John G. Veicht, an Exeter nursery-man, and the Scottish plant collector Robert Fortune and was much sought after by those coveting the rare and the curious.
Equally curious is Lord Hanson's Pea (Lathyrus nervosus ) which grows, among other places, in the garden at Sissinghurst Castle in Kent.
It was first discovered by Admiral Lord Hanson when he put in at Cape Horn during his four-year circumnavigation of the world (1740–44).
To sailors starved of fresh produce it was the food value of this pea which attracted rather than its ornamental merit.
Lord Hanson's cook, however, had the foresight to bring its seed back to England and it was grown in the Apothecary's Garden at Chelsea.
Present garden stock of this blue-flowered scrambling perennial is derived from a more recent introduction.
Whilst in no way related, the stories of the pea and the pine serve to illustrate the many facets of plant introduction through the ages, reminding us of those thoughtful, artistic, practical and often intrepid individuals who were responsible for the plants which grace our parks and gardens today.
As well as the professional collectors, their ranks included sailors and soldiers, doctors, pirates, missionaries, explorers, legation officials, traders and politicians.
The more dedicated among them combed both the cultivated and wild places of the world in search of novelties and in doing so a good number of them lost their lives, in some cases in tragic circumstances.
Their stories are often forgotten today when many gardeners are more concerned with design and the practical uses and artistic value of plants.
But they represent a great slice of gardening history (no plants, no gardens) and provide us with a rich, exciting and often colourful tapestry of adventure and discovery going back at least several hundred years.
Sadly there is little documentary evidence relating to early introductions to Britain, although it is claimed that the Romans brought the walnut and sweet chestnut while remains or myrtle, bay and rosemary have been found on the sites of Roman villas, suggesting that these Mediterranean shrubs were cultivated in their gardens.
Of course, all such early introductions have many times been added to if not replaced by others right up to the present day.
So our gardens represent a long steady stream of introductions with occasional ‘eruptions’ as new and botanically rich areas of the world opened to the West.
One of the most important of these ‘eruptions’ occurred in the latter decades of the nineteenth and early decades of the present century when the fabulous wealth of plants in the Chinese hinterland was made known to the West by French missionaries and British and European hunters.
Many of the most popular plants in gardens today fist arrived with the flood of introductions which filled our nurseries and gardens over a fifty-year period.
Amongst the highlights were the Candelabra primula —P. bulleyana, P. beesiana and P. pulverulenta — which, with their numerous hybrids, are now such a feature of gardens like Rowallane in Northern Ireland and Bodnant.
Equally important were the new rhododendrons, camellias and magnolias which each year in spring attract visitors in their thousands to gardens such as Wakehurst Place and Nymans in Sussex, Trengwainton in Cornwall and Knightshayes Court in Devon.
But rich as China is, it is by no means the dominant contributor to our gardens.
Long before the doors of the Chinese empire opened to the West, travellers in other parts of the globe were sending plants and seeds back to the motherland to enrich or replace those native collections which had existed in some cases from early times.
This way came the tulip tree (Liriodendron tulipifera ), introduced by John Tradescant the Younger from Virginia in the mid-seventeenth century.
There is a fine specimen of this noble tree — the tallest in Britain — at Stourhead in Wiltshire.
Then there were plants from the antipodes, including eucalypts, acacias, olearias and New Zealand Flax (Phormium tenax ), which early colonists sent home in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries.
A good representation of Australasian plants flourishes at Mount Stewart in Northern Ireland and at Overbecks in Devon.
Meanwhile in 1772 the Royal Botanic Garden at Kew engaged its first professional plant collector, Francis  Masson, and packed him off to South Africa from where he duly introduced a great number of exotic plants, at least two of which,Zantedeschia erathiopica and Amaryllis belladonna , are still grown in Trust gardens in warmer areas to this day.
National Trust gardens, then, are not just oases of beauty and tranquillity or examples of horticultural skills and imaginative design; they are living libraries where, armed with a good reference book and a sense of adventure, one can roam through the world at large.
Stroll along any traditional herbaceous border and you will feel the winds of the North American prairies with their heleniums, rudbeckias and michaelmas daisies (prairies, by the way, that have now all but disappeared).
Those same borders might also contain Inula magnifica, Strantia maxima and Campanula lactiflora from the Caucasus,Euphorbia griffithii, Polygonum amplexicaule and Morina longifolia from South Africa and Alstroemeria ligtu from Chile; the possibilities are endless.
Wander through any arboretum worth its salt and you will smell the resin of the world's great conifer forests, with Pinus densiflora, Cryptomeria japonica and Chamaecyparis obtusa from Japan and Pinus ponderosa, Thuja plicata and Pseudotsuga menziesii from western North America.
To understand the meaning of survival, stand beneath a maidenhair tree (Ginkgo biloba ) or a dawn redwood (Metasequoia glyptostoboides ); both are well represented in Trust gardens and both are ‘living fossils’ with pedigrees stretching back to the age of the dinosaurs.
The former, a native of China, was introduced to Britain from Japan via the United States in 1754; the latter, also from China, via the United States as recently as 1948.
The story of plant introduction which began many centuries ago continues unabated and British gardens have been and continue to be major beneficiaries.
In the last ten years alone, plants grown from seed collected in the wilds of China, Japan, Chile, Mexico, New Zealand.
Tasmania, Nepal and elsewhere have found their way into collections scattered throughout Britain.
In response to the recent devastation caused by gales and to a lesser degree late spring frosts, there is an ever-increasing galaxy of trees and shrubs waiting to take the place of those uprooted or severely damaged.
Indeed, given that great gardens in order to survive must have both continuity and flexibility in their planting, the importance of new plant introductions, together with the increasing role of conservation, is assured for the foreseeable future.
Roy Lancaster's new television series,Garden Club , can be viewed on Friday nights on Channel 4 from 1 March.
He is the author of a number of books, including Travels in China — a Plantsman's Paradise and Garden Plants for Connoisseurs .
LEFT: The garden at Bodnant in Gwynedd is notable for its collection of rhododendrons, magnolias and camellias among a wide range of trees and shrubs (National Trust Photographic Library/Ian Shaw )
A Garden by the Sea
STEPHEN LACEY
Atlantic rollers may sweep into Porth Neigwl (Hell's Mouth Bay) below and the west wind may roar across the Llŷn Peninsula on which it sits, but Plas-yn-Rhiw stays unruffled.
Protected by hills and woods, the small granite house and its three-quarter-acre garden snuggle into the lower slope of Mynydd Rhiw, exposed only to the south and east.
Thanks to the warming influence of the Gulf Stream, the climate is also mild, temperatures rarely dropping much below freezing.
There is the potential here for a startling garden of exotic plants.
But the character of Plas-yn-Rhiw is subtler than that, drawing its mood from the Welsh landscape and blending its colours with those of the wildflowers with are freely admitted through the gates.
The oak wood above the house is carpeted in spring with snowdrops and bluebells; ferns spore into the stone walls; and wild bees nest under the eaves.
It was their deep love for the Llŷn landscape, and a desire to keep it protected for future generations, which prompted the three Keating sisters, Honora, Lorna and Eileen, and their eighty-year-old mother to buy Plas-yn-Rhiw and its fifty-eight acres in 1939; later they purchased over 300 acres more with the express purpose of giving the land to the trust.
A Nottingham family, the Keatings had taken their holidays in the area for many years and had settled nearby in 1934.
When the property came up for sale, for only the second time in its long history, a telegram was despatched to Honora, who was working in London: ‘Will you invest savings in Plas?’
She replied: ‘Yes, but haven't got much.’
The house, empty for nearly twenty years, was in a sorry state, and Honora recalled in a television interview, ‘The garden was given up as lost…
There were brambles up to the first floor.’
They renovated the house, removing the Georgian stucco and revealing the Elizabethan stonework, and set about tackling the garden, growing a lot of potatoes and taking ‘millions and millions’ of box cuttings to repair and extend the hedging, probably planted by a previous tenant, Lady Strickland, at the turn of the century.
Otherwise, they planted in time-honoured cottage-garden fashion, pushing bulbs in here, slips of shrubs there, and gradually building up a very large and varied plant collection, traditional favourites rubbing shoulders with exotics, and everywhere ferns and wildflowers.
Things were getting a little out of hand by 1981, when Lorna, the last Miss Keating, died, and the Trust began a programme of gentle restoration.
The present custodian, Mrs Pat Cheney, sensitive to the quiet charm and mystery of the garden, continues to add imaginatively to the planting.
My lasting impressions of Plas-yn-Rhiw are of the great clumps of Fuchsia magellanica , its soft hazes of scarlet toning so well with the grey wall; of an old pear tree and forsythia growing through the roof of the ruined dairy; of the superb Magnolia campbellii mollicomata , planted by the Keatings in 1947; and of squeezing between box hedges down narrow grass passageways and ducking under arching pink rhododendrons and car-mine camellias as I followed the curving stone and cobbled paths.
The garden is full of scented plants which on warm days infuse the still air.
Viburnums, philadelphus, azaleas, daphnes, jasmines and clethra all contribute sweetness, and from the pillars of the Victorian verandah the fragrance of ‘Zéphirine Drouhin’ roses pervades the house.
And forever drawing you away from the garden are the stupendous views, of the curve of Porth Neigwl, of the Merioneth Mountains, and even, on a clear day, down the full length of Cardigan Bay to St David's Head in South Wales.
Stephen Lacey is currently writing the new edition of Gardens of the National Trust which will be published in 1992.
His latest book,Scent in Your Garden , will be published in March.
LEFT: Native and exotic plants flourish in the mild maritime climate at Plas-yn-Rhiw on the Llŷn Peninsula (National Trust Photographic Library/Martin Trelawney )
The Discreet Charm of Statues
PATRICK TAYLOR
In many gardens ornaments provide an essential part of the distinctive character of the place.
‘Statues and vases contribute very much of the embellishment and magnificence of a garden, and extremely advance the natural beauties of it,’ wrote John James in The Theory and Practice of Gardening (1712).
Gardens in the care of the National Trust are immensely rich in garden statuary of all kinds.
The earliest period in which garden ornaments were widely used in England was the Tudor age, when wooden columns painted in the armorial colours of the garden's owner were surmounted by carved beasts of heraldic significance.
Nothing survives today from this period and very little from early seventeenth-century gardens which, as is well documented, were rich in statuary and other ornaments.
It is only from the Restoration that we find surviving examples of statues in National Trust gardens.
The white marble figure of Bacchus now in the ilex walk at Ham House in Richmond, for example, is almost certainly that mentioned in a 1672 inventory —‘For 1 Pedastall for ye figure Bacchus’.
The predominantly formal gardens of this period, influenced by France and the Netherlands, made much use of statuary, as the early eighteenth-century engravings of Kip copiously show.
Many of these were virtually mass-produced.
John van Nost, who died in 1728, came from Flanders to London to set up a workshop to meet this need.
He specialised in lead figures of which excellent examples are found at Powis Castle in Powys, ornamenting the spectacular hanging terraces.
Lead statues were often painted to resemble more precious stone or marble and some of those at Powis bore traces of their original white paintwork and have been repainted.
There is a lead statue of a shepherd boy and his dog at Canons Ashby in Northamptonshire which was almost certainly supplied by van Nost when the garden was being remade in the early eighteenth century.
John Cheere worked in van Nost's workshop and produced many figures in the same tradition.
At Charlecote Park in Warwickshire there are lead statues of a shepherd and shepherdess made by him in about 1718.
He also made for the grotto at Stourhead in Wiltshire the figure of a river god which, painted white to resemble marble, glows splendidly in the cavernous gloom.
River gods, and other deities and nymphs, are an ancient theme in gardens from the Renaissance onwards and, more often than not, they have a specifically symbolic purpose.
At Stourhead Cheere's figure symbolises the River Stour which was dammed to make the great lake at the heart of the landscape.
Another river god, the Coarse stone figure of about 1800 representing the Thames that is placed in front of the north court at Ham House, illustrates the continuity of this theme.
Such reclining figures, clasping either a cornucopia or an urn (and sometimes both), date back to at least the mid-sixteenth century (for example at the Villa Lante at Bagnaia in Italy) and were a commonplace in late seventeenth-century Baroque gardens (for example at Vaux-le-Vicomte, Versailles and Het Loo).
Coade stone revolutionised the production of fine-quality ornaments.
It was invented by Miss Eleanor Coade who changed her title to Mrs Coade to seem more respectable.
She opened her factory, Coade and Seely, in Lambeth in 1769 which at first, in keeping with the times, manufactured ornaments of classical inspiration, but by the 1840s it showed the pronounced influence of the early Victorian decorative style.
Coade stone is a kind of fired ceramic, whose recipe was secret and is still not entirely understood, which provided a hard smooth surface that was resistant to frost.
Ornaments and statues were cast in a mould and the material lent itself very well to this technique, preserving crisp detailing.
Although it was extensively used to model figures such as the river god at Ham, most of the surviving  pieces are smaller decorative items such as the pineapple finials in the south terrace at Ham and the richly ornamented urns at Killerton in Devon.
A National Trust garden with an outstanding collection of statuary is Cliveden in Buckinghamshire.
This reflects, above all, the taste and patronage of one man, William Waldorf Astor (later the 1st Viscount Astor), who bought the estate in 1893.
Among his acquisitions which now ornament the garden are a superb collection of third-century Roman marble sarcophagi, richly carved in high relief; a splendid group of eighteenth-century North Italian commedia dell'arte figures decorating the Long Garden, admirably suited to the whimsical topiary there; and a commission of Lord Astor's, Ralph Waldo Story's riotously blowsy Fountain of Love made in 1897 which forms an eyecatcher (to put it mildly) in the drive.
There is little twentieth-century sculpture in National Trust gardens but a new initiative started in 1986, the Foundation for Art, commissions and acquires works of art for the Trust.
The Foundation includes garden statuary among its interests and it is anxious to commission pieces that are specifically appropriate to their setting.
It is not in the business of scattering latter-day garden gnomes.
Vincent Woropay's giant Portland stone carving of a disembodied foot, the Patagon, in the Wilderness Garden at Powis Castle is a good example.
It has a wonderful presence here, like the mysterious relic of some ancient culture.
Modern sculptures go well in informal landscape settings.
At Scotney Castle in Kent Henry Moore's bronze statue,Three Piece Reclining Figure — Draped , was placed in 1977 on a romantic isthmus which juts out into the well-wooded lake in the middle of which the old castle crouches on its island.
Some people find it hard to accept modern works of art in ancient settings, but in fact much of the special attraction of many historic gardens comes from the several chronological layers of their architecture, planting and ornaments.
The discreet use of statuary in gardens may contribute powerfully to their atmosphere.
Discretion should be the guiding principle, however, as more can very quickly become less.
John Claudius Loudon wrote of statues in his great Encyclopedia of Gardening (1822): ‘They excite interest, often produce character…when a few are judiciously introduced; but profusely scattered about, they distract attention.’
Westbury Court in Gloucestershire illustrates the principle well.
In this small enclosed late seventeenth-century formal garden there is only one statue, a rustic figure of Neptune riding the waters of a canal.
It is perfectly placed in relation to the canal whose placid waters reflect the boldly modelled figure.
This idea of the placing of figures in relation to the plan of the garden is important.
At Mount Stewart in County Down Lady Londonderry let rip with an amazing ensemble of whimsical statues but they avoid seeming a jumble by the purposeful way in which they are related to the whole garden design.
Statues or urns should culminate a vista, crown a pier or parapet and have the air of absolute logic.
Many modern reproduction period ornaments are well made and often based on high-quality originals.
However, the very fact that they are mass-produced and relatively cheap means that they are too frequently seen.
Widely used in gardens they impart a predictable flavour — like bottled sauce in a cheap restaurant.
Fine works of art, carefully placed in an appropriate setting, may still animate the garden and constitute a vital part of its design.
Patrick Taylor is currently working on a book about garden ornaments which will be published by Pavilion in association with the Trust in 1992 
Nautica, an eighteenth-century statue attributed to Bonazza, graces the Italianate Long Garden at Cliveden in Buckinghamshire
Pantaleone, one of four eighteenth-century commedia dell-arte figures in the Long Garden at Cliveden
In an English Kitchen Garden
SIMONE SEKERS
There is no area more evocative of the organised and peaceful life of a well-ordered household than the kitchen garden.
The serried ranks of peas and beans in a Victorian or Edwardian vegetable garden, the more picturesque planting of earlier potagers , where ornamental flowers blend with practical vegetables, fruit trees and bushes, and the formality of a herb garden all indicate changes in horticulture through the ages which were mirrored by the contemporary cookery books.
The word ‘vegetable’ was not used in the sense we know it until the middle of the eighteenth century.
Until then the diet of the wealthy was rich in spices and sugar and involved mixing fruit, both fresh and dried, with meat — a tradition which still lingers in such things as Christmas mincemeat.
The taste for sweet and highly spiced food, which made little use of the plants which grew easily in our temperate Northern climate, may well have been brought back from the Holy Land by returning Crusaders.
Indeed, far from being seen as the fragrant components of pot-pourri or as the aromatic base for creams and lotions, herbs were the only vegetable element of the medieval and Tudor kitchen.
The Trust's great herb gardens at Buckland Abbey in Devon, Hardwick Hall in Derbyshire and Acoirn Bank in Cumbria were the kitchen gardens of the period, producing the herbs, the worts, scallions (forerunners of our cabbages and onions) and roots used in ‘pottages’ and broths.
These herb gardens grew the costmary that was used to flavour ale, the skirret — a carrot-like root — that was mixed with honey to form the fillings of sweet tarts, and the damask roses whose petals were made into jam.
Later they were used in elaborate salads, John Evelyn listing no fewer than three dozen suitable in his book Acetaria in 1699.
The dividing line between health and gastronomy was finely drawn.
Was the herb Good King Henry — seen growing at Acorn Bank and at Hardwick — eaten because it tasted good, or because it was a valuable source of vitamin C?
While unaware of the value of vitamins, an old lore recommended its use both as a laxative and as a poultice for sores.
Not until much later was a similar vegetable, spinach, cooked carefully with butter, orange juice and a little nutmeg and served as a side dish with ‘sippets’ of toast, without a passing thought as to its efficacy as a regulator of the bowels.
A visit to the walled kitchen garden at Felbrigg in Norfolk, complete with handsome dovehouse, is a good way of observing the changes which had begun to take place by the eighteenth century.
Vegetables were now beginning to be used as an integral part of the diet.
The stock doves provided a constant supply of meat; they were the fast food of this period, useful for the unexpected guest.
The orchards yielded plums, pears and apples; bees occupying the hives set amongst the trees produced honey with the extra aid of the herbs flowering in beds along the walls; and above all careful gardening provided a wealth of vegetables unknown to the herb growers of previous centuries.
Felbrigg has its own cookery book of the period, written by Katherine Windham, widow of William Windham I, who kept house here for her son Ashe for sixty years.
The book is dated 1707 and contains numerous recipes for vegetables, including one for cucumbers.
These were being grown with all the benefits of contemporary technology, making use of hot beds (composed of earth and dung) and bell-glasses.
In his book The Country Housewife and Lady's Director , published during the early half of the eighteenth century, Richard Bradley, the first Professor of Botany at Cambridge, mentioned both cucumbers and melons in his list of garden produce for August.
He also included cauliflowers, artichokes and sweet fennel (as opposed to the herb), all of which were fairly recent imports from the Continent, suggesting that with such a range of vegetables ‘a Country Gentleman and Farmer may have every thing at home, and set out a Table fit for a Prince, without being beholden to the Markets’.
Further indications that vegetables had won a respected place in the English diet can be found in Hannah Glasse's delightful The Art of Cookery made Plain and Easy , published in 1747.
This influential book was full of recipes that made imaginative use of the lightness and freshness of vegetables, which sounded the death knell of the heavy, sweet, spiced dishes of medieval cookery, and which appeal just as much today.
Quarry Bank Mill, at Styal in Cheshire, demonstrates an entirely different side to the genteel art of the walled kitchen garden.
The nineteenth-century industrialist Samuel Greg observed that such a rural site, situated deep in the countryside only twelve miles south of Manchester, could provide energy for his cotton spinning mill in two ways.
The most obvious was that the River Bollin could be harnessed to power the spinning machinery.
The other was more subtle; by housing his workers in the country, where life was far healthier than in the crowded tenements of the city, he could provide them with space to grow their own vegetables.
A healthy diet would generate the energy for his workforce, in the same way that water power generated the energy to drive the mill machinery.
The allotments which accompanied each neat  brick cottage can still be seen, although dahlias and roses now replace utilitarian cabbages and onions.
But at the Apprentice House, home to the child workers, the garden has been re-created to illustrate an ideal picture of productivity and industry.
Each plot was worked by a group of apprentices to produce the leeks, potatoes and brassicas that were the staples of their unimaginative but reasonably nourishing diet.
Nothing fancy here in the way of melons or artichokes, but damsons, gooseberries and apples were translated into wholesome and filling puddings, and a range of herbs provided simple medicines to use alongside those prescribed by the factory doctor.
Recipes for such dishes were to be found in the cookery books of the mid-nineteenth century, usually under the rather patronising heading of ‘Food for the Poor’.
Across the Pennines, in Derbyshire, the immense walled kitchen garden at Calke Abbey, where visitors to Calke could once sit in the now-ruined orangery that presides over it and admire the order and industry, is just an area of pasture.
But the Trust is reviving the more manageably sized physic garden nearby, filling it with vegetables, fruit trees and herbs, restoring the hot houses and hot beds, and all in time, some 200 years later, to celebrate the new vegetarian age.
In order to reflect it fully, and to mirror the contemporary cookery books, one wonders whether Stephen Biggin, its gardener, will grow the vegetables this century has imported?
The Chinese cabbages and American pumpkins and Italian courgettes?
If this turns out to the case the great wheel of horticulture really will have turned full circle.
Simone Sekers is the author of The National Trust Book of Fruit and Vegetable Cookery which will be published in June this year 
‘A Country Gentleman and Farmer may have every thing at home, and set out a Table fit for a Prince, without being beholden to the Markets’
BELOW: The walled kitchen garden at Fenton House in Hampstead has been restored by the Trust over the last ten years (National Trust Photographic Library/Ian Shaw )
Not Just Muck and Magic
‘The success of the experiment at Snowshill proves that organic gardening is not just an eccentric alternative; it can also produce better results’
SUE SPIELBERG AND TOM PARKER
Snowshill Manor is unique.
Not only does the house contain one of the most interesting ‘collections of collections’, but it is surrounded by the first pleasure garden to be run entirely organically in the National Trust.
Indeed, it would seem almost sacrilegious to introduce anything unnatural into this idyllic setting.
Set in the beautiful Cotswold countryside near the village of Broadway, in 1919 Snowshill Manor became the home of Charles Paget Wade and his subsequent eclectic collection of artefacts, including among other things clocks, bicycles, musical instruments and samurai warriors' armour.
Charles Wade was also a keen gardener.
Between 1920 and 1923 the two-acre site was transformed following his own ideas as well as a design by H. M. Baillie Scott of the Arts and Crafts Movement, whose work Wade greatly admired.
The National Trust acquired this unusual property in 1951, but few records were kept of the garden's early management.
Lack of evidence, together with the garden's small size, persuaded the Trust to run an experiment in organic gardening at Snowshill.
This idea was the brainchild of Anna Coombes who, in 1988, took over as gardener; her work has been carried on and developed by her successor Linda Roberts since the beginning of 1990.
Anna Coombes realised that the growing of healthy plants is much less a question of eliminating pests and diseases with chemicals than of providing optimum conditions for growth.
Constant vigilance is also vital in combating problems as soon as they arise, and the garden at Snowshill is on such a scale that this is possible.
The experiment has certainly proved that organic gardening works.
The borders at Snowshill exude health, most of the roses are remarkably free from greenfly and black spot and even Cyclamen neapolitanum are seeding freely.
But, as every good gardener knows, healthy plant growth depends very much on the fertility and structure of the soil.
The well-drained, alkaline soil at Snowshill is greatly improved by the addition of compost, which helps both to keep the worm population high and to increase nutrient levels.
Four compost bins are maintained at various levels of decomposition.
They are built up in tiers  of well-rotted manure, grass clipping and annual weeds from the garden; thin layers of pigeon droppings are then used as a compost activator.
This potent recipe seems to satiate the hunger of both shrubs and herbaceous subjects.
In addition an annual dose of a slow-release organic fertiliser of blood, fish and bone is administered to the lawns and mixed borders.
The maxim of hygiene in the garden is rigidly adhered to at Snowshill.
Weeds are kept under strict control within the borders, although, as the food plants of the red admiral, peacock and small tortoiseshell butterfly caterpillars, nettles are positively encouraged in wilder areas.
Rigorous digging eliminates most perennial weeds but deep-rooted ones such as bindweed (Convolvulus arvensis ) are more stubborn and will eventually become weaker with systematic removal.
Regular mulches of compost keep down annual weeds within the borders, and perennial invaders within the ornamental lawns often succumb with a careful spot treatment of salt.
The matrix of gravel paths is kept weed-free by regular hoeing, whilst weeds in the paving are easily eradicated using the corner of an onion hoe or a knife.
Pest-free plants also play a large part in garden hygiene, and a sharp eye will spot unwelcome visitors so that the necessary curative measures can be taken.
Snowshill has a head start against aphids, one of the most common garden pests.
The majority are deterred by the garden's high altitude and exposure to winds, whilst ladybirds or resident blue tits feeding their young devour the remainder.
Similarly predators are encouraged to control other pests such as slugs, snails and the Solomon's seal sawfly.
If predators do not oblige, the pests are picked off and squashed — not a job for the faint-hearted!
Disease caused by fungal attacks is kept at bay with the prompt removal of both infected and damaged material.
Coral spot with its orange pustules is dealt with in this way, while any rose leaves stricken with the ubiquitous rose black spot are picked off and burnt.
Out of necessity, some organic sprays may have to be used but this is avoided as much as possible.
Phostrogen Safer's Natural Garden Fungicide is used to control a multitude of diseases such as powdery mildew on Phlox .
Certain plants, however, pose problems every year, and their complete removal may prove to be the only solution.
The roses ‘Handel’ and Rosa rugosa ‘Alba’are particularly prone to black spot whilst ‘Albertine’succumbs to powdery mildew into the bargain.
Disease-resistant cultivars at Snowshill have shown themselves to be Rosa rugosa ‘Roserie de l'Hay’,R. rugosa ‘Frau Dagmar Hartopp’,R. ‘Excelsa’, ‘Felicite et Perpetue’ and ‘Felicia’,Rosa spinosissima and Rosa rubrifolia .
Plant selection, therefore, goes a long way to help the organic gardener.
Since the detrimental effects of many chemicals used within the environment are now only too well known, it seems natural that the National Trust, as a high-profile conservation body, should set a good example.
The garden at Snowshill Manor is on a small enough scale for a totally organic approach to be feasible, but this is not the case with many of the Trust's larger gardens where chemicals are still employed.
Although kept to e minimum, herbicides are used particularly to control weeds on paths, in ornamental lawns and in areas prior to planting.
The high cost of labour unfortunately makes this practice a necessity.
But the success of the experiment at Snowshill shows that organic gardening is not just an eccentric alternative; it can also produce better results.
In small gardens of the National Trust it could turn out to be the rule rather than the exception.
Sue Spielberg is a horticultural journalist and consultant; Tom Parker is Assistant Head Gardener at the Chelsea Physic Garden 
LEFT: Charles Wade's old-fashioned planting schemes at Snowshill reflect the influence of the Arts and Crafts Movements, with its preference for simple, cottage-garden styles (National Trust Photographic Library/Nick Meers )
The Making of a Garden
SARAH-JANE FORDER
‘I fear I'm rather past giving interviews,’ Lady Heathcoat Amory had warned, ‘but I'll meet you if it will help the garden.’
Indeed, although she is now nearly ninety, one senses that Lady Amory would do almost anything in her power if she thought it would benefit Knightshayes, the garden she created with her husband, Sir John Heathcoat Amory, after the Second World War.
When she and Sir John were married in 1937, they inherited a large Victorian house with fine views over a park framed by forest trees and the rolling Devon hills beyond.
Situated high above sea level, Knightshayes Court was surrounded by wild woodland with a magnificent stand of Douglas Firs overlooking the back drive.
In front of the house was a typical Victorian garden which had been designed by Edward Kemp for the first Sir John: a few formal terraces, some bedding out, a tortuously clipped yew topiary and a small paved area with rose beds.
The rest was given over to a bowling green and a large expanse of lawn; the potential for change was enormous.
Neither Lady Amory nor Sir John had any practical experience, but Lady Amory's father had been fond of altering gardens: ‘He was very kind and always said you must help in the garden whenever you want to, but you know you've got to have your own garden, you can't do it in your father's garden.’
Lessons at Knightshayes were learnt the hard way, through trial and error.
Bursting with enthusiasm, Lady Amory laid a new rose garden on the terrace in front of the house.
It was not until she came across a book by Sylvia Crowe, who pointed out how often the English countryside is spoilt by gardens blazing in colour which intrude on the natural backdrop, that she realised her mistake.
Eventually the rose beds were flattened and grassed over and a first principle was established.
‘The idea has always been at Knightshayes to blend if it's possible — up to a point you can do it — the garden you're making into its setting.
Gardening is really interfering with nature; it's man-made and you're putting the plants where you want them.
That's the difference between Knightshayes and some of the lovely old seventeenth-century gardens where you have a beautiful garden with no connection with the outside; is suits the houses but it doesn't blend .’
At first all the impetus came from Lady Amory while Sir John pursued other interests.
The change came suddenly: ‘I always think it was like St Paul on the road to Damascus.
My husband was mad on golf, and he used to go down into the park and send golf balls onto the lawn and then walk back through the rose garden which I put in the wrong place.
Then one July evening, just before the war, he suddenly noticed the roses as if for the first time.
He came back and said, ‘Oh, I like those,’ and I  said, ‘I'm just going to cut their heads off, the dead heads.’
From that moment he looked after the rose garden and when the war came he said, ‘Look here, if we get through this all right, we'll make a garden together.’
During the war they both worked in the local Heathcoat factory making parts for aeroplanes — he was Chairman; she was on the factory floor — then in 1946 they began to plant the garden in earnest.
They were advised by many friends, including Norman Hadden, Graham Thomas, Lanning Roper and old lady, Nellie Briton, who ran a rock-garden nursery near Tiverton.
Both Lady Amory and Sir John liked to get their hands in the soil — they did all the planting and arranging of the beds themselves — but they also had two willing helpers, gardeners who'd been at Knightshayes for years, and some foresters.
Husband and wife were perfect foils for one another: ‘Jack loved collecting plants, big or small, and I rather enjoyed trying to arrange them, so it worked.
He was always producing the plants.
I remember once we were going to have a lot more crocuses on the way up the drive, and he said, ‘Look, you decide what you want and I'll order them,’ so I decided what I thought would be good, because I knew I had to put them in.
When they came I was rather surprised that there seemed to be so many; I said I had no idea that I'd ordered as many as this.
He said, ‘Oh well, you didn't, but I doubled you order.’
That sort of thing was such fun.’
In 1963 they were joined by Michael Hickson, a very young Head Gardener who completed the team.
It was admirably democratic: ‘There were three of us, so we used to go by a vote.
If one had an idea, the other two had to agree to it.’
The work had begun near the house, loosening the appearance of the stiff formal terraces with small shrubs, roses and plants.
They replaced the roses in the paved garden with low carpeting plants, and the bowling green was swept away to make room for a peaceful enclosure with a pool, a statue, stone benches and a weeping pear.
But it was the idea of ‘the garden in the wood’ which really fired Lady Amory's imagination; to this day it remains her favourite part of the garden.
‘We had a lot of splendid gardening friends with woodland gardens, but I didn't want that, I wanted a garden in a wood .
And then in Scotland we saw some very interesting and original peat walls built by some gardeners there, so we copied them.’
It was a gargantuan task: each year a piece of woodland approximately the size of a tennis court was brought into the garden.
Later, when modern machinery enabled them to speed up the process, the realisation came that twenty-five acres was probably more than enough to cope with, what with the borders, lawns and terraces into the bargain.
Hundreds of trees were lost in last year's storms and ‘the garden in the wood’ suffered much damage.
Lady Amory's reaction to this was a mixture of sadness and the old excitement: ‘We're very fortunate in that in the near part of the wood garden we've been able to grass over and you wouldn't realise the number of big trees that have come down.
In some places it may even be an improvement, and of course if only I was years younger I would be thrilled at the challenge.
There's a lovely great open space, where it used to be all wood, which if you had plenty of money and could have enough gardeners could be made very exciting.’
In 1972 Lady Amory and Sir John decided to give Knightshayes to the Trust, there being nobody in the family who was a gardener.
Though she has every confidence in the Trust, and particularly in John Sales, the Trust's Chief Gardens Adviser, it is no easy thing to relinquish control of your life's work — especially when it's situated right under your nose.
‘When the Trust took over eighteen years ago I was made what was called Garden Manager, and I used to run the garden and the gardeners did exactly what I wanted.
But the time came when Graham Thomas, who was then the Trust's Gardens Adviser, suddenly had to produce a report and I began to see that it wasn't quite like the old days.
Eventually I though it much wiser to give up being called Manager and since then I've had to adapt myself.
Whereas before I used to say let's do this or that and worry if it wasn't done, now I've decided that I'm really not going to worry about the garden any more.
The Trust still asks my advice, but it's not an easy process because although I'm very old I've still got a clear idea about what I'd like to do in the garden.’
It must be disconcerting, to say the least, to have hordes of complete strangers wandering round your garden for seven months of the year, but this is another thing with which Lady Amory has come to terms.
‘I've got used to not being able to go out and enjoy the solitude of the garden.
It used to be a tremendous transition from 1 April when you realised you wouldn't have the garden to yourself until quite suddenly at the end of October when everybody goes.
But I'm so used to it now, and honestly I rather enjoy both.
I do think paths have got to have people on them, they're meant for it.’
Sir John used to enjoy telling non-gardeners that gardening was ‘eleven months of hard labour and one month of acute disappointment’.
He was joking, of course, and when Knightshayes was opened privately under the National Gardens Scheme he would park his wheelchair at the top of the garden and watch the visitors coming along the terrace.
If people stopped to look at the borders alongside the house he would be perfectly charming; if they didn't he wouldn't bother them.
Though she may be old now, Lady Amory has lost none of the original excitement and enthusiasm which she shared with Sir John, and, like a true gardener, she is constantly looking forward: ‘I don't think a garden is the thing to keep; it's not like furniture in a room or a house.
It's either growing or dying, it's changing all the time.
I don't think it's possible to try and keep it exactly as it used to be, nor do I think you'd want to.
If Knightshayes had been a really fine Victorian garden, you'd have had to keep it as it was, but we've turned it into a twentieth-century garden and that's what the Trust has taken.
It's a changing garden.’
THE LILY POOL ENCLOSURE AT KNIGHTSHAYES (NT/ANDREW LAWSON)
GREETINGS FROM BUSCOT
LYN SALES
Early in this century most people collected postcards and were very proud of displaying their albums.
Some were sent especially for this purpose but they were also an important means of communication and often the back of the postcard is as interesting as the front.
My collection of over 2,000 cards, many of National Trust gardens, provides a useful historical record of how gardens have changed over the years in terms of layout and planting.
Some, such as those of Clumber in Nottinghamshire, depict great houses now demolished.
Others were sent by servants to families; this series was written in 1911–12 by George Comfort who seems to have been a gardener at Buscot Park in Oxfordshire in its heyday.
Dear Ethel Tell mother I shall be writing to-morrow night.
We are so busy, we are having high times.
In best of health.
Much love George
Dearest Mother Just arrived safe and sound 9.20.
I have now got a lovely ride.
Much love George
Dear M. Sorry not to have answered letter will do so to-morrow evening.
Hope you are well.
Weather is very trying.
Much love George
Dearest Ma Thanks so much for the parcel.
Sorry not to have acknowledged it before.
I am writing this evening, I am just going to church.
Much love George
Dearest Mother and Dad I am sorry I cannot write letter to-night will write to-morrow night.
I have been on to-day, so I have not had much time, I have wrote to G. Titman to-night.
This P. C. is a part of my range.
I have about 3 times as much glass to look after.
My health is capital especially for the weather.
Much love George
Winds of Change
Julian Prideaux
Francis Bacon was surely not far wrong when he wrote: ‘To control nature, you must obey it.’
In seeking to preserve landscapes of natural beauty and historic interest, the Trust can never ignore change, whether it be slow and imperceptible, as with climatic developments, or sudden and dramatic, as with the freak storms which swept the country in October 1987 and the first two months of last year.
The effects of the devastation have been well catalogued.
In 1987 in sixteen counties across south-east England an estimated 15 million trees were blown down; from the Trust's estate alone the figure was at least 250,000.
In 1990, although none of the damage was as concentrated in its severity, in many respects the results were just as bad, if only because they were more widespread.
Many of the Trust's famous gardens lost a high proportion of their specimen trees and structural plantings, and, most serious of all, places like Lanhydrock and Trengwainton in Cornwall, Kingston Lacy in Dorset and Knightshayes in Devon lost large sections of their shelter belts and woodlands, leaving the gardens prone to future gales and further deterioration of their micro-climates.
In addition, significant numbers of individual trees of specific nature-conservation interest were lost, including, at Lanhydrock, the only tree supporting a rare lichen.
It was inevitable that when confronted with the initial chaos the Trust's staff concentrated on dealing with trees which blocked roads and drives or which posed a threat to the safety of people or buildings.
In many cases the salvaged timber was sold, albeit at prices depressed by the glut of timber on the market.
Perhaps in one or  two places the Trust was too assiduous in its clearance operations, but by 1990 the need for restraint to avoid unnecessary ecological damage was well recognised.
Gardeners, some of whom had seen much of their life's work destroyed before their very eyes, refused to be beaten by an aberration of nature.
In the gardens and parks surveyors painstakingly recorded the species and locations of fallen trees and calculated their ages by counting the rings.
On important archaeological sites torn up by windblown salvage operations were carried out.
Elsewhere there were surveys to assess how wildlife interest had been affected, lichens were artificially transferred from fallen to standing trees and recommendations were made for safeguarding invertebrates.
A computerised operation to save rare plants and trees was launched by the Trust's Botanical Consultant, Michael Lear, who became known in the media as ‘Green Adair’.
In 1990 contingency plans laid after the 1987 storm were activated, with nurseries across the country being asked to propagate from material collected from fallen trees.
At the same time the Trust stepped up its routine programme of raising woody plants of species from seeds gathered in the wild as well as from its own properties.
Careful research was set in train to discover the best way to restore gardens and historic landscape parks to their former glory.
Any new planting was designed to be phased in over a period of years, planting schemes having to take account of the need to create a distinctive landscape for the immediate future as well as for the long term.
In some gardens, where trees had provided an ideal environment for less-hardy plants, as at Trengwainton in Cornwall, the planting will need to ebb and flow in relation to the available shelter.
The Trust is now examining the whole concept of trees as windbreaks; what is clear is that trees and shrubs should filter the wind and provide shelter without creating a solid barrier and that mixed planting, wider belts and regular thinning will be essential in achieving this.
In some of the Trust's woodlands, while terrible damage has been done and the shape of the landscape has been altered.
there have none the less been benefits.
The storms may have improved the wildlife importance of some woods, by breaking the canopy and giving better light conditions, thus helping to improve ground flora and regeneration, and by presenting foresters with a chance to vary the structure of woodland — for example, by introducing a wider range of species in more woods, or by phased regeneration over several decades.
The woods worst affected by the storms were those with mainly uniform, planted stands of trees, whereas those comprising trees of different ages and species were better able to withstand the high winds.
There had not been such severe storms in southern England for hundreds of years, and the structure of woodlands had not been so regularly modified by gales as in the more stormy north of Britain.
Clearly the Trust must act boldly and be willing to fell over-age trees.
How much better it is to remove trees carefully rather than wait for a gale to do it in an uncoordinated way.
In many places the Trust is resisting the urge automatically to replant and is aiming instead for natural regeneration by creating the right conditions for species such as birch, ash and beech to self-seed.
It is a common fallacy to assume that all blown trees die; on the contrary, those retaining at least 25 per cent root contact with the soil may well continue to grow, albeit with a shorter life expectancy.
In broadleaved woodlands where planting is necessary, the Trust has introduced a new system of placing young trees close together in widely spaced clumps.
Careful management of such clumps can result in the production of high-quality timber while the areas in between are available for the natural regeneration of trees, shrubs and ground flora.
Other woods, especially those which are important as nature-conservation sites, are simply being left alone so that the woodland plants, insects and birds can recolonise naturally.
In some wooded areas which have developed in recent decades on open ground, such as abandoned heathlands, the opportunity is being taken to restore the now scarce and declining open habitat.
There have been gains for nature conservation in that the storms have prompted a fundamental questioning of the received view.
There has been a recognition of the constraints within which the Trust can plan its long-term management and for everyone a jolting out of the cosy belief that man is master.
The storms have speeded up the process of new though on such matters; more or less overnight they have provided the opportunity to create a new order.
Where appropriate there can now be a new acceptance of untidiness and dereliction — indeed of chaos — and an acknowledgement of the importance of natural events in moulding the landscape in which we live.
On the coast too, where we are used to the process of erosion (though its scale has been heightened by the storms), how long can the Trust continue to play King Canute by trying to win back the dune systems, as at Woolacombe in North Devon?
Some of the greatest lessons to be learnt have been in human terms.
The storms like the world wars of this century, brought people together.
Trust staff from all over the country hurried to the aid of their colleagues in the affected regions; foresters gained a deeper understanding of the gardeners' problems, and vice versa.
Public attention was focused on the force of nature as never before; successful campaigns were launched to foot the vast bill for the clear-up operation.
A universal chord had been struck; people everywhere felt a physical loss.
Even so, one of Britain's foremost authorities on trees, Dr Oliver Rackham, warned in the Guardian in February 1990: ‘This time there will be no excuse or failing to learn from the former storm.
The Great Storm was a setback to woodland conservation because it drew public attention to trees and woods without adding to public understanding.
It gave opportunities for circulating the myth that a tree is an artefact, a kind of gatepost with leaves that comes out of a nursery and dies when cut or blown down.’
There is nothing wrong with change, however dramatic it may be.
Some good will always come of it.
Julian Prideaux is the Trust's Chief Agent 
RIGHT: Lanhydrock in Cornwall after the January 1990 storm (National Trust Photographic Library/Paul O'Connor )
Back on the Chain Gang
SARAH-JANE FORDER
In National Trust terms, volunteers represent big business.
Every year many thousands of people, young and old, perform unpaid tasks, such as biological surveys, construction work, archaeological digs, footpath repair, scrub clearance and lakeside revetment, which the Trust would otherwise be unable to carry out.
What motivates people to give up their leisure time and spend long hours toiling in the countryside, often in appalling weather conditions?
Are they really so selfless and, if not, what makes them tick?
I determined that the best way to find out would be to take part in a National Trust Acorn Project, week-long holidays between March and October which are open to anyone over the age of sixteen.
Special skills are not required, though it is necessary to be ‘reasonably fit’.
I thought I would just about pass muster.
I was not an easy customer right from the start.
I wanted to go to the Yorkshire Moors or the Lake District: I had romantic visions of myself as a drystone waller, indomitable against the elements.
As things turned out, it was probably just as well that I was brought gently back to earth by Beryl, who from one of the Trust's head offices masterminds the working holidays with military precision, advised me that the only available option was a 21-plus Acorn Project at Clumber park in Nottinghamshire.
(You're an Acorn until you reach the age of thirty-five, when, in Trust speak, you have reached the age of maturity and are eligible for an Oak Camp.
It all seemed a bit twee; I wondered somewhat cynically if there would be signs saying Does and Bucks on the dormitory doors.)
I knew I must be nearing Clumber when I saw the Robin Hood and Little John Hotel from the train window.
I alighted at Retford and looked around expectantly.
None of the other passengers had the appearance of Acorn Campers, and as they all disappeared into parked cars I began to feel rather apprehensive.
I waited; a pick-up had been arranged for 5.30pm and I was certain it would not fail me.
At 6 o'clock I dialled the telephone number I'd been given ‘for emergencies only’.
I knew it wasn't an emergency, but I thought it might have the makings of one.
Stuart Chappell, the Head Warden at Clumber, answered the phone and I said, as brightly as I could, ‘I'm here, I've arrived at Retford.’
There was a brief silence, then Stuart said, ‘But the camp doesn't start until tomorrow.’
The horrible truth was slowly dawning on me: I'd been so preoccupied with finding things like Wellington boots and torches, not to mention boning up on my Enid Blyton, that I'd forgotten to read the small print.
I was probably the eagerest volunteer the Trust had ever had.
The National Trust warden is a rare breed, and Stuart was no exception to this.
‘Stay where you are,’ he said to the unexpected guest, ‘I'll be there in ten minutes.’
He was philosophical, not to say laid back about the inconvenience of being called out unnecessarily at the end of what had already been a long day.
These things happen, he said as we were driving along, he'd done something similar only a few weeks earlier, and he was used to being woken up by the police at 2 o'clock in the morning to rescue deer on the estate.
He installed me in the base-camp, an old redbrick gardener's cottage with roses climbing up the side, offered me the keys to the crew bus so that I could pick up something to eat in nearby Worksop, and even had the foresight to take a pint of milk from the warden's fridge so that I'd be able to make a cup of coffee in the morning.
At high noon the following day, Carole, the leader, was the first to arrive.
Dark-haired and vivacious, she was a mature student who'd already led three other Acorn Projects that summer, and it was instantly apparent that she was an old hand.
After a quick recce of the basecamp, she proceeded to unload from her car three large black dustbin liners stuffed to the brim with what appeared to be the entire contents of her wardrobe.
‘I always pack in a hurry,’ she explained, as she carefully arranged three pairs of canvas shoes in a neat row under her bed.
Imelda Marcos would have been proud of her.
Carole said that she always brought everything including the kitchen sink because she'd stayed in the past in basecamps where there hadn't even been enough mattresses to go round; one in South Wales had been a wooden hut with gas lights and a fridge half a mile away.
Bless you Beryl, I thought to myself.
If you've succumbed to Miles Kingston's image of the National Trust volunteer being elderly, preferably female, and usually asleep in the window seat of a stately home, I suggest you think again.
There were twelve of us finally assembled at Clumber, including Carole and Debby, the assistant leader, and everyone was young, sparky and outgoing.
Mike, an ex-philosophy student, was going off to Germany in the New Year; Naomi from Bristol was about to embark on a Museum Studies course at university; Liane, a weights and measures official, was one of the many volunteers who had helped at Uppark after the fire; and Hugh, a quantity surveyor currently between jobs, set out to astound us over the next few days with his minimalist clothing (some ancient jeans which were fashionably ripped at the crotch and a pair of lurid, exceedingly short shorts).
There was also Alec, a prison officer from Wormwood Scrubs (when he'd given his address and next of kin on a previous camp everyone had thought he was kidding); Ken, who to everyone's delight turned up with a guitar (were we really going to sit round a campfire singing?); and David, an aircraft engineer who after fifteen years in the Scouts could ‘do wonderful things with ropes’.
He proved it too; we needed a washing line to dry some tea towels and within minutes one had been created almost out of thin air.
It was better than Blue Peter .
The job of being an Acorn Project leader is an unenviable one.
For a start, they don't get paid, though they do receive a petrol allowance; for another thing, it's a bit like being in charge of a group of unruly children for a week, which, as anyone who has been a parent knows, means that there's a lot of hard work involved and very little time for oneself.
Carole seemed to manage through a combination of patience, firmness and good humour.
After supper on the first night we sat round the table in anticipation of the promised induction talk.
Referring to her leader's handbook, Carole covered the fire regulations, the working day (9–5 with an hour off for lunch), the rota for making breakfast and sandwiches, doing the washing-up and the cooking, and various curious house rules, such as no alcohol, no ‘personal entertainment’, which apparently included such things as Walkmans, and lights out at 11pm.
Here she pause and said that the handbook advised a ‘nice but firm reiteration’ of the latter.
She put it so nicely and so firmly that no one seemed to mind too much.
One of the main problems at Clumber is erosion (another is subsidence from coal mining), and with up to 1.5 million visitors a year it's easy to see why.
A four-mile path meanders round the lake in the centre of the park; our project was to lay red shale on a popular and consequently very worn stretch along the north side.
So it was that at 9 o'clock sharp the following morning, Aj, our warden in charge, arrived to show us what needed to be done.
Stuart had told me that Aj (whose name is short for Arnold Junior, after the Head Forester of whom he became the spitting image when he first came to work at Clumber as a woodsman ten years ago at the age of sixteen) was a dab hand with a tractor.
‘That's funny,’ said Aj, ‘because the last time I did a project like this I ended up with three tractors in the lake.’
Carole had said that the style of warden could really make a difference, and I was relieved to see that Aj was far too easy-going to be a slave-driver; a non-conformist, his regulation chocolate-brown corduroy trousers were bleached white, a phenomenon which he put down to the use of Ariel automatic.
Aj went off with three of our number to do a bit of lakeside revetment and we others set to with a will, clearing away the undergrowth alongside the path in readiness for the red shale.
The next morning, Aj had said, he'd be down with six tons of red shale and then the real work would begin.
I didn't want to argue but, up to my neck in nettles, it felt like the real work had already begun.
I liked it, though, when bemused visitors came up to us and said, ‘You're doing a very good job.’
It reminded me of old Mr Grace in Are You Being Served?
Halfway through the afternoon I went to see how the lakeside revetment was going.
Aj was directing the action as though he was a producer in charge of a play, and Hugh, Mike and Debby were up to their thighs in stinking lake water; Debby was fetchingly attired in green chest waders and looked like a cross between Jeremy Fisher and a model in kinky rubberwear.
After a night of endless fun — rounders followed by Cluedo, Cheat and a visit to the Clumber Park Social Club where Ken performed a striking rendition of Wild Thing on his guitar — I felt burnt out the next morning, but everyone else was raring to go.
It was pouring with rain, so we dolled ourselves up in wet-weather gear and swayed like Michelin men back down the lakeside path nicknamed by Stuart the Yellow Brick Road.
A rumble in the distance signalled the arrival of Aj with his tractor, and the first load of red shale was tipped in a heap of rocks and stones at our feet.
‘When you've finished, it'll look like a snooker table,’ he said cheerfully, and, reversing deftly, he went back for the next lot.
I began to see what Stuart had meant; Aj manoeuvring a tractor and trailer was far more graceful than Come Dancing .
Every time another load of red shale appeared we raked and then raked some more in preparation for the rolling later in the week.
All day long wheelbarrows trundled up and down the unmade surface carrying topsoil to neaten up the edges of the path.
I could hardly credit it when Carole said we were on a cushy number; she'd spent whole days hacking down rhododendrons and that was really back-breaking work.
Another advantage was being near enough to the basecamp to go back for lunch; not only did it mean we could have a hot drink but it avoided the clammy sensation, which Carole graphically described, of sitting down for lunch when you're soaked on the outside and soaked on the inside.
It had been hard work, but now I understood why people wanted to be National Trust volunteers.
The conviviality of working outside all day alongside others is difficult to find elsewhere in modern life, and it certainly does wonders for insomnia.
The path would last for forty-odd years, and seeing it being transformed was immensely satisfying.
Even so, I was looking forward to nothing so much as a long hot soak in the bath.
For information about Acorn Projects, please contact Beryl Sims, The National Trust, PO Box 12, Westbury, Wilts BA13 4NA 
A LIFE IN THE DAY OF Andrew Mudge
Born in Devon in 1954, Andrew Mudge left school at the age of fifteen and did nine years' service in the Navy before becoming Gardener for the Trust at Castle Drogo where he worked for seven years.
In 1985 he was made Head Gardener of Killerton, an arboretum famous for its rare trees and shrubs.
He lives in nearby Cullompton with his wife and daughter.
I was brought up to work in the garden with my father; we had to grow vegetables ourselves because money was tight.
I had a bit of an interest in gardens because I grew up in the country at Drewsteignton, but I always think I was very lucky to get that job at Castle Drogo — straight in as a single-handed gardener with no experience.
In the first few months when I came out of the Navy I'd tried my hand at a couple of things, and then my mother phoned me up one day and said there's this job going at Drogo.
I applied and got the details but never bothered sending off the application form because I didn't think I was capable of doing what was asked.
But my grandparents had worked at Drogo since it was built, so we've had a long link with the Drewes; the family put in a word for me so I got the job.
It was quite a responsibility at first, but if I was worried about anything there was a Head Gardener called Arthur Godfrey here at Killerton that I could turn to.
He'd been here for forty-odd years, so he was the chap behind me, if you like.
I'd never even heard of Killerton until I started working for the Trust, but when I was at Drogo I used to come across here fairly regularly because of the regional office being here and because I was just interested.
I always had this thing in the back of my mind that I'd like to be Head Gardener at Killerton one day, because of the type of garden it is, because of its size and because of the plant content.
What makes Killerton so special is the collection of trees and shrubs, forgetting the herbaceous plants and the borders because they were a later addition.
You can stand here and look at all these trees which come from all over the world, and we're open all year round and there's always something to see, and the views are spectacular.
One of the most popular things in the garden — especially with children — is the Bear Hut which used to house a black bear cub one of the Acland sons brought back from Canada.
The bear outgrew the hut very quickly, and when it got to about 23 stone they decided to give it to London Zoo.
Depending on the time of year and what's going on, I'm usually in by about 7.45.
I start by checking the nursery, where we've got our glasshouses and propagation facilities, and I'm always walking around — I try to get round the whole garden at least once a week.
There are four of us on the full-time staff and four trainees.
I work the same as the rest of them; I'm very much a working Head Gardener as opposed to a white-collar Head Gardener.
The staff all know what's got to be done and they go off and do it; it's just when jobs are different that I give them any guidance.
Once everybody else has gone off and done their bit, I've either got a job I'm in the middle of doing or I'll plan some work for another time.
I try to keep one step ahead of the rest of the staff, making sure that there's a continuity of work for them, and I like to try to mix their work as much as possible.
Of course some of them like doing one job more than others; I've got one gardener who likes doing nothing else but cutting grass — well, he's quite welcome to do that because the rest of us are not fussy.
Autumn and winter is when we do our major work — planting, pruning, tree felling and so on— and spring can be very busy too.
When I lived right on the job it used to drive my wife round the bend — I'd be at home on a weekend, perhaps in the garden, and I'd think about something in the greenhouse across the road so I'd go over there and disappear for an hour whereas perhaps I should have been giving more time to my family.
The first thing a gardener's got to have is an interest in the job, and he's got to be motivated to do it.
An ability to deal with the public is also important — when you're out working you'll quite often be approached by a visitor who'll treat you a bit like Gardener's Question Time .
I've got a very down-to-earth attitude and I just tell visitors how to do it, without going into anything too technical.
If something wants pruning you just show them: you chop this off and you chop that off and you get on with it.
We find winter is the time when most people come and have a chat to us; we've got a regular following of visitors and you get to know them quite well.
I like having my head down in a border listening to conversations as visitors go past.
They mainly argue about plants; one will say it's called so-and-so and the other lady will say it's not, it's a so-and-so because I've got one in my garden.
Nine times out of ten they're both totally wrong and sometimes I have to stop myself from butting in.
There are a few other gardens in the Trust that would appeal to me after Killerton — places like Sheffield Park, Stourhead and Lanhydrock immediately spring to mind.
Sissinghurst is a nice garden and it's got some lovely plants in it, but it wouldn't be for me, I'd find it too claustrophobic.
In any case, there's still lots to do at Killerton.
I am ambitious, but you can be ambitious in the same garden because of the amount of work that you can see five or ten years in front of you.
Interview by Sarah-Jane Forder