

Birmingham City Council
COMMUNITY CHARGE — YOUR RIGHTS AND ENTITLEMENTS
‘THIS LEAFLET FORMS PART OF THE DEMAND NOTE’
From 1st April 1990 the community charge is payable in place of domestic rates in England and Wales.
This is an amount payable by each adult to help cover the cost of local services.
With only a few exceptions all those aged 18 or over are liable to pay the same basic charge.
Birmingham City Council has now set its community charge, the basic amount payable is shown on the enclosed demand note.
THE COMMUNITY CHARGES REGISTER
A Register has been compiled known as the Community Charges Register.
This shows all those who are liable to pay community charge and specifies the particular type the individual will pay.
All those who appear on the Register must, by law, notify the Community Charges Registration Officer about any change regarding their entry within 21 days of the change occurring, this includes moving in or out of Birmingham.
For instance anyone who moves house must advise the Community Charges Registration Officer.
This should be done by writing to the Address given below or by completing and returning the tear-off slip which was included with the Notification of Entry.
ANONYMOUS REGISTRATION
The full Register will not be on public display, but an extract of the Register, showing only initials, surnames and addresses, will be available for inspection.
this will not be available for sale neither will any copying of all or part of the extract be allowed.
There will be cases where it would be unwise to make public details of individual's names and home addresses.
The Community Charges Registration Officer has discretion therefore to omit names from the public extract if the individuals concerned could be in danger of physical violence.
Anyone requiring further details of this procedure would contact this office.
APPEALS
If you consider that your name should not appear on the Register, or if you disagree with the details shown in your entry then you have the right to appeal.
Initially you should contact this office specifying your reasons which will be considered and the appropriate decision made.
If you are not satisfied with this decision you can then appeal to the Valuation and Community Charge Tribunal.
EXEMPTIONS
Some people may be exempt from inclusion on the Community Charge Register and thus from payment of Community Charge, examples are:—
Any patients whose sole or main residence is in a hospital, care home, nursing home or hostel
Severely mentally handicapped people
Prisoners
Community Service Volunteers not in support of Income Support
Members of religious communities devoted to prayer, contemplation the relief of suffering or education and who have no income or capital but are dependant on the community for support
Foreign diplomats and members of overseas forces
If you require any more details regarding exemptions please contact this office
PAYMENT
With the introduction of Community Charge all charge payers will pay their annual bill by ten monthly instalments commencing 15th April unless they opt for either annual or half-yearly payments.
The number of instalments will be reduced if a bill is issued during the year.
PAYMENT BY MONTHLY INSTALMENTS
If you have a bank account Direct Debit is a simple, inexpensive an convenient method of making payments.
You give you bank a written instruction to pay the monthly payments as they fall due and the City Council informs both you and your bank of the amount to be paid.
There is no need for the City Council to ask you to sign a new instruction whenever the amount is deducted from your bank account, you will be sent a new bill and advised of the new payments to be made.
If you wish to pay your Community Charge by Direct Debit, please complete and return to this office the attached mandate.
Those ratepayers already paying General Rates by this method must also make application.
If you do not submit the relevant Direct Debit mandate a payment booklet will be issued.
This will enable you to pay by cash or cheque at the Exchequer Division at 120 Edmund Street or any branch of a clearing bank although there may be a charge for the bank's service.
Payment facilities are also available at all Neighbourhood Offices.
Payment can also be made through the Transcash system at the Post Office although there may be a charge for this service.
ALTERNATIVE PAYMENT METHODS
You do not have to pay by monthly instalments.
You can
Pay the year's charge by 1st May
Pay half the year's charge by 1st May and the balance by 1st October
If you wish to take advantage of one of these options please contact this office.
FORTNIGHTLY/WEEKLY PAYMENTS
Anyone having difficulty making monthly payments and who wishes to make fortnightly or weekly payments should contact this office without delay.
HOUSEHOLD PAYMENTS
Each person by law receives their own bill.
Parents are not liable to pay for their children aged 18 or over who are living at home.
It can however be arranged for several bills within one household to be included on the same payment.
For example a husband can make payments on behalf of his wife and children or vice versa.
There will be no charge for this facility and the same payment methods will be available as with a single charge.
Anyone requiring further information should contact this office.
Even if such an arrangement is adopted each person will remain liable for their own charge and in the event of non-payment any outstanding amount will be recovered from each person in the normal way.
However in the case of couples should one partner neglect to pay the Community Charge the other partner may, by law be held responsible for payment of any unpaid sum due.
STUDENTS
Students will pay only 20% of the Community Charge providing they are undertaking a full time course of higher education.
This charge will be for the whole year and will be based on their term-time address.
It should be noted that this does not include 18 or 19 year olds undertaking a full time course in further education (eg A levels, BTEC etc.) who qualify for an exemption.
Anyone who believes they come within this category should contact this office without delay.
FAILURE TO PAY
If you begin to fall behind with payments the practical step is to contact this office and we will try to make the payment arrangements easier for you.
Failure to pay can result in our applying to the court for power to deduct arrears from your income or to arrange for the sale of your goods to recover the amount due.
TRANSITIONAL RELIEF
To ease the burden of changing immediately from general rates to Community Charge the Government has implemented a scheme of transitional relief.
This will protect those personal community charge payers who would otherwise have been more than £3 per week worse off in the first year of Community Charge.
This relief is calculated with reference to an assumed general rate liability for 1990/91 which is £248.
Transitional Relief will apply to a minority of charge payers in Birmingham.
It will be assessed automatically and therefore no application is necessary.
Where such relief is granted it will be shown separately on the Community Charge bills.
Disabled Persons and pensioners who have not previously paid rates will also receive extra help under the transitional relief scheme.
This will mean that those qualifying for extra help will receive a rebate of up to £92.
Details of entitlement can be obtained from the address below and anyone who considers they may qualify for such relief should contact this office.
ENQUIRIES AND FURTHER INFORMATION
Any enquiries relating to Community Charge should be addressed to:
COMMUNITY CHARGE BENEFIT
This is a scheme introduced by the Government and operated by the Council which provides help with Community Charge bills.
Successful applicants will find that they will pay less.
WHO CAN CLAIM COMMUNITY CHARGE BENEFIT?
Anyone having to pay the full personal Community Charge can claim community charge benefit.
You can claim if you area:—
Working or unemployed
Tenant or homeowner
Pensioner or non-pensioner
Sick or disabled
Couple or single
Non-householder
AMOUNT OF BENEFIT
The amount of benefit granted depends on your income or, in the case of couples, joint income.
You can get extra benefit if you:—
Have children for whom child benefit is paid
Are over 60 years
Are long-term sick
It should be noted that the maximum benefit you can get is 80%.
People on income support will pay only 20% of the Community Charge.
HOW TO APPLY FOR COMMUNITY CHARGE BENEFIT
If you think you could get Community Charge benefit please contact this office and a form will be sent to you.
NOTE: EVEN IF YOU WERE GETTING HOUSING BENEFIT AND/OR INCOME SUPPORT BEFORE 1ST APRIL 1990 YOU MUST STILL APPLY FOR COMMUNITY CHARGE BENEFIT BY COMPLETING THE NECESSARY FORM.
Cherwell District Council
A MESSAGE FROM: THE COMMUNITY CHARGES REGISTRATION OFFICER AND CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER
Dear Community Charge Payer,
In this envelope you will have received some important and valuable information regarding the community charge.
Please take the time to read it since it should explain the charge more fully.
The contents of this envelope include:
a bill
a wall planner containing details of Cherwell District Council's estimated finances for 1990–91
a leaflet from Oxfordshire County Council providing information on it's financial plans
a leaflet designed by the Government to explain the new system of local authority finances (white for Personal Charge Payers and pink for Standard Charge Payers)
an instalment book for cash payers
The first instalment
There is a section on the wall planner drawing attention to the difficulties which may be experienced by people wishing to use the direct debit facility.
IF YOU HAVE NOT ALREADY SENT A DIRECT DEBIT FORM TO THE COUNCIL, YOU SHOULD PAY THE APRIL INSTALMENT IN CASH OR BY CHEQUE.
Please remember to send the direct debit form to this office as soon as possible to allow time for it to be processed for the May instalment.
Special relief for the disabled and elderly
It has not been possible, in the time available, to assess entitlement to special relief.
It is intended that all the applications, received so far, will be processed, and accounts adjusted, before the May instalment becomes due.
If you believe you may be entitled to special relief and have not completed a form please request one as soon as possible so that your entitlement may be assessed.
Community charge rebate for people on lower incomes
There has been a very large response to the Council's campaign to encourage people to apply for a rebate on the community charge.
The vast majority of applications have been dealt with, but there are still some which need to be processed.
If you have applied but, as yet, have not been advised of the outcome, please contact the Council to obtain information on the latest position.
If you have not applied but think you may be entitled to rebate, please request a form from the Finance Department.
If you do not understand the details enclosed please contact the Finance Department where the staff will be pleased to assist.
PLEASE TURN OVER
The Government as assessed the combined spending needs of the Cherwell District Council and the parishes in it's area at £91.49 per personal charge payer.
The average requirements are in fact considerably less and the details are set out below.
PLEASE TURN OVER
Personal Community Charge
Explanatory Notes
THE COMMUNITY CHARGE replaces domestic rates, i.e. rates on houses, flats and other living accommodation.
There are three types of charge:
the personal community charge which most adults have to pay
the standard community charge which people with more than one home may have to pay
the collective community charge paid by landlords of buildings with mostly short-term residents who are difficult to register in the normal way
CHERWELL DISTRICT COUNCIL is the authority (known as the charging authority) which has the job of collecting community charges on behalf of itself and the other authorities in your area.
YOUR AUTHORITIES' PLANS: The spending plans for each of the local authorities in your area are shown separately on your bill so that you can see how they affect the level of your community charge and how they compare with the amounts for a standard level of service (see next note).
More detailed information can be found in the information accompanying this bill.
STANDARD LEVEL OF SERVICE: These amounts are the Government's view, for the purpose of sharing out Government Standard Spending Grant (see next note), of the appropriate level of spending for the authorities in your area to enable them to provide broadly a standard level of service, taking into account the particular circumstances of the area.
The standard level of service is determined by reference to the total level of revenue spending the Government thinks appropriate for all local authorities in England.
Local authorities and other spending bodies are free to provide a different level of service and may vary in their efficiency.
GOVERNMENT STANDARD SPENDING GRANT: The amount of Standard Spending Grant (Otherwise known as Revenue Support Grant) for each area is calculated on the basis that (subject to the effect of the safety net) a standard level of service can broadly be provided everywhere in England for the same community charge — this year £278.
But as regards the City of London there are special arrangements in relation to business rate income to enable this to happen.
BUSINESS RATES: These are rates charged on properties other than domestic property.
the business rate poundage is the same for all non-domestic ratepayers except that it may be different in the City of London.
It is set annually by the Government and cannot rise by more than the rate of inflation.
Business rate payments go into a central pool managed by the Department of the Environment.
Each charging authority gets from that pool a sum proportional to the number of community chargepayers in its area.
OTHER GOVERNMENT GRANTS: The Government also provides specific grants to local authorities to help with particular kinds of spending, for example on housing, police services, grants to students, in-service teacher training and social services training.
The bill mentions the amounts of the specific grants estimated to be received by the local authorities in your area.
Your authorities' plans are shown less the amounts of these Government grants; and of fees, charges and other income which they estimate they will receive (on which see next note).
FEES, CHARGES AND OTHER INCOME: Your authorities raise income by imposing fees or charges for the use of their services and receive other income such as interest on investments.
THE SAFETY NET: In the first year of the new system (1990–1) an area safety net will protect areas in which the community charge (on the Government's assumption about spending would otherwise be more than £25 higher than the average rate bill per adult in 1989–1990 (plus an allowance for inflation).
This protection is paid for by chargepayers in areas which would otherwise have charges lower than the average rate bill per adult.
If your area is shown as receiving a contribution from the safety net, it is helping to provide the protection for other areas.
Protection will be phased out over the following three years (1991–92 to 1993–94).
If your area receives protection in this period, it will be paid for by the Government.
Areas which contributed to the safety net in the first year (1990–91) will not make any contribution after 1990–91.
This means that, for many areas, the full community charge will be in place in all area, except those receiving special Government grant because they have taken over the education service from ILEA.
ADJUSTMENTS: The main adjustments are to take into account your charging authority's estimate of
any shortfall arising from the authority's being unable to collect all the community charges due from the people on the community charges register;
income from standard community charges;
changes in income due to movement of people on and off the community charges.
TRANSITIONAL RELIEF: Personal community chargepayers in some properties may be entitled to relief in the first three years following the changeover from rates to the community charge.
Relief is calculated by reference to the difference between an assumed rate bill for 1989–90 and the community charge which your authority would set if authorities in the area were spending in 1990–91 in line with assumptions made by the Government.
extra help is available for elderly and disabled persons if they and their partners (if any) did not formerly pay rates or rent.
For further details about transitional relief ask your charging authority — the address and telephone number are included with this bill.
REBATES: People on low incomes are entitled to community charge benefit of up to 80% to help pay the remaining 20%.
Further details on rebates and on how to apply can be got from the charging authority at the address and telephone numbers included with this bill.
If you think that you may qualify, but have not yet applied, it is important that you should do so immediately.
These rebates are paid for largely by the Government.
PENALTY: If an amount is shown in respect of a penalty or penalties being recovered under the bill and you have not previously been informed of the ground on which it has or they have been imposed, further particulars will be found in the information accompanying the bill.
STUDENTS pay ⅕ of the personal community charge for the period during which they are undertaking a full-time course of education.
Students are not eligible for community charge benefit in respect of such a period, but may be eligible for transitional relief.
Students who are entitled to transitional relief will receive ⅕ of the relief they would have received if they had been paying the full community charge.
RATE-INCLUSIVE RENTS: A booklet called ‘You and the Community Charge-Rents’ has been issued by the Department of the Environment.
It explains the position of tenants whose rates were not paid separately but were included in their rent.
The booklet can be obtained from the Department of the Environment, Room N6/20, 2 Marsham Street, London, SW1P 3EB.
YOUR GUIDE TO COMMUNITY CHARGE REGISTRATION.
The Community Charge Authority for Oxford
From 1st April, 1990, Domestic Rates will be abolished.
They will be replaced by a new tax called COMMUNITY CHARGE or POLL TAX
Nearly everybody who is 18 or over will have to pay the Personal Community Charge/Poll Tax.
People who have a second property may also be liable for the Standard Community Charge/Poll Tax.
Some Landlords who let out properties where the majority of tenants are resident for short periods of time, may be liable for the Collective Community Charge/Poll Tax.
By 1st December, 1989 we have to compile a Register of all those people in the Oxford City Area who will pay Community Charge/Poll Tax.
We shall begin by sending a CANVASS FORM to each household.
The leaflet gives you the facts about the Canvass.
1.
WHAT WILL THE CANVASS FORM ASK FOR?
The Canvass Form (or Community Charge Registration Form) will ask you for the manes and dates of birth of everybody living in the property who will be 18 or over by 1st April 1991.
You will also be asked if any of these people are students.
This is because full-time students will only have to pay one fifth of the Personal Community Charge.
2.
WHEN WILL I GET THE CANVASS FORM?
We shall send one Canvass Form to every property in the Oxford City area around 22nd May, 1989.
IT MUST BE RETURNED BY 12th JUNE 1989.
A PREPAID ENVELOPE WILL BE PROVIDED.
3.
WHO HAS TO COMPLETE THE CANVASS FORM?
The Canvass Form will be addressed to ‘the Occupier’.
It should be completed by one person on behalf of all residents at the property.
The person who signs the form should be 18 or over.
This person is responsible for ensuring that the information given is true, accurate and complete.
However, this person cannot be held responsible for the charges due from the other residents.
There is an exception to this:—
Men and women who live together as couples can be held responsible for each others charges if either party does not pay.
4.
WHAT WILL YOU DO WITH THE INFORMATION I GIVE YOU?
The information on the form will be transferred onto the Community Charge Register, which is held on a computer.
The Register will contain:—
your name and address
the dates that you will pay from and to
whether or not you are a student
the type of charge payable (ie, Personal, Standard or Collective)
the address of the property if the charge is Standard or Collective.
Each person whose name appears on the Register will be sent their own Community Charge Bill around 1st April, 1990, unless they are exempt.
5.
WILL ANYBODY BE ABLE TO SEE THE REGISTER?
No.
The full Register as described in question 4 will be confidential.
Individuals may obtain details of their own entry from the Community Charge Registration Officer.
There will, however, be a shorter version of the Register, known as the ‘Extract’, available for public inspection.
This will contain only your last name, initials and address.
6.
WILL MY NAME AND ADDRESS HAVE TO APPEAR IN THE PUBLIC EXTRACT?
No.
If you fear the threat of violence you can ask to be excluded from the public extract.
We shall be writing to you again around August 1989 to ask you whether you would prefer to be excluded.
7.
WHAT WILL HAPPEN IF I DON'T REGISTER?
You are required by law to provide us with the following information:—
your name and address
the name and address of everyone resident in the property who will be 18 or over on or before 1st April 1990.
If you do not give us this information, or you give false information, you may be subject to a penalty of £50 for the first offence and £200 for any subsequent offence.
8.
I THINK I MAY BE EXEMPT, DO I STILL NEED TO PUT MY NAME ON THE CANVASS FORM?
Yes.
We shall be writing to you around August 1989 to check that the information that we intend to put onto the Register about you is correct.
We shall also send you details at this stage of those people who will not have to pay Community Charge because they are exempt.
If you think that you may be one of these people, there will be a form for you to complete and return to us.
We will then let you know whether you are exempt or not as soon as possible.
9.
I'M WORRIED THAT I WON'T BE ABLE TO AFFORD TO PAY THE CHARGE.
WHAT CAN I DO?
People with a low income will be able to apply for Community Charge Benefit.
The amount you will get will depend on your income and personal circumstances.
The maximum benefit will be 80% or the charge.
So, people who qualify for maximum benefit will still have to pay one fifth of the Community Charge.
Community Charge Benefit Forms will be available around November 1989.
If you have a low income, please make sure you apply for Community Charge Benefit.
10.
WHAT HAPPENS IF I MOVE?
Please notify us immediately, at the address below, if you move after you have returned the Canvass Form.
If you move out of this area, you should also contact the Community Charge Authority for your new address.
AND FINALLY…
If you have any further questions or would like some help with completing the Canvass Form, please contact us on Oxford 741669.
THE BUSINESS RATE 1990
OXFORD CITY COUNCIL
The new Business Rate, also known as the National Non-Domestic Rate (NNDR), will come into effect at the same time as the Community Charge/Poll Tax on 1st April 1990. this leaflet is intended to outline the changes that are being made to the rating system and show how these changes will affect businesses in Oxford.
This information is based on what is known at the present time, which is August 1989.
As you prepare for the change in 1990 you should bear in mind that further regulations on the new Business Rate are still to be published.
BUSINESS RATES NOW
At present rates are calculated from the rateable value of business premises and the local rate poundage.
The rateable value is set by the local valuation office, which is a branch of the Inland Revenue.
The rateable value reflects annual rental values for 1973 when the last valuation of business properties was carried out.
The rate poundage is set by local councils and for Oxford in 1989–90 it is 291.1p in the pound.
The rates collected contribute both to City Council and County Council services.
The amount each business pays is the rateable value multiplied by the rate poundage.
HOW WILL THE NEW BUSINESS RATE WORK?
There are two key elements to the new Business Rate.
First is a revaluation of business properties to update rateable values.
Second is a single rate poundage which will be set nationally by the government rather than local councils.
REVALUATION OF BUSINESS PROPERTIES
There will be a revaluation of all business premises in the country to provide wholly new rateable values before the change to the new Business Rate in April 1990.
The new rateable values will be based on current annual rents.
A sample survey carried out by the Inland Revenue throughout the country suggests that the average national increases will be 7½ times the 1973 level.
However parts of Oxford may be valued significantly higher than this because some changes in rental values are significantly greater than the national average.
A list of the new rateable values will be published by the local valuation office in Marston Road by 31st December 1989.
If you disagree with the new valuation you will be able to appeal by proposing a change to the valuation officer between 1st April and 1st October 1990.
If the valuation officer does not agree with the proposed change and agreement cannot be reached, the matter will go to the Local Valuation and Community Charge Tribunal.
THE NATIONAL RATE POUNDAGE
A uniform poundage, called a multiplier, will be set by Central Government and levied throughout the country.
The uniform poundage will be set by Central Government and levied throughout the country.
The uniform poundage will be set by the government in April 1990 at a level to ensure that, taking account of inflation, the total amount that the business sector pays nationally in 1990–91 figure paid in 1989–90.
A sample survey from the Inland Revenue suggests that the multiplier will be in the range of 30–35p per £1 of the rateable value.
For subsequent annual multipliers the increase will be linked to the retail price index, although the Chancellor of the Exchequer may specify a lower rate.
After April 1990 a business will pay the new rateable value multiplied by the national multiplier, the uniform poundage.
THE EFFECTS OF THE NEW SYSTEM ON INDIVIDUAL BUSINESSES
Businesses will still receive a rate demand from Oxford City Council and businesses will pay their rates, as now, to the Council.
It is clear that nationally, some businesses will pay less than at present and some will pay more.
How an individual business will be affected will depend on the combined effect of the revaluation and the switch to the national multiplier, the uniform poundage.
CUSHIONING THE CHANGES
In order to give businesses time to adjust to their new rate liability, the change in the amount of rates to be paid by a business will be phased in probably over 5 years.
From April 1990 no rate bill will rise by more than 20% of the previous year's rates, once a figure for inflation has been added on.
Small businesses, which are those with new rateable values of less than £5,000, will be limited to a 15% increase each year, once inflation has been added.
A decrease in rates payable will also be limited to 10% and 15% for small businesses.
These limits will apply each year during the phasing-in period of the new Business Rate until the new rate is reached.
They will apply to all business properties which were first occupied on or before 31st March 1990.
AN EXAMPLE OF HOW IT WOULD WORK
Here is an example of how the changes might affect a small business, with a 15% phased increase each year.
The figures we have used are made up and are not intended to indicate any trend in Oxford.
The small firm faces an increase in rateable value from £250 a year to £3,000 a year.
By the third year the phasing has overtaken the full rate so the full rate is paid.
WHAT HAPPENS WHEN THE RATES HAVE BEEN COLLECTED?
The money that each local authority collects as Business Rates will be sent to central government for redistribution to all local authorities in the country.
The amount each local authority receives is likely to be calculated on the number of people in each area who are on the Poll Tax Register.
Hence the amount of Business Rate each local authority receives will bear no relation to the amount actually collected in each area.
THE BUSINESS RATE AND THE POLL TAX
The new Business Rate is another part of the Local Government Finance Act 1988 which is the law governing the Poll Tax.
Both the Poll Tax and the Business rate come into force on 1st April 1990.
The principal difference between the two is that the Poll Tax is a charge on individuals and the Business Rate is a charge on business properties.
However, if the property where your business operates is also used as a person's home, only the business element will be taken into account when it is revalued.
Each person over 18 using the property as their sole or main residence will be personally liable to pay the Poll Tax, unless they are exempt.
MORE INFORMATION
If you would like to know more about the Business Rate please ring the Rating Department of the City Treasurer on (0865) 249811.
They will be pleased to help you with specific questions and will give you as much general information as they can.
This information was accurate at the time of going to print, which was August 1989.
Produced by Oxford City Council
THE POLL TAX AND WOMEN
Oxford City Council
START HERE
This is one in a series of leaflets about the Poll Tax written for people in Oxford.
This leaflet deals with some of the effects of the Poll Tax on women.
If you would like to read a general introduction to the Poll Tax, you can get a copy of ‘The Poll Tax and You’ by phoning Oxford 741669.
1989!
On 1st April 1989, annual domestic rate bills were sent out for the last time.
By 1st April 1990, one year later, the Government will have abolished domestic rates and replaced them with a tax called the Community Charge or Poll Tax.
The Government has instructed all Local Authorities in the country to prepare registers of everyone in their area who will have to pay this new tax.
nearly everyone who is 18 or over and who lives in Oxford will have to pay the Personal Poll Tax in Oxford.
HOW WILL WE KNOW WHO TO CHARGE?
In May this year the Registration Officer, who is the person responsible for collecting Poll Tax, will send out a form to every household asking for the name, address and date of birth of everyone who will be 18 or over by 1st April 1991 (that is, everyone who will be 17 or over when Poll Tax is introduced).
The Registration Officer will then compile a Register of everyone in Oxford who will be 18 or over by 1st April 1990.
WHAT WILL BE HELD ON THE POLL TAX REGISTER?
The poll Tax Register is confidential.
For most people it will contain:
their full name and whether they are Ms., Mrs., Miss,.
etc.
their address
that they are paying the Personal Poll Tax
when they became liable to pay the Poll Tax in Oxford.
when they are no longer liable for the poll Tax in Oxford.
The Poll Tax Register will be held on a computer and each person will only be able to see their own entry.
THE PUBLIC PART OF THE REGISTER
A part of the full Poll Tax Register, known as the Public Extract, will be available for anyone to inspect.
However the Public Extract will only contain:
your present name.
your initials.
your address.
It will not show whether you are male or female.
It will not show your marital status.
WOMEN WHO FEAR VIOLENCE
If you are afraid that you, or someone you know, could be threatened with violence if your name appears in the Public Extract of the Poll Tax Register, you can ask that your name does not appear on the Extract.
In this case your details will only be held on the confidential Register.
In August 1989 the Registration Officer will ask everyone on the Poll Tax Register if they wish to be taken off the Public Extract because of the Threat of violence.
You can ask at any time that your details are removed, and this will be done at the regular updating of the Extract.
SOME WOMEN WON'T HAVE TO PAY
Some women won't have to pay the Poll Tax.
They are:
women over 18 where child benefit is being paid to parents.
women whose only or main residence is a NHS hospital.
women who are in prison.
women who suffer severe mental impairment.
This will be confirmed by a doctor, and the woman will be receiving severe disablement allowance or invalidity pension or unemployability supplement or unemployability allowance or old age pension.
women who are members of religious communities and have little or no income.
women who are careworkers.
The woman will be employed by a charity or public body and will be resident with the people being cared for.
She will work at least 24 hours a week giving care and earn £25 a week or less.
women who have no fixed abode.
HOW TO PAY THE POLL TAX
Every person who is 18 or over will be sent their own Poll Tax bill and everyone will have the right to pay in 10 monthly instalments.
Some women are financially dependent on other members of the family and so may be dependent on someone else to pay their Poll Tax bill.
Some women may wish to pay the Poll Tax bill of another member of the family.
You can arrange with the Registration Officer for another member of your family to pay your Poll Tax bill, and you can arrange to pay the Poll Tax bill of someone else.
Remember that whatever arrangements are made within families, in law each individual remains responsible if their Poll Tax bill is not paid.
However there is one exception…
LIVING AS A COUPLE
If a woman and a man are living together as a couple, the woman can be charged her partner's Poll Tax if he does not pay, and the man can be charged the woman's Poll Tax if she does not pay.
This is known as ‘joint and several liability’.
It only applies to women and men living as couples.
So if your relationship breaks down you cannot be charged each other 's Poll Tax bills, even if you are still living in the same house.
HOW MUCH WILL IT BE?
You won't know exactly how much your Poll Tax will be until closer to April 1990, but a projected estimate is that each person will be charged about £350 in the first year of Poll Tax.
This figure is an estimate and may change.
HELP WITH PAYING THE POLL TAX BILL
It is very important that you claim Poll Tax benefit to reduce the amount of your Poll Tax bill that you pay.
Poll Tax benefit forms will be sent to everyone on the Register towards the end of 1989.
The amount of benefit you get will depend on your personal circumstances.
However even if you get maximum assistance with the Poll Tax, you will still have to pay a fifth of your Poll tax bill.
On present estimates this will be £70.
Women and men living together as couples who apply for Poll Tax benefit will have their joint incomes assessed when the amount of benefit is calculated.
ANY OTHER QUESTIONS?
If you have any questions about the Poll tax it is very important that you ask.
Staff in the Registration Officer's department will be happy to help you with any questions or difficulties about how you or anyone else you are concerned about will be affected by this new tax.
They will give you advice on completing forms and as much general information about the Poll tax as they can.
This leaflet is a summary of how the Poll Tax will affect women.
There are other leaflets produced by Oxford City Council for your information.
Look out for them, or phone the Poll tax/Community Charge office.
This information was accurate at the time of going to print, which was May 1989.
Oxford City Council Elections Thursday 3rd May
green party
Caring for people…and the environment
green party — politics for life
The Green Party is committed to policies and an economic system which cares for all people and the environment.
TRANSPORT
Oxford's roads are congested, polluted and dangerous.
The Green Party will:
Pedestrianise the city centre.
Consider installing a tram or trolleybus system.
Restrict heavy goods vehicles within the ring road.
Extend traffic calming measures in residential streets.
Make cycling safer and create more cycle paths.
PLANNING AND HOUSING
Oxford's green fields are being overwhelmed and its historic character lost to luxury developments, while homelessness grows.
The Green Party will:
Protect all green field sites from development.
Create new Local Nature Reserves.
Only support new housing developments where 50% of new houses are low cost for rent.
Protect tenants' rights.
Give priority to energy efficiency measures.
The Green Party believes that local people have the right to decide how their communities are run.
The powers of local government have steadily been eroded.
The Green Party wants to return power to local communities and make local government more open and accountable through freedom of information and proportional representation.
RECYCLING
Oxford wastes both money and resources by failing to recycle domestic waste.
The Green Party will:
Set up pilot projects to collect sorted waste from households.
Provide bottle, paper and can banks within residential areas.
Give community recycling schemes financial support.
Recycle 60% of domestic waste by 2000.
POLL TAX
The Poll tax is an unjust and unacceptable way of raising local revenue.
Nationally, the Green Party will replace the Poll Tax with a system of local income and land taxes, based on ability to pay.
Locally, Green Councillors will:
Do everything possible to oppose the Poll Tax.
Support alternative ways of funding local government, such as‘Not the Poll Tax’.
Support small businesses affected by the Local Business Rate.
Dear Voter,
I am again offering Green Party members and sympathisers in North Ward, the opportunity to vote Green.
I stood as the Green Party candidate in May 1988 and 1989.
Since then, it daily becomes clearer to more and more people that Green issues must now be taken seriously, especially in Planning and Environmental matters.
We all must work together to find Transport alternatives to be rid of the present traffic-hells of Oxford and other cities, and this is urgent.
Overleaf is a brief summary of the Manifesto published by Oxford Green Party for this election: this gives you an outline of the Party's main policies.
I am a retired Museum Director, an archaeologist and historian.
I have lived in North Oxford since September 1978 ad been actively involved locally, eg. in Community Education, the Port Meadow Enquiries and Walton Street Coop Shop Committee.
Since 1988 I have been working with Oxford and Jericho Against the Poll Tax and am now participating in a scheme, devised by Oxford Quakers and the Green Party, to pay the tax as a group, according to one's means: ie. a local income tax.
I oppose the Poll Tax because it is unfair and the legislation was a botched-job, never properly thought out!
I see it as part of the present government's determination to reduce the power of Local Government, and centralise power and financial control at Westminster.
Whereas, one of the Green Party's basic principles is belief in the autonomy of local communities, so far as this is practical.
So I hope that you will vote for the environment and local democracy by VOTING GREEN on 3rd MAY.
Should you want to be in touch, my number is Oxford 513625.
Jocelyn Morris
green party — politics for life
Oxford City Council Elections Thursday, May 3rd
DEBORAH MANLEY for North Ward
VOTE LABOUR
Labour
Putting people first
OXFORD'S HOMES
The Government has stopped Oxford City from building Council accommodation.
Council Houses are a valuable asset for those who cannot buy or afford private rents.
The Council:
Helps local housing associations to provide homes for rent and low cost owner occupation.
Opened new local housing offices to improve repairs and services.
Held Council rents down — the £2.50 increase was in the face of Tory Government demands for £4.50.
Has reduced the number of families in bed and breakfast accommodation.
Has backed the Private Tenants' Group to try to improve standards and conditions in bed-sit land.
Continued to support elderly owner occupiers to remain in their own homes.
LISTENING TO LOCAL PEOPLE
Your Labour Council involves people in council decision and cares about the people of Oxford.
It:
Holds open public meetings on all important planning, traffic and recreation decisions.
Holds forums for pensioners and students.
Grant aids voluntary groups throughout the City.
Keeps recreation prices low — free for City residents on low incomes.
Works to improve access for people with disabilities.
Helps tenants and residents to set up new associations.
Runs a women's training centre with child care so that women can learn trades and skills.
THE POLL TAX
Labour condemns the Government's Poll Tax because it is unfair, undemocratic and bears no relationship to people's ability to pay.
The Tory Poll Tax:
Is unaffordable by many people.
Threatens local services.
Costs £3 million to implement.
Forces every Oxford adult to pay £75 to subsidise other councils.
THE NEXT LABOUR GOVERNMENT WILL ABOLISH THE POLL TAX 
Keep OXFORD LABOUR
OXFORD'S JOBS
The Labour Council is fighting to keep jobs in Cowley.
It has brought together, the community, trade unions and the University in a campaign against closure.
Your council:
Has set up an independent enquiry which will show the effect of closure.
Will continue to create local job through providing grants and premises.
OXFORD'S RECREATION
Your Labour Council, working with local people, voluntary agencies and local businesses, has:
Made Oxford's ice rink, swimming pools and sports facilities some of the best in the country.
Opened a major leisure centre at Blackbird Leys with a variety of activities for all to use.
Come first in the 1989 ‘Britain in Bloom’ competition.
Provided a popular Fun-in-the-Parks programme during the summer.
Refurbished the Old Fire Station Arts Centre to provide a daytime cafe and even bar and live music.
OXFORD'S ENVIRONMENT
Your Labour Council works for a healthy, safe and clean city.
It is:
Promoting a healthy Oxford policy.
Giving awards for the cleanest kitchens and restaurants based on regular inspections.
Fighting factory pollution and noise nuisance problems.
Providing more pelican crossings, cycle lanes and residents' parking schemes.
Installing emergency alarms and heating for elderly people.
We are lucky to live in Oxford and to have in our Labour Council a body which cares not only for our community but also for our environment.
Its concern for our surroundings won the City the national Britain in Bloom award.
We have councillors who both tells us what they are doing and listen to what we want done.
But, of course, there are problems.
Here in North Oxford we have to consider ways to get our streets cleaned better; how to redevelop the area (especially the West of the ward) without spoiling it; and how to cut down the nuisance and pollution of rush hour traffic.
Labour is committed to caring most for the people who need our care: the homeless, those thrown out of institutional care without adequate support, the old and frail, those whose jobs are threatened by change at Cowley.
The Labour Council continues to show its concern for the least fortunate among us at a time when it has to spend time, money and effort attending the demands of increasingly authoritarian central Government and collecting the Tory Poll Tax.
The Poll Tax is grossly unjust.
For many in North Oxford it will mean paying less for council services at the expense of those who are not as well off.
The Labour Council — with our support — must ensure that, at least, those who are giving more from smaller incomes will benefit accordingly.
It is with such an approach: an appeal to your sense of justice and vision of a fair society, that I ask for your vote on 3rd May.
Yours sincerely,
Deborah Manley.
Deborah Manley trained as a social worker but has spent most of her working life in publishing.
She is a writer and freelance editor.
She lived in Oxford a s child and has now settled here again.
She has been a governor of both comprehensive and primary schools and has served as a co-opted member on council social services committees.
For twelve years she was a member of the consumer watchdog for transport in London and Southern England.
She has travelled widely and has lived in four countries in the Commonwealth.
Her special interests are transport, planning and community care.
In all these topics she is concerned that there should be a proper recognition of the needs of the older people in our community.
SAY NO TO THE POLL TAX.
VOTE LABOUR to defend services on Thursday, May 3rd 8am — 9 pm
Oxford West & Abingdon Conservative Association
Dear Resident,
LUCY'S PLANNING APPLICATION — USE OF PART OF NORTH YARD
I am sure you will be interested to know the outcome of the application by Lucy to use part of the North Yard as a temporary training organisation in construction worker skills, for previously unemployed adults.
You will have seen that the ‘Porta-Cabins’ are already on site!
Regrettably, because to forcibly remove the cabins by legal action would take 12 months, the City Council considered they had no option but to approve Lucy's application.
However the consent is for only 12 months.
Unfortunately, the Liberal Democrat Councillor accepted the approval without making any constructive safeguards for the residents.
Fortunately, the Conservative Councillor, whom I had contacted, insisted on demanding that the approval must be conditional to restrictions on noise and traffic control being enforced.
I have already worked to get the best possible compromise for residents regarding the development of Lucy's North Site.
It is vital to have committed efficient representation in the City Council to maintain vigorous observation of the conditions attached to the planning approval and future developments on the site.
Please give me your support on May 3rd so that I can support you.
Yours sincerely, Brenda Thornton 
Conservative Candidate
In Touch ELECTION SPECIAL
BRENDA THORNTON THURSDAY, MAY 3rd 8 a.m. –9 p.m.
VOTE TO MOVE TOWARDS THE SUNNY SIDE OF THE STREET
LABOUR & LIBERAL DEMOCRATS WANT TO KEEP YOU IN THE DARK ABOUT:
Their alternative to the Community Charge.
Although they have been reluctant to disclose their plans they would like to tax people's property and tax their income.
Their refusal to acknowledge the hitherto unfair rating of widows, widowers and single people.
Their naive financial management, wasting money on stop-go projects — The Westgate Extension is only one example.
Their lack of vision in planning — Gloucester Green Coach access and the inconvenient Taxi Point.
That Conservatives lobbied British Rail and were the first to press for proper access to both platforms at Oxford Railway Station for disabled people and those who are unable to carry heavy luggage.
Their wish to hand over control of parking supervision to the County so that there would be no direct line of responsibility for responding to residents' complaints about parking abuse.
That in spite of a vast increase of staff — and manual staff — they are still not manning the services efficiently or even satisfactorily.
Their refusal to face the fact that many schools want to opt out of having their budgeting done for them by remote administrators.
Their refusal to face the fact that many parents do want to have more say in how schools are run.
THIS REVIEW IS NOT A TRACT OF POLITICAL DEMAGOGY.
IT IS A STATEMENT ABOUT THE DAY TO DAY ROUTINE AFFECTING ELECTORS IN THE NORTH WARD COMMUNITY.
YOU NEED TO VOTE FOR ME, BRENDA THORNTON ON MAY 3RD.
Community Charge
LOOK AT YOUR BILL!
Oxford's Community charge will be £489 but don't blame the Government.
Labour-controlled Oxford is the second highest of the 293 County Districts in the Country.
In the County Labour and Liberal Democrats have united to spend over £50 million more than last year.
Conservatives opposed this.
In the City, Labour is spending far more than any of the other Conservative Districts in Oxfordshire.
The City Conservatives produced a budget which kept below Government Guidelines.
Oxford's community charge is 82% above the Government's target — the second highest in the country, including London.
Conservative councillors will cut unnecessary expenditure — and slash your community charge bill.
But we will only win if you vote for us on 3rd May.
MUSEUMS in Oxfordshire
April to December 1990
Programme
Welcome to Oxfordshire's Museums
Oxfordshire has a rich diversity of museums open to the public — are enormously varied in size and in the scope of their collections.
There are six museums run by the University of Oxford and six branch museums run by Oxfordshire Museums Service (Oxfordshire County Council Department of Leisure and Arts).
A variety of independent museum are run by Trusts, local societies, parish councils and enthusiastic individuals.
These are listed by District, and located on the map on the back cover.
This leaflet gives details of opening times, facilities, charges and some of the main exhibitions and events to take place over the coming season.
Information is correct at the time of going to press, but museums may have to vary their hours from time to time and it is worth checking before a special visit is made, especially around Christmas, Easter and Bank Holidays.
Please note that admission to some museums is by appointment only.
UNIVERSITY MUSEUMS
Ashmolean Museum of Art and Archaeology
Britain's oldest public museum (founded 1683) now housed in C R Cockerell's classical building of the 1840s.
On display are the University's rich and diverse collections of British, European, Egyptian and Near Eastern antiquities: European paintings and drawings, sculpture, silver, ceramics and musical instruments, coins and medals in the Heberden Coin Room, Oriental art — Chinese, Japanese, Islamic and Indian metalwork, ceramics, paintings, textiles and sculpture.
Bate Collection of Historical Instruments
The most comprehensive collection in Britain of historical woodwind, brass and percussion instruments; over a dozen historical keyboard instruments; a complete bow-maker's workshop and a collection of bows; the oldest playable Javanese Gamelan orchestra in Britain.
Detailed guide books and catalogues available.
School and other parties welcome (with demonstration, by appointment).
Events: A teaching weekend each term on a different historical instrument, designed both for beginners and the more experienced, and covering both playing and maintenance.
Cathedral Treasury
An exhibition of the plate belonging to the Cathedral and college with a changing display of plate from the parishes of the Diocese.
Christ Church Picture Gallery
Permanent collection of European Old Master paints and changing displays of Old Master drawings, mainly Italian, from the 14th to 18th centuries.
Temporary exhibitions:
February 20 May 15: ‘The Easter Story.’
An exhibition of Old Master drawings, the theme of which is the Passion and Crucifixion of Christ.
February 21 May 18: ‘Tinker, Tailor, Soldier, Sailor.’
A selection of drawings inspired by scenes from everyday life including work by Andrea del Sarto, Federico Zuccaro and Abraham Bloemaert.
May 19 June 9: ‘Watermarks by Elizabeth Williams’.
Our exhibition for Oxford Art Week this year is a collection of photographic sequences in colour by Elizabeth Williams depicting the varying nature of WATER.
May 17 July 25: ‘Decorations and Designs’.
An exhibition illustrating the inventiveness of many 16th and 17th century artists.
It includes drawings for wall decorations, tapestries, silverware, stage designs and even a triumphal car.
July 27 October 25: ‘The Nude’.
A special exhibition which will explore the way in which the Old Masters addressed some of the problems, conventions and techniques of drawing nudes.
Museum of the History of Science
The museum is housed in the oldest public museum building in the country, opened in 1683 as the original Ashmolean Museum.
The displays include scientific instruments dating back to the 16th century, a comprehensive collection of early chemical apparatus, watches and clocks, medical instruments, the original penicillin apparatus and Einstein's blackboard.
University Museum
The museum building is a splendidly imposing Victorian Gothic structure, with rich naturalist carving and one huge glass-roofed gallery housing the University's worldwide collections of zoology, entomology, geology and mineralogy.
Temporary exhibitions: July 8 — August 12 Wildlife Photographer of the Year.
Pitt Rivers Museum
One of the world's greatest ethnographic museums.
Founded in 1884 when General Pitt Rivers gave his collection of ethnology and prehistory to the University, it has now grown into an astonishingly diverse collection of the products of human art and ingenuity from all periods and cultures.
Exhibition of Musical Instruments — to see and hear — and Hunter Gatherers, past and present, are in the nearby Balfour Building.
Temporary exhibitions: May 9 — early 1991: Main Museum The Goddess of Batik: textiles from China.
April 27 — August 11: Balfour Building Sound Threads: Indonesian musical instruments and weaving.
August 18 — January 31 1991: Bells
May — June: At both venues — Upturned Ark: temporary installations by six sculptors.
COUNTY MUSEUMS
Oxfordshire County Museum
The County Museum, in a fine town house with a pleasant garden, has permanent display galleries which tell the story of Oxfordshire — its people, buildings and landscapes — from early times to the present day, and a changing programme of temporary exhibitions.
Temporary exhibitions: March 20–April 15: Tunbridge Wells Painters
April 21 — May 12: Oxfordshire Guild of Glass Engravers
May 21 — June 14: Matisse Prints from Merseyside Contemporary Artists
June 22 — September: Memories of Change
September 7 — November 4: Threads
November 7: Boards Hill Sculpture Photography
December: Crafts Exhibition
Events: Friday June 29 — Sunday July 1: Oxfordshire Crafts Guild Summer Fair; the best of Oxfordshire Crafts in a marquee in the museum garden.
Cogges Manor Farm Museum
The manor house and farm buildings close to the church and river are an open-air museum of farming and the countryside, telling the history of Cogges village over 1,000 years.
The house, dairy, farm buildings, walled garden and orchard show what life there was like eighty years ago.
Events: There is a daily round of activities:
10.30 Housework, cleaning, laundry and Work with the Horse
11.00 and 4.00 Milking
12.30 Feeding the Animals
1.30 Cooking
Every weekend will have events around a theme: lambing, horses, sheepshearing, gardens, scarecrows, cycles, costume and textiles, rugs, Edwardian and Medieval life, woodwork, haymaking, cider-making and the harvest.
4–18 August: Archaeological Excavation, with guides to explain the story as it unfolds.
Cogges Programme available from Oxfordshire County Museum before opening and from the Manor Farm Museum afterwards.
Temporary exhibitions:
April 7 — August 12: A Moment in Time — Paintings of Cogges by Nina Carroll.
Clues on Cogges: A children's activity exhibition.
August 19 — September 11: Exhibition of furniture and wood working by Lucinda Leech.
Museum of Oxford
The museum tells the story of the City and the University: history, archaeology, architecture and environment, and is the starting point for anyone who wants to learn more about Oxford.
Situated opposite the Information Centre, it is housed in the historic Town Hall, also the meeting point for Oxford Walking Tours.
In addition to ancient, medieval and later objects, there are maps, plans, many excellent models and reconstructed Oxford interiors from the 16th century to the present day.
Temporary exhibitions: April 7 — May 12 — Memories of Change.
Oxfordshire in World War II — an oral and visual account.
(Exhibition Room)
May 19 — June 2: Art week Information Display.
Oxford and Oxfordshire participants and where and when they can be found.
(Lecture Room)
May 19 — June 22: The Oxfordshire Craft Guild's Artweek Exhibition.
Bookbinding, calligraphy, jewellery making and potting; demonstrations and workshops each Tuesday and Thursday during the exhibition period; sales.
(Exhibition Room)
May 23 — June 9: Art from Casts.
Contemporary paintings and drawings inspired by ancient sculpture in the Ashmolean's cast gallery.
Five artists; sales.
(Old Library)
July and August: JNL Myres: An Oxford Career in Retrospect.
(Exhibition Room)
September 1–22: Afghan Arts.
September 25 — October 27: Colour Works.
Maggie White, Hugh Dunford-Wood and Mary Rose Young: silk, ceramics and knitting.
(Exhibition Room)
November 6 — January 5 1991: Payne and Son — A Family business: 1790–1990.
Two centuries of silver from an outstanding Oxfordshire family firm.
(Exhibition Room)
Events: A talk, demonstration or gallery tour is held each Thursday lunchtime, 1.15–1.45.
Bring your lunch — coffee available.
Banbury Museum
Admission Free
The museum, overlooking Banbury Cross, tells the story of ‘Banburyshire’; it is housed in the old boardroom of the Poor Law Guardians.
A new introductory video has been installed for the 1990 season.
On the ground floor there is a temporary exhibition gallery with an exciting programme.
The museum holds a comprehensive collection of photographs and glass plate negatives of the region; most of these can be viewed on microfiche, by appointment with the curator, and copies can be ordered.
Collections and archives of information on ‘Banburyshire’ are available for consultation and the curator welcomes enquiries and the opportunity to identify local finds.
School groups can be accommodated in a lecture room where project work or pre-arranged activities can be provided in conjunction with the displays.
Out of school Saturday afternoon sessions and special events are regularly organised.
Temporary exhibitions:
April 4 — June 2: ‘Showcase’— A celebration of Oxfordshire Museums and their collections.
October 2 — February 2: ‘M40 Project 1990’— Special events and activities marking the opening of the M40 — throughout the summer — culminating in a special exhibition.
A separate programme of exhibitions and displays in the Coffee Bar of work for sale by local artists is available from the museum.
Abingdon Museum
The museum is housed in the Old County Hall, built in 1677 (possibly to designs by Sir Christopher Wren) when Abingdon was the county town of Berkshire.
The displays illustrate the local history and archaeology of the town and surrounding area with relics of the abbey and some of the borough plate.
Temporary exhibitions:
May 20 — July 15: Bigos — Polish Artists in Britain including paintings, ceramics, photography and installations.
A programme of performance art to be announced with this exhibition.
August 13 — October 14: Unearthed in Abingdon — An exhibition about recent excavations in the town.
November 19 — January 1991: Oxford Paintmakers — an exhibition for Christmas and the New Year.
Vale and Downland Museum Centre
Housed in a converted 16th/17th century cloth merchant's house with modern extensions and a reconstructed barn, the museum has permanent displays showing the geology, local history and archaeology of Wantage and the Vale of the White Horse, and a programme of temporary exhibitions.
In the upper gallery local community groups are invited to exhibit on local issues — current exhibition is ‘Blocked up in Wantage’— the story of the town's sewers.
As a branch museum of the County service, schools are warmly invited to use the museum and education room.
Contact the curator or the education officer, County Museum Woodstock.
Temporary exhibitions:
March 1 — April 8: Nick Schlee: Paintings of the Ridgeway.
A local artist interprets the colours and shapes of the Ridgeway.
June 12 — July 29: Wildlife Photography: Photographs by Alistair Shay.
Contact the museum or watch local press for a comprehensive list of current exhibitions.
Events: The museum operates a programme of events and workshops throughout the year.
These include guided walks, talks and workshops.
Often these must be booked in advance.
Full details from the museum.
Programme includes:—
Saturday workshop with artist Nick Schlee
Afternoon talks on Oxfordshire Samplers by Sally Barker
Guided walks of the Ridgeway
In addition a programme of children's events takes place every school holiday.
INDEPENDENT MUSEUMS Oxford
Museum of Modern Art
One of the leading centres in Europe for the visual arts: changing exhibitions of international twentieth century art, design, photography, film, video and performance.
Lively supporting programme of lectures, seminars, workshops and performances.
MOMA celebrates its 25th anniversary in 1990 with a particularly fine programme.
Sculpture, photography, architecture, drawing, printmaking and design; lectures, workshops and performances.
Temporary exhibitions:
April 1 — May 27: Devetsil: Czech Avant-Garde Art, Architecture and Design in the 1920s and '30s.
Marin Parr: The Cost of Living (photography).
June 1–10: Art Creating Society.
Exhibition and conference on art beyond the museum.
September 23 — November 25: Signs of the Times: New Media in British Art in the 1980s.
December 16 — March 1991: Andrew Derain
British Telecom Museum
The exhibits comprise a selection of telephone and telegraph equipment illustrating the history and evolution of telecommunications.
Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry Regimental Museum
The militaria of the county regiment of Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire, now incorporated in the Royal Green Jackets.
Includes a fine medal collection, uniforms, badges, pictures and regimental silver.
The Rotunda Museum of Antique Dolls Houses
A fine private collection of over 40 historic dolls' houses (1700–1900) with their period furniture, carpets, dinner services, silver, miniature and books and inhabitants.
INDEPENDENT MUSEUMS South Oxfordshire
Benson Veteran Cycle Museum
A fine collection of about 450 veteran bicycles dating from 1818 to 1930.
Didcot Railway Centre
Recreating the golden age of the Great Western Railway: regular programme of steaming days on first and last Sundays of each month from March, Bank Holidays, all Sundays June — August, all Wednesdays in August.
Events: Spring Steam Gala 26 May — 3 June.
Day for Disabled 8 July.
Autumn Steam Gala 29/30 September.
Photographers' Evening 27 October.
Santa Steamings 2, 9, 16, 23 December.
Pendon Museum of Landscape and Transport
 Skilfully detailed miniature landscapes, including working trains of the 1930s set in the wilds of Dartmoor and farms and cottages grouped in a typical village from the Vale of White Horse.
Also railway relics.
Temporary exhibitions: James Vickery Collection of Railway Art and Memorabilia until Easter
Events: Special showings for parties travelling by Preserved Bus from GWS Didcot May 29 — June 1.
Tickets available at Didcot.
Dorchester Abbey Museum
Exhibition on the rich history of Dorchester area from early times, with aerial photos of prehistoric sites, displays of Roman, Saxon and Medieval material, and unusual items from the Old Grammar School dating from 1652.
Events: Abbey festival in June: details from The Rectory, Dorchester-on-Thames.
Fawley Court Historic House and Museum
Splendid collection of historic Polish material — paintings, books documents, arms and armour — housed in a fine late 17th century house and in part of a 12th century manor house.
Events: Mozart Concert 28 July 7.30 pm
Wallingford Museum
A permanent exhibition depicting 1,000 years of Wallingford's history, from Saxon Town to present day, with a special display on the Castle: temporary exhibitions.
Temporary exhibitions:
March 1 — July 6: Witta's People: 2000 years of Long Wittenham's history.
July 17 — October 31: Payne and Son: A family Business 1790 1990: A celebration of 200 years of a local firm.
November 6–30: Children's Local History Competition Exhibition.
Combe Mill
Mid-19th century sawmill, with working steam beam-engine, original Cornish boiler and a working blacksmith's forge.
A pattern-maker's shop on the first floor houses a collection of tools, models and displays of the Society's collection.
Events: Steaming dates: May 20, August Bank Holiday Sunday and Monday, 26/27, October 21: 10 to 5.
Swinford Museum
Housed in a 17th century cottage, this fine collection of local domestic, agricultural, trade and craft tools forms one of Oxfordshire's oldest small museums, set up by Mr George Swinford in the 1920s.
Tolsey Museum
The social and industrial history of this splendid Cotswold town, with varied material including a fine dolls' house, the Royal Charters and town maces houses in the 16th-century Council Chambers.
Events: Exhibition of Burford's past.
INDEPENDENT MUSEUMS of West Oxfordshire
Charlbury Museum
Museum displays illustrating the traditional crafts and industries of Charlbury, with maps and photographs.
Temporary exhibitions:
Annual exhibition to coincide with the street fair in September.
Chipping Norton Museum
Housed in the former Baptist church schoolroom, displays feature exhibitions on Bliss Tweed Hill, Hitchman's brewery, GWR station and other items of local interest including the Chipping Norton Roman head.
Temporary exhibitions: Medical Services.
Oxford Bus Museum Trust
The museum houses over 40 vehicles, from the Oxford horse trams to the buses of the 1960s, some roadworthy, others in course of restoration.
INDEPENDENT MUSEUMS Cherwell
Bloxham Village Museum
The museum is housed in the Old Court House, which still belongs to the Bloxham Feoffees, trustees of the ancient Bloxham charities.
The collection reflects past life in this ancient and beautiful village, one of the largest in the ironstone area of North Oxfordshire.
Temporary exhibitions:
until June 3: ‘Old Bloxham in Photographs’.
People, places and events, together with objects relating to the photographs.
June 10 — November 11: ‘Bloxham Schools’.
— The development of Bloxham's schools over 380 years.
December 9 — June 9 1991: ‘Forward From Fossils’.
The story of Bloxham through the centuries.
Edge Hill Battle Museum
On 23 October 1642, the Army of Parliament commanded by Robert Devereaux, 3rd Earl of Essex, clashed at Edge Hill with a Royalist Army commanded by King Charles I. Thirty thousand Englishmen fought this, the first major battle of the English Civil Wars.
The museum commemorates the events of that day, and of those times, with displays of arms, armour and period costume, together with dioramas and maps of the Battle.
Events: Occasional ‘Living History’ days throughout the year.
Guided tours of the Battlefield by arrangement.
Contact museum in advance for details.
INDEPENDENT MUSEUMS Vale of White Horse
Granary Museum, Claydon
Housed in a former granary and cowshed, the displays show 19th and early 20th century material from the homes, farms, offices and craftsmen's workshops of North Oxfordshire.
Also shown are a 1912 Aveling and Porter Steam Roller, diesel rollers, tractors and other stationary steam engines.
Events: Second Vintage Fayre Sat4/Sunday 5 August Admission: Adults £1.50, children and OAPs 75p
Champs Chapel Museum
Displays of material of local interest, housed in an interesting 15th century chapel.
Uffington, Tom Brown's School Museum
The life and works of Thomas Hughes, author of Tom Brown's Schooldays, with other historical material from the area.
Gallery displays are changed annually.
Oxmus Club
A museum club for 8 to 14-year-olds which meets during the school holidays in a museum within Oxford City.
Meetings include all kinds of activities reflecting the variety of things to see and do in Oxford's Museums.
Meetings open to members only — SAE to:
Programme 1990–1991
11 April 1990: Pitt Rivers Museum
Weave a story, spin a tale.
Be your own graphic designer.
18 April 1990: Museum of Oxford/University Museum
Environmental Fair.
Open invitation to parents and OXMUS members.
30 May 1990: Christ Church Picture Gallery
The Butcher's shop.
Food for thought.
9 June 1990: University Museum
Insect safari.
Hunting with an entomologist.
23 June 1990: University Museum
Animal Antics.
Can you beat the animals at their own games?
25 July 1990: Ashmolean Museum
Images in words.
From mummies to Milais — what catches your imagination?
13 August 1990: OXMUS Picnic
Ambling at Avebury.
A coach trip for all the family.
24 October 1990: British Telecom Museum
It's you we answer to.
Come and see what we mean.
22 December 1990: County Museum
Wassailing in Woodstock.
Fun activities to capture to Christmas spirit!
2 January 1991: Bate Collection
Details to be announced.
20 February 1991: Museum of the History of Science
The Multicoloured Dream Coat.
Looking at light and colour.
Museum Friends
Friends can help museums in many ways — they are in great demand to help fill the gap between an ideal museum service and the reality of limited resources with which most museums struggle.
Volunteers serve at refreshment counters, give guided tours, run educational activities, do conservation and display work, cataloguing and sorting — there are jobs for any skill you may have.
In return the museums can offer a wide range of privileges and special activities — they vary from museum to museum.
Look in the list below to find one that suits your interests.
Most of the Independent museums have a Trust or Society through which you can offer your help.
Enquire on your next visit!
OXFORDSHIRE MUSEUMS ADVISORY COUNCIL
DON'T LOSE YOUR VOTE if you are away from home or ill or have moved house
INTRODUCTION
Up till now, anyone who was away on holiday when an election was held lost the right to vote, and some people who were away because of their work lost their vote too.
Now the law has changed.
As long as there is a good reason why you will not be able to vote in person on election day you can apply to vote by post or proxy.
This leaflet tells you how:
if you will be away on holiday (in the UK or abroad);
if your work will take you away from home;
if you have moved house since October 10 last;
if you are ill;
if you are a student living away from home.
If you are blind or physically disabled or your work regularly takes you away from home, you may qualify to vote by post or proxy for an indefinite period .
(Ask your electoral registration officer for further details.
Your district or London borough council will tell you how to contact him.)
WHEN YOU CAN APPLY FOR AN ABSENT VOTE
If you cannot reasonably be expected to vote in person on polling day you can apply for an absent vote.
You will need to give the electoral registration officer a detailed reason and explain where you will be on polling day, and why.
For example, if you will be on holiday you can explain this and say where you will be staying.
If you are likely to be prevented from voting in person because of illness you will have to say what the illness is.
WHEN TO APPLY
Ask the electoral registration officer for an application form (RPF9)as soon as an election has been announced and you know that you will not be able to vote in person.
(Your district or London borough council will tell you where to contact the registration officer.)
Your application form must reach him or her by noon on the thirteenth working day before polling day (not counting Saturdays, Sundays, Christmas Even, Christmas Day, Maundy Thursday, Good Friday or a bank holiday).
This leaves very little time after an election is called so you will need to act quickly.
There is only one exception to this closing date, that is if you cannot vote in person because you are ill, and you could not have foreseen this on the closing date for applications.
You will then be allowed to vote by post or proxy if your application reaches the registration officer before noon on the sixth day before polling day (not counting the days mentioned above).
HOW TO APPLY
You will need to fill in form RPF9 giving the following information:
your full name and the address for which you are entered in the register of electors;
the election for which you are applying for an absent vote;
the reason why you will be unable to vote in person at the polling station.
When you have done this you will need to get your application attested (that is, countersigned) by a person:
who can certify that to the best of his or her knowledge and belief, the statement in your application is true;
who is aged 18 or over;
who knows you but is not related to you as husband, wife, parent, grandparent, brother, sister, child or grandchild; and
who has not attested any other application for an absent vote at that election.
If your application is made because you are ill or are likely to be ill on polling day you can have your application attested by a doctor, a suitably qualified nurse (first level nurse trained in general nursing) or a Christian Science practitioner.
There is no restriction on the number of applications that these people may attest.
A late application because of illness must be attested by one of these people.
HOW TO EXERCISE YOUR RIGHT TO VOTE
You will need to say on the application form whether you want to vote by post or by proxy.
A proxy is someone who votes at the polling station for you.
If you will be abroad on polling day you have to vote by proxy unless there is time for you to apply for, receive and return a postal ballot paper before leaving the United Kingdom.
If you want to vote by post give the full address where your ballot paper should be sent.
If you want to appoint a proxy to vote for you he or she must be:
willing to be appointed;
a British citizen or a citizen of the Commonwealth or of the Republic of Ireland;
of voting age and not subject to any legal incapacity to vote.
A proxy may not vote at the same election for more than two people unless the proxy is a close relative ie husband, wife, parent, grandparent, brother, sister, child or grandchild of the people he or she is voting for.
Your proxy does not necessarily have to sign the form himself or herself.
If you have consulted the proxy and confirmed that he or she is able and willing to vote for you that is enough.
Otherwise the proxy will need to sign the form.
AFTER YOU HAVE FILLED IN THE FORM
Make sure that you have signed and dated the form then take (or send) it to the electoral registration officer.
He will normally let you know if he allows your application.
If you have applied to vote by post and your application is allowed you will receive a postal ballot paper a week or so before polling day.
This must be sent back to the returning officer by hand or by post so as to reach him before 9.00pm on polling day at local government elections and 10.00pm at parliamentary and European Parliament elections.
If you have applied to vote by proxy and your application is allowed the registration officer will issue your proxy with a ‘proxy paper’ which entitles him or her to go to the polling station and vote for you.
If the registration officer disallows your application he will let you know.
Any application received by the registration officer after noon on the thirteenth working day before polling day will be disallowed unless it is a late application because of illness.
In this case it must be countersigned by a doctor, a suitably qualified nurse (first level nurse trained in general nursing) or a Christian Science practitioner and must reach the registration officer before noon on the sixth day before polling day.
Wanting to move?
Second Revision.
A guide for those wanting to rent or buy in another area
Important Note.
Before starting to buy a house or flat or signing a private tenancy agreement you are advised to consult a solicitor.
Wanting to move?
This booklet is designed to help those who want to buy a low-cost home or to rent in a new area in England and Wales.
All the booklets referred to in the text as Housing Booklets are available throughout England and Wales from the housing departments of all district and borough councils, from Housing Aid and Advice Centres, and from Rent Officers, and most Citizens' Advice Bureaux have stocks.
Their addresses are listed in local telephone directories.
Many of the references to local authorities in this booklet apply also to the Development Board for Rural Wales.
Wanting to buy?
Q1.
How much can you afford to pay?
A. You can get advice from a building society, a bank manager, a local authority, or a new town development corporation about how large a mortgage they are likely to be able to give you.
The building Societies' Association (at 34 Park Street, London W1Y 3PF) publishes a leaflet,Hints for Home Buyers , and a more detailed booklet,Building Societies and House Purchase , both of which can be obtained free of charge.
If you have been saving under the Homeloan scheme for two years or more you may qualify for an extra £600 loan and a cash bonus of £110, provided you buy a house or flat below a certain price limit for each region.
You can get a leaflet,Homeloan — Special Help for First Time Buyers , and details of the current regional price limits from most building societies, Citizens' Advice Bureaux, banks and local authorities.
Q2.
Is there a home in your price range?
A. When you have found out how much you can afford, look in the local papers and contact the estate agents in the area to which you want to move to see whether there are any houses or flats in your price range.
Also contact the housing department of the local authority or new town development corporation in the area you want to move to and ask them whether they have any low-cost home-ownership schemes for first-time buyers.
In particular you should ask:
i.
— Are they building any low-cost homes for sale to first-time buyers?
ii.
Do they have any empty homes that need improvement available for sale in ‘homesteading’ schemes whereby a purchaser undertakes to improve the home within a specified period?
(Under such schemes financial assistance is generally available through Home Improvement Grants and arrangements for mortgages and loans.)
iii.
Are any of their houses or flats being improved for sale?
iv.
Do they have any homes available for sale on ‘shared ownership’ basis whereby you partly buy and partly rent, but you have the right to buy outright later on when you can afford to do so?
(Details are given in Housing Booklet 15,Shares Ownership .)
Local authorities can give discounts of up to 30% if they sell empty houses or flats to priority groups such as first-time buyers and to those moving to their area to start a new job.
New town development corporations can also sell empty dwellings with discounts of up to 30%.
The local authority can also tell you whether there are any housing associations that might be able to help you.
Like local authorities, many housing associations can now improve houses and flats for sale, and also make homes available for sale on a ‘shared ownership’ basis.
If the local authority do not have a list of housing associations in their area ask them for the address of the regional office of the Housing Corporation, who can give you a list.
The addresses of the Corporation's regional offices are also available from the headquarters of the Housing Corporation at 149 Tottenham Court Road, London, W1P 0BN (telephone 01–387 9466).
Q3.
Is there a home you could afford, but you can't get a mortgage?
A. If you find a house or flat you could buy but can't get a large enough building society or bank mortgage, the local authority may be able to help in the following ways:
i.
By nominating you for a building society mortgage under the Support Lending Scheme which is designed to help first-time buyers.
ii.
By guaranteeing a building society mortgage.
iii.
By itself offering you a mortgage.
New town development corporations may also be able to assist in the ways described in ii.
and iii.
above.
Q4.
Can you get financial help to improve the home you want to buy?
A. Home Improvement Grants can help you to meet the cost of some improvements (including adaptations, if you are disabled) and repairs.
Details are given in Housing Booklet 14,Home Improvement Grants .
The local authority will tell you what their policy is on giving discretionary improvement grants.
However, it is mandatory for all authorities to give grants for basic improvements such as installing a toilet, bath or sink.
Wanting to rent?
Q5.
Can you use the National Mobility Scheme?
A. If you are a tenant of a public landlord, such as a local authority, new town or housing association, and if you have a pressing need to move to another local authority area for a job or social reasons (for example, because you are elderly or handicapped), you should ask your landlord whether you can be nominated for a move under the National Mobility Scheme.
Even if you are not at present a tenant of public landlord but you have a pressing need to move, your local authority might be prepared to nominate you.
A leaflet,The National Mobility Scheme , is available from local authority housing departments, Housing Aid and Advice Centres, new town development corporations, and Citizens' Advice Bureaux.
If you need to move only a short distance, counties, including London, have mobility schemes operating within their own boundaries.
Your local authority will be able to give you details.
Q6.
Can you use the Housing Association Liaison Project?
A. If you are a tenant of one of the housing associations within about 100 miles of London which participate in the Project, you can ask it to nominate you for a move to another association within your area.
You can get details from your landlord.
Q7.
Can you arrange an exchange with another tenant?
A. If you are a tenant of a local authority, new town or housing association, you yourself may be able with your landlord's consent to arrange a direct exchange with another tenant who wants to move to your area.
You can go to the housing department of your local authority or new town, or a Housing Aid and Advice Centre, or a Citizens' Advice Bureau, and ask for a copy of an explanatory leaflet and registration form about the Tenants Exchange Scheme.
This national scheme, which is supported by the Government, is designed to put you in touch with tenants in other local authorities' areas who might be interested in exchanging homes with you.
There is no charge for using the Scheme.
You can also try to arrange an exchange in any of the following ways:
i.
Ask your present landlord, and also the local authority or new town development corporation or any housing association in the area to which you want to move whether they know of any tenant who wants to move to your area.
ii.
Advertise in local newspapers in the area to which you want to move or in periodical such as Exchange & Mart, Dalton's Weekly,and the London and Local Advertiser .
iii.
Look for advertisements placed by other tenants wanting to move to the area where you yourself are currently a tenant.
These advertisements may be in your local newspapers and in the periodicals mentioned in ii.
above.
iv.
If you are a local authority, housing association or private tenant wanting to move into, our of or within the Greater London area and surrounding districts you should contact the Mutual Exchange Bureau (telephone ), 2nd Floor Island Block, County Hall, London, SE1 7PB.
Q8.
Do you want to rent from a local authority, new town or housing association in the area to which you want to move?
A. If so, you should ask these bodies whether they have any accommodation currently available for renting to you.
If you are moving for job reasons, the local authority or new town development corporation, even if they cannot offer permanent rented accommodation, might be able to arrange short-term letting for up to a year under Schedule 3 of the Housing Act 1980.
This will give you and your family time to look for other accommodation in the area.
Q9.
Do you want to rent privately?
A. Look in the local newspapers and shops for advertisements and consider advertising your own needs.
Estate and accommodation agents may also be able to help.
A number of measures have been taken in the 1980 Housing Act to help release more rented accommodation.
Existing home owners can now let spare rooms in their homes more easily, and shorthold tenancies have been introduced.
These changes are explained in Housing Booklet 4,Letting Rooms in Your Home and Housing Booklet 8,Shorthold Tenancies, First Revision .
Most tenants of local authorities, new towns and housing associations can now take in lodgers if they wish and they do not need their landlords' consent to do so.
Tenants may also sublet part of their homes with their landlords' consent.
If you wish to rent from a private landlord you security of tenure and the amount of rent you have to pay will depend on the type of tenancy you have.
The main types of tenancy are described in the Housing Booklet 3,The Rent Acts and You .
Q10.
What about a hostel?
A. Hostels are another form of accommodation, often suitable for single people, or as a temporary arrangement.
Some hostels are run commercially by private firms or individuals, some by local authorities, voluntary bodies, religious organisations or housing associations.
Hostel accommodation almost always involves the sharing of basic facilities such as bathrooms and kitchens.
Ask the local authority's housing department in the area to which you want to move for the addresses of local hostels.
Q11.
Can you get help with rent and rates?
A. If your rent or rates are higher than you can afford you might be entitled to housing benefit.
You can apply whether you are a tenant of a local authority, a new town development corporation, a private landlord or a housing association, or even if you live in a hostel.
If you own your own home, you can apply for help with your rates.
You can get more information about the housing benefit scheme from your local authority.
Prepared by the Department of the Environment.
Produced by the Central Office of Information.
Printed in the UK for HMSO.
3/87
Housing Booklet Number 12.
Department of the Environment and the Welsh Office.
PRIVATE TENANTS
YOUR RIGHTS UNDER THE HOUSING ACT 1988
OXFORD CITY COUNCIL
THE NEW LAW
The Housing Act 1988 has radically changed the law relating to renting accommodation in the private rented sector.
The part that affects the private rented sector came into force on Sunday, 15th January 1989, and this means that nearly everyone who moved into different accommodation on or after Sunday, 15th January 1989 will be covered by the provisions of the Housing Act 1988.
This means that they will have different tenancy rights and possibly higher rents.
YOU MOVED BEFORE 15TH JANUARY 1989
IF YOU WERE living in your accommodation before 15th January 1989 then this is how the Housing Act 1988 will affect YOU:
1.
The rules for succession after the death of a statutory tenant have been changed.
There can now be only one statutory succession after the death of a statutory tenant.
Instead of acquiring a statutory tenancy the successor acquires a new assured tenancy allowing the landlord to charge the new tenant a market rent.
2.
You can still apply to the Rent Officer to fix a Fair Rent for your accommodation.
However, this only applies if you do not live in the same house as your landlord.
3.
If you do live in the same house as your landlord and he or she wants you to leave the property then he or she must still give you at least four weeks Notice to Quit on a special form.
If you are still living in the property on expiry of the Notice to Quit, he or she will need to obtain a Possession Order from your local county court.
4.
If you are a Protected Shorthold Tenant and your landlord wants you to leave your accommodation he or she will still need to serve upon you, within the last three months of your tenancy, the Notice of Intention to apply for Possession.
He or she will also need to obtain a Court Order.
When your Protected Shorthold Tenancy expires you and your landlord can agree for you to become a new-style Assured Shorthold Tenant.
If your landlord fails to serve the Notice of Intention to Apply for Possession upon you then you may stay in your accommodation for another year at the same rent as the previous year.
YOU MOVED AFTER 15TH JANUARY 1989
If you moved into your accommodation after 15th January 1989, this is how the Housing Act 1988 will affect YOU:
The Housing Act 1988 brought into existence two new types of tenancies the ASSURED TENANCY and the ASSURED SHORTHOLD TENANCY.
ASSURED TENANCIES are lettings at market rents with some tenancy rights.
It is not now possible to refer the rent to the Rent Officer to fix a Fair Rent.
The landlord must obtain an Order from your local county court if he or she wishes to gain possession of your accommodation.
If the landlord of an Assured Tenant wishes to obtain possession of the premises he or she must first of all serve upon the tenant a Notice Seeking Possession of a Property let on an Assured Tenancy.
In some cases only two weeks notice need be given to the tenant, e.g. for rent arrears cases.
In other cases two months notice needs to be given, e.g. if the owner-occupier wishes to return.
If you receive board (e.g. breakfast) or attendances or services you may be an Assured Tenant.
ASSURED SHORTHOLD TENANCIES do not give long-term tenancy rights and there is very little control over the rent levels that can be charged by a landlord.
At the end of the term the landlord is guaranteed possession by the Court, but only if the landlord has followed certain procedural steps correctly.
To be an Assured Shorthold Tenancy the following rules must be followed:
(1)
the tenancy must be for a minimum period of six months
(2)
a Notice of an Assured Shorthold Tenancy must be served upon the tenant — BEFORE the start of the tenancy
(3)
the tenancy must not contain any provision allowing the landlord to terminate the tenancy within six months of the beginning of the tenancy
(4)
it would be an Assured Tenancy if the three above requirements had not been followed
If the landlord of an Assured Shorthold Tenant wants possession of the premises he only has to prove to the Court the following three things:
(1)
that a Notice of an Assured Shorthold Tenancy was served upon the tenant before the start of the Assured Shorthold Tenancy
(2)
that the Assured Shorthold Tenancy has come to an end
(3)
that not less than two months notice has been given to the tenant stating that possession is required and that the Notice has expired.
An Assured Shorthold Tenant may make an application to a Rent Assessment Committee for a determination of the rent which in the opinion of the Committee the landlord might reasonably be expected to obtain for the property.
If you live in the same house as your landlord and your share living accommodation,(e.g. kitchen or bathroom) then once a Notice to Quit has been served upon you and has expired your landlord has the legal right to order you to leave your accommodation.
He or she does not need a Court Order.
PROTECTION FROM EVICTION AND HARASSMENT
The Protection from Eviction Act 1977 still applies to most lettings.
RENT BOOKS
If you are weekly tenant your landlord must provide you with a rent book otherwise he/she may be guilty of a criminal offence.
For further information contact:-
PRODUCED BY OXFORD CITY COUNCIL JUNE 1989
GENERAL INFORMATION AND ACTIVITIES PROGRAMME
NORTHWAY CENTRE
OXFORD CITY COUNCIL RECREATION SERVICES
NORTHWAY CENTRE GYMNASIUM
The gymnasium is available for customers and clubs from 10am-9pm, Monday to Friday and 10am-6pm, Saturdays and Sundays.
It can cater for a wide variety of activities, aerobics, badminton, football, martial arts, weight training and 50+.
Many daytime activities are supported by a purpose built creche staffed by qualified people.
Two full size soccer pitches, and inside a fully equipped fitness centre  complement the gymnasium and provide a comprehensive community facility.
The manager, Peter Rose and his team are available on Oxford 742048, telephone or pop in at your leisure.
NORTHWAY LOCAL HOUSING OFFICE
The new local housing office in the Northway Centre, Maltfield Road was opened on 14th August, 1989.
The office will serve people in council homes in Northway, Marston, Cutteslowe, Templar Road, Wolvercote and Kidlington areas, some 1500 homes in all.
This office will deal with all matters regarding council tenants services such as repairs, transfers, and rent queries.
The officers responsible for these areas are all based at Northway so there will be no need for people to go from office to office in search of an answer.
Those living on estates further from the office will be served by surgeries staffed by the local officers.
We hope and believe that this, the second of six local offices will prove successful in providing the service that city council tenants want and deserve.
Hours of opening:
HEADINGTON COMMUNITY EDUCATION COMMITTEE
Headington Community Education Committee seeks to respond to local needs and interests by providing a wide range of educational opportunities for people of all ages.
The activities it supports include a programme of over 90 day and evening classes covering topics varying from Basic Reading, Writing and Number skills to G.C.S.E. Greek, from Aromatherapy to Word Processing.
It runs Youth Clubs, organises School Governor Training, works with elderly people, supports Young Mothers Groups, and offers Educational Guidance Counselling.
If you would like to join the committee and influence policy, pass on a good idea, attend the community lunch held for those working in the area, get involved in producing the regular Headington Area Newsletter, join an informal discussion group or borrow material on Health, Parenting or Caring for the Elderly, make a special request or offer your services as a tutor or Youth Club volunteer, we would love to hear from you.
Drop in or ring Oxford 58359 and speak to Di, Bob, Val or Helen.
NORTHWAY CRECHE
The creche is situated in a pleasantly bright and cheerful room with access to the outside area.
(in the near future it will have its own fenced-in garden).
The room has been specially adapted to cater for a maximum of 12 children between the ages of 3 months and 5 years.
A wide variety of special selected play equipment and materials are available at every session.
The staff are all experienced nursery/playgroup workers and provide a very high standard of child care.
OXFORD WOMENS TRAINING SCHEME
The Oxford Women's Training Scheme is based at the Northway Centre.
We run FREE training courses in computing and painting and decorating, and a variety of practical and introductory short courses, including basic woodworking, English and maths.
For more information contact: Jane Butcher, Oxford Women's Training Scheme, Northway Centre, Maltfield Road, Oxford OX3 9RF.
Tel:
You do not need any previous skills or experience.
Our courses are aimed at women who have missed out on training or education in the past.
Courses run within school hours and childcare and travel expenses are available.
A creche is provided on site for part-time courses.
Women are welcome to drop in to look around and meet staff and trainees.
KIDLINGTON TRAVELLER
New routes and revised timetable for Kidlington!
Kidlington's local bus service to Oxford is to be revised from Sunday 4 February 1990.
The service will be re-numbered 20, 21 and 22 and routes in Kidlington modified.
Red double-deck buses will continue to link Kidlington with Summertown and the City Centre at regular intervals.
Two routes will serve Kidlington during the daytime, Monday to Saturday: Service 20 from The Moors via Banbury Road (via High Street before 0930), Grovelands and Yarnton Road; Service 21 from Lyne Mead via High Street and Evans Lane.
In the evenings and on Sundays, Service 22 will serve Lyne Mead, Grovelands, High Street and Evans Lane.
A service is to be restored in both directions along Evans Lane, throughout the day.
The bus stop opposite Exeter Hall will no longer be served.
Passengers who use this stop are advised to use either the stop on Yarnton Road or the stop on High Street outside Tesco.
Fares will remain unchanged.
Holders of Kidlington and Gosford concessionary bus fare passes can travel at half fare between 0900 and 1630 and after 1800 Monday to Friday and at anytime on Saturdays, Sundays and Bank Holidays.
If you a regular traveller from Kidlington to Oxford you can save money by buying a FREEDOM TICKET which gives unlimited city bus travel for as little as £5.00 per week.
You can purchase your first FREEDOM TICKET and renew it at any Post Office in Oxford or at The Broadway, Banbury Road or Mill Street offices in Kidlington itself.
The FREEDOM TICKET can also be obtained from either Carfax Travel at Carfax (138 High Street), Gloucester Green Bus Station (George Street) or the Oxford Bus Company Head Office (395 Cowley Road).
KIDLINGTON TOWN SERVICE
YOUR NIPPER LINK TO THE HIGH STREET SHOPS
Every Tuesday, Friday and Saturday the Nipper minibus operates along a number of roads unsuitable for use by double-deck buses, linking residents with the High Street Shops.
Starting in the High Street, outside Tesco, the Nipper operates in a one-way loop serving mill Street, Evans Lane, Springfield Road, Edinburgh Drive, Waverley Avenue, Lovelace Drive, Cromwell Way, Hampden Drive, Fairfax Road, Garden City, The Broadway, South Avenue, Stratfield Road, Laburnum Crescent, Almond Avenue, Spruce Road, Morton Avenue and Yarnton Road.
The service operates on a hail and ride basis — at any point along the route the Nipper minibus will stop, so long as it is safe to do so, by giving a clear signal to the driver.
CITYLINK FROM OXFORD TO LONDON, HEATHROW & GATWICK
NON-STOP MOTORWAY EXPRESS COACH SERVICES
190 LONDON
CityLink 190 is the only way to travel to London to work, shop or just visit the sights.
From Oxford, 190 CityLink coaches leave Gloucester Green Bus Station every 20 minutes most of the day for a fast motorway journey to the capital.
In London passengers can alight and board for their return journey at either Marble Arch, Grosvenor Gardens (for Victoria Rail and Tube Stations) and Victoria Coach Station.
Late night departure from London departs Victoria Coach Station at 0040, daily.
X70 HEATHROW & GATWICK
Get off to a flying start with CityLink X70 from Oxford quick, comfortable and direct.
With CityLink X70, there are frequent departures daily from Oxford to Heathrow — every half hour for much of the day.
Journey time only 65 minutes.
Seven coaches a day take you through to Gatwick Airport, both south and north terminals — journey time from Oxford just 140 minutes.
Help with NHS costs
AB11 from April 1989
How to get free
NHS prescriptions
NHS dental treatment
NHS vouchers for sight tests and glasses
NHS hospital travel costs
NHS wigs and fabric supports
Milk and vitamins
or get help with the cost
You may have an automatic right to get these things free or to get maximum help with the costs.
If not, you may still be able to get some help with the costs if you have a low income.
This leaflet tells you what help you may be able to get.
NHS prescriptions
Who can get free NHS prescriptions
You can get free prescriptions if you're in one of the two groups of people shown below.
Group 1 — People who have automatic entitlement
You automatically get free prescriptions if:
you're 60 or over (woman) or 65 or over (man) or
you're under 16 or
you're 16 or over but under 19 and still in full-time education or
you get either Income Support or Family Credit or are the partner of someone who gets either Income Support or Family Credit or
you're pregnant or
you've had a baby during the last 12 months or
you get a War or MOD Disablement Pension and you need prescriptions for your accepted disability or
you suffer from any of the following medical conditions
permanent fistula (including caecostomy, colostomy, laryngostomy or ileostomy) requiring continuous surgical dressing or an appliance,
the following disorders for which specific substitution therapy is essential
Addison's disease and other forms of hypoadrenalism
diabetes insipidus and other forms of hypopituitarism
diabetes mellitus
hypoparathyroidism
myasthenia gravis
myxoedema (hypothyroidism)
epilepsy requiring continuous anti-convulsive therapy
a continuing physical disability which prevents you from leaving home without the help of another person.
Temporary disabilities do not count, even if they last several months.
Group 2 — People who have low-income entitlement
You may be able to get free prescriptions if you and your partner are on a low income.
See pages 18–21 of this leaflet for the meaning of ‘low income’.
How to claim
Automatic entitlement
For details, see leaflet P11 NHS prescriptions .
Low-income entitlement
For details, see page 22 of this leaflet.
If you can't get free prescriptions
Prescription charges
From 1 April 1989, each item on a prescription will cost £2.80.
Prescription ‘season tickets’
If you need a lot of prescriptions but can't get them free, you may be able to save money by buying a ‘season ticket’(prepayment certificate).
For £14.50 you can buy a season ticket to last four months.
So if you're likely to need more than five items in four months a season ticket will save you money.
For £40.00 you can buy a season ticket to last 12 months.
So if you're likely to need more than 14 items in 12 months a season ticket will save you money.
If you want to buy a season ticket, get form PF 95 (EC 95 in Scotland) from:
a post office or
a chemist or
a Social Security office or
your Family Practitioner Committee (Health Board in Scotland).
Their addresses are in the phone book.
Fill in the form and send it to your Family Practitioner Committee (Health Board in Scotland).
Refunds
If when you pay prescription charges you think that you may qualify for free prescriptions, ask the chemist for a receipt form FP 57 (EC 57 in Scotland).
The back of the form tells you how to claim your refund.
You must claim within one month of paying for your prescription.
More information
If you want to know more, see leaflet P 11 NHS prescriptions .
NHS dental treatment
Who can get help with the cost of dental treatment?
You can get help if you're in one of the three groups of people shown below.
Group 1 — People who have automatic entitlement
You automatically get free dental treatment if:
you're under 18 or
you're 16 or over but under 19 and still in full-time education or
you get either
Income Support or
Family Credit or are the partner of someone who gets either Income Support or Family Credit or
you're expecting a baby and were pregnant when the dentist accepted you for treatment or
you've had a baby during the 12 months before your treatment began.
Group 2 — People who have low-income entitlement
You may be able to get help with the cost of dental treatment if you and your partner are on a low income.
See pages 18–21 of this leaflet for the meaning of ‘low income’.
Group 3 — Certain War Pensioners
You may get help with the cost of NHS treatment if it is needed because of the disability for which you get a War Pension.
How to claim
Automatic entitlement
On your first visit to the dentist, and every time you start a new course of treatment, tell the dentist you want free NHS treatment.
Low-income entitlement
For details, see page 22 of this leaflet.
War Pensioners
Send the receipt from your dentist to: Treatment Group, War Pensions Branch, DSS, Norcross, Blackpool FY5 3TA.
If you can't get help with the cost of dental treatment
From 1 April 1989, you will pay three-quarters (75 per cent) of the cost.
The most you can be asked to pay for all that needs to be done during any one course of treatment is £150.
Refunds
If you've already paid for your NHS dental treatment and you want to claim a refund because:
you were entitled to free treatment because you were getting Income Support or Family Credit or
you have a low income,
ask your Social Secretary office for form AG 5 (and form AG 1 if you want to claim on low-income grounds and you do not hold a current AG 2 or AG 3 certificate), fill them both in and send them where the form tells you.
You must claim within one month of the date on your receipt.
More information
If you want to know more, see leaflet D11 NHS dental treatment .
NHS vouchers for sight tests and glasses
Your sight test
Your sight can be tested only by a registered ophthalmic optician (optometrist) or an ophthalmic medical practitioner.
You will get a free NHS sight test if you:
are under 16
are a full-time student under 19
or your partner are getting Income Support or Family Credit
have certificate AG 2 from the Department of Social Security
need complex lenses as defined for the NHS voucher scheme for glasses
are registered blind or partially sighted
are a diagnosed diabetic or glaucoma patient
are aged 40 or over and the brother/sister/parent/child of a diagnosed glaucoma patient.
Help with the costs:
you can get help with the cost of a sight test if you are on a low income.
See pages 18–21 of this leaflet for the meaning of ‘low income’.
Your prescription
If your sight test shows that you need glasses the optician must give you a prescription.
If you've already been wearing glasses you must still be given a prescription, even if your sight hasn't changed.
If you don't need glasses the optician must give you a statement saying that.
Your prescription is yours by right and is valid for two years.
If you don't use it straight away, you should keep it where you can find it when you need it.
Paying for your glasses
If you need new glasses because your sight has changed, and you're in one of the three groups of people shown on pages 10–11, the optician will give you an NHS voucher to help pay for them.
If you don't qualify for a voucher you will have to pay the full cost of the glasses yourself.
The optician will mark your voucher with a letter-code.
This code depends on the type of lenses you need and also decides the maximum amount of help the voucher can give you.
If you've been given a voucher because you have a low income, the value of your voucher may be reduced.
You can choose glasses that cost more than the value of your voucher and pay the difference yourself.
Refunds
If you pay for the glasses yourself, you can't apply for a refund afterwards (even if you were entitled to a voucher) unless they were prescribed through the Hospital Eye Service.
So make sure you've had a decision on your claim before you buy.
Who can get NHS vouchers for glasses?
You can get NHS vouchers for glasses if you're in one of the four groups of people shown below.
Group 1 — People who have automatic entitlement
You automatically get full-value vouchers if:
you're under 16 or
you're 16 or over but under 19 and still in full-time education or
you get either
Income Support or
Family Credit or are the partner of someone who gets either Income Support or Family Credit.
Group 2 — People who have low-income entitlement
You may be able to get NHS vouchers if you and your partner are on a low income.
The value of your voucher may be reduced.
The amount of this reduction depends on your income.
You will get no help if your assessed contribution towards the cost as shown on certificate AG 3 is more than the value of the voucher you were given.
See pages 18–21 of this leaflet for the meaning of ‘low income’.
Group 3 — People who need complex lenses
You'll get a special voucher if you're prescribed glasses with at lest one exceptionally powerful lens.
Your optician will tell you if this applies to you.
Group 4 — Certain War Pensioners
You may get a refund of the sight test fee and the voucher value of glasses or contact lenses if these are needed because of the disability for which you get a war pension.
How to claim
Automatic and complex lens entitlement
For details, see leaflet G 11 NHS sight tests and vouchers for glasses .
Low-income entitlement
For details, see page 22 of this leaflet.
War Pensioners
Send the voucher form and receipt to: Treatment Group, War Pensions Branch, DSS, Norcross, Blackpool, FY5 3TA.
More information
If you want to know more, see leaflet G 11 NHS sight tests and vouchers for glasses .
NHS hospital travel costs
You can get help from the hospital with your travel costs if:
you are receiving NHS treatment at a hospital, and
you're in one of the two groups of people shown on page 13.
If the hospital agrees that you need someone to travel with you, they also will get help with their travel costs.
Payment is made at the hospital each time you visit.
Or if you're not going back to the hospital, it will be sent to you by post.
If you don't have enough money to get to the hospital and you do not need ambulance service transport on medical grounds ask the hospital to send you payment in advance.
If you cannot get this in time you may, exceptionally, be able to get a Social Fund Crisis Loan from your Social Security office.
What travel costs can be paid?
normal public transport fares
the estimated amount of petrol used if travel is by private care or the equivalent public transport costs, whichever is the less
reasonable contributions you may make towards transport costs if you're taken to or from the hospital by a local voluntary car scheme or similar arrangement
taxi fares only if there is no other way you can travel for all or part of the journey.
If you have any queries about the help you may get, ask at the hospital.
If you're visiting the hospital or someone in hospital
If you're not the patient but are visiting someone in hospital and can't afford the fares, ask your Social Security office if you can get help.
You may be able to if:
you're visiting a War or MOD Disablement Pensioner who is being treated for the disablement he or she is getting the pension for or
you're visiting a close relative and are getting Income Support.
You may be able to get help from the Social Fund.
Who can get help with NHS hospital travel costs?
You can get help with the cost of travel to and from hospital for NHS treatment if you're one of the two groups of people shown below.
Group 1 — People who have automatic entitlement
If you're having NHS treatment, you automatically get all your hospital travel costs paid if:
you get either
Income Support or
Family Credit or are the partner or dependent child of someone who gets either Income Support or Family credit or
you get a War or MOD Disablement Pension and are being treated in an NHS hospital for your disability.
There are special arrangements for people living in the Highlands and Islands of Scotland or in the Isles of Scilly.
Group 2 — People who have low-income entitlement
You may be able to get help with hospital travel costs for NHS treatment if you and your partner are on a low income.
The amount of help you can get depends on your income.
See pages 18–21 of this leaflet for the meaning of ‘low income’.
How to claim
Automatic entitlement
For details, see leaflet H11 NHS hospital travel costs .
Low-income entitlement
For details, see page 22 of this leaflet.
More information
If you want to know more, see leaflet H11 NHS hospital travel costs .
NHS wigs and fabric supports
Who can get help with the cost of NHS wigs and fabric supports?
You can get free NHS wigs and fabric supports or help towards the cost if you're in one of the two groups of people shown below.
Group 1 — People who have automatic entitlement
You automatically get free wigs and fabric supports if:
you're a hospital in-patient at the time the wig or fabric support is supplied or
you're under 16
you're 16 or over but under 19 and still in full-time education or
you get either
Income Support or
Family Credit or are the partner of someone who gets either Income Support or Family Credit or
you get a War or MOD Disablement Pension and you need a wig or fabric support for your disability.
Group 2 — People who have low-income entitlement
You may be able to get help with the cost of wigs and fabric supports if you and your partner are on a low income.
See pages 18–21 of this leaflet for the meaning of ‘low income’.
How to claim
Automatic entitlement
When you go to the hospital for your fitting for your wig or fabric support, tell the person you see there that you have automatic entitlement and for what reason.
Low-income entitlement
For details, see page 22 of this leaflet.
If you can't get help with the cost of wigs and fabric supports
From 1 April 1989, each item will cost:
Wigs:
stock modacrylic £24
partial human hair £62
full bespoke human hair £97
Fabric supports:
surgical brassiere £12
abdominal or spinal support £16
More information
If you want to know more, see leaflet WF 11 NHS wigs and fabric supports .
Milk and vitamins
Who can get help for milk and vitamins?
From 1 April 1989 you can get help for milk and vitamins if you're in one of the groups of people shown below.
If you're getting Income Support
You automatically get tokens to exchange for seven pints or eight half-litres of milk each week for each of your children under five.
(You can drink the milk yourself if you are breast-feeding a baby under one year old.)
You can use the tokens to get 900g of dried milk each week at maternity clinics and child health clinics for each of your babies under one year old.
If you become pregnant you should tell your Social Security office and let them know the date your baby is due, so that you can get tokens for seven pints or eight half-litres of milk each week for yourself until your baby is born.
If you're a mother or expectant mother you can get free vitamins for yourself while you are pregnant or breast-feeding, and for your children aged under five.
Just ask for them at a maternity clinic or child health clinic and show your Income Support payment book or, if you're paid by girocheque, the letter that came with the girocheque.
If you're getting Family Credit
If you have children under five years of age you cannot get free milk but the rates of Family credit are increased because of this.
If you've got babies under one year you can get dried milk for them at specially reduced prices at maternity clinics and child health clinics.
Just show your Family Credit order book or, if you're paid by direct credit into your bank or building society account, the letter that notified you of the award of benefit.
If you have a disabled child
If you have a disabled child aged 5 to 16 who can't go to school because of disablement, you can get tokens to exchange for seven pints or eight half-litres of milk each week for that child.
You will need to fill in form FW 20, available from your Social Security office or from DSS, Block 2, Government Buildings, Warbreck Hill Road, Blackpool FY2 OXW.
What is a low income?
Your savings
If you and your partner have more than £6000 in savings between you, you can't get any help under the low-income scheme.
By ‘partner’ we mean wife, husband, or someone you live with as if you were married to them.
If you have more than £3000 in savings between you, this will make a difference of the amount of help you can get.
Each £250 or part of £250 will be treated as if it were bringing in an income of £1 a week.
If you have savings of £3000 or less between you, this will make no difference to the amount of help you can get.
If any child in your family has more than £3000 in savings, you will not be able to get any help with their travel costs to hospital for NHS treatment.
Savings mean things like:
money in bank accounts, building society savings accounts, the National Savings Bank, the Post Office, Unit Trusts, etc
National Savings Certificates
Premium Bonds
shares and similar investments
money from a redundancy payment
money that you are saving up for something
any cash that you keep at home or carry with you
winnings from lotteries, pools, etc
any other money
Personal possessions, including your home, don't count.
How to work out whether you have a low income
What counts as a low income depends on how much money you and your partner have left each week after you've paid for things like rates or Community Charge, rent or mortgage.
You can work this out yourself by adding up your outgoings and allowances and taking the total away from the money you and your partner have coming in each week.
You can use the columns below to work these figures out if you wish.
Money coming in (each week)
Money coming in includes:
earnings from full-time or part-time employment
earnings from self-employment
earnings from an Employment Training Scheme
income from Social Security benefits (except for Attendance Allowance and Mobility Allowance)
War or MOD Disablement Pension or War Widow's Pension (except for Constant Attendance Allowance and Mobility Supplement paid as an addition to a War Disablement Pension)
any non-Social Security benefit or pension including occupational pension and personal pension
maintenance payments
money from trust funds
student grant
payments made by boarders
any other money coming in as regular payments
Outgoings and allowances (each week)
either
rent (less any Housing Benefit) or
mortgage plus
rates (less any Housing Benefit) less 20% or
Community Charge (less any Community Charge Rebate) less 20% plus
income tax plus
National Insurance contributions plus
half of any occupational or personal pension contributions plus
£5 of your earnings if you're single without children or
£10 of your joint earnings if you're one of a couple or
£15 of your earnings if you're a lone parent plus
£5 of a War or MOD Disablement Pension or a War Widow's Pension plus
if you have boarders, £35 of each boarder's payments
TOTAL
Take this TOTAL away from the money you and your partner having coming in each week and see how much you have left.
Then see (page 21) whether it's worth claiming.
Money you have left (each week)
If the money you and your partner have left each week is less than the amounts shown below, you may be able to get full help with NHS costs and hospital travel costs.
If you have more than these amounts, you may still be able to get some help.
But you will not be able to get any help with NHS prescription charges.
SINGLE PEOPLE WITHOUT CHILDREN
under 18 £20.80
18 to 24 £27.40
25 and over £34.90
60 or over (women) or 65 or over (men) £46.10
80 and over £48.60
COUPLES WITHOUT CHILDREN
both under 18 £41.60
at least one of the couple 18 or over £54.80
at least one of the couple aged 60–79 £71.85
at least one over age 80 £74.30
LONE PARENTS
under 18 £31.20
18 and over £45.30
COUPLES WITH CHILDREN
both under 18 £48.10
at least one of the couple 18 or over £61.30
CHILDREN
To the amount shown above that applies to you, add one of the following amounts for each additional child in your family unless they have over £3000 in savings:
under 11 £11.75
11 to 15 £17.35
16 to 17, doing a full-time further education course not above A-level or equivalent standard £20.80
18 and over, doing a full-time further education course not above A-level or equivalent standard £27.40
How to claim help because you have a low income
Important: Please do not claim help on low-income grounds if you have automatic entitlement or if you already have a current AG2 or AG3 certificate.
Claim on form AG 1 which you can get from:
any Social Security office or
the Agency Benefits Unit (see below for address) or
an NHS hospital or
a dentist or
an optician
If you're 16 or over, you can claim on your own low-income grounds: it's your income that counts, not your parents', even if you're still living with them.
Fill in the form and send it to:
What happens after you claim
The Agency Benefits Unit will let you know whether you are entitled to help.
If you are, they will send you a certificate, which is valid for six months.
If you are entitled to full help, they will send you an AG 2 certificate.
This means that you can get:
free NHS prescriptions
free NHS dental treatment
free NHS sight test
maximum value of a voucher to help with the cost of glasses or contact lenses
full cost of contact lenses prescribed through the Hospital Eye Service
free NHS wigs and fabric supports
payment of your travel costs to hospital and back for NHS treatment.
If you will have to pay some of the costs yourself, they will send you an AG 3 certificate.
This means that you may get some help with the costs of:
NHS dental treatment
a sight test
glasses or contact lenses
contact lenses prescribed through the Hospital Eye Service
NHS wigs and fabric supports
your journeys to hospital and back from NHS treatment.
But you will not be able to get any help with NHS prescription charges.
How long does entitlement last?
Low-income entitlement lasts for six months.
After this period you will have to apply again by filling in a new claim form AG 1 and sending it to the Agency Benefits Unit (see address on page 22).
Keeping You in Touch
FOCUS ON SOUTH WARD
SOCIAL & LIBERAL DEMOCRATS
SIR WILLIAM GOODHART'S MESSAGE
I was one of the founder members of the old SDP.
So am I sorry that David Owen has killed it off?
No — because the real SDP lives on, along with the Liberal Party, in the LIBERAL DEMOCRATS.
I do regret the waste of his remarkable talents and wonder about the flattering noises he makes towards the Labour Party.
Is he really going to give his blessing to Bruce Kent?
THE LOCAL ELECTIONS LAST MAY
Why did we do so much better than the pundits and opinion polls predicted?
Because you do not want a return to destructive two party politics and you do know at first hand that Liberal Democrats do put ‘people first’; that local income tax is a fair and predictable alternative to the poll tax; that our stance on Hong Kong is morally right and that we realise the urgency of environmental action with targets for achievement away ahead of the other two parties.
WHAT ARE LIBERAL DEMOCRAT POLICIES?
The policies of the Liberal Democrats who sit as councillors on the Oxford City and County Councils are well known and set out in our elections leaflets.
BUT WHAT OF NATIONAL POLICY FOR THE WHOLE COUNTRY?
Here are three of fundamental importance.
1.
A WRITTEN CONSTITUTION FOR THE UNITED KINGDOM
This will define and secure the rights of the individual and set out what governments, both in Parliament and locally, can and cannot do.
It will prevent the government pushing thro' policies (such as the poll tax) which are contrary to the wishes of the majority of the citizens.
It will set out a fairer voting system.
2.
GREEN ISSUES
Action is urgent — and let's be clear about it, this is going to hurt.
Our policy paper, Energy and the Living World, for example proposes: a Global carbon budget targeted to reduce CO2 emissions from the UK 30% by year 2005 & 75% by 2050: to reduce emissions of sulphur dioxide (60% by 1995) and nitrogen oxides.
3.
REFORM OF TAXATION & BENEFITS SYSTEMS
In the long run we aim to introduce a Citizen's income, a payment to every individual, irrespective of sex, marital status, income of employment status.
This is for the future but we propose to move quickly to integrate income tax and National Insurance into Broad Income Tax: treat all savings equally with regard to tax liability; pay all pensioners a decent level of pension adequate for subsistence, restoring the link between pensions and earnings; increasing child benefit and indexing it in future years.
See the next FOCUS for other policy proposals — and if you would like more detailed information about the above we can lend you the documents.
THE CITY COUNCILS MAY ELECTIONS
In South Ward my vote went up by 35%, more that the percentage increase of any of the other contenders and that was in spite of a pre-run of general election tactics by Labour.
I thank all of you who supported me and particularly all those who helped in this non-target ward campaign.
Specially welcome was the much greater interest and support shown by our many STUDENTS.
In future you will get a special STUDENT FOCUS!
ON OUR DOORSTEP — HOUSING
The Conference in Oxford which launched National Housing Week reported:
a)
4,600 households on the City's Council Homes waiting lists.
b)
Council housing stocks dwindling at the rate of 200 a year (Tory policy of course).
c)
350 homeless families housed by the City Council.
d)
More than 1,000 young people homeless in Oxford.
In addition to this, the high price of housing on the market, together with high mortgage and interest rate puts first time buyers in an impossible position whilst the mounting toll of re-possessions is a disaster.
Furthermore the Housing Association which provided the main source of funds to local Housing Associations is now in financial difficulty itself.
It is deplorable that the old Aldens supermarket site remains underused and the Whitehouse football ground plans stagnate.
EMPTY HOUSES
There are far too many empty houses in South Ward which are slowly deteriorating.
If there is one in your street, please let us know and we will try and get it back into use again.
LAKE STREET COMMUNITY CENTRE SWIMMING POOLS
No money, no scheme to save our lives!
We are just holding our thumbs in the hope that the machinery and fabric will last through the summer months.
THE POLL TAX — THE UNPLEASANT TRUTH
We let the Tories get into power.
The Poll Tax is Law.
If people do not pay the Council will have to borrow money at current high interest rates to pay its bills (including bills for trying to collect the tax) and that can only mean higher poll tax bills next year.
OXFORD'S TRAFFIC PROBLEMS
We welcome the Oxford Preservation Trust's appointment of a German expert to make a report, with the County and City Council's co-operating.
We await the proposals with impatience.
HOW GREEN ARE YOU?
JUNK MAIL
Write to the Mailing Preference Service, FREEPOST 22 London W1E 7EZ and ask them to have your name removed from direct mailing lists.
It will save trees and a lot of wasted time.
NEWSPAPERS & PERIODICALS
Surely you are saving these and taking them to FOE, Whitehouse Road.
But factories for re-cycling are glutted so you need to do more by buying re-cycled paper yourself wherever possible.
DISPOSABLE NAPPIES
Britain's babies use 3.5 million trees.
Thus we are accumulating in our local rubbish dumps tons of baby excreta, some of it infected, which sooner or later will dribble into our water supply.
Are you prepared to use cloth nappies and potty train your infants?
JOIN THE LIBERAL DEMOCRATS
If you want to join or have any questions about the policies of the Liberal Democrats, then don't hesitate to get in contact with YOUR FOCUS EDITOR: GEOFFREY GRIFFITHS,
Poll Tax Benefit
Will you qualify?
OXFORD CITY COUNCIL
IF YOU ALREADY RECEIVE HOUSING BENEFIT THERE IS NO NEED FOR YOU TO RE-APPLY!
WE WILL AUTOMATICALLY WORK OUT YOUR POLL TAX BENEFIT
INTRODUCTION
From 1st April 1990 almost all adults will pay the new Poll Tax.
However, if you are on a low income you may be entitled to help in paying this charge.
Poll Tax Benefit, of up to 80%, can be granted to people on low incomes who have to pay the personal charge.
Getting benefit will depend on:
How much money you have coming in
How much money you need to live on (this is decided by the Government)
The amount of Poll Tax you have to pay (no definite figure will be known until early 1990.
This leaflet has been prepared to help explain this new scheme and how it might affect you.
It explains who should make an application and who will automatically be considered for help.
If you already receive Housing Benefit we will automatically work out your Poll Tax Benefit from the information you gave us on the ‘Review’ form we recently sent.
There is no need to apply again.
If you don't receive Housing Benefit or Income Support you should apply now in order that your application can be dealt with at an early date.
This will mean that if your claim is successful we will be able to send out your first bill showing the reduced amount.
COUPLES
If you are married or living together as a couple, you should only make one joint claim (any other members of your household should make a separate claim).
Your income will be added together and any benefit entitlement will be split equally between you.
SAVINGS
If you (and your partner) have savings and/or investments amounting to more than £8,000 you will not be entitled to claim benefit.
STUDENTS
Students will automatically be entitled to an 80% exemption.
Benefit cannot be claimed to assist with paying the remaining 20%.
YOUNG PEOPLE
If you are over 18 and still living at home with your family, you will receive your own Poll Tax bill.
This bill is your responsibility.
If you feel that due to your own income, you will find difficulty in paying the charge, make application for Poll Tax benefit to us now.
All applications and enquiries to:
POLL TAX BENEFIT
Will you qualify?
How to use the table:—
Opposite are examples of weekly income levels up to which you should be entitled to some reduction on your Poll Tax bill.
If your income is slightly above these levels you should still apply because the figures shown are only a guide and cannot reflect every personal circumstance.
Look for the personal circumstances that fit yours (or are close to) the first column, then look under the Poll Tax figures.
If your weekly income is below or near the figure shown in the green box then apply immediately for your Poll Tax Benefit.
Don't delay.
1.
COUNCIL TENANTS
From April 1990 your rent will no longer include domestic rates, which will have been abolished.
Each adult in your house will receive a separate bill from the Council for the Poll Tax.
If you are receiving help towards your rent through Housing Benefit, you will automatically be assessed for help with the Poll Tax.
There is, therefore, no need to make a claim.
If you are not receiving Housing Benefit at the moment, but because you are on a low income you feel that you may qualify for help, please apply to the Council now.
2.
HOUSE OWNERS
Domestic Rates are abolished from 1st April 1990.
You will no longer receive an annual Rates bill.
Instead, a Poll Tax bill will be sent to each adult in your house.
If you are currently receiving a Rate rebate you will automatically be assessed for Poll Tax Benefit.
There is no need to complete a new application form.
However, if you do not currently receive a rebate and are on a low income, please apply to the Council now.
If there are any other adults, other than you and your partner, living in the household (eg adult children, parents etc, they should read section 5).
3.
PRIVATE TENANTS
Some tenants pay their Rates DIRECT to the Council.
If so section 2 will apply.
Others pay their rates direct to the landlord in with their rent.
As Domestic Rates will cease to exist in April 1990, tenants who pay their rates in this way should ensure that their rent is reduced by the landlord to reflect this change.
Please ask your landlord about this.
If you are receiving Housing Benefit help with your rent at the moment there is no need for you to make a further claim for help with the Poll Tax.
The Housing Benefit Office will automatically work out any benefit due on the new charge.
4.
BOARDERS
The information in section 3 will apply to you however, in some circumstances, the place in which you live may be classed as a ‘Collective Charge Property’(these could include accommodation with a very high turnover of residents).
You will need to check this with your landlord.
If you live in such a property your landlord will pay the Poll Tax to the Council and she/he will in turn collect a daily contribution from you.
You can apply for benefit in respect of this contribution if you are on a low income.
If you are already receiving Housing Benefit this will be done automatically.
5.
ADULT NON HOUSEHOLDERS
(eg Adults living with close relatives)
This group are not currently paying rent or rates to a private landlord or the Council, so cannot currently apply for help.
From 1st April 1990, a Poll Tax bill will be sent to most adults, including people in this group.
If you fall into this category and have a low income, you may be entitled to Poll Tax Benefit.
If you are currently receiving income support, the DSS will send a form to you in the late Autumn.
You should fill this in and return it to them.
The Council will contact you some time after this.
If you are not on income support at the moment and you wish to make a claim for benefit, please apply to the Council now.