

SAVE YOUR CHILD'S LIFE!
What to do in an emergency
TRIED & TESTED Slings and changing bags
YOU & YOUR BODY Our guide to a healthy pregnancy
PARENT OR PACKHORSE?
Cut down the baby baggage
Win A FAMILY PORTRAIT
ARE THEY EATING PROPERLY?
Food for real families
TIME OUT FOR TOTS Fun classes for the under-threes
Caught in the TANTRUM TRAP?
Find out how to escape!
ALL BUTTONED UP Help your child to dress herself
subscribe to parents and get free children's books worth nearly £8 page 90
IN THIS MONTH'S ISSUE
Being pregnant is a wonderful, life-shaping, sometimes terrifying experience — as you told us in How Does It Feel? on page 10.
But it has its mundane side, like backache and swollen ankles.
To help you cope, you'll find a complete A–Z of pregnancy health on page 42.
Small babies always need a lot of luggage — nappies, jars, bottles, wipes — but you can keep it to a minimum with our checklist of the bare essentials which you'll find in page 18.
On days when your toddler's energy supply seems endless, you really need to get him out of the house.
With this in mind, we've rounded up some fun classes for the under-fives — turn to page 34.
Is your child all fingers and thumbs when it comes to getting dressed?
On page 26 we suggest handy tips for teaching her to dress herself.
On a more serious note, on page 80 we tell you how to save your child's life, should an emergency — like electric shock or scalding — occur.
Definitely something to keep by you just in case.
upfront
Learning tapes
Four new videos that follow the gentle Montessori approach to education turn early learning into a game.
Called Learning Activities For Babies, For Toddlers , and two volumes For Preschoolers , they're priced £9.99 each from Holiday Brothers Ltd, 172 Finney Lane, Heald Green, Cheadle, Cheshire SK8 3PU (061–437 0538).
Soft drink
If you're having difficulty coaxing your baby to drink from a trainer cup, turn his old, familiar bottle into one with a Mam Soft Training Spout,(far left) which fits any standard bottle.
Its ‘soft-bite’ texture makes it seem more like a teat then a normal spout.
A pair of Training Spouts cost around £1.75 from good chemists and large toy stores like Toys R Us and Children's World.
Fitted duvet
If your child's a restless sleeper and constantly loses his duvet, invest in a Tidibed, a duvet cover that's partly attached to a fitted sheet so the duvet will stay in place.
The cover comes in 12 fabrics and sizes to fit most cots, single or double beds; prices from £19.99 for cot-size.
Phone 0533 607224 for a brochure or write to Lesley Thomas, 128 Long Furrow, East Goscote, Leicester LE7 8SU.
Safe shopping
Trolley safe from the Heinz Baby Club's Safety Catalogue is a two-inch wide polyester webbing belt, which is fully adjustable and will restrain babies and children, preventing them from standing up and falling out of a trolley, or tipping it over completely.
Priced £3.49, the Trolleysafe can also be used with chairs.
The Heinz Baby Club Safety Catalogue contains tons of useful advice and practical equipment.
To obtain a copy, call 0379 651981 or write to the Heinz Baby Club, Vinces Road, Diss, Norfolk IP22 3HH.
Let's talk
The Playground Talkabout Jigsaw Puzzle from Orchard Toys is choc-a-block with children doing things — jumping, swinging, sliding into mud, cycling, skateboarding, chasing dogs and playing all sorts of games.
As your child puts together the 50 chunky pieces, each new bit of the picture will encourage him to talk to you about what he sees — be prepared for a long conversation!
Available, priced £4.50, from most good toyshops and department stores; phone 0607 73547 for local stockists.
The jigsaw is suitable for ages three to six.
Good sports
If you're pregnant and sporty, you may be wondering what exercise you can do safely.
A new booklet, written by physiotherapist and NCT teacher Tina Everett, tells you the dos and don'ts of exercise in pregnancy and afterwards.
Price £1 plus stamped, addresses A5 envelope, from Tina at 33 Crosslands, Stantonbury, Milton Keynes MK14 6AY.
Disney Soother
Teething can mean tears and sleepless nights for baby and parents alike, but with a good old chew on Playskool's Disney Babies Teethe & cool can bring welcome relief to all the family.
Decorated with Disney's best loved characters — such as Mickey Mouse and Donald Duck — the Teethe & Cool is filled with sanitised water.
which when chilled in the fridge (not freezer) acts as a cold compress for baby's gums and helps to reduce any discomfort he's feeling.
Available from The Disney Store, 140/144 Regent's Street, London W1R 5FA, priced £2.50.
Checking temperature
Keep a check on your baby's temperature if he seems feverish or unwell with the Oxford Infant Contact thermometer.
Simply place the flat, rectangular thermometer between the infant's skin and his clothing or the mattress, leave it for ten minutes, and then remove and read immediately.
The colour-coded unit tells you if your baby's temperature is below normal (blue)— 34–35°C; normal (yellow)— 36–37°C; or high (red)— 38–41°C.
It is vital to bring down a high fever immediately by using infant paracetamol, removing any extra clothing, opening a window in a warm room or by tepid sponging.
Consult your doctor if none of these bring the temperature down.
The Oxford Infant Contact thermometer is available from selected branches of John Lewis around the country, priced £4.95.
Film news
Some good news for harassed mums and dads: Saturday morning could soon be your own again.
Warner Bros is reviving the tradition of Saturday morning children's cinema at its multiplex cinemas.
The Warner Bugs Bunny Club will be showing films and cartoons, including old favourites and new releases such as Back to the Future III and Babar the Movie , from about 9.30am at a cost of only £1.50 per person.
Clowns, magicians and competitions add to the fun.
The multiplex cinemas are currently in Bury, York, Newcastle and Basingstoke, but there are plans to expand the chain nationwide.
On the alert
If you're worried that your baby might fall out of his pushchair, or worse still be forcibly taken from it, Babysave is a new device specially designed to alert you instantly.
Invented by a new company, Niktron Corporation, Babysave is a soft, waterproof cushion which comes with a battery-operated buzzer box.
It is placed in your child's seat and if he moves off it, the pressure-sensitive cushion sounds the alarm.
Babysave is suitable for babies from three months on and is endorsed by the Portia Trust, a charity which was specially set up to prevent baby-snatching as well as to advise any distraught parent whose child has tragically been snatched.
Babysave costs £14.95 direct from Niktron Corporation plc, 1/3 Hale Lane, London NW7 3NU (081–906 1270).
Party fun
If you are planning to give your child a good old-fashioned birthday party, but are pushed for time, you might find the Party Club's Party Book and Fun Book are invaluable.
They include almost everything you need to make a party go with a swing, such as invitations, prizes, goodie bags and gifts.
And even better, you can make your choice from your armchair.
To join the Party Club, send off your child's name and birthday date in good time to: Party Club from Stockingfillas, Tennant House, London Rd, Macclesfield, Cheshire SK11 0LW, and you'll receive the two books and an order form six weeks before the big day.
Video memories
Remember Tales of the Riverbank, Tiswas, Crackerjack and Basil Brush?
Enjoy them again with your own kids with The Best Children's TV of the Decade videos, from the 60s and 70s (with the 80s out soon).
Philip Schofield of Going Live! introduces a glittering range of children's programmes, featuring well-known TV personalities and characters like John Noakes from Blue Peter, Noel Edmonds, Scott Tracey of Thunderbirds, Hammy Hamster and Zippy.
Available from all good video stockists, price £9.99 each.
Pregnancy people
Two people you're bound to come into contact with during pregnancy — and after — are your midwife and your local National Childbirth Trust teacher.
Find out a bit more about both when you go to your antenatal classes by watching two new videos, both sponsored by Pampers.
The first,A Privilege To Be There , tells you about the work of the midwife; the second Informed Choice , fills you in on exactly what the NCT does, from its antenatal classes to postnatal support and breastfeeding counselling.
So look out for Informed Choice at NCT branches and A Privilege To Be There at your local GP unit and hospital antenatal classes (they are not available privately).
how does it feel?
The nine months of pregnancy is a period of adjustment, a slow coming to terms with change and preparation for the excitement ahead.
Francesca Wolf talks to parents-to-be about their feelings
It's a good thing pregnancy is nine months long, because you need this time to adjust emotionally, as well as physically, to the tremendous changes going on within you.
For most women it is a period during which emotions run deep and strong.
For many, it's a time of profound contentment and satisfaction.
But it is also common to experience difficult, troubled feelings.
This is hardly surprising given that pregnancy causes the biggest hormonal upheaval your body has experienced since puberty.
And you also need to renegotiate your feelings about yourself, your baby, your partner, your relationship…no wonder your emotions are unpredictable!
Finding out
Lesley is 11 weeks pregnant with her first baby.
She says: ‘I felt immense relief when I found out I was pregnant, mainly because I'd had this secret panic that I wouldn't be able to conceive.’
Couples who've been planning a baby often feel this relief and excitement.
‘We were over the moon and had a great sense of achievement — as if we'd done something terribly clever,’ says Susi, who has just given birth to her first baby.
But for others, emotions may be more disturbing.
Trisha, who is 29 weeks pregnant, says: ‘I was quite shocked, and very negative at first.
It was an accident — we hadn't planned to have a baby.
One part of me thought ‘I don't want to do this,’ while the other was thinking ‘Oh God — I don't want a miscarriage!’
Then I began to feel guilty and superstitious about having any negative feelings at all.’
Early days
The overwhelming tiredness and persistent nausea of the early weeks often comes as a shock.
Lesley says: ‘I feel sick, tired, grouchy.
No one told me how dreadful you can feel.
But I know it will go away and when I see friends with babies I still think ‘Oh, I want one now!’’
So much is going on inside — but nothing shows yet.
You may swing from high to low in a moment.
Some women, like Susi, sustain positive feelings all the way through.
‘Despite the exhaustion I still felt excitement.
I liked the novelty and fuss and being the centre of attention.
Right from the start I felt special, very feminine, more like a woman than ever before.’
Adjustments
Women who are used to controlling their body, who've kept fit, well-nourished and been efficient about contraception, sometimes find it hard to adjust to a state in which they are no longer fully in control.
Deborah, a keep-fit and aerobics teacher, says she felt ‘completely taken over’.
Trisha says this was an emotional as well as a physical reality: ‘This feeling of being out of control is like being on a roller coaster — there's no way out.’
The inevitability of the process can be hard to accept and it's normal to have these feelings, although many women do like the sense that they have relinquished control.
How will I be able to cope?
What am I going to do about work?
Will our relationship survive?
What kind of mother will I be?
What will the birth be like?
Worries like these are common, indeed are an almost inevitable part of adjusting to your new state.
It may help to talk about them.
You may have fears — about things you did early on before you knew that you were pregnant or that something could be wrong with the baby.
For Pat, who is 40, the first half of the pregnancy was completely overshadowed by worry about the amniocentesis.
For women who've had previous miscarriages, abortions or stillbirths, anxiety can be particularly acute.
As time goes by…
The middle part of pregnancy is the best for most women.
Sickness and exhaustion often disappear and give way to a sense of emotional wellbeing.
Carol, five months into pregnancy, is luxuriating in it: ‘I love the way my stomach and breasts are filling out — I feel very womanly.
My hair is thick and glossy whereas it's normally a bit straggly.
I love the feeling of a child developing inside me.
I feel rich, fecund, complete.’
Yet some women continue to feel unwell or are plagued by discomforts such as varicose veins, backache, bleeding gums or faintness.
If you have many demands on you at work or at home the ‘bloom’ of middle pregnancy may be sadly elusive.
When baby's first movements are felt — at around 18 to 20 weeks — it's a tangible sign of the separate life inside you.
For most women this is tremendously exciting; but it can also feel strange and not a little unnerving.
Sex
Feelings about sex vary widely.
In the middle part of pregnancy, Rachel felt ‘sexier than ever before — in a constant state of arousal.
I felt sensual, earthy, eroticised.
It was so wonderful to be able to make love without contraception.’
Excitement and happiness about being pregnant, coupled with a greater blood flow in the pelvic area and genitals, often have a physically arousing effect.
Breasts and nipples are highly sensitive and you may find that orgasm comes more easily.
But it's also normal to go off the whole idea.
‘To be honest, I'm more concerned about getting a good night's sleep,’ says a pregnant woman, who's working full-time at a demanding job.
Sometimes it's the man who goes off sex.
Wendy, whose baby was due very soon said she was keen but her husband wasn't.
‘He felt there was another person there and he might bang its head.
He felt it wasn't quite right.’
Some men also find pregnant bodies less desirable — a view reinforced by our society's strict separation of sexiness from motherhood.
Men
Men's response to pregnancy is as complex and varied as women's.
Hugh says: ‘I felt very proud and fertile at first, but then I had a terrible sweaty hot night thinking about the responsibility.
I realised there was no going back — that pregnancy meant 18 years and then college…’
This sense of responsibility, of having to be grown-up, is felt by many men.
Your partner will probably feel protective and worried about you.
He may feel anxious, depressed or moody as well as positive and excited.
A man also needs to come to terms with the idea of becoming a father.
This may dredge up long-buried, uncomfortable emotions about his own childhood.
‘My father never had time for me.
I am determined that I'm going to spend far more time with my child,’ says Richard.
A man can feel left out during pregnancy.
He may be jealous of the baby or of the pregnant state itself.
It's not unusual for man to be put in this position of taking second place.
And women can become so wrapped up, so engrossed in the mystery of the physical process taking place inside them, that it can intensify a man's feeling of rejection.
Some men are happy not to be too closely involved, however.
Wendy says: ‘He feels very much that it is my baby, not at all jealous.
He leaves me free to get on with it and I like that.
He finds pregnancy rather bizarre and primitive, in a way.’
Your relationship will also be changed by pregnancy.
It may bring you much closer together, as for Carol and Alan.
‘I feel a new tenderness for this man who is now the father of my child.
We have created something between us.
I watch him and know what a good father he will be.
We are closer than ever before.’
It can also create hostility.
Lesley says: ‘My husband is getting very frustrated with trying to talk to me at 9.30 in the evening when I'm in a heap.
He says, ‘I thought this was going to make you happy’.’
Waiting
The last months of pregnancy can seem interminable and you may, like Susi, become fed up: ‘I began to hate my body.
I felt like I'd become a vehicle — a big bullfrog.’
But Wendy — whose baby's arrival is imminent — feels ‘placid and cheerful.
I'm in my own world, drifting about, communicating with the baby, looking forward to it, not really thinking…
I love being pregnant.
I do feel vulnerable when I go out though — people don't treat me as someone special, they laugh at my size.’
Towards the end you may well become quite wrapped up in yourself and the growing baby and increasingly remote from the rest of the world.
You may feel it will go on forever, but it won't.
Birth approaches inexorably.
Pat, whose baby is due in four days, says: ‘It's unnerving, this waiting to see what the future holds, but there isn't a lot I can do.
There are just two big question marks: ‘What will the birth be like?
And what will the baby be like?’’
CAN WE HELP?
Worried about a crying baby, breastfeeding, a clinging child or your relationship with your partner?
Whatever the problem, however small, write to us and one of our experts will be able to help and reassure you
Can We Help? is organised by our Family Editor, Heather Welford.
Each letter that isn't answered by our experts on these pages will receive an individual reply from Heather.
Please write to: Can We Help?,
Parents, Victory House, 14 Leicester Place, London WC2H 7BP.
Don't forget to enclose an sae.
SHE'S STARTED BEDWETTING
Q Our daughter is nearly three and she's been dry at night for over a year, but recently she's started to wet the bed at night.
Is there anything we can do to stop her doing this?
MT, Devon
A A sudden relapse into bedwetting is a very common problem at Lucy's age.
It is often triggered by an emotional upset of some kind, such as moving house or starting playgroup.
Make sure you give her as much reassurance as you can to help her feel secure.
If the problem still doesn't clear up, consult your doctor, who can arrange for an analysis of the urine.
An infection of the bladder could be causing Lucy to lose control at night, and other infections such as flu can also be a factor in the beginnings of night-time accidents.
ALISON SPIRO
BITING BREASTFEEDER
Q My baby's six months old and he's started to bite me when I'm breastfeeding him.
I'm pretty sure he's teething, and that the biting has something to do with this, but what can I do about it?
PT, Sussex
A Try taking your baby off the breast and saying ‘no’, quite firmly.
This usually works.
If the biting happens at the start of the feed, use an ice cube or some soothing gel on his gums to deaden the pain of teething first.
SHIRLEY ANNE SEEL
SHOULD I CARRY ON FEEDING?
Q My son Nathan is ten months old, and I have really enjoyed breastfeeding him.
He eats a wide range of solid foods, but he still likes a breastfeed last thing at night.
The problem is, I don't know whether I want to continue or not.
He gets a lot of comfort from the breastfeed, and as he has never had a bottle, and doesn't drink milk from a cup, I feel it gives him some nourishment, too.
Friends and relatives tell me I should have stopped by now, and I know I don't want to carry on through the toddler years.
I never really planned on feeding for this long — it just happened.
I'm confused by the whole thing.
Should I stop now?
CH, Essex
A Many mothers find that they end up breastfeeding for longer than they had intended.
The National Childbirth Trust produces a book called Breastfeeding A Toddler , which recounts several women's stories, some of whom decided to continue breastfeeding, and some who decided to stop.
It's available at £1.30 plus 35p p&p, from NCT (Maternity Sales), Alexandra House, Oldham Terrace, London W3 6NH.
It's quite common for babies of Nathan's age to want to carry on breastfeeding.
However, he may gradually wean himself off without any pushing from you.
If you do decide to stop before this happens, perhaps someone else can put him to bed, so he doesn't automatically expect a breastfeed before going to sleep.
If you put him to bed and he cries, check on him every few minutes, reassuring him you're there by talking to him and stroking him before leaving the room.
Repeat the process if he carries on crying.
This is quite difficult to do unless you are sure you want to give up that last feed.
You're right the breast milk that you give Nathan has some nutritional value.
The Department of Health states that it forms a valuable part of a baby's diet for at least a year — so do carry on if you want to.
SHIRLEY ANNE SEEL
I'M DESPERATE FOR A BABY
Q I have two little daughters, aged two and almost a year.
Shortly after having the second baby, I chose to be sterilised.
I was quite sure at the time that I wouldn't want any more children.
Now, though, I've changed my mind.
I'm desperate for a baby.
My husband's not all that bothered one way or the other.
Is there any hope that I could have the operation reversed?
DW, Oxfordshire
A Sterilisation is a big step to take, which is why it's always best to make sure you have some counselling beforehand, to allow you to talk through your feelings.
Even after counselling, though, what seemed the right decision at the time can be a source of regret later.
It's possible that your feelings are especially strong at the moment because you can see both your children growing away from the baby stage, leaving you with the knowledge that that chapter of your life is perhaps closed.
Talk over the way you feel with your husband; imagine what life would be like with another child and think about the advantages and disadvantages.
At the same time, speak to your GP and ask about the sort of operation you had and the possibilities of reversal.
It's possible to be sad about your babies becoming children, and yet accept the fact that you won't have any more.
Your little girls still need you very much, so don't dwell on the baby you might never have.
HEATHER WELFORD
WILL SHE EVER BE TRAINED?
Q Alexandra is two years, four months old.
She is still in nappies during the day and at night.
I've made a few attempts to try to potty train her without any success.
I've noticed that she has good bladder control.
If I leave her nappy off she can stay dry for four hours, but then she wets the floor as she can't hold on any longer.
The problem is she won't use the potty.
I've tried everything, from bribery to anger (though I've never smacked her).
The potty is always nearby, and I feel absolutely convinced she knows what it's for.
She always tells me when she's wet her pants, and understands everything that's said to her, so why won't she cooperate on this?
JP, Surrey
A Some children are dry in the day at 18 months; others are as late as 3½.
Alexandra tells you after she's wet, but she can't tell you before, because she doesn't know she's going to!
That is the normal pattern of development, and before long she will be able to know in advance — and then let you know.
At first, you may still have accidents as you may not be able to get her to the potty in time, but she'll gradually learn to hold on longer.
Whatever you do, don't make a fuss when she has an accident or won't use the potty.
If she gets anxious, potty training is bound to take longer.
Give her lots of reassurance, and stay as relaxed as you possibly can.
ALISON SPIRO
WHAT'S WRONG WITH HER NECK?
Q For the second time in two months, my four-month-old daughter's head and neck have become ‘stuck’ on one side, making her look awkward and uncomfortable.
She seems to have all the symptoms of an adult-type stiff neck.
Her head appears lopsided, and one side is slightly swollen.
She doesn't appear to be in any pain, and she seems quite happy and healthy.
The first time it happened I immediately thought of meningitis, and rushed her to the doctor's.
He said it would right itself, and that she was basically okay.
Within a week, she was back to normal but now it's happened again and I feel anxious to know more about it.
One minute her head looks normal, and the next it's twisted.
Should I see a specialist?
DR, Leeds
A It sounds as if your baby has torticollis, which is the medical name for a stiff neck.
The usual cause in a baby is some minor damage to the neck muscle during delivery, which pulls the head to one side.
Sometimes, there's a small swelling in the middle of the muscle.
The condition can last for months, but it goes away completely in time.
Check, though, that she isn't sleeping in an awkward position, which may sometimes cause the problem.
Occasionally, the condition is associated with a viral infection, but if your daughter's quite well then you don't need to worry about that.
If you're still concerned, though, take her to your doctor again, and discuss the condition with your health visitor.
DR TONY WATERSTON
I JUST CAN'T COPE
I love my two sons, aged three and 21 months, but I'm finding it difficult to cope with them.
Life seems to have gone downhill since the younger one was born.
I've had various health problems, especially extreme tiredness, and there are days when I want to do nothing except cry and cry.
I have to drag myself out of bed each day, and I can't get up the energy to do any housework.
I can't bear to look at myself in a mirror: I know I look a mess most of the time.
My doctor has no advice except ‘try and take it easy’.
He says having two children close together is bound to be hard work.
My husband tries to be sympathetic, but I can tell his patience is running out.
I sometimes think it might be better for everyone if I wasn't here.
Have you any advice on what I can do about it?
LE, Kent
A I'm concerned about you, and I'm surprised your doctor implied it's not unusual to feel as you do.
You sound very depressed to me, and it's probably this that's making you feel unable to cope.
It may be that you have a form of postnatal depression that needs treatment.
Depression can be helped by medical and counselling methods.
You need to tell your GP just how bad you're feeling — and perhaps your husband could come with you when you see him to give added support.
Be as honest as you can.
Talk to your health visitor, too.
It can help just to have someone around to talk to, especially if you're on your own with the children during the day.
Have you got a close friend or relative who could spend some time just talking with you, or who might be able to take the children out to give you a break?
Arranging a weekend away with your husband, without the children, is another idea.
Although I realise that organising childcare for two small children is bound to be difficult, if it can be arranged, it will do you the power of good.
The Association for Postnatal Illness, 7 Gowan Avenue, London SW6 6RH, can offer further information and counselling.
DIANE MELVIN
WHAT CAN I DO ABOUT HIM?
Q My son is nine and I can honestly say I can't do a thing with him.
He's cheeky, defiant, and rude to my friends.
At school he's a bully, and I've had lots of discussions with the teachers about his behaviour.
He has temper tantrums if he can't get his own way, and he even tries to hit me.
I'm a single parent, and I blame myself for the way he is — but I feel it's too late to get through to him now as talking or reasoning doesn't work.
SC, Edinburgh
A I'm pretty sure you're going to need some help to deal with your son's behaviour, and his problems at school.
Your son's teacher should be able to refer him to an educational psychologist who'll try to find out why he acts as he does, and how he can be helped.
Don't feel guilty.
Being a single parent brings extra stresses to childcare, and there may be lots of things that have happened in your life that you haven't included in your letter.
If you're reluctant to ask the school for support, contact your local child or family guidance centre or ask your GP to refer you to a child psychologist.
DIANE MELVIN
WHY IS HE SO AGGRESSIVE?
Q I've been living with my boyfriend for three years, and we have two children, Liam, aged two and Jade, six months.
Things have been very difficult over the past few months, because of the way my boyfriend treats Liam.
He gets very angry with him, and shouts at him a great deal.
He says I'm no good at disciplining, and he calls Liam a ‘wimp’ and a ‘spoilt little brat’— and blames me because I don't smack him.
The other day he slapped Liam across the face and got mad at me when I complained.
I feel so desperate about it, I'm seriously thinking about leaving and taking the children with me.
KT, Lancaster
A This is such a sad situation, and one to which there is no easy answer.
Does you boyfriend know you feel so strongly about the issue that you're thinking of leaving?
It might be worth telling him.
You will have to get him to talk, perhaps with a third person present so the discussion doesn't degenerate into a row.
Your health visitor, or a counsellor from the family guidance centre (most areas have one — ask at your clinic) would be able to help.
I agree with you that it's not right to call your son names, and that slapping him is potentially dangerous.
There may be reasons why your boyfriend is behaving in this way.
Maybe, now that Liam is a toddler, he finds it more difficult to remain patient.
Maybe Liam reminds him of something unhappy in his own childhood.
Situations like this tend to get worse, not better.
So act now.
HEATHER WELFORD
Test of time
Ever wondered how mothers coped in the past?
Surprisingly some things haven't changed…
It was the first time the Worthingtons had ever taken their baby on a train journey…and it broke down just 15 minutes out of Waterloo.
‘We were stuck there for nearly three hours,’ says Jill Worthington.
‘It was terrible.
But Sally was so good, Luckily I'd remembered to pack the Farley's Rusks and she had those mixed up with boiled water the guard got for me from the restaurant car.’
This wasn't Britain 1991…but summer 1949 when the Worthingtons like most families went on their holidays by train.
Back home they had few conveniences…every day Jill Worthington boiled up nappies for Sally.
Like most families then Jill didn't have a fridge so shopping was a daily event though she had a ventilated larder to store some perishables.
Once baby Sally was on solids Jill used a mincer to prepare her meals.
But in between meals, for tea and whenever they went out Jill relied on Farley's Rusks because she knew it was a name she could trust.
Generation game…
It seems some things never change.
Jill has recently become a great-grandmother.
And one of the first foods grand-daughter Lisa gave her baby were Farley's Rusks mixed up with a little baby milk.
Otherwise Lisa's lifestyle couldn't be more different from her grandmother's.
She's back at work two days a week now.
The rest of the time sees her shopping in her car or meeting other mums.
At weekends she's out with her husband or preparing something for their friends in her new kitchen with its microwave, food processor and dishwasher to take the strain.
But like her own mother and her grandmother before her, when it comes to stocking up the food cupboard for her baby Lisa relies on a name she can trust.
So there's always a packet of Farley's Rusks.
‘When friends come I know I've something to offer their babies,’ she says.
‘And if they have toddlers then a Farley's Rusk is so much healthier than a biscuit.’
Moving with the times…
These days as well as the Original Farley's Rusks there are three other varieties to choose from: low sugar, banana and orange.
But whatever favour you choose the rusks will still have all the qualities you would expect from one of the country's most trusted and established baby food manufacturers.
It's a fact that just one of their rusks provides at least 15 per cent of a baby's recommended daily intake of vitamins and minerals.
And of course you can rest assured the product contains no artificial colours, flavours or preservatives.
And even though the packs may look different — you can't miss the bright new design — parents everywhere can still be quite confident that Farley's Rusks are just as ideal for their babies and toddlers in today's world as they ever were.
Whether you're working, travelling or simply rushing around at home you'll find Farley's Rusks are versatile, easy to use and light to carry.
Perfect for today's busy lifestyle.
GET UP & GO
Don't let your baby restrict you, says Francesca Mackinnon
Venturing out with a small baby is actually easier than with toddlers, who want to crawl, explore and get up to mischief.
Babies, on the other hand, simply wish to be where you and the milk are.
Moreover, they'll sleep anywhere as long as they're warm and comfortable.
The real problem when it comes to going out with an infant is the amount of clobber you have to take with you.
So it pays to cut it down to the bare essentials — the minimum you feel is necessary.
Of course, these essentials will depend on your baby, your destination, your purse and your personality.
For example, Gemma, a teacher and now mother of nine-week-old Alice, tries to be calm.
‘Ideally, I like to allow enough time so I don't need to rush and make us both tense.
I get myself and everything ready, then just before we leave I breastfeed and change Alice — even if I've done this an hour before.
It's much easier going out when she's got a full tummy!’
Most of us would agree that it's useful to stay calm and think ahead, but few of us are as well organised as Caroline Lamb, who makes a point of taking her seven-week-old baby, Ben, out every day to visit friends, the clinic or shops.
She checks daily that her changing bag is filled with essential and spare clothes and leaves it permanently packed in the hall ready to pick up at a moment's notice so she's never caught unprepared.
‘I made a conscious decision to go out as much as possible when I had the baby,’ she says, ‘because I knew the walls would close in on me if I didn't.
At first, I thought ‘Oh God, how am I going to do it?’
But once I'd taken the plunge and got myself organised, I found it wasn't bad at all, and not nearly as difficult as I'd imagined.’
Gina, mother to Georgia (four months) and Louise (four years), has a much more casual approach than Caroline.
‘I don't have a car so I take as little as I can get away with,’ she says.
‘Sometimes I'm in such a tearing hurry I just grab a nappy and bottle on the run as I head out of the door.’
THINK AHEAD!
Many mums find it helps to think through every eventuality in advance.
So ask yourself the following questions beforehand:•How long are you likely to be out for?•How many bottles and nappies does your baby manage to get through in that time?•Is there going to be somewhere you can change him (even the car) and/or breastfeed him comfortably, or warm a bottle if necessary?•Is it likely to rain (you'll need a wet-weather cover), be very hot (sun cream and a hat), or cold (extra layers, hat and gloves)?
THE ‘GET-UP-AND-GO’ LIST
With these questions answered, it's time to start gathering the essentials.
Assuming your trip is for more than an hour, the following items are considered pretty indispensable by most mothers.
They may seem a lot, but in fact they fit easily into a single bag.
What to take
•Nappies — one or two more than you think you'll need — and pins, if necessary.
•Nappy liners.
•Baby wipes (thick ones are best) or a damp sponge or flannel in a plastic bag.
•Barrier cream.
•Kitchen roll or tissues to mop up spills.
•A complete change of baby clothes.
•Some plastic bags (folded) for used nappies, clothes and bottles.
•Breast pads if you're breastfeeding.
•If bottle-feeding, take as many bottles as you think you'll need, plus one more.
Make them up beforehand and put them in a cool bag — or take boiled water in a sterile Thermos flask and mix feeds as you go.
•A 4oz bottle of cooled, boiled water if it's hot.
•Dummy (if used).
•Plastic spoon and bib.
•If you're weaning your baby take a jar of baby food or home-cooked purée in a sealed container; or dried food in a packet, boiled water in a Thermos and a small plastic dish to mix the food together in.
Babies can consume cold milk and food, but some refuse.
If so, you'll have to find a hot tap or ask for hot water (eg in a coffee shop), or take a wide-mouthed Thermos of boiling water to warm bottles and jars (bottle and food warmers are another option).
•Teacher beaker. •Teething ring/toy.
Put the whole lot in a changing bag — ideally a big one with zip-up pockets, a good shoulder strap and a clip-on changing mat.
A FEW HINTS
Don't forget that accidents can happen to you, too!
Take a muslin nappy or piece of cloth with you to put over your shoulder.
I learnt this lesson the hard way: I turned up for a dinner party having remembered everything for the baby, even flowers for the hostess, and then the baby was sick all over my lovely silk skirt!
If you feel shy about breastfeeding in public, wear a loose jumper or shirt so you can push it up and tuck your baby underneath.
That way little or nothing is revealed.
If you take made-up bottles, check them for leakage beforehand.
Tina, mother of Joanna (now nine months) says she wishes she'd done this.
Only when the bottles leaked in a smelly, milky mess all over everything in her bag did she discover that the rings and sealing discs did not fit properly.
Most mums value a really good changing bag.
Trisha McCulloch, mother of Michael (six weeks), says, ‘A roomy, padded bag with little pockets either side and a flap over the top which becomes a mat is worth its weight in gold.
Bottles and nappies don't get muddled up and you don't need to empty everything out when you want to use the bag as a mat.’
Car seats (the portable, rear-facing kind which last your baby up to the age of nine months) are also highly praised.
Caroline Lamb says her version is ‘wonderful…it has a rigid handle so you can take it out over your arm and still carry other things, and it converts into a rocking chair indoors.’
Many babies are lulled to sleep in cars, but if yours is wakeful and miserable, tapes of music or songs can be useful.
And try to avoid travelling in the rush hour…there's nothing worse than the combination of a traffic jam and a screaming baby, believe me!
THE BEST-PREPARED PLANS…
‘You always take far too much.
But the one occasion when you don't, the thing you need is the one thing you don't have!’
Linda Hopcraft's words strike a chord with most of us — and in her case the missing item was a spare set of clothes for seven-week-old Jessica.
Linda's family were visiting from Ireland and after visiting Thorpe Park in Surrey, they decided to stop at a pub on the way home.
‘The landlord was incredibly nice and said it was fine to take Jessica inside,’ says Linda.
But, horror or horrors, ‘As we were carrying her in, we noticed this awful peanut-like smell.
Then we realised that she'd had diarrhoea so badly it was actually oozing out of her collar!
We immediately rushed to the ladies, washed Jessica carefully in the sink and dried her under the hand dryer.
‘I had a nappy, but no spare clothes — no vest, Babygro, nothing.
So we improvised.
My husband took off his underpants and Jessica sat in the car with them wrapped round her the rest of the way home!
It was awkward at the time, but Jessica survived.’
The moral of the story?
You won't always get it right, but it's not the end of the world if you don't.
Your baby isn't made of china, so she won't break!
The hardware
Essential
Carrycot, pram and/or pushchair
Shopping tray or net
Rain cover and hood
Car safety seat
safety harness for car seat, pushchair, etc.
Optional
Cuddly lambskin to go in the carrycot
Baby sling
Back carrier once your baby can support his head and neck
Clip-on parasol
Clip-on tray for use in the car seat
Pushchair liner
SLINGS & THINGS
Travel light with Sheila Sang's selection of slings and changing bags
Getting out and about can be hard work in the early months, when babies seem to need three times their weight in accessories.
One of the easiest ways to regain your freedom is to use a sling — you'll be able to get about on public transport and visit shops and restaurants without the cumbersome trappings of a buggy or pram.
And there's the added advantage that fretful babies can be soothed when mothers want to get on with other important jobs around the house.
To carry all that baby gear and be prepared for the small crises babies present us with so frequently, there's nothing like a really good changing bag.
We've asked three mums, with babies aged from two weeks to five months, to give the slings and changing bags a star rating from one to five.
For stockist details, see page 88.
Our testers
Elaine, with baby Suzannah, aged two weeks
Patricia, with baby James, aged three months
Pamela, with baby Sam, aged five months 
SLINGS
Picking a sling can be quite a personal choice, for both you and your baby.
It's important that the sling is easy to put on single-handed, and that your baby gets adequate support.
Of all the slings we tested, the Wilkinet Baby Carrier, £19.95, was fairly cheap, should last until your baby is toddling and was well-liked by two of our testers.
Patricia, who had the biggest baby, liked the Maclaren carrier, because it placed the weight comfortably and firmly between her shoulders.
ACn Baby Carry, £12
Age: birth to five or six months
What it's like: soft, padded seat and padded neck support, with straps that go round mum's waist and over her shoulders.
Comfort in use ***
How easy to put on? **
Testers' comments: Pamela: ‘We were both comfortable with this, and Sam slept happily in it.
But I had a problem getting it on and off; the clasp seemed to settle between my shoulders where I couldn't reach.’
Elaine: ‘I thought Suzannah looked too small for this, though it was nice and soft.’
Bettacare Carrybabe, £21
Age: birth to 18 months
What it's like: a large shawl with padded sides and an adjustable buckle at the shoulder.
Testers' comments: Pamela: ‘It took a bit of adjusting to get the sling set just right, but it's very easy to put on.
I found I wanted to support Sam, even though he's old enough to sit up on his own now.’
Elaine: ‘Our small baby didn't like lying back like this.’
Mothercare Baby Cuddle Pack, £28.99
Age: birth to six months
What it's like: a baby sling with a multi-position inner seat, a zipped, quilted outer cover and adjustable padded straps.
Comes with two bibs.
Testers' comments: Pamela: ‘Heavy on the shoulders, and although Sam went to sleep he didn't look comfy.
It was all a bit complicated and wasn't particularly easy to put on.’
Elaine: ‘I like the idea of the outer cover but I never seemed to get her comfortable.’
Tomy Cradle Carrier, £40
Age: birth to 18 months
What it's like: adjustable, removable seat with neck support and removable padded outer cover which can be used as a cradle for nursing and dozing, terry bib and adjustable padded straps.
Testers' comments: Pamela: ‘Very comfortable.
I particularly liked the seat, which unzips so that I can put him down in bed once asleep.’
Elaine: ‘It was easy to put on, and Suzannah seemed very snug.’
Wilkinet Baby Carrier, £19.95 (mail-order only)
Age: birth to 18 months
What it's like: soft, padded cloth with tie straps and neck support.
Can be used with baby facing mum, facing forward, on hip or on your back.
Testers' comments: Pamela: ‘It was a bit hard to understand how to put it on at first, but we were both very comfortable, and the baby didn't seem to droop down as sometimes happens.’
Elaine: ‘A good fit for tiny Suzannah, who seemed comfortable, and quite easy to put on by myself.’
Maclaren Front Baby Carrier, £20
Age: birth to 12 months
What it's like: soft, padded, adjustable seat and padded neck support, with straps that go round mum's waist and over shoulders and fit together with clunk-click fitting.
Testers' comments: Patricia: ‘This is well-designed and stylish, has a handy pocket at the front, and the adjustable, padded nylon straps give added support so aren't a strain on the back.
The only slight fault was that the strap tended to lie on top of James' head — but he wasn't bothered by them.’
Tomy Comfort Carrier, £33
Age: birth to 24 months
What it's like: fully lined cover that supports baby's head, adjustable inner seat, padded shoulder straps and waistband.
Testers' comments: Elaine: ‘Very snug and comfortable with the weight kept well off my shoulders.
She always looks very warm — she sort of sinks into it so you can just spot the top of her hat.
But it's like carrying a hot-water bottle strapped to me!’
BABY CHANGING BAGS
It's handy to have a baby changing bag packed and ready to go with the nappies, wipes and anything else you'll need.
Look for one with a detachable changing mat (all ours had them), and lots of pockets to prevent odds and ends getting jumbled up.
Of the three we tested, the Caboodle Bag, £16, stood out, with all the features you need, although Patricia felt it was a bit too fussy.
It's widely available from babycare shops and department stores, or by mail order (see stockists, page 88).
All our scores are out of five.
All prices are approximate
ACn Baby Cuddle Pack £15
What it's like: zipped, quilted changing bag with one wide and two small outer pockets and a shoulder strap.
Changing mat that folds over top and is attached with a popper at each corner.
The inside is plastic-lined.
Overall rating ****
Caboodle Bag £16
What it's like: zipped, quilted changing bag with detachable shoulder strap and two wide outer pockets; one for separate changing mat, the other zipped and labelled for grubby stuff; bottle pockets at either end, lined interior with see-through pockets and motif with squeaker on outside.
Mothercare Changing Bag £13.50
What it's like: zipped, padded changing bag with shoulder strap.
Changing mat fold over top and is attached with a popper at each corner; inside is lined with plastic and there is a useful wide inner pocket.
Overall rating •••
getting on WITH IT
practical problems
Getting dressed and undressed is something we do almost unthinkingly, but for young children it is an amazingly complicated task — just think of all those buttons and zips!
Dorothy Einon helps you to help them
Dressing is one of those tasks which we do every day as a matter of routine.
Most adults do it almost unthinkingly, but for young children it's a painstakingly complicated business.
Forgetting for a moment the more obvious skills — such as the fine finger control needed to do up buttons, or the eye/hand coordination involved in matching the button to the hole — there are a host of basic problems a child needs to overcome before she will be able to dress herself, let alone fling on her clothes without thinking.
Take putting on a pair of knickers — there are no buttons but plenty of problems.
Besides knowing that pants are meant to cover her bottom, a child has to know how to get them there.
Clothes go on via the arms, legs and head — so which way is it for pants?
And if the leg holes are for legs, why not put her legs in first, leaving the waist hole until later?
With pants, as with many clothes, she has to know the difference between things that are nearly the same — like large waist holes and smaller leg holes — and then match them to her body.
as if this isn't difficult enough, she has to remember, too, to put the pants on before her trousers.
Nothing, it seems, is easy.
So it's a good idea to give your child plenty of practice at dressing.
Most of us help the process automatically, by talking our way through it: ‘Let's put the vest on first, over your head.
Where has she gone?
Peep-bo, there she is.
Now where's that little hand?’
As you talk, you'll find she'll begin to understand the patter, until eventually she begins to attempt to put on her clothes all by herself.
DRESSING: AGE AND STAGE
At around six months, your baby won't be able to do much, but she will cooperate with your wishes.
In spite of her squirming, her hand is usually ready to go into her sleeve and her foot is often lifted for her sock.
She is already learning to anticipate the movements needed to get dressed and beginning to associate a particular piece of clothing with a certain part of her body.
We could say that she is laying the foundations for dressing herself later on.
At around one year, she'll hold out her foot or raise her arms when you ask.
But, although many babies pull off hats, socks and booties in their first year, they don't really try to dress or undress at this stage.
They have neither the physical skills — that is, the finger control and hand manoeuvrability — nor the planning skills necessary to organise the dressing sequence on their own.
Anyway, there are numerous easier ways for her to show her independence at this stage, such as walking, feeding or emptying out her toy box.
As her physical and mental skills develop, though, her desire for independence will often push her beyond her physical abilities.
Dressing often becomes a battle at this time, as you try to hurry the process by helping where help isn't wanted and she becomes more and more frustrated when her leg goes in the wrong hole or the jumper ends up back to front.
At around two years, there is another driving force pushing her towards independence: the desire to be like everyone else.
Soon after her first birthday, you'll notice she's beginning to imitate you, watching everything you do carefully so that she can start trying things out for herself.
By two, most children can take off hats, shoes, socks, pants and vests, but they have trouble with sleeves, fastenings and bulky jackets because chubby hands are clumsy and uncoordinated.
They lack the flexibility to do more than drag or pull on clothes.
So, although your two-year-old can sweep off her hat or pull down her trousers, she hasn't got the physical coordination needed to put a sock on the right way, with the heel round the back of her foot.
By three years old, time, practice and the growing skill that matches hand with eye will have helped most children to master sleeves, big buttons and some zips.
Indeed, your child may surprise you by suddenly appearing fully dressed one day, in an odd assortment of clothes, when you hadn't even realised she was capable of it.
By four, only the most fiddly things like back zips, waist buttons, shoelaces and hooks are beyond her developing skill.
Some of these are always difficult — even for adults — but by seven, she should be able to do them all without any help from you.
Putting on a vest, pants and T-shirts
There are two problems here: getting the arms and legs in the right holes and getting the garment the right way round.
Avoiding getting both legs in the same hole takes great concentration!
How you can help:
Choose underwear that clearly distinguishes the various holes.
A bow at the neck of a vest, for example, marks it out from the arm holes; a different-coloured waist band indicates that it's the ‘bigger’ hole in pants.
Tackle the problem of front and back in the same way, making it obvious which side is the front.
Try putting a little badge on the front of a top and placing it face down.
The badge is secret — and no-one should know that it's hiding on the front until she gets the T-shirt or jumper on.
Buttoning up a shirt
Your child will take a lot of trouble, but still the button will not go into the hole — and then, when she's finished, she finds she's got a button over!
How you can help:
Big buttons are easier than small ones, so it may save time as well as tempers if you replace small buttons with something a bit more chunky.
And sew them on with elasticated cotton so that they ‘give’ a little.
Show her how to start buttoning from the bottom up.
Stick a gold star (or a dab of nail varnish) on the bottom button and sew a little red thread on the bottom buttonhole so that she doesn't mismatch them.
Use the same trick to mark the right hole on belts and shoe buckles.
Putting on a skirt or trousers
Keep these simple to put on, as this will give the child confidence and the satisfaction of being independent.
How you can help:
Two-year-olds find buttons and zips beyond their limited skills, so choose skirts and trousers with elasticated waists that just need pulling up.
This is particularly important for the newly toilet-trained who might have a mishap if they are impeded!
Putting on shoes
One problem here is the tendency for children to get the shoe on the wrong foot, especially if they have side fastenings.
The reason is that the child usually sits on the floor to put her shoes on and her knees point outwards.
She likes to see the fastening, which means that for convenience, the shoe ends up on the wrong foot.
How you can help:
Teach her to step into both shoes as one operation and then fasten each shoe as a second operation.
Get her to sit on the bottom stair and put them on, as this way she'll have better access to the fastening.
Remember that stepping into wellies is always easier than trying to pull them on.
Velcro shoe fastenings are by far the easiest for young hands to deal with.
Buttons are fiddly so look out for ones sewn onto elastic loops.
Help her to fasten buckles by marking the comfortable hole she usually uses with a dab of coloured nail varnish.
Doing up laces
Shoelaces are difficult; most five-year-olds manage to tie them, but it'll take a long time if the only practice she gets is actually putting on the shoes each morning.
How you can help:
Make tying laces into a great game: sit down with the shoes in front of you both and tie and untie them together.
Wet the laces.
This will help them to stay tied.
Frayed laces make tying very difficult (and they tend to get into a knot), so put a little nail varnish or some tape on the ends or buy some new, novelty laces!
Getting her coat on
Cardigans and coats are difficult because your child has to approach them from the wrong side.
Suppose she puts the coat on a chair with the opening facing upwards: to get the zip at the front, she has to put her right arm into the left-hand sleeve, which means ignoring the nearest armhole.
It's hard for her to work this out.
How you can help:
Lay the coat, zip or buttons up, on the floor or a chair and get the child to stand at the ‘head’ end.
Now she can put her right arm in the right-hand hole, and her left in the left side; then simply lift her arms up and sweep the coat over her head into place.
Getting the zip fastener together is difficult but she will be able to zip up much more easily if you attach a key ring to the zipper.
Show her how to pull away from the body as she pulls the zip up, so other clothes don't get caught in it.
A little soap on the zipper will make it run more easily.
Sew a little loop of elastic inside the cuff of her sweater, which can be looped over a thumb to stop the sleeves bunching up uncomfortably when she puts her coat on.
DOS AND DON'TS OF DRESSING
Do be patient.
Some children are more clumsy than others.
Dressing takes considerable skill and like everything else, children develop these skills at very different rates.
Give her plenty of opportunities to practice eye/hand coordination besides dressing, ie by picking up small objects, playing with threading toys, building with bricks, etc.
Help her by arranging her clothes on the bed in the order she should put them on, and facing the right way.
Start on the left with her vest, finishing on the right with her shoes.
(An added bonus of this method is that she'll already be familiar with left-to-right logic when she comes to start reading.)
Always put things face-down on the bed so they are ‘right’ for putting on.
If there's a choice of options, ie more than one button or buckle hole, mark the one she needs or the place at which she should start using stickers or a drop of nail varnish.
Practice really does make perfect, so encourage her to play with dressing-up clothes and let her dress up dolls and teddy bears (this is equally important for boys, too!).
Buy or make a ‘fastening bag’, covered with zips, buttons, buckles and laces for her to practise on.
Above: once she's got the T-shirt in position, it's easy for Clare to slip her head through the big hole in the middle
Left and below: The armholes are trickier, though, but she gets there in the and.
The T-shirt is even the right way round!
Top right: small buttons can be a nightmare for uncoordinated fingers.
Above right and below: Children find it difficult to balance, so — like Clare — they'll often sit on the floor to put on a skirt or trousers
the PAIN barrier
The pain of childbirth is legendary, but positive thinking and modern methods of pain relief can go some way towards easing the situation
Pain is something we're all afraid of, and the pain of labour can be particularly daunting.
But it's important to remember it's not painful because something is wrong.
It's a positive pain, if you like, that will transform you into a mother.
The trouble is, pain is all anyone seems to talk about when it comes to giving birth.
Just like old soldiers, women get together and describe their wounds.
And this tendency to focus on the pain is a pity because birth is such a wonderful experience.
Fear of the unknown
All births are different; some are short and intense, some are long and exhausting.
Whatever they are, few women have successfully described the pain and this is, perhaps, the main reason why some expectant mums are afraid — fear of the unknown.
It's a bit like telling ghost stories.
The narrator says, ‘I was there, I felt it, but I can't describe exactly what it was,’ and everyone draws closer, fascinated.
And as with all things that elude description, they get exaggerated until, in the end, no-one can be quite sure what really happened.
Women, especially mothers, are often guilty of birth gossip, and unwittingly create fear in the minds of first-time mothers.
Many women say that their own mother's attitude also had a big effect on them.
Being positive
Expecting something to be bad can turn out to be a self-fulfilling prophecy and thinking positively about labour may reduce the amount of pain relief needed.
This is certainly the view of active-birth advocates as well as the pioneers of natural birth.
Managing to be positive when you are in pain is easier said than done, but the way in which you handle it could have a lot to do with your own personality.
If you're in trouble, for example, do you try to sort it out yourself or get everyone else involved?
Do you feel a victim when things go wrong in life?
Are you easily cowed by people in authority and if you feel you really should say no, do you often end up saying yes?
It's worth stepping back a little and considering your own personality before drawing up a birth plan or vowing that you will never have an epidural whatever the circumstances.
Some women have a terror of losing control and this can play a negative part in labour.
Observations of birth do suggest that women need to let go.
Fear of being out of control may mean a fear of appearing uninhibited, or seeming dependent.
This is fighting pain rather than dealing with it.
Passive suffering, where the woman doesn't move around, scream or swear, may mean that she is too focused on the pain, with no distractions to help her.
Judy, aged 35 and a first-time mother, left her last active-birth class at 10.30pm, six hours before her daughter was born.
She had no pain relief, no stitches and a beautiful birth.
‘The hospital I chose had a birthing pool and I met a midwife who I liked immediately.
She seemed so happy and positive and the thing that made me opt for that hospital was when she said, ‘Childbirth is the woman's experience, we're just here to back you up.’
‘When it came to the birth I wanted to feel I could be left alone but have supportive people around me.
I've never had any fear of childbirth.
I don't think fear comes from old aunts telling horror stories, I think it comes from women who've had babies recently.
The idea that things can be made easier for women through medical advances can lead to a lot of disillusionment.
Pethidine often doesn't work, epidurals go wrong, and women can get trapped in a very painful and negative downward spiral.
‘Quite early on I found out about the Active Birth Centre.
I got their programme and went to a lecture by Michel Odent who wrote Entering the World , a book that had really impressed me.
They did yoga-based classes quite near me so I started going once a week.
‘It all seemed very remote to me — having a baby — right up until the labour began at about 11pm.
Geraldine [a close friend of judy's]and the midwife were with me at home.
We had a tape of African music on and we began dancing at about midnight.
I'd been told the baby was semi-posterior so I knew I had to turn her into a more comfortable position for birth.
I wiggled my hips a lot!
‘The hard bit started at about 2am.
Geraldine read us a short story and, as I had each contraction, I'd kneel over a bean bag.
‘At about 3am I had to stay upright, anything else was too painful, and my legs began to feel tired.
It was the only time I felt slightly frightened and that was mainly because I'd heard that a posterior labour could last a long time — even 24 hours.
The actual experience wasn't frightening me so much as what I'd been told .
‘The midwife examined me then and said we ought to getting to the hospital [Judy had chosen shared care].
After my waters broke I had an uncontrollable urge to push but the midwife told me not to.
I didn't ask why, just assumed that the baby was presenting the wrong way.
‘Once we got to the hospital I could feel her head and it was the first moment it all became real for me.
They said ‘push with the pain’ and she just slipped out.
‘Right from the beginning I'd felt it was more important to have a woman with me than my partner.
I think it's too alien for men, they don't even have period pains.
They also tend to feel sorry for you when what you really want is someone to say ‘Yeah, you can do it.’’
The partner
A partner's positive approach is essential in beating pain.
As Sheila Kitzinger, the birth expert, wrote: ‘The most undermining thing you can do to a woman in labour is to encourage her to feel sorry for herself.’
Most likely a first-time father has never seen a person in such pain and it's also the person he loves most.
‘Perhaps you need some pain relief,’ he might say, immediately sowing the seeds of doubt in the woman's mind.
On the other hand, partners can be very supportive in labour, especially if they've attended classes.
The big question mark
There are sometimes very good reasons why a woman needs strong pain relief: the baby may be at risk, or there may be obstetric reasons.
But sometimes fear is the sole cause.
Most women would agree that if only minimal pain relief is used the birth is much more focused and the baby may be better off too.
Everyone has a different pain threshold but how much of that is due to what is going on in the mind is hard to say.
More and more hospitals are finding that if women have prepared themselves well and practised breathing and relaxation, the birth is more likely to be drug-free.
Remember, though, no-one gets handed a medal for having a drug-free birth, but it's still quite a good goal to aim for.
Carol, aged 29 and a first-time mother, was induced just four days before her baby's due date because she experienced a rise in her blood pressure.
‘My mum was induced because of high blood pressure.
She'd had a 24-hour labour but often said she didn't know what all the fuss was about these days.
‘I opted for full hospital care.
With a first baby you feel cautious.
I'd just wanted to be somewhere where people knew what they were doing.
I expected to be terrified of the pain and I was worried that if anything went wrong I wouldn't be able to cope.
‘It was standard practice at the hospital to complete a birth plan.
It made me feel quite comfortable about the hospital.
I also went to classes at the local clinic but they were a low-key sort of affair.
I did worry about how fit I'd be, but I didn't do much about it.
For example, I knew I couldn't squat for fifteen minutes on a bed or a floor.
‘I was induced because of high blood pressure and I had a pessary at midday.
Nothing happened.
The lights were put out at 10pm because there were other mothers who'd had babies and were pretty exhausted.
I felt as if I was there under false pretences.
They took me down to the labour ward and offered me a sedative to help me sleep.
‘I said I didn't want one and the nurse said ‘Why are you down here anyway?’
I was not dilating and my husband said, ‘Perhaps you're not very tolerant of pain’ which made me feel awful although I realise he meant it kindly.
‘At about 6am they said I should eat something and if nothing had happened by 8am they'd ask a doctor to break my waters.
However, labour started on its own and as the contractions got worse they put a monitor on me.
At 11am they said the baby was in distress and the six people in the room all began talking about the possibility of a Caesarean.
I felt as if I was totally out of control.
‘Up until then I'd been using gas and air and they were just about to give me some pethidine when all this serious discussion began.
‘The baby's heartbeat calmed down, however, and she was born about 3.30pm.
I felt that she was quite distressed by the birth — she seemed drowsy and a bit blue.
‘She wouldn't suck — I'm sure some pethidine had got into her system.
I tried a machine to express milk in the hospital but by the time the milk did start to come through she was really used to the bottle.
‘I feel unconvinced that they really needed to induce my baby.
Other women in the ward had had much higher blood pressure than me.’
JOANNA DONALDSON
Pain relief
•Breathing and relaxation — most antenatal classes teach breathing and relaxation.
Techniques vary but it is important to work at them until it becomes automatic so that, when the time comes, you don't need to think about it too much.
•Gas and air — the most common gas is Entonox, a 50/50 mixture of oxygen and nitrous oxide (laughing gas).
You will probably have had a chance to practise with the hand-held mask at antenatal class.
There is no harmful effect on either mother or baby but some women don't like the mask over their face.
Some hospitals may use a mouthpiece instead.
Gas and air produces a lightheaded feeling that takes the edge off the pain but it can make some women feel nauseous.
•Pethidine — usually given as an injection, it takes about 10–20 minutes to provide relief from pain.
It is a narcotic (sleep-inducing) drug which causes drowsiness in you and, to some extent, in the baby.
Its effects vary enormously: some women feel happily relaxed while others feel totally out of control.
•TENS — standing for transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation, TENS or TNS is increasingly available in hospitals.
A small battery-operated box with electrodes wired up to it is placed against the woman's back and sends mild electrical charges to her brain, stimulating the production of endorphins, the body's own natural painkillers.
•Epidural — this is a skilled procedure carried out by an anaesthetist.
A needle is inserted between two of your vertebrae after a local anaesthetic has been applied.
It takes about 20 minutes to work and can give almost total pain relief.
Often you will feel nothing from the waist down.
The analgesia is fed through a tube and topped up when necessary.
You have to lie curled up on you side and you will be attached to a drip and a fetal monitor so you won't be able to move around.
There are possible side effects such as nausea and headaches for a few days and extremely rarely there are other serious complications.
However, apart from providing good quality pain relief, an epidural may be necessary in the case of difficulties such as inductions and multiple births.
•Alternative methods of pain relief, like acupuncture and hypnosis, are not generally available on the NHS and can be expensive.
For further information and a list of reputable practitioners, contact The Acupuncture Association & Register Ltd., 34 Alderney Street, London SW1V 4EU 9enclose £1.50), or the Hypnotherapy Register on 081–840 3790.
TIME OUT FOR TODDLERS
Swimming, painting, climbing, dancing, singing and acting are just some of the activities even young children are trying out.
Marianne Brace goes in search of fun classes for the under-fives
You've been to the park twice, the toy box looks exhausted and your little tornado is still raring to go.
Don't despair.
All over the country, sports, arts and adult education centres offer activities for under-fives, some from under a year old.
Your child can swim, paint, sing, tumble, play an instrument, learn new skills and have fun too.
WATER BABIES
‘Swimming's something every child needs to learn.
My son Mark was eight months when he started and Rachel was 2½.
They really enjoy it.
The first time Rachel went, I felt anxious but it's so safe there's no need to worry.
Now the whole family can swim together.’
Eve Mason 
Swimming is an activity many babies enjoy, and they can learn from as young as five months old.
The Amateur Swimming Association trains teachers who offer nationwide classes for tots aged 5–18 months, 18 months–3 years, 3–5 years.
Carol Hicks coaches at the Crystal Palace National Sports Centre in London.
‘There's a lot of play involved but the games all have an underlying aim; survival, safety and getting some movement going.’
Around 12 parents and their babies are in the pool at one time.
Infants become water-friendly through songs and exercises; for example, floating toys encourage the children to stretch and pull themselves through the water.
Sessions usually last between 10–20 minutes.
With older pre-school children, parents watch from the poolside.
Carol Hicks has had three-year-olds ‘who are swimming 25 metres.
Up to that age, babies either use their arms or their legs.
But by the time they're three, the two begin to work together and we introduce strokes.’
Equipment: The usual swimming gear.
Cost: from about 90p to £1.80 a lesson.
Information: Amateur Swimming Association on 0509 230431.
BALANCE & BOUNCE
‘The kids have never looked back.
They've learned a lot about balance and how to climb things safely.
It doesn't make them more adventurous but when they do climb you can see them looking for footholds.
David (three) can walk along a bar and feels quite chuffed when he's done it.’
Janet McGoldrick 
Every week around 56,000 energetic children go to Tumble Tots.
Sessions last 45 minutes, and four instructors cater for a maximum of 24 children in the following groups; walking to two years, 2–3 years, 3–4 years, 4–5 years.
Under-threes are accompanied by parents, who help them explore the brightly coloured equipment against a stimulating background of music and storytelling.
Mothers leave older tumblers to enjoy group songs and rhymes before they start working on the equipment.
Trestles, ladders and barrels improve balance, climbing and coordination.
And there are ribbons to shake, stepping stones to hop between, forward rolls to master.
Classes end with each child getting a sticker saying ‘I did it’ or ‘I can’.
Dress: Tumble Tot T-shirt.
Booking: there's a four-month waiting list in some areas so don't hang about.
Cost: £1.60–£2.65 a lesson for each child; if you become a member of the National Tumble Tot Club (£6.75 a year) this covers your child's insurance.
Information: The Tumble Tots Association can be contacted on 071–621 0904.
Crêchendo classes are divided by age — starting as young as three months — with mums accompanying tots.
Equipment includes soft play wedges and circles, climbing frames and wooden beams, which all help to build physical confidence.
Sessions take up to 20 children, last for 45 minutes and include songs, games and stories.
Dress: Crêchendo T-shirt
Booking: At the moment, Crêchendo is London-based (Putney, Fulham, Battersea, Notting Hill Gate, West Kensington) and is heavily booked, but there are plans to go nationwide in the not-too-distant future.
Cost: £3.50 a class; Crêchendo membership (£8.95 a year) includes insurance.
Information: Crêchendo on 071–738 2458.
Bear in mind that many local sports centres run mini-gymnasia and exercise classes.
MUSICAL CHEERS
‘Timothy, four, has been learning cello for a few months and loves it.’
Dr Peter Key 
The Suzuki Institute is unique in offering tuition in violin, cello, piano and flute to kids as young as 2½ years.
Parents are closely involved, attending classes so that they learn how to coach their offspring themselves.
Clare Santer teaches Suzuki violin in Ipswich.
She starts small children in group classes of three or four, introducing them to instruments and devising musical games which involve listening and responding to music.
Children learn to speak by copying what they hear, and Suzuki believes the same goes for music.
First-stage tinies progress to playing variations on Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star and by school age are tackling several tunes.
Equipment: an instrument, although check with the teacher, as some can be hired; paper and tape recorder for making notes.
Cost: at least £15 an hour.
Information: send an sae to the British Suzuki Institute, 4d The High Street, Weathampstead, Hertfordshire AL4 8AA.
Usually when you sing you're happy and when you're happy you sing.
My daughter Natasha (3½) sings a lot.
Her imagination is stimulated and she's expressing herself vocally.’
Gunter Etzmuss 
Group musical activities for the under-fives are found at some adult education and arts centres.
In Cardiff, Steve Todd's Parent and Toddler Music Workshop is designed for around seven children and parents.
Infants — aged 18 months to four years — get to sing, but the keynote is ‘free musical improvisation,’ as Steve explains.
‘Embarking on a musical journey, we head off for say, a dinosaur forest.
I'll create a sense of place and imitate the sounds, Then we'll find a song specific to that situation.’
Instruments range from a xylophone made of slates to empty washing-up bottles.
And it's definitely a hands-on session — toddlers are free to leap about during the hour-long class.
Cost: varies according to classes.
Steve Todd charges £9.60 for ten lessons, plus £2 for an extra child.
Information: look locally for classes.
Contact Steve Todd on 0222 223096.
WHAT'S IN YOUR AREA
To find out what's happening near to you contact:
local swimming baths
sports or leisure centres
adult education centres
libraries
playgroups, mother and toddler groups
primary schools
For general information, contact The National Children's Play and Recreation Unit on 071–383 5455.
This organization will also be able to help you if you're thinking of setting up your own group locally
LITTLE FOOTSTEPS
‘Natasha started dancing at three and she's always longed for her lessons.
The class is fun and I like the way she has a bit of poise and discipline.’
Caroline Hartley 
June Gill's Tiny Tot Dance Class in Sheffield is an introduction to dancing for the 3–5s.
‘They do learn they don't just float around the room being trees.’
In 45-minute classes infants grapple with walking in time to music, marching, pony-trotting; facial expressions and gestures are tested, too.
There is an exam which lasts 15 minutes and, not too surprisingly, everyone tends to pass.
Dress: leotards or shorts and T-shirt; ballet shoes.
Booking: waiting lists are common.
Cost: under £2 a lesson.
Information: International Dance Teachers' Association on 0273 685652.
‘Louise (2½) likes to have her own activities, and I can enjoy the fact that I can participate too.’
Gillian Clark 
Hinrich Medau, a musician and a gymnast working in 1920s Germany, promoted the importance of body movement and rhythm.
Today the Medau Society continues his work.
Margaret Charlwood runs Mother and Toddler Exercise Classes in Redhill, Surrey.
‘I use percussion instruments and lots of music.’
The hour-long sessions are relaxed and aimed at mothers with children between 18 months and 4 years old.
Cost: Margaret's classes cost £6.60 for five lessons, which is fairly average.
Information: The Medau Society on 03727 29056.
CREATIVE PLAY
‘Alexander, Michael and now William (2¾) have all been to the art class, and I've found it encourages their imagination and creativity.
It's very important they feel they can do something themselves as well.
They just get a kick out of bringing home a project they've worked on and proudly showing it to other people.’
Gerda Pope 
Art classes for the nursery age are scarce, but try looking locally.
Cobham Adult Education Centre in Surrey invites 2–4-year-olds to test out their creativity.
Teacher Margaret Howker says, ‘Art is never good unless it's messy and this gives children and parents an opportunity to get messy.’
During the 90-minute session, they dabble with paper and paint, cut up magazines, print with bobbins and pastry cutters.
In the first term, colour is the theme, in the second it's shape and third texture.
Margaret shows the 13 parents how to make things and they show their children.
Everyone takes their work home.
Dress: painting smock to keep clothes clean.
Cost: varies according to local classes.
The Cobham classes are £24 a term plus £1 per child.
Information: look around locally.
Contact Cobham Adult Education Centre on 0932 864373,
‘My son Stephen was very lively and needed an outlet for all this pent-up energy.
He did ‘Dressing-Up Box’ from 3½ years.
It developed his imaginative skills ad self-confidence and helped him to settle in at school more easily.’
Ann Turner 
Founder Nicola Claire believes the John Peel Children's Centre, Ealing, is the only existing children's arts centre.
The twice-weekly Carers and Toddlers Club for 1½–2½-year-olds concentrates on the visual arts (collage, clay, drawing) There are stories, too, for the eight children and parents.
Other activities include music and song (2–4 years) and Tinies Tap & Dance (3–4 years).
Dressing-Up Box (3–4 years) is an introduction to drama and a world of make-believe.
Booking: about eight weeks ahead is average.
Cost: membership £6 a year, classes £25 a term.
Information: Contact John Peel Children's Centre on 081–579 4789.
Mums and their children take the plunge
Messy outdoor fun — art classes for kids encourages their imaginations (above); children build up physical confidence at Crêchendo (below)
Get into printing at the John Peel Children's Centre
WIN A FAMILY PORTRAIT BY A PRIZE WINNING PHOTOGRAPHER IN OUR £5000 FUJI COMPETITION
1st prize
A half-day photographic session for you and your family, a framed portrait and a special album to record the day, together worth £250.
Plus £250 worth of shopping vouchers to spend in top stores.
12 2nd prizes
A half-day photographic session, framed portrait and album, worth £250.
Plus £80 worth of vouchers
100 runner-up prizes
A Fuji Quicksnap Flash, worth £7.99
Rules of Entry
1.
This competition is open to UK readers (including Northern Ireland) except employees, associates and their families of Emap Elan Ltd and Fuji Photo Film UK Ltd.
2.
All entries must be received by 31 March 1991 and become the property of Emap Elan Ltd.
3.
By entering the competition, all competitors will be deemed to have accepted and agreed to be bound by these rules.
4.
All entries must be on an official entry form and legible.
Only one entry is allowed per form, but a competitor may send in any number of entries providing each entry is on an entry form from Parents magazine.
5.
Responsibility will not be accepted for entries lost, delayed, mislaid or damaged in the post.
Proof of posting will not be taken as proof of delivery.
Entries which are altered, illegible or not in accordance with these rules will be disqualified.
6.
All entries will be examined by a panel of judges containing at least one independent member, and their decision will be final.
No correspondence will be entered into.
No competitor may win more than one prize.
No cash alternatives will be offered to any of the prizes.
7.
The prizes as stated will be awarded to those readers whose correct entries are the first drawn out of the bag after the competition's closing date.
8.
Winners will be notified by post.
For a list of prize winners send an SAE marked March/ Parents competition, Emap National Publications Ltd, 14 Holkam Road, Orton Southgate, Peterborough PE2 0XW after the closing date of the competition.
9.
Only enclose the official entry coupon; no other correspondence should be enclosed in the envelope.
Having you family portrait done by a professional photographer gives you more than just a reminder of what your children looked like as they grew up, because a professional has all the best equipment necessary for a top-quality portrait.
He is also experienced in putting the family — especially children — at their ease, so you'll get pictures that look completely natural.
A day at the studio — or having a photographer come to your home — is fun too, and the pictures show it!
Fuji is offering 13 readers the chance to win a half-day session at a photographer's studio in their area (entries will be judged regionally), or you can arrange for him to come to your home; if you go to the studio, your travel expenses are covered.
You'll have a selection of photographs taken, either of the whole family or just mother and baby if preferred.
These will be made up into an album of at least eight prints and the best portrait will be specially framed for you.
All the photographers taking part in our competition are winners in the annual Fuji Wedding & Portrait Awards, so you can be sure their work is of a high quality — as you can see from the sample here — in a variety of styles.
Our winners' portrait will be eligible for entry in this year's Awards and the chance for you and the photographer to win even more prizes.
The first prizewinner will also receive £250 worth of vouchers to spend at a range of top high-street stores; the 12 second prizewinners get £80 worth of vouchers.
100 runners-up each receive a Fuji Quicksnap Flash, a pocket-sized, easy-to-use disposable camera, worth £7.99, which comes already loaded with a 24-exposure film — just right for capturing those special moments.
HOW TO ENTER
Just match up the famous daughters (right) with their equally famous mothers on the entry form, by putting a letter in each box.
Then fill in the tiebreaker, telling us in not more than 25 words why you would like to have your family portrait taken.
£5000 worth of prizes to be won
A–Z of pregnancy
Expectant mums experience many physical and emotional changes before the birth.
Here is a selection
Anaemia
The symptoms of anaemia are exhaustion, irritability and a pallid complexion.
It's caused by a fall in haemoglobin (Hb) in the red blood cells which transfers oxygen to the developing placenta and fetus.
Your Hb level will be tested early in pregnancy.
Keep your levels up by eating a mix of foods rich in iron — dark green vegetables, liver, nuts, dried apricots, oily fish and cereals.
Iron is more easily absorbed into the body if mixed with vitamin C; have an orange with your meal, for example.
Backache
A relaxation of the ligaments in your spine combined with the effect of your changing shape on your posture can give rise to backache.
Wear flat shoes and get as much rest as possible with your feet up.
A hot water bottle in the small of your back should help.
Bladder
As the uterus enlarges and presses on the neck of the bladder, you'll feel an increased desire to go to the loo.
If there is any pain or a burning sensation, tell the doctor, just in case you have a urinary infection.
Blood pressure
A fall in blood pressure is common in early pregnancy, and accounts for dizziness.
Later on, a rise in blood pressure is fairly common in first pregnancies, though it could be a sign of pre-eclampsia.
Your blood pressure will be monitored at all antenatal checks.
Breasts
The high level of the hormone progesterone during pregnancy accounts for the increase in breast size.
Tenderness and a tingling sensation may be one of the first signs of pregnancy and there will be an increase in the number of superficial veins you can see.
Constipation
Progesterone also relaxes the intestines, reducing their power to push out their contents.
Drink lots of fluids (at least two litres a day) and eat fibre-rich foods.
Consult your doctor before taking laxatives, or try natural laxatives like bran and prunes.
Contractions
Uterine contractions occur throughout pregnancy, and are known as Braxton-Hicks contractions.
They are usually so mild that you won't be aware of them, but during late pregnancy they become more noticeable, and are a painless way of preparing the body for labour.
Labour contractions are much stronger, more painful, and come in a regular pattern.
Cramp
You may experience cramp in the legs at night.
It helps to bend your toes upwards towards your knee.
Persistent leg pain may be caused by varicose veins.
Cravings
Strong likes or dislikes of various foods are another of the early signs of pregnancy.
Many women go off coffee and alcohol (the latter is, of course, not recommended anyway).
Try to curb cravings for ice cream, crisps and cheese if weight is a problem.
Dizziness
Hormone changes slow down your circulation which leads to light-headedness.
Get up slowly, don't stand for long periods and if you feel faint, take some deep, rapid breaths.
Emotions
You may find yourself getting weepy, angry, tense, anxious or tearful, particularly at the beginning and end of pregnancy.
If so, try to involve your partner in how you are feeling.
Alternatively, you may feel serene!
Exercise
Go easy on vigorous exercise, especially during the first three months when you need as much rest as possible or if you are suffering from high blood pressure.
Don't suddenly increase the amount of exercise you do, or become over-exhausted.
If you are exhausted, you can be sure the baby is even more tired.
See Sports .
Fetal position
Until about the 32nd week, most babies are breech presentations (bottom first), after which time the great majority somersault round with heads down.
Most also lie with their backs towards the front of the mother's abdomen (‘anterior’).
Flatulence
Possibly caused by swallowing air to relieve nausea, or because of constipation.
It is also aggravated by heartburn.
Avoid onions, beans, peas and heavily fried foods.
Folklore
Old wives' tales abound in pregnancy, particularly concerning the sex of the child: excessive sickness is supposed to indicate a girl and boys are supposedly ‘carried in front’.
Take no notice!
Gums
Inflammation of the gums (gingivitis) is more common during pregnancy, when they become softer and more easily injured.
Brush carefully with a soft toothbrush.
Floss as often as possible.
Haemorrhoids
These are damaged vascular cushions lining the rectum and anus which are aggravated as a result of the hormonal changes during pregnancy that also cause constipation.
Later on, the pressure from the baby's head can also be an additional cause.
Try to avoid getting constipated and do tell your midwife or GP.
Headaches
If these can't be cured by lying down, take a paracetamol.
If they are very severe and accompanied by disturbances of vision, see your doctor immediately as this is a symptom of pre-eclampsia.
Heartburn
Hormone changes tend to relax the cardiac sphincter and this, together with pressure from the growing baby, can result in regurgitation of fluid plus a burning pain in the lower chest.
Eat smaller meals and try soda mints or indigestion tablets.
Insomnia
Fetal movement, physical discomfort and fears about the future all hinder sleep.
Talk over any worries with your GP or midwife and nap during the day if you can.
Iron
Iron pills are sometimes given in pregnancy after the 14th week to prevent anaemia.
Your haemoglobin level should stay above 11gm (75 per cent).
Some experts feel that iron supplements are unnecessary, and that too much iron interferes with the body's absorption of other minerals like zinc.
Jealousy
In siblings: tell your child about the baby well before it's due.
Understand that this could be the worst news you could give him and make sure he gets as much of your time as you can give.
A gift ‘from the baby’ is a crafty approach once the baby has arrived.
Let the older child get as involved as possible and point out how much the new baby loves her big brother.
In your partner: let him know how much he is loved and needed and don't talk about the baby too much or he will feel shut out.
Once the baby is born, try to share as much of the care as possible; he can do everything except breastfeed.
Knowledge
Recent research has shown that well-informed mothers who have been able to take responsibility for decisions in pregnancy and labour feel happier after the event, even when their plans didn't work out as they had expected them to.
On the other hand, it's not a particularly good idea to read too many obstetric textbooks about unlikely complications.
Linea nigra
A line of pigmentation that extends from the pubic hair to the navel in all but the most fair-skinned of women.
Other pigmented areas, such as the nipples, the area around the nipples, freckles and birthmarks, darken too, but fade after delivery.
Libido
Not many mammals have intercourse during pregnancy, and you may find you go off sex.
However, some women feel more keen, especially during the middle few months.
Massage
The aches and pains of pregnancy can be soothed by a relaxing massage.
Many experts claim that it is good for your growing baby, too.
Nausea
Feeling sick is one of the earliest signs of pregnancy and can happen at any time of day, not just the morning.
It usually starts to improve at ten weeks and clears up completely by the 14th week.
Try to avoid anything that makes you want to vomit.
Nipples
These darken at around the 14th week of pregnancy and get more prominent.
Tiny nodules appear on each areola.
Inverted or flat nipples can be a problem when you start breastfeeding.
Ask your midwife or GP about breast shells which can be worn inside your bra during pregnancy to help this.
Nosebleeds
Bleeding from the nose is quite common in pregnancy; pinch the nose gently and hold a cold, wet handkerchief to it.
Don't lie down.
To avoid nosebleeds happening, try not to blow your nose too hard.
Oedema
This is the medical term for fluid retention which can cause puffiness and swelling.
It's not uncommon for the ankles to swell up — you can relieve this by lying with your feet up; avoid pop-socks and socks with tight elastic.
Of other parts of the body swell this can be a sign of pre-eclampsia.
This will be confirmed at your antenatal checks.
Pins and needled
Tingling fingers early in the morning are caused by a build-up of fluid and the feeling should go once you start to move around.
If it persists, see your doctor.
Pre-eclampsia
This is a condition that occurs in ten per cent of pregnancies after 28 weeks.
It is generally more common in first pregnancies.
It reduces the blood supply to your baby, and in severe cases causes sickness, headache, blurred eyesight and high blood pressure in the mother.
It often necessitates the immediate delivery of the baby.
However, there are several early-warning signs of pre-eclampsia which will be observed at your antenatal visits and, in most cases, the condition can be kept safely in check.
Quickening
First-time mothers feel the baby moving in a bubbly, fluttering way at around 18 to 20 weeks.
Movements often stop for long periods, but you may be asked to fill in a ‘kick chart’ if you are concerned about it.
Relaxation
Teach yourself to relax by lying down, breathing deeply, tensing and then relaxing.
Do this with each part of your body in turn.
Rubella
German measles (rubella) is one of the few viruses that can infect the baby in the first 12 weeks.
You will be tested for rubella immunity and until you know you are definitely immune, you should avoid seeing anyone who thinks they've been in contact with the disease.
Sex
Intercourse is safe throughout pregnancy, unless you had a previous miscarriage, in which case it should be avoided during the first 14 weeks and avoided altogether if you have a history of miscarrying.
Sex at full term can bring on labour.
See libido .
Show
The cervix is sealed off with a mucus plug which looks like a pinkish clot and its appearance is a good sign that there is some activity around the cervix.
However, it can come out two or three weeks before labour begins or even during labour itself, in which case you probably won't notice it.
Smoking
Cigarette smoking is harmful to you and to your baby.
It causes many complications, including small placenta size, stillbirth and low birthweight.
Sports
Never take up a new sport when you are pregnant, and be careful not to overdo it, especially around the dates then your first few periods would have been due.
Some doctors advise against riding and diving.
Skiing is all right as long as you don't take risks.
See Exercise .
Stretch marks
These occur in the second half of pregnancy, and there is nothing you can do to prevent them.
They are pink or pale-coloured lines on the stomach, breasts or hips, caused by your body's rapid growth and by hormonal changes.
After the baby's birth, the marks will eventually fade into barely noticeable streaks.
Taste
You may notice that food tastes different when you are pregnant.
This is an extremely common phenomenon but the exact reason for it isn't known.
It disappears after the baby is born.
Teeth
Dental treatment is free during pregnancy because teeth can be troublesome.
Brush regularly and look after the gums.
Thrush
Monilia vaginitis is common during pregnancy and takes the form of a thick white discharge with acute irritation of the vaginal area.
Your GP will prescribe pessaries or cream.
If left untreated, it can cause a mild infection in the baby when it is born.
Tiredness
Exhaustion, especially between six and 14 weeks, is common.
Rest as much as your body tells you to, and if you are at work, get your feet up in the lunch-hour.
See also Sleep and Insomnia .
Ultrasound
You will be given a routine ultrasound scan at 16 and 32 weeks to determine the exact age of the fetus, the presence of twins, etc.
You'll be asked to drink lots of water beforehand; your stomach will then be greases and a hand-held transducer ran over it.
Urine
This will be routinely tested at your antenatal visits for pregnancy diabetes and the presence of proteins which could indicate that pre-eclampsia is developing.
Uterus
Normally pear-sized, the uterus grows up to five times its usual size in pregnancy.
Breastfeeding speeds up its return to normal size after birth.
Varicose veins
Hormone changes and weight gain give rise to varicose veins.
Wear support tights (these also offer support to the abdomen) and put them on before getting out of bed (keep your pants and tights under your pillow).
Don't wear clothes that cut off your circulation.
Put your feet up as much as possible.
If you suddenly get severe calf or leg pain, consult your doctor or midwife immediately.
Weight
There is no hard and fast rule about what you should gain in pregnancy.
Heavy women need to put on less weight than very thin mums-to-be.
The average weight gain in women is probably 20–30lb.
It definitely is not a good idea to diet during pregnancy.
Working
If you have a very active job or tiring journey to work, give up at the statutory 29th week.
Otherwise carry on for as long as you feel fit.
X-rays
These are not advised during pregnancy, unless absolutely necessary at full term to ascertain whether a normal delivery is possible.
You
A poet, watching young mothers wrote: ‘Their beauty is thickening.
Something is pushing them to the side of their own lives.’
You may feel pushed to the side by your baby, but the experience will bring a new maturity.
Enjoy it!
Zzzz
This stands for sleep — and get as much of it as you can, while you can!
READ ALL ABOUT IT
The New Pregnancy and Childbirth by Sheila Kitzinger (Penguin, £9.99).
Covering everything from backache to bonding, this classic is written by a leading birth expert in her typically sympathetic and knowledgeable style.
Pregnancy by Dr Gordon Bourne (Pan, £6.99) is another classic written by the leading obstetrician and gynaecologist.
Very much the Mrs Beeton of childbirth, he gives sound and practical advice.
The Mother & Baby Book of Pregnancy and Birth by Patsy Westcott (Grafton, £3.99) is a clearly written paperback that follows the stages of pregnancy from conception to birth.
Water Birth (Unwin, £8.99) by Janet Balaskas with obstetrician Yehudi Gordon, must be the definitive book on the role of water in pregnancy.
It doesn't just focus on giving birth in a pool, but looks at how swimming and water exercises can prepare you for labour, and how water can help you and your baby in the bonding process.
READER OFFERS TO SEND FOR
freebies!
Kooshies from Canada are an environmentally friendly alternative to disposable nappies.
Made in 100 per cent cotton, they have adjustable hooks and loops which make them easy to put on, an extra cotton inner pad for more absorbency, are washable and reusable.
You can get kooshies from department stores in single packs (£5.95), or packs of five.
We have 150 single packs to give away to the first 150 names drawn from the postbag on 7 March.
Send a self-addressed label, stating the age and sex of your baby, to Parents /Kooshies Offer, PHP, 12 Thornton Place, London W1H 1FL.
(Please note, only one pack per household.)
Perk up your child's lunch box with these convenient easy-to-use Munch Bunch sandwich bags.
Each roll contains around 50 colourful sandwich bags and we have 1000 to give away to readers.
To receive a free box, send a postcard telling us your name and address to Parents /Munch Bunch Sandwich Bags Offer, 4 St John's Place, London EC88 1HA to arrive before 7 March.
To introduce you to the idea of giving your toddler Weetabix made with hot milk, the company is giving away 25 special Weetabix ‘Keep Warm’ kits.
Each kit includes a Tommee Tippee spouted drinking cup and stay-warm bowl, a pure wool mini scarf and hat that will fit toddlers and babies, and a handy tin of 24 Weetabix, all packed in a strong blue holdall (complete kit worth £25).
To enter, send a self-addressed postcard to Parents /Weetabix Offer, Spreckley Pittham, Winchester House, 259 Old Marylebone Road, London NW1 5RA; draw on 7 March.
For those of you who are about to have a baby, Kiddibitz! is a sturdy holdall packed with the things you'll need when you go into hospital.
It costs £19.99 and contains a bar of soap, bottle of shampoo, toothbrush and toothpaste, pack of sanitary towels and three hairbrushes; for your baby, there's a smart Babygro, pack of ten nappies, tissues, a large pack of baby wipes, Vaseline, baby lotion and powder, and a large bag of cotton wool.
We have six to give away to the first names drawn from the postbag on 7 March.
If you would like to receive one, send a self-addressed label to Parents /Kiddibitz!
Offer, 112 Ashurst Drive, Gants Hill, Ilford, Essex IG6 1AQ.
Your pre-schooler can have fun learning about music with Carousel's Music Club's monthly correspondence curses, whereby children learn to read music, sing and play percussion instruments through games and songs.
There are two courses; the first for 3–5 year olds, the second for 6–8s.
Carousel is giving away 100 first packs free (worth £15 inc p&p).
Send a self-addressed postcard, stating which course you want, to Parents /Carousel Offer, PO Box 600, Chester CH1 3PH; draw on 7 March.
For information abut Carousel, contact above address or phone 0244 315556.
games with gloop!
Slick, sticky, slimy, squelchy — gloop is easy to make and just washes away
Rachel and Nicky love getting up to their elbows in gloop, a slimy mixture of nothing more than cornflour mixed with water and food colouring.
But it feels strange : when you look at it in the bowl, it looks too runny to be fun, but when you touch it, it's the squelchiest, stickiest sensation; it turns to spaghetti when you let it drip through your fingers and it's stodgy enough to make into patterns, swirling in different colours and practising making faces, people, letters and numbers.
But best of all for parents, cleaning up is easy because gloop washes away (although you may have to scrub hands a bit to get rid of the red colouring).
And if any splodges onto fabric, just leave it to dry and it turns to dust — then you can rub it off in a second.
You'll need
1 packet of cornflour ½ pint of water different food colourings large container for playing with gloop aprons plastic to cover floor and table tops
To make
1) Put cornflour in a bowl.
2) Add most of the water.
3) Mix, adding more water until the gloop feels sticky and slimy.
4) Add food colouring gradually until you get the colour you want.
5) Test the texture by putting some on a spoon: it should harden slightly (6) and go ‘gloopy’.
What glorious, gloopy, messy, gooey fun!
Nicky and Rachel mix and drip the gloop from their fingers to create pools of primary colour, and mysterious seas of splodge
what's COOKING
Do you worry about what you're feeding your family?
Are you frightened by food scares?
Parents' nutritionist Caroline Bunker spent a day at a reader's home to find out what her fears and concerns were
As every parent with young children knows only too well, life revolves around mealtimes.
But while there's no shortage of advice about what our children should eat, when it comes to the day-to-day grind of feeding a family, many a frazzled mother's good intentions fly out of the window.
Recent surveys show that sausages, chips and burgers are still favourites with children yet they're just the type of foods we're being told to cut down on.
I spent the day with Faith Reed and her family — husband Chris and children Lydia, aged 3½, Sophie, aged two, and Jake, aged nine months — and answered some of the questions today's parents are asking about their children's food.
Life in the Reed household tends to be organised chaos but mealtimes are always enjoyable occasions with lots of chatter.
Faith immediately admitted that she finds a lot of advice about healthy eating plain confusing: ‘It's very difficult sifting through all the information that's pushed at parents and weighing up what's really important.
I always seem to be reading about a new food scare.
Issues like food additives do concern me but I'm just not sure whether it's worth worrying — I usually end up following my own instincts and hoping for the best.’
Faith, who helps run the local mother-and-toddler group, isn't alone in the way she feels.
‘The other mums are always talking about what their children eat and most of them seem as just as confused as I am.’
Looking after three young children, being involved in various groups as well as doing part-time evening work means that Faith depends on food that's quick and convenient to prepare.
‘I simply haven't got time to spend hours slaving over a hot stove — I'd rather be out playing with the children or getting out and about, but I do try to make sure we eat well.’
Having a family of three also means the Reeds don't have a lot of spare cash.
‘The grocery bill is around £50 a week and that includes everything.
There are lots of things I'd like to buy — such as organic food — but our budget just won't stretch that far.’
Simple tips for healthy family eating
The key to a healthy, nourishing diet for children is variety — aim to give your child a good range of foods over the course of a week or so and you can be pretty certain she'll get the nutrients she needs.
Try to include plenty of healthy choices but don't feel guilty if you can't manage everything.
Eat fewer fatty foods such as processed meats and meat products, pies, pastries, crisps and ice cream.
Eat less butter, block margarine, suet and blended vegetable oil — switch to polyunsaturated margarine and vegetable oils instead.
Eat fewer sugary foods like cakes, sweets and biscuits.
Add less sugar and salt (none to babies' food).
Include lots of fresh foods like fruit, vegetables, bread, potatoes, pasta, rice and pulses, unsweetened cereals, lean meat, poultry and fish.
Look for healthier versions of foods your children like — reduced-fat sausages, burgers and chips, wholemeal bread instead of white, reduced-sugar jams, semi-skimmed milk (once your child is two).
Avoid unnecessary additives by choosing processed foods with fewer additives — check labels to see what you're getting.
Prepare and cook food in healthier ways — wash and peel vegetables, trim fat from meat, grill, bake and steam or boil instead of frying or roasting.
A day in the life of the Reeds
BREAKFAST
Faith's day starts at around 6am when baby Jake wakes up and starts yelling for a feed.
‘I'm a firm believer in breastfeeding and intend to feed Jake until he's at least a year old but he has a bottle of formula milk when I'm out in the evening and drinks from a spouted cup at mealtimes — usually pure juice because there's no added sugar.’
Caroline's comment: Faith is right to think that breast or formula milk is the best choice for Jake until he's a year old although cow's milk can be given from six months.
Baby fruit juices and drinks are popular, but even pure fruit juices contain natural sugars which can be harmful to teeth.
Try to limit juice and other sugary drinks to mealtimes when they'll do the least damage, dilute them well and don't give them in a bottle used as a dummy because these bathe the teeth in sugar for long periods of time.
At 7.30am Chris is up and off, leaving Faith and the children to have breakfast.
‘Breakfast tends to be a bit of a rush because the girls both go to playgroup.
It's always cereal, milk and toast.
We have semi-skimmed milk but I'm thinking of switching to skimmed milk because my husband Chris is trying to cut down on fat.
Sophie doesn't particularly like eating breakfast but I insist she has something.’
Caroline's comment: Cereal, milk and toast is a popular and healthy choice for breakfast — adding some fresh fruit or fruit juice would be even better.
Unsweetened cereals such as Weetabix, porridge or cornflakes are better than sweetened varieties, which can contain as much as 50 per cent sugar.
Skimmed milk is not suitable for the under-fives because it lacks important vitamins and energy-giving calories but semi-skimmed milk can be introduced from the age of two, if your child is eating a variety of foods.
For baby Jake and Sophie, who's going through a faddy phase about eating, whole milk is the best choice.
(For more information about milk, see page 84).
It is worth encouraging children to eat something at breakfast because they have high calorie and nutrient needs.
LUNCH
Once the girls are at playgroup, Faith spends the rest of the morning catching up on chores before collecting them for a leisurely lunch.
‘We don't have a big meal at lunchtime — usually sandwiches, beans or soup with toast but I do feel Jake should have a proper meal.’
With her first baby, Faith tended to cook and purée fresh food but she admits there isn't always time to do this now.
‘I've relied more on commercial baby foods for Jake because they're quick and convenient.
They look healthy enough and there's lots of nutritional information on the packs but I suspect some probably contain a hefty dollop of sugar and additives.’
Caroline's comment: Commercial baby foods make up a substantial part of the average baby's diet and they are very convenient.
The content of baby food varies with the brand and the type of product.
There's plenty of information on the packs but few tell you exactly how much sugar is present.
Even those claiming to be low sugar may contain other forms of sugar like glucose, fructose, honey or syrups, so check the list of ingredients.
Artificial additives such as colourings, sweeteners and flavour enhancers aren't permitted in baby foods.
Manufacturers are reducing or removing sugars from baby foods, so go for those with no added sugar.
There's no need to feel guilty if you do use baby foods but try not to rely on them.
SNACKS
After lunch, Faith often goes round to see a friend or her mum, who lives nearby, but she spends one afternoon a week doing a big shop.
‘Trying to shop with three children in tow is no joke — I just gallop round as quickly as possible.
What always annoys me is the display of sweets at the check-out right where the children can grab them.’
Letting the children eat sweets and other sugary foods like biscuits is something Faith has mixed feelings about.
‘We don't buy many sweets but the girls do enjoy them as an occasional treat — and I sometimes use them as a bribe!
They have quite a few biscuits for snacks although that's probably just as bad as eating sweets — even the reduced-sugar teething rusks I give Jake taste quite sweet.
I give the children fluoride drops, so perhaps it doesn't matter how much sugar they eat.’
Caroline's comment: There's no need to ban sweets and sugary foods altogether.
Frequent sugary snacks do more damage to teeth than the same amount of sugar all in one go, so try to limit sugary foods to mealtimes.
If your child does have sweets, it's better to give them after a meal.
Jake may not have many teeth yet but developing a sweet tooth now could lead to decay later.
Even low-sugar rusks can contain up to 15 per cent sugar so give crusts of toast or a scrubbed carrot to gnaw on instead.
Fluoride helps to toughen the protective enamel on children's teeth, but won't prevent decay if they eat lots of sugary snacks.
DINNER
At around 4.30pm, Chris arrives home and after playing with the children lends a hand with the evening meal, which is something straightforward like a casserole or a pasta dish.
‘The children like convenience foods such as sausages or fishfingers and chips so we sometimes have that sort of thing, and occasionally we buy a takeaway from the chip shop.
I tend to think of all the convenience food as junk but I'm sure some must be better than others.’
Caroline's comment: Although convenience foods make life easier, they are high in fat, sugar, salt and additives.
It's also difficult to tell exactly what some convenience foods contain — a 100 per cent pure beefburger, for example, can legally contain 10 per cent water and up to 35 per cent added fat.
There's no harm in using highly processed foods occasionally but it's best not to make them a regular part of the family's diet.
Around three-quarters of the food we buy is processed in some way but Faith is right in thinking some convenience foods are healthier than others — fishfingers, frozen vegetables, pasta, pizza, baked beans, canned fruit in natural juices and yogurt all fit in neatly with ideas about healthy eating.
Choosing healthier versions of food such as lower-fat sausages or chips is another way of making meals a bit healthier and how you cook food makes a difference too — grilling or baking instead of roasting or frying, for instance.
Faith is given some organically grown fruit and vegetables from a neighbour's allotment but can't afford organic produce in the supermarket.
‘I like the idea of organic food because it doesn't get treated with pesticides and other chemicals and it's better for the environment, too.
The trouble is it costs a lot more than we can afford so I end up buying fruit and vegetables and washing it really well.’
Caroline's comment: Buying organic produce does avoid pesticide and other chemical residues in food but prices are high.
The highest residue levels come from pesticides used on the surface of fruit, vegetables and cereals.
Washing food doesn't actually have much effect on residue levels (though it's important for removing dirt and bacteria) but peeling and removing the outer leaves of foods like cabbages and lettuce reduces residue levels significantly.
Even if you can't afford organic produce the benefits of eating plenty of ordinary fresh fruit, vegetables and cereals far outweigh any risks from the chemical residues.
Dinner is a noisy affair, Jake wolfs down everything in sight within minutes but Sophie refuses to eat anything except bread.
‘Sophie is going through a really fussy phase at the moment.
I try to ignore it but I do worry she may be going short of protein and vitamins.
I give all the children vitamin drops that I get from the clinic but I sometimes wonder whether they're really necessary.
Caroline's comment: Feeding problems are extremely common in young children and being fussy about food is usually only a passing phase.
Try to keep mealtimes positive and relaxed and don't waste time and energy forcing your child to eat.
Don't worry too much about providing her with a healthy diet for the time being— the strangest combinations of food can provide an adequate intake of nutrients and children can be perfectly healthy on remarkably little.
Just aim at giving as much variety as you can manage and sooner or later she'll want to try other foods again.
Providing children eat a reasonable variety of foods they don't really need extra vitamins but as a safeguard it's recommended to give drops containing vitamins A, C and D from six months to two years and until the age of five if a child is fussy about what she eats.
LEARNING leaps
As soon as babyhood is over, parents often decide it's time their toddler Learnt Something.
But, says Libby Purves, children don't like to be pushed and their skills will grow naturally if you give them gentle encouragement and lots of opportunities
It is dizzying to think how much a baby learns in his first couple of years.
Smiling, recognising, swiping, grabbing, balancing on his bottom, eating, imitating sounds, crawling, standing.
Next on the curriculum come talking, acting, building, blowing party squeakers and pretending to choke in the back of the car.
And during all this time, does the baby have a trained teacher and formal lessons?
Does it have to enrol, turn up at a classroom, do homework, remember to take the right equipment along in a bag?
It does not.
So if you are still at the baby stage now, enjoy it.
You may well look back upon it as a golden age.
Once carefree babyhood is over, you are going to start feeling that your child should be Learning with a capital L: acquiring skills, keeping up, getting on.
You will meet another mother down the road, whose child is not yet three but knows the letters of the alphabet and can count up to 100.
You will look at your own child, whose current display of skills is limited to marching around the house with a pair of knickers on his head claiming to be Postman Pat, and you will get restless.
‘This child ought to Learn something!’ you think anxiously to yourself.
Indeed, even if you are relaxed enough not to worry, the system will eventually take over and you will have to: school will happen; reading books will be brought home.
You will sit anxiously on an undersized chair at parents' evening, asking a teacher whether the child's reading is really up to scratch and shouldn't he be on Blue Book Three by now?
You will lie in bed, dutiful parents that you are, discussing the fact that he still does his 3s and 5s back to front and wondering whether to arrange extra coaching.
You will become increasingly shifty about the fact that your child hasn't actually taken the safety wheels off his bike yet.
And as for that damned woman down the road, by now her child will be passing music exams, riding in gymkhanas and winning poetry competitions in the local paper.
Of course, some of our anxiety about getting children to learn skills is healthy enough.
If parents do not care and praise and listen to a child's reading, schoolteachers can't easily make them literate.
Also, certain pleasant and useful skills — cycling or swimming, playing a musical instrument or dribbling a football — depend on a parent's willingness to provide the equipment or access to the location, and if necessary find a suitable teacher.
Children actually like to acquire skills, and they learn them faster when they are young, so it is tempting to offer them the chance, and rewarding to watch them blossom.
You may think that the moment of those first tottering steps was special, but believe me, absolutely nothing compares with the sight of one's own child doggy-paddling across a swimming pool for the first time (or indeed doggy-paddling through Twinkle Twinkle Little Star on the violin, with a not-dissimilar arm action).
However, there are pitfalls.
Deep, terrible ones.
For one thing, it requires searing honesty to know whether you are arranging oboe lessons because a) you genuinely think it would be good for your child, b) you think your child would enjoy it, or c) you rather fancy having a child who can play the oboe: of the three, a) and b) are acceptable reasons, c) is definitely not.
Even when you have reached a rational decision as to what they should learn, watching them do it can be agony as well as ecstasy.
You start out with good intentions, helping with the homework, making it fun: you lay out the chocolate drops on the giant musical stave and challenge them to find the note ‘B’ and eat it: you run supportively alongside the wobbling bicycle, getting your ankles chewed up by sharp pedals.
And what do you end up doing?
Shrieking, ‘That's G, for God's sake, concentrate!’ or ‘Come on, come on, pedal, don't look down, oh, for heaven's sake, don't be such a wimp, of course you won't fall off.’
And the child storms off in fury because you don't understand, and because this activity you billed as ‘fun’ has suddenly ceased to be any fun at all.
Chastened, you pick up the bicycle and shuffle indoors, convinced you have ruined everything for good.
Misery.
There are one or two things to remember.
The first, golden rule is that children do not learn at an even pace .
This is harder to believe than it should be, because textbooks and courses always seem to be structured as if there is a steady progress from chapter to chapter, week to week, grade to grade.
One expects a child who mastered four notes in his first week to master four more in the second; a child who has achieved doggy-paddle with both feet off the bottom to progress logically to breaststroke.
But it does not work like that.
Remember how your baby, after weeks of aimless standing around holding onto the fireguard, suddenly took five steps across the room when nobody was looking?
Remember how she said ‘duck’ at ten months, then remained totally silent — until at the age of two she said in a conversational tone, ‘What a big fat duck, give it a bit of bread’?
There are sudden, dramatic leaps in small children's learning, interspersed with long fallow periods when nothing seems to happen.
The fatal thing is to try and follow the sort of gradual schedule you would with a much older child.
You will be frustrated.
Of course, little bits of practice help; but if a child goes on doing exactly the same thing just as incompetently every day for a month, or even three months, it does not necessarily mean that no progress is being made: it is, but inside, where you can't see it.
The second thing is that a child's fear of failure is probably greater than you think.
It is also very private, and well-meaning parents shouldn't delve for it, because it is so often Mum and Dad that a child dreads disappointing.
If you say, ‘Just have a go, we don't mind if you don't do it first time’, a sensitive child will probably clam up.
Better just to praise success and pretend not to notice the setbacks.
Plenty of clever, talented children seem to make slow progress at learning skills which they know their parents care about — like reading — while showing remarkable confidence and daring when it comes to the things their parents ignore, like swinging upside down, or building complicated models out of Lego.
This is why the idea of the ‘educational toy’ is so fraught with difficulty: the trick is never to let on that it is supposed to be educational, in case you transmit your own anxieties.
Even overpraising does, at times, lead to tantrums as a child decides that your lavish praise means that you didn't expect much of him in the first place.
The leaps forward will, believe me, be worth it.
I remember several moments when the trumpets played and rays of heavenly light danced around my children's heads.
One occasion was when my daughter, who I had suspected was a better reader than she had ever let on, casually picked up The Wind in the Willows while I was unpacking after a house-move, and read out the first page with great expression and hardly any mistakes.
It took me all my self-control not to turn round from the job I was doing until she had stopped and was ready for applause.
If I had swung round straight away, I don't think she would have got beyond line two, and that moment would have been lost.
children's wonderland
One baby-friendly Austrian region has a warm welcome for children.
Margaret Henderson reports
‘In this part of Austria, we don't expect babies and toddlers to fit in with hotel routine; we've adapted the hotels to suit them,’ claimed the tourist officer for Vorarlberg.
It was easy to see what he meant.
All over Austria, children are included in adult activities to a much greater extent than in Britain, but in the Alpine province of Vorarlberg they've got it down to a fine art.
Austria's smallest and most westerly province, bordering on the Tryol, Lichtenstein, Switzerland and Germany, Vorarlberg has been dubbed The Children's Wonderland.
If this conjures up visions of an American-style theme park, fear not.
It's much more about making families feel welcome, keeping the kids entertained and thinking of all sorts of ways to make life easier for harassed mums and dads in need of a break.
Our home for the week was the Gasthof Traube, not far from the resort of Lech where Prince Charles and other celebrities go skiing.
The hotel is one of a select band that qualify for Vorarlberg's ‘family specialist’ status.
In the garden, a brightly painted double-decker bus was specially equipped for children's games.
On the patio, some Italian children were rehearsing their contribution to the show being put on for parents that evening.
As we took our seats in the dining room on the first night, three babies and ten toddlers were having their evening meal with their parents.
Older brothers and sisters were eating in the playroom, supervised by Monika, a trainee teacher from Salzburg.
The children have their own menu to choose from — melon, spaghetti bolognese and pineapple glacé would be a typical selection.
The hotel provides an assortment of highchairs suitable for different ages and plump cushions for those who can't quite reach the table, which was set with child-sized cutlery and crockery.
It had been an exciting day for the children: they'd been to watch pedal-car racing at the village school and the older ones had spent the afternoon in the garden with Monika making brightly coloured carnival masks.
Two rooms in the hotel were set aside for children.
In the exercise room, an aerobics session was in progress, to be followed by rock and roll dancing.
In the other room, a Swiss boy and a German girl were making an impressive model chalet from a kit they'd found in the hobbies cupboard.
The next day, Sunday, was glorious and parents and children filled the squares of the nearby towns, listening to the traditional Sunday-morning performances of the village bands.
After lunch, families could join an organised hike from the hotel or get on mountain bikes for a visit to an Alpine dairy — the cows are pastured at high altitudes in the summer.
Other activities on offer were a family cycle ride round Lake Constance, which has 140km of bike lanes; a dip in a nearby swimming pool (a bus takes care of tired legs on the way back); or a peaceful walk through the woods with the baby, along special paths made wide enough for prams.
On at least a morning a week at ‘family specialist’ hotels, children are collected, given breakfast and taken on a trip or entertained for a few hours so their parents can enjoy a morning on their own.
Another excellent feature is the way the accommodation is arranged.
At the Gasthof Traube, we had a family suite, with a communicating door separating our rooms — bedroom, sitting room and bathroom — from the children's bedroom, shower and toilet.
The children can also watch television on their own set or help themselves to soft drinks from their own bar, which gives Mum and Dad a chance to enjoy a leisurely drink on the verandah.
In order to qualify for the ‘family specialist’ tag, hotels must be situated away from busy roads and should offer laundry facilities, baby baths, bottle warmers, back carriers and strollers, and what is described as s ‘night-pot’— which turned out to be a package of baby toiletries.
In the dining rooms, colouring books, crayons and paper mats suitable for painting on are provided.
Restaurants qualifying for family-specialist status must also have children's furniture, a children's menu and a play corner or children's lawn.
In addition, more than 300 hotels in Vorarlberg have also become ‘family orientated’, which means they offer the main facilities — if not all — provided by the family specialists.
For ten weeks in the summer, Vorarlberg also offers the largest programme of children's event in Europe; the little town of Bludenz plays host to a huge Children's Chocolate Festival, and 1000kg of Suchard chocolate is donated for the occasion.
Also in Bludenz, BMX fans can sign-up for the week-long training camp.
Nearby, there's an international festival of children's theatre and another of street theatre and music.
There are also Red Indian villages to visit and trappers' camps in the mountains, 200 appearances by Julius the Clown…
It's certainly all happening!
‘We believe in keeping the children busy as well as happy and comfortable,’ the tourist officer said.
‘Even with the hotel full of children, behaviour will never be a problem if some thought is given to children's needs.’
On our last night in Vorarlberg, watching nine-month-old Elisabeth crawling round the dining room and finding a welcome at every table, it occurred to me that, right from babyhood, children instinctively know whether they're welcome.
In Vorarlberg, they most definitely are.
FURTHER INFORMATION
How to get there
Austro-Tours, 11/15 St Ann's Road, Harrow, Middlesex HA1 1AS (0727 838191).
Erna Low Consultants Ltd, 9 Reece Mews, London SW7 3HE (071–584 2841).
Made to Measure Holidays Ltd, 43 East Street, Chichester, West Sussex PO19 1HX (0243 533333).
Austrian National Tourist Office, 30 George Street, London W1R 0AL (071–629 0461), for general information and advice on visiting the country.
Holiday reading
Blue Guide to Austria by Ian Robertson (A&C Black, £10.95)
Baedeker's Austria (Automobile Association, £10.95).
Michelin Tourist Guide to Austria (Michelin, £5.95).
Sun and scenery contribute to Vorarlberg's family appeal (top), while a giant Suchard cow presides over the chocolate festival (left)
taming YOUR TWO-YEAR-OLD
Every mother's been through it — a toddler screaming on the supermarket floor.
But what can you do?
Dr Harvey Marcovitch has a plan of action
I always have a pile of small, brightly coloured bricks on my desk, because they teach me so much about the children who sit in front of them.
Some children will instantly start building houses or cars, telling me what they're doing, and I know immediately that toys are not just for children, but for sharing with parents.
Other children reach out for them nervously, only to have their hand lightly slapped by their mother.
In that household, it's likely that adults come first by a long way; children are expected to conform, and tidiness takes precedence over fun.
When two-year-old Nicola saw the bricks, she glanced briefly at her mother, then threw each on in turn onto the floor.
Her mother, Carole, continued to tell me about her daughter's problems, just once aiming a glance at her.
When Nicola had despatched the last brick she began to yell loudly.
Carole reacted wordlessly, handing her daughter a bottle of juice.
After just a few sucks at the bottle, Nicola began to explore my room.
Getting up from rummaging in the wastepaper basket, she bumped her head, very lightly, on the sink.
She began to yell furiously, then threw herself on the ground, red-faced with rage, stamping her feet and screwing up her eyes.
Her mother delved once more into her bag, came up with a biscuit and curled Nicola's hand round it.
The yelling continued and crushed biscuit soon joined the scattered bricks on my floor.
The reason Nicola's GP had sent her to me was that the little girl wouldn't sleep at night, had tantrums and breath-holding attacks, and her mother wondered if she was allergic to something she was eating.
Why tantrums?
But Nicola isn't unique in her behaviour.
Almost all children have tantrums, and they start having them at about the same age — somewhere between 20–30 months.
They're not called ‘terrible twos’ for nothing!
This suggests that tantrums have something to do with the normal development of a child's personality, rather than with the way they have been brought up — although the way they are handled can make things worse.
A tantrum is a sudden release of pent-up emotion, a mixture of rage, frustration and anger.
These powerful feelings alarm the infant just as much — probably more — than the parents.
In one way, tantrums are healthy.
If children didn't pour out all their bad feelings in one go, they might be grumpy and irritable all the time.
Certainly, the children I see who have been rigidly controlled and not allowed to express bad feelings are often ill-tempered and uncooperative.
In addition, children who store up all their bad feelings, rather than expressing them, often develop symptoms such as recurrent stomach pains or headaches.
Tantrums are also a way for children to test out boundaries: at the age of two or three, they are finding out just how far they can go with their parents, and how much control they can gain.
The two natural processes — learning how to relate to parents, and how to deal with a build-up of feelings — can get mixed up together, however, and that means trouble.
The way Carole watched helplessly while the bricks were hurled, and then offered unwanted food and drink in a fruitless effort to placate her furious little girl, could only be bad for both of them.
Toddlers take no pleasure in achieving control over their parents; they understand that this is not how life is meant to be, and yet they are driven to test it out.
Parents, on the other hand, become distraught as they watch their delightful baby turn into a monster.
It's hardly surprising that some, like Carole, think, think their behaviour is connected to something their child eats, drinks or breathes in.
Solving Nicola's problem
So what about Nicola?
After I had got to know them both, I showed Carole a video of our first meeting and went through what had happened with her.
I tried to help her see that if she let herself go enough to enjoy playing building bricks too, Nicola wouldn't feel the need to throw them around to get the attention she wanted.
She was able to see that Nicola's tantrum wasn't caused by her bumped head, but by her anger with the world for letting the sink get in her way.
Making a joke of it, by slapping the sink and calling it naughty, might have defused the situation.
If that didn't work, it was more logical to let her express her anger in the safety of her mother's arms than to give her an irrelevant bottle, dummy or biscuit.
I also asked to see Nicola's father to make sure he was supporting his partner rather than acting against her.
I suggested that help might come from friends who'd been through the same scenario, or from genuinely sympathetic relatives (but not critical ones!).
With children's tantrums, you'll find the old child-rearing catchphrase ‘They'll grow out of it’ usually holds true.
It may help to keep this in mind next time your two-year-old throws a wobbly at the supermarket checkout.
Coping with tantrums
If you were Carole, how would you handle the situation?
Smack Nicola?
Tell her she's a naughty girl?
Ignore her?
Offer her a drink, biscuit, book or ice-cream if she will be quiet?
Say Daddy will smack her?
Pick her up and hold her until she calms down?
Make a note of the options you choose (more than one is allowed) and read on overleaf.
Did you decide to…
Smack Nicola?
Tell her she's naughty?
Ignore her?
Offer her food or toys?
Threaten her with her father?
Pick her up and hold her?
How you feel
Briefly relieved and satisfied.
Guilty and hurt later and frightened in case you lose control
Self-righteous at first, but then puzzled and cross when she doesn't respond with better behaviour
Happy if you are 100 per cent calm and at peace with yourself.
If not, you become more tense inside by trying not to react
Puzzled.
You can't understand why they don't calm her down
Angry with him of he doesn't share the way you feel.
Powerless that you can't get results yourself and have to rely on your partner's authority instead
Partly in control — partly out of control if she struggles against you
How she feels
Frightened by your anger.
Eventually she'll learn that you are powerless and laughs at the smacks
Contrite at first, but ‘naughty’ is an adult idea that means nothing to toddlers.
She just knows you're angry so she feels unloved
If her aim is to control she may give up.
If she's trying to get a reaction she'll double her efforts
Puzzled that you think she's hungry or thirsty rather than angry
If she's frightened of him, angry with you for not protecting her.
If she can wrap him round her finger, she'll ignore your threats
Still loved despite her bad feelings.
She may realise she can't get away with everything
Flexible approach
In reality, you may need to combine some of these methods.
A mixture of ignoring short tantrums, for example, but holding her if they continue, may work.
Prevention is usually better than cure, though, so keep one jump ahead of your child.
•Set limits while she's still young enough to be cooperative.
Nobody likes a child who is allowed to do whatever she likes, but then again no child is happy if she is always prevented from exploring.
Let her do things which help her understand the world; stop her from doing things which are dangerous or antisocial.
•Be consistent yourself — probably the hardest thing for parents to learn.
It's hopelessly confusing to a child if you laugh at her behaviour one day, but shout at her the next for the same trick.
•Make sure you and your partner are consistent too; men and women usually see discipline and control quite differently.
Dr Harvey Marcovitch is Consultant Paediatrician to Oxfordshire Health Authority.
He has three children.
Top: Allow your toddler to express bad feelings, however embarrassing.
Above: Testing the limits of your love
Don't worry — your terrible two-year-old will probably grow out of it!
Work it Out
It's a real dilemma — you want to be with your baby, but you need an income and you want to keep your brain cells working!
But going back to work needn't mean full time, or even leaving home or baby.
Zita Thornton looks at the options available
Going back to work after having a baby isn't always easy.
You may feel so attached to your baby that you loathe the thought of leaving him.
But nowadays, the family needs the extra money and many mothers find there are other rewards.
They are more able to relax and enjoy the time with their baby when they have had a break from the everyday routine at home; others find that having their own income gives them independence — and fewer money worries.
After a few months off, your main worry may be that you won't be able to cope with a full-time job, which will probably put you off returning to what you were doing before the baby.
But there are more flexible ways of easing back into the job market.
WORKING PART TIME
Nearly half of Britain's women workers are part-timers.
Many mothers continue to work part-time even when their children start school, so they can be there when they come home in the afternoon and so holiday childcare arrangements are a little easier.
Some women even manage to combine two part-time jobs and the children!
Cathy registered as a childminder when she started to look after a friend's young son.
When he started school, she only had to look after him before school started and after it finished, so she took on a part-time job as a lunch-time playground supervisor at the same school.
She feels that the experience of being a childminder helped her to get the job and certainly gave her the confidence to apply in the first place.
Later, she gave up the childminding and took on some secretarial work in the mornings which still allowed her to continue with her lunch-time job.
GETTING STARTED
•Bear in mind that in order to claim maternity benefits or redundancy pay and to have protection against unfair dismissal, you need to have worked for at least two years and 16 hours each week.
If you work for between eight and 16 hours you will have to have worked for the same employer for at least five years to be eligible, and if you work for less than eight hours a week, you'll lose these rights altogether.
•If you live in the country or in a suburban area, you may find that there are more opportunities in the nearest town.
The money may also be better, although don't forget travel costs and the time involved in travelling.
•It is worth asking your employer if you can continue your previous work on a part-time basis.
JOB SHARING
Although job sharing has become more popular in recent years, many people don't think of suggesting it, which is a shame because the benefits to both mother and employers are huge.
Most jobs can be shared, so don't be put off if the job you want is only advertised as a full-time one.
Anne and Chris didn't want to return full time to stressful teaching jobs when their maternity leave ended, so together they sent in a joint application for a full-time position with a covering letter pointing out the benefits of job sharing, and the way they could organize their week and their timetable.
They'd decided they could use the lunch break on changeover day to review the first part of the week and plan the second, so they would actually be working more hours than most.
They were offered the job and it has been working very well.
GETTING STARTED
•If you don't know of anyone you could share a job with, try approaching employment agencies who might be able to match you up with someone.
•You could also advertise in the local paper, or join a job-share register.
The group New Ways to Work organises a register for the London area.
It can tell you of any local registers.
New Ways to Work, 309 Upper Street, London N1 2TY (071–226 4026).
TEMPING
Temping jobs are traditionally secretarial but temps are always needed for clerical work and filing, as well as teaching, nursing, pharmaceuticals and school-meals supervision, for example.
Being a temp gives you a good chance to try out different types of work before committing yourself to a permanent job, and also to size up the different companies.
Many people find that they return to the same company over and over again, or take up a permanent job offer at a place they have been working for a while.
Tricia decided to temp when her youngest child started nursery full time.
It was the best choice for her, because she could decide which weeks she wanted free — and timed them to coincide with school holidays.
After working for a building company for two months, she was offered a permanent secretarial position there and decided to accept it because the firm was willing to be flexible about unpaid time off.
GETTING STARTED
•To find temporary jobs, visit a specialist employment agency or the appropriate department of a local authority or company.
You'll be asked abut past jobs and, for typing, will probably have to do a speed test.
•If you are keen to work as a temp for your old company, broach the subject before you take maternity leave.
WORKING FROM HOME
This option is probably the most elastic way of working.
You can choose your own hours, which means that you can fit in with the needs of your baby.
Marie had been a hairdresser before her son Mark was born.
She started cutting the hair of children at her local toddler group and eventually their mothers asked her to do their hair, too.
She invested in up-to-date equipment, took out a subscription to hairdressing magazines to keep in touch with the latest ideas, and took clients at the weekends and evenings.
She now has a thriving business and is constantly in demand.
GETTING STARTED
If you work from home you are also running a business, however small, and therefore you have to be businesslike from the start.
The following guidelines should make this easier:
•Decide on a regular time for working — perhaps when your child is asleep or at playgroup.
You could decide to work at a time when your partner or a friend is round to see the baby, or arrange for someone — a childminder or relative — to look after her for a few hours each week.
This way you can concentrate on your work.
•Decide on the space that is wholly yours, even if it only a table somewhere.
Choose a place where you won't have to clear things away after every bout of working.
•Tell your friends when you'll be working and ask them to call round at other times instead.
•Don't be put off by the fact that you have to control the purse strings — it isn't too difficult and leaflets are available from the Inland Revenue and the DSS.
Many banks are keen to loan money to small businesses, provided you have thought things out properly, and are often willing to give financial advice.
•The Women's Guide to Starting Your Own Business by Deborah Fowler (Thorsons, £6.99) is really helpful and includes ideas on different ways of earning money from home by jewellery-making, picture-framing, etc.
SELL YOURSELF!
Bringing up a family gives you many skills and much experience which will be valuable to an employer:
•Your role as a mother involves patience, tolerance, sensitivity to the needs of others and the ability to put other people first.
•Juggling the running of a house, keeping everyone well-fed and clothed, and seeing to the needs of a new baby make mothers excellent organisers.
•Keeping the household budget (especially on only one salary) gives you a good grounding in financial matters.
•Voluntary work you may have done while at home will be prized by an employer.
It shows that you are responsible, committed and can work as part of a team.
Include this type of work on your CV.
Remember all these things at an interview and never let it be said that you are ‘just a mother’!
Part-time work means using a minder for less time
WHAT'S YOUR BABY LIKE?
Is your baby a cheeky chappie or a sensitive soul?
Heather Welford takes a lighthearted look at baby personalities with tips on catering for their needs
Your baby is of course unique, with her own needs and character, and one of the joys of parenthood is getting down to know her.
But pinning down the personality of a baby is no easy task and, in many cases, your tantrum-throwing two-year-old may bear little resemblance to the sweet, quiet little newborn bundle you presented so proudly to the world.
My second child, for instance, was a placid baby who fed to routine from his earliest day and rarely cried.
He became an exhaustingly energetic toddler, however, who could never be persuaded to keep still, even for a cuddle or a story.
By the time he was three years old, he had the scabbiest knees in the nursery from all the scrapes he got himself into.
But even if you can't predict exactly what your baby is going to be like as a toddler or pre-schooler, let alone as an adolescent, sorting out her needs and wants in the here and now can be fascinating.
Where does yours fit in to the various classifications — or do you have a baby who's a mixture of several?
Read on…
The Maybe Baby
This baby hates routine!
Maybe he'll feed well today, maybe not.
Maybe he'll go a regular time between feeds, maybe he'll snack on and off all day — there's no way of telling.
The Maybe Baby is wakeful at night — sometimes.
You'll have three or four ‘good’ nights on the trot, and think you've cracked it.
Then the next night, it's back to waking twice or three times, and you won't know how easy it's going to be to settle him.
Advantages: Maybe Babies are far more common under the age of three months than over, so it's often a short-lived phase, connected with development rather than personality.
Their lack of routine means you can often encourage them to feed when you want them to — such as just before you set off on an outing.
•Tip: Accept your baby's unpredictability as far as you can, and on no account blame yourself for it (or listen to anyone who implies you ought to get his act together).
Time is sure to bring a lot of changes.
The Cheeky Chappie
Male or female, the Cheeky Chappie bubbles with character and sociability from the very first weeks.
You'll swear you saw her smile long before the ‘average’ age of about six weeks.
She's the one who loves to hold gurgling ‘conversations’ with you, and you'll sometimes find she seems to deliberately attract your attention by making noises quite loudly, and then smiles broadly to reward you when you look round at her.
Advantages: The Cheeky Chappie is fun to have around, and other people — even confirmed non-baby types — can join in too.
•Tip: Bear in mind that even the most sociable babies can develop a ‘clinging’ phase, often towards the end of the first year, when only Mum or Dad will do if they need comforting.
The Sensitive Soul
Babies like this thrive best in a restful, quiet atmosphere.
Bustling, cooing visitors upset them, and a ‘pass the baby’ session ends up producing piercing screams of genuine distress.
You need to dress, undress and bath your baby gently, with lots of soothing noises to reassure him.
Advantages: The Sensitive Soul can be really relaxing to care for!
He'll force you to take life at a slower pace, to put your feet up when you feed him, and to enjoy cuddling and stroking him.
•Tip: Don't make plans to visit far-flung family, or have riotous parties for him when he's very small.
He won't enjoy it, and you'll be on pins waiting for him to show everyone just how much he hates it.
As he gets older, he'll become more adaptable.
DOES BODY SHAPE AFFECT PERSONALITY?
A branch of psychology, developed in the United States in the 1960s and 1970s, looks at the links between body shape and personality, and defines three major types of body: endomorph, mesomorph and ectomorph.
You can apply these types to babies as well as adults, so see where your baby fits in!
The endomorph is round and soft, with shortish limbs, and small, plump hands and feet.
As a baby, he loves to suck.
He adores feeding, not so much for the food, but for the sucking experience.
When he's not feeding, he'll suck at anything else that's available — a dummy, finger, thumb or piece of blanket.
He finds it easy to sleep, wherever he is and in whatsoever position he finds himself.
He loves company, and thrives on other people's attention.
In fact, he gets lonely if he's on his own for very long.
The mesomorph has largish hands and feet, long arms and legs, and squarish fingers.
Baby mesomorphs have a large appetite, and like to make feeds last a long time.
When the mesomorph gets onto solids, you may find he ‘wolfs’ down big meals very quickly.
He's a restless sleeper, kicking and thrashing about throughout the night.
When he wakes, he's ready for action now!
He thrives on less sleep than the other types.
Socially, he's not as dependent on the company of others as the endomorph.
He's less ready with smiles on demand — he'll decide whether he's going to give a gummy grin or not!
The ectomorph is slender.
Torso and limbs are slim, arms and legs are long, fingers and toes are fragile-looking, with pointed tips.
Expect your baby to feed less enthusiastically then you'd like.
She can be trusted to feed according to her needs, however, but those needs mightn't be very great.
When she's taking solids, she won't want much at each meal.
Her natural pattern is probably four or five small meals a day, rather than three large ones.
She finds it hard to get to sleep, unless she's exhausted, and even then she sleeps lightly.
She doesn't like crowds of adoring relatives and friends, and becomes distressed when too much is going on at once.
The Mystery Cryer
Okay, no matter what your expectations, the Mystery Cryer is a difficult baby in anyone's book.
He'll cry long and hard, and though you can soothe him for a few minutes at a time, hours can pass without you ever really silencing the cries.
You'll hear lots of diagnoses — colic, wind, boredom, allergy, ‘tension in the mother’.
It's important to get the appropriate medical advice to rule out any underlying disorder, of course, but thereafter, most parents end up drawing a blank.
Advantages: Are there any?
The only one is that constant crying is usually ‘self-limiting’— that is, it stops by itself after running its course; usually after no more than three to four months.
•Tip: Don't blame yourself.
Use whatever methods, consistent with kindness and common sense, you need to soothe your baby — whatever anyone else says.
Dummy?
Bed-sharing?
Constant breastfeeding?
Don't worry: none of these habits will last forever.
Seek support from your health visitor, other mothers, or the support group Cry-sis (071–404 5011).
The Textbook Baby
This is the one everyone seems to have except you!
You know, the one who feeds to routine, sleeps through the night at a fortnight old, gains weight at the average rate and doesn't get a spotty face the day before he's due to have his photo taken.
And he smiles at everyone.
He is, believe it or not, very rare.
Advantages: This baby makes you feel good.
You know it was just chance you had a baby like this, but you can't help congratulating yourself on your wonderful mothering, too!
•Tip: Don't get too smug.
These textbookers change a lot as the months go on.
And please don't tell everyone how wonderful he is too often.
STORYTIME
Tony Bradman reviews the pick of this month's books
Baby books
There is nothing a baby likes more than to see something brightly coloured an interesting.
That's why I think a child could become seriously addicted to Jan Pienkowski's Nursery Board Books (Heinemann, £1.99).
Jan Pienkowski's bold primary colours and simple line drawings are a baby's delight.
There are five titles altogether: Sizes, Food, Colours, Time and Faces, the last one being the best with its lively pictures of happy faces, sad faces and cheeky tongues being stuck out.
Very young children will also enjoy four little paperbacks by Colin and Jacqui Hawkins.
There are four books in the Jollypops series (Macmillan, £1.99 each)— The Elephant, This Little Pig, Round the Garden and my favourite, Incy Wincy Spider.
Each features a very familiar rhyme accompanied by the kind of lively, funny pictures Colin and Jacqui Hawkins have been doing so well for years.
But there's a surprise too, for each book has a clever pop-up on its last spread which will have babies and toddlers squealing with delight.
(0–2)
Animals also feature in the new book from one of our best children's illustrators, Pat Hitchins.
In What Game Shall We Play?
(Julia MacRae/Walker, £6.99) Pat returns to some characters she created in The Surprise Party, a book she did over 20 years ago which has become something of a classic.
Duck and Frog search for their friends and it takes quite some time to find them all.
And none of them have any ideas when it comes to deciding what game they should play — until wise old owl finally saves the day and comes up with the answer.
Pat's strong, simple illustrations make this a very appealing story.
(1½–3)
The Wheels on the Bus by Paul O Zelinsky (Orchard Books, £7.95) is a book with moving parts based on the traditional song of the same name.
If any of your children are at playgroup, it's a song you'll know very well.
The pictures are terrific; they follow the bus through the town, and your child can turn the wheels, open and shut the doors, swish the windscreen wipers and so on.
The babies' mouths even open and shut as they go ‘waah!’, and there are lots of characters you can follow on their journeys.
(1½–4)
Animal magic
Babette Cole's Beastly Birthday Book (Heinemann, £8.95) is a guide to having a really ‘beastly’ birthday party by inviting raging rhinos, slippery sharks and singing cows!
It's all told in a bouncy rhyme, with outrageously funny pictures.
But this is a novelty book and many of the pages can be opened like envelopes to reveal all sorts of goodies.
The final pop-up spread is quite something, too.
(2–5)
Parents and children will enjoy Septimus Honeydew by Susan Hill, with pictures by Carol Thompson (Julia MacRae/Walker, £6.99).
It tells a very familiar tale of sleepless nights and beds full of small, noisy children.
It begins with Septimus Honeydew waking up at three in the morning and trotting off to Mum and Dad's room.
There he climbs into bed and goes to sleep.
Mum and Dad do just the opposite, mostly because of Septimus' wriggling, and ‘one of those nights’ ensues.
Septimus is trained out of his bad habits in the end, and everyone sleeps happily ever after.
It's not that easy in real life, of course, but the book is a lot of fun.
(2–5)
Pig tales
Tottie Pig's Special Birthday by Vivian French and Clive Scruton (Walker Books, £6.99) is perfect for toddlers who are about to acquire a little brother or sister.
When Mother Pig tells Tottie that she's having a new baby, and that it might arrive on Tottie's birthday, Tottie isn't very happy.
Naturally enough, she wants to keep her birthday all to herself.
So Tottie tries to ensure that the baby will come early or late, helped by an unsuspecting neighbour called Mrs Bottom.
Tottie is a charming character, and one with whom children will immediately identify.
And don't worry — there is a happy ending!(2–5)
Pigs are familiar characters in children's books, but you won't have come across one like Henry before.
He's the star of The Whistling Piglet by Dick King-Smith, with illustrations by Norman Johnson (Walker Books, £6.99).
As the title suggests, he's no ordinary piglet.
The grown-up animals aren't very impressed by his whistling, but the young ones are.
In fact, Henry can whistle one tune which makes them all want to follow him.
And on the day Henry is due to got to market, that's exactly the tune he whistles.
Children will enjoy seeing the chaos as Henry leads all the young animals out into the forest, where it takes the farmer a long time to catch them.
And they'll be even more pleased to hear that Henry escapes, and will never be turned into pork chops and sausages.
This is a delightful book which has all the makings of a minor classic.
(2–5)
Family life
Tessa Dahl's famous father Roald certainly knew what made a good children's book, and judging by The Same But Different, with illustrations by Arthur Robins (Puffin, £2.99), she's got a pretty good idea too.
It tells the story of a day in the life of one particular family.
Clover, Luke, Mum, Dad, Granny, Grandpa and Speedy the dog all do the same things but in their own, different ways.
All the humour is in the illustrations, and this is a book your children will return to again and again.
(2–5)
In When We Went to the Zoo by Jan Ormerod (Walker Books, £7.99), a dad decides to take his small son and daughter to the zoo, where they see all sorts of wonderful animals.
They have a marvellous time, but the best thing of all is totally unexpected — a family of sparrows nesting on the zoo gates on the way out.
It might seem that there's not a lot to it.
But words can't do justice to Jan Ormerod's wonderful animal pictures, which make each spread in this large-format picture a joy to look at.
There's plenty of detail in the smaller pictures of the humans, too, and the book as a whole adds up to a great experience for a child — almost as good as a day out at the zoo!(2–5)
Changes by Anthony Browne (Julia MacRae/Walker, £8.99) deals with the effect the arrival of a new baby has on an older child.
Anthony Browne is one of the most original illustrators working in children's books today, and the youngsters love the strangeness of his pictures.
Joseph's father has told him that things are going to change, meaning, of course, that the new baby will have an impact on all of them.
But Joseph doesn't really understand that, and the changes he sees are bizarre and a little frightening — the furniture slowly turns into animals, objects are no longer what they seem.
It sounds a little odd described in this way.
But the book does explore the emotional effect that this major change has on a small boy's life in a clever and very unusual way.
It seems exactly right to see the whole family sitting on a sofa together as Joseph meets his new sister at the end.
(3–5)
Book of the Month
I have two selections this month: The Pet Shop and The Black Cat by Allan Ahlberg, with illustrations by André Amstutz (Heinemann, £5.95 each).
One of the finest books I ever had to review was Janet and Allan Ahlbergs Funnybones, a brilliant tale of what a skeleton family gets up to at night when everyone else is in bed.
Now Allan Ahlberg has written two more stories about the same skeletons, and they're just as good.
Under-fives will love all the skeleton animals from the pet shop, and the way the black cat disappears in the dark cellar.
André Amstutz's pictures are just as successful as Janet Ahlberg's in the original, which has been re-issued by Little Mammoth (£2.99).
Above centre: Owl is decisive in Which Game Shall We Play?
Far right: Septimus keeps Mum and Dad awake.
Below:Incy Wincy Spider won't give up.
Bottom: A beastly birthday present!
Top: the ‘Pied Piper’ of piglets leads the farmer a dance.
Below right: Nothing is quite what it seems in Changes .
Below left: ‘Let's swap the dog’ in Funnybones' Pet Shop.
SAVE YOUR CHILD'S LIFE
If you were suddenly faced with an emergency, would you know how to cope?
It could mean the difference between life and death.
Nancy Stewart tells you exactly what to do in a life-threatening situation
Knowing what to do in a life-threatening emergency is like buying fire insurance — you hope you'll never need it, and you probably never will.
But it gives you the peace of mind to know that, if the worst should happen, you could cope with the situation.
Your quick response in an emergency could be a life-saver for your child.
ELECTROCUTION
Never approach the victim of an electric shock until the you're sure you are not risking a shock yourself — otherwise you could become another casualty instead of a rescuer.
If possible, turn off the power at the switch and pull out the plug.
If you can't locate the source of the power, push the child away from the power with something that won't conduct electricity (a broom handle if there's one handy or another long, dry piece of wood or plastic is ideal).
•Put out any burning clothes by smothering them with a thick cloth or rug, but not something synthetic which would melt in the heat.
•Check that your child's heart is beating and he is breathing regularly and, if necessary, give artificial respiration (see Not Breathing ).
•Any burns may be deeper than they appear, so cool them with cold water and cover with an antiseptic dressing or clean cloth.
•Put your child into the recovery position (see page 82) to rest, and call your doctor.
•Call an ambulance immediately if your child shows signs of medical shock, such as dizziness, pallor, sweating, light pulse or rapid breathing.
BURNS AND SCALDS
A burn is from dry heat and a scald is from wet, but the first-aid treatment is the same for both.
•First of all, remove your child from the source of the heat.
•For minor burns and scalds, cool by holding the affected area under cold running water for ten minutes or immersing in a bowl of cold water.
Do not use butter, creams or lotions, but put on a clean dressing instead.
•For burns affecting a larger area, either put your child in a cold bath or cover the burn with a wet sheet or towel.
For severe burns where the skin is dark red, charred or blistered, do not use water but cover lightly with a sterile dressing before calling for medical aid.
•If your child's clothing is on fire, stop him running about to prevent fanning the flames.
Douse with water if possible, but don't throw on water from a distance, as this creates scalding steam and only spreads the flames.
•When the flames are out, remove hot clothes but leave in place any which are seared to the flesh, as they provide a sterile protection.
•Check your child's breathing, giving artificial respiration if needed, while waiting for medical aid.
If your child is unconscious, place him in the recovery position (see page 82).
CHOKING
Choking requires instant action, since the more your child struggles to breathe, the more firmly fixed the blockage will become.
•First, try dislodging the object with slaps on the back.
Hold a baby or small toddler upside down by the feet; an older child can rest face down across your thigh.
Give three or four sharp, flat blows between the shoulder blades with the palm of your hand.
•If that doesn't do the trick, use an abdominal thrust.
For a baby, sit him on your lap or on the floor.
With the tips of two fingers positioned slightly above the baby's navel, press gently but firmly upwards.
For an older child, use your hand made into a fist, using gentle but firm upwards pressure with the other hand supporting his back.
•The object may have been choked up in the child's mouth.
If it can be easily reached, hook it out with your finger so it can't be swallowed again (be careful not to get bitten!).
Give the child artificial respiration if needed.
POISONING
Different poisons require different actions, so if you suspect poisoning find out what substance your child has eaten or inhaled.
Contact your local hospital immediately, and take the poison container with you.
•If your child has stomach pain or is vomiting, hold him so there is no risk of his inhaling any vomit.
•Many poisons cause as much damage coming back up as they do going down, so do not make him vomit unless you are sure it is safe to do so.
Poisons for which you must not cause vomiting include oily substances like furniture polish, and corrosive substances such as caustic soda, weed killer, disinfectant, acid and insect sprays.
Aspirins and other medicines can be safely brought up.
The exception is heart medicines, which can be safely brought up straightaway, but not if some time has passed since they were swallowed.
•To make him vomit, give your child water to drink if he has not eaten recently.
Then lay him over your knee with a basin to catch the vomit, and wiggle your finger near the back of his throat.
If this does not work, give him a teaspoon of mustard dissolved in a tumbler of warm water.
•Do not cause vomiting if you are in any doubt as to what he's taken, but dilute the poison in the stomach by giving milk or water.
•Give artificial respiration if your child stops breathing, protecting yourself from burning by wiping his face first (below) or giving aid through a clean handkerchief.
Send for an ambulance immediately.
DROWNING
•Pull your child out the water.
Alternatively you can begin artificial respiration in shallow water and move towards dry land between each breath.
•Clear any debris from his mouth (above).
After giving four breaths, check the pulse.
If it is absent, use chest compression until the pulse returns (see Not Breathing ).
Turn the child's head to the side frequently to clear any water that comes up.
After ten presses, give the child two breaths.
•Don't give up on artificial respiration if the child doesn't respond quickly.
Children can sometimes be revived as much as 40 minutes after their own breathing has stopped.
NOT BREATHING
If your child is not breathing, you need to breathe into the lungs for him until he can do it himself (artificial respiration).
Quick action is vital, since anyone who stops breathing can usually live for only a few minutes without help.
•First, remove anything that is blocking breathing.
The most common culprits are plastic bags or things round the neck.
Lay the child on his back, turn his head and remove any debris in his mouth with your finger.
•Hold the child with his head slightly tilted back to clear the airway.
Cover his mouth and nose with your mouth, and breathe gently into his lungs, making the chest rise.
For a small baby, use only the amount of breath that you can hold in your cheeks, to avoid damaging his lungs.
Remove your mouth and watch the chest fall.
•Continue giving one shallow breath every three seconds.
During the first four breaths, check for a pulse by feeling on the neck just under the jaw line at the ear lobe.
If there is no pulse, you will have to begin chest compression until the heart starts.
•For a baby, use two fingers to press down between ½–1in in the middle of the breastbone, and let it rise again.
For a child, use the heel of one hand in the middle of the breastbone, pressing down 1–1½in.
Repeat quite quickly, at the rate of about 90–100 times per minute.
After ten presses, give the child two breaths.
Continue this sequence until the pulse beats without help, stopping when the pulse starts strongly.
•Continue the breaths every three seconds until the child is managing to breathe without help, and then place in the recovery position.
RECOVERY POSITION
This is the safest position after an accident as it prevents your child's tongue falling back and obstructing his airway and avoids the risk of choking if he vomits.
His head must be turned to one side and tilted well back.
Cool extensive burns immediately by putting the child in a cold bath; be careful not to rub his skin
Smother burning clothes with a blanket, rug or heavy curtain
Hold a baby by his feet (left) or lay a child over your knee (right) and strike between the shoulder blades
If your child is still choking, sit her on your knee and press firmly below her ribcage with your fist
Put your baby on the floor and press with two fingers above his navel
To clear the airway, support your baby's neck (top right) or lift an older child's chin, pinching his nostrils together (right).
Place your lips around the child's mouth and breathe into his lungs
Place one of his hands under his leg.
Fold the other arm over his chest and cross the far leg over his near one.
Protect the face with one hand; grasp his hip and roll him towards you until he's lying flat.
Bend his top arm and leg up to support him.
Cover with coat.
all about MILK
Deciding what sort of milk is best for your child can be confusing.
You can't assume that, because a particular milk is healthier for you, it's also good for your three-year-old.
Children's needs change as they grow, so it's important to know what milk they should be drinking at different stages.
BREAST MILK
The ideal food, combining protein, carbohydrate, fat, minerals and vitamins in a perfect blend that's easily digested by the baby.
It also contain antibodies that protect her against infections — and it costs nothing!
FORMULA MILK
This is a breast milk substitute made from cow's milk and vegetable and animal fats, fortified with important vitamins and minerals.
It comes in dried and liquid forms.
It doesn't contain protective antibodies and isn't as easily digested as breast milk.
When any milk enters a baby's stomach, it is turned into curds and whey, breast milk curds pass through the stomach easily, but formula milk produces tougher, less digestible curds that stay in the stomach for about four hours.
Formula milks with a high protein content are usually labelled ‘for the hungrier baby’, presumably because they take longer to pass through the stomach.
FULL COW'S MILK
Although in many parts of the world babies don't drink milk after weaning and grow up perfectly healthy, in Northern Europe cow's milk is part of our diet and young children are encouraged to drink it because it's cheap, convenient, high in protein and energy, and a good source of calcium and vitamins A and B. There are conflicting opinions on when cow's milk can first be given to children.
Present guidelines advise that you stick with breast or formula milk until at least six months, although some nutritionists feel that, because cow's milk is low in iron and vitamin D, it shouldn't be given to babies under a year.
Lack of vitamin D and iron are not problems for the average baby.
But as a safety net, the government recommend that babies over six months old should be given children's vitamin drops containing vitamins D, C and A — these drops are available from child health clinics.
They should be taken until your child is at least two years old, preferably five years.
FOLLOW-ON MILK
This comes in dried and liquid forms and is basically reduced-fat cow's milk with added vitamin D and iron — the two essentials missing from full cow's milk.
It shouldn't be confused with formula milk, which is breast milk substitute, and never be given before a baby is six months old.
There's little need to give your baby a follow-on milk in preference to breast of formula milk.
Formula is well fortified with all the necessary vitamins and minerals, and those in breast milk are more easily absorbed.
Follow-on milk contains more protein than breast milk or formula, but since protein deficiency is practically unheard of in this country, extra protein isn't really necessary.
SEMI-SKIMMED AND SKIMMED MILK
The skimming process removes vitamin A from cow's milk and reduces the calorie content.
Calories aren't baddies at this stage in children's growth, as they provide much-needed stores of energy.
Semi-skimmed and skimmed milk are not recommended for children below two and five years, respectively.
COW'S MILK IN BABY FOOD
Skimmed cow's milk is sometimes found in commercial prepared foods for babies under six months.
The amounts are very small and the processing of the food makes the milk digestible.
But it is still better not to cook dishes yourself using cow's milk before she is six months old, and you should also avoid giving your baby dairy products like yogurt, or mixing her cereal with cow's milk.
ALTERNATIVE MILKS
Cow's milk can trigger allergies, especially if they run in the family.
Women with a family history of allergies are always advised to breastfeed because even the modified milk in infant formula can provoke an allergic reaction.
Formula specially made for bottle-fed babies with a cow's milk allergy is based on soya beans and should not be given without talking to your doctor or health visitor first.
There should always be a good reason for substituting cow's milk with unmodified soya milk (which you can buy in cartons)— for example, if you are a vegan and don't consume any dairy products — as some brands have a high aluminium content.
Goat's milk, which is sometimes used as an alternative to cow's, is low in folic acid, an important vitamin necessary for proper blood formation, and his vitamin should be added if you use goat's milk.
If it's not pasteurised, you must boil it first and let it cool.
And goat's milk can still provoke allergic reactions, despite its less allergenic popular image.
PENNY NATHAN
MILK TIMETABLE
Breast or formula milk
From birth to one year or longer
Full cow's milk
Not before six months
Semi-skimmed milk
Not before two years
Follow-on milk
Not before six months
Children's vitamin drops
To be taken from six months until the child is at least two years old, preferably five
Your letters
Send your letters to Parents at Victory House, 14 Leicester Place, London WC2H 7BP.
There's a £5 Children's World voucher for every letter we print and a £10 voucher for the writer of our star letter each month.
THE EYES HAVE IT
Your excellent article,Looks Familiar (January issue), was really interesting.
My father has black hair and brown eyes and my mother is blonde with blue eyes.
I have red hair and green eyes.
My husband, who is pure Japanese, can trace his family back at least 800 years.
When our son, Minoru, was born, I though he would have brown eyes and black hair.
Instead he has one brown eye and one blue eye, and his hair is reddish-black!
He's nearly a year old now, but his right eye is still getting darker, while his left eye is staying firmly blue.
Mrs T Yuki Kilburn, London NW6 Ed's comment: a real genetic hiccup!
NATURAL ALTERNATIVES
Why are people so quick to associate children with sweet things?
Invariably, whenever I am out shopping with my little boy, conversation with people we meet turns to sweets, with questions like ‘Are you going to buy some sweets today?’ or ‘Doesn't he want sugar in his drink?’
All these references to sweets are enough to ‘brainwash’ any young mind, and I can't help wondering how mothers cope when their children can't have sugar for medical reasons.
My little boy honestly prefers a bag of nuts or fruit, and isn't partial to anything sweet or sugary.
I was even asked to remove the jam and icing from a biscuit at a recent party!
I know people mean well, but they should realise that they could easily offer a child fruit like an apple or a banana instead.
Mrs E Miles Basford, Nottingham
FITTING SOLUTION
Been shopping lately and found that you bought clothes that didn't fit your toddler?
Lots of readers have written in complaining about the lack of uniformity in children's clothes sizes.
Here are two letters:
…
I wish shops would have more uniformity when it comes to sizing guides.
My five-month-old son is wearing suits to fit a 12–18-month-old, while my four-year-old is wearing clothes for a child aged six to seven years, and my seven-year-old fits garments sized eight to nine years!
All my children are of average size so where do the manufacturers get their sizes from?
It makes shopping very tedious and I find myself forever returning clothes.
R J Wylson Broxbourne, Herts
…
As a new mum, I am finding life very confusing.
It's not my daughter, Hannah, who is the problem, it's her clothes — there seems to be no uniformity in the size of clothes in shops.
Sometimes, in a store where more than one manufacturer is stocked, dresses for the same ages differ in size.
I have come to the conclusion that I may have to stick to one particular make for the right size.
Mrs L C Hetebrij Reading, Berks
BAD EXAMPLE
I couldn't believe my eyes when the consultant in charge of my pregnancy came round the antenatal ward in my local hospital, puffing away on a cigar.
He chose to ignore all the ‘No Smoking’ signs on display and the disdainful looks of the nursing staff, who were obviously too intimidated by his status to say anything to him about it.
Talking to other mothers I learn that, like me, they too were disgusted and we all agreed that next time we would ask for another consultant.
Mrs S Stephens Watton, Norfolk
BURNING ISSUE
Visiting a children's ward in a local hospital, I was appalled to read a ‘Smoking is Permitted’ sign in the parents' waiting room.
I know that some parents might become tense while waiting to see their children, and they feel they need a cigarette to calm their nerves.
But to say blatantly that this is allowed, is to my mind terribly wrong.
Everybody is now well aware of the dangers of passive smoking, and children with asthmatic or bronchial conditions could also be adversely affected by wafting smoke.
R Cooper Muswell Hill, London N10
TWIN CONCERNS
Your January issue contained two items I would like to respond to.
The letter from Mrs Grey (Your Letters ) questioned whether scans were ‘essential’.
She had refused scans as she did not wish to choose a termination.
It is, however, vital that mothers realise that scans do not only detect abnormalities, they also detect multiple births, and have been one of the main factors in increasing the survival rate of twins and triplets over the last few years.
If twins are detected by ultrasound scan, parents can prepare themselves for the births and plan accordingly, and also alert the obstetric team so that the appropriate antenatal care can be given to allow for the best chance of a safe delivery.
If Mrs Grey had found that she was having twins in the delivery room, I think she would have quickly changed her mind about the usefulness of scans.
Your article,Antenatal Tests , did not mention that mothers expecting a multiple birth are usually advised against having amniocentesis and chorionic villus sampling.
We receive numerous calls from mothers in this situation, and have put them in touch with our consultants who have advised and helped them reach their own decisions.
If parents require any further information about twins, they can write enclosing an sae, to the Secretary of the Twins and Multiple Births Association (TAMBA), 59 Sunnyside, Worksop, Notts S81 7LN (0909 479250).
M Lowe Chairman, TAMBA
TAMBA wins a £10 voucher from Children's World
in touch
Contact other mothers with our parent link-up scheme
COPING WITH ASTHMA
Asthma can be a very frightening condition, especially in a child.
Julie writes from Milford Haven in South Wales: ‘I am 24 years old and, although not married, I have lived with my boyfriend Jeff for six years.
We have a five-year-old daughter, Rebekah, who was born two months prematurely.
She is asthmatic so I would very much like to get in touch with people who have had experience of an asthmatic child.
‘My main interest is my family and I love soap operas, animals and writing and receiving letters.
I would love to make some new friends.’
The National Asthma Campaign, 300 Upper Street, Islington, London N1 2XX, offers lots of support and advice for asthma sufferers and their families.
Membership costs £3 per year for adults, £2 a year for children.
It publishes helpful leaflets and has local branches all over the country which have regular meetings and fund-raising events.
The helpline on 0345 010203 is open from 1pm to 9pm Monday to Friday (all calls are charged as a local call).
YOUNG MUMS
Nina from Hornchurch in Essex would like to know where all the young mums are hiding!
‘I am 21 and live with my fiancé and our two sons, born in August 1987 and November 1989.
Because I am quite shy, I am finding it hard to make friends.
None of my friends have children and all the mother-and-toddler groups I have been to are full of older mums.
I can't figure out where all the young mums go!
‘My older son would like to make friends, too — he gets so bored and he is a bit jealous of the baby.
He really needs some friends to play with.’
Joanne, who is also 21, has recently moved to Sheffield.
‘I am married to John, a postman, and we have a lovely daughter, Rachel, born in March 1989.
My hobbies involve caring for my family, cooking, reading, watching TV soaps and decorating the house.
‘Because John does shift work I get very lonely and would like to write to someone in a similar position to myself, preferably living in the Sheffield area.’
Beverley from Netherton in Liverpool is 19 years old, and she writes, ‘I have a two-year-old daughter who is very lively.
I have been living in this area for over a year now, and I still haven't made any friends.
My husband is on an ET (Employment Training) scheme so I see very little of him and, being on the dole, we don't have enough money to go out.
‘I enjoy reading, making things, music and taking photos of my daughter.
I would love to meet other young mums in this area.’
Wendy from Countesthorpe in Leicester, is 18 years old and has a little daughter, Natasha, who was born in December 1988.
‘I am not married at the moment, but I am looking forward to a very happy future with Natasha's father.
I am quite new to this area and only know people to say hello to.
I would love to have a friend of around my own age to share outings, coffee and a chat and generally the good and the bad of bringing up children.
I love most pop music,Home and Away , nightclubs and having a good time.
I hate sleepless nights, full nappies and Songs of Praise .
I would love to hear from other young mums everywhere.’
NURSE UNDER PRESSURE
Marie, 25, from Telford in Shropshire has a lot of problems at the moment, and needs a good friend.
‘I am a registered general nurse and, although I love my work, it depresses me at times to have to work shifts, both day and night.
‘My husband's name is Paul and we have two lovely daughters, Natasha aged three and Naomi, nine months.
‘During my last pregnancy my husband and I went through a really tough time — in fact it has not ended yet and we are undecided as to whether we are going to separate or not.
‘I am a fairly lonely person — I do have friends but I don't get to see them very often because of my unsociable shift work.
I am very close to my sister, but she lives in Germany.
My parents only live about five miles away and I try to see them about twice a week.
‘My hobbies include knitting, reading nursing material, the newspapers and Stephen King novels, writing letters, badminton, walking, driving, pop music, Tamla Motown music, bowling, gardening, visiting the pub or going out for meals.
I hate housework, untidiness and most programmes on TV — I love going to the cinema, though.’
SOCIABLE COUPLE
Camie and her husband have recently moved, and are now living in Harrow-on-the-Hill, Middlesex.
‘My husband and I enjoy going to the theatre, Agatha Christie novels, outdoor walks and picnics, and eating in restaurants.
We also very much enjoy travel.
We are new to the London area, and would like to eat in restaurants or visit pubs with others.
We both read a great deal and play computer games.
We would like to write to anyone with similar interests.’
HOME BIRTH
Sharon writes, ‘I would like to contact anyone in the Salisbury area who has recently had a home birth since I am contemplating one myself and would like to hear how it went, authorities/doctors' attitudes etc.
‘Many thanks to anyone who can help.’
If you would like to contact anyone whose letter appears on this page, write to them care of Melanie Garrett, In Touch, Parents, Victory House, Leicester Place, London WC2H 7BP.
0–5
news and know-how for you and your child from our experts
PREGNANCY AND BIRTH
Home-birth service
Because they feel women have lost the choice of having a home birth, midwives Valerie Taylor and Caroline Flint,Parents' own midwifery adviser, have started Special Delivery, a private midwifery practice for women who want to have their baby at home.
‘In 1965, 30 per cent of women had their babies at home,’ says Caroline.
‘Now, if you want a home birth, you have to fight and jump through hoops.
We want to change this.’
Special Delivery covers you through pregnancy and birth, with comprehensive ante- and postnatal care, and, of course, a special birth package.
The only drawback is the cost — a hefty £1950 in London, £1450 outside — although they'll help you arrange a home birth on the NHS if you can't afford their own service.
For further information about home births, contact Special Delivery at 34 Elm Quay Court, Nine Elms Lane, London SW8 5DE.
Pregnancy podge
After the first few months of feeling sick, many pregnant women find they have a raging appetite.
The weight seems to pour on, especially after 24 weeks, and it may seem impossible to keep your weight gain within the current guidelines of 20–30lb.
To add to their guilt at this lack of self-control, some books say that from 36 weeks, pregnant women aren't likely to gain any more weight and that from 38 weeks they may even lose some!
While there is no doubt that if you gain no more than 20lb you will probably return to your pre-pregnancy weight in a matter of weeks after the birth, is a weight-gain guide of 20–30lb realistic?
A Californian study of over 4000 healthy women who had normal deliveries of full-term babies found that more than three-quarters gained between 22–46lb, with an average gain of nearly 35lb.
So it seems that most women go over the 20lb ‘ideal gain’.
But this is no excuse to stuff yourself silly, as the researchers concluded that more studies are needed to see if a large weight gain during pregnancy is linked to complications in labour and delivery, or to long-term obesity.
PENNY NATHAN
Baby knows best
It's become common practice for babies to be placed on their mother's stomach immediately after birth but many hospitals still have a policy of removing the baby within the first half hour for measuring and weighing.
But it may be better to leave him there — provided he's healthy — for at least an hour, because it helps successful breastfeeding.
Doctors in Sweden compared babies who were allowed to stay on their mother's tummy for an hour without being interrupted with those who were removed after 20 minutes.
They found the babies who were left for longer began to make crawling movements towards the breast after 20 minutes, and after 50 minutes virtually all had suckled correctly at the breast — and were more likely to breastfeed successfully as a result afterwards.
In this country, delivery-ward routines vary from hospital to hospital but there's no reason for separating mothers and their healthy babies so soon after the birth — measuring and weighing could easily be put off for an hour or two.
CAROLINE BUNKER
BABY
Soothing sounds
The drone of something like a vacuum cleaner or hair dryer — so-called ‘white noise’— often sends a fractious baby to sleep, or at least stops her grizzling.
This has actually been put to the test in a two-year trial at Queen Charlotte's Hospital in London.
This found that 85 per cent of the babies in the trial, who were aged up to eight months, were soothed by the crackle of Egnell Ameda's Babyshh, which sounds like an out-of-tune radio (see Lulla-buys , our review of soothers in the January issue).
However, according to Egnell Ameda, white noise won't soothe a baby if she really needs attention — because her nappy needs changing, say, or if she's hungry.
Parents who own a cassette player can easily make their own tape — just record the vacuum cleaner or hair dryer for about five minutes.
Although the chosen noise should initially be loud enough to gain the baby's attention, it should be turned down to background level after 30 seconds.
Any baby soother should be played at least a couple of feet away from her head.
PN
Gripe water
Gripe water is an age-old remedy for colic, wind and endless crying but the alcohol content of some brands could be putting babies at risk.
Researchers in Sheffield analysed the contents of several popular brands and found that giving a baby the recommended dose of eight 5ml spoons a day is equivalent to an adult drinking five tots of whisky!
They also point out that the excessive amounts of sugar in some brands could also be harmful to older babies' teeth.
The Health Visitors' Association (HVA), which drew attention to the study, believes that alcohol should be banned from gripe water, or at the very least, a warning should be given on the bottle.
Some manufacturers are removing the sugar and alcohol from their products and alcohol-free gripe water is a safer choice, although the HVA points out that there's no hard scientific evidence that gripe water actually works in any case, whatever it may contain.
CB
Plastic surgery
Every year a significant number of babies are born with facial defects, such as a cleft lip or palate, and many undergo operations to rectify the damage.
But does having surgery at such an early age make any difference to the baby's psychological growth?
Professor Christopher Barden, a plastic surgeon at the University of Utah, observed ten mother-and-child pairs.
Of the ten infants (average age 16 weeks), five had facial deformities and five were normal.
Each mother/child pair was observed while playing and during sessions in which the mothers were asked to try to get the infant to make a noise.
The results, publishes in Child Development , showed that mothers of the facially deformed babies provided less stimulation for their child than mothers of normal children, and were less involved with them.
This ties in with earlier studies which have found that two-day-old infants who are considered attractive are held closer and spoken to more than unattractive babies.
It adds weight to the idea that plastic surgery benefits many young children, in that improved appearance can help the relationship between mother and child.
DR RICHARD WOOLFSON
TODDLER
Vitamin sense
It's common sense to keep medicines in a safe place away from children, but it's equally important to lock away vitamin and mineral supplements.
Although these supplements, given in the correct dosage, are perfectly safe, large amounts of certain chemical types can be toxic.
Hundreds of children are taken to hospital after swallowing vitamin pills, often because they mistake them for sweets.
According to a recent report from the Consumers Association, a dose of only 3g of iron is enough to kill a toddler, yet few vitamin and mineral supplements are sold in child-resistant packs, so it's vital to keep them out of the reach of children.
And so to bed
Spare a thought for your toddler during National Bed Month (March).
When she outgrows her cot, it is important for her developing limbs and back that she is given a new bed, not a hand-me-down that has been shaped by somebody else's body.
The National Bed Federation (071–589 4888) says that sometimes parents will buy a bed for their three-year-old thinking that, if it is expensive and hard enough, it will see her through until she leaves home.
But the needs of a child who has just vacated a cot and, say, a sturdy 12-year-old are very different and ideally beds should be changed as a child grows, about every four or five years.
Firm support is essential, but as it's the core of the bed that does the work, this doesn't rule out a nice soft surface.
An ‘orthopaedic’ bed is just another way of describing a bed that is firmer and harder than the average and certainly isn't necessary for a lightweight child.
The mattress should be at least 4–5in thick, either foam or sprung, and carry a fire-resistant label.
Bunk beds should comply with the New British Standard BS 6998, and remember — children under six shouldn't sleep on the top bunk.
PN
Looking into the future
Most parents look at their young child and wonder what he'll be like when he grows up.
But can you predict your child's future personality on the basis of his behaviour as a toddler?
And how good are mothers at assessing how their child will develop?
American psychologist Sheryl Olsen, studying a group of mothers with toddlers, asked them to rate their 13-month-old tots using a series of seven-point scales, covering social and intellectual behaviour.
Follow-up assessments were carried out when the children were six years old.
Two key findings emerged.
Firstly, a child's personality and behaviour changes little in the pre-school years.
For instance, difficult toddlers were found to have more behavioural problems when they went to primary school; unsociable toddlers were found to have poor social skills later and had difficulty in adjusting to school; and toddlers with good language development showed above-average ability in language at the age of six.
It also seems that the mothers involved were usually very good judges of their own child's character, and were often able to make accurate predictions concerning future behaviour.
RW
CHILD
Starting school too young
You may have noticed that age differences between pupils in the first class at school can be as great as one year, sometimes more.
This occurs because a pupil's birth date — not his ability or maturity — is still the main criterion for acceptance into the school system.
The underlying assumption is that this age gap between pupils in the same class is not important, but it may be that younger children are at a disadvantage educationally.
Researchers in Israel analysed the social and emotional development and the educational achievement of hundreds of children in their first year at infant school.
They found that the older children born in the first part of the year did better in reading and arithmetic tests than their younger classmates born later in the same year.
In addition, the older pupils ‘were significantly more socially acceptable among their peers, were less anxious, had a higher self-image and were rated by teachers as being better adjusted to school.’
These Israeli findings parallel results from a recently published British study, which emphasises the importance of nursery education, rather than school, for five-year-olds.
RW
Hospital menus
Staying in hospital can be a traumatic experience for young children — as well as having to cope with strange hospital routines or unpleasant treatments, they may also be offered unfamiliar foods just at the time when their appetites are likely to be poor and they need encouragement to eat a healthy, balanced diet.
Some hospitals are already trying to make mealtimes more fun by having children's favourites on the menu or giving them child-friendly utensils, but many hospitals lag behind.
The government's new guidelines for the welfare of children in hospital aim to ensure that, in future, food for children is not only nutritious but enjoyable, too.
In the meantime, if your child has to go into hospital, tell the hospital staff of any particular foods he doesn't like or if he has any special dietary needs.
If he finds the food provided difficult to eat, ask the dietitian for advice and check whether you can take in food your child will enjoy.
The National Association for the Welfare of Children in Hospital produces an excellent parents' pack which includes a comic showing young children what to expect in hospital.
Available from NAWCH, Argyle House, 29/31 Euston Road, London NW1 2SD, price £1.80 (inc p&p).
CB
Getting rid of lice
As with all medicines, over-the-counter treatments for headlice should be used carefully, as they contain quite powerful insecticides.
For example lindane, or gamma benzene hexachloride, is an insecticide found in a shampoo called Quellada Application PC — more often prescribed for scabies — and in Lorexane, which, although now withdrawn from the market, may still be held by some chemists.
Unlike other insecticides, lindane has a high skin-absorption rate and experts worry that repeated treatments could lead to a build-up of this chemical in the body, with possible toxic side effects like convulsions.
Dr John Maunder, director of the Medical Entomology Centre (MEC) at the University of Cambridge, believes that Quellada shampoo is an obsolete treatment anyway, and that it should also be withdrawn from chemists.
Indeed, the MEC does not advise the use of any insecticidal shampoo for the treatment of headlice; it says that the contact time is not long enough to kill both lice and eggs, making repeat treatments necessary.
Lice can be cleared best with special lotions which evaporate on contact with the scalp and should be left on for 12 hours before shampooing away.
Lyclear, a new cream rinse applied after the hair had been shampooed, will kill both headlice and their eggs in just ten minutes, if used correctly.
The MEC says the secret is in the drying: hair should be thoroughly towel dried, so the rinse can saturate the hair without being diluted.
A second treatment with the product you have used a week later will make doubly sure the lice have all been eradicated.
PN