

Photograph of Beverly Johnson by Janice Dickinson.
Keep cool in classic knitwear, page 100
When was the last time you had fun? page 74
Wonderful ways with delicious new potatoes, page 132
All about SHE
If the rest of the media were anything to go by, you'd assume that most women were at each other 's throats.
Especially on the issue of maternal responsibility.
On a recent Kilroy programme I was asked to represent the views of working mothers in both my professional capacity as editor of SHE and personal capacity as mother of four-year-old Thomas.
Lined up against the working mums were women who'd given up work to look after their children, women who'd had working mothers themselves and felt they had missed out, and women who had tried to do it all and given up the struggle.
The accepted wisdom is that adversarial television is good television.
And Robert Kilroy-Silk, smooth operator that he is, soon had the invited audience going for each other 's jugulars, vigorously defending their position and trying to make the ‘other side’ look bad.
I found it all deeply depressing.
Do women who describe themselves as housewives really resent/disapprove of/despise mothers who go out to work?
Do mothers with careers really look down on women who choose to be their children's prime carer?
And aren't most mothers in the 90s planning to return to some form of work outside the home by the time their youngest child is at school full-time?
This magazine is well-known for its support of women who are attempting to balance the demands of children, job, partner and home.
And it will continue to campaign vigorously for more flexible working, better maternity rights and anything else that will ease the working mother's load.
But it will defend equally vigorously the rights of women who choose to look after their children full-time.
Because we've given much space to the needs of working mothers, I felt it was time to give housewives their say.
To this end, and in order to provide a nationally representative sample, we commissioned Gallup to interview 1,000 mums at home with children under the age of 16.
We wanted to discover how they feel about their lives, whether housewife is an adequate job description and to find out if this war between women really exists.
I'm glad to report that the war is a myth.
There may be the odd skirmish, but for the most part we're happy to live alongside and respect one another 's lifestyle's.
An overwhelming 95% of the mothers surveyed believe that it is up to each mother to decide to work or not, and 91% believe that it's fine to be a working mother as long as the job fits in with their family commitments.
Seventy-five per cent of the women questioned admire the ability of working mothers to juggle their lives.
Do working mothers belittle the housewife, making out that they're superior beings?
No, says the overwhelming majority.
But 28% do feel working mothers regard themselves as superior which suggest that some of us might have got carried away with out own importance.
Do housewives envy working mothers?
Certainly not, say 61%, although 23% admit to an occasional twinge of envy.
But are housewives happy with their lot?
Sadly, the picture here is not quite so positive.
Although 93% of housewives feel that they do a very important job, 88% think their role in the home is not valued enough.
Working hard for no pay, never getting a day off and having no financial independence are the most common complaints.
And more than half the women interviewed hate the label housewife because it sounds so patronising.
Moreover, only half think that their partner respects and appreciates what they do in the home.
So what do full-time mothers want?
They would like men to accept more domestic responsibility, and they believe that, just as childcare allowances should be given to help women who want to return to work, there should be equally generous financial incentives for women to stay home.
In other words, they would simply like to be valued for the important role they play.
Surely that's not to much to ask?
Feel how fat this May issue is.
Our Looks Great!extra is virtually a magazine in its own right.
There's masses of good reading and irresistible food and fashion.
And when you've sent off for our supremely stylish blazer (page 50) I hope you'll enjoy browsing through Classics (loose-inserted in this edition), a catalogue of the best fashion and home offers produced in recent months by SHE and some of our sister magazines including Country Living ,Cosmopolitan and Good Housekeeping .
Have a marvellous May!
Linda Kelsey
NEXT MONTH'S SHE
Are you always running out of time?
We'll get you organised
Being single shouldn't stop you doing anything.
Carol Thatcher reports
How to control marital rows
Why more women are taking to the bottle
Orgasms are big news again.
Here's why
Do manners matter?
Can you deal with a troubled adolescent?
Plus our health, fitness and diet extra: feel better about your body
Fill in our food diary and we'll analyse your eating habits
The no-time-to-diet diet
Can salon treatments shape you up?
June issue on sale May 21     
WHEN HE GOES TO PRISON WHY MUST THE FAMILY SUFFER?
Prisoners' wives are the forgotten victims of crime.
By Sarah Edghill
Crime creates many victims and, despite our claim to be a caring society, not all of them get the help and support they deserve.
In court, those who have suffered at the hands of criminals are comforted by relatives and Victim Support counsellors.
The offender gets help, too — from the probation service, his lawyer, perhaps even from doctors and psychiatrists.
But one group is largely forgotten, both inside the courtroom and out.
These other victims are the wives and families of offenders.
When a judge sends a man to jail, he passes sentence on that man's family as well.
The Howard League for Penal Reform believes that there are about 24,000 women in England and Wales who have partners in prison.
Most of these also have children, and studies have shown them to number more than 100,000 in any single year.
Despite these alarming figures, there is no national support scheme or official information network to help ease the problems these families face.
Women who speak publicly about their situation often find themselves ostracised by friends and neighbours.
Financial problems can be severe, with women finding themselves riddled with large legal bills and deprived of a partner's income.
Stress levels are raised even further by the shock at hearing sentence passed.
Margaret's partner Richard is serving an eight-year sentence for rape — a crime she firmly believes he did not commit.
‘When the sentence was passed, it was as if the ground had been pulled from under my feet,’ she remembers.
‘We'd been assured that the case would be dismissed, none of the evidence tied up, even the judge didn't believe he was guilty.
But the jury convicted.
I was shocked, angry and frightened and, although I walked out of that courtroom with my life in pieces, there was nobody there to help me.
I had to walk out into the street to find my way home as if nothing had happened.’
Pauline Hoare is a founder member of the Prisoners' Wives and Families Society in north London, a voluntarily run charity which gives advice and support to women with a loved one in prison.
She sees Margaret's experiences as typical.
‘Women don't know where to turn after their partners have been sentenced,’ she says.
‘Some feel unable to stand by their man; they feel horrified at the crime, or betrayed by his ‘double life’.
Many also feel responsible because they assume that they must have done something to bring this man down.
It's sometimes easier for them to cope if they distance themselves from it and rebuild their lives as single parents, without telling people what they've been through.’
For those who continue to support their partner, the strain can be intolerable.
‘An immediate worry is money,’ says Pauline.
‘Often the man is the only breadwinner and without him the family has to rely on state benefits — the social security system can be horrendous if you're using it for the first time.
Many men also go inside leaving their partners with debts which they didn't know about, and have no way of ever paying off.’
Another problem wives face is dealing with prison regulations.
Few know when they may see their husbands, or what to expect when they walk through the gates.
Men are often held in establishments near the scene of the purported crime, and these can be very isolated and miles from home.
Pauline Hoare knows of women who regularly travel from Kent to Durham to visit their husbands, and if a crime was committed in Scotland it would be normal to find families based in England or Wales having to travel up to Scottish prisons.
These trips are expensive and women may have to take young children hundreds of miles.
Although the Home Office operates an assisted visit scheme, whereby wives can claim the cost of one visit every 28 days, women need to be told about this system in order to use it.
While posters are put up in prisons, it is ludicrous that there is no standard procedure for passing on details to prisoners' wives.
Staff at DSS offices receive regular information form the Home Office, but many wives tell of  officials who deny having any knowledge of the scheme whatsoever.
Other issues present themselves once inside the prison.
What gifts can a wife take in?
What necessities should she provide for him?
These practical worries add to the emotional turmoil a woman will already be undergoing.
What does she tell friends and neighbours?
How does she explain Dad's absence to the children?
And how does she live with the guilt and isolation she is feeling?
‘The guilt's overwhelming,’ says Margaret.
‘He's in there and you're out here, carrying on for the children's sake.
You feel guilty just buying a bar of chocolate, because as you go to pay you suddenly remember that he can't have one.
Then you feel guilty about the children — they can't get as much love and attention from one parent, so you worry they're missing out.
It all makes me even more angry at the injustice of the situation, and then I worry that I am passing on that anger when I'm with the boys.’
Margaret's oldest son is nine and he knows that Richard is in prison, but that he's there for a crime he didn't commit.
Her other children are aged six and four, too young to be able to understand what has happened.
‘The youngest watches TV like every other little boy, and from that he thinks that prison is a place where they put bad people who've done terrible things,’ explains Margaret.
‘How can I explain this to him?
At the moment he thinks Richard is away repairing policemen's cars.’
Margaret's three closest girlfriends know about Richard and have stuck by her.
Others she thought she could rely on have since cut her off completely.
They listened to her story with interest, but afterwards stopped popping in to see her, and didn't return her calls.
‘I don't know whether they couldn't accept what Richard was accused of doing, or whether they didn't understand why I was standing by him,’ says Margaret.
‘Whichever one, they didn't want to know me anymore.’
Lorraine, whose husband Mike is serving a ten-year sentence, has also been a victim of this sort of social ignorance.
Her situation is slightly more complicated in that she has also been in prison.
Mike was charged with possessing and selling heroin, and she was later sentenced as an accessory to the crime.
‘I accepted the heroin because I felt there was nothing else to do — I loved him,’ she says.
‘I tried to get help, and even went to the police, telling them he was taking and selling heroin.
I didn't want to grass on him, but I was desperate.
I got no help, though, and in the end just went along with it.’
Lorraine was in prison for 18 months, and when she was released she not only faced the prospect of rebuilding family life for her children, but also the pressure of having a husband still inside.
‘I knew there was going to be lot of stigma, because it was heroin,’ she says.
‘None of the neighbours knew what Mike was doing, and we've since had some nasty scenes.
I'm not a hard person, but I had to be tough for the kid's sake.’
Lorraine's daughters were ten and six when their father went into prison in 1985, and Lorraine was pregnant with their third child.
‘The first thing I did when I came out was try to explain to the kids that we weren't bad people.
I told them always to hold their heads up high because, at the end of the day, this family is as good as any other.
The worst bit was them going to school, knowing that all the other children knew.
Children can be the most cruel of all, and there has been everything from physical fights to slanging matches.’
Margaret and Lorraine are among a growing number of women who hope that, by talking about their experiences, they can make society aware of their existence.
Prison reform is generally well-publicised, with the Home Office having to react to the findings of investigations such as the Woolf Report (a report on prison conditions published last year, in response to the Strangeways riot).
But for the forgotten victims — the wives — there is little official recognition, let alone pressure for reform.
The families stress that what they need most is information — and quickly.
The police, probation and prison services have the information families need, and they generally have the opportunity to impart it.
However, anyone  who has been through the process knows that very little practical effort is made by the services involved to pass on details.
There are also various independent support groups, such as the Prisoners' Wives and Families Society.
Most are run by women who have had friends or relatives in prison, and they do an excellent job of giving practical advice and helping wives deal with conflicting emotions.
However, the groups are poorly financed, too few in number, and only found in major cities.
There is an obvious need for a national network to be established which would publicise the families' needs and allow prisoners' partners to communicate and support each other.
Samantha Sherratt from The Howard League for Penal Reform believes that the system must change and make itself more accessible.
‘The prison service is trying, but it has to start earlier, with courts recognising families' needs,’ she says.
‘A while ago, the Federation of Family Support Groups set up advisers at some courts to distribute leaflets and give help to families of prisoners on the spot.
But it's more socially acceptable to do things like that for victims of crime, and I don't think courts were as interested as they should have been.’
Despite this apparent lack of official enthusiasm, progress has been made in other areas.
Visitor centres are now in place in many prisons around the country, providing counselling, crèche facilities and general information for families.
‘The Home Office has said that visitor centres will be included in the construction plans for all new prisons,’ says Diana Ruthven of the Prison Reform Trust.
‘They are making the right noises about providing them, and each year the budget gets bigger.
Unfortunately it's not big enough and there's no consistency.
Some centres are connected to prisons, others are separate; some are run by volunteers, others are sponsored by the Government.’
First on most reformers' lists would come the financial situation, with specific benefits for prisoners' wives.
Maureen's husband Bob is serving a three-year sentence for credit-card fraud.
It was his first offence, and Maureen feels it was a result of family and work pressure.
From living a life of relative financial ease, she has been reduced to near poverty, having to leave the family home and moving into rented accommodation.
‘I live on around £60 a week from the state,’ says Maureen.
‘With that I have to feed and clothe us, pay rent and bills, and save up for extras, like presents.
What people don't seem to realise is that families outside still have to support prisoners.
Bob needs money for things like cigarettes, stamps and batteries, and I take him cards to send to the children on their birthdays and at Christmas.
Although I can't afford it, I have to find the money somehow.’
Maureen has also found her misery compounded by the stress involved in working her way round the whole prison system.
‘After my first visit, I cried for hours,’ she says.
‘It wasn't so much the shock of seeing him in a metal cage, it was the atmosphere of the place.
All I could think of were the smelly corridors, the dirty waiting room with cigarette butts all over the floor, the stares of the officers, the bunches of keys at their waists.
It was a sentence spending half an hour in that place — I didn't know how Bob would cope with three years.
I was angry at the system, and at him for getting into trouble.
While the relevant authorities should adapt to make wives’ lives easier, the public also needs to be more open-minded.
‘People have got to realise that this could happen to them,’ says Pauline Hoare.
‘Every day we have women come to us in shock, saying ‘Nothing like this has ever happened to me before.
Where did I go wrong?’
Prison happens to people of all ages, from all walks of life — there's no typical prisoner's wife.’
All the women we spoke to agreed that it's up to the families themselves to fight for their rights and recognition — sadly no one else is going to do it for them.
‘We must make people understand we've done nothing wrong,’ says Maureen.
‘Many wives are frightened to ‘go public’ in case neighbours stop talking to them.
But by being ashamed of who they are, they're making it harder for other people to accept them.’
While these wives face an uphill struggle, there are some hopeful signs.
The Government has pledged to increase the number of assisted visits to two a month, and is putting more resources into prison visitor centres.
The Woolf Inquiry Report proposed that prisoners should be allowed more family visits and should be held closer to home in community prisons.
While the Government has made no promises, it is looking into the assessors' findings.
Meanwhile, The Howard League is producing an Information Pack for prisoners' families, giving advice on everything from the complexities of prison visiting to handling the strains of single parenthood.
It will be handled out in courtrooms, DSS offices and prisons this year.
Finally, Partners of Prisoners and Families Support Group (POPS) is planning a pilot scheme to place advisers in Manchester Crown Court two days a week.
Lorraine hopes these changes happen quickly.
‘Everything in life has to be paid for, and if a man does wrong he deserves to be punished,’ she says.
‘But that doesn't mean his family should suffer too.
We don't want pity, just understanding and respect.
Something good can come out of something that went wrong if we get encouragement from the rest of society.
Prisoners’ wives' names and family details have been changed.
Further information
Prisoners' Wives and Families Society, 254 Caledonian Road, London N1 0NG.
Tel: 071–278 3981.
Advice centre plus hostel for homeless wives, or those travelling long distances.
Help and advice line for Offenders' Wives (HALOW) has offices in Birmingham, Bristol and Southampton.
For more information, contact the Birmingham office at 30 Blackford Street, Winson Green, Birmingham B18 4BN, tel: 021–523 4898.
It also runs a 24-hour confidential helpline on the same phone number.
Partners of Prisoners and Families Support Group (POPS), Black Resource Centre, Old Library Building, Cheetham Hill, Manchester M8 7NS, tel: 061–740 8600.
The Howard League for Penal Reform, 708 Holloway Road, London N19 3NL, tel: 071–281 7722.
The League answers queries from prisoners and their families.
Samantha Sherratt, who is compiling the Information Pack, would be glad to hear from people with any comments or details of problems they faced following a partner's imprisonment.
Prisoners' Families and Friends, 106 Weston Street, London SE1 32G, tel: 071–403 4091.
Advice/home visits in the London area.
HEADLINES
They care
Any old spectacles or reading glasses?
Take them to Boots and Help the Aged will distribute them to needy people around the world.
Donate a pair before May 30 and you'll receive a £30 voucher which you can use when you spend £60 or more on your new spectacles from Boots.
Positively Women (Sheba Feminist Press, £9.99) explores the position of women who are HIV positive.
With case studies, advice on safe sex and a useful self-help and advice section, this is a pioneering book on a crucial subject.
Available from good bookshops or by mail order (enclose £1 p&p) from Sheba Feminist Press, 10a Bradbury Street, London N16 8JN
‘Buskaround’ for the British Red Cross between May 3 and 9 by entertaining the public with your choir, theatre-group or band.
Join in to help raise funds and have fun at the same time.
For more information, contact Lorian Walters on 071–245 1000.
Did you know?
About two-thirds of UK secretaries, clerks and typists are never ‘out for lunch’— they eat a midday meal of sandwiches at their desks
Women take an average of 45 seconds to decide if they fancy a bloke, according to a Danish survey.
They look at his eyes first, then clothes, then check for a wedding ring.
We went to the movies 93 million times in 1991 — the highest figure for eleven years.
People
Tina Turner bitched out at younger Cher, ‘I'm proud that I was never vulgar.
There's no way I'd need a tattoo or dress up in some surgical appliance to give folks a good night out’
Sylvester Stallone keeps his assets in shape by swallowing 65 vitamin pills a day.
He also takes an anti-ageing shot 18 times a year.
He says, ‘I can't live forever, and that scares me.’
And we thought he was a super-hero.
Man of many guises Harry Enfield will be off to Europe, exploring the cultural side of his character on Channel 4.
Harry Enfield's Guide to the Opera , filming now for next year, is a bid to introduce opera to the masses.
Nuisance calls
The phone rings in the night, you pick it up only to hear heavy breathing, silence or a volley of screamed obscenities.
‘Most people assume nuisance calls are made by the dirty raincoat brigade,’ says Olga Hubicka at BT, ‘but often they are received after domestic arguments and lovers' tiffs.’
Repeat nuisance calls are a frightening experience for 200,000 people a year — and that's just those that are reported.
BT has just introduced new moves which it hopes will alleviate the problem completely; countrywide specialist bureaux which can make a computerised link-up between the person being called, the caller and the police.
Between them, they can track down the whereabouts of the caller.
Specially trained BT staff will also be on hand to advise those who are suffering from nuisance calls, and it is intended that self-help groups will be set up by people who have been victims themselves.
The bureaux will be in operation nationwide by the end of the year and offenders will be dealt with by the courts.
At the moment, they face fines of £400, but there are moves afoot to introduce stiffer penalties.
Meanwhile, if you are being pestered by a nuisance caller, telephone 150 for practical advice.
Look out for
the new Modern Art Collectors' Club from Wiseman Originals.
It offers original prints from modern masters, such as Bruce McLean (above), Chagall and Hockney, from £75.
Membership, usually £10, is free to SHE readers.
Contact Wiseman Originals Ltd, 34 West Square, London SE11 4SP (071–587 0747), mentioning SHE
The Traidcraft catalogue, packed with recycled and handmade stationery.
For a free copy, tel: 091–491 1001
Caution Used Cars by Philip D Turner (£7.95 inc p&p)— tips for buying a secondhand car.
To order, tel: 0684 310725.
GOOD BOOKS
FORBIDDEN SECRETS
The writing is avant-garde and exquisite, the storyline of Thereafter Johnnie (Virago, £14.99) dangerous and disenchanted.
Carolivia Herron's alternating chorus of dark, poetic voices compels you to hear the most intimate and forbidden secrets of incest in a well-off black family.
If you can bear the relentless anguish overlaid by one daughter's inflamed desire, you will come to some understanding of this sorry subject.
As a first novel, this represents an outstanding feat.
MODERN VICTIMS
Kathy Page's Frankie Styne and the Silver Man (Methuen, £13.99) might have been a bleak novel of misfit neighbours hiding from the world.
In less imaginative hands, Liz — an unmarried and uncommunicative mum of a handicapped baby — would surely come a cropper.
Likewise John, the horror-story writer neighbour whose face is disfigured by a livid birthmark.
Both Liz's social worker and John's literary agent (arguably life's more serious victims make brisk efforts to smoke their recluses out of their antisocial cover.
But Kathy Page confects a rescue package for her unlikely heroes, giving them money and freedom in the spirit of all the best fairy-tale endings.
Kathy Page makes us think afresh about the lies that bind and the barriers that separate.
PORTRAIT OF A PRINCE'S DAUGHTER
Once upon a time, long before fatwas and ayatollahs, the daughter of a shazdeh , or prince, grew up in a Tehran harem.
Sattareh lived with numerous mothers, more than 30 siblings and some thousand servants.
Her story seems to hail from an ancient feudal past but, incredibly, Sattareh Farman Farmaian is alive and more than spry enough to recall her spellbinding adventures as a Daughter of Persia (Bantam £16.99).
Sattareh's father may have been autocratic, infuriatingly stingy and over 60 at the time of her birth, but he was also unusually enlightened.
His motto ‘education is everything’ applied as much to daughters as sons.
It paid off, for Sattareh provides an accomplished portrait of a childhood enriched by nightingales and bazaars, politics and family romances.
More impressively, she broke with tradition to study in California, returned to found the Tehran school of social work and, after the Shah's downfall, survived execution by a whisker.
(Sattareh will be In Conversation at the ICA, London, on April 28.
Tel: 071–930 3647 for details.)
OLD BOYS' NIGHTMARE
Joanna Trollope's latest delicious novel,The Men and the Girls (Bloomsbury, £14.99), focuses on two men, lifelong friends of sixtysomething, whose younger women infuse them both with seemingly eternal vigour.
But when James forgets his spectacles and knocks an Oxford spinster off her bicycle, his devoted Kate perceives him as a ‘stupid old man’.
Hugh, meanwhile, loses his contract as a TV presenter, takes to the liquor then flees the soothing ministrations of his wife Julia and their small twins.
Dismay and alienation seriously threaten this foursome's relationships with each other and all who love them.
The supporting cast, including Kate's rebellious daughter, James's ancient testy father and a wild young stud, leap off the page to grab their share in the action.
Wonderful and witty.
FLIGHT OF FANCY
Hilary Norman's Fascination (Hodder & Stoughton, £15.99) is a rich-little-poor-girl saga in which the brave and loving Madeleine Gabriel, daughter of a Swiss banking dynasty, runs away to find her black-sheep father.
Renouncing opulence, she remains heiress to a unique treasure — a jewelled sculpture called Eternité, designed by her grandfather in memory of his mistress.
Making her own way as a maid-turned-chanteuse, Madeleine experiences extremes of joy and sadness, and her toughest test comes when Eternité becomes an artifact to kill for.
This is a grand yarn, touchingly told.
Clockwise from above right: Sattareh Farman Farmaian with Indian leader Nehru in 1962; far from the harem compound, today Sattareh lives and works in Los Angeles; Sattareh with her mother.
AND IN PAPERBACK THIS MONTH
Vainglory (Arrow, £6.99) by Geraldine McCaughrean fills a 15th-century French chateau with romance and high passion
High Hopes (Virago £5.99) by Mita Castle-Kanerova reports on the expectations and ideals of East European youth.
You'll Never Eat Lunch in this Town Again (Mandarin, £4.99) is film producer Julia Phillips' famed and vitriolic insider account of Hollywood — not so much in the raw as the crudité
In The Rites of Man (Paladin £6.99), Rosalind Miles calls for a new masculinity for the millennium.
BY MADELEINE KINGSLEY     
ART BEAT
FILM REVIEW
HOWARD'S END
Following their success with both A Room with a View and Maurice , Ismail Merchant and James Ivory complete their E M Forster hat-trick in customary style.
As is his wont, the novelist delivers an appropriate come-uppance to not-so-eminent Edwardians who adopt the pompous manners of the Empire and refuse to acknowledge that the rest of the world is due to move on.
These entrenched attitudes are represented by the Wilcox family, and especially by Henry (Anthony Hopkins) and his son Charles (James Wilby).
Having conspired to ignore the deathbed wishes of Henry's wife Ruth (Vanessa Redgrave), they leave themselves vulnerable to the forces of emancipation they most dread.
Nemesis comes through the Schlegel sisters, Margaret (Emma Thompson) and Helena (Helena Bonham Carter), a forthright pair whose European perspectives and social enlightenment set them apart from their peers.
The acting is excellent, especially from Thompson.
The only pity of it is that they're running out of Forster novels to film.
Howards End (15) opens in London on May 1.
NAKED LUNCH
Adapting William Burroughs' surreal 50s classic for the screen is a much tougher option, not least because its drug-induced stream of consciousness is unfettered by constraints of character or plot.
Fortunately, it has fallen into the ingenious hands of David Cronenberg, acknowledged master of the bizarre.
He revels in the challenge of shaping the writer's nightmarish odyssey through Tangiers low-life into a film that engages both mind and eye.
Burroughs' alter ego William Lee is played by Peter Weller, emerging from his Robocop shell to reveal that he is quite an actor.
He and the rest of the cast face stern competition from Cronenberg's insect creations.
Naked Lunch (18) opens in London on April 24.
GRAND CANYON
Lawrence Kasdan returns to the ensemble formula that worked so well in The Big Chill in a film that puts contemporary Los Angeles under the spotlight.
He looks at the city through the diverse eyes of Kevin Kline's anxious but sympathetic lawyer, Steve Martin's greedily exploitative film maker and Danny Glover's endangered tow-truck driver.
All three come into contact with the random violence that haunts a society dominated by fear of gangland gun rule, but Kasdan's object is to analyse not terrorise.
In the process, he illuminates the loneliness of Los Angeleans of the 90s as they try to find love and comfort in an essentially hostile environment.
That sounds downbeat, but the characters are interestingly complex, and the film comes to a life-affirming conclusion.
Grand Canyon (15) opens in London on May 1.
TV CHOICE
Ruth Rendell uses the pseudonym Barbara Vine to dig into the dark side of the soul.
A Fatal Inversion is a tale of psychological menace set in a Suffolk mansion.
The protagonists are five students whose summer ends in tragedy.
Their secrets return to haunt them 12 years later when bodies are discovered buried in the grounds.
(BBC1, three weeks from May 10)
The six ages of womanhood are examined in the series Female Parts .
Sex, Spots and Sulks reflects on puberty, while Rude Women celebrates female sexuality.
The Wedding Dress defines attitudes to marriage,A Different Kind of Love follows the biological clock and Complicity considers the mother-daughter relationship; while The Chorley Belles claims that life doesn't end with the menopause.
(C4, six weeks from May 11)
VIDEO FAVOURITES
The Commitments
Alan Parker comes up with a winner when his cast of unknowns forms a working-class band that lights the torch of opportunity in Dublin's mean streets.
It's a memorable film of considerable charm.
(Fox video, out now)
Oscar
Sylvester Stallone is cast to type as a 20s Mafioso leader who finds his deathbed promise to his father uncommonly hard to keep.
(Touchstone Home Video), out now)
Meeting Venus
Istvan Szabo's film, about a 40-something Swedish diva falling in love in Paris, joins the face of Glenn Close with the voice of Kiri Te Kanawa.
The film charts the rehearsals of a multi-national production, complete with fights, passions, strikes and some rare moments of pure harmony.
What more could any opera buff ask for?
(Warner Home Video, out now)
SHE CAN HELP
Trudy Culross
Q
I divorced my ex-husband five years ago, after years of him making it obvious that I was acting as a ‘brake’ on his life.
My life fell apart, but he had no trouble picking up the pieces and forged ahead with a new woman.
Three years ago I met a marvellous man, we married and had a daughter.
Now we plan to move to the US and my life feels happy and exciting again.
But my ex heard about this and sent me two letters, full of how much he cares for me and that the break-up was his fault.
Then he phoned to ask if he could visit me and my daughter.
I don't know what to make of it, but I'm uncomfortable.
I haven't told my husband about this and I don't want my ex to spoil what I have now.
A
What you're asking is, could your ex be a threat?
I would say no, he can't, because what comes through loud and clear from your letter is that your life is whole again and your love for your husband is strong.
But you remember how intense your feelings were for someone who was your whole life, and you're afraid that your love for him isn't so much dead as lying doggo, ready to rise up and damage everything you hold dear.
Believe me, it won't happen — although I understand why you think it might.
We all have ‘what if’ questions.
Most of us move on without daring to look back, so we never come to terms with the truth about these old relationships.
But I suspect that if you confronted your past, you would be amazed at how little it moved you.
As to why he has contacted you after all this time, it could be for one of three reasons.
First, he did love you more than he realised.
Now that you are moving away, he wants you to know that you were special and he hopes to return some of the self-esteem that he stole from you.
Second, he feels guilty about how he treated you and wants to make amends — something people often do when they find happiness because it's only then that they can afford to consider how much they have hurt others.
Or, finally, knowing you always loved him and enjoying the sense of power this gave him, he can't quite believe that he doesn't count any more.
So he's trying to re-establish contact and exert the old control.
You know him, so you know which account is likely to be the most accurate.
And intuition will tell you how to respond.
Q
Before we married, my husband and I agreed that we wanted children.
But since then, there has never seemed to be a right time.
First we worked abroad, then his father died, then my husband changed jobs and wanted to settle in.
Now he has been promoted and says he needs more time.
We've been married for seven years and, though I'm only 31, I'm beginning to worry — has he changed his mind?
A
I think I can count on the fingers of one hand the men I know who were desperate to experience fatherhood and regarded a woman's desire for children as paramount when it came to choosing a partner.
Which is why the eternal words, ‘Do you think that it's about time we started a family?’ rarely fall from men's lips.
And, faced with this question, most men are totally nonplussed at the idea.
Fortunately, the majority warm to it and do go on to fulfilled fatherhood.
But, away from their partners, more than one has admitted to me that, left to his own devices, he wouldn't have opted for ‘daddy’ status, enjoyable though it may be.
So I would hazard a guess that,no , your husband hasn't changed his mind about having a family.
He just never really made up his mind to begin with.
And a man on an emotional roller-coaster might well be wary of making his life even more complicated.
Most parents will admit that there has never been a ‘good’ time to reduce income, curtail freedom and expend extra energy on a new, time-consuming project.
But, bearing all this in mind, I would say that now is a good a time as any to whisper the eternal words — and say them as though you mean them.
He may well go into shock and take a few months to accept the inevitability of family life.
But at just 31, you've still got plenty of time in hand.
Q
We married because I was pregnant, so the first years of our marriage were spent in a whirlwind of babies and evening jobs to earn extra money.
Now that things have settled down, I'm discovering that I don't really know my husband at all.
He doesn't talk about what's happening in his life or how he feels about anything.
I have to quiz him about everything and even then he won't tell the whole truth.
When I confront him with his omissions and lies he just looks sheepish.
If asked how he feels about anything, he says ‘I don't mind.’
It's so frustrating that I could hit him!
I often feel like his mother or his ‘chum’, but I don't feel like his partner and our sex life has ground to a halt.
Yet we rub along well most of the time.
How can I get through to him?
A
By now it must be obvious that bullying him isn't going to work.
By your own admission, when you're not quizzing him about everything, you're confronting him and toying with the idea of hitting him.
Small wonder he prefers to keep his thoughts strictly to himself.
He's obviously been doing that since your pregnancy, yet you've only just begun to notice how little he confides in you.
People who ‘don't mind’ about anything are people unused to giving an opinion, probably because they are rarely asked for one.
And I would guess that in this ‘whirlwind’, his views have been pretty much ignored.
You complain that your marriage isn't a partnership, yet when you are not tearing a strip off him (as mothers tend to do to sons) or winding him up (as mates do) you are treating him like a no-talent support act.
A partner is an ally or a companion and you don't seem to fit the bill.
Your husband probably senses that you don't admire or respect him and he obviously doesn't trust you, which is why he pulled the drawbridge up a long time ago.
So if a partnership is what you're looking for, you've got some serious bridge-building to do.
And the first step is to stop treating him like a tube of toothpaste — something you can squeeze the contents out of whenever it suits you — and start appreciating him for the easy-going patient guy he obviously is.
If you have a problem, write to Trudy Culross at SHE, 72 Broadwick St, London W1V 2BP.
We regret that letters cannot be answered personally.
BEAUTY NEWS
BY SARAH CLARKE
Exfoliators remove dead cells from the surface of the skin.
Although they are not essential, since this process does occur naturally, used once a week a gentle exfoliator can revitalise the complexion and make your skin feel extra clean — particularly if you're a city dweller.
Our testers loved Clinique's new Gentle Exfoliator (£11), RoC's Gentle Exfoliating Cream (£11.15) and Clarins' new Gentle Exfoliating Refiner (£13).
Or try Lis Earle's homemade scrub from her fascinating book Vital Oils (Ebury Press, £6.99): mix half a ripe avocado together with one tablespoon find ground oatmeal and one teaspoon olive oil, and massage gently into dampened skin.
HOT TIPS
We nailed down hand model Sara Francis and discovered some well-kept secrets:
Use a ridge-filler to even out nails, act as a base coat for polish or simply give nails a chic natural-looking gloss.
To achieve a smoother finish when painting nails, stroke carefully down each side with the brush, followed by one stroke down the middle.
If you have a shaky hand, invest in Mavala's Manicure Correcteur Pen (£5.95).
Thick coats of polish cause unsightly cracking, so make sure the brush isn't overloaded when applying.
Buff nails to smooth ridges and create a shine.
Try Boots' Nail Glosser (£2.09).
Don't rub your nails when removing colour, as it distributes the polish and makes it harder to remove.
Instead, place cotton wool soaked in remover over each nail, hold for a few seconds then life off.
We suggest you massage almond oil into your hands and cuticles before bedtime, to soften and protect them.
Next time you're in Sainsbury's or Savacentre, check out Regime, the new own-brand hypo-allergenic skin-care system that isn't tested on animals.
Simple, effective and great value for money, prices range from £2.45 for the Cleansing Milk to £4.75 for the Nourishing Night Cream.
Good foundations
Cosmetic companies are building on their foundations for black skin this spring:
Clinique has added six dusky shades called Colour Deeps to its Stay-True Makeup range.
This oil- and chalk-free foundation, which has an exceptionally smooth and matte texture, also flatters suntanned skins.
Prescriptives now has a foundation to suit just about every skin colour.
The range, entitled All Skins, embraces over shades of foundation and four formulas, so get your skin ‘colourprinted’ at the counter in department stores nationwide.
Tel: 071–409 6869 for stockist details.
Spice up your life with a new fragrance that is exotic and thoroughly seductive.
Imagine the subtle bouquet of jasmine and sandalwood in the air on a balmy evening, and you've got Guess, by fashion designer Georges Marciano.
Prices start at £26 for the 50ml Eau de Toilette spray.
We have 25 bottles of the Parfum (worth £44 each) to give away.
Name and address on a postcard to Guess Offer, SHE May Treats, PO Box 501, Leicester L99 0AB, by May 31.
HEALTH NEWS
There is no need to leap straight out of bed and off to the doctor's surgery to take advantage of the ‘morning after’ contraceptive pill.
These post-coital hormonal contraceptives can be taken up to 72 hours after intercourse.
If you miss that deadline, you can get an IUD fitted up to five days later.
Smokers who find nicotine gum no substitute for cigarettes may need to step up their chewing rate.
Patients who start out using high levels of gum — about one piece every waking hour for the first six weeks of quitting — do better than half-hearted chewers.
The secret of their success is to keep the level of nicotine in the blood high until the habit of smoking has worn off.
After that, withdrawal from the drug is relatively easy.
US casualty doctors recently treated two cases of face injuries caused by exploding eggs.
The eggs had been microwaved, minus their shells, but with the yolks still intact.
One prick from a fork and the eggs shot out a stream of hot liquid which caused serious facial burns in both cases.
Would you like to be more healthy?
Then get yourself a pet.
The well-being of 71 dog and cat owners was monitored for ten months, and then compared to the health of 26 people who didn't own any animals.
The UK study discovered that the pet owners suffered fewer headaches and colds and less constipation and backache than the petless.
Swimming is the one sport in which black people trail behind whites.
New research from America may explain why.
It was discovered that black girls gain 34% more bone density during puberty, compared to only 11% in white girls.
And because dense bones tend to sink, black swimmers need to work much harder and expend more energy to keep afloat.
Compensation comes later, though; their heavy bones make black women less likely to suffer from osteoporosis when they're older.
Hysterectomy can't be too bad: 96% of a group of Australian women who have had the operation say they are pleased to have had it, while 55% say they wish that they had had it sooner!
The Meet-a-Mother Association (MAMA) puts new mothers in touch with one another for mutual support and friendship.
It has now published two leaflets,Post-natal Illness and Post-natal Illness and its Effects on the Family .
If you'd like a copy of one or both, write to MAMA, 58 Malden Avenue, South Norwood, London SE25 4HS, enclosing an sae.
Healthy books
Alternative Health: The Bates Method by Peter Mansfield (Optima £5.99) tells how to improve your eyesight without spectacles.
Some say it works.
The Handbook of Over-the-Counter Medicines compiled by Mike Smith (Kyle Cathie, £6.99) lists all sorts of nasty afflictions, from acne to worms, and what you can buy for them at the chemist's.
Infertility: Your Questions Answered by Tan and Jacobs (McGraw Hill, £8.50) is a clear and extremely comprehensive guide for couples with fertility problems.
Body Myths by Cecil Heiman (Chatto & Windus, £13.99) traces the roots of some of our deep-seated fears and superstitions.
Fascinating.
Iridology by Adam Jackson (Optima, £5.99) tells how to read the warning signals of bad health from the iris.
Mr Jackson believes such readings give a complete picture of a person's physical constitution.
The method has centuries of use to commend it, though scientific trials have found no evidence it works.
SHE OFFER
come to our NO MORE STRESS workshop
Don't let anxiety rule your life — at our special one-day workshop you'll learn how to control stress and make it work for you
Do you ever feel that life is getting on top of you or that you want to run away from the demands made on you by career or family?
Do you find yourself snapping at your partner when he doesn't deserve it, or losing patience with your children, simply because you're exhausted?
Do you react badly to criticism at work?
Do you envy other women who seem to manage their lives without getting anxious — who appear even to benefit from difficult situations?
If you find that you don't cope well with stress, taking part in one of our No More Stress workshops could change your life.
Designed to show you how to adopt a positive attitude towards stress, they can help you cope with the pressures of modern living.
The workshops are organised by The Domino Consultancy, UK leaders in women's development and training, and advisers to top companies including Lucas Industries, Shell, Barclays and NatWest.
Our workshops will be run by Mary Casey, a specialist in inter-personal skills training who has conducted many stress management courses for women.
The workshops will be geared towards all aspects of women's lives, whether you run a home and look after children, juggle a family and a career or simply have a demanding job.
Relaxation is a skill that has to be learned, and the techniques that you will be taught at the workshop can be applied to any area of your life.
And when you discover a technique that works for you, you will have an effective weapon against stress.
The workshops will take place from 9.15am to 4.30pm at SHE's comfortable conference facilities in London's West End, and there are three dates to choose from: Thursday May 28, Thursday June 18.
The cost of £35 per person includes a buffet lunch and all refreshments during the day.
Numbers will be restricted to 40 people on each day, and there will be a variety of activities for you to carry out individually, in pairs and in groups, with plenty of opportunity for discussion.
You will learn what stress really is; the sources of stress; how to cope with it in your individual daily life, modifying and adapting your behaviour to handle stress; long-term solutions; plus how to relax and keep happy and healthy.
In addition to the enormous amount you will learn on the day, you will be given lots of helpful written information to take home, and have the opportunity to buy relevant Domino publications.
If you would like to reassess your life and learn how to use stress to your advantage, come along.
Your life could be changed for ever.
There is a limited number of places so, to make sure you don't miss out, fill in the coupon on page 216 and return to us without delay.
Closing date is May 18.
MALESPEAK
‘we're such sensitive souls!’
by Joe Joseph
Where do some women get this idea that men don't have feelings?
Contrary to popular myth, many men can remember those small but important details about the women in their lives, such as their birthday and the fact that they have two eyes, one on each side of their nose, probably browny-blue (the eyes, not the nose).
So why the constant carping in the Ladies about insensitive male brutes?
The trouble is, men's emotions are generally misunderstood because they don't talk openly about their feelings.
Well, I don't talk openly about my kidneys, but that doesn't mean I don't have any.
If women want to spend their lives with something that is slim, sanitary and sensitive, perhaps they should consider setting up home with a thermometer dipped in Dettol.
In the imperfect world, where things get misunderstood, a woman has to realise that when she returns from the kitchen with a toasted sandwich and her man barks, ‘I said cheese and tomato, not just cheese!’ he is probably not so much worried about his stomach as about her hearing.
‘Should she get her ears tested?’ he is asking himself, perhaps more anxiously than he really cares to let on.
Women should also remember that many men are bashful about discussing their feelings out in the open.
A lot of ingenious men get around this problem by communicating to their womenfolk via their T-shirts.
Instead of saying, ‘That's a nice dress you're wearing,’ they might rush to the wardrobe and put on a T-shirt that says the same thing.
Obviously, they would look pretty stupid wearing a T-shirt that read, ‘That's a nice dress you're wearing’, so they may lounge around in something which relays almost the same message, but in a more roundabout way.
For example, ‘I can drink 12 pints of Fosters without puking.
Can you?’
And if you happen to see him sitting in front of the television, dressed in a plain white vest rather than one of his talkative T-shirts, why assume that he is being a slob?
The likely explanation is that he is feeling contemplative, a little introspective, and he wants a quiet evening at home without the sort of chit-chat that might drown out the TV football commentary.
Another problem is that this myth about men and their lack of feelings is perpetuated year after year by flimsy public opinion polls.
These purport to show that:
a)
On an emotional scale of one to ten, women rank men about minus 45.
b)
Most mothers, if forced to leave home for a few days, would entrust their children to the pet dog for safekeeping rather than hand them to their lawful father.
c)
A vast number of women don't appreciate the positive contributions that men have made to the world, such as knitted polyester suits, one-day cricket and the Cuban missile crisis.
d)
Seven out of ten women cannot tell the difference between one fish paste and another.
(This question doesn't, of course, have anything to do with the main topic of the survey.
Pollsters often slip in an extra question with the hope of later flogging the results, cut-price, to a fish paste manufacturer.)
But can you trust the results of these opinion polls?
We all like to think that we can tell the truth, but we all bend our answers to the ears of the particular listener.
Even in private, many women will give what they feel to be the ‘correct’ answer rather than respond with complete honesty.
For example, you're filling out a questionnaire in a magazine and one question is, ‘Most men are: a) gorgeous; b) called Tyrone; or c) often unhygienic’.
If you knew that a friend was going to look at that magazine shortly after you, and that the friend would see which answer you had marked, would you seriously tick a) or b)?
Here's another example of just how sensitive men can be.
Holidays abroad are not just a chance to unwind, they're an opportunity to taste a different culture, see how other people live.
Does your partner hog the emotional experience?
No, he thinks first of you.
Say you're both lost, late at night, in the seediest part of Naples.
You see a young man in a doorway sharpening his fingernails with a razor-blade, perhaps a common Neapolitan pastime, and useful too if it helps winkle those stray bits of salami from between your teeth.
He looks like an interesting type.
Does your partner demand to talk to the fascinating Italian, potentially a new friend?
Of course not.
‘Go and ask him how we get back to our hotel,’ he urges you.
He's saying, go ahead, enjoy yourself, soak in the atmosphere.
I'll wait here.
Is that sensitive enough for you?
COUPLES counsel
Peter was obsessively jealous, and his behaviour was driving his wife Susie away.
As told to Cathy Troupp
Peter was 33, six feet tall, and dressed in a well-worn suit and tie.
He looked tired and tense.
Susie was a 28-year-old Danish woman, small, attractive and very quiet.
It had taken six telephone calls and much going to and fro before Peter and Susie finally arrived for their first counselling appointment.
Peter had first contacted the centre three months previously, very upset, saying his GP had suggested making an appointment because Peter was sure his wife was planning to leave him.
He was given an appointment but then rang back and said he wasn't sure that counselling was the right thing after all.
He seemed very anxious and wanted answers to a lot of questions, which he was given.
Several appointments were made and broken before he and his wife finally arrived.
During the first session Susie barely spoke at all.
Peter was obviously nervous and spoke fast and loudly, shifting about in his chair.
The story that emerged was as follows.
Peter thought Susie was having an affair, ever since he'd seen her leave work with a colleague.
He was so anxious about her whereabouts that he could barely concentrate on his job as a bank officer.
She worked in a restaurant from Monday to Saturday, 8am to 6pm.
Peter took her there and picked her up at the end of the day.
He phoned her several times a day to check she was there, even though both Susie and her manager had asked him not to.
During his lunch breaks he often hung around outside the restaurant to make sure she didn't go out with anyone.
He went through Susie's handbag and checked things such as her bus tickets.
He opened her letters.
And he felt his searches had been vindicated when he found a savings book that he didn't know about.
Admittedly there had been almost no money in it, but he took it as evidence that she was saving in order to leave him.
He added, ‘And as her husband I have the right to check on what Susie is up to.
I have the right to know what she is doing and, if she is having an affair, it has got to stop because it is driving me out of my mind.’
By now most of the hour had passed.
The counsellor was conscious that Susie had said nothing, while Peter had taken up the time.
She turned to Susie and said, ‘There's very little time left today, I'm afraid.’
Susie nodded, and then added, ‘I don't agree that he has the right to follow me around just because he's my husband.’
Before they left, the counsellor asked for Peter's permission to contact his GP, which he gave, and asked why.
She replied that she wanted to know why the doctor had referred Peter to a marital counsellor.
The GP said that Peter had been to see her many times in the two years that he had been married, with small ailments that  seemed to be stress-related.
Recently his complaints had been more and more concerned with his wife: he had even asked the doctor to ‘tell Susie’ to give up her job and stay at home.
At this point the GP had felt that she could no longer help him, and she had given him the number of a marital counsellor.
At the next session the counsellor began by asking the couple what they would like to see happen in their marriage as a result of counselling.
Peter immediately replied, ‘I would like Susie to give up work and stay at home, so that I can be sure that she is not cheating on me and not planning to leave.’
Susie said quietly that she didn't know what she wanted — she had come because Peter had asked her to.
The counsellor asked Peter, ‘Do you think that if Susie didn't work she wouldn't want to leave you?’
‘Well, she couldn't leave me then,’ Peter replied.
‘She wouldn't be meeting other people and she wouldn't have her own money so she couldn't go.
Now, I can't stop her.
She says she wants to go back to be with her family in Denmark.
She says she needs to ‘sort herself out’.’
‘Is that right, Susie — you would like to go back to Denmark?’ asked the counsellor.
Susie nodded.
‘For a time,’ she said.
‘And you feel you couldn't tolerate that?’ the counsellor asked Peter.
He looked at her with surprise, as if the possibility had not occurred to him.
‘No,’ he said at last.
‘We're married and we should stay together.’
‘So the behaviour you described last time — following Susie's movements, going through her things — is your way of trying to make her stay?’ asked the counsellor.
‘I know it's not a good way to go about things,’ said Peter.
‘But I feel desperate.’
‘Is it the thought of losing Susie that makes you desperate?’
‘Yes.
I couldn't bear to lose her.’
Susie spoke.
‘Peter's behaviour is increasingly hard to live with.
The more he follows me around and goes through my things, the more I feel I have to hide things.
If I take a bus into town during my lunch break to do some shopping I have to remember to throw away the bus ticket or he'll ask me where I've been, and when I say I've been shopping, he'll say he doesn't believe me.
It's exhausting.
I tell him I am not having an affair but he hardly listens.
Sometimes I think he wants me to have an affair just so he can be proved right.’
In their third session, Peter reported that he had had his annual pay increase and said, ‘I think I'm earning enough for Susie to stop working.
I think now would be a good time to start a family.’
‘I don't want to stop work,’ said Susie in her quiet way.
‘I've been working at the restaurant for three years and I like it there.
I like my colleagues and I earn good money.
What would I do at home all day?’
‘The housework, for a start!’ said Peter.
‘Susie seems to leave everything in a mess these days, even though she knows I care a lot about the way the flat looks.
When we were first married she kept everything really nice and tidy.’
The counsellor looked at Susie.
‘Do you feel you have changed since you got married?
Did you enjoy keeping the house tidy then, and not now?’
Susie did not reply for a long time.
Finally she said, ‘Yes, I did enjoy looking after the house at first, because I knew Peter appreciated it, and he did things for me.
When we first married, I thought Peter's possessiveness was a sign of love.
But now it's gone too far.’
She added with finality, ‘Things can't go on like this.’
Peter became hysterical.
He began crying and shouting — that he'd known all along she was having an affair and was planning to leave him.
Susie simply looked at him.
Then she said, as quietly as ever, ‘I've had enough of your behaviour and your constant suspicions and your checking on me.
I've saved some money, and I've spoken to my mother, and I am going home.’
She paused again.
‘Your behaviour is too much,’ she told Peter.
‘I have to get away.’
The counsellor said nothing.
Peter looked at Susie, defeated.
‘That's it, then, I can't do anything about it.
I've lost everything.’
He was crying.
Before they left, the counsellor asked Peter if he'd return on his own to continue counselling.
He agreed, but during the week he rang and left a message to say he wouldn't be coming after all.
The counsellor feared that would be the last she heard from him so she was pleasantly surprised when he did come the following week, bearing a letter from Susie in Denmark.
‘Listen to this,’ he said, and read a passage: ‘I was seeing a colleague from work, but just as a friend, because I need someone to talk to.
I couldn't tell you because your reactions were always so extreme.’
He said triumphantly, ‘You see, I was right!
She was seeing someone.’
The counsellor said, weighing her words, ‘Perhaps you are saying that you were right in your feeling, your sense that there was something going on, even though it was not an affair but a friendship.’
‘Yes,’ Peter replied passionately.
‘But everyone always denies everything.’
After this, Peter attended counselling for more than a year.
They talked a lot about his childhood.
He was an only child whose parents had had an unhappy marriage, with rows and infidelities.
But both his mother and father always denied that anything was wrong, and Peter grew up with a powerful sense of there being many secrets.
His behaviour in his marriage was driven by the child in him seeking the truth, and his need to have his perceptions validated.
He came to see how his possessive checking on Susie had provoked her secretive behaviour.
His strong belief that she was withholding things from him did, after all, have some basis in fact.
Susie had been secretive partly because of who she was — a different woman might have confronted him openly — but partly because he had driven her to it.
Counselling also helped him to uncover some of the fears of loss which underlay his extreme jealousy.
He has to come to terms with past losses — the loss of security and trust in adults, and the loss of innocence.
Counselling helped Peter understand the links between his childhood and adulthood.
He wrote to Susie during this time, asking if she would come back, but she said no.
Accepting this loss was an important part of his counselling.
When he left, he had started a new relationship, and was determined not to ruin it with jealousy, but to draw on the insights he had gained and to share his feelings with his new partner.
Cathy Troupp was talking to a specialist couple counsellor about this month's case history.
Name and details have been changed to protect identities.
If you would like a copy of SHE's counselling fact sheet, please send a sae to: Couples Counsel, SHE, National Magazine House, 72 Broadwick Street, London W1V 2BP.
perfect PORTUGAL
The affordable paradise of sandy coves, Moorish castles and irresistible food.
By Adriaane Pielou
It is almost summer, high time you decamped for a fortnight.
This time you are going to be very picky.
Top of the list you want sunshine (so cross off northern Europe) but nothing too baking (cross off southern Spain).
Sandy beaches (there goes Greece).
Somewhere you can rent a villa in a resort, then say goodbye to tourists and go exploring (forget all small Mediterranean islands), staying at interesting, but inexpensive, old hotels (delete Italy).
Which leaves France (lovely, but you've been so often) and Portugal.
Which fits the bill perfectly.
Great swathes of beach along its 520-mile shore; sunny but breezy weather; family-oriented resorts and a stunning, untouristy hinterland; reasonable to bargain-basement prices for excellent meals.
Just thinking about it makes you feel the sun on your skin and taste the freshly grilled sardines and the prickly vinho verde.
Where to go?
The Algarve for a beach, sports, lolling kind of family holiday, the rest of the country for sightseeing and travel off the beaten track.
How to go?
Outside the Algarve — where the majority of accommodation is self-catering — by staying at pousadas, like Spanish paradores, set up as a method of making otherwise disused monasteries, castles and fortresses pay their way.
They're not the bargains they used to be: a double room will cost from around £35 to £65 a night, but it's likely to have a four-poster bed, and there's always a splendid dining room where you can try food of the region.
Alternatively, stay at the grand manor houses whose impoverished owners will take B&B guests (from £25 a night for a double) under the Turismo de Habitação scheme.
they are real bargains.
Contact the Portuguese Tourist Office (tel: 071–494 1441) for details.
Since the development of the Algarve in the mid-70s, the 50- mile stretch between Faro and Sagres has become synonymous with villas.
Back in 1974, the idea was to avoid turning it into another Costa of cheap, pack-'em-in highrises, and concentrate instead on upmarket accommodation.
But pleasant as much of the Algarve still is — with endless beaches, sandy little coves and whitewashed towns — things haven't gone entirely to plan.
There is still a handful of tiny fishing villages with idyllic beaches fronted by a few discreet villas — Salema, for instance, at the very west of the Algarve, and around Tavira, the prettiest town on the Algarve, east of Faro.
But between 1985 and 1989 the holiday accommodation on the Algarve doubled, cramming resorts such as Vilamoura and Quarteira with highrise apartment blocks still shadowed by cranes from building sites.
You should check carefully before you commit yourself, especially to a low- to middle-priced holiday.
Albufeira to Faro (where the airport is) is the busiest stretch.
Think instead about Quinta Paraiso da Mia, on the big sandy Luz Bay, just outside Lagos: a dozen or so apartment buildings linked by pathways in a shady garden, a minute's walk from the beach.
One-bedroom apartments cost from £319 each for a week for two sharing.
Moving up a price bracket, there are probably more villas with pools, luxuriously comfortable rather than Costa-glitzy, along these lovely beaches that on any other coast in Europe.
Many are part of beautifully groomed, pine-shaded complexes such as Vale do Lobo and Quinta do Lago, with championship golf courses and floodlit tennis courts, pools, restaurants, gyms and playgrounds.
The roomy Casa Craggsy on the 2,000-acre Quinta do Lago is typical; a two-storey, four-bedroom house in a shady garden with two terraces and a pool.
It sleeps eight comfortably, and rents for between £352 and £489 each for a week if eight share, including hire of one car and flights, or £449 to £699 each if four take it.
These examples are from Meon Villas; not the cheapest company around, but with about the best choice of villas and  apartments on the Algarve and, because it is largely a family-run company, it has an excellent reputation for looking after its customers (0730 66561).
Away from the Algarve, it's not hard to get off the beaten track.
The road up the west coast from Lagos to Lisbon, 150 miles away, takes you through a typically Portuguese mix of urban sprawl (around the multi-fly-overed town of Sines,) lovely countryside (cork forests bordering a 30-stretch of beach between Sines and Tróia), and enchanting old towns (such as Santiago do Cacém).
Here the narrow streets lead to a town square shaded with trees.
Outside the town is an inviting introduction to pousadas — the hillside Pousada de São Tiago, an art deco villa with a pool and views of Moorish ramparts.
Dinner is served by candlelight, so no-one will notice how many pudim flã (the creamiest crème caramel you'll ever taste) you consume.
If you split a fortnight between the Algarve and exploration, and are flying back from Faro, then you could make the Lisbon area your limit, staying in the city or in Cascais, the breezy little port along the coast, heading out to ravishing Sintra, the royal summer retreat which is 15 miles north, then driving back via the walled Moorish town of Évora.
But if your ticket allows you to fly back from Lisbon or Oporto, after all this culture you could go walking in one of the national parks, explore the wine regions, or treat yourself to a spa (try Termas de São Pedro and Caldas da Rainha, cheapest in Western Europe).
The wildest, emptiest part of the country — where cauldrons still hang over kitchen fires and shepherds' dogs wear studded collars to protect them from wolves — is the high, craggy Beira Alta area, where Sabugueiro and Manteigas make great bases for walking.
And if you want to come home with traditional Portuguese pottery then your best bet would be the Minho region, north of Oporto, where street markets sell the distinctive, bright designs for a third of the price of Lisbon shops.
Travel Tips
Recommended books:The Cadogan Guide to Portugal (Cadogan, £11.95).
Exploring the Rural Portugal (A&C Black, £6.99).
Portugal has one of Western Europe's worst road accident rates.
Drive defensively and have comprehensive insurance.
Take strong and comfortable shoes — you will find cobbled streets everywhere.
all summer long!
Go to new lengths this summer in flowing dresses that look so cool
This page: Floral print button front dress £25, Marks & Spencer.
Black wooden beads from a selection at Fenwick.
Opposite: White cotton dress £54.99 (M81326), Next Directory.
Leather belt £19.99, Oasis.
This page: Spotted dress £34.99, Coppernob.
Sandals from a selection by Emma Hope for Nicole Farhi.
Opposite: Sarong dress £45, hat from £85, Whistles.
Sandals £45.99, Russell & Bromley.
Pendant from a selection by John Bowman at Liberty.
Stockists on page 217.
Model: Jill.
Hair: Peter Forrester for Daniel Galvin.
Make-up: Ariane at Freelancers.
Shot on location in Tunisia.
We flew courtesy of Tunis Air (071–437 6236) and stayed at the Kanta Residence in Port El Kantaoui courtesy of Panorama's Tunisia Experience (0273 206531).
Thanks to the Tunisian National Tourist Office (071–224 5561) for providing us with a guide and transport.
WORK SPACE
how to be a successful low-flier
You don't have to be on the fast-track to get job satisfaction.
By Devoyrah Hogan
Women's chances to climb the career ladder have been hard fought for.
by no means all the battles have yet been won, but already we expect that we can break new ground if we really try hard enough; we expect to seen our ambitions fulfilled if we have the talent and application to meet our goals.
But what if you're there, trail-blazing in the business world or on track for great success in one of the professions, and suddenly you realise that this path is not the one you want to take after all?
It is, perhaps, particularly hard for a potentially high-achieving woman to acknowledge that the world of work is not where all her life ambitions lie.
The time is still too uncomfortably close when women had to fight to have jobs at all and were even then expected to abandon them once they married and had children.
A man who throws in his job as a bank manager for life as a fisherman in the Orkneys is seen as individual-minded.
The woman who backs down or away from the heights may seem simply to be conforming to stereotype — and surely that means letting the side down?
Kate Hargreaves of Careers for Women thinks that, on the contrary, a decision to stop short or change tack is brave and positive, but can indeed be a difficult one to take.
‘If you have reached a point in the career structure where there are few other women and where you are therefore extremely visible, there is tremendous pressure on you to keep going upwards.’
Sandra Melhuish found it was teaching that really made her happy
Once women have reached senior management, for instance, where they are the only woman among 20 or 50 men, some companies tend to see them as the token woman singlehandedly proving that the company is encouraging and supporting women to reach the top.
With so much riding on their personal success, they can feel under considerable pressure to aim for the top.
They there are the social pressures.
It is hard to relinquish status and income, both of which are like to fall if you take a step down or sideways or you stop on the career ladder.
Partners may resent or fail to understand a drop in income important to maintaining a certain lifestyle.
Yet many women are very happy after making the huge decision to put ambition on hold, for whatever reason.
Solicitor Janna Neale sold her partnership in the law firm she had helped establish when she realised that her anxious and perfectionist nature made her unable to leave work any evening before ten, and even then she'd carry clients' cases and cash-flow worries home.
She is now working for another firm and still worries more than she should, but she can leave the office at night and enjoy a social life.
She was perfectly capable of running her own firm — she simply made a reasoned choice not to.
Job satisfaction is commonly a crucial factor in a decision not to aim high.
Careers adviser Kate Hargreaves opted for the greater job satisfaction of running a small organisation rather than having a more senior position in a large company.
‘For me the decision wasn't hard,’ she said.
‘I realised I had 17 years to go before retirement and I wanted to spend them doing what I wanted to do.
What I didn't want was to work for a large organisation.
I am so sure of that now that I can ignore all the pressure to do something else but it does take strength.’
Promotion may be unattractive if it means that you cease to use the skills you have and have to learn a new set, such as administration, or political manoeuvring.
Not liking what  promotion meant was the deciding factor in staying put for teacher Sandra Melhuish.
‘I went into teaching at 21 because I liked working with children.
I was 38 and an acting deputy head when I had twins.
I had brave ideas of taking forever off and immersing myself in motherhood but, after 10 months, I couldn't wait to get back,’ she says.
Val Coulson was a hospital ward sister at 22, but is now content to be a school nurse
She had to work her way up the system again, but decided to stay a rung below that which she had previously reached.
‘I have a managerial role, organising in-service training and schedule, but I also teach and that is what is important to me.
I feel my present responsibilities are as much as I want to cope with and, from now on, promotion would take me away from teaching children.
I have absolutely no regrets.
I am doing exactly what I was trained to do.
Yes, the pay is lower, but everyone pays in some form for the choice they make.
I have family and friends and the time to enjoy them all.
Before I had the children, I was pretty certain I would be a head by the time I was 40.
Now, with schools taking responsibility for their own budgets, being a head means dealing with roofs, drains and electricity bills, along with everything else.
So I wouldn't wish to be head now.’
For nurse Val Coulson, a step off the career ladder was taken mainly to enable her to fit work around her children.
At 22, Val became the youngest ever ward sister at London's Middlesex Hospital.
‘Because I became a sister so young, I suppose I did have high expectations of myself.
I did a diploma in nursing to add to my basic nursing qualification and it was pretty much expected that I'd be moving up into line management (overseeing several wards).
But I became pregnant at that point and was absolutely thrilled.
It was my choice to stop working.’
After seven years of bringing up two children, now aged ten and nine, she took refresher nursing courses and eventually landed a much coveted job as a school nurse.
‘It fits in beautifully with running a home and family.
The hours mean I can collect the children from school and am with them in the school holidays.
It is also interesting, absorbing and new.
Hospital nursing is mainly about caring for the sick.
Community nursing is more about preventive health care and health promotion.
‘I have gone in a completely different direction from the one I envisaged,’ she says.
‘But, because I am relatively young, I still have the option of aiming for line management, though I would have to decide whether I would rather stay in contact with the patients.’
Julie MacGovern, an independent training and personnel consultant, believes that it is a strength to realise when a top job wouldn't suit, for whatever reason.
‘Not everyone has the drive, ability, energy or inclination to aim for the top — and of course that goes for both men and women.
She made the decision to go out on her own because she wanted more freedom to pursue her many interests.
‘I used to work so hard in the week I had no energy left to enjoy weekends and I became awful to live with.
I am still ambitious — to fulfil myself rather than become a managing director.
I have learned new skills and often have the freedom to do things like go to matinées or exhibitions in the afternoon.
I feel like a whole person again.
I don't just talk about work all the time.
It is my choice to earn less and have that freedom.’
Making a decision not to take the next step up doesn't have to be permanent, of course.
At a different point in life, a move on might feel right.
Jan Moynan, 50, joined London Transport in 1974 when she was bringing up her children and wanted shift work that would leave her free after school hours.
She has now been a ticket collector for more than 15 years and has won a radio and a newspaper award for her personality and popularity with passengers.
‘I love my job,’ she says.
‘There is much more to it than collecting tickets.
I am the person in the front who has to cope with whatever situation comes up.
But now I want another challenge.’
The promotion she is seeking entails learning the complexities of the whole ticketing system, passing exams and then travelling throughout the London Transport region as a trouble-shooter.
Working shifts as a ticket collector suits Jan Moynan perfectly
‘My children are all grown up and now it's my turn,’ she says.
‘I want to do more and feel that I can, now that I've brought up my family.’
Getting back on track may not be easy, however.
‘It takes an enlightened boss to realise that standard textbook career progression is not always right for certain people,’ says Kate Hargreaves.
‘I think, rather than be penalised, you should get bonus points for recognising when you really are ready to go up.’
Or recognising that up there the air might be too rarefied and you don't want to go up at all.
Life has many other prizes to offer if you are clear enough that you want to claim them.
Careers for Women, 2 Valentine Place, London SEI 8QH, telephone 071–401 2280.
WORKSPACE NEWS
Bright ideas
Do you feel that your boss is unappreciative of your ideas or resistant to change?
Occupational psychologist Dr Judy Blendis, who offers management development training to companies through Professional Psychological Services (tel: 081-886 0397) advises that you try a change in strategy.
Learn when your boss is most receptive and approach her then.
Unsolicited ideas may seem threatening.
Use self-delegation, eg: ‘Would you like me to look into that?’
If ideas seem solicited, they are more acceptable.
If the idea itself is more important to you than the glory reflecting from its success, then raise the idea at a meeting so that it becomes an idea generated by a team.
When you're presenting plans, stick to the point — two good reasons for doing something are better than ten because your last reason is probably the weakest, so can be attacked and used as an excuse for a refusal.
Be imaginative in your presentation.
ME AND MY JOB
Maria Panayiotou is a self-confessed ‘people person’.
Now, after years spent behind a sewing machine in her husband's dressmaking factory, she feels like a woman reborn.
She has become a hospital ‘link worker’, interpreting for members of London's Greek community who don't speak English.
‘You sometimes walk into a ward and talk to a new Greek patient, and they burst into tears because they have heard their own language,’ says Maria.
‘Until then, they couldn't even ask for a glass of water or to go to the toilet.
Now they can pour out their problems and we can help.’
Aged 43, with two teenage children, Maria only found her perfect profession five years ago.
‘I'd come to the end of my tether,’ she confesses.
‘I had left school at 15 with no qualifications and always done dressmaking, but I never enjoyed it.
For my sanity I had to put my foot down, even though my husband, a very conventional Greek, couldn't understand why.
Link working — interpreting for both patients and medical staff — was a new idea, and when a job at the North Middlesex Hospital was advertised locally, I applied and, unknown to my husband, got an interview.
‘I had never been interviewed before but felt really at ease, mainly because I discovered I had been an informal link worker all my life!
I came to Britain from Cyprus when I was six and, when I was 12, my mother volunteered me for the job of interpreting for a pregnant neighbour who needed to talk to a doctor.
I had continued since, working for friends and neighbours who were ill or had legal problems.
I had even built up quite a good knowledge of medical terms.
So I felt the job was tailormade for me.
Needless to say, she was successful.
The next hurdle was breaking the news to her husband.
‘He was cross,’ Maria says.
‘He said I didn't need to work for financial reasons and how could I leave the children?
But the job was part-time and local, so I could be home before the children.’
Maria went ahead and accepted the post and slowly her husband became more supportive.
The pay isn't great but, ‘the job is rewarding,’ says Maria.
‘You are not just interpreting — you get involved, visiting homes and schools, too.’
Maria recently began a modular degree course, working in the evenings towards a BA in social sciences.
And the job?
‘I wish I'd done it years ago.’
The London Interpreting Project's Directory (£4.50 inc p&p) gives more information about link working.
Write to 20 Compton Terrace, London N1 2UN.
Back to work
Whether you're a returner or unemployed, the ‘Return To Work with Confidence’ course from Patricia Cleghorn's Self-Esteem Company will encourage a fresh approach to work and job-hunting.
The courses last three hours and are held throughout the UK.
Price is £45 (with a take-home tape), but only £35 to SHE readers until mid-August.
Contact the company, mentioning SHE at PO Box 354, London W13 9NU, tel: 081–579 0435.
Sex talk
What constitutes sexual harassment?
One US company says employees should ask themselves: Would you do or say this in front of your spouse, parents or a colleague of the same sex?
Would you like your behaviour reported in your local newspaper?
Does it need to be said or done at all?
Strike out
Women entrepreneurs have guts.
A recent survey found only three out of ten women started a business of the same type they had worked in previously.
And 32% said that they set up because they saw ‘an opportunity too good to miss’, compared with only 25% of men.
COMPETITION
Small biz, big bucks
If you mean business, we'll help make your entrepreneurial dreams come true
Setting up your own business is a very attractive proposition.
So much so that, despite the recession, more than 250,000 new businesses have been started in the last 12 months — and over a third were set up by women.
Making a business succeed is not simple — even the best ideas and skills need detailed planning and sound business sense.
Without an efficient system and good professional advice, unforeseen problems can develop into major setbacks.
That is why SHE and Midland Bank have joined up to help six enterprises in our annual Small Business Competition.
Midland Bank is giving £5,000 first prize, £3,000 second prize and £2,000 third prize (all tax-free) for winners to invest as they choose.
All finalists will be introduced to an appropriate book-keeping system, enabling them to monitor and control their businesses in a professional manner.
Over the years, Midland has helped thousands of businesses to start up and grow into thriving enterprises.
Whether at the planning stage or up and running, Midland has an Enterprise Counsellor in every branch who can guide you along the path to success.
To help run your business in a professional and stylish way, we have some wonderful business-related prizes:
From Apple Computer , the first prize winner will receive a complete business computing system.
It includes an Apple Macintosh IIsi personal computer with a 13-in colour monitor (normally priced at £3,340) and Personal LaserWriter NT printer (£1,795) to enable you to manage your business and present documents in a professional way.
All Macintosh software is based on easy-to-use principles, so it won't take long to learn.
Software from Claris and Pegasus provides everything needed for a growing business: Pegasus Accounts (£395), Claris Filemaker Pro (£225), Claris MacWrite II (£175), Claris Resolve (£272) and Claris MacDraw Pro (£325).
The Claris software can be used for word processing, graphics, database management and spreadsheet analysis.
Royal Mail is giving a package of technical support and advice worth £3,500 as a first prize, to enable the winner to make the best use of postcodes in her business.
For example, Royal Mail Postcode Centre offers the postcodes of the UK's 24 million addresses on compact disc and in directories.
A Royal Mail specialist will visit your business to assess your needs and provide products and advice to help you process your mail quickly and efficiently.
From Pentagon , specialists in office supplies, there's a first prize of £2,000-worth of the latest office furniture.
Pentagon also offers computer-aided design to make the most of your office space.
Topps of England is giving a Keytime Management System (£141) to each finalist.
Developed in conjunction with Prof John Adair, international consultant in leadership and management, this system includes an A5 loose-leaf binder in deluxe calf leather; dated forms and comprehensive planning information; user's guide and a hardback copy of Prof Adair's bestselling book,How to Manage Your Time .
Betacom is giving each of the six finalists a Betacom Venture cordless telephone (£79.99).
In ivory, black or petrol green, this stylish phone is Mercury compatible and has a ten- number memory, automatic security-coded line access, paging facility and battery back-up.
It is TouchTone/Pulse Switchable (for use on new exchanges offering services such as Star Services).
Fellowes is giving each finalist a Fellowes P50 compact personal office shredder and wastepaper bin (£164), plus a range of computer accessories (£195).
Finally, to help you formulate your business plans and guide you through the first years,The Institute of Business counsellors is offering ten business counselling sessions for the first three prize winners and five each for the three runners-up.
The counsellors are qualified to offer impartial business counselling which is practical, confidential and commercially independent.
All entries will be analysed and a shortlist of 15 will be asked to supply further financial information.
Six of them will be chosen to attend an all-expenses-paid final at National Magazine Company's headquarters in London's West End on July 28, 1992.
Here they will be interviewed by judges Neil Harle (Network Support manager, Midland Bank), Linda Kelsey (SHE's editor), Roy Filling OBE (president of the Institute of Business Counsellors) and Jean Watkins (head of the Centre for Access and Career Development, Dorset Business School).
All finalists will stay overnight at the luxurious Langham Hilton Hotel, 1c Portland Place, London W1N 3AA (071–636 1000).
The winners will be announced at a press reception the next morning at the Langham Hilton Hotel.
To enter, turn to page 216 .
CURRENT AFFAIRS
We take a look at the devastating effect of affairs.
First, Claudia Hayworth argues that the thrill of illicit sex never compensates for the pain it causes
INFIDELITY — No, it's never worth it
Last night, I dreamed my partner was unfaithful.
I woke up at the part where he was telling me it had been a mindless fling, and I shouldn't get upset over it.
A few weeks ago, the dream was slightly different, in that some woman had set her sights on him, flattered him — at least, that was his defence.
And a man's gotta do what a man's gotta do, when a woman's hot and willing.
In the months and years since we met, variations of The Dream have visited me regularly.
Always, it's a different woman.
Always, the circumstances vary.
But always, the bottom line is the same.
The man I love has just destroyed us and I wake up, vacillating between suicide and murder.
The dreams are bad enough.
But what's really scary is that I often lie there for an age afterwards thinking, ‘Just what will I do, if this dream should ever come true?’
Well, I might forgive and forget but I'm more likely to get mad and get even.
Maybe I'll try to understand — but I'll probably be too busy packing.
What's for sure is it will be a Mega Drama, the day I discover my man has been playing around, because I believe in fidelity and learned its importance the hard way.
I should say at this point that I have no reason to think my man has ever been unfaithful to me.
He's honest to a fault and makes me feel I'm greatly loved.
So, no, he isn't the cause of my nightmares.
My past is.
It's the emotional baggage I'm hauling around that's causing all the trouble.
Because every so often, the neatly packed suitcase which is my old marriage bursts open and the bad memories scatter like dirty laundry.
Nine years have passed since my divorce and I tell myself the half-forgotten betrayals and deceits are old news.
Then I dream the dreams, and the uncertainty, suspicion, anger and emptiness engulf me all over again.
I relive the coded phone calls, secret smiles, late nights at the office and last-minute business trips — all the subterfuge husbands employ when they're fucking other women and daring you to stop them.
The amazing thing about infidelity is that, for a long time, you don't believe it's happening.
In fact, you castigate yourself for being suspicious.
Because admitting your relationship is foundering is to acknowledge that your home, your security, your way of life and your dreams of the future are all heading for the rocks.
The worst thing about infidelity is that it's usually death to a relationship.
Even those which survive it rarely do so unscathed.
I know of only one or two couples who have managed to stay together when one partner has been unfaithful and I wish I could pluck up the courage to ask them how they've done it.
How they've managed to pick up the pieces, when the most fundamental element of their relationship — trust — may have been shattered forever.
For that's what a relationship is for me — the making of a promise, albeit rarely uttered, that I will strive never to hurt, damage, betray, demean or disappoint this person I claim to love.
It's a promise I expect him to equal.
The trust my partner and I share gives us the freedom to get on and do things without stopping every ten minutes to check up on each other.
Yet we know that when life gets tough and we both feel weary, we can trust each other to provide safety, security, love and truth.
I believe I had these things with my ex-husband, for a while.
I believe we lost them all the moment he began lying to me — which would have been about four hours after he first climbed into bed somewhere strange, with someone else.
Who she was hardly matters.
I doubt he gave her a second thought, once he'd pulled his trousers back on and ushered her  into the first available taxi.
I don't suppose he remembers her name now, any more than he remembers the names of the dozens of other women he seduced during the ten years of our marriage.
When we finally had the showdown, he actually told me that none of them mattered.
And I believed him.
What he failed to understand was that the illicit sex itself wasn't the biggest crime.
What was unforgivable was that he had systematically lied to me — and I had let him do it.
Once or twice he'd gone to great lengths to deceive me but, more often, he'd taken little trouble to cover his tracks.
Often, he'd involved others in the deceit.
His secretary had come to regard lying to me as part of her job and even our friends lied for him, aiding and abetting my dick-led husband in a misguided effort to protect me.
Being the last to know isn't actually the worst thing a betrayed wide can experience.
The real bitch is being the first to know but choosing to swallow his flimsy excuses and his transparent lies, in the hope that he'll tire of his bit on the side and the threat, if unchallenged, will pass.
I think I was destroyed long before the divorce courts.
And it's no exaggeration to say that it took years of sifting through the wreckage of myself to find a woman I could begin to take some pride in again.
That's why I can't promise I'll take the mature, adult, philosophical approach, should my present partner stray.
Other women do and I admire them for it.
But I almost owe it to the reborn me not to take that kind of shit from any man again.
So, if my partner ever plans to deceive me, the woman he fancies had better be worth it.
If the high expectations I have of a partner are based on past experience rather than romantic ideology, so are the expectations I have of myself.
I intend to remain faithful, simply because I've given infidelity a whirl and it doesn't work for me.
It happened during the final couple of years of my marriage when, tired of the humiliation my husband's affairs imposed on me, I decided to give him a taste of his own medicine.
I didn't want him to find out.
I just wanted to know, inside my own head, that I was betraying his trust in me the way he'd betrayed mine.
And, since I'd often been obliged to meet his other women during the course of his business, I maliciously decided that he would have to encounter my bit on the side, day in and day out.
So I chose the young, handsome builder who was working on our house.
And although the sex was something I endured rather than enjoyed, it was a learning experience.
I learned that sex without  emotional involvement or more than a fleeting physical attraction was more sad than fulfilling and that ‘getting even’ could only motivate me for so long — particularly since my husband was blithely unaware that I was evening the score.
I learned that using someone sexually leaves you feeling oddly empty and bad about yourself.
The second time I had a affair, I learned a lesson which was even more valuable, albeit terribly painful.
I chose a man who massaged my bruised ego, made up for much of the emotional neglect I'd suffered and made me laugh a lot.
Inevitably I fell for him, thereby complicating my life horrendously and introducing an unexpected wild card into his.
Before it was over I had devastated his family, disappointed him and further divided myself.
Everyone got hurt.
Except my bloody husband, who is still blissfully unaware of this man's existence, let alone his identity.
The reasons most women offer for extramarital sex — boredom and a need for drama and excitement — ring fairly hollow as far as I am concerned.
I doubt they've ever considered the downside of their sexual fantasies — the tacky, borrowed bedrooms and checking each other afterwards for telltale hairs on jackets, mascara marks on shirts, or the odour of stale perfume.
Or try the heart-in-mouth sensation when you're strolling with your lover at some secret rendezvous and you suddenly see a neighbour across the street or your husband's car waiting at the lights.
Would you really risk everything for that kind of buzz?
My divorce was followed by many relationships.
All of them short, some of them sweet, but most of them bitter.
Usually with single men but sometimes with married ones.
I discovered as I picked my way through endless encounters that, even when you are your own mistress — free of guilt, responsibility or even social obligation — the excitement of different sex with new partners does eventually pall.
That's why infidelity has been struck off my agenda.
Not just because it would ruin the trust that my relationship is built on and that I so much believe in, but because being unfaithful would require me to be the kind of woman I choose not to be.
Deceitful and calculating, capable of causing pain and hurt, always stressed and guilty — and all for what?
The thrill of sex with someone taller or blonder than the wonderful man I've got?
The chance of an ego trip, to add to all the ones I've already made?
No thanks!
Infidelity is a game for fools and while I'm still sometimes silly, when it comes to love, sex and the whole damned thing, I'm no longer certifiably stupid.
When your world falls apart, do you get mad, get out or get even?
Or do you make the best of it?
By Madeleine Kingsley
FACING UP TO HIS AFFAIR
It may be that, like Jackie Kennedy Onassis, you see male sexual frailty as an inescapable part of the marriage deal.
‘I don't think,’ the wife of the late, great, womanising US president once observed, ‘that there are any men who are faithful to their wives.’
Or possibly, like sweet, besotted Linda in Nancy Mitford's The Pursuit of Love , you have decided to be philosophical about your beloved's insistence that ‘these little sins of the body are quite unimportant.’
Possibly, but I doubt it.
It's a rare wife indeed whose genuine reaction to betrayal is fond indulgence (‘Oh, Charles, you're such an adolescent skirt-chaser’), dignified disinterest (‘Where you choose to put your thingie while zooming around the world on so-called business is, quite frankly, no concern of mine’) or outward serenity, as displayed by Jane Ashdown during the furore over Paddy's affair with his secretary.
But the odds are that even those women who appear impermeable to pain are suffering great hurt behind their face-saving pose.
Why women particularly, when we all know that men are increasingly victims of adultery?
First, because there are still far more betrayed women than men around: the percentage of wives playing away may have risen from 26% in the 50s to around 40% now, but a conservative estimate suggests that 60% of husbands have cheated at least once — and one US survey puts the figure as high as 82%.
Second, as psychologist Maryon Tysoe writes in Love Isn't Quite Enough (Fontana, £5.99), because women tend to take lovers only if they are already dissatisfied with their relationship, while men are inclined to leap more lightly into a strange bed.
Also, men have no worries about pregnancy and single parenthood, they still seem to be blithe about AIDS, and haven't taken heed of the warning from One Plus One (formerly the Marriage Research Council) that men cast out of marriage between the ages of 25 and 50 are twice as likely to die prematurely and drink too much.
And because 59% of men regret divorce (but only 29% of women), it seems that men don't recognise marriage as a good thing when they have it.
And they perhaps fail to understand just how crushing it is to make beds and casseroles for one who is secretly making whoopee.
Learning that your loved one is having an affair is a body-blow to trust and poison to self-esteem.
It fells most women like an emotional heart attack.
And, because there is no standard first aid for a broken heart, every betrayed woman has to find her own cure.
She has to do so, what's more, at a time in her life when she probably feels at her least competent and worthwhile.
The chances are that her shock has been compounded by an unexpectedly extreme reaction.
‘I can't believe that I never stopped to think that Amber, four, was in the room, too, when I started punching her father,’ Gail recalls.
‘I screamed at him to leave but afterwards Amber blamed me.
‘You're the horriblest Mummy in the world to make Daddy go,’ she said.
I was shattered, but how could I defend myself by explaining that his hitherto unsuspected mistress had just rung me up to spill the beans?’
‘After what seemed an eternity of nights with Grant turning away from me in bed, I dared to ask,’ recalls Charlotte.
‘He admitted that there was someone else, but he wouldn't give me any details.
That's when  I went mad.
I started to claw at his body and rip his pyjamas.
Later I made scenes with a knife and threatened to swallow a bottle of pills.’
Six years on Charlotte, a woman of considerable composure, is still appalled by her uncustomary violence.
She didn't realise that many normal, rational modern women react likewise.
A wronged woman might stab her husband with scissors, cut up his clothes or ram the other woman's car, but the consequences are not predictable.
In some cases it may so horrify the husband that he can't cope and slopes off.
In others, he may be thrilled to think that he can inspire such passionate feelings.
Says Renate Olins, director of the London Marriage Guidance Council, ‘It's entirely understandable that the innocent party is wracked with feelings of such vehemence and passion that she may not know what to do with them.’
What could be more devastating than discovering that the one man you relied on has blown your world apart?
Already knocked off balance by a cocktail of negative emotions, the betrayed wife is then shattered by unanswerable questions: Why did this happen?
Who is she?
How could he?
Who is to blame — him, me or her?
Shall I go or shall I stay?
Will he cheat on me again?
Can I ever trust him again?
It's no wonder that the concept of coping with her partner's affair struck Nadine as ‘the ultimate contradiction in terms.
Doug's year-long affair has been the roughest life event I've ever faced, harder even than my mother's death,’ she says.
‘I knew, you see, that my mother couldn't help leaving me and that, even in her illness, I had a loving role to play.
With Doug, I felt my love had been trampled on and I was shattered that he'd chosen, emotionally, to abandon me.’
‘Get rid of the bastard…
Change the locks and get yourself a lawyer…
’ Such was the advice of Nadine's angry and protective friends.
Wise counsel for some, because coping with his affair is easier, in the short term, when you're naturally driven to get mad, get out or get even.
‘As the full-time mother of pre-school twins, I just thought that I had to put up with Sam's barely concealed fling with a neighbour,’ says Tina.
‘But once he told me that he wasn't about to change and that he was likely to be a lifetime philanderer, I saw red and thought, ‘Screw you!
I deserve better.’
So I told him to leave and took in lodgers to make money.
At the start of my current relationship, I made it clear that sexual exclusivity was important to me.
I felt extremely loved when Phil said he was delighted to hear it.’
It's only with hindsight that Andrea recognises that her own steamy fling (started four months after her husband's discovered dalliance ended) was a get-even affair.
‘Our son was only a year old and I was still feeling pretty asexual.
My lover reminded me that I could feel and inspire desire, which proved highly reassuring and, ironically, put the spice back into my marriage.
I haven't told my husband in case he decides to up his score.
I haven't even told my closest friend.
But it helps a lot to know that I've balanced the books.’
Nadine, on the other hand, had no wish for escape or revenge.
All she wanted was to turn the clock back and shrug off the ghastly realisation that her marriage was not what she'd thought it was.
While she and Doug were doing up their new house and planning a trip to Egypt, he was, she says bitterly, ‘mentally and physically rogering Rosie.
And worst of all, for me, is that, instead of fizzling out, my love for him has grown.
On a purely practical basis, I don't to lose the last 15 years, the house, shared friends and the kids' future.
I can't trust him again, but I still find him more interesting and exciting that any other man I know.
Like many, if not most, modern women in her plight, Nadine is struggling to overcome the hurt adultery has left behind.
These days, says Penny Mansfield, director of One Plus One, infidelity is still a serious upset, but it's no longer seen automatically as a terminal twist in a relationship.
‘What's needed,’ she says, ‘is to make some judgement about what the affair means in terms of your whole life.
If, for instance, it was a one-night stand while he was working away, then of course it's upsetting and you wish it hadn't happened but you can, perhaps, make sense of it.
Maybe it'll lead him to explain that he latched on to lust because something was missing for the moment in your relationship.
‘People have changed in that they no longer seem to be quite so worried about pure sexual betrayal.
It's more the affair with a possible future that devastates — the emotional betrayal and the recognition that he gave part of himself and what should have been your time and your lives to another person.’
A wife who forgives and forgets (or, better still, remembers) should beware of falling into the self-destructive doormat trap.
‘Don't,’ Penny Mansfield warns, ‘sink into the double bind of, ‘If I were good (or sexy or clever) enough, he wouldn't have done it…and if I were strong enough I'd leave him.’
People are actually inclined to run when they feel threatened or frightened, and you have to be sure that if you leave it is not on the basis of that weakness.’
Experts have exploded the old wives' myth that, if he decided to play away, there must have been something wrong with the relationship in the first place.
It may be that your man is loving and living with you in what seems like a peaceful landscape when a volcano on the horizon suddenly erupts.
In short, he falls in love.
And often, says Penny Mansfield, it's not so much that he falls in love with another woman but he's at a stage in life where he wants some diversion.
‘Although ostensibly about sex,’ says Renate Olins, ‘affairs are often more about the other person's ability to make you feel clever, witty and desirable.
‘It may help to remember,’ she adds, ‘that the man hasn't necessarily gone out looking, and he might not even be conscious of what it is he wants.
It's just that this other woman to whom he comes fresh enables him to see himself in a different, more exciting and rejuvenating light.
Maybe there's some X factor people need, like vitamins.
You can get vitamins by eating a healthy home diet of fruit and vegetables, or you can go out and get them in a bottle.’
What the wife back home should hold on to is that, provided their relationship was good enough — and that doesn't have to be perfect — in the first place, then the marriage has a good chance of survival.
If survival of the marriage is actually what she wants.
But how does a woman best handle that hellish and uncertain time when her husband is still shopping for the supplements?
Obviously much depends on personality.
Peggy Vaughan, author of The Monogamy Myth (Thorsons, £6.99) and herself a former wronged wife, rests her survival case on honesty and understanding.
Her tolerance (and eventually ability to forgive) grew with the realisation that society is just as responsible as individuals for infidelity.
Society pays noisy lip service to monogamy but, in reality, encourages affairs.
Media gossip hypes marital byplay and raunchy male stereotype.
Men who stray are somehow seen as more exciting and desirable than good old Mr Steady (remember how Paddy Ashdown's poll popularity grew after he'd ‘confessed’).
But some bruised wives may feel that Vaughan is almost too ready to let men off the hook; many would like to see their partner shed a little retributory blood.
Says Penny Mansfield, ‘We shouldn't dismiss the need for making amends and atonement.
It's probably up to the person who had the affair to help with this painful passage to reconciliation.
The man may feel that, if she's harking back to the whys and wherefores, his wife is rubbing his nose in the past.
But it's important that he should recognise the damage he's done and the pain she has felt.
Even though they may be working together on contributory problems in the marriage, he still needs to recognise how she hung on for both of them while he was out having a good time.
Because it really wasn't fair.
Sociologist Shirley Eskapa, whose book Woman Versus Woman (Heinemann, out of print) is a spirit-raising bible for the legit wife, tells how a jaw-dropping piece of strategic diplomacy succeeded for Dawn whose husband ‘completely lost his mind’ for his secretary.
Recovering from her immediate mini-breakdown, Dawn decided that what she had regarded as comfortably dull marriage had become comfortably boring for Tim.
So she embarked on a four-month programme of erotic self-education and yoga.
When Tim came home to visit the children one evening she disappeared upstairs.
When he came in to find her, she was standing on her head in a sexy leotard, legs provocatively parted.
Staggeringly, it worked.
Amy, 42, took a different tack when she found that Joe had been leading a double life for 18 months, holed up with a ravishing ex-model 15 years her junior while she believed he was ‘opening up new markets’ in Middle Europe.
Cruelly and coldly, Joe made her understand that he was not prepared to give the other woman up.
Amy tried confronting her rival but was thrown into despair by her youth and beauty.
She felt humiliated, sexually worthless and incapable of holding the man she still believes is ‘the love of my life’.
So, after the inevitable few months of bereavement, Amy went to work on herself, for herself.
She was helped, she says, by all the classic moves, such as losing weight, exercising and picking up old friendships.
But her saving grace was work.
‘I'd always been good with a sewing machine,’ she says, ‘so a kindly neighbour asked me to run her up a few silk separates for the summer holidays.
I suppose she thought that it would be mild occupational therapy, but it changed my life.
Now I'm sewing full-time with a small business to bolster my sense of self.’
A few months ago, Joe slunk back home and, although old patterns have not yet been established, Amy feels she has the strength and confidence to call some shots.
‘He's still in a separate bedroom,’ she says, ‘and I've insisted we go for couples counselling.
He needs it because I suspect he's hooked on the secrecy and excitement that could easily make him run off again.’
Amy has also learned to take responsibility for her own happiness, rather than trusting Joe to invest and harvest it for her.
She is complete in herself.
For Charlotte (she of the pills and bread knife), good friends and blind faith were the main factors which helped to cope.
Independence, if anything, seemed to work against her.
But the end of her husband's affair and their reconciliation came unexpectedly and in its own time.
Charlotte had blamed Grant's affair on the work that kept him all week in a rented London flat while she and her three small daughters lived in their Suffolk cottage.
‘Once I knew about the other woman, I realised we'd been drifting apart and that, at weekends, I'd felt quite distant.
It was almost as if the independent life I'd built up of necessity was being disrupted by Grant's presence.
So I suggested that we should try to mend things by letting the house and all move to London.
He didn't want that and he wouldn't give up the mistress either — not for three years.’
That's how long Charlotte held on.
Her daughters suffered, she says, ‘because I went through periods of such intense misery, that friends would collect them from school and take them home for tea.’
Why didn't she give up and demand a separation?
‘Oh, for so many reasons — because friends supported me in the faith that we would end up together.
And it helped that Grant never let us down financially, and phoned home every day.
I had faith that he would remember where he belonged.’
Even now, Grant has not heard the sorriest details about Charlotte's chronicle of misery during this nightmare waiting period.
‘Contrary to marriage guidance advice, we didn't do a lot of talking things through afterwards.
Talk didn't work, because he wouldn't, so I learned to hold   back.’
Charlotte says she can only bear to recount it for the sake of others who may feel they're totally alone in their plight.
‘To begin with,’ she says, ‘I couldn't cope at all.
I can't imagine how I would have survived without good friends who sustained me when I turned up weeping in the middle of the night.
I would alternate from extremes of hope to despair as every way I tried to win Grant back failed.
When he came for Sunday lunch, I wept and clung to him, begging him not to leave until he had to prise me off.
I forced him to try marriage guidance and then backed off bawling when he told our counsellor he'd felt alienated since our eldest, then seven, was two.’
Open communication may work for some, but Charlotte found it too destructively honest.
‘I warned him he'd ruin his career when his senior managers found out.
I lost weight, had my hair done three different ways and bought a load of clothes that weren't me — all those classic wifely wiles.
No response.
I went on about the other woman, how she looked and what she was like in bed.
Grant wouldn't say.’
Obsessed as she was with her unknown rival, Charlotte never quite dared to seek her out.
‘It sounds feeble, but I was afraid Grant might be so angry I would finally lose him.’
A turning point came the day Charlotte's cousin saw them together and reported back, ‘She's actually quite ordinary — and she wears red shoes!
You've nothing to fear.’
As the months passed, Charlotte began to gather strength and renewed confidence by taking on an extra day's teaching.
She found ‘a kind of peace that would last for whole half-days at a time without that sinking feeling’.
She enjoyed the Sundays when Grant came home and they went off on outings ‘as if we were a perfectly ordinary family’.
But the final reconciliation came with Grant's next promotion which required them to move to another county.
Both felt that it was a natural fresh start.
‘We were so excited about a new life in a new house that we were drawn together again as friends and lovers and the Other Woman got left behind.’
Coming together again in bed, says Charlotte, ‘was the most wonderful thing.
Not that there was any firework display, but simply that, whereas I had usually initiated lovemaking, it was now Grant who turned to me.
We just slipped back into each other again.’
Their marriage, she says, can't ever be the same, ‘but, although different, it's there.
And it's strong.’
Whatever the outcome, it's clear that affairs shake marriages — often to their roots.
You can't go back and it's natural to assume that your relationship has changed invariably for the worse.
Absolute trust, commitment and respect suddenly become conditional.
Sometimes the scar tissue is so thick that a couple never truly manage intimacy again.
And yet, says Renate Olins surprising positives may emerge: one initially devastated client in counselling began to reflect that her husband had started to play around because it made him feel a bigger man.
It emerged that he was not a match for her strength, ability and intelligence and, in time, she came to terms with the reality that she was better off without him.
A second recognised that she may actually have chosen a philandering partner because she's frightened of lifetime exclusivity herself.
Women who stay and work through their partner's betrayal may, says Penny Mansfield, regain trust in time if they both grow from the experience and become different people.
No couple chooses to be tried and tested by an affair.
But having been so, they may emerge understanding what commitment really means.
And grasp the value of exclusive partnership more than they ever could when making their marriage vows.
All names have been changed .
THE ELEPHANT WOMAN
Daphne Sheldrick is a surrogate mother — to a herd of orphaned elephants.
By Amy Charles
Four baby elephants are trundling along the dry ground in the blazing African sun, their feet brushing up clouds of dust.
They're just what you would expect to encounter on safari — except that the backdrop for these elephants is not the wilderness of Africa's vast plains but the flower-bedecked veranda of a neat house.
This is Daphne Sheldrick's ‘home’ for young orphaned elephants in Kenya — the triumph of a remarkable woman who has dedicated 40 years to saving wild animals, orphaned mainly by man's greed or bloodlust.
At the moment the young elephants are enjoying themselves, rolling tyres on to their trunks and playing together, therapy to ease the trauma of having seen their parents hacked to death.
The African elephant is particularly endangered by man's greed, thanks to its ivory tusks.
Poachers shoot mature elephants, leaving their helpless young to starve.
Like human toddlers, they cannot cope without their parents.
During the ten years up to 1989, the African elephant population plummeted from 1.3 million to just over half a million.
Daphne has laboured for years to save the elephant, as dedicated to her task as was Dian Fossey to her gorillas.
But, unlike Fossey, she is a native of Africa; her father arrived in Kenya in 1908.
She grew up in the African bush, and came to love the many wild animals as well as the domestic animals on her father's farm.
Her first ‘pet’, a baby deer, was given to her when she was just three.
‘We all had jobs to do from an early age, feeding the pigs, washing the eggs,’ she says.
‘I fed my deer with milk from a baby's bottle,’ she remembers with a smile.
‘And I realised even then that, if I neglected it, it would die.
I had a succession of pets — water buck, impala, young zebra.
When they grew up and went off into the wild I suffered dreadful pangs.
The hardest and most necessary lesson I had to learn was how to say goodbye.
Wild animals never really belong to you — they're just on loan.’
Daphne was married twice, and has two grown-up daughters.
It was her second husband, David, who died 16 years ago, who persuaded her to adopt orphaned elephants to see if they could be nursed through their grief and restored to health.
By that time, Daphne was skilled in raising all sorts of animals.
‘Once they went off they would return with their offspring,’ she recalls.
‘To them we were just part of their extended families.’
In the first years of her elephant sanctuary, many of the young ones died.
Each death was more distressing than the last.
‘When I was asked to look after orphaned elephants, my heart sank,’ she says.
‘Over the years we lost so many because there was so much we didn't know.
At one point, David suggested it would be kinder to have them put down straight away when they came in.
In spite of all my experience or rearing wild animals, the one species that continued to defeat me was the infant elephant.’
Elephants are extremely sophisticated mammals and their needs, both physical and emotional, are complex.
Daphne discovered for instance, that baby elephants were unresponsive to many types of milk.
It was only by trial and error that she discovered that a product developed for milk-sensitive human babies was the ideal elephant food.
From then on, discoveries followed more rapidly — baby elephants need three-hourly feeds, they can have only local anaesthetics, they need body warmth.
In fact, Daphne often sleeps in the elephant hut, cuddling the babies and supervising their feeds.
‘I've blown their noses and wiped their bottoms,’ she states, with the stoicism of a practised mother.
‘I know more about elephants than most — particularly scientists.
You have to allow for an animal's feeling, for individuality.
Some are passive, some neurotic and some excitable.
When you mother an animal, you feel what it feels.’
She cites, for example, the fact that a baby elephant, however hungry, will feed only under certain conditions.
‘They have to feel comfortable, with their trunk nestling against something that feels a bit like mum.
Sometimes we give them a little canvas pack, or they will fasten on to their keeper's neck or earlobe, armpit or face.
But they won't take their milk until the tip of their trunk feels right.’
If the babies will not feed unless a mother figure is near, how must they feel when their mother suddenly falls dead in front of them, blasted by a submachine gun?
Daphne says that many baby elephants arrive at the sanctuary in shock, having seen their entire extended family hacked to death.
The nature of the elephants' death is particularly distressing to their young because elephants are social creatures, and will help a family member or friend who is ill.
One biologist recalls seeing a mother trying to lift a sick baby to its feet and screaming with frustration when she was unable to.
When the baby died, the other elephants from the herd covered the corpse with branches and leaves, while the mother rocked back and forth.
Often a bereaved family will return to the bones of dead elephants many years later.
The elephants form a strong bond with their keepers and will feed only when in physical contact, taking ten pints of milk a day
‘Elephants do have long memories,’ Daphne says, ‘and they go into a period of deep grieving that will often last three or four months, which is when the really intensive care comes in.
You cannot force-feed them, so you have to try to persuade them.’
That is no easy task when you consider that they must take ten pints of milk in just one 24-hour period if they are to survive.
Adult elephants spend three quarters of the day feeding and can eat up to 225 kilos of food a day.
It is also very important for the elephants to have several carers.
Daphne recalls how, early on, ‘I made the mistake of allowing one to become too fond of me and, when I went away for two weeks, she died of a broken heart.
I now have eight keepers who rotate so that each youngster becomes equally fond and knows them equally well.
And they are never left alone — not even for one minute.
If this happened they would be terror-stricken.
They've lost one family and they immediately think they are going to lose another.’
Baby elephants are sent long distances to be put under Daphne's care, and her love and knowledge ensure their survival and eventual rehabilitation.
But, despite growing international recognition of the plight of elephants on general, the wider problems of their conservation remain.
Elefriends, the elephant protection charity, publishes adult and junior newsletters.
Membership costs £12.50 adult, £6 junior and concession, £18.50 family and £10 for a school.
For details: Elefriends, Cherry Tree Cottage, Coldharbour, Dorking, Surrey RH5 6HA.
Tel: 0306 713320.
Elephant by Ian Redmond (Walker Books, £12.99) is a good book for older children.
Half of the royalties go to Elefriends .
DOES YOUR VOICE LET YOU DOWN?
Getting your point of view across starts with using your voice to best advantage.
By Denise Winn
Have you ever started to speak and found yourself having to stop and take short breaths just to get through a sentence?
Or heard yourself screaming in a high pitch while arguing fruitlessly with your nearest and dearest?
Or stood in despair as your children big or little, carry on ignoring your repeated demands that they stop whatever undesirable thing it is that they are doing?
Our voices are intimately connected with the way we live our lives.
How we carry ourselves, how we feel about ourselves and how we feel about what we are doing will all inevitably be revealed in how we speak.
So what is it about women which leaves many struggling in an effort to command authority or respect when they talk to colleagues, partners or children?
‘Women often sound unauthoritative because of their posture,’ says Meribeth Bunch, one-time associate professor in music and anatomy, now a consultant in human communication and author of Speak With Confidence (Kogan Page, £3.95).
‘Many women have a one-sided stance, with their weight on one leg.
If they have been accustomed to carrying a baby on the hip, they start to curve in that direction without realising it.
‘Standing that way changes the balance of the voice.
The lungs, larynx, throat and mouth, which act as a resonating chamber, are no longer aligned.
You wouldn't take a clarinet out of a box and put it together crooked.
Yet that is what we do with the voice when we stand badly.’
A classic precursor of poor posture and poor voice is the dramatic development in breast size around puberty.
Girls who suddenly find themselves with enormous breasts may collapse in on themselves in embarrassment or try to hide behind folded arms, and the result is an equally collapsed voice which often gives out altogether at crucial moments.
Then there is the ‘little girl’ voice.
‘People usually don't know that girls' voices break, too,’ says singer and voice teacher Angela Caine.
Unfortunately, girls may be encouraged to keep their voices high, perhaps because it sounds sweet and makes them appear vulnerable and feminine.
An artificially high voice can be achieved quite unconsciously by tightening the diaphragm and keeping tension in the neck.
The pelvic floor needs to be free for the voice to be free and then a voice has both highs and lows.
‘The reason a lot of women and men argue without hearing each other is that many women lack the bottom harmonics in their voices, while men don't allow themselves the upper harmonics.
So the voices don't connect with each other,’ says Angela.
‘When voices are relaxed, the difference between male and female voices is not one of pitch, but one of quality.
‘Similarly, if a woman has a child's high voice and is arguing with a child, the child will always win because only the child's voice is natural.
You can't come in over the top, you must come underneath to get children's attention.’
What we wear can be significant too.
High heels or very tight-fitting clothes can adversely affect balance and therefore our voices.
So, too, can the way we behave in the world.
For instance, the breathiness or squeaks that come out when we are trying to say something important are caused by lack of confidence, which many  women are particularly prone to.
‘What happens is that just as they are about to speak, they take a quick breath,’ explains Angela Caine.
‘A short sharp breath interrupts the normal pattern of breathing.
It is the right reaction to an emergency, leading your heartbeat and your breathing to speed up.
But speaking to the boss, answering the phone and making a speech are not emergencies.’
One of Angela's clients used to have this breathing problem.
Yet, to get to Angela's home for her lesson, she would walk uphill with her 18-month baby on her back and manage to breathe perfectly in spite of the exertion.
She was not conscious of her breathing, of course, when she wasn't performing.
Being self-conscious is doubly self-defeating.
Not only does it make us horribly uncomfortable and ill-at-ease but it is impossible to disguise the voice.
‘If you look down as your are talking and are holding yourself in, you can't achieve what you want to achieve,’ says Meribeth Bunch.
‘We actually inhibit our speech patterns by worrying what others are thinking of use.
You can't worry and be convincing at the same time.’
A sure-fire way to failure is fidgeting.
‘Women seem to find standing firmly on two feet difficult,’ Meribeth says.
‘They sway, shift about and cross their legs.
perhaps it is self-consciousness again, or an unconscious desire to hide when in a public situation.’
Ironically, women will often cross their legs when they're trying to look relaxed or elegant or assured.
The effect is to prevent the pelvic floor playing its part in the delivery of the voice.
So what to do, then, to rediscover the power of our voices?
Both Angela and Meribeth are trained in the Alexander Technique, a method of helping free the body's natural energy by unlearning bad postural and breathing habits.
Meribeth specialises in teaching communication and presentation skills in the workplace.
Angela runs her own centre.
It is filled with a climbing frame, bean bags, inflatable bouncers, mini-trampolines and balance boards because, as Angela explains, the voice should sound the same whether you are standing still, balancing, bouncing about or clambering up and down.
The benefits of the balancing, bouncing and clambering are that your body is relaxed instead of recital-rigid and the voice comes over in a strong way.
‘When the body has spring and the legs are free, the voice has so much more authority,’ she says.
‘We practise lying on a bouncing ball and reading aloud or singing the words in the book.
It is amazing that you can look so undignified and yet sound so much more authoritative!’
There are lots of simple techniques — all fully explained in Angela Caine's The Voice Workbook (Hodder and Stoughton, £11.99, including audio cassette)— which quickly help the voice develop its strength.
For instance, one exercise involves reading a children's book aloud but singing every verb.
The singing and the speaking voice are part of the same continuum, and doing this stretches all the vocal cords.
To learn to stop stiffening the whole body, as we often do unconsciously when we are about to speak or sing, practise this exercise at home: stand with feet slightly apart, then squat down quickly (with knees moving apart and bottom aiming downwards) to hit the floor hard between your feet with both hands.
Spring back up without stiffening and sing ‘gah’ or ‘lah’or the first line of a chosen poem or song.
Doing this will help your voice spring more spontaneously into action.
If you have a friend to work with, sit back-to-back and have a conversation.
Many women fear their voices are too small to carry.
However, as Angela explains, ‘You are a natural sounding board and if you remain focused and have your back secure, you'll find your voice reaches the other person without you having to try to project it.
This exercise is really good for women because it makes them aware of their backs.’
Backs are a specific problem area for women, often because of damaged suffered in pregnancy.
To beat the habit of taking an unnecessary emergency breath before speaking, practise this at home: shout ‘Oy!’ before reciting each line of a chosen poem or song, then go on into the line without a breath.
To make sure the ‘Oy!’ is a gut-reaction type of ‘Oy!’(the ‘Oy!’you might cry if someone was tampering with your car), put one hand just below your throat and the other on your pubic bone.
You should feel a reaction in both.
One headmistress who came to a workshop put this exercise to good use.
Back at school, she approached the classroom where she was to teach and saw a group of teenagers lolling in the doorway.
Her heart sank as she contemplated how, as usual, she would walk up, bleat out ‘excuse me’ and then be forced to wait, powerless, while they peeled themselves slowly and insolently away from the door.
This time, however, without even knowing what she was going to do, she found herself striding up to them and yelling ‘Oy!’
She was gratified to see them jump apart, eyes popping.
Knowing more about the voice also means realising that raising the voice and screeching on a higher pitch (inevitable when excited) is not the way to get through to a rebellious teenager who is deliberately testing your limits.
The solution is to step outside the argument for a moment and attempt to change its direction instead of getting caught up and caught out by arguing on their terms.
If you are nervous before having to use your voice, whether you are speaking to a conference or about to ask the bank manager for a loan, the first secret of success is to feel those nerves instead of tensing yourself against them.
A little nervousness gets the adrenaline going and kick-starts us into action.
And if you don't feel confident?
‘Fake it until you make it,’ advises Meribeth Bunch.
‘To sound authoritative, stand tall and extend your space outwards instead of inwards.
Keep your eyes open, so that you see more than what is just in front of you.
If you want to sound persuasive, mirror the other person's tone of voice.
It's like sympathising with your voice.’
Meribeth often recommends standing up to make important telephone calls because it puts more energy into the voice.
If you have to sit down, for example at a meeting, lean forward rather than sit straight-backed because the voice gets more spring.
But one thing you can't disguise is that you'd rather not be there.
‘Unless you want to be there, your audience will realise that you don't.
Your eyes will be dead and your voice will be dead,’ she says.
Sometimes we are not convincing because what we say is belied by our actions — for instance, a woman who wears a permanent fixed smile while trying to reprimand a subordinate, or when returning faulty goods to a shop.
‘Women often have a tendency to arch their backs which has the effect of making the voice sound more remote,’ says Meribeth.
‘The combination of leaning away and remoteness will not help you sound convincing when you say, ‘I'm glad to see you,’ however genuine you are.’
It would seem, then, that voice work is an effective form of assertiveness training.
‘After voice work, what you say and what you mean are far more connected,’ says Anne Walker, an Alexander Technique teacher who now works with Angela.
‘There is a way of saying no, for instance, that gets through to children.
You have to mean it and then they know there is not argument.
Whereas saying ‘sort of’, ‘you know’ and ‘I mean’— to anyone — is a leaking of power.’
‘I'm convinced the voice is the strongest part of us,’ Angela says.
‘But it isn't just actors and singers who need help.
We are all professional voice users.’
Angela Caine, 9 Kerfield Place, London SE5 85Y.
Tel: 071-703 1575.
The Voice Workshop is in the process of moving, but can be contacted c/o Angela Caine (see above).
Meribeth Bunch is available for seminars and workshops.
Contact Flat 4, 38 Crediton Hill, London NW6 1HR.
Tel: 071–435 6179.
SHE PROMOTION
a storyteller for the nineties
Amy Tan weaves an unforgettable tale of ancient culture and modern secrets
Amy Tan won huge critical acclaim for her first novel,The Joy Luck Club , an unforgettable tale of joy and heartbreak in the lives of Chinese Americans.
Now she has followed this up with her second book,The Kitchen God's Wife (Flamingo, £5.99, published April 23), which is as powerful and moving as the first.
On the one hand it is a bittersweet story of communication difficulties between a mother and daughter; on the other, it is a poignant portrayal of a young woman's life in old China before the revolution.
The Daily Telegraph described it as, ‘Pure delight…a book of the year for sure.’
Pearl is the thoroughly Westernised daughter of Chinese immigrants to America.
Happily married with two children to an American, she carries around a secret she cannot bring herself to tell her mother, Winnie.
She is too afraid of her reaction: ‘To this day, it drives me crazy listening to her various hypotheses, the way religion and superstition all merge with her own beliefs.
She puts no faith in other people's logic — to her, logic is a sneaky excuse for tragedies, mistakes and accidents.
And according to my mother, nothing is an accident…‘
But Winnie has a secret, too, one she has kept from her daughter for all these years.
Now she decides it is time to tell Pearl the truth.
What she reveals is not one secret but many, in a spellbinding tale of her life in China before emigrating to America.
This gripping novels opens our eyes to another world, yet its themes are ones we all know.
Winnie is revealed as a woman of quiet fortitude who has endured almost unbearable suffering and sadness.
But her sense of humour, courage and ability to love help her to survive those terrible years until she finds the happiness she deserves.
With this second novel, Amy Tan has again proved herself to be a first class writer, one who can write books which not only have enormous popular appeal, but also teach us something new about the human condition.
Such writers are rare indeed.
As The Sunday Times said, ‘When you finish The Kitchen God's Wife , you will already be yearning for the next one, and the one after that.’
We have 40 copies of The Kitchen God's Wife to give away.
Send your name and address on a postcard to SHE/Amy Tan Offer, HarperCollins, 77–85 Fulham Palace Rd, London W6 8JB, by May 31.
LET'S HAVE FUN AGAIN
Shake off your responsibilities and take time to rediscover the child in you.
By Margaret Rooke
What comes to mind when you think about having fun?
Holding hands with your man in the sea and jumping over the biggest waves you've ever seen?
Or perhaps it's belting out Slade's greatest hits with your best friends and a bottle of wine?
Or maybe you never think about fun at all— it's just another banned ‘f-word’, ousted from your list of priorities.
If we are not careful, all our precious spare time is spent visiting grandma, taking the children somewhere worthy, cleaning the inside of the teapot or balancing the budget.
So, if talk of painting the town red brings the flaking bathroom walls to mind, in the only rush of spontaneity you can think of is your baby's before you've managed to get her clean nappy on, maybe you're missing out.
And missing out will harm you and your relationships with others.
Martha and Dominic recall how they lost their sense of fun when they moved in together.
‘I thought it would be great — in fact I thought it would be someone to have fun with all the time,’ remembers Martha.
‘But almost from the day we set foot in our new house our relationship changed.
We just seemed to spend all the time we weren't at work doing up the house and arguing about how we wanted it.
I felt angry and claustrophobic.
I couldn't go out with Dominic because we had so much to do.
I couldn't go out without him because we'd agreed we'd both do our share.
I began to forget why I'd been attracted to him in the first place.’
Having fun is one of our essential needs as human beings yet we can so easily ignore it.
We condemn it as childish and insignificant.
‘We forget that play is an essential part of our make up and that when we don't play we get stressed out,’ explains psychotherapist John Witt.
He decided to run workshops on ‘having fun’ after noticing that this was a gap in the lives of many of his clients — and in his own.
‘I was coming to work, going home to my family, coming back to work,’ he says.
‘I started to feel that I was getting stale.
Something was missing.’
Martha and Dominic realised this too.
The turning point for them came when their car broke down after a family christening.
‘Dominic had left his AA card at home — we had a bit of a row about that — so we gave up on the car and decided to go out for a meal.
It was one of those restaurants with paper tablecloths and a pot of crayons on each table and we both started drawing.
We were giggling at each other 's pictures and I started to remember the amount of fun we used to have together.
I blurted out to Dominic how I had been feeling and to my astonishment and relief he said he felt the same — trapped and resentful.’
The DIY was given a lower priority from then on but, even when they were working on the house, the mood changed enormously.
‘We'd put on silly voices and tell silly jokes.
We even had a paint fight and stuck paint brushes in each other 's ears.’
It's astonishing how easy it is for us grown-ups to lose touch with the ability to shake off our responsibilities and inhibitions.
I remember watching children dancing at a wedding a few weeks ago.
Some were dancing to the beat.
A couple of others whirled around pleasing themselves.
When adults take to the floor it tends to be a different story.
Some might be worrying about their dancing and how it looks to onlookers, others might be worried about their partner's nervous shuffling from foot to foot — what will people be thinking?
One of my main preoccupations that particular evening was keeping my right bra strap out of sight, underneath my skimpy top.
Something so trivial really did get in the way of a good time, yet none of the children, still bopping away, would have got their vests in such a twist.
Self-consciousness is a common party-pooper.
‘When I go to a party I feel there's an expectation for me to be witty  and to be a ‘party gal’, says my friend Alison.
‘That expectation makes me freeze up and feel very shy and nervous, or else it makes my try too hard and I just end up feeling awkward.
I start thinking, ‘Am I entertaining the person over there having a better time?
If he walks off and leaves me someone might see me left on my own’.’
Alison says parties and dinner parties can be the last places she has a good time.
She found fun in the place she least expected to — a Spanish night class.
‘At the class there were no expectations,’ she says.
‘It had all the best things about being at school, like the chumminess, but there were no standards to keep to.
We had to role-playing.
One of us would be a hotel receptionist, the other a lost tourist.
To begin with we were nervous but by the end we were making up silly situations and if we made mistakes everyone laughed.’
Alison's classes didn't take on the air of duty which can mar anything from going to a party to visiting relations.
It's not surprising we don't have fun when we're there.
If we stopped to check out what we really wanted to do, our internal voices might not be saying, ‘Time to go out clubbing,’ but, ‘Out with the Ovaltine, on with the duvet and open the Ruth Rendell.’
‘I think there's an expectation that we all know what having fun is, but many of us don't know,’ says John Witt.
‘We get into terrible ruts.
Parents who leave the kids with the babysitter and go out because they feel they should are among the biggest culprits.
We buy theatre tickets and have the restaurant booked when, if we stopped and checked what we actually wanted to do, we might find we would much prefer to stay at home and have an early night.’
Looking back on their ten years of marriage, Davina and Alastair feel they stopped being in touch with what their needs were after their children were born.
‘We were having fun with the children but we seemed to lose each other,’ says Davina.
‘It didn't seem to bother Ally but it did concern me.
I was feeling old, much older than 33.
I persuaded him that we should go away together, just the two of us.
‘We both felt quite nervous — it was a bit like a first date.
But we went for a long walk and Ally started talking about his work in a way I hadn't heard before.
In the past I'd just resented how long he spent in the office.
That night as we walked past the pub next door to the hotel we heard a band playing 60s songs.
We went in and people were singing and dancing so we joined in too.
That really did take us back to the good old days.
Since then, there's definitely been a change in our relationship,’ says Davina.
‘We took the kids out in Windsor a few nights ago and after the meal Ally sang, ‘It's now or never’ to me by the castle.
It was very loud and very late.
I'm surprised he didn't get arrested.
The kids were mortified but I thought it was a real hoot.’
All sorts of concerns can stop our enjoyment if we're out at a party or dinner party or anywhere we expect to have fun.
Disputes about who's going to stop drinking and drive home don't help us go with the flow.
If we're on our own, neither does a nagging concern about having to walk home alone in the dark.
So it is important to make some  preparations in advance and accept that having fun can involve hard work.
‘Watch children at play,’ advises John Witt, ‘and see how hard they work.
Children having fun is quite a structured exercise.
They build up one structure which breaks down and flows into another.
Kids play a game, stop it, get bored and go into another.’
He says that the children are responding to a need in themselves, and believes that many adults don't make the time to slow down and think about what they really need.
‘Having fun means having contact — either with yourself or with other people or both,’ he continues.
‘That's why people find it so fulfilling.
It needs working at.
It never happens completely spontaneously, even if it feels that way.
Most people simply don't make enough time to have physical time together, even it it's just lying next to each other cuddling.’
Bridget and Daniel found they had to do exactly that.
Both have busy working lives and they realised they were seeing less and less of each other and spending their one day together, Sunday, in a daze.
‘We drew up a list of things we wanted to do and people we wanted to see,’ says Bridget.
‘It ranged from going to a new swimming pool with a whirly slide to going to the National Gallery.
Every week we do something new.
Our day together is such a treat.’
They've adopted John Witt's prescription for having fun: ‘Slow down and ask yourself, ‘What do I need now?’ and put time aside.
Make fun as much a part of your weekly structure as anything else, because it's as important as anything else.’
And because nothing ever seems healthier or more warming than looking back at something we have just done and realising, ‘Mmmm.
That really was fun’.’
John Witt's workshop, ‘Having Fun’, costs £80 and will be held on July 4–5 1992 at Spectrum, 7 Endymion Road, London N4 1EE.
Telephone .
After many years spent out of step, Sarah Lewis is still learning…
THE MOTHER-DAUGHTER DANCE
‘Don't go Mummy!
Please don't go.’
I was six years old and the scene was the dim and secluded scullery in my grandparents' house.
My mother was saying goodbye.
I was clinging to her legs.
I remember she crouched down and lifted me on to the table.
‘Darling, it's all right.
It's only for a little while.
I'll come home every three weeks, and Granny and Grandfather will look after you while I'm away.
Don't cry, darling.
Mummy loves you.’
‘I don't want you to go,’ I repeated helplessly.
She unwrapped me from her arms.
She had made provisions for her daughter and was determined to get away from the life of a single mother in a small town.
‘I have to, darling,’ she said as she left.
That evening my grandmother bundled me, weeping, in a large warm bath towel and tried to explain.
But I had no notion of time — or of my mother's needs I felt only that I was being abandoned.
That is my first and most powerful memory of separation from my mother, and even though it lasted only a year, those feelings of rejection and insecurity have coloured my life.
It has taken therapy and training as a counsellor for me to begin to tackle them.
In a healthy relationship, I know now, the process of separation — child from mother, mother from child is vital and necessary.
What went wrong in my case was the timing.
An unsettled child who had already lost a father, I was not ready for such a drastic break at so young an age.
Yet my mother was.
Our needs conflicted — not for the first or last time in our lives.
For mothers and daughters, the process of ‘letting go’ is likely to be difficult.
A girl lives in the image of her mother, and the mothers sees herself in the child.
As that wisest of analysts, Carl Jung, said, ‘Every mother contains her daughter in herself and every daughter her mother, and every woman extends backwards into her mother and forwards into her daughter.’
At first, it is natural for there to be a symbiosis or identification between the two.
A nursing mother sees her reflection in the eyes of the infant in her arms.
And the baby as it suckles has no idea that they are separate beings.
Gradually, however, if all goes well, the bond should loosen and each become aware of their different needs and strive for some degree of independence.
And so a dance between the mother and daughter begins.
It is likely to be a lifelong one.
Sometimes the two move closer in mutual harmony — the mother acting as nurturer and role model; the daughter needing her care and acceptance.
Sometimes they pull apart — smoothly or discordantly — either one needing distance.
The task of the little girl is to find new variations and discover individuality, secure in the broader structure of the dance.
The mother's job is even more exacting; while remaining true to herself and her needs, she must at first embrace her baby in the closest hold, and then let her move away in steps of her own.
Paradoxically, mothers and daughters who achieve separation in an appropriate way are more truly loving than those who are over-dependent.
If they are not threatened by the other's control, it is safe to develop a generous and open relationship.
But getting the balance right between closeness and separation and  between conflicting needs is difficult.
My mother got it wrong when I was six, but her mistake did serve to galvanise me in later years and I became a successful businesswoman, outwardly independent and self-sufficient.
I married, being well aware of my own emotional needs.
but decided I didn't want children.
I was afraid I might hurt a child the way I'd been hurt.
My big fear, as with so many daughters, is that every year I am becoming more like my mother.
By this I mean those aspects of her I like least.
I sometimes hear the same impatient intonation in my voice or catch a glimpse in the mirror of a certain thin-lipped expression which is peculiarly hers.
The mirror reflects the fear that I cannot be fully myself while my mother's image is superimposed on mine.
By the late age of 37, I finally felt secure enough in myself to take the ultimate risk — and I became pregnant.
I was delighted, if apprehensive, and arranged a lunch with my mother to share my news.
‘I've got something to tell you, Mum,’ I opened, expecting massive surprise and a glimmer of pleasure.
She looked aghast.
‘Was it a mistake?’ she asked.
That was all.
I was devastated.
Reason should have told me that instant acceptance was too much to ask, but I was overwhelmed by my emotional need for an endorsement, however small, of my situation.
Instead we might have been strangers.
Not only did her question underline how far communication had broken down between us but also how little either of us was able to meet the other's needs.
Honest and appropriate expression of feelings is crucial in bringing the dancers into step.
Yet, however successful in other spheres of my life, when facing my mother I found myself hiding my hurt just when I most needed to express it.
Then the worst happened.
My baby was stillborn.
The pain of it took me back to that earlier pain as a six-year-old, and all the anguish of inappropriate separation.
This time, as I stroked the downy hair on my tiny son's head, I was the mother — a mother who had lost her child.
Birth and death, the ultimate holding and letting go, were paradoxically present at the same moment.
With the grief, however, there was the joy of discovering mother love — and of rediscovering my own mother's love for me.
She drew me close and comforted me as I mourned my child and the bond between us had never been stronger.
Time passed and I decided to try again.
I had a son, and my mother was delighted, as she had been with her own son.
A year later, I plucked up my courage and became pregnant once more.
This time her reaction was very different: ‘I feel like crying.
I don't think you should have it.’
‘How can you say such a thing, Mum?’
I asked limply.
‘You know I didn't want you to have another child.
Don't expect me to support you.’
With these words ringing in my ear I became a little girl again — hurt, angry and rejected.
It didn't help that, intellectually, I knew that she was reliving her own feelings about the way in which a second child — me — had wrecked her marriage.
Her only way of coping with her over-identification with my situation was to try to reassert control over the child I used to be and prevent the cycle repeating itself.
Undoubtedly, the fact that both mothers and daughters are able to have babies and so enact a continuing cycle makes their dilemma of finding a harmonious balance difficult.
The daughter's relationship with her mother is at its most intense as she prepares to give birth herself and, in a sense, to step into her mother's shoes.
In her study My Mother My Self (Fontana, £5.99), psychologist Nancy Friday puts her finger on how I felt when she says that, at such a time, ‘The new mother finds the need for her own mother increasing.
By this I don't mean the need for physical help and practical advice so much as the longing for emotional reconciliation, a bonding with her.’
I certainly felt more empathy for my mother and what she had been through.
I was more able to forgive her for past hurts because, as Nancy Friday says, I needed to do so.
Yet here she was opening up old wounds and it was harder to forgive that.
We seemed destined to replay the same parts in an old story.
The problem lay in our unrealistic expectations of one another.
I wanted her, at my convenience, to become a nurturing Mother Earth figure who would take care of my when I felt unable to cope, and the little girl who had never grown up was crying out for help and approval.
She, on the other hand, having finally regained  her own life and independence after years of child-rearing, wanted to turn her attention to her own needs.
She wanted me to be independent and strong, the ‘successful’ person I'd been before having children, so that she could be free to do this.
This issue of unrealistic expectations is vital in the dance.
I have found Evelyn Bassoff's book,Mothers and Daughters (published in the US), perceptive.
She says, ‘Only after a woman takes in her stride her mother's failures of understanding, empathy and availability, instead of responding to these shortcomings with childish indignation, is she ready to become her adult friend…
A mature, non-exploitative, separated relationship between mother and daughter begins as each accepts that the other cannot be perfectly available or responsive to her just as she cannot be perfectly available and responsive to the other.’
I tried hard to tell myself this.
Yet what I was really doing was hardening myself against disappointment — my mother was going to be abroad when the baby was born.
It was too painful for me to repeat those words from my childhood, ‘Please don't go,’ and risk further rejection.
Instead I remained silent — and she departed.
Then I got a letter.
She wasn't changing her plans and returning, yet she seemed to be angrily tugging at me just as I was turning away.
‘Why didn't you tell me the date for the birth had changed?
Do you want this baby to come between us?’
I was dumbfounded.
How dare she expect up-to-the-minute information when she had decided to remove herself from the scene?
‘She wants everything her way,’ I stormed at my husband.
But I was also secretly pleased that, in her own irrational way, she cared.
Eventually I felt calm enough to respond and tell her a little of my hurt.
‘If you'd just offered to come,’ I wrote, ‘that would have been enough.’
What was I expecting?
That even at this late date she'd change her mind?
Yes, but it didn't happen, although I did feel a little better for being at least partially honest.
As my pregnancy went on, I wondered whether the baby was a girl and If I should soon be in a mother/daughter relationship with my own child.
It was then that I was struck by another passage in Mothers and Daughters : ‘As the middle- aged daughter develops reasonable expectations of her ageing mother, she will be able to develop reasonable self-expectations in relation to her daughter.
No longer berating herself for being an imperfect mother, she will be satisfied simply to be good enough.’
How would my own child see me?
Looked at like that, I gradually began to feel a little more able to let go of my unrealistic expectations of my mother and to love her as she is.
In accepting both what I like and don't like in her, I can more readily accept both aspects in myself.
I certainly wouldn't say that this acceptance is complete.
I was disappointed that my mother wasn't there for the birth, but I wasn't totally devastated.
I had a loving husband to hold and support me throughout.
We waited for the moment when we would hear those words: ‘It's a…‘
Of course, it had to be.
And as I looked at my little daughter, bright-eyed and ready to challenge the world, I could only pray that I would be ‘good enough’ in the new dance that was just beginning.
get your KNICKERS ON!
Could stockings, suspenders and a peephole bra spice up your sex life?
By Vanessa Feltz
I was brought up in knickers.
My father travelled in ladies' underwear.
Cotton gussets were, quite literally, meat and drink to us.
Others split the atom, Dad split crotches.
Others sought the Holy Grail, Dad stalked the earth in pursuit of the perfect pyjama.
Countless au pairs fled sobbing back to Bilbao after he swooped on their smalls yelling, ‘Just as I thought!
Cotton interlock.
Made in Mauritius.’
To have gone without a nightdress in our house would have been heresy.
Even in the 1976 heat-wave, I steamed uncomplainingly in polyester satin with rosebud trim.
After all, as Dad quite rightly explained, if the entire country flung its brushed nylon to the winds, we'd be out of detached splendour and into the gutter within a week.
You could say I've always had a vested interest in lingerie.
Indeed, having a father known as Norman the Thermal King, my view of vests is more informed than most.
But why did people snigger when I told them what my father did?
Why do supposedly mature adults still find underwear rude and, therefore, titillating?
Why are the words ‘stockings and suspenders’ enough to arouse whole generations of men?
Why would we consider men fully paid-up perverts if they showed an unnatural interest in Crimplene blouses, but normal red blooded males if they ignite at the mere mention of silk teddies?
Dr John Gayford, consultant psychiatrist at Warlingham Park Hospital's Psycho-Sexual Clinic, believes that it's a historical inevitability that underwear and sex are inextricably entwined.
‘Men are prone to fixations,’ he explained.
‘In the Victorian era, when the only bit of female flesh men commonly glimpsed was a flash of ankle, they developed fetishes focusing on feet, shoes and boots.
These days, if you imagine a young man's sexual exploration, he works from the outside in and encounters women's underwear long before he comes anywhere near the female body itself.
Many little boys experience their first erections while watching their mothers dressing.
By association, girdles, suspenders, stockings, even petticoats, all become imbued with sexual connotations in their own right.
Dr Gayford also contends that underwear is less threatening than women themselves.
‘Men who are intimidated by the reality of female sexuality quite often sublimate their feelings into a fascination, or minor obsession, with ladies' underwear.
There's no doubt that 1992 is proving a bumper year for lingerie fanciers.
A Marks & Spencer spokesman announced: ‘The  androgynous days are over.
Slightly butch cropped tops and thigh-high pants are no longer directional — 1992 means femininity.
Chemise teddies festooned with lace.
Silk and satin.
Today's woman is into co-ordinating an entire wardrobe of lingerie.
She might start with the camisole and French knickers and add an underwired bra, perhaps, or bikini brief to match.’
The most recession-resistant garment is undoubtedly Gossard's Wonderbra.
Launched in 1968 and never out of the top ten, the Wonderbra   has undergone a dramatic renaissance.
Says Gossard, ‘The Wonderbra guarantees cleavage to every woman.
The bosom is back and, if you haven't got one, the Wonderbra is your answer.
Models have been wearing them for years.
The secret is a hidden pocket of extra padding.
Ever since Vogue homed in on it last December, the Wonderbra has been literally bouncing off the shelves.
Fenwick is selling 800 a week!’
All this for £13.99.
Has this underwear explosion hit the suburbs?
The time has come to investigate.
Using SHE as justification, I snooped through drawers of drawers and subjected my chums to a barrage of impertinent questions.
All that ‘can't judge a book by its cover’ is truer than you think.
You show me a tweed-skirted twinset and pearl wearer, and I guarantee there's a scarlet bustier pulsating beneath.
Actually to hear some of them tell it, sex without stockings is like an egg without salt.
‘Underwear is a shared sexy secret,’ said Lauren.
‘If I'm wearing a silk teddy or stockings and suspenders, I whisper a description in Stewart's ear as he leaves for work.
Sometimes he phones in the middle of the day just to ask what lingerie I'm wearing.
I know he fantasises about it.
I know he fantasises about it.
The thought of him thinking about it means I can't help thinking about it, too.
He buys me underwear all the time.
It's flattering after 15 years of marriage, to know that he's in a lather of anticipation about undressing his wife.
If underwear keeps him interested, I'm all for it.’
Bonita is a reluctant stocking wearer.
‘Quite frankly, whoever invented suspenders should be shot at dawn!
Only a man could put women through such hell.
Stockings mean icy blasts whistling round your thighs and gusts of wind blowing up your knickers.
If I had my way it would be opaque Lycra tights every day of the week.
Unfortunately, Bryan's got this thing about stockings.
He actually likes rolling them on for me.
Once he confessed that he used to sneak in and watch his mother dressing.
Sometimes I resent having to truss myself up like a stuffed chicken.
On the other hand, though, he's a lovely bloke and I haven't got the heart to deprive him.’
Some women were amazed that underwear featured on the agenda of long-term relationships.
‘Good God!’
Linda spluttered.
‘I wear knickers until they fray beyond belief.
Usually, after a few washes, they go from pristine white to a sort of blotchy grey.
If I suddenly swanned out of the bathroom in satin, Nick would have a fit.
He thinks underwear-fixated men are pathetic.
Men only find underwear sexy because porno magazines expect them to.
Nick things that men who really love making love with women would rather grind flesh against flesh than fiddle about with straps and elastic.
I agree with him.
I've got one friend whose husband insists that she keep her stockings and push-up bra on during sex.
I'd find that insulting.’
‘If I stuck a pom-pom on each nipple and waggled them in front of Jed, he'd tell me I was blocking his view of the telly,’ says Mandy.
‘I'd love to splash out on lovely bits of lacy stuff, but I'd do better spending my money on a deep-fat fryer for all the notice my other half would take.
He likes easy access.
Says he can't be bothered ferreting through negligées.
When he's on the job, his eyes are tight shut throughout so my undies are lost on him.’
The ultimate question, of course, is do you keep your underwear on when you do it?
When Al Pacino made Kate Nelligan squeeze her feet into gold stilettos throughout intercourse in Frankie and Johnny , the audience knew instinctively that it couldn't be love.
He was so starry-eyed when he finally made it bedwards with true love Michelle Pfeiffer, he wouldn't have noticed if she'd been wearing Dr Martens.
Personally, I'm not adverse to squeezing my assets into the occasional black filmy thing in the interest of fanning the marital fires.
It seems, however, that many women worry that their partner's arousal is dependent on the lingerie they're togged out in, and has nothing at all to do with them.
But Dr Gayford suggests that women who demand to be taken in their birthday suits should face up to reality.
‘The fact is that middle-aged mothers of two, with abdomens covered in stretch marks and slightly sagging breasts, might look an awful lot more attractive with some underwear on.
At least it leaves a little something to the imagination.
They might prefer to be irresistibly appealing in the nude, so would we all, but that can't always be the case.
I rather feel that men (and women) who gently imply that they'd quite like their partners to keep some items of clothing on should probably be humoured at least some of the time.’
Dr Gayford recommends discussion and compromise.
‘Most women don't object to dressing up sometimes, as long as it isn't routinely expected of them.’
Sara, a 38-year-old mother of three, said, I don't particularly like talking about this, but Len insists I keep a corset, suspenders, the whole works on while we're making love.
At first I didn't mind at all that much.
It seemed a bit of a lark.
But after a few months, I felt completely bored with the whole idea.
When I'm hooked into a corset, it actually interferes with my own enjoyment.
I can't breathe properly.
I can't really feel much that is going on.
I'd just as soon burn the bloody lot and wear white cotton knickers and a nice sensible bra.
I don't like dressing up for sex as if it's a performance.
I'd like it to be natural, spontaneous, not something that requires a special outfit.
Unfortunately, if I raise any objections, he just refuses to make love at all.
I've thought of going to my GP about this, but when I run through what I'd have to say in my mind.
I go cold with embarrassment.’
Psycho-sexual specialists agree that when one partner has a fetish which is causing unhappiness to the other, the situation has become pathological.
‘An interest in underwear is fine.
When it threatens to destroy a relationship, it's not,’ says Dr Gayford.
‘Women who feel their partners are   more involved with their lingerie than with them definitely need to seek professional help.
GPs are unshockable.
No-one should think twice about blurting out the whole story.
Couples with problems need to be referred to a clinic, not to soldier miserably on.’
It seems underwear enthusiasts divide neatly into two cups.
The A-cups are big on luxury.
The B-cups are heavily into sleaze.
A-cups are Janet-Reger-ites, turned on by the decadent thrill of spending enormous sums on scraps of silk only their lovers will ever see.
B-cups, using porno mags as their role mags as their role model, snap up peekaboo bras — the kind with holes for your nipples to protrude through — crotchless panties, and ten-denier black nylon baby doll pyjamas with marabou feather edging.
A-cup membership is 50:50 male and female.
All the women who say, ‘I spend £40 on a pair of La Perla panties, but I do it for myself,’ are A-cups.
All the men who stampede through Harvey Nichols in pursuit of £450 negligées the week before Christmas are A-cups.
To them, underwear is a logical extension of flowers, perfume and chocolates, but a heck of a lot more fun.
The B-cups are 98% male.
Sleaze is strictly for the boys.
Whatever their partners persist in believing, most women don't particularly relish getting on a bus with their labia hanging out.
Peekaboo bras cut off circulation in the boobs.
Thonged G-strings disappear up both cracks and there's never a good time to fish them out again.
What's more, as anyone who has ever flicked through the ‘Readers' Wives’ sections of porno mags will know, pseudo-whorish underwear is as ugly as hell.
Shoddily made and prone to virtually instant disintegration, it's not that cheap and it's not in the slightest cheerful.
Surprisingly, though, some women are sleaze converts.
Suzanne, whose husband can't resist mail-ordering everything from wet-look bras to latex knickers, admitted, ‘Frankly, I used to be horrified.
It's basically crap.
A load of rubbish.
My daytime look is very Nicole Farhi — natural fibres, understated, elegant.
The underwear Max wanted me to wear couldn't be more different from my own taste.
The colours are vile, the fabrics are scratchy and horrible.
I resisted for ages until one night, after a few drinks, he persuaded me to pose for photographs in one of the outfits.
When I saw the pictures, I couldn't deny that I found them arousing.
I looked like a tart.
I looked sexy.
Perhaps it was the contrast between this creature and my normal self.
I'm not sure.
But, gradually, I realised that kinky underwear gives me sexual freedom.
In it, I'm not myself.
That frees me to enjoy things I wouldn't normally even try.
Max says that's what he had in mind all along.’
Before you accuse me of sex discrimination, I know I ought to plunge headlong into the Y-fronts versus boxer shorts debate.
But the sexist truth is that women don't give a damn.
Experts confirm that female fetishists are few and far between.
We like our lovers au naturel , wafting in the breeze if possible.
Calvin Klein, C&A or leather jockstrap, polyester or paisley, when it boils down to it, it's not the packaging, it's what inside that counts.
SHE PROMOTION
a NOVEL way to escape!
Let Trudi Pacter's latest book sweep you off into high society
Trudi Pacter's novel,Living Doll , tells the story of two beautiful women who rise to fame and fortune in the swinging 60s.
It is the story of the rich men they love, the powerful people they mingle with, the marriages they make.
Liz Enfield and Vanessa Grenville come from totally different backgrounds.
Working-class Liz has a raw sexiness, and a tough streak that makes her ruthless.
She matures into a woman who cannot be judged by ordinary rules because she doesn't play by them.
Rich, well connected Vanessa exudes good breeding, but her passive veneer conceals a passionate nature.
Both women are stunning — and photogenic.
Irresistible to men, they have an astonishing control over their own destinies in the glamorous but cut-throat worlds of high fashion and advertising.
As young models, Liz and Vanessa become friends and then rivals, their lives linked inextricably over the years.
But then their control over their lives starts to weaken.
Liz rides many of the storms but finds that her own marriage is under threat when Vanessa's pretty young daughter comes to stay.
Meanwhile, Vanessa herself suffers a downfall as humiliating as it is spectacular.
With consummate skill, Trudi Pacter follows the paths of these extraordinary women from the 1960s to the present day, as their fortunes rise and fall in the high society hothouses of London and New York.
Against a background that reflects the social changes of the period, she has woven a richly textured tapestry of a book that sweeps you off to another world.
Nobody is better qualified to write such a tale than Trudi Pacter.
As a hugely successful show-biz journalist who pioneered ‘kiss and tell’ journalism, Trudi chronicled the lives of the rich and famous.
She interviewed them and mixed with them.
She then married Sir Nigel Seely and joined them.
She is the insider with the sharp eye of an outsider.
She knows the international jetsetters and, with her powerful storyteller's talent, she brings these characters to life in her latest book.
But the world of Living Doll need not be just a fantasy — win one of our special pampering make-overs and you too could feel like a top model.
HarperCollins has linked up with Glemby Hair Salons to offer five lucky readers a free top-to-toe treatment.
Worth £100, each treatment includes a haircut, massage and facial.
Just send your name and address to SHE/Trudi Pacter Offer, HarperCollins, 77–78 Fulham Palace Rd, London W6 8JB, by May 31.
The first five names out of the postbag after that date will win a make-over.
HarperCollins Publishers 
Don't forget to look out for Trudi Pacter's three bestselling novels available in Grafton paperback 
will you SURVIVE THE WILL?
Where there's a will there's a way to keep everyone happy.
By Kate Fairchild
It's a shameful fact, but here it is: if I were squashed under a bus tomorrow, my relations would have to hold a seance to find out how I wanted to settle my affairs.
I have often thought about making a will, but merely thinking about it is just the same as merely thinking about contraception — good intentions are feeble.
The main problem about drawing up a will is that it means accepting the inevitability of death.
Like most people, I remain secretly convinced that I am immortal.
But just in case, I am not about to tempt the Grim Reaper by announcing that I am ready for him.
The immaturity of my attitude will do no harm at the moment, for the very significant reason that I have no dependents.
I like to think my husband would be devastated by my untimely demise, but I know that he would not be left short of cash to buy black ties and Kleenex.
However, for people with children, making a will means a lot more than coming to terms with you-know-what.
Parenthood brings an overwhelming sense of responsibility, and most parents have, at some time, been terrified by the sheer, aching vulnerability of their offspring.
It must be the nightmare question nagging every maternal or paternal mind: if, heaven forbid, something happened to us, who would look after our babies?
Theoretically, it should be a simple matter of asking your own parents or a favourite sibling if they are willing to be named as guardians.
But when were families ever simple?
Making provision for the children can bring all sorts of hidden conflicts rushing to the surface.
Lucy, who had her first baby, Oliver, three months ago, is still reeling from the impact of the blazing row that exploded when she and her husband drew up their will.
‘We decided that, if anything happened to us, Oliver would be brought by my parents.
They are still young and I could die happy, so to speak, knowing he was with them.
Unfortunately, when my husband mentioned this to his mother, all hell broke loose.
She's elderly and, quite frankly, so bad-tempered I wouldn't leave her a cat.
But she wants her share of bringing up baby, too.’
There was some distinctly unladylike wrangling between the grandmothers.
‘They were fighting,’ says Lucy, ‘over the fluffy head of my son, as if his parents were already pushing up daisies!
Apart from anything else, it was the most embarrassing episode in my life.
We're sticking to our original plan, and they'll have to accept it, although I sometimes think that, if we knew we were about to die, I'd rather post Oliver through the nearest letter-box and just let him take pot luck.
‘Any more rowing and I'll half the cat
Baby Oliver is a potential victim of too much love.
But too much is much better than too little — at least everybody wants him.
Janie admits to worrying sometimes about the future of her two daughters, aged four and six.
‘My younger sister is the only person who could possibly take the girls if we died, and I'm not sure that she would really want them.
It might be different if she had children of her own — but she's never even had a boyfriend I've liked.’
Yes, it boils down to a lot more than ensuring that the innocents are clothed and fed.
Anita has a reciprocal arrangement with her brother — each would take the other's children.
‘The problem,’ she says, ‘is his wife.
Her kids guzzle sugar all day, and the house is an absolute mess.
And her values set my teeth on edge — she doesn't care about anything.’
It is not always the larger issues which make you doubt a guardian's suitability.
‘My two-year-old son would have to live with my partner's parents if we both died,’ says Ruth, who was brought up in foster homes and has no contact with her own parents.
‘On the surface, it is a good arrangement.
He'd want for nothing, and they worship him.
It just nags at me that  they're so old-fashioned.
Think of the poor little thing at school — he'd be laughed at for wearing grey flannel shorts and a Fair Isle pullover!
Their moral values are a bit intolerant, too.
I wouldn't want my son to lose touch with the notions of right and wrong that we are trying to give him.’
Anita echoes this: ‘As parents, we're trying hard to bring our three up decently, and the thought that my sister-in-law could chuck it all out of the window depresses the hell out of me.
So that's that — you don't get me off this earth until they are all well into middle-age.’
‘And to Cousin Flo, who I promised to mention in my will…
‘Hello, Flo’’
Even in their middle-age, however, Anita's children could have a deep interest in the terms of her will.
When adult children face the demise of parents, the fact that there is property to be handed on can cause all kinds of emotional complications.
For more manipulative members of the older generation, a will is much more than a simple legal document — it is a voice from beyond the grave, rewarding good children with the best spoons, and cutting the naughty ones off with a shilling
This is the stuff of the typical three-volume Victorian novel, in which the Reading of the Will is always a magnificent set piece.
In those good old days, people went out in style, using their wills as instruments of revenge.
Novels may have changed, but dropping hints about your will remains a sure-fire way to annoy your nearest and dearest.
For my late grandmother, this was nothing more than an amusing game.
Once she had accepted that she could not be buried in King Tut's pyramid with her possessions heaped around her, she positively relished broadcasting who was to get what ‘after I'm gone’.
Property is the muscle of the elderly, and you can't really blame them for flexing it occasionally.
However, where large amounts of money are at stake, the manipulation can be more serious.
Lizzie is divorced and bringing up her two children, aged seven and five, on a tight income.
Although her family is well-off, the purse-strings are firmly held by Lizzie's mother, now in her late 70s.
‘We quarrelled a lot when I was younger,’ Lizzie says, ‘because I would never follow her advice.
She has to be in control.
After my divorce, we seemed to get along better for a while.
I had no money, and she helped me over the worst times.
The trouble started when she began to talk about her will.
There's only me and my brother and, compared to me, he's absolutely loaded.
So Mum told me she was going to leave me a bit more than she had originally planned.
Great — I'm sure we'll be able to use it.
What I didn't realise was that she then felt she had a right to run my life.’
Lizzie has now reached the point of wondering whether any amount of future money is worth the aggravation.
‘Anything to do with the children is a battle.
My mother has fixed ideas about what I should be teaching them, what schools they should attend and the clothes they wear.
She treats them like a pair of toy dogs, throwing them little treats when they're good to make them more dependent on her.’
Growing up is hard to do, when the terms of your parents' will keeps you in a perpetual state of childhood.
As Lizzie says, ‘God knows, we're poor enough, but it would be a relief in a way to be certain that she had cut us out altogether.
Then I could just get on with living.’
Fortunately, for most of us, the business of dividing up an estate does not involve nearly as much emotional wear and tear, and material possessions are the last things on your mind when you lose someone you love.
However, the best reason for making a will is that it takes the practical burden from the shoulders of those you leave behind.
Maggie reckons her family should be help up as a warning to everyone who has never got round to it.
‘When my Dad died, the four of us realised, to our horror, that he hadn't left a will.
Selling the house and dividing the money was comparatively easy, but the pain of his death was sharpened because we started fighting over small things, like books and pictures.
Although nothing was especially valuable, we had all grown up in that house and these things had special associations.
It got rather nasty — at one point my sister and I were actually playing tug-of-war with a vase — and ended with us rowing about which of us was his favourite.
I'm only just getting the bad taste out of my mouth — I was ashamed of myself, and of us all.’
That was enough for me.
I may not have much to bequeath, but I cannot endure the thought of my loved ones squabbling over my best earrings.
So I went out and brought a will form.
‘I, Katharine Mary Fairchild, being of sound mind…
’ Well, I haven't got any further.
But it's a start.
The guide Making a Will Won't Kill You costs 60p plus sae from The Law Society Bookshop, 227 The Strand, London WC2 1BA .
FASHION
HOT SILKS
The newest silks vibrate with colour.
Contrast the shades for a positively brilliant impact
cool classics
Fluid knitwear in delicate sugar-almond colours of rose pink, yellow and ice blue
Do Gynaecologists THINK THEY'RE GOD?
Mostly male, they fiddle with all the bits that men don't have.
By Ginny Dougary
‘Because of her role in reproduction, woman is regarded as a special case, a deviation from the norm represented by the male…since the 19th century the science of gynaecology has legitimised this view .’
The Science of Woman by Ornella Moscucci (Cambridge University Press ,£35 ).
It's not every day that you come close to playing God.
A young woman is wheeled into the operating theatre for laparoscopy.
Her humanity is reduced to a pair of legs raised high and splayed apart, a soft stomach and the lips of a vagina coated in bright yellow cleaning solution.
‘She wants to get pregnant, does she?’ a masked technician asks the gynaecologist, who nods.
Green overalls are draped over her and a metal clamp is inserted into her vagina, followed by a telescope.
I peer into her womb.
There are bubbles, pink circles, clouds and vapours.
The swirling shapes remind me of those kitsch 1960s lamps.
An irrepressible thought surfaces  — I am unlikely ever to get quite this close to female genitalia again.
At the other end of the trolley, trying to avoid the patient's head (she is now like an object), we look down another microscope in to her stomach.
The verdict is immediate.
‘Bad news, her tubes are knackered.’
‘Is she young?’ someone asks.
‘She's 30 this year.
The only way she's going to get pregnant is through IVF [in-vitro fertilisation].
Her tubes are beyond repair.’
The female technicians look upset.
I look at the knackered tubes.
‘See,’ the gynaecologist says, ‘the ovary should be floating free but this one's banged up against the tube — it's so swollen.’
The woman is moved on to another bed.
Only her bare feet are exposed, which somehow underlines her vulnerability.
As they wheel her out of the theatre, she comes to and murmurs groggily, ‘Thank you so much for all your help.’
Michael Chapman, professor of obstetrics and gynaecology at Guy's Hospital, will deliver his findings to the patient.
Once she has digested the news that she is unable to conceive naturally, she will be offered IVF — with the caveat that the method has only around a 30% chance of success.
The way in which this is explained is important.
She feels terrible but, if the gynaecologist is at all high-handed, brusque or falsely cheerful, she is going to feel a lot worse.
The psychology of the patient is something that Michael Chapman thinks about a lot.
He takes the issue of communication seriously, unlike some of his colleagues.
There is something God-like about gynaecologists: they deliver life and they can take it away.
The consultants are often treated as masters of their universe.
In their non-obstetric role, they are expected to handle anything from hysterectomies to period pains.
As one health worker put it, ‘They fiddle with all the bits that men don't have.’
This fiddling can go straight to the heart of the way a woman feels about herself.
The patient in the operating theatre, naked, her legs parted, is a graphic reminder of female defencelessness.
A visit to a gynaecologist can be intimately intrusive — and not only physically.
Women with cervical problems, for example, are quizzed about their sexual history.
Unless the questioning is handled with great delicacy, it is all too easy for the patient to feel guilty: ‘I have only myself to blame for this condition.’
Most gynaecologists are men.
Last year's figures from the Royal College of Obstetricians showed that, of 918 consultants, just over 110 were women.
Women overtake men only in the part- time registrar posts.
The RCO held a conference to investigate why it is proving so difficult to recruit in this area.
The over- riding point was that there should be more part-time specialist posts because the anti-social hours are simply incompatible with family life.
Here are some horror stories — they may be all-too familiar.
Sally lost her baby pre-term and was told only a fortnight later, ‘Just get on with having the next one, dearie.’
Sarah's eminent gynaecologist tore up her birth plan and insisted on inducing her.
My own appointment to sort out persistent period pains ended abruptly when I was asked to point to my kidneys.
The great man congratulated me on knowing where they were.
It is hard to imagine a woman treating another woman in this way.
June Mcpherson, press officer for the Marie Stopes Clinic, says the clinic is often approached by women who are dissatisfied with their gynaecologists.
‘We are considered to be more sympathetic,’ she says.
‘The most persistent complaint is that woman are made to feel as though they're a number or the next case.
You're told to take off your clothes and put on a gown that doesn't fit at the back.
It isn't easy for a lot of women to display themselves in this way to someone.
It's a very personal area of the anatomy and the women need to be handled with care.
The other complaint is attitude: ‘We'll deal with this very quickly — you'll be a good, brave girl.’
Can you imagine a man with testicular cancer being told, ‘Don't worry, ducky, we'll soon have this sorted’?’
Linda Agran, a film executive, told me that she chose a female gynaecologist, Wendy Love, to do her hysterectomy because she believed in positive discrimination.
Love says that most women's reason for seeing her — apart from those who come on ethnic or religious grounds — is that they are more relaxed talking to another woman.
There is a sort of shorthand.
‘It can work the other way, too,’ she adds.
‘Some women prefer seeing make gynaecologists because they find them more authoritative.’
Michael Chapman is Guy's first professor of gynaecology, but his manner is more casual than authoritative.
One of his achievements since joining Guy's in 1985 has been to set up a full fertility unit.
His wife, Fiona, is its embryologist.
Ten minutes into the interview, the phone rings.
There is a problem with the egg collection so we set off immediately.
In the waiting room of the fertility unit, where I am dispatched, I notice the number of posters advertising counselling services and helplines for the infertile.
Chapman studied medicine in the late 1960s in Adelaide.
His first intention was to become a psychiatrist.
‘I didn't like the academia of being the physician and I thought that I was far too clumsy to be a surgeon,’ he says.
Then he discovered obstetrics.
‘For the first time, I started to take my course seriously.
Delivering babies was so exciting — seeing the joy of the parents and being part of it.’
Does he still find it exciting?
‘Sure I do.
Can you imagine what it feels like when someone has been infertile and you've helped them to have a baby?
To seek it happen is very moving.
Sometimes I get misty-eyed.’
His assistant told me that the most common complaint from patients was about poor communication on the labour ward.
What was Chapman's reaction to the criticism?
‘There are certainly doctors who are unsuited to being gynaecologists,’ he says, ‘but they have to be weeded out earlier on.
Yes, we have complaints about patronising attitudes, and I would have to say that there does  seem to be certain lack of insight.
When I explain what has caused offence, they just don't seem to see the problem.’
He has taken steps to alleviate the problem of attitude but it isn't always easy to strike the right balance.
The labour ward provides user-friendly notes for pregnant women, arising out of discussions with patients.
But, he says, ‘the more educated women complain that it's condescending when the notes translate ruptured membranes as broken waters.’
Yehudi Gordon
The most painful part of any obstetrician's job must be dealing with stillbirths and damaged babies.
Some doctors are so overwhelmed by their own emotions that they find it hard to handle the mother's.
‘I still get my medical students to listen to members of the Stillbirth Society who come to tell their stories.
What it gets across to the students is that they must deal with women appropriately, hugging them or holding them if it feels natural, rather than standing back and playing doctor.’
By now, I realise that Chapman is some of paragon; he likes women, he respects their opinions, he concerns himself with their needs and desires.
So I am startled by his abrupt shift of tone when we discuss women-led initiatives, such as the National Childbirth Trust.
Although he is supportive of the general trend of de-hospitalising labour wards in the NHS, he dislikes what he calls the evangelism of the active birth movement.
‘If you go to the NCT, you will be taught by women who have had either a wonderful of a nasty labour and who bring their experiences to the class,’ he says.
‘I can think of at least three professional women who are my patients and who don't want to near the ‘natural is wonderful’ message preached by the NCT.
They say, ‘I know it's going to be painful, I want an epidural.’
When women are told, ‘Just do your breathing and don't let those doctors interfere with you’, my experience is that they are very bitter when their labours don't turn out the way the NCT has predicted.’
In The Garden Hospital's active birth centre in North London, you can have a baby any way you want — low lighting, music, whirlpools, lotus position — as long as you've got the money to pay for it.
It costs around £2,000 — including consultant — for a birth.
The corridor walls are covered in photographs; barrel-bellied women with scrunched-up faces strain to deliver, post-birth beatific smiles radiate satisfaction.
There is a black and white sequence of an Indian dancer giving birth in water.
There is a beautiful poem written by a woman whose baby died.
And there are rather a lot of photographs of one particular consultant obstetrician gynaecologist, Yehudi Gordon.
Here he is jumping for joy.
There, as a mid-wife explains, he is standing on his head, whiling away the long hours of labour with yoga practice.
Michael Chapman
We sit in one of the slightly faded birthrooms.
Gordon looks exhausted.
He has spent the afternoon removing a uterus.
One of his specialities is minimal invasive surgery; executing the maximum work through the smallest incision.
Under the circumstances, he is remarkably civil in his response to questions such as, does your work affect the way you see women sexually?
‘Gynaecologists always get asked that,’ he says.
‘We're not washing machines, we can't switch ourselves off.’
What do you dream about?
‘It's far too stressful to tell you.’
And how do women affect your work?
‘Women have taught me a tremendous amount about emotions.
They've made me have more humility and compassion.
I'm much less aggressive, which isn't to say I don't have a strong ego…’
Gordon trained in South Africa and came to England in 1971.
He did research on the detection of foetal abnormalities at St Bartholomew's, then moved to the Royal Free Hospital and began his crusade to offer women a more holistic approach to giving birth.
This did not endear him to his colleagues: ‘At that time, women were automatically shaved, given enemas, had their membranes ruptured and were given foetal monitoring.
I said women should have a choice: the hospital said it had to have a policy.’
He resigned to join the private sector and says there was a massive demonstration of at least 5,000 women, marching in his favour, on London's Hampstead Heath.
So, I suggest, he was tapping into what women wanted — going with the flow.
‘No,’ he contradicts, ‘I was ahead of the flow.’
One of his innovations was setting up a group which meets on Wednesdays for a five-hour session of yoga, baby massage, lunch and discussion — attended by an assortment of pregnant women, new mothers, midwives and obstetricians.
It exemplifies his preferred touch/feel alternative approach to medicine.
Gordon's misgivings about conventional labour wards first surfaced when he was a medical student.
‘I found that delivering babies was exciting and a bit scary, but I noticed that the environment was not comfortable for women.
They never saw the same person twice, were frightened and worried about making fools of themselves or showing their ignorance.’
At the unit, Gordon has created an environment which is far removed from the sterility of those wards.
‘I have created somewhere which is soft and loving and lovely for the parents and baby.
It makes me feel pleased that I've achieved something in my chosen career.’
When I ask him how he feels he is viewed by the medical profession these days, he replies, ‘I used to be seen as someone who was totally way-out.
Now that the active birth thing has become more and more accepted, I'm seen as only marginally peripheral.
In the past, women patients were satisfied with accepting what was offered to them, but now they have started to take control.
That's what active birth is all about — women taking responsibility for themselves.’
Women taking responsibility for themselves; women taking control.
It sounds like good fighting talk but, beyond the active birth arena, I wonder how accurate a picture it represents.
I set out to get inside the heads of gynaecologists, but what remains in my head is the freeze-frame of that young women with her legs held apart, unconscious, still unaware of a verdict which is likely to affect her whole life.
The birth centre is moving from The Garden Hospital to the Hospital of St John and St Elizabeth, St John's Wood, London .
why women should wear the trousers
The freedom to dress as we choose is a symbol of women's liberation.
By Jessica Mann
I was wearing a trouser suit.
It was new, expensive and identical to the one that occupied a full page in the current Vogue , so I had spent the day at a crime fiction convention feeling more confident about my appearance than usual.
Afterwards, I went to a wine bar with a couple of other crime writers.
I had paid for but not sipped my drink when a heavy hand fell on my shoulder.
An affected young man with acne ordered me curtly to get out.
Did he think I was drunk already?
Did I look like a hooker on the trawl?
No.
‘We do not serve females wearing trousers,’ he said.
A lifetime's habit of apologising to the person who treads on one's toe is hard to break; and (in common with most middle- aged and middle-class women) I have hardly ever encountered overt hostility from strangers, and never been ‘chucked out’ before.
I forgot everything I ever knew about standing up for myself and, without argument, I slunk meekly into the night.
What should I have done?
Refuse to leave, said one feminist friend.
It's blatant sex discrimination, so sue, advised another.
‘You should have whipped off the trousers and said the jacket was a mini-dress,’ said literary agent Felicity Bryan, who remembers doing just that at the Tory Carlton Club 20 years ago.
But that was when women still expected to have to fight for their rights.
Those were the last days of that dying dinosaur, male supremacy.
Haven't we changed all that?
To everyone I know under the age of 35, it is prehistory.
But this disagreeable, though trivial, episode was a reminder that the price of freedom is eternal vigilance.
It is, after all, a short time since we accepted without question the assumption that used to underline all women's lives; that men had more rights than we did.
We had to placate them by appearing in what they thought was acceptable guise.
It never crossed my mind to wear ‘slacks’ at a university in the late 1950s, still less that a girl could go to one of the ancient Oxbridge men's colleges.
We did not consider having careers in the Stock Exchange or the City.
We never dreamed that women might be members of the judiciary of House of Lords.
We had the vote.
We had been admitted to my university, though only just; it was under ten years since Cambridge has allowed women to take degrees (and one don still addressed a hall full of students as ‘gentlemen’).
We could go out to work, although usually at lower salaries and with lower expectations than men.
But, wherever we went, whatever we did, we were accompanied by the innate, subconscious awareness that we were expected to be grateful.
We were trespassers on licence, receiving privileges, not exercising rights.
It took the women's movement to show how we had colluded in ignoring slights, insults and restraints.
But even after the Equal Opportunities and Sex Discrimination Acts of 1975, when the legal shackles were cast off, those who had grown up with them continued to tread carefully.
If is often said that as people get older they care less what other people think, but it has never been so true as in the last 25 years, when women who were brought up to propitiate the more powerful sex gradually realised that it was no longer necessary — or, at least, not always necessary — to do so.
A symbol of our liberation was the freedom to dress as we chose.
Trouser suits outraged convention when Courrèges introduced them in the 1960s.
I remember the shock-horror and accusations of non-femininity that my first one provoked when I wore it to push the pram up Edinburgh's steep streets in 1967.
Of course, they quickly became acceptable and then positively dowdy.
It must be a long time since anyone — except the most die-hard old buffer — can have thought them outrageous.
But, as  Alison Lurie observed in the Language of Clothes (Bloomsbury, £11.99), ‘The entire history of female fashion in this century can be viewed as a series of more or less successful campaigns to force, flatter or bribe women back into uncomfortable or awkward styles in order to handicap them in professional competition with men.’
She translates the implicit meaning of tight skirts and high heels as the exact equivalent of Chinese foot binding and the Nigerian custom of loading women's legs with pounds of brass wire.
All are designed to attract men and all represent men's desire to limit female mobility.
And, of course, ‘wearing the pants’ is, in western society, a symbolic expression of male authority.
No wonder male chauvinists want to reclaim the sole right to do so.
They did not push me out of their watering hole because I was unsuitably dressed, but because females are only admissible if they are willing to pose as deferential ‘little women’.
My experience, I later discovered, was not unique.
There were about one thousand people at the crime fiction convention; mostly American, female and in trousers.
‘You need a women's movement in your country, this wouldn't have happened to me back home,’ one said, more in surprise than in anger.
If she, and I, had been better informed, we would have known not to enter an establishment whose notoriously repulsive treatment of women is its chief attraction to its regular male customers.
The bouncer's glee, the masculine grunts in the background of ‘Quite right, too’, were a timely reminder of surviving and thriving misogyny, and of the petty power struggle it engenders.
The old, inimical Adam has been beaten back to such seedy redoubts.
We must make sure he has not recoiled only to spring out more strongly.
According to William Wordsworth, poetry is emotion recollected in tranquillity.
This prose is emotion recollected in what began as indignation and has ended as apprehension.
I am old enough to remember being an underdog.
I don't want another generation of females to grow up thinking that if they keeps their heads down, don't make waves and wear the uniform — if, in fact, they are good girls — then the boys might let them join their games.
And might even buy them a drink at the same bar afterwards.
It takes effort, courage and a sense of humour to love again after a certain age.
Jeannette Kupfermann asks…
are you ever too old to FALL IN LOVE?
Although I'm approaching 50, I'm not yet old enough to renounce the idea of love.
On the contrary, the older I get, the greater priority I give to a loving relationship.
And so, I imagine, do most women, even if they know that, often, love also means pain.
So why do I want to fall in love again?
An I such a glutton for punishment that I would take on romantic love rather than follow Germaine Greer's example and embrace ‘hagdom’, as she recommends in her new book The Change (Hamish Hamilton, £16.99), and with it, a loveless old age?
It's partly because of Ms Greer herself.
She pours withering scorn upon such ‘painted poupées’ as Joan Collins and Liz Taylor for the hours they devote to their images, as well as the men they choose as partners, but one look at the deep lines of bitterness etched into the faces of those women who renounce loving relationships in favour of cats, gardens or anything else tells me all I need to know.
For a start, older women in love look better; they don't seem to need HRT, they're sweeter tempered, happier and generally more generous to other women.
I know from my own mother, who found love at 73 and would make us all smile as, like any lovesick teenager, she held hands, blushed, giggled and danced with her new partner.
Her skin acquired a glow, there was a new light in her eyes and her mood of happiness was infectious.
Her new partner alleviated the terrible loneliness caused by my father's death after 50 years of marriage and literally gave her something to get up for in the morning, when planting tulips wouldn't have been enough.
Many other widows of a similar age, however, remain lonely and embittered, having lost all the shared intimacy in their lives.
And much as we can love our children, friends or pets, it cannot be compared to sharing intimacy with a lover, especially when you have been used to the sounds, smells and physical qualities that brings.
Intimacy means allowing one person to see you with all your defences down, stripped of any masks.
Sexual attraction is, of course, a large part of falling in love, yet sex alone does not guarantee intimacy.
It is that feeling of having been chosen, being special, that makes the falling-in-love period such a pleasurable one.
At this stage nothing about you is boring or mundane, he loves your silly mannerisms — even your flaws.
And you put up with his way of making decisions for you, even if, one day, you wake up and want to wear the green skirt he hates, watch Morse which he can't stand…
Individualism will gradually assert itself — which doesn't mean you've fallen out of love, merely out of that phase of romantic love we confuse with the more lasting thing.
My mother is now in the third year of her relationship.
It has, of course, gone through many changes and perhaps some would say it had become less romantic and more simple companionship.
The fact is, however, that it has helped both of them to survive difficult times: when he had a small operation, she was there; when she was ill, he carried up the trays.
It has enabled them both to do things, especially socially as a couple.
It has given my mother a complete raison d'être , since she wasn't of the generation that had careers or outside interests to involve themselves in.
It has also, strangely, given my mother a measure of freedom — the freedom through him to be the sort of  woman she had, perhaps, suppressed in a long marriage with four children.
I realised this the first time I saw her dressed up to go out — excited, nervous and yet so alive.
Often love is spoken of as a loss — of individuality, independence or space.
This is why so many women who have battled to ‘be their own person’ live in fear of falling in love and losing their individuality.
I have battled with the feeling myself.
What happens when ‘he’ moves in and I can't work at all hours, can't eat when I like, can't take a bath any time I like, when he insists that I visit his relatives?
What would happen if I loved him more than he loved me, and if he were to cheat on me one day?
Have you forgotten (the little voice keeps nagging me) those awful days of waiting by a phone for the call that never comes, the ignoble feelings of intense jealousy which accompany sexual passion, the hurt, the rows, the roller-coaster ride of emotions?
Have you forgotten how easy it is to delude yourself into believing you are in love?
How could I forget the days when I was in and out of love every five minutes?
It would only take a certain kind of eyelashes or a whiff of one particular aftershave and I would be sick with love.
My school grades would plummet, I'd become virtually anorexic and I'd take up the oddest hobbies to please my loved one.
Madness, of course, but then I met my husband.
Madness yet again, as he, a penniless artist 17 years my senior, proposed on our second date and I said yes!
Everyone said it wouldn't last six months.
It lasted almost 24 years until his death in 1987.
What had been wildly romantic to begin with turned into something else over the years, although I could always look at him and remember why I had been so stricken.
Romantic love gives us a glimmer of something that we remember during the sticky times, and it's only when the sticky times begin that real love starts to take over.
I have only one yardstick for a good, loving relationship: does it allow both people to grow and flourish?
I was fortunate enough to have such a relationship, which is probably why I cannot accept the idea of a future without love.
And I know many older women who have found the kind of partnership that adds to their life rather than subtracts from it.
Two such women have found it with younger men.
Bella is a well known artist in her 60s, her husband is almost 25 years younger, an actor and less successful, but together they are able to lead a very attractive life.
He is thoroughly domesticated and loves cooking elaborate meals for her when she is absorbed in her work.
She travels widely, but is always glad to return to him as her ‘anchor’.
Doreen is a great-grandmother in her late 70s who looks 20 years younger.
She is married for the second time to a man 15 years her junior.
Together they go dancing, and collect antiques.
She's noticeably more open-minded and lively than her daughter, who's divorced and living alone.
Doreen puts her youthful zest down to the fact that she met ‘the right man at the right time’.
Timing is of the essence, which is why so many youthful romances go awry; she is just getting somewhere with her career but he has already arrived and wants her to be there for him, or vice versa.
This is less likely to happen when we are older — not only have the hormones settled down, but we have moved beyond youthful ambitions and have time to cultivate a relationship, and actively seek love and companionship as a number one priority.
Of course, we can be alone and derive pleasure from it.
On a good day, it only takes a glimpse of blue sky or a tree in blossom to make me feel full of the joys of spring and in love with life.
But I also know that this feeling of buoyancy, energy or even ecstasy, although close to that of romantic love, is not the same thing.
I may have poured myself into my books, my home, my garden and my animals, but the loving feeling I have for them is not the same as a loving relationship, which goes beyond feeling into action and commitment.
Love makes you act in a certain way even — and this is the crunch — when you are not feeling very loving.
It also produces a reaction because you and the person you love are interdependent — I can love a painting, but it certainly can't love me back.
I understand the defensive reaction which makes someone say, ‘I'm finished with love.’
No-one likes to be tricked and love can so often be mere delusion — a trick of the hormones.
Is the price we pay for a few moments of Mills and Boon romance too high, leaving an aftermath of bitterness, boredom and let-down?
Why should we succumb to something that makes us lose our logic and turns our brains to marshmallow?
I still remember my headmaster's damning indictment: ‘Jeannette could be a Cambridge scholar if she were to stop this nonsense of falling in love.’
I dropped out of sixth form because of a young Frenchman with green eyes.
Two heartbroken months later, my headmaster refused to have me back and I was forced to study for A-levels at home.
I did make it to the LSE eventually and, a dozen love affairs and three broken engagements later, into marriage.
So why do I want to repeat these teenage agonies?
I don't think I do.
It's not that I'm totally assured that this time round I won't be quite so foolish, it's simply that I know it's possible to progress to that stage beyond ‘falling in love’— if I don't opt out as soon as he starts to look less like Prince Charming and more like Mr Very Ordinary and Boring.
I now know that it's not  what happens in the good times that counts, but how you survive the bad — disastrous holidays, financial crises, illnesses.
I also think that there isn't a woman alive who wouldn't like to have a companion to be there with a cup of tea when she's in bed with the flu and a high temperature, or holding her hand at the surgery when she's awaiting the result of a test.
And we know, too, that a loving partner can make the world of difference to the way we cope with stress, illness or even surgery.
The body does become less efficient as we grow older, and it's a comfort to have someone by our side who recognises this.
‘In sickness and in health’ takes on a new meaning.
It's not the young lovers I marvel at, but the older ones, such as one couple I see regularly.
She is severely disabled and he takes her everywhere.
I have even seen him at the hairdresser's, supporting her head as her hair is washed.
Without him, her life would be totally restricted.
Not that I'm suggesting that a partnership is an investment against the ills of old age, only that it can help smooth the way, comfort a little.
It takes so much more effort to entertain a loving relationship when one is older.
‘Who can be bothered?’
I hear again and again.
It takes not only effort but courage of another kind to love again after a certain age, when the body may be far from beautiful — and a sense of humour, too.
I know a 51-year-old women who'd embarked on a passionate affair with a 55-year-old, but was terrified of spending the night with him.
After protesting that she simply couldn't share her bed with anyone else, she admitted the real reason: she was ashamed to let him see that she had to get up to pee once or twice a night.
She was also scared to undress in front of him.
Many older women probably avoid relationships for similar reasons but, once they get over the inhibitions, it can be very reassuring to know that you are accepted, varicose veins, belly and all.
Without wishing to sound morbid, I have noticed that older women in partnerships express less fear of death, and I know many who discuss their ultimate demise openly.
Fear of dying alone is, of course, the most basic and primitive fear.
I heard an older couple joking about it: ‘I don't care what kind of burial I have,’ he said, ‘as long as I'm on top of her.’
Love gives our lives meaning.
I think of Victor Frankl's words, ‘The salvation of man is through love and in love.’
We are not, I feel, meant to be alone in life or in death.
Loneliness is the scourge of our age.
No wonder that we cheer when we see older generations giving it just one more go, not because they expect to hear bells ringing or lights flashing, but because they want to reach out and feel that reassuring touch or see that reaffirming glance which means they have an ally in the world who uniquely cares that they thrive.
Someone that means the world out there is not such a cold place after all.
We can exist and function well without love but, alone, we will never be put to the test, never be asked to grow in a certain way, never be stretched to the full.
I'm willing to pay the price for a love that brings out my hidden strengths, for without it I feel I will live a diminished existence, however problem-free.
After all, single, I don't even have to bother to make my bed…
SHE PROMOTION
join the great DASH DISCOVERY TRAIL for Birthright
Enjoy a fantastic day out on the Dash Discovery Trail
Join us for a fun day out on the Dash Discovery Trail on Sunday June 7 — and bring your family and friends!
Your challenge will be to solve the clues and uncover the mysteries of the Discovery Trail.
Your powers of detection will help us raise thousands of pounds for leading mother and baby charity, Birthright.
You can join the Trail in a park near you — there are 16 venues nationwide.
The winners from each regional Trail will go forward to take part in a special souvenir version of Channel Four's exciting adventure show,The Crystal Maze .
From there you could go on to be the lucky winner of a brand new limited edition Escort/Dash Cabriolet (worth £15,000 approx) and £1,000-worth of Dash leisurewear.
All finalists will be invited to a spectacular winners' reception in London in September.
All you have to do to take part in this competition is make a £5 donation to Birthright.
Take your first step to solving the mysteries of the Trail by filling in the form over the page.
The Trail Map will lead you to the nine mysterious clues which will help you solve the fascinating Dash Discovery Puzzle
The Dash Discovery Trail takes place on Sunday June 7.
Hidden along each Trail are nine mysterious clues.
What you have to do is find them — with the aid of your Trail Map — and solve the Dash Discovery puzzle.
You'll have a great day out — and remember that every penny raised will go to Birthright.
Birthright is a charity which funds research projects to improve the health of women and their babies, and is best known for its work on pregnancy and childbirth.
HRH the Princess of Wales has been the charity's Patron since 1984.
Dash , the company behind the event, is the leading UK leisurewear brand with over 200 retail outlets, and offers fashionable designs for a relaxed lifestyle for men and women.
The summer range of casual separates — with its emphasis on natural fabrics, colours and value for money — is the perfect choice for the Dash Discovery Test.
The Crystal Maze is one of Channel 4's consistently top-rated programmes.
It's best described as ‘an adventure show with a difference’— an exciting test of mental and physical agility for those who take part, recorded on the largest set ever constructed for a TV programme.
Although this special edition won't be broadcast, it will be covered by the cameras for a special video souvenir of what promises to be exciting and challenging day of adventures.
The winner's reception will take place in a top hotel in central London.
Dash will present the winner of The Crystal Maze with a car which has been specially designed for the busy Dash customer.
The 1.4Cfi Dash Cabriolet comes in unique two-tone metallic colours, and has a luxury interior.
How to enter
To follow the Dash Discovery Trail, you will need a Dash entry pack for each participant.
Just complete the entry form below and return it — together with your minimum donation of £5 per entry pack — to Birthright, to arrive by May 18, 1992.
You can enter as many people as you like, as long as your coupon is accompanied by a minimum donation of £5 per entry pack.
The Discovery Trails will be set up in parks in or near Birmingham, Bournemouth, Bristol, Cambridge, Cardiff, Edinburgh, Guildford, Glasgow, London, Maidstone, Manchester, Milton Keynes, Newcastle, Nottingham, Plymouth and York.
Make sure that you indicate your preferred Trail location on your entry form .
Confirmation of the exact Trail locations, an entry voucher and further details will be sent to you ten days before the event.
Your Trail will open at 11am on Sunday June 7 — and you can register to collect your Entry Pack any time between 11am and 3pm.
Your Trail will be about a mile long.
There will be no climbing or hill-walking involved and you'll only need about an hour to complete it and hand in your finished Puzzle.
Last entries must be received before 5pm on the day.
The judges' decision is final.
This competition is closed to employees of National Magazine Co Ltd and the sponsors.
Our aim
…is to raise £100,000 for Birthright — so we need you, your family and your friends on the Dash Discovery Trail on Sunday June 7.
Send your entries in now.
See you there!
Win the special edition of The Crystal Maze and you'll be presented with this unique 1.4Cfi Dash Cabriolet
SURVEY RESULTS
How to live with P.M.S.
Most of you suffer from it, but it doesn't have to ruin your life.
By Louise Pearce
The SHE/Seven Seas survey,Is PMS Your Problem ? sparked off a massive response.
Over 3,500 of you told us exactly how PMS affects every area of your life.
For example, 84% of you suffer from PMS every month, and about one in four suffers badly or very badly (a higher proportion of those with ‘very bad’ PMS also have children).
Seventy per cent state that their PMS has worsened as they have grown older — 84% of women with ‘very bad’ PMS have experienced this.
Those who suffer from PMS less frequently reported that it has got better with time.
Irritability, tension and depression rank as the most severe symptoms, and half admit to having more arguments at home during this time.
Other PMS-related symptoms include making impulsive purchases, an increase in sex drive and shouting at work colleagues!
Surprisingly, sore breasts, spots, bloatedness and food cravings — symptoms commonly associated with PMS — are not considered to be such severe problems.
Our survey proves that PMS is now a widely recognised condition, and 73% of you have understanding partners.
The more severe PMS, the more likely it is to be noticed — over 20% had their behaviour commented on by colleagues.
When it comes to taking time off for work, most of you feel unable to give a truthful reason to your employer, and the usual excuse is a stomach upset or migraine.
The younger you are, the more likely you are to tell the truth.
(Many of us take a few days off a year due to PMS, but about one in five women takes a fortnight or more).
What helps PMS?
Despite being largely sympathetic, few doctors provide constructive advice.
The treatment prescribed in may cases is either vitamin B6 or the contraceptive pill (only around 20% of respondents found either to be helpful).
Of the methods you have tried, exercise is the most effective — 30% find it helps — but none of the methods proves very successful if used in isolation.
However, recent studies in this country and abroad have revealed that the majority of women who combine exercise, dietary recommendations and supplements have found that their symptoms have either cleared up or considerably improved.
The reason for this, experts believe, is that the hormonal changes which occur before menstruation are the main cause of PMS.
Factors such as stress and a poor diet can affect these hormone levels, worsening the symptoms.
Diet
Try the following dietary changes for at least the two weeks before your period.
Reduce your intake of salt, sugar and junk foods — especially beneficial if you suffer from water retention.
Make a conscious effort to drink less tea and coffee — about one or two cups per day.
Substitute with herbal teas.
Eat plenty of green vegetables and salad leaves — both contain vitamins and minerals which help in the prevention of PMS.
Limit your intake of dairy products; they hinder the absorption of magnesium, which is often deficient in PMS sufferers.
Use pure vegetable oils, such as olive, sunflower or safflower seed oil.
Cut down on alcohol.
Eat plenty of wholefoods, such as wholemeal bread, rice and pasta, sugar-free cereals, porridge, nut pulses and seeds.
Exercise
Taking regular exercise throughout the month is of proven value in the treatment of PMS — particularly for those who have a sedentary job.
This is most probably due to the fact that any form of exercise reduces stress levels and also enhances your sense of well-being.
For optimum results:
Only embark on any new exercise programme when you are not premenstrual.
Vary what you do, so that you are more likely to stick to a regular programme.
Supplements
Evening primrose oil capsules taken with vitamin B6 or a multivitamin/mineral supplement (considered by some to be as beneficial as vitamin B6 alone) may also help alleviate PMS.
The dosage depends on how bad your symptoms are:
Severe PMS — two x 500mg evening primrose capsules per day throughout the month, and 50mg vitamin B6 or one multivitamin/mineral supplement.
Less severe symptoms — 2 x 250mg capsules every day, plus 50mg vitamin B6 or one multivitamin/mineral tablet.
Some women have found that they need to take evening primrose oil for only ten days before their period but, until your PMS eases, it is a good idea to take the capsules every day and then try cutting down to ten-14 days before your period.
If you decide to follow any of these suggestions, don't expect immediate results.
Allow three months to see if your symptoms improve and try keeping a diary to monitor your progress.
Further information
The Evening Primrose Office offers a diet plan for PMS sufferers (on request), plus general advice on evening primrose oil.
Tel: 071–498 8256.
Books which offer excellent diet plans include:Beat PMT Through Diet by Maryon Stewart (Ebury Press, £6.99),Premenstrual Syndrome by Jill Davies (Thorsons, £4.99).
General reading:Self-Help With PMS by Dr Michelle Harrison (Optima, £7.99).
Women's Nutritional Advisory Service, PO Box 268, Hove, East Sussex BN3 1RW — offers a two- or four-month postal advice service on diet, exercise and supplements (costing £48 and £86 respectively).
For more information, telephone: 0273 771336.
A PASSION FOR THE PAST
Restored to its original glory, a Cotswold country house makes a wonderful home.
By Jane Cumberbatch
Sally and Jake Colborne are passionate about old buildings, so they were undaunted by the huge amount of work needed to restore their handsome Cotswold country house to its former glory.
Having housed a wartime officers' mess and a succession of families, the house had undergone a motley array of alterations since it was remodelled in 1800 for a local mill owner.
Faced with ugly double glazing, acres of Artex, false ceilings and other ‘improvements’, they were determined to put back as many original features as possible.
‘We had builders here for six months before we moved in, and then lived with them for another year,’ says Sally, who was not only busy with their two young daughters, but was also running a full-time interior decoration business in Cirencester.
Drawing upon her team of specialist painters, upholsterers and curtain-makers, Sally masterminded the on-site operations, while Jake scoured auction sales for period furniture and fittings.
Sally has a relaxed approach to decoration.
‘I hate rigid schemes where you pick three colours,’ she explains.
‘I prefer to mix different textures and shades.’
Main picture: The elegant creamy yellow drawing room.
Above left: The 17th-century fireplace is a focal point in the sitting room.
Left: Sally, Jemma-Jane, ten, Abigail, 12.
Above: A dolls' house is stowed under the stairs.
Her formula is used throughout the house, which has a peaceful and informal country house ambience — particularly in the creamy yellow drawing room which is used only on high days and holidays.
Its elegant proportions are embellished with sweeping floral chintz curtains, and eclectic mixture of 18th- and 19th-century furniture and natural seagrass flooring.
For day-to-day living, the family gathers in the snug sitting room which was the original kitchen in the 17th-century core of the house.
Furnished with a squashy sofa, tartan throws and embroidered scatter cushions, this is where everybody sprawls in front of a blazing fire to watch TV.
In summer the family spills out on to an adjoining sun-trap patio.
Despite having an area of fitted kitchen with a speedy hi-tech   oven, Sally prefers to cook on an Aga in the breakfast room.
Sunday roasts are her speciality, with the whole family sitting around an old pine table.
Decorative touches include a shelf displaying collections of spongeware and pottery by Susie Cooper and Clarice Cliff.
On the floor there is attractive yet practical maple flooring.
Upstairs, the master bedroom has a magnificent four-poster, hung with Indian silk drapes and dressed with crisp white antique bedlinen.
The creamy bedroom carpet is echoed in the bathroom which has been furnished with some of the antique fixtures and fittings gleaned on Jake's auction tours.
It took four men to heave the huge Victorian cast-iron bath up the stairs.
Towels are kept warm on a 1930s' heated rail which was rescued from a hotel in Manchester, and Sally stores her cosmetics in an elegant Regency mirror-on-stand.
Below dado height, the soothing parchment-coloured walls have been marbled by a friend.
‘It was his first job and he locked himself away for the day with a feather and a bottle of wine,’ remembers Sally.
After giving up her interior decoration business two years ago, Sally threw herself into the couple's current venture, Harry Hares, a brasserie in Cirencester specialising in English food.
Because it's open seven days a week, the restaurant claims much of Sally's time, but whenever she has a chance, she goes riding with her daughters, Jemma-Jane, now ten, and Abigail, 12, around the leafy Cotswold lanes.
Sally cooks on a gleaming Aga in the breakfast room.
The bed is decorated with silk and antique bedlinen.
a happy HAVEN
A wild and neglected garden, lovingly brought back to life.
By Polly Bracken
It takes someone who is passionate about flowers and plants to choose a house because its garden is so special.
But one glance at the cascading wisteria blossom — never mind the rest of the promising, if overgrown, London garden — and Spanish translator Patricia Grillo was hooked.
‘I loved the garden the minute I saw it,’ says Argentinian- born Patricia, who confesses to having little technical knowledge and relies on advice from friends.
‘It was like an enchanted garden when we first saw it six years ago, very full and wild.
The old lady who lived here couldn't do much work, so she'd left the garden.
Although it was neglected, you could see signs of the initial planning, such as a rock garden which was completely overgrown.’
Main picture: the extravagant blooms of the ancient wisteria last for only three weeks, but their dazzling beauty compensates for their short life.
Right: Adding a pond brings wildlife to the garden.
Bottom: Patricia and Francesca weeding among the weigela and peony bushes.
Unlike most fiendishly keen gardeners who move to a new place, uproot the lot and instigate their ideas and favourite plants, Patricia held back.
‘We didn't do anything for a year to see what would come up, and we had constant, wonderful surprises.
There were beautiful wild flowers — I suppose some people call them weeds — such as yellow poppies, wild geraniums, forget-me- nots, campanulas and tiny wild violas springing up everywhere, as well as masses of snowdrops.’
And, of course, there was the wisteria.
‘I'm training it to grow along the kitchen wall, and the flowers already hang over the kitchen's picture window.
We wouldn't dream of going on holiday in May, when it flowers.
We appreciate every moment.
Most years it flowers again in July.
The flowers are not so profuse then, and the leaves tend to cover them, but it's still an extra treat.’
The mature weeping willow that dominates the garden is much appreciated by Patricia and the children, not least because Pablo and Francesca can swing from its   expansive branches.
Pablo's contribution to the garden is vital: ‘He cuts the tree's fringe,’ says Patricia.
‘Not short back and sides, but to just the right height so you can see the rest of the garden.’
The tree's large shadow and thirsty roots limit what can be grown in much of the garden.
‘Around the base of the tree I've planted cyclamen bulbs which look marvellous in spring, together with the snowdrops.
I've found that camellias, rhododendrons and azaleas do well in the shady conditions, but they need to be planted with lots of ericaceous around the roots.’
The curving pond, flanked with stunning peonies which were another legacy of the garden and thrive in London's clay-based soil, is an experiment, says Patricia, that she intends to improve on this summer.
‘I like it, and so do the frogs, but now I want a bigger one that doesn't have plastic edges, so the effect is completely natural.
My hope is to have fish that will reproduce but, so far, all that's happened is the neighbour's cat ate every last one.
Once a month, a gardener comes in to do the heavy work for me, and I hope he'll dig the new pond.
Last time I half dug it up myself and I thought my back was going to go.
I would spend all my time out there if I could.
There are drawbacks to the house and sometimes we think about moving again, but I know that I couldn't leave that garden.’
Above: The splendid weeping willow can be useful as well as decorative; Pablo, 14, and Francesca, eight, on the swing.
Far left: Patricia uses a pot of sugar-pink azaleas to complement the garden's perennial forget-me-nots.
The worn crazy paving provides a soft and very unobtrusive backdrop.
Left: The pretty wild rose Rosa rugosa has been in the garden for years, and has the bonus of glossy red hips in the autumn.
GREEN NOTES
pledge to save the planet
by Jonathon Porritt
‘This is one way in which each of us can make a difference now’
TREE OF LIFE
Pledging for the Planet
Some things are just too big to cope with.
There is a rather improbable story that, when Captain cook first sailed into Botany Bay, Australia, the size of his ship was so far beyond anything that the local aborigines had ever seen that they couldn't see it at all.
It was only when the intrepid explorers climbed into their rowing boats to come ashore that they really clocked what was going on.
By any standards, the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro (June 1–12) is big.
In fact, it's not just big, it's the biggest conference on environment and development ever held.
The biggest gathering or world leaders in one place at one time, and the biggest bonanza that the muggers of Rio de Janeiro will ever have experienced.
For an international movement that still rates ‘small is beautiful’ as one of the most glorious clichés of the 20th century, the Earth Summit is quite improbably big.
It has to be, of course.
When you're trying to wrap up international agreements on global warming and the protection of biodiversity, let alone to devise ‘an agenda for action’ for all countries to follow in the next century, things will inevitably escalate.
Where the Prime Minister of the UK goes, for instance, it would seem that at least 50 assorted helpers and hangers-on must go, too.
Add to them the cohorts of civil servants patiently drafting and redrafting sackfuls of international Green verbiage, and whole planeloads of whingeing journalists and television crews, and the whole shebang becomes so big as to overwhelm the senses of the vast majority of the aboriginal citizens of Planet Earth.
And that's regrettable, because the Earth Summit could have just as big an effect on us as Captain Cook did on Australia.
It's exactly 20 years since the first United National Conference on Environment and Development took place in Stockholm.
In the intervening two decades, it has gradually dawned on politicians that solutions to today's environmental problems have to worked out internationally.
A whole succession of international agreements have come into being since then, including the Montreal Protocol to phase out the manufacture and use of ozone-depleting chemicals (such as CFCs) and the Convention on the International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES), which has played a significant role in helping to protect some of the world's rarest flora and fauna.
But, once they have been signed by world leaders, it's still ordinary people who have to make these agreements stick.
It was consumers in the UK who forced manufacturers to stop using CFCs as propellants in their aerosols.
The Government did very little, other than wring its hands and shuffle the responsibility off on to somebody else.
It's all about partnership.
Politicians can't force people to adopt Green lifestyles, and people remain dependent on politicians to set the legislative pace.
That's the thinking that lies behind the huge number of initiatives being taken by environmental organisations as their contribution to the Earth Summit.
Outsize though the Earth Summit may be, we all have a role to play in its outcome.
Pledging for the Planet (see next page) is one way in which each of us can actually make a difference right now.
Pledges from around the world are being taken out to Rio de Janeiro (courtesy of British Airways) where they will be assembled into a symbolic Tree of Life at the heart of the Earth Summit's activities.
Real people making real pledges to make the real difference in their own lives.
Governments can be pretty blind.
Blind to the destructive changes going on around them, blind to some of the human costs of industrialised progress, blind to the suffering of other countries.
What's more, after years of growing awareness about the state of the Earth, it seems  to me that most governments are still blind to the readiness of their people to accept radical changes in the interests of their children and grandchildren.
We simply have to make ourselves more visible — and get as many leaves on the Tree of Life as we can.
Pledging for the planet: The Tree of Life project
The Tree of Life project has two simple objectives.
It encourages individuals to make a personal pledge to change their lives in a way that minimises their impact on the environment — each of the eight pledges shown here will make a real difference.
By taking part, individuals also put direct pressure on the Government to ensure that some real action is taken at the Earth Summit — politicians will only act when enough people demand that they do something.
The last four months have seen thousands of pledges raised from schools, local communities and trade unions, and from business, environment and development groups here in the UK and around the world.
The culmination of the whole initiative will the construction of the Tree of Life exhibition in Rio de Janeiro in June at the centre of the Earth Summit and in view of the world's press.
Hundreds of thousands of personal pledges received from countries all over the world will be attached to the Tree of Life as a powerful visual expression of the concern of individuals for the state of the Earth and their commitment to protect it.
How to make your own pledge for the planet
You can pledge to take on one or more of the actions listed.
The first six relate directly to the Earth Summit, the last two provide an opportunity for people to get more involved in practical initiatives and to help to raise more pledges for the Tree of Life within your local community.
When you have chosen your pledge or pledges, simply draw a large leaf shape on a plain postcard and write in block capitals, ‘I PLEDGE TO…’ and write in your pledge.
Add your name and town below the pledge and send it, first class, to: The Tree of Life Project, 30 Swinton Street, London WC1X 9NX.
We will take your pledge to the Earth Summit where it will be hung on the Tree of Life itself.
Pledge one: energy 
I pledge to use ten per cent less gas and/or electricity at home during the next year.
Pledge two: Third World debt 
I pledge to write to my bank manager urging the banks to write off debt owed by poorer countries.
Pledge three: transport 
I pledge to cut my car mileage by ten per cent during the next year.
I will walk, cycle or use public transport whenever possible.
Pledge four: recycling 
I pledge to recycle as much waste as possible at home and/or I pledge to help organise recycling at work or at school/college.
Pledge five: forests 
I pledge not to buy any products made from tropical hardwoods.
Pledge six: fair trade 
I pledge to try to buy products that are made without exploiting the people who produce them, or damaging the environment.
Pledge seven: acting locally 
I pledge to increase the amount of time or money I give to environmental and development organisations.
Pledge eight: spreading the message 
I personally will raise 20/50/100 pledge leaves for the Tree of Life in Brazil before June 1 1992.
Jonathon Porritt will present a new six-part series , How to Save the Earth,on Channel 4, starting on May 5 .
SHE PROMOTION
get your FATS right!
Lower fat alternatives to everyday foods allow you to cut down on fat without changing your diet or lifestyle
Experts agree that a varied diet is the key to great health, but it is also essential to monitor your fat intake.
Fats are very high in calories and so eating too many fat-rich foods could cause weight gain.
Too much fat can also mean you're not eating enough starch and fibre-rich foods, and this dietary imbalance may lead to a number of serious health problems.
With so many dietary information sources bombarding us with dos and don'ts, it's no wonder people get confused.
However, it is generally agreed that we should cut down on fat and ear more foods containing complex carbohydrates (starch and fibre-rich foods) and include lots of fresh vegetables, fruit and a sensible amount of protein.
Organising a change in diet can seem daunting, especially for working mothers who have little time to spend on complicated recipes.
However, by using low fat alternatives to full fat everyday foods, you can reduce fat without changing your normal diet and lifestyle.
With more and more low fat alternatives available in supermarkets, it's important to make the right choice.
Look for the Delight range of lower fat, great-tasting foods.
For example, Delight Extra Low spreads deliciously on fresh bread but contains only 20% fat, compared with 80% for butter or margarine and 40% for most low fat spreads.
Those with a sweet tooth will love Delight Vanilla & Strawberry and Vanilla & Chocolate ice cream, with a third less fat than normal ice cream.
With a little thought, you can maintain a low fat diet when entertaining.
The Delight range contains party favourites such as pâté (Brussels, Ardennes and Chicken), Sliced Meats and Fromage Frais.
Substitute cream in recipes with Delight Single Half Fat Alternative to Cream, and dress salads with Yogonaise, Delight's new low fat dressing — your guests will never know that the delicious food you're serving is also lower in fat.
Achieving a healthy diet is high on most people's list of priorities.
In order to help you do so, and to find out more about what aspects of nutrition are important to you.
Delight have set the following survey.
Please take the time to fill it in and return it to the address below by June 1 1992.
All answers will be kept in strict confidence.
The senders of the first three questionnaires pulled out of the postbag will each win a Delight personal diet analysis and healthy eating programme.
Watch out for the answers in October SHE.
1 What is your approach to nutrition?
a)
I eat what I like
b)
I always try to eat a balanced, healthy diet
c)
I eat what I like but diet occasionally
d)
I'm constantly dieting
2 Do you find it easy to accommodate healthier foods into your lifestyle?
a)
Yes — I find healthy food just as enjoyable
b)
No — I find it difficult to persuade my family to eat healthily
c)
No — I'm concerned that a healthier diet means sacrificing taste
d)
Other (please specify)
3 Do you buy more or less of the following than you did a year ago?
Less More
a)
Convenience meals e.g. chilled or frozen 
b)
Snack foods e.g. crisps, peanuts
c)
Sweets and confectionery
d)
Fresh vegetables and fruit
e)
Meat and poultry
f)
Cereals and pulses
g)
Rice, pasta, bread and potatoes
h)
Reduced sugar versions of preserves, desserts etc
i)
Low fat versions of foods such as cheese and ice cream
j)
Semi-skimmed, or skimmed milk
4 Do you actively try to avoid fat in your diet?
a)
Yes — I make a real effort to cut out high fat foods
b)
Yes — I eat low fat alternatives whenever I can
c)
No — I eat what I like
5 What percentage of energy from fat should your diet contain?
6 What are your biggest weaknesses when dieting
a)
Chocolate
b)
Chips
c)
Cakes
d)
Crisps
e)
Savoury food
f)
Ice cream
g)
Biscuits
h)
Fried food
i)
Cheese
j)
Other (please specify)
7 Which of the following contains the highest percentage of fat?
a)
Crisps
b)
Cheddar cheese
c)
Chocolate
Send your completed survey, together with a postcard with your name and address to SHE Promotions Department, 72 Broadwick Street, London W1V 2BP, by June 1, 1992.
the proud POTATO
Delicious ways to transform new potatoes from a side dish into the star turn.
By Clare Ferguson
Cara, Belle de Fontanay, Estima and Maris Bard: a line-up of silent movie belles?
No, they are some current stars of vegetable showbiz — new potatoes, one of summer's treats and every cook's delight.
New season's potatoes offer a promise of summer bounty, and it's fun to make them the focus of a feast, as in the following recipes.
These dishes merit being a course of their own, for their charms are worth savouring.
Cooked whole, with their skins pretty much intact, potatoes retain much of their vitamin value.
A daily 175g (6oz) portion is a vitamin C, iron and fibre booster.
Their B vitamins, potassium and other trace elements, starch and some protein are especially significant since we are more likely to eat potatoes each day than a kiwi fruit, a posy of parsley or a bunch of blackcurrants.
Well-cooked potatoes can play a practical part in effortless good health.
a 225g (8oz) portion, boiled, steamed or microwaved, contains only 160 calories.
Cook a potato decently and you conserve its flavour.
This way you are less likely to drown it in butter (though what more delicious accompaniment could there ever be?).
Main picture: Edible flowers make a feast of potatoes with an avocado-lime dressing.
Above: New potatoes in a creamy morel sauce.
Right: Knobbly, rosy, irregular — new potatoes come in every variety of shape and size.
Many ‘designer’ potatoes, elegant, expensive and almost extinct, have been reprieved by public interest and a certain novelty value.
Some varieties can look odd — knobbly, rosy and irregular — but most taste terrific; mellow, earthy, nutty with a waxy sweetness.
Clever cooks always respect and make full use of potato power.
Here are some helpful potato pointers:
Fresh is best.
‘From garden to table as quick as you're able’ is a vegetarian maxim for everyone.
‘Earlies’ are on sale mainly May to mid-August.
Second ‘earlies’, August to September.
A potato rack on a cool airy spot is ideal for storage.
Keep it dark; light turns potatoes green.
Avoid all green potatoes; these contain excessive solanine, which is toxic.
Chuck these.
Treat potatoes gently; bruises are ugly and show nutrient loss.
Wash or scrub rather than scrape or peel: skins seal in flavour and food value.
Why discard cooked potato skins when you pay extra for fibre in breakfast cereals?
Cook potatoes in already-boiling liquids; never keep cooked potatoes long and always fry at correct temperatures.
Even hopeless cooks find it hard to spoil new potatoes.
NEW WORLD POTATOES WITH AN AVOCADO-LIME DRESSING
Chilli and a guacamole-style sauce give a Central American savour to this summery dish.
Dressed up with an edible garnish of nasturtiums, pansies, borage and chive flowers, this lunch or supper recipe looks and tastes sensational, hot or cold.
The sauce stays bright for hours.
Serves 4 .
675f (1½lb) new potatoes
2 fresh red  chillis , lightly crushed salted boiling water
2 ripe Hass avocados
juice of 2 fresh limes
4 spring onions, sliced
4 tbs coriander, scissor-shaped
4 tbs mayonnaise
225g (8oz) tomatoes or cherry tomatoes
optional garnish: edible flowers such as nasturtium, pansy, borage and chive flowers
Cook the washed potatoes and whole  chillis in boiling salted water, covered, for 20–25 minutes or until tender.
While these cook, make the sauce.
Halve the avocados, discard the stones.
Scrape out the flesh with a teaspoon and put into a food processor or blender with the next four ingredients.
Whizz to a creamy green sauce.
Put tomato pieces or whole cherry tomatoes among the drained, hot potatoes on serving plates and spoon sauce prettily over each serving.
Decorate, if wished, with edible flowers and a crunchy lettuce heart salad.
GOURMET NEW POTATOES WITH MORELS
La Ratte potatoes served a voluptuous, creamy, mushroom-flavoured sauce, and surrounded by crisp-cooked mangetouts, make a sophisticated supper dish.
Serves 4 .
1kg (2.2 lbs)‘La Ratte’ new potatoes
150ml (¼ pint) flavourful white wine
300ml (½ pint) hot chicken stock
1 tsp sea salt flakes
225g (8oz) mangetout peas, trimmed
15g (½ oz) dried morel mushrooms
200ml (⅓ pint) hand-hot water
300ml (½ pint) single cream
Wash and halve the potatoes lengthwise.
Put the wine, stock and salt in a wide pan, add the potatoes (cut side down) and bring to the boil.
Cover and cook over gentle to moderate heat for 30–35 minutes or until the centres are tender but the potatoes still hold their shape.
Scatter the mangetouts over the top and cook for a further 1½ — 2 minutes or until brilliant green.
Drain, reserving any liquid, and keep warm in a heated serving dish until the sauce is made.
As the potatoes cook, soak the dried mushrooms in the hand- hot water for 10 minutes until they swell and soften.
To get rid of grit, strain them through kitchen paper in a sieve then pick mushrooms out individually.
Keep the soaking liquid.
Rinse the mushrooms again is more hot water.
Replace the mushrooms in the soaking liquid in a medium pan and cook for 15 minutes until near-tender and fragrant.
Reserve four of the best morels.
Add the cream, bring to the boil (without letting it boil over) and cook for 5–10 minutes or until the cream has reduced by a third.
Strain reserved potato liquid into the sauce.
Boil the sauce hard for a further 5 minutes.
Put the reserved morels in the dish with the potatoes and mangetouts.
Put eight to ten of the cooked potato pieces, chopped, into a food processor or blender, add a little of the mushroom-cream mixture and whizz to a paste.
Add remaining sauce and whizz until smooth.
Pour sauce over potatoes and morels inside their mangetout border.
PEPPERAMI NEW POTATOES WITH GARLIC CREAM
These tasty little snacks make brilliant finger foods or stylish not appetizers for a party.
Children will love them too.
To double the recipe, cook them in two pans.
Serves 4 .
675g (1½lb) or 20 medium sized (‘mids’) new potatoes
1 pack (5 ‘sticks’) pepperami sausage, quartered
1 large head of garlic (12–16 cloves)
2 tbs extra virgin olive oil
1 tsp sea salt flakes (optional)
Wash and dry the potatoes.
Using a grapefruit knife (or other slim-bladed, preferably serrated knife) push and twist a hole through each potato working crosswise.
Insert a pepperami portion into each.
Separate the garlic into cloves but leave each intact and unpeeled.
Heat the olive oil in a large heavy-based pan (about 30cm/12-inch diameter is best).
Arrange potatoes and garlic in one layer.
Cover (lid or foil), reduce heat to moderate and cook for 20–25 minutes, undisturbed, then turn browned potatoes and garlic over and cook the other side for a further 25 minutes or so.
The insides of the garlic turn to a purée when cooked.
To serve, squeeze some of mild-scented garlic insides over each potato, add salt if wished, and pop into your mouth while hot.
SPUDS ON STICKS
The easiest way to cook new potatoes — fun, too .
new potatoes, halved
good olive oil
wooded satay sticks or skewers
freshly ground salt, pepper and chopped herbs
Heat a ridged iron griddle or large iron pan until very hot.
Brush on some olive oil.
Push halved new potatoes, cut sides down, on to sticks and set on the hot surface.
Cook for 20 minutes then turn to cook the curved sides for a similar time.
Serve hot and very well seasoned as snacks or ideal children's party food.
MID-EASTERN CITRUS POTATOES
Baby new potatoes cooked in orange and lemon juice with cinnamon have a vivid Middle Eastern accent.
The low-fat sauce takes seconds to make and contains a fraction of the calories of butter.
A party piece!
Serves 4 .
675g (1½ lb) baby new potatoes
150ml (¼ pint) freshly squeezed orange juice
150ml (¼ pint) boiling water
juice of 1 lemon
1 cinnamon stick, broken into 4
½ tsp sea salt flakes
5 tbs low-fat fromage frais mixed red and green leafy salad (optional)
Wash potatoes and halve crosswise.
Put cut sides down with the juices, water, cinnamon and salt into an enamelled, medium sized flameproof casserole or non-stick saucepan.
Bring to the boil and simmer, covered, for 35–40 minutes or until potatoes are a tender pale orange.
Remove the potatoes with a slotted spoon, leaving the liquid behind.
Reduce this to two tablespoons by rapid boiling.
Stir this into the fromage frais and pour over the still-hot potatoes in their serving dish.
Serve hot, warm, cool or cold.
Accompaniments: grilled fish, chicken, lamb or veal with a cucumber and chive salad.
PATATES ANTINAKTES
This excellent recipe is adapted from Lindsey Bareham's book In Praise of the Potato (Grafton Books, £5.99 ).
This classic Greek dish can be served as a meze (starter) or an accompaniment to a main course.
Use Cypriot new potatoes — delicious!
Serves 4 .
675g (1½ lbs) new potatoes
6 tbs good olive oil
150ml (¼ pint) red wine
25g (1oz) chopped coriander roots and/or stalks, washed, trimmed and tied in a bunch
2 tsp coriander seeds, crushed
½ tsp sea salt flakes
to garnish: 25g (1oz) fresh coriander or flat parsley leaves, scissor-chopped
Wash and dry the potatoes in a cloth.
Give them, still covered by the cloth, repeated thumps with a heavy kitchen implement to crack them slightly.
Heat the oil in a large heavy- based pan about 30cm (12 inches) across.
Fry the potatoes, covered, for about 20 minutes on high, shaking the tightly covered pan frequently.
Once they are well browned, add the next four ingredients.
Cover again and cook gently for 15 minutes more.
Tip into a serving dish.
Remove the coriander stalks and serve hot, warm or cool, scattered with chopped herbs.
THYME-SCENTED NEW POTATOES-IN-A-BAG
Thyme, butter and onion add earthy sweetness to these little potatoes.
And there's no pot to wash.
Serves 4 .
25–40g (1 1¼oz) butter
40g (1½oz) bunch of fresh thyme
1–2 tsp sea salt flakes
Wash and dry the potatoes.
Pierce each once.
Pile them into a large-size clear roasting bag with the butter, thyme (leaves, stems and all) and salt.
Tie the bag at the top, leaving a tiny gap, and lie it flat on a baking sheet or roasting pan.
Bake in an oven preheated to 200°C (400°F, Gas Mark 6) for 50 minutes, or until patches of brown can be seen and the potatoes feel tender.
Shake out into a pretty bowl and serve hot.
ROSEMARY GEORGE'S WINE CHOICE
For a feast of potatoes, I offer a medley of Chardonnays, the most fashionable grape variety which makes delicious wines — not just in its native Burgundy, but in vineyards all over the world.
Chardonnay is an amazingly versatile grape variety.
Depending on how it is vinified and where it's grown, it can be rich, toasted and buttery, redolent of tropical fruit, or lean and grassy with lemony acidity.
My first example comes from Burgundy, and is labelled quite simply White Burgundy, with Chardonnay in small letters underneath.
for £4.95 at Gateway and Somerfield, this is a lightly buttery wine from the ripe 1990 vintage, with a hint of vanilla, oak and French elegance.
Examples of Chardonnay from the New World tend to be more opulent, such as Rosemount's Show Reserve Chardonnay, which is ripe and buttery, with full tropical fruit flavours.
Stockists include branches of Victoria Wine, Majestic, Oddbins, Waitrose, Threshers and Wine Rack (£7.25–£8.55).
For a lighter version, try the straight Rosemount Chardonnay, available from Fullers (£5.79), and all of the above for between £5.49 and £6.15.
Hill-Smith is South Australia is known above all for its white wines.
Its Old Triangle Chardonnay is elegantly fruity.
with good acidity so that it is not too blowsy, which can be a fault with some Australian Chardonnays.
Majestic is the principal stockist at £4.49 a bottle.
There are some wonderful Chardonnays from New Zealand, from producers such as Matua Valley, Morton Estate, Neudorf and Villa Maria, among others.
One that is tasting particularly well at the moment is 1989 Nobilo's Dixon Vineyard Reserve Chardonnay, which is available from Asda for £8.99, the Australian Wine Centre (£9.49) and Averys of Bristol (£9.26) which supplies by mail order (0272 214141).
With some rich, buttery fruit and great depth of flavour, it has the quality level of top-class Burgundy, at half the price.
Californian Chardonnays are becoming more elegant and stylish with every vintage.
One of the best for current drinking comes from Murphy Goode in the Alexander Valley.
The 1989 has a delicately leafy nose, with some elegant fruit.
Adnams of Southwold stocks it for £8.45 and also supplies by mail order (0502 724222).
FOOD NOTES
Tangy orange cake
Is there no end to the uses for olive oil?
It can also be used in cakes instead of the usual solid fats — as in this wonderful recipe for tangy orange cake (if you prefer, you could alternatively use soya, sunflower or any other vegetable oil).
Sift 175g (6oz) plain flour and 2 tsp baking powder into a large bowl.
Then stir in 125g (4oz) caster sugar and the grated zest of an organic or unwaxed orange.
In a separate bowl, mix the juice of the orange, 2 free-range egg yolks, 4 tbs olive oil and 6 tbs sweet dessert wine.
Add this mixture to the dry ingredients and beat well.
Whisk 2 egg whites until firm and fold into the mixture.
Pour into an oiled 20cm (8in) cake tin and bake at 180°C (350°F, Gas Mark 4) for 40 minutes, or until golden and well risen.
Glaze while warm by pricking the cake with a skewer and pouring over syrup made from 50g (2oz) sugar melted in the juice of one orange.
Leave cake in tin to cool.
Magic mushrooms
Ceps, morels and other wild fungi were previously only to be found in specialist shops during the picking season (from August to October).
Now Fungi Wild are available all year from Safeway and delicatessens.
Packed in handy 25g boxes with recipe cards, the dried mushrooms are sealed in a bag for freshness.
You only need about 4g per serving in a recipe.
The three varieties are ceps (or porcini), priced £3.20, morels (morchella) £6.45, and fairy ring (marasius oreades) £2.15.
They're wonderful in soups or sauces.
Healthy eating
Adopt the European habit of eating bread and croissants without spread.
Choose tarts rather than pies — tarts have only one layer of pastry.
Eat at least five portions of fruit and vegetables per day.
If you're extra hungry, fill up on rice, potatoes, pasta or vegetables.
If you like meat, eat it, but trim off all the fat before cooking.
Give kids fruit or a sandwich for a snack, not sweets and biscuits.
Eat sweet things only as part of a meal, then have something sweet once a day, then only on alternate days.
Setting targets for yourself works.
Bangers and mash is said to be the thing many newly converted vegetarians miss, but now they need pine no longer.
New tofu bangers from Cauldron Foods are sizzlingly succulent when grilled just like conventional sausages.
A box of eight sausages costs around £1.95, from food stores and health food shops.
Grown-up treats
Maxwell & Kennedy make chocolates for grown-ups.
There are over 100 mouth-watering varieties to choose from — buy one or as many as you like — for £23.93 a kilo.
From Maxwell & Kennedy stores in London, Glasgow, Edinburgh, Newcastle, York, or Cardiff, Bath and Lakeside, Essex.
We have 12 beautifully packaged 500g boxes, each worth £14.99, to give away to SHE readers.
Send your name and address on a postcard to Maxwell & Kennedy, SHE May Treats, PO Box 501, Leicester L99 0AB, to arrive by May 31.
Cooking in colour
Look and Cook has to be seen to be believed.
This series of cookbooks illustrates each stage of every recipe with attractive colour photographs that show you exactly what to do.
All the recipes are tried and tested under the supervision of Anne Willan, founder of the Ecole de Cuisine La Varenne in Paris.
The first three of the series are Perfect Pasta ,Classic Chicken Dishes and Chocolate Desserts (Dorling Kindersley , £10.99 each).
We have 20 copies of Perfect Pasta to give away.
Send your name and address on a postcard to Look and Cook, SHE May Treats, PO Box 501, Leicester L99 0AB, by May 31.
SHE PROMOTION
look alive!
If virtually fat-free yogurt sounds (and tastes) too good to be true, don't just take our word for it
Since the mid 1980s, increased public awareness of healthy eating has made many of us rethink our diets.
In 1985, to make things easier for health-conscious consumers, Tesco introduced, for the first time, information panels on its food packaging.
This was followed by the launch of Tesco's hugely successful Healthy Eating range, aimed at promoting a balanced diet.
The foods are prepared following the recommendations of various health bodies which are also endorsed by the Government.
The range now consists of over 150 products, all containing less fat, in particular saturated fat, less sugar and salt and, where possible, more fibre.
A new addition to Tesco's Healthy Eating range is Bio Yogurt.
Despite its very low fat content it tastes so deliciously creamy that you'll want to make it a daily part of your healthy eating plan — either as a topping to cereals and desserts or eaten on its own.
Its special ingredient is a new fat alternative made from natural ingredients, called Simplesse.
Developed by the company which made Nutrasweet a household name, Simplesse is produced from proteins found in milk and, although it's virtually fat free, it has all the texture and creaminess of fat.
During yogurt-making, cultures are added which give it its distinctive fresh taste.
But those that are added to Tesco Healthy Eating Bio Yogurt give it a special mild flavour — less acidic than some varieties.
Also, these cultures are almost identical to those found naturally in the stomach; medical evidence has suggested that they may aid digestion and also help protect against certain illnesses.
Suitable for vegetarians, Tesco Bio Yogurt comes in eight fruit flavours, in packs of eight and four, as well as natural.
For details of this product or Tesco Healthy Eating Lowest Ever 5% Fat Spread, also with Simplesse, call the Simplesse Information Centre on 071–636 3758.
HEALTHY LIVING TESCO  
SHE LOOKS GREAT!
Here comes summer — how to shed your winter make-up
New-wave hair
Curlers are back minus the hassle
Are you a beach belle or a beached whale?
Love the sun safely
Over a thousand free treats
Is it OK to go grey?
Three cheers for the unconventional beauty  
Now's the time to give your looks a spring clean and face the summer with confidence?
Our special supplement is packed with inspirational ideas for healthy and glamorous hair; tips on how to adapt your skincare and make-up to suit the season; and our essential guide to safe sunning for your and your children.
And what about our attitudes to beauty: will you go grey or would you rather dye?
Are our ideals of beauty changing?
And why are British women afraid of exposing themselves?
Plus we have over 1,000 pampering treats to give away.
Skin sense
You change your clothes for summer, but do you change your skincare and make-up?
With a little beauty know-how, you can look wonderful under the sun.
By Sarah Clarke
What do a heavy face cream and a woolly sweater have in common?
Both act as a barrier against the elements in winter, but are rather unsuitable choices for summer.
Just think about the ways in which your skin changes in warmer weather.
It's likely to be less dry, more oily, shiny and even blemish-prone.
Do you adapt your skincare routine accordingly?
The answer is probably no.
Most of us apply more or less the same old lotions, creams and make-up all year round through force of habit.
Yet skin is a functioning organ affected by environmental changes, and what we put on it in summer often hinders rather than helps.
Here's why:
In winter, skin has to contend with central heating and cold temperatures; conditions which can cause even the oiliest of skin types to become dehydrated.
Cleansing milks, moisturisers and creamy foundations all help to seal in moisture and to some extent will prevent this problem.
In summer, the story is different.
Warmer weather causes us to perspire more.
When perspiration mixes with oils on the surface of the skin, it forms an emulsion which acts as a natural moisturiser and protective barrier.
Plying this area with yet more oil, in the form of creamy cleansers and heavy moisturisers, will exacerbate the problem of excessive shine, and may also contribute to outbreaks of spots.
It makes good sense to switch over to a lighter routine, just as you adapt to the warm weather by wearing lighter fabrics.
We recommend cleansing in the morning with a facial was or bar — both refreshing but non-drying alternatives to tissue-off milks.
Lancaster and Neutrogena have a good choice in their ranges, whilst RoC's Compact Facial Cleanser (£10.25) and Christian Dior's Equité Gentle Cleansing Bar (£8.50) come packaged in their own travel-friendly dishes.
You can still use your creamy cleansing milk at night to remove make-up, but follow this with a facial wash or bar.
Both are more refreshing than a toner — and more effective methods of removing the last traces of make-up and oil.
Lighter looks
Summer make-up can cause a dilemma.
‘I always end up wearing the same old make-up, but just a little bit less of it,’ admitted one frustrated friend.
It can seem an impossible feat to look natural but not bare-faced, and made-up but not overdone in trying temperatures, but it can be achieved.
Vow to be more adventurous — put away your old faithfuls and follow out tips to create a flattering summer face:
Have you tried tinted moisturisers?
These brilliant products lightly even out skin tone and give a hint of healthy glow.
If you want slightly more coverage, simply mix with a little foundation between your fingertips, blend over your face and finish with a light dusting of translucent powder.
There are lots to choose from but we particularly like Christian Dior's new Tinted Cream (£16), Estée Lauder's Perfect Climate Sportswear Tint (£14.50), and Neutrogena's Sheer Tint Moisture SPF15 (£8.65).
Another alternative for a very natural look with no effort is Clinique's new Allover Face Lustre (£8), which gives skin radiance and can also be used to give a gleam to browbones and lips.
If you feel you need foundation, change to a light, matt formulation.
Choose a beige or biscuit shade and steer clear of anything too pinky, which will make you look flushed.
Remember, it is very important to try a new foundation on your jawline in daylight.
Our favourites include: Estée Lauder's Lucidity (£16.50), Chanel's Teint Pur Mat (£16) and Guerlain's Elysemat (£16.95).
Does your skin become excessively greasy and shiny in summer?
Then try Lancôme's Maquicontrole (£17), a new oil-free foundation.
Or invest in a foundation-and-powder compact which can be whizzed over the face first thing and used to touch up a shiny nose or chin during the day.
Kanebo's Bio Total Finish with UV Protection (£25.95) and Helena Rubinstein's new Luminescent Finish (£22) will both give you a beautifully smooth complexion.
We consider Givenchy's popular Sun Prism (£14.75) to be summer's most versatile make-up item: it is an all-over bronzing powder, eyeshadow and blusher in one.
Sweep a fat brush across the four earthy colours in the compact and across your cheeks, temples, browbones and eyelids for a golden glow.
Bright blusher looks far too blatant in summer, so avoid it like the beach on a bank holiday.
One attractive alternative to brushing bronzing powder on your cheeks is cream blusher: blend it in well with your fingertips over a base of tinted moisturiser, then dust any areas prone to shine with powder.
Try Colourings Cream Brush (£2.50) from The Body Shop.
Soft pinks and browns are the summery eyeshadow shades that suit every woman, regardless of colouring.
Creamy formulations do tend to crease more, so opt for matt powders.
You can't go wrong with Chanel's Marbre-Bronze duo (£17)— pinky peach paired with warm golden copper; Lancôme's new Ombre Subtile duo Cendre d'Or (£16)— terracotta and chocolate; or Rimmel Silks Shadow Trio Sandstones (£3.29)— earth, coral and soft chestnut.
Apply the palest colour over your eyelid up to the browbone, and use the darker colours for emphasis at the outside corners of your eyes.
Have your eyelashes dyed at a local beauty salon and then you can simply forget about them all summer.
If you like your lips to look nude, makeup artist Ya'nina suggests outlining them with a skin-toned pencil for definition and filling with Vaseline, balm or a lip gloss.
Lovers of more flamboyant lips should bear in mind the colours of the sun before applying cold pinks, purples and maroons: warm corals, peaches, reds and golden browns look glorious against a lightly tanned complexion — whether real or fake!
Summer moisturising
Top beauty therapist Janet Filderman, author of Perfect Skin (Vermilion, £8.99) recommends letting your own skin be the judge of whether or not you need a moisturiser — don't just apply it out of habit.
If going without completely leaves your skin feeling taut, at least swap your winter day cream for a lighter emulsion to help minimise shine.
Shop around for one which has the added bonus of sun filters for protection.
We recommend Elizabeth Arden's Immunage UV Defence Lotion (£26), Chanel's Hydra Système Emulsion (£25) or Neutrogena's Moisture SPF5 (£7.65).
If you have a combination skin, recognisable by an oily T-zone (forehead, nose and chin) and drier cheeks, apply moisturiser only where you need it (ie over the cheeks and up to the temples).
This is especially important if your skin is prone to breakouts in the T-zone.
Your make-up will help to protect this area from the sun and city grime.
Very oily skins will probably feel far more comfortable without moisturiser, but a light application of oil-free foundation will even out your skin tone and act as a protective barrier.
Or, if you prefer to go without foundation, try Clinique's new light City Block Oil-Free Daily Face Protector SPF13 (£9.50).
Whatever your skin type, it will benefit from forgoing moisturiser completely at night.
In the summer months, your skin simply doesn't need a ‘night’ cream.
SUN sense
To tan or not to tan, that is the burning question.
We have the answers.
By Louise Pearce
Who can deny that feeling of pure unadulterated pleasure as the sun hits your skin on a summer day?
Ask anyone who has a tan how they feel and they'll use words like attractive, confident and healthy.
Sunbathing is akin to smoking; the immediate psychological effects outweigh the long-term risks.
But while only a fool would argue that smoking is harmless, many people remain blissfully ignorant about the dangers of the sun.
If medical experts had their way, sunbathing would be banned altogether.
Over the last 15 years, hard-hitting facts have been unveiled about the detrimental effect of the sun on skin, and the warnings have become increasingly gloomy.
Somewhere in the middle of this dilemma are the sunscreen manufacturers with their high protection sunscreens — skin's saving grace.
Hackneyed it may sound, but sensible sunning with adequate protection is the only way to achieve a much desired tan with minimum risk to your skin.
But what constitutes safe tanning?
We've answered the questions that cause most confusion.
Q
Is it possible to return home with a tan after a fortnight's holiday, after using only high protection sunscreens?
Yes, it is, unless you have very fair skin which doesn't tan anyway (see following question).
High factor sunscreens are essential to prevent a typical British skin burning when first exposed to the sun.
Ideally, you should use factors 12 to 15 for the first few days, while your skin's natural defences are being activated (the body produces more pigment cells, or melanin, and skin begins to thicken, which can take up to 48 hours to start becoming effective).
Gradually drop to a factor 10 or 8 and then 6 as your tan develops throughout your holiday.
Never go lower than this.
There are plenty of lower protection sunscreens on the market, but dermatologists stress that these should be avoided in order to minimise the risk of skin cancer and ageing — regardless of natural skin colour.
Combine this advice with the ‘Golden rules of tanning’(see over) and you will achieve a lasting tan more safely.
It is far safer to tan slowly than to burn first.
Q
I have fair skin that burns very easily and barely tans.
Should I stay out of the sun?
Fair skin has little natural protection and is particularly susceptible to damage.
It's probably unrealistic to expect you to avoid the sun altogether on holiday, but you must use a sunscreen with a factor of at least 15 and not go any lower.
This doesn't mean you have to be pasty-white all summer.
Try applying a little self-tanning milk mixed with moisturiser to your face once a week until you achieve a natural colour.
Give your body a pre-holiday boost with Estée Lauder Self-Action Light Tanning Crème (£11) or Piz Buin Jet Bronzer Lotion (£7.50), both of which are ideal for fair skins.
Remember that fake tanning products don't protect your skin from the sun.
Q
Should I buy sunscreens which contain both UVA and UVB filters?
Until recently, UVB rays were thought to be the only ones which caused serious sun damage.
However, it is now known that UVA rays also have a profound effect.
UVB is responsible for burning, tanning and skin cancer.
New evidence also proves that it causes a chemical reaction in the skin, attacking and destroying collagen and elastin — which keep skin supple — and so hastening signs of ageing.
While UVA is about one-tenth as strong as UVB, it does appear to accentuate damage when it works with UVB.
It also penetrates more deeply into the skin than UVB, damaging the elastin fibres resulting in sagging and wrinkling.
What's more, UVA is solely responsible for polymorphic light eruption, known to most of us as prickly heat.
Until this year, there was no way of telling exactly how much UVA protection sunscreens gave.
Now Boots has introduced a standardised star system which appears on the back of all manufacturers' packs, and refers to UVA screening power.
Products are awarded between one and four stars, according to the effectiveness of the UVA filters they include, compared with their UVB filters.
For instance, if you pick up an SPF15 sun cream awarded four stars (the maximum rating), it means that the product filters out UVA and UVB equally, whereas an SPF15 cream with two stars means it filters UVA considerably less effectively than UVB.
It sounds confusing, but the way to choose your sun products is to select the appropriate factor first, then refer to the back of the pack to see how many stars it has been awarded.
For optimum safety, we recommend high factor numbers which have three or four stars.
Uvistat, Nivea, Soltan and Ambre Solaire all have a good selection of products which fit these criteria.
Q
I get prickly heat every time I go in the sun.
Is there anything I can do to prevent it without covering up completely?
Prickly heat is the term most people use for a medical condition called polymorphic light eruption (PMLE).
Contrary to popular belief it is triggered, not by heat, but purely by the sun's UVA rays.
It is estimated that as many as one in five people suffers from PMLE.
With more sunscreens now filtering out UVA, the condition should be easier to control.
We asked several sufferers to put sunscreen to the test.
Two testers rated Uvistat Factor 15 Cream (£7.29) very highly, claiming it prevented the problem completely.
Boots has given this product a rating of four stars, which means it filters out UVA and UVB equally.
Also recommended: Piz Buin Sun Allergy Lotion (£9.95) and Ambre Solaire High Protection Cream 25 (£7.59).
Q
I'm going on a sun and sand holiday in Greece for a week.
is there anything I can do to prepare my skin before I go, and is it realistic to expect to come with a tan?
The depth of colour you can expect to achieve in one week will depend on how dark your skin is naturally.
The darker you are, the more melanin your skin will produce.
Don't overdo it in the first few days.
Remember, it takes your skin between 24 and 48 hours to start producing melanin, which will not only give your skin colour but some natural protection, too.
You could have two or three sessions on a sunbed just before your holiday.
This may help to activate your skin's natural defences so that you have slightly more natural protection on the first few days of exposure.
However, we would never recommend using a sunbed on a regular basis (see next question).
A better option is to cheat altogether with the help of a fake tan.
A couple of applications of a self-tanning product, such as Clarins Self-Tanning Milk (£10.25), before you leave home will help you feel more confident about your skin colour, and so less likely to overdo it.
Q
Sunbeds have received a lot of bad publicity over the last years.
Are they safe?
Never use a sunbed on a regular basis, unless you are under medical supervision for a skin complaint.
Scientific studies carried out a few years ago revealed that regular sunbed users (those using a bed more than once a week over a period of a few years) now have a condition called skin fragility syndrome.
The UVA rays have broken down the elastin fibres, or support structure of the skin, resulting in severe premature skin ageing.
However, most experts agree that two or three sunbed sessions before your annual holiday in the sun cause negligible harm.
Q
I prefer to shield my face from the sun, but find that most sunblocks cause me to colour.
Is there a total sunblock which prevents tanning altogether?
We highly recommend RoC Maximum Protection Total Sunblock Cream (£6.29) and Uvistat Ultrablock Factor 30 (£6.59).
Both will prevent you from burning and tanning,provided they are reapplied on a regular basis.
All sunscreens work because they contain ingredients which either absorb or reflect UV rays before they harm and damage the skin.
The efficiency of these ingredients wears off over a period of time, and swimming, towel- drying and perspiration can speed up this process.
Experts advise that sunscreens should be reapplied on a hourly basis (a dollop of cream about the size of a grape is a good guideline for your face).
Q
How can I safely protect my young children's skin from the sun when on holiday?
A young child's skin is considerably thinner than that of an adult, allowing greater penetration of UV rays and increasing risks of long-term damage.
Young skin is less able naturally to protect itself as it contains less melanin and therefore has less tanning ability.
Studies indicate that the risk of developing skin cancer is significantly increased by excessive sun exposure during childhood.
It has been estimated that childhood protection from the sun ban reduce the risk of skin cancer in later life by 78%.
For these alarming reasons, it is important to pack plenty of hats and T-shirts for your kids.
These will prove especially useful if they refuse to stay in the shade between the hours of 11am and 2pm, when the sun is at its hottest.
Allow at least two large tubes of water-resistant cream for each child for a fortnight's holiday.
Reapply thickly every hour, or more frequently if they are in and out of the water.
We recommend Uvistat Babysun Factor 22 (£5.79) and Nivea Sun Block Cream (£4.49), from the Children and Babies range.
Small babies — under the age of six months — should be kept out of the sun altogether.
Q
I am dark haired and tan quite easily, but I also have a lot of moles and freckles.
Does this mean that I am more at risk of developing skin cancer?
You are not necessarily at any more risk of malignant melanoma than someone who has fewer moles.
However, it is important to keep a close eye on your skin to see if any moles change in size or shape, in which case you should seek medical advice.
Anyone who has skin which freckles easily should always use high factor sunscreens (don't drop below factor 8).
This is because freckled skin indicates a pigmentary imbalance, and the area of skin surrounding the freckles has less ability to protect itself.
The facts about skin cancer
It is alarming that one quarter of women in this country still lie in the sun without protecting their skin.
If you are among them, take heed of the latest warnings:
Incidences of sun-induced skin cancer — have doubled in the UK over the past five years.
Infrequent, careless bouts of sun exposure considerably increase the risk of developing skin cancer.
The most dangerous type of skin cancer — malignant melanoma — is the fastest growing form of cancer in women after lung cancer.
Even if we stopped using all CFCs today, depletion of the ozone layer — the earth's barrier against cancer-causing ultra violet radiation — would carry on at the same rate for the next 50 years.
It is estimated that the ozone layer over northern Europe will have been considerably damaged by the end of the century.
In short, this could mean that even more UV light will hot the earth's surface — in winter as well as summer — increasing the risk of skin cancer, sun rashes and premature skin ageing.
GOLDEN RULES OF TANNING
Adhere to a few simple sunning rules so you an enjoy the sun without sacrificing your skin.
A high factor sunscreen doesn't mean that you won't tan, it means you won't burn before you tan.
Make sure your sunscreen contains UVA and UVB filters.
We particularly recommend Uvistat's range.
Reapply sunscreens hourly and always after swimming or excessive perspiration.
Avoid the sun between 11am and 2pm, when the majority of damaging UVB rays hit the skin.
Arm yourself with more than just protection products if you are spending a day in the sun.
Hats and T-shirts are excellent sunscreens too.
Accept your skin type and don't overdo it in the sun.
If you have naturally fair skin, accept that you are only likely to achieve a light tan on a two-week holiday.
are you a BEACH BELLE or a beached whale?
Why British women live in fear of exposing themselves.
By Vanessa Feltz
Subjecting my stretchmarks to international scrutiny isn't my idea of relaxation.
Breastfeeding does perky things to some women's statistics, but it left mine looking like two well-past-their-sell-by-date helium balloons.
If I don't have ruinously expensive scaffolding sewn into my swimwear, I look like some kind of tribal illustration in The National Geographic .
Frankly, my usual braving-the-beach technique is to exude mystery beneath an extravagant sunhat, in the hope that my headgear will divert attention away from my cellulite.
Why is it that Europeans never quite fall victim to British women's curse — the puffy pear shape?
Eurowoman may have a baggy bottom, but she always manages to salvage it with a sensational pair of legs.
Her boobs may look like a couple of wrung-out teabags, but her granite stomach muscles somehow propel her into perfect proportion.
Just watch a Frenchwoman wiggle luxuriantly along the promenade and you see relaxed anticipation of a sensual beach banquet.
Then watch a British   woman shuffling self-consciously along the same promenade and you see ‘Christ, why the hell am I here?’ agonising embarrassment.
Maybe it's because we have a major problem with superfluous hair.
‘What, us?’
I hear you cry indignantly.
‘What about the Europeans and their ghastly matted armpits?’
‘Yes, us,’ I reply.
Eurowoman doesn't have a problem.
She's quite happy to look like a forest conservation area.
She genuinely considers protruding pubic tufts to be particularly fetching.
Even if she's afflicted with those dark curly sprouts which creep up from the bikini line, ultimately shrouding the bellybutton in a rich hirsute outcrop, she couldn't give a fried calamari.
British women, on the other hand, are intensely sensitive about potential danglers.
We think nothing of handing over enormous sums of money to be reduced to screaming and tearstained wrecks, as short-wave diathermy currents course down our follicles.
We spend hours locked in the en suite, frantically attempting to confine our pubes to strict isosceles triangles.
Not to mention tweezing, plucking and smearing on depilatories everywhere from big toes to kneecaps.
Show me a frowning British woman on a beach, and I'll show someone who's just spotted a mid-thigh clump the wax didn't reach.
The French, with their annoyingly effortless little chignons, imply that an immaculate beach coiffure is a cinch.
In full view and mirrorless, they give one deft twist, insert a couple of flamboyantly jewelled hairpins, pull out a few face-framing tendrils and recline.
Chic encapsulated.
Even encroaching black roots are miraculously translated by Ms France into two-tone glamour.
The Spanish, meanwhile, are dab hands with the pomade pot.
Slicked back severely from the face into glistening tails, unruffled by ocean breezes, Spanish hair is understated minimalism.
The Italians can't resist festooning their tawny highlights with an assortment of rainbow-hued scrunchies, slides and combs and, while the Germans still favour no-nonsense crops, they are so emphatically topless that no-one cares.
Only we British valiantly battle with elastic bands and hairgrips to control the frizzies.
We'd kill to have wash'n'wear hair, but we can't do a thing with our drooping rats' tails.
Have you ever wondered why, when all the lights fuse at your hotel, there's always a blushing British female, standing at the reception, clutching a burned-out hairdryer?
Let's face it, we don't trust the sun.
We've been brought up to know that it can't last and we're deeply suspicious of what we disdainfully see as decadent ‘beach bimbos’.
We Brits know that cardigans, leggings and anoraks are real clothes and cossies don't count as investment dressing.
British fashion slaves, who wouldn't venture into Waitrose without a tasteful mélange of Gaultier, Joseph and Alaïa (or nearest decent copies) clamped to their backs, still pack the floral swimsuit Mum bought them in 1976 for a Guide camp trip.
Playing Spot the Brit on the beach is a doddle.
We're all in regulation M&S, distinguished by sprightly squiggles.
Would we all trot out in uniform at  home?
No way!
But beachwear isn't our thing.
We thrive on layers; a cashmere scarf here, a brocade waistcoat there, a cotton skirt peeking from beneath a denim one.
Strip us of our protective coverings and we are sartorially lost.
That's why, no matter if the press trumpets, ‘Rebirth of the Bikini’ or ‘One-Piece is Back’, we always get it wrong.
Self-confident Ms Milan is thonging and saronging her sinewy path through the surf.
Ms Paris is gamine in leather cowboy boots, with her gold Lycra waist minuscule under a studded Sam Brown.
Ms Munich is lunging at the beach cricket ball in tiny leather-look bikini bottoms, par-baked nipples to the fore.
Even Ms Barcelona has a camellia blossom tucked behind her ear and a hand-crocheted shawl slung around her somewhat sturdy hips.
We are the ones miserably fiddling with our shell necklaces while we wait to turn from anaemic to lobster.
We're silently praying for the moment we can plead sunburn and hide all out mottled bits under the outsize bullfight T-shirt.
After all, for most of us, a holiday just isn't a holiday without a bout of prickly heat.
Accessories can make or break you.
You need just the right bag to transport your Sun Protection Factor 10 — a plastic one saying ‘Dan Air’ won't do.
The Italians excel in discovering the one bag to die for.
Naturally, even if you made sufficient headway with your phrase book to ask, they'd never dream of telling you where they got it.
It's also vital that your shades make the grade.
By the time Ray-Ban rip-offs have filtered through to the British high street, you can be sure our European sisters have moved on to something else.
Cover-ups also pose a hellish dilemma.
We'd dearly love to grab squares of iridescent fabric and twist them into fabulously flattering Jerry Hallesque wraps.
But we know that we'd make a frightful hash of it.
So we opt for the tried and tested T-shirt or, even worse, baggy shorts and a button-through overshirt.
Naturally, Eurowoman has harem pants in shot silk, edged in quilted material which matches her costume.
Italians sashay forth decked out in full-scale strapless ballgowns designed to complement their one-pieces.
The French, who wouldn't set foot on a plage without weighing themselves down with their entire jewellery collection, are good at finding tiny little shorts with nifty frou-frou tops.
Shoes, too, are bad news.
We know that high heels are a must if we don't want to look like bonsais — all those Miss UK contestants can't be wrong.
So we set off bravely in our four-inchers, risking life, limb and hoots of European laughter, while the Italians stride through the sunbeds in the ultimate pair of flat sandals.
Succumbing to the urge to generalise, envy seeping from every pore, I conclude that the gem-encrusted French are catastrophically overdressed, the bosom-thrusting Germans diabolically underdressed, the Italians too pedantically style-conscious and the Spaniards prone to BO.
Nevertheless, as I dab calamine on my spare tyres, I can't deny that this isn't my finest hour.
Here's to a browse through the winter knits, and the hope that global warming takes its time reaching the UK.
SHE PROMOTION
colour by numbers
In search of a golden tan?
With the help of Uvistat sunscreens you can achieve it more safely than ever
Most of us feel happier, healthier and more confident with a tan, according to a recent survey by Windsor Healthcare Limited, makers of the Uvistat range of sun protection products.
Its findings reveal that although we're aware that the sun causes skin cancer and premature wrinkling, more than half of those interviewed admitted that they will risk burning their skin to get a tan.
Some people don't believe that it's possible to tan in any other way, but provided you are sensible and use quality sunscreens, you can go brown more safely.
Get high
Many people mistakenly believe that using a sunscreen factor 6 or above will prevent tanning altogether.
High factor sunscreens won't stop you turning brown, but will prevent your skin from burning when first exposed to the sun, allowing it slowly to acclimatise and produce its own natural protection and colour.
Start your holiday with a factor 10 or 15 and, over a two-week period, gradually decrease to factor 6 or 8 as your tan develops.
Uvistat's range contains no products with a sun protection factor below 6, as dermatologists don't recommend them, regardless of how dark your skin is naturally.
The right balance
Most sunscreens give high protection against UVB sun rays (primarily responsible for burning), but not all brands provide high UVA screening as well(now known to cause skin sagging and wrinkles).
All Uvistat products screen both rays in near equal proportions and are hypo-allergenic, making them suitable even for sensitive skin.
Block out trouble spots
If you prefer not to tan your face at all, Uvistat Ultrablock 30 is ideal.
Use it on any sun-sensitive areas, such as ears or nose.
As with all sunscreens, it should be applied hourly.
Lips, which burn easily, need special help, too.
Uvistat Lipscreen factor 15 also guards against chapping and cold sores.
Respect your skin
Don't expect a deep tan if your skin is naturally fair.
Accept its limitations and remember that a tan acquired slowly and carefully will result in the best, and most lasting, colour for your skin.
To prolong your suntan use Uvistat Aftersun — a light silky lotion that is quickly absorbed into the skin, helping to rehydrate it and prevent peeling.
Sunproof your children
Young skin is not only thinner but also has fewer pigment cells and is less able to protect itself from the sun.
This is why Uvistat has developed extra protection products for children and toddlers.
Use these every time they go out in the sun and you'll help reduce the risk of serious skin damage later in life.
UVISTAT THE GENTLE ART OF SUN CONTROL
SPFs — safety in numbers
Contrary to popular belief, you can tan using medium to high protection factor sunscreens.
The Uvistat range, which is made a healthcare company, will help your skin to tan with minimum damage.
Tests prove that when it comes to shielding skin from harmful UVA and UVB rays, Uvistat's unique balance of filters gives superior protection.
All Uvistat products are hypoallergenic, lanolin-free and water-resistant, making them suitable for all skin types.
NEW waves
Whether it's long or short, you can add an unexpected twist to your hairstyle in next to no time
The shampoo and set is back in fashion, but with a 90s slant.
When a woman went into a hair salon 30-odd years ago, her hair was painstakingly rolled rigid with sticky spray to create a standard style which everyone wore, regardless of age.
Today, the story couldn't be more different — a head of curls is no hassle for anyone and there are lots of looks to choose from.
You don't need to have straight hair that touches your shoulders to make waves.
And you don't have to spend hours struggling with a awkward pins while you get hot over the collar.
Even the clumsiest hands can cope with the latest rollers, which — when combined with lightweight styling products — can add an unexpected twist to every head of hair.
Short hair is great for its wash-and-wear-ability, but the downfall is that you always feel you're stuck with the same old look.
Not true — with curlers to hand and just ten minutes to spare, any short style can be given a shot of glamour.
Try winding four or five large curlers into the crown to add height.
Longer hair, whether chin- or waist-length, can be softened and made to look more feminine — whether left loose or piled on top of your head.
And rollers will make fine hair look thicker instantly.
The final results will depend on the texture of your hair.
For example, stylist Errol Douglas, from Edmonds salon in London (tel: 071–589 5958), showed us how curlers set randomly in long, straight hair with no layers will create loose waves.
When Errol removed the rollers, he brushed the hair through to give a soft, natural-looking style that took his client by surprise — she hadn't realised how versatile her one-length hair could be!
Layered cuts, on the other hand, will come out curlier — the smaller the size of the rollers, the tighter the curls.
Even hair which is naturally curly can be transformed because rollers can help to make the existing curls more crisp and structured.
Tips for the perfect set
Whatever the length of your hair, it's best to put rollers in when hair is slightly damp after washing, rather than soaking wet.
You can also put them in dry hair, but we suggest that you lightly spritz all over with water first.
Don't try to cram too much hair around each roller.
Make sure that the ends of your hair are tucked neatly under the roller.
Once your rollers are in place, set with a light fixing spray for a long-lasting result that has shine without stickiness.
One of the best sprays on the market now is L'Oréal Tec Ni Pli Thermo-Fixing Spray (£4.99, from appointed salons only — tel: 071–937 5454 for your nearest stockist).
Over-the-counter alternatives are Trevor Sorbie's new Hot Shapes (£3.65), Laboratoires Garnier Grafic Spray Fixé (£2.69) and L'Oréal Studio Line Fixing Spritz (£2.69).
Your hair sets when it cools down — not when it's hot.
If you are using heated rollers, make sure they and your hair are completely cold before you remove them.
If using ordinary rollers, aid the process by switching your hairdryer on to the cold setting and whizz over hair for a few minutes before unwinding the rollers.
Gently massage your scalp after removing the rollers, working fingers through the hair to loosen the curls.
The more you brush your hair, the softer and more natural-looking the curls will be.
Before buying your own rollers, why not ask your hairdresser to show you how you could look.
Top London hairdresser Charles Worthington (tel: 071–831 5303) is suggesting setting to more and more clients who want a different look for special occasions.
Striking 60s-style make-up sets off waved short hair.
Start with a sheer base, such as Elizabeth Arden's Flawless Finish Liquid Makeup (£16.50).
Brush lids with Pink Sand from Clarins' Eye Colour Duo (£13.75), then define with black from Chanel's eyeliner compact, La Ligne De Chanel (£23).
Outline lips with Estée Lauder's Automatic Pencil for Lips in Clay (£13.50) and fill in with Ultima II's The Nakeds No 53 (£9).
Givenchy's Ivory Prism (£18.50) will give cheeks a barely-there glow.
When setting medium to long hair (left and above), start at the front: to get rid of flopping hair, wind away from the face, back towards the crown.
Elsewhere, attach rollers randomly, in any direction.
To create the look above, remove rollers and bend to tip head upside down.
Gently brush hair upwards and outwards from the nape of the neck, for fullness and swing.
Roll call!
If you struggled with rollers and gave them up as a bad job about ten years ago, you'll be surprised at the simplicity of the latest setting appliances.
We suggest cynics try L'Oréal Tec Ni Pli Velcro rollers — pinless wonders which grip hair on contact (around £4.50 for a set of six extra-large rollers, and around £7 for 12 — from appointed salons only.
Tel: 071–937 5454 for stockists).
The beauty of this system is that a stylist can show you how to set your hair before you buy.
If you prefer to use the heated variety, we were impressed with Carmen's new Set To Go rollers (£20.99 for 10), which have a speedy heat-up time of just five minutes.
And BaByliss has brought out Soft Curlers (around £27 for a set of 20), which have easy-to-use fasteners.
Give a sleek shoulder-length bob a new kick (far left).
Dampen ends slightly and wind around medium rollers.
After removal, accentuate with the help of a round bristle brush.
Left: This hair has long top layers and a slight natural wave, which has been emphasised with about 15 medium and large rollers.
Wind away from the face, remove, then gently scrunch hair with fingers and mousse.
TRANSFORMED!
With a good cut and a touch of colour, the finest of flyaway hair can look fantastic
Is your hair fine, flyaway and altogether frustrating?
Does it tend to look limp and lifeless no matter how much time you spend styling it.
Of all the hair problems we are asked about at SHE, the is no doubt that this is the most common.
‘The trouble with fine hair is that it is naturally wispy,’ says 32-year-old Aimee Blumson, who is photographed here.
‘I find it impossible to make my hair look neat and stylish for any length of time because it is so difficult to manage.
It just hangs!’
If this sounds familiar, then it's high time you took a fresh look at your hair.
Charles Worthington, who transformed Aimee's looks, stresses the importance of giving fine hair a definite shape and style.
A good cut can work wonders at creating the illusion of body and bounce.
‘Lots of women who have fine hair hanker after long, thick hair, so they grow it in the mistaken belief that the longer it gets, the more hair they have and the fuller it will look,’ explained Charles.
As he snipped several inches off the length of Aimee's hair, he pointed out why he encourages all his clients who have fine hair to keep it in a short style — or at least above their shoulders.
‘Longer hair tends to break up into stringy ends once it touches the shoulders.
All this does is accentuate its thinness and, if your hair is a light colour like Aimee's [left], you can actually see through it which makes it look even finer.’
Charles cut the hair up to the nape of the neck at the back, then graduated it into a flattering, face-framing bob.
Aimee was the first to agree that this short and quite blunt cut instantly gave her hair new movement and swing.
Charles pointed out that Aimee could consider going even shorter in the future to emphasise fully her delicate bone structure, a feature which her old hairstyle had failed to draw attention to because it had tended to drag her face downwards.
Colour is another important point to consider with fine hair, because it can greatly enhance its appearance.
Charles stressed that Aimee's hair would look especially striking if it was darkened and enriched to give the illusion of body.
Dark hair also reflects the light more.
He used L'Oréal's Diacolor in a rich but natural-looking burnished brown.
This colourant falls between a semi-permanent, which lasts for six to eight washes, and a permanent, which doesn't fade at all.
Diacolor lasts for about 15 to 20 washes, adding a healthy sheen as well as colour, which is beautifully illustrated by Aimee's hair (right).
Charles finished off by lightly blow-drying the hair, working with a large round bristle brush to turn the ends neatly under, giving a smoother finish.
The final result show conclusively how a good cut and clever use of colour can make fine hair look thick, lustrous and bouncy.
‘I never thought my hair could look so good,’ said a delighted, new-look Aimee.
‘I'm also pleased that I now have a style I can easily recreate at home.
There is nothing more frustrating than finding that you can't make your hair look the way it did when you left the salon.’
Louise Pearce
There are three branches of Charles Worthington's salon, Worthington's, in the central London area.
Tel: 071–831 5303 for further details .
Body-building
Any chemical process, such as a perm or colourant, swells each hair shaft, increasing body, so even a subtle colour change will make hair appear thicker.
Ask your hairdresser for advice or try a semi-permanent at home (see page 169).
Jetting, L'Oréal's unique perm, lifts the roots and so adds body without curl.
It's perfect for short, layered or medium-length hair and lasts for about six weeks.
For salons offering Jetting, tel: 071–937 5454.
Setting with rollers is excellent for thickening fine hair (pages 162–165).
Avoid conditioner on the root area, which weighs fine hair down.
Lightly comb through to the ends.
Scrunching is a simple and effective technique for adding volume to fine hair, giving you a different look at the same time.
Lightly dry washed hair using a diffuser attachment, then work a mousse through your roots to give height.
Finish drying with the diffuser, pushing it on to each section of hair so it almost touches the scalp.
Serums give shine and prevent static, but use sparingly.
Lightly coat your hands with one or two drops and smooth over your hair, before or after styling.
Get a boost!
Maximiser, a styling spray from The Philip Kingsley Trichological Clinic (tel: 071–629 4004 for mail order) is designed to make fine hair look fuller and stay that way!
Simply spray on to damp hair that has been lightly towel-dried and comb through.
We have 300 bottles of Maximiser (normally £3.75 each) to give away.
Send your name and address on a postcard to Maximiser Offer, SHE May Treats, PO Box 501, Leicester L99 0AB, by May 31.
don't tear your HAIR OUT!
Can't do a thing with it?
We have the answers to some of your most common hair problems
If your hair causes you no concern, count yourself lucky.
When we launched our Health and Beauty Club last year, we discovered that one in three members has a hair problem — and many simply didn't know what to do about it.
Here are some of the most common queries and out suggestions for helping your hair back to the very best of health and condition.
Q
I've had dandruff for some time and now my scalp has started to itch as well, but nothing seems to clear it up.
The outer layer of the skin (epidermis) is made up of cells which are shed over a cycle of 28 days.
When this process is accelerated, the result is dandruff.
This is characterised by a scaly and sometimes itchy scalp, but it shouldn't be red or sore.
Any visible signs of inflammation indicate a more serious scalp problem which needs special treatment (see below).
The causes of dandruff are not known, but many experts believe that stress plays a big part.
Bad diet, illness, harsh or incorrect use of hair products can exacerbate it.
Dirt and pollution can make the problem worse, so cleanse hair every day with a frequent-use shampoo (rinse hair thoroughly afterwards).
We recommend Neutrogena Shampoo (£2.85), Clinique Daily Wash Shampoo (£6.50) and Lancaster Extra Mild Shampoo (£7.50, tel: 0372 739596 for stockists).
Let your hair dry naturally instead of using a hairdryer.
Should the problem persist, find an effective anti-dandruff shampoo.
These contain ingredients which suppress the problem, and no one product works for everyone.
If you have used the standard anti-dandruff shampoos to no avail, try Neutrogena T-Gel Shampoo (£3.85) or L'Oréal Kérastase Spécifique Exfoliant Creme Hair Bath for dandruff (£5.45, from appointed salons).
Once the condition clears up, switch back to a mild shampoo.
If the dandruff is still apparent, seek the advice of your doctor or a trichologist (hair and scalp expert) who will prescribe a specific lotion or ointment to suppress the scaling.
These are more effective than shampoos because they are applied directly to the scalp and left on for longer.
Some experts believe that cutting down on dairy products may help.
Liz Earle's book Vital Oils (Ebury Press, £6.99) features a healthy eating plan which replaces saturated fats with pure, unprocessed oils — testers found their scalps became less flaky and, in some cases, dandruff cleared up.
Q
My scalp is red, inflamed and sore.
I assumed I was suffering from dandruff but it hasn't cleared up.
I'm worried that is could be something serious.
Many people wrongly diagnose a more serious scaling condition as dandruff, which doesn't cause redness.
Inflammation and soreness of the scalp indicate that you could have  seborrhoeic dermatitis or even psoriasis.
These problems can be hereditary and there is no doubt that they can be triggered or made considerably worse by stress.
Don't try to cure the flakiness yourself with an anti- dandruff shampoo — it requires a different treatment.
It is essential that you seek professional advice.
Your doctor can prescribe special shampoos and ointments which contain anti-inflammatory ingredients.
Alternatively, consult a trichologist who can provide scalp treatments and give general advice on diet and haircare.
If you prefer an alternative approach, some aromatherapists and reflexologists claim to have had good results.
Q
I have shoulder-length hair which is greasy at the roots, yet the ends are brittle and dry.
Should I use a shampoo for greasy or dry hair?
‘So many people come to our clinic complaining that they have greasy hair, when they are simply not washing it frequently enough,’ says trichologist Glenn Lyons.
He recommends shampooing hair at least twice a week, more often if it looks as if it needs it or you live in a city.
Instead of buying a shampoo for a specific hair type, use a mild, frequent-use product (see previous recommendations).
Massage shampoo well into the roots where grease accumulates and attracts dirt, and  let the lather work it own way outwards.
Massage conditioner into the ends of the hair and avoid the scalp and roots.
You may also find your hair benefits from an intensive re-moisturiser once a week.
We have found products from salons such as Redken, L'Oréal Kérastase and Wella System Professional to be effective.
Have your hair trimmed on a regular basis to keep dry ends at bay.
Q
Is there a cure for split ends?
I have tried endless products which claim to remedy this, but nothing has any effect.
The outer layer of each hair is made of overlapping cells (cuticles).
If these are damaged, the cells begin to separate and the surface of the hair becomes rough, dull and prone to tangles.
The ends may eventually fray and split into layers: split ends.
Once hair is split, the only cure is to have the ends cut off.
The cells are dead, so they lack the ability to repair themselves.
The products you use and the way you treat your hair will help prevent making the problem worse.
Don't rub hair with a towel after washing — blot and leave it to dry.
Conditioner helps to make split ends less noticeable because it  smooths the cuticles down and improves hair appearance.
Products designed to mend split ends work on a temporary basis by ‘ gluing ’ the ends together.
However, many new serums act as a protective barrier and seem to improve hair suppleness, too.
Our tester was impressed with Wella System Professional Dry Ends Synergeticum (around £6.95, salons only — tel: 0256 20202).
Q
I have pale, mousy hair that is dull and lacks shine.
What can I do to improve its lifeless appearance?
It's important to choose the right products for your hair.
Some people find their hair looks better if they change their shampoo regularly because using one product can cause a build-up of residue, as dies using too many styling products.
A good cut will remove the need for lots of products to keep your hair in shape.
Also, hairdresser Charles Worthington recommends colouring to boost dull hair, ‘but this needn't mean drastic change, just enhancement.’
Semi-permanents and colour rinses are best at adding subtle colour and shine, and they are easy to use at home.
We recommend Wella Colour Confidence Wash Out Colour (£2.49) and J F Lazartigue's new Colour Reflecting Hair Conditioners (£16 — tel: 071–629 6487 for mail order).
Ask your hairdresser about tinted lights, which add warmth and depth.
Q
I have long, naturally curly hair which always seems to be dry and often goes frizzy.
How can I prevent this?
This type of hair tends to be naturally dry and prone to breakage, so it requires special care.
When washing your hair, work a blob of shampoo about the size of a ten pence piece into the roots, and let the lather work its way through to the ends.
Apply conditioner from mid-length to the ends of your hair every time you wash it.
You could coat the ends with a leave-in conditioner afterwards, such as Vitapoint (89p) or Alberto Pure and Clear Leave In Conditioner (£2.19).
And give your hair a weekly intensive conditioning treatment.
If you like styling products, we recommend using a gel when your hair is wet because the moisture in your hair will dilute it.
Gel is less sticky than mousse and works better with curly hair.
Serums are another good styling aid, helping to make frizzy hair smooth and more manageable.
We recommend John Frieda's Restructuring Serum (£5.99).
Work six or seven drops through your hair before or after drying.
When drying hair, use a diffuser with prongs to give volume and height without frizz.
Use the hairdryer on its lowest speed.
Don't overhandle or brush your hair.
Instead, massage the roots with your fingers to encourage volume.
Every two months or so, have half an inch trimmed off to get rid of dryness.
Further information
We recommend the Philip Kingsley Trichological Clinic in London (071–629 4004) for consultations, treatments, products and mail order.
Or send an sae to the Institute of Trichologists, 228 Stockwell Road, London SW9 to find a trichologist near you.
Write to the Register of Qualified Aromatherapists, 152c Tufnell Park Road, London N7 0DZ, with sae, to find a local aromatherapist.
The Institute for Complementary Medicine will provide a list of qualified reflexologists.
Write to them at PO Box 194, London SE16 1QZ, enclosing three first-class stamps.
three cheers for the UNCONVENTIONAL BEAUTY
Women are looking to a new generation of gutsy, sexy heroines.
By Trudy Culross
If every picture tells a story, movies tell the most powerful stories of all.
And what millions of us watch on the big screen can influence whole areas of our lives — from our kitchen design, our holiday destination, our fantasy men, to what we eat and wear and how we'd like to look.
Above: Truly attractive Juliet Stevenson.
Below: Spain's Rossy de Palma.
The power of celluloid is so seductive that we're often unaware of how all-pervasive — and persuasive — its message can be.
Yet there are few who didn't recoil from the chill of The Silence of the Lambs or feel a sense of bleakness as JFK unfurled its theories.
And how many men staggered out of Fatal Attraction swearing they'd never dare flirt with a woman again?
Throughout its short history, the world of movies has started movements, set trends, created myths, subverted truths, woven imagery and given birth to icons — and none of it has done much good for women.
Instead we've spent the last 60 or so years trying to live up the likes of Jean Harlow, Marilyn Monroe and Grace Kelly.
Always boobs have been big business, blondes have had more fun, ‘sexuality’ has been top of the agenda and brains have been a distinct disadvantage, as we have tried to emulate the qualities of the famous beauties our men salivate over.
Until recently, that is, when something started stirring down on the movie lot.
And women who, while not exactly ugly, were certainly not beautiful in the Hollywood sense, began to fill the screens and put record numbers of bums on seats.
Ellen Barkin (small of eye and thin of lip), Jamie Lee Curtis (bright-eyed but androgynous), Anjelica Huston (body to die for — unforgiving face), Bette Midler (where do I begin?) uncurled themselves across screens from LA to Llandudno, playing women who were as sexy and salacious as they were ballsy and bloody-minded.
And even as they fouled up long-held theories on what was sexy, they gave a whole new dimension to perceptions of ‘womanhood’.
So what's happening?
Has Hollywood scraped the barrel for bimbos?
Is the male notion of what is sexy changing?
Or is it women who are calling the shots — weary of living up to men's fantasies, preferring instead to watch actresses they can identify with, both physically and emotionally?
Derek Malcolm,The Guardian 's film critic, agrees that there has been a gradual shift in perception and suggests it began as movie moguls realised women were no longer being ‘taken’ to the movies by their menfolk, hot on the trail of Rambo .
Instead they were movie-choosing for themselves; turning up in droves to see films which   were long on emotional content, romance and humour, and short on blood and guts.
Right: the healthy, androgynous sexuality of Jamie Lee Curtis.
Above: Dangerous to liaise with — Glenn Close.
Above left: Lauren Hutton broke the model mould.
Left: The raw strength of Anjelica Huston.
Ali MacGraw set the ball rolling with Love Story ; Shirley MacLaine examined sex after 40 and death at any age in Terms of Endearment ; Bette Midler proved you could hate and loathe your best friend in Beaches ; and Juliet Stevenson screamed the fury of love lost — and the disappointment of love regained — in Truly, Madly, Deeply .
In between were dozens of movies whose heroines were all the things the rest of us knew we could be, given the time and the place.
Possibly cunning, devious and vengeful like Glenn Close, or vulnerable and smutty like Bette.
We knew we had Roseanne Barr's capacity to be fat and sexy and, on a bad day, any one of us could be Grace Jones —Terminator 3?
We identified with all of these women, because none of them had anything to do with Being Beautiful.
To be fair, there has also been something of a shift in the male mindset.
The generation which designed cantilevered structures for Jane Russell, had Marilyn looking permanently over-ripe and arranged a sexual encounter between Jane Fonda and machinery, has given way to a society which is hooked on fitness.
Barry Norman, who previews around 250 films a year, puts it down to fashion.
‘Let's face it, women in Rubens paintings are fat.
And if Marilyn Monroe wanted to be movies today, she'd have to go on serious diet first.
Now men seem to like the look of long, lean, coltish women and it's probably inevitable, given our fixation with diet and fitness.
‘I also think men are fascinated by strong women.
They're frightened of women at the best of times and strong women scare them even more.
They like to watch a tough woman up there on the screen and comfort themselves with the thought that they'll never have to live with her.’
Anyone in doubt might care to recall Dudley Moore whimpering with lust in the shadow of the Amazonian Bo Derek in ‘10 ’ or Jack Nicholson being subjugated by the sheer presence of Angelica Huston in Prizzi's Honor .
Or try Al Pacino being seduced against his better judgment by Ellen Barkin, whose weird appearance more than matched the suspect character she played in Sea of Love .
Strong women, scary women, physically big — but beautiful?
I don't think so.
Even when you look at the outer end of the physical spectrum, there are hopeful signs.
That you could make it in the movies with no boobs to speak of was, until recently, an alien notion.
But Sigourney Weaver managed it.
And Mia Farrow's career took off the moment she swam into Woody Allen's myopia.
Sondra Locke never would have made a Forces' pin-up but that didn't deter Clint Eastwood from turning her into a star with lotsa spunk — and they were off-screen lovers — although he could have had his pick of ‘beautiful broads’.
Derek Malcolm might have a point when he says that our idea of ‘glamour’ has also changed — making it possible for the 90s woman in the street to look glamorous, too.
When Ginger Rogers swept around in yards of chiffon, spangles and ostrich feathers, Audrey Hepburn looked like a walking wedding cake in My Fair Lady and Liz was practically gold-plated in Cleopatra , it was well-nigh impossible for the rest of us to copy the look.
Top left: Helen Mirren has grown into her looks.
Top right: Gutsy Glenda Jackson.
Above left: The decidedly off-beat Laura Dern.
Above centre: Enigmatic Paloma Picasso.
Above right: The bewitching beauty of Grace Jones.
All that was changing when Diane Keaton appeared in Annie Hall , looking no more than passably pleasant and sporting the sort of garb you could find in any Oxfam shop.
Suddenly Britain's high streets were awash with women wearing baggy, belted cords, lace-up brogues, men's sports jackets and stripy ties.
The battered fedora was optional but the straight brown bob and the invisible make-up were de rigueur .
Result?
Most of us had the satisfaction of looking just as good as — and in some cases, a damn sight better than — one of the hottest Hollywood properties around.
Of course, a woman's woman doesn't have to be plain or even just averagely attractive.
We can live with them being gorgeous, as long as they don't get too full of themselves.
Julia Roberts' beauty didn't stop Pretty Woman becoming a smash at the box office.
And it was women who sang its praises.
Why?
Because she played a character we liked.
A gutsy but vulnerable underdog who swiped the prince and was still one of us at the end of it.
Admittedly, it probably helped that in real life, she came a cropper over Keifer.
Because a failed relationship is a great leveller — a universal experience.
And it helps to know it happens to beautiful women, too.
One way or another, these women have all done their bit to change the movie-going world's notion of what is female and fanciable.
And if my theory about the power of celluloid is true, it follows that what's real in the movies today will be real for the rest of us tomorrow.
is it OK to GO GREY?
When the signs of ageing come too soon, you must decide whether to make do or dye.
By Anna Quindlen
In the beginning you pull them out.
And then the day arrives when there are too many to pull out any longer, when they gleam bright in one corner of your fringe, when they are stippled throughout the longer strands, when your hairdresser lifts your hair and says, ‘Hmmm’.
And that is the moment when you begin to decide what you are going to do about going grey.
I know that for millions of women it must be an easy, painless decision.
For me it has become almost comically prolonged, because it seems to have very little to with the colour of my hair.
It is as much about who I am as it is about how I look, and about how difficult it is for women to separate the two.
I have never been the kind of person who can dismiss physical appearance, who passes a make-up counter without a glance.
Those women who can, I assume, go grey without regret.
Neither have I been someone who devotes an enormous amount of time to the care of my own face and figure.
I am vain enough to want to look good, but not to style my hair and paint my toenails.
The women who do, I suspect, may never see those first grey hairs at all; they've been highlighting for so long that the colour of their hair has always been a matter of choice.
It's become a truism that we despise ageing in this culture, and I see few signs of that abating.
People still think the greatest compliment they can pay you is to say that you look younger than your age.
I turn 40 this year, not an inconsequential fact in this discussion.
‘Ah,’ said my hairdresser.
‘Forty.
You'll dye it then.’
If the term ‘middle age’ has any meaning for me at all, it is in the adjective.
I am in the middle now, too old to have hair that remains an unadulterated chestnut, too young to feel entirely comfortable with going grey.
I know that, aesthetically, the results of colouring my hair might be an improvement.
But that's beside the point.
The question is not whether my face or hair would look good or better.
It's just that I feel that colouring to cover the grey belies the steady progression of life and the honourable nature of growing older.
That sounds lovely, doesn't it?
If only that was what I felt when I looked in the mirror, instead of anxiety over these little springs of steel.
I know, too, that my hair might look great if I left it alone.
There are women who have silver hair to die for, great metallic masses of it.
But so far I'm going grey like a house that needs painting: slowly and streakily.
And is it some cosmic joke that the texture of grey hair so completely different from the texture of the rest, so that each one stands out from your head like a bolt of lighting?
‘I didn't look quite so much like myself any more,’ one of my closest friends told me about her decision to colour her grey.
‘I felt as if I was beginning to fade.’
That description captures perfectly the feeling of being invisible and diminished that is our worst fear about ageing.
But it also suggests that we have only one self-image: a portrait of the woman as a young person.
I suspect that there is another self, possibly a better, richer, more complicated one.
But, like my ignorance about how I will look completely grey, I am unsure of the stages I will go through to reach her.
And, let's be frank, I fear the diminished sexual allure that woman might suffer.
‘I'm afraid that if I go grey,’ one of my friends said, ‘men won't try to chat me up on planes.’
Not long ago, I met a woman with lovely head of silver hair.
She was altogether beautiful and of no special age, except that she was no longer young.
‘I used to dye it when it first went grey,’ she said.
‘And then, after about ten years, I let the colour grow out.
I suppose I had finally grown into it.’
And that is the crux of the matter.
There is the age at which I will grow into my own maturation, and there is the age at which my hair has started to turn grey.
And they are not the same age.
So I can colour my hair to fill in the gap.
Or I can hurry up and become my older (better? wiser?) self.
I find myself very much in the middle, and I haven't decided yet which it will be.
Instead, I have decided to give myself time.
After all, time is really what this is all about — whether it is friend or enemy, whether to roll with its punches or fight back.
The differences between who we are and who we are becoming.
And you thought it was about hair.
‘Eat, drink and be merry, for tomorrow we dye’
pampering TREATS
Add a warm glow to the palest complexion with Givenchy's new Ivory Prism powder.
Sweep a brush across the four shades, from lightest sand to tawny terracotta, and dust over your face.
This ultra fine matt powder will enhance your natural colouring.
We have 50 Ivory Prisms (worth £18.50 each) to give away.
Mark your card ‘Ivory Prism’.
For safer sunning protect your skin with a high-factor sunscreen and slowly decrease to lower factors.
You won't burn, but you will achieve a safer tan.
Uvistat has put together 40 kits, comprising Ultrablock Factor 30, factor 15 Sun Cream, Factor 10 Sun Lotion, Factor 6 Sun Lotion, Factor 15 Lipscreen and Aftersun (together worth around £35).
Mark your card ‘Uvistat’.
Give your hair a boost with Wella's new Colour Confidence Wash Out Colour.
This deep-conditioning semi-permanent comes in 12 stunning shades, and gives hair softness and sheen.
It's an effective, simple and inexpensive way of enhancing natural hair colour (lasts for 6–8 washes).
We have 700 packs, worth £2.49 each, to give away.
Choose from Terracotta (bright copper gold), Chilli Pepper (vibrant red), Garnet (medium brown with red tones), Rich Plum (mid brown with purple tones), Mocha (dark brown).
Not recommended for grey, blonde or colour-treated hair.
Mark your postcard ‘Wella’ and state choice of shade.
Active Wrinkle Control is the latest addition to L'Oréal's Plénitude range.
This moisturiser is formulated to soften the skin and improve suppleness, so that lines and wrinkles are less noticeable.
It has a lovely light texture and is suitable for use both morning and evening.
We have 200 pots (worth £7.29 each) to give away.
Mark your postcard ‘Plénitude’.
Moschino, the fragrance, is as covetable as this exclusive designer's fashion collections.
Now there is a body and bath line, too, in glamorous pink and gold packaging.
We have 50 bottles of Moschino Lait Parfumé Pour Le Corps (worth £22 each) to give away.
This decadent body lotion, with its spicy flower aroma, demands to be smothered over skin coming out of winter hibernation.
Mark your postcard ‘Moschino’.
horoscopes
CALL JUSTIN TOPER ON THE SHE HOROSCOPE HOTLINE
TAURUS Apr 21–May 21
Taurus is ruled by Venus, or Aphrodite, the goddess of love, beauty and harmony, and is one of the most gentle, placid and reasonable signs of the Zodiac.
Although when riled you dig in your heels and refuse to budge, on the whole you prefer a strife- free life and usually manage to maintain the status quo.
Taurus is a fixed sign, which means you are a creature of habit and are fond of material comforts.
Financial security is high on your list of priorities, as are emotional stability, commitment and loyalty in relationships.
May is certain to prove a decisive month for matrimonial or partnership affairs and for dealing with those in positions of power.
A brilliant New Moon in your sign on May 2 and aspects to Uranus and Neptune in the travel sector of your chart on the 8th and 9th should send your spirits soaring.
But, if you are planning to move on or move out, you may not receive someone's approval or permission.
The period around the 12th is likely to bring negative responses or sour grapes, culminating with the Full Moon on the 16th when an argument or heart-to-heart will take place.
After that, the dust will begin to settle and you must settle your differences, too, since you will need all the support you can muster to make your mark at work or make life more financially secure.
There will be some conflict over who owns or earns what between the 26th and 28th but, as June gets under way, your chances of clinching a deal or celebrating a major coup are extremely high.
Gemini May 22–June 21
May is unlikely to be particularly easy or straightforward, but what comes to light between the 2nd and 9th will alleviate your fears or anxiety.
Events or developments that take place around the 12th and 16th could leave you deflated and suspicious of other people's motives.
But one the Sun enters Gemini on the 19th and makes a decisive aspect to Jupiter on the 26th, the worst will be over.
Breathtaking planetary aspects and movements will give your confidence and personal affairs a tremendous boost.
Cancer June 22–July 23
Contradictory aspects to the Sun in Taurus on the 2nd, 8th, 9th and 12th will bring a time of tears, tantrums and arguments about finances.
However, the Full Moon in Scorpio on May 16 should bring everyone to their senses and give some light relief.
After that, the pace of your life will begin to slow down and although confusion will reign supreme around the 26th, it looks as if a long-awaited breakthrough will materialise.
This should leave you happier about your lot in life and also better off financially.
Leo July 24–Aug 23
On May 8, 12 and 16, the atmosphere at home or work may be far from congenial.
But, instead of feeling sorry for yourself and resentful towards others, you should endeavour to find permanent solutions to problems that have overshadowed your day-to-day existence for some time.
The Sun, your ruling planet, changes signs on the 19th and so begins one of the most exciting, romantic and memorable periods of the year.
A financial or moral issue may well prove a stumbling block but, as the month draws to a close, a dream could come true.
Virgo Aug 24–Sept 23
May is invariably a month when you have itchy feet and when important plans or decisions regarding the future are made.
Planetary activity in Taurus during the first ten days in May will give your personal affairs or morale a marvellous boost, but after that complications will arise.
Don't expect meetings, discussions or journeys to go smoothly between the 12th and 16th.
Likewise, a challenging aspect to Jupiter in Virgo on the 26th will coincide with some kind of snub or rebuff.
But there are some bright spots on the horizon–what occurs as June gets underway should have an amazing effect as far as your worldly ambitions, happiness and general well-being are concerned.
Libra Sept 24–Oct 23
Matters relating to your home life and financial security are highlighted and, while you can anticipate some minor gains, benefits or other incentives early this month, sparks may fly just prior to the 16th, when someone appears to be taking you for a fool or expecting you to foot the bill.
You are unlikely to make headway at the end of the month when discussing important career issues, travel plans or personal matters.
However, a magnificent aspect to Saturn on June 8 will bring out the romantic in you and give you a rare feeling of liberation.
Scorpio Oct 24–Nov 22
May 2, 8 and 9 are days when partners, close associates or family members will blow hot and cold.
At first you may be flattered by all the fuss and attention you receive.
However, the combined influence of Pluto, your ruling planet, on the 12th and a potent Full Moon in Scorpio on the 16th will try your patience.
Don't expect too many favours around the 26th or 28th, particularly when handling anything of a legal or business nature.
But after that the tide of fortune will turn in your favour, so that you should end up celebrating some kind of moral or financial victory.
Sagittarius Nov 23–Dec 21
This is liable to be a month when you will feel under pressure, off-colour or uneasy about the future.
You should have some success when dealing with practical or financial matters at the start of the month, but what comes to light either personally or at work on the 12th or 16th may leave you feeling deflated.
Relationships with partners or employers are also likely to deteriorate around the 26th.
However, things will improve dramatically around the time of the New Moon in Gemini on June 1, when offers or invitations will prove rather tempting.
Capricorn Dec 22–Jan 20
Fantastic aspects on the 8th and 9th to both Uranus and Neptune in Capricorn should provide one or two rather blissful moments, although this may not be enough to lift your spirits entirely.
Planetary factors that occur a week later may bring jealousy or resentment in certain quarters and show you who your real friends are.
However, the Full Moon on May 16 could provide a happy ending and, despite the odd hold-up or broken promise at the end of May, things are looking up professionally and financially.
Aquarius Jan 21–Feb 19
The Sun at odds with Saturn in Aquarius on the 8th should give you fair warning of conflict with others over home, family or professional matters.
In fact, this could be a month of tantrums and ultimatums.
The Sun enters Gemini on the 20th and highlights romance and the good things in life, but tempers could flare if you don't settle a complex moral or financial issue.
An event that takes place in your personal world in early June could be one of the highlights of the year.
Pisces Feb 20–Mar 20
You may be full of bright ideas and good intentions now but not everyone will share your enthusiasm.
The messages or responses your receive around May 2, 5 and 9 will be flattering and good for the ego but also a bit misleading.
Be prepared for a breakdown in communication and for certain individuals to misbehave or let you down around the 12th and the 26th.
After that it will be time for some home improvements, but not necessarily the DIY kind.
However, June looks like being a month of domestic bliss with some happy twists of fate in store.
Aries Mar 21–Apr 20
Money is liable to be the main topic of conversation or bone of contention this month, so make the most of a reassuring planetary set-up in early May to reach a settlement.
Chances are that the build-up to the Full Moon on the 16th will prove emotionally and financially draining, and there will be one last hurtle late in the month which could throw you temporarily off balance.
But if you've persevered with certain plans or associations and kept your cool under pressure, your patience is about to be rewarded.
Indeed, June will be a month to remember.
Justin Toper is a Libran.
After graduating from the Faculty of Astrological Studies in London, his talents were spotted by veteran astrologer Patric Walker and he has cast The Sun 's horoscopes for over ten years.
Call Justin Toper on our SHE horoscope hotline (48p per minute, 36p off-peak).
SHE PROMOTION
BRIGHT FUTURES
When I grow up I'd like to be…
Dress for success with the new Bright Futures* Childrenswear Range from Debenhams — clothes and accessories to suit all walks of life
*a proportion of the proceeds from each sale will fund children's educational grants
…an explorer
Colonial green jacket £16.99, cotton piqué T-shirt £3.99, striped dungaree £10.99 (all 6 months-3 years) and Orang-utan all available from Debenhams
…a gardener
Floral print T-shirt and short set £9.99 (6 months-3 years) all available from Debenhams 
…an artist
Floral print dress (also in yellow) £12.99 (3–6 years) available from Debenhams 
…a sea captain
Jacket with striped lining (3–6 years) £21.99 (7–12 years) £23.99, striped T-shirt (3–6 years) £4.99 (7–12 years) £5.99, jog pants (3–6 years) £7.99 (7–12 years) £8.99 all available from Debenhams 
…a rock star
Multi-coloured striped leggings (3–6 years) £8.99 (7–12 years) £9.99, swing top £8.99 (7–12 years) all available from Debenhams 
…a winner
T-shirt £8.99 and matching Taslen shorts £8.99 (7–12 years), Taslen baseball cap £1.99 all available from Debenhams  
DEBENHAMS
Don't forget to look out for the Debenhams Bright Futures competition in our June issue!
you and your CHILD
The pages that give you expert advice, practical tips and the latest in children's fashion and entertainment
UPDATE MAY
Get your family dug into the Garden Festival Wales , 1992's ‘biggest leisure event’.
At Ebbw Vale, from May 1 to Oct 4, it's ‘a cross between Alton Towers and Kew Gardens’.
Tel: 0495 305545 for details.
Forget the plume de ma tante , Euro-children prefer Mickey and Minnie in Discovering French/Spanish with Walt Disney books (ages 8–13), £6.95 each.
Or jolly then along with French/Spanish/German for Fun book and cassette packs (ages 5–11), £8.95 each.
All published by Harrap.
Teatime telly treats :The Gingerbread Man , a 13-part animation series for under-8s, is set on a busy kitchen dresser.
And Ronald Pickup is Sir Walter Raleigh in the two-part ghostly drama,My Friend Walter .
Both start April on ITV.
Hotel for tinies?
Pippa Pop-ins in Fulham, London, is the first nursery to keep children aged 1–12 overnight, with ‘midnight feasts’ at 8pm and fairies at the bottom of the garden .
It costs £25 per night (£30 weekend nights).
Tel: 071-385 2458 for further details.
One of the aims of 1992 National Breastfeeding Week (May 18–24) is to make schoolkids aware of the natural method of feeding babies by asking them to design a poster .
For more information, call Lorraine Shepherd on 0908 271672.
In The Times ’ 1991 league of top names for children , favourite Emily knocked the previous year's Charlotte into second place, followed by Olivia, Sophie, Lucy and Emma.
James has been number one for boys since 1964, now followed by Alexander, Thomas, William and Edward.
EDITED BY PAT GARRATT 
A new initiative to help the young victims of radiation.
By Sharon Maxwell Magnus
the children of Chernobyl
Do you remember what you were doing when the Chernobyl nuclear reactor exploded on April 26 1986?
Alexei Omelianiuk does.
He was nine years old, it was the spring holiday and he went swimming in a local pond.
Later be became giddy, sick and weak and had to go to hospital twice, but no-one knew what was wrong with him.
No-one had been told that Chernobyl was leaking lethal doses of radiation, polluting the air, the ground, food and water.
Only those in the immediate ‘zone’ were evacuated, but the radiation, carried by the wind, didn't stop there.
It was only much later that Alexei's mystery sickness was connected with the Chernobyl explosion.
Today, Alexei is pale, tires easily and has frequent colds and infections but, despite the continual doses of radiation he receives in the food he eats, the water he drinks, he is still in reasonable health.
Many other children are not.
Around 800,000 children are thought to be affected, and even those living 200 miles north of the reactor still receive constant, dangerous doses.
Some have developed leukaemia, others feel so tired that they can only attend school for three hours a day.
Their immune systems are so damaged that colds and bugs which normally take a few days to clear can take weeks or months.
Adults and children suffer from strange, debilitating headaches that no drugs will cure.
Babies are born deformed or with leukaemia.
No-one knows how the radiation will have damaged the reproductive organs of the children who receive continual doses.
One problem is that, because the ground is contaminated and will be for centuries, produce from the soil is also contaminated.
And, because there is a food shortage, the affected people have the choice of eating contaminated food or not eating at all.
The only way to improve the health of the children is to ensure they get non-radiated food, clean water and air.
It has been found that taking them away from the contamination and giving them a healthy diet for a month can boost their damaged immune systems for up to 18 months.
After two weeks, there was a noticeable difference in the health and energy of all the children.
Their holiday will sustain them for up to 18 months.
Main picture, back row, from left: Marina, Dimitri, Alexei, Andrei, Irina; front; Pavel, Tatiana, Daria, teacher Maria, Natalia, Eugeni
This is where a group of neighbours, living on an estate in Guildford, Surrey, come in.
They have played host to ten children from Byelorussia, north of Chernobyl, in which 20% of the land (an area two-thirds the size of Scotland) has been contaminated.
Chris Milton, 40, helped to co-ordinate the visit.
She found out about the project through her T'ai-Chi class.
Her teacher had seen a small notice about a charity in Russia which was looking for hosts for children from the affected regions and had contacted a friend, originally from Russia, who helped investigate the charity.
Convinced that it was genuine, they decided to find local hosts.
‘I thought about it,’ says Chris, ‘and, to be honest, I wanted to find a reason not to do it.
Then I thought about those children and decided  to give it a go.’
Her husband Terry agrees.
‘I didn't fancy having a lot of kids tearing about the house, but, having brought up my own, I didn't feel I had an excuse.
What sort of a world would it be if people just turned their backs on things like this?’
The charity, the 26th April Foundation (formed by those who had been involved in putting out the reactor fire and evacuating the immediate area), planned to send ten children for a month- long ‘trial’ visit.
The children had to stay within close reach of each other and the hosts had to take two children so they could keep each other company.
Finding homes proved difficult.
Chris reckons she put about 650 letters through the doors of her neighbourhood, but had few replies.
Even then, some found that they had to drop out.
A week before the children arrived, it was a tense group of host families which gathered to make the final preparations.
‘We were really nervous,’ says Michelle West, ‘but we found that it was the nervous people who stuck with the project.’
People who were incredibly enthusiastic at first dropped out because they thought the language barrier would be a major problem, even though they were assured that an English-speaking teacher would accompany the children.
‘It's the little things that are frustrating,’ said Jane Olds, ‘such as not being able to ask if they're warm, or not understanding if they're asking for something.’
There were other less obvious things to bear in mind, too, such as keeping the children amused and easing their passage into a different culture.
‘The temptation is to give them everything,’ says Janka Stuttard, the Russian speaker who co-ordinated the visit, ‘but their parents asked us not to do that because it makes it difficult for them to settle back home.
Of course, the children should enjoy themselves, but they should not be given rich food.
And they have to be supervised on the roads — traffic here is mad compared to what they are used to.’
Although many of the early worries were unfounded, there were a few surprises for the host families.
‘We'd been told that they might not have a lot of clothes, but they arrived with these huge suitcases,’ Michelle recalls.
‘When they opened the cases, they were full of presents for us; Russian dolls, tablecloths hand-made by their families.
It was very moving.’
The children themselves had little, but Woolworths, touched by their plight, offered each child the chance to choose a beautiful set of clothes.
And neighbours rallied round with games.
They were also surprised by the children's appetites.
On the first day, Chris left out a bowl of fruit and the children — unused to seeing such a wide variety — helped themselves to the lot.
After that it was more carefully distributed.
‘And their understanding of English is a little selective,’ says Chris.
‘They understand ‘time to eat’ very well, but ‘time to sleep’doesn't register.’
Then there was the noticeable change in the children's health.
‘You can actually see it improving,’ says Chris.
‘The first week, they plodded up the stairs and when we took them out for the day they were wiped out the next.
Now, they bound up the stairs and have much more energy.’
The children amuse themselves for much of the time, with the local swimming  pool proving a favourite treat.
‘We only have to mention it and they're diving for their costumes,’ says Chris with a laugh.
They are clearly having the trip of their lives.
‘It's just like a fairyland,’ says Alexei, through the interpreter.
‘The shops have so much, the shelves burst with food, the houses are so big.’
What didn't he like?
His eyes widen in his pale face.
‘Nothing, nothing at all.’
For Daria Davidova, 13, coming to England has not only helped her physical health — her headaches have stopped and she feels more energetic — but has also provided emotional relief.
Her father, a driver, was sent to Chernobyl for six months when the plant exploded.
‘He's become nervous and more aggressive,’ says Daria.
‘The situation at home is tense.’
Her grandmother lived close to Chernobyl and received a large dose of radiation — she died within the year.
‘It has been very sad for me,’ she says.
‘But here I can relax and the food is so good.
And I feel better.
The family treats me like I was theirs.’
Her situation is echoed by the other children, all of whom have been affected by Chernobyl emotionally as well as physically.
Tatiana Rovkatch, 12, remembers the shock of seeing pictures of the deserted villages around the plant.
She knows that her parents are anxious about her because of the radiation.
‘They are more attentive because they worry about my future,’ she says.
They were thrilled that she had the chance to come to Britain.
And she feels better herself — after two weeks, her headaches and tiredness have gone.
Andrei, 14, had noticed similar changes.
He arrived in Britain with a broken arm which has since healed well.
And the sores which have plagued his mouth for months have now disappeared.
‘At home, I want to sleep a lot of the time.
But here not so much,’ he says.
Their teacher, Maria Leonidovna Obrazova, has noticed a real difference in all the children, as well as herself, after just two weeks of uncontaminated air and food.
She is amazed at the attitude of the people she meets: ‘I thought people would be cold and uninterested, and I can't believe that everyone cares so much about us.’
Maria, too, has personal experience of Chernobyl.
Her husband was sent to the plant after the disaster and now suffers from poor health, and is often anxious and snappy.
‘I didn't know what to do when he came back from the zone.
Should I let him in before he takes his clothes off?
And should he wash first?
What was contaminated and what wasn't?
She feels angry that the public were given so little information and were exposed to such large amounts of radiation, unable to take any precautions to protect themselves.
‘I feel despair at being deceived and betrayed.
I think the authorities then were so used to keeping everything secret, they didn't even think to tell us.
No-one knows what the consequences will be.’
She is silent for a moment, then looks at the children playing.
‘This visit is helping them,’ she says.
‘They are so much less tired, their skin is so much better.’
Chris Milton agrees.
‘We intend to do it again.
It's a bit of a wrench, knowing we are sending them back.
But we know, too, that they have really benefited, and that's what counts.’
The 26th April Foundation hopes to help more children.
If you are interested in hosting, donating or helping, write to: Children of Chernobyl Link UK, The Bassetts, Tilford Road, Hindhead, Surrey GU26 6RD.
Groups of children need to be based in the same neighbourhood.
They can co-ordinate only within the south-east of England, but if you would like to set up a local group, Chris Milton has prepared information sheets and can put you in touch with other interested people in your area.
Write to her at 58 Guildford Park Avenue, Guildford, Surrey GU2 5NL (please enclose sae).
LEARNING CURVE
Ways to deal with a child perfectionist…memory tricks and techniques for exam revision…rude rhymes illustrated by Maurice Sendak
PERFECT FAILURE
Does your child often tear up drawings when they go wrong?
Does she procrastinate, lose things or fail to hand work in to her teacher?
You may have a perfectionist on your hands ‘The problem can arise when a child who is quite bright is aware that she cannot express herself equally well on paper,’ explains educational psychologist Dr Judith Haynes of Child Consultants.
‘She may be articulate but feel upset that she cannot do justice to herself.
As a result, she may use all sorts of techniques, such as losing exercise books or side-tracking the teacher.’
If your child is self-conscious, she may be afraid of revealing her thoughts in an essay.
‘It could be an emotional problem.
She may be reluctant to give evidence of what is in her mind,’ says Dr Haynes.
‘Also, if she thinks that all that matters is high marks, then she will feel her work is substandard if she does not achieve them.’
If the problem persists it may cloud her attitude to school.
Dr Haynes suggests:
Show that you are as interested in how she is enjoying school as in achieving good marks.
Accentuate the positive.
‘Praise goes twice as far in producing positive results as picking on the negative.
If you can't find anything to praise, create something!’
Give her a small responsibility which will offer genuine reasons for praise one it is done.
Talk about difficulties you've had.
Show her failure isn't the end of the world.
Child Consultants, independent educational psychologists, have recently produced the ‘Scholarcheck’ test to assess children's achievements in reading, spelling and maths, in relation to their age and to the National Curriculum.
The home- based tests are returned with charts after scoring by psychologists.
For ages five to 11, the tests normally cost £24.50, but SHE readers will pay only £20.
Tel: 071–487 4027 for further information.
MEMORY TACTICS
The memory can play tricks but, if you can harness its potential, says teacher Jacqui Thacker, exams could lose their terror.
She suggests these revision tips:
Use as many senses as possible.
Close your eyes and visualise what you are learning, imagine what is happening, say your work out loud and listen to it.
Facts to be learned by rote are often best assimilated just before bedtime, when you get up or when walking.
Speak or sing lists of facts to a rhythm.
Or use a mnemonic, for example‘Mrs Vera Evans Marches, Jumps and Skips Using a Nice Pogo-stick’ gives the order of planets in our solar system.
Write vocabulary, dates, formulae etc on brightly coloured cards and stick them where you will see them.
Keep the data on flashcards and put in your pocket to look at in spare moments.
NOISY, RUDE AND FANTASTIC!
Maurice Sendak fans are in for a treat.
Now in his 60s, the grandaddy of author/illustrators has classics such as Where the Wild Things Are to his name.
His latest illustration work,I Saw Esau: A Schoolchild's Pocket Book (Walker Books, £9.99, out April 30) is, in his own words, ‘Noisy, rude and scatological — all the things children love.’
At his Connecticut farmhouse he divides his time between illustrating books, designing operas based on his work and arranging plays for his Night Kitchen Theatre Group for children.
He says that illustrating this book was ‘one of the happiest times of my life.’
This collection of traditional rhymes is edited by Iona and Peter Opie, who first published the little book in 1946.
‘They were clearly not rhymes that a grandmother might sing…they pack a punch,’ remarks Iona.
‘It wasn't very well illustrated,’ says Sendak, ‘but they wanted to keep the smallness and the charm.
I was given a dummy in which to do my preliminary sketches, but the dummy was designed so beautifully by Amelia Edwards that I was really happy with my work.
I thought that I would never be able to repeat the illustrations as finished drawings, so the book stayed as a dummy.’
The result is a collection of stinging, clever or comic rhymes illustrated in watercolour, pencil and quill pen.
Brooklyn-born Sendak's own childhood memories have spawned his fantastic, often scary, creations but, in I Saw Esau , he has entered the imagination of real children down the years.
Have his preconceptions changed?
‘No, the book has just confirmed childhood as being a dynamic time and a barbaric, wonderful state!’
Sendak and his latest work
HEALTHY KIDS
natural childbirth after Caesarean is possible…caring for an asthmatic child…peat bog nappies…
NHS laser treatment for birthmarks…pain-free jabs
SECOND-TIME CAESARS
‘Once a Caesarean, always a Caesarean,’ runs the received wisdom.
And according to the Caesarean Support Network, ‘Natural birth following Caesarean section is highly unlikely.’
However, researcher Dr Catherine Paterson disagrees.
Today, with a more liberal regime in many obstetric units, she believes the chances of being able to deliver vaginally, after having a Caesar for your first baby, are good.
In a study of over 1,000 second-time mothers who had one baby by Caesarean section, she found that 37% chose another Caesar.
Of the 63% who were allowed a ‘trial of labour’, 71% succeeded in delivering vaginally.
However, this last figure includes women who were induced or given oxytocin to speed up contractions.
Beverley Beech from AIMS (the Association for Improvement in Maternity Services) believes this success rate is low, and says, ‘There is a lack of understanding about what a ‘natural’ vaginal birth is.
It is not natural to be given oxytocin.’
The main fear with vaginal birth after Caesarean (VBAC) is rupture of the scar.
‘If a woman has never had a Caesarean, we can push her quite hard,’ says Dr Paterson.
‘But if she has a scarred uterus, with strong contractions and a large baby, the weak point might give way.’
The Caesarean Support Network maintains that modern bikini-line scars may part or blister during a vaginal birth with oxytocin but, in a truly natural labour, complete rupture is almost unknown.
However, says Beverley Beech, in most hi-tech, teaching or consultant hospitals chances of ‘natural’ VBAC delivery, without intervention, are small.
Caesarean Support Network, 2 Hurst Park Drive, Huyton, Liverpool L36 1TF.
Tel: 051–480 1184.
VBAC Information and Support Group, 8 Wren Way, Farnborough, Hants GU14 8SZ.
Tel: 0252 543250, before 9pm.
AIMS has dedicated one issue of its quarterly journal to VBAC (Vol 3, No 4, 1991).
Copies cost £2.50 (inc p&p) from Goose Green Barn, Much Hoole, Preston, Lancs PR4 4TD.
And for our next trick — the peat bog nappy?
Johnson & Johnson in Canada is currently making sanitary towels out of the stuff (peat moss soaks up 12 times its own weight of liquid).
Red Indians used it for nappies, and J&J might just follow in their tracks — encouraging us to flush the bog down the bog, as it were?
Laser treatment for the removal of port-wine stains and strawberry marks on children is now available on the NHS, at the National Hospital for Aesthetic Plastic Surgery in Bromsgrove, Warwickshire.
After arachnophobia and agoraphobia — acuphobia.
An estimated 84% of children of suffer from fear of needles or injections.
Now EMLA, a local anaesthetic cream, can be applied one hour before an injection, to remove pain from the site.
Ask your GP for information.
ASTHMA ALERT
Asthma is an increasing worry because it's one of the few Western diseases that  is becoming more frequent and severe.
One child in ten is affected and, in 1990, there were 98 deaths among five-to-24-year-old asthma sufferers.
According to a recent report in the British Medical Journal , all the evidence suggests that asthma is an environmental disease.
Pollution and house dust mites are the main culprits.
So what can patents do?
Experts suggest:
Encourage self-management of the illness with a peak flow meter to measure lung function and help anticipate attacks (available on prescription).
A child who has always looked after his own asthma is less likely to rebel later and discard inhalers or start smoking.
Ensure that your child doesn't rely on his emergency bronchodilator, or forget about his condition after he's had an attack.
He also needs to use a steroid or sodium cromoglycate (Intal) inhaler regularly.
Buy pillows and duvets with synthetic fillings, and look for bedding covered in Gore-tex (Slumberland Medicare, tel: 061–628 5293).
Studies show how this can reduce dust levels to one per cent of those in conventional mattresses.
For further advice, call the Asthma Helpline, 1–9pm weekdays, tel: 0345 010203 (local rate).
For an information pack, send a 41p SAE to the Information Dept, National Asthma Campaign, Providence House, Providence Place, London N1 0NT.
‘I suppose one advantage is they look cleaner after use ’
GROWING PAINS
only is OK…black, white or half and half?…speak up!…talking about sex…the terrible twos…born shy?…recognising teenage depression
ONLY — NOT LONELY
The stigma of being an only child still exists, although their numbers are increasing worldwide.
In the UK between 1972 and 1989, there was a two per cent increase in both two-parent and lone-parent families with only children.
Attitudes are changing, but the view persists that only children are spoiled, lonely or over-protected and that their parents are selfish for ‘depriving’ them of a brother or sister.
Ann Laybourn, research fellow at Glasgow University and herself an only child, believes that parents are frequently influenced by this negative stereotype.
‘The strong prejudice against only children comes over as a clear reason for having at least two,’ she says.
To stand your ground against brothers and sisters is traditionally considered an early preparation for the realities of life.
Child psychiatrist Dr Dora Black says, ‘Siblings obviously have a great impact on each other.
For many young children, the birth of a brother or sister provides their first experience of sharing.’
This has been described as the first ‘social laboratory’ where children can experiment with relationships and learn to cope with change, envy, competitiveness and rivalry — things that will help them to develop social skills.
Yet it seems that only children are not disadvantaged by this lack and may even profit from the attention lavished on them.
They seem to be as happy and popular as contemporaries who have brothers and sisters, have greater self-esteem and are happier with their own company.
They also tend to be achievers, and are possibly less rebellious.
A survey of teenage only children in Scotland found that they were the least likely to have played truant.
And although they tended to come from less advantaged backgrounds, only children performed as well as, or even slightly better than, fellow pupils from two-child families.
Susanna Stringer
The average two-year-old has a vocabulary of around 900 words, and girls seem more able to learn language than boys.
But, say US researchers, mothers can encourage children by speaking to their child a lot, especially before the age of two, and pronouncing words clearly and in context.
Make sex discussions much less of a trial with the Family Planning Association's new Growing Up series of leaflets:Answering Your Child's Questions , for parents;How Your Body Changes , for teenagers.
£1.50 each, £3 the set (inc p&p), from Growing Up Series, FPA, 27–35 Mortimer St, London W1N 7RJ.
Control the ‘terrible twos’ with the ‘three Ps’, says US Child magazine: predictability — toddlers need a daily routine; praise — appropriate praise helps a child foster a sense of self-worth; perspicacity — know when to give in and when to stick to your guns.
‘A child whose demands are always met may feel insecure in wielding more power than he can handle,’ it says.
SHADES OF HAPPINESS
Parents in mixed marriages who are concerned about how this affects their offspring should take heart from new research.
Interviews with 58 teenagers from the London area, who each had one white and one African or Afro-Caribbean parent, showed that most of them felt very positive about themselves.
Psychologist Professor Barbara Tizard of the Institute of Education found that, although about 16% of the children did feel unhappy and that they ‘didn't belong’, three-quarters felt perfectly at ease with their peers and reckoned that Afro-Caribbean culture, music and ‘style’ were generally admired.
Over a third said they hardly ever or never thought about their colour, and nearly half thought of themselves as neither black or white, but ‘half and half’.
The implications for adoption, says Professor Tizard, are important, because they show that the race of the adopting parents should not be the central issue.
But parents ‘should not hold prejudiced views about the other race which might be uncomfortable for a mixed-race child’.
‘I am refusing to accede to your request on the grounds that it will make you insecure’
WHY SO SHY?
Studies of adopted children show that the seeds of shyness may be sown in the genes and extreme shyness may last a lifetime.
Professor Kagan of Harvard University studied a group of children at 21 months and again six months later.
He found that most shy toddlers remained timid at seven.
But, some had become sociable and talkative, probably because their parents had helped them.
He also videotaped how hundreds of infants dealt with strange noises, odd smells and toys and noticed that, for some children, newness and uncertainty proved very painful.
These children had easily excitable nervous systems and the very shy were more likely to have a thin face and blue eyes.
Such a child will remain vulnerable, says Kagan.
He attributes this shyness to a structure in the brain which regulates the nervous system.
To help a shy child, Richard Lansdown and Marjorie Walker, authors of Your Child's Development from Birth to Adolescence (Frances Lincoln, £16.95), suggest you:
Encourage self-esteem.
Listen to him, praise him for good ideas.
Avoid showing over-concern about appearance.
Children with poor social skills often feel they do not look right.
Provide lots of social opportunities and suggest ideas for play beforehand.
TEENAGE DEPRESSION
Recent studies show that parents underestimate the amount of depression their children may be suffering.
Research in Newcastle has shown that about a third of all children referred with psychiatric disorders also suffered from undiagnosed depression.
Mothers often failed to recognise such inner distress as a sense of failure, feeling unloved, fears, phobias and obsessions.
Clinical depression is worlds away from common teenage feelings, such as‘feeling low’.
If a teenager has been feeling acutely depressed for some time, then it may only take a trigger such as exams, to tip her over the edge (suicide is the third most common cause of death among the under 25s, and the peak months are April to July).
Parents should be aware of increasing strain around exam time and avoid adding to it by, for instance, having too high expectations.
Sports nutritionist Dr Sally Parsonage says regular exercise reduces tension, improves mental confusion and ability to cope with stress.
Encourage 15 minutes of exercise three times a week, plus a healthy diet, for optimum results.
And try not to fuss.
A free leaflet to help kids handle exam stress has been compiled for SHE by Sally Parsonage, consultant to Sanatogen.
The ‘Exam Diet Guide’ is available from the Sanatogen Information Bureau, PO Box 21, Godalming GU7 2SS .
MINDING THE KIDS
training the fathers of the future…serious competition for private nurseries
BABY-CARE FOR BOYS
In a converted caretaker's house at Northampton School for Boys, an experiment is taking place.
Not only has the house been turned into a nursery for the children of staff, but the pupils — all male in this comprehensive-turned-direct grant school — help look after the babies.
‘We have a strong community programme here,’ says the brains behind the scheme, deputy head Alan Davison.
‘During their time here, the boys go once a week for two whole terms to work with the community — with the elderly or in special schools, or in our nursery.
It teaches them responsibility and gives them the chance to work as adults with other adults.’
To the astonishment of some, the nursery — opened just over a year ago — has been most popular option.
‘We take 14 under-fives,’ explains nursery supervisor Claire Westwood.
‘The boys come, two at a time, when they are 14 and again between the ages of 16 and 18.
They change nappies, feed babies under supervision and learn about sterilising and safety.
They even develop their own tactics for lulling the babies to sleep.
Two boys now come to the nursery voluntarily at lunchtimes, and one sixth-former who wants to be a doctor decided, after two months here, to specialise in paediatrics.
The babies’ parents were rather dubious about it all at first,’Claire admits.
‘But now they think it's wonderful.
The boys are very caring.’
The scheme is seen as work experience rather than as a ‘parenting’ class, but the spin-off could benefit the families of the future.
Claire Westwood comments, ‘Several of the sixth-formers have said, ‘I never realised toddlers were so demanding.
I think I'll have more patience when I'm a father.'’
That has to be good news!
ON YOUR DOORSTEP
Pre-school Playgroups are sometimes considered a stop-gap until the state steps in with ‘proper’ nursery education.
Yet the Preschool Playgroups Association now runs half of all registered day nurseries in England.
Describing themselves as ‘full daycare playgroups’, they offer extended hours to cater for working parents.
Nearly all are open nine hours a day, five days a week, 47 weeks a year, and cost far less than private nurseries.
There are now about 1,000 such groups (up from 200 in 1987) and many more would love to extend their hours — but are prevented by lack of funds.
Recently, Avon Cosmetics (UK) sponsored a £25,000 award scheme for groups which are trying to meet the needs of working parents.
But it's not enough.
Says the PPA, ‘Urgent attention needs to be given to an obvious and effective means of alleviating the crisis in daycare.’
It calls on authorities to match, pound for pound, parental contributions.
To find your nearest group, contact the information department of the Preschool Playgroups Association, tel: 071–833 0991.
SHE/JORDAN COMPETITION
win your way to DISNEY WORLD
The chance to take your family to meet Mickey Mouse on the holiday of a lifetime
It must be every child's dream to visit Walt Disney World — and every parent's wish to take their children on the holiday of a lifetime.
Jordan Oral Hygiene is offering SHE readers the chance to win a fortnight's holiday for two adults and two children in wonderful Walt Disney World.
Jordan, Europe's number one toothbrush manufacturer, has been expert in dental hygiene for over 100 years.
To celebrate National Smile Week (May 18–24) and to encourage children to develop an effective oral hygiene regime, Jordan has introduced a new range of toothbrushes to put the fun into brushing: Jordan Disney Baby Toothbrush and Disney Junior ‘V’ Tuft Toothbrush.
The winning family will travel with Destination USA and stay at Disney's Caribbean Beach Resort in Orlando, Florida.
The colourful resort comprises five villages which represent the islands of Barbados, Jamaica, Trinidad, Martinique and Aruba.
They surround a 45-acre lake which is bordered with sandy white beaches, seven swimming pools, children's playground and pool, and lots of shops and restaurants.
You will also receive a 5-Day Plus Super Pass allowing you unlimited entry into the Magic Kingdom Park, Epcot Center, Disney-MGM Studios Theme Park and a variety of Disney attractions: plus £800 spending money for a fabulous time in Florida.
Five hundred runners-up will each receive a Jordan Disney Baby Toothbrush and a Jordan Disney Junior ‘V’ Tuft Toothbrush, normally priced £1.12 and £1.25.
The Baby Toothbrush has extra soft short tufts to protect delicate gum tissue, and an extra long handle to give the parent a steady, comfortable grip.
The Junior ‘V’ Tuft Toothbrush has a small head (26mm) and a spoon-shaped handle, easy for a child to use.
The ‘V’ tuft design is very efficient at cleaning in between teeth and is effective in the removal of plaque — essential for the maintenance of healthy gums and teeth.
To enter the competition, answer the following questions:
1.
Regular flossing of teeth is essential for healthy gums.
It helps to: a) strengthen teeth b) remove plaque c) whiten teeth
2.
How many times a year do Jordan recommend that you change your toothbrush? a) 4 b) 1 c) 2
3.
In which Disney cartoon film does the cartoon character Cruella De Vil appear? a)The Rescuers b)Sleeping Beauty c)101 Dalmatians 
Then, in no more than 25 words, tell us which Disney character you think has the best set of teeth and why.
Turn to page 216 to fill in the entry coupon and read the competition rules.
Above: In the Magic Kingdom, Mickey Mouse is a huge favourite with children of all ages.
Left: All five of the brightly coloured villages in Disney's Caribbean Beach Resort sit on the edge of a huge lake, with beautiful sandy white beaches.
SHE OFFER
join us at our GREAT GREEN get-together
Discover more about the world around us at a fun day out for all the family
How Green are you?
Do you buy environment-friendly products and take an active interest in nature?
Or is it your children who are setting the ecological pace?
A recent Mintel report found that, when it comes to Green issues, it's children who are educating their parents.
Which is why SHE would like to invite you and your kids to our Great Green Family Event on Saturday May 23 at St Mary Magdalene School, London N1.
It will be an exciting and fun day — educational too, with informative workshops so everyone can get hands-on experience, indoors and out.
Jonathon Porritt , environment TV presenter and for director of Friends of the Earth, will be looking at how we can learn to think Green.
Caitlin Easterby and Simon Pascoe of Bitsa!, the children's recycling crafts programme, will run a Red Earth Workshop and show how to turn junk into glorious new creatures.
Wayne Talbot of WATCH, the junior branch of the RSNC Wildlife Trusts Partnership, will present the RockWATCH Roadshow , which brings geology to life and unravels the mysteries of the earth.
Take part in woodland experience with the RSPB's Young Ornithologists' Club and fit birds and animals into their correct habitats.
John Elkington , co-author of the Green Consumer Guide (Gollancz, £4.99) and Holidays that Don't Cost the Earth (Gollancz, £5.99), will be asking you to turn detective and find out just how Green you home and school are.
Nigel Marven, producer at the BBC Natural History Unit , has worked on Supersense and My Family and Other Animals and with David Attenborough, and he'll talk about filming wildlife.
Phil Gates , lecturer in botany and author of The Aliens are Coming (Puffin, £2.99), will explore the secret life of plants and the greenhouse effect.
And talking of plants, SHE's cookery editor Clare Ferguson will talk about Green food and show you how to make it.
Colin Shawyer of the Hawk and Owl Trust will explain how to dissect owl pellets to find out what barn owls eat — and how they manage to survive in the modern world.
Then join the World Wide Fund for Nature's fun quiz and see just what you've learned.
You will also have a chance to browse though book and information stalls — and, if all this activity gets too much, take time to enjoy the school's nature garden.
The day is most suitable for children aged six to 12, and there will be a free crèche for children under three.
Healthy refreshments will be provided by Safeway and mineral water by Spa .
We have kept ticket prices as low as possible, and any profits will go to Age Concern's Golden Years Appeal, our charity of the year.
Prices: adults, £7.50; under-16s, £6; group ticket (three people), £16.
Space is limited so fill in the coupon on page 188 (before May 11) to book a place at the most entertaining and educational event of the year — or risk being Green with envy!
tons of treats
THAT'S MAGIC!
50 Playmobil sets
Make the lady disappear!
See her levitate!
Kids from four to ten will adore Playmobil's new ‘Mister Magic’ set with dapper magician, glam assistant and ‘real’tricks.
Normally priced around £11, we have 50 to give away to readers.
Mark your postcard ‘Mister Magic’.
PORTLAND BILL AHOY!
50 videos
Revisit Portland Bill, Ross and Cromarty and all the other classic characters from the 1976 ITV series about a lighthouse and its keepers, now in a 50-minute video from Snapdragon.
Priced £7.99, we have 50 to give away.
Mark your card ‘Portland Bill’.
BOWL THEM OVER
10 tenpin bowling parties
Give knock-out kids' party at any Megabowl, Super Bowl, GX Super Bowl, Hollywood Bowl, or Super Bowl 2000 bowling centre nationwide.
The centres offer a party package of admission, shoe hire, game and birthday tea for around £5 per head, but we have ten parties, each for ten children, to give away.
Please mark your postcard ‘Tenpin party’.
GET STREETWISE
50 road safety books
Encourage good traffic sense with Let's go Out , a colourful book with picture puzzles and information.
For parents of two- to seven-year-olds to read with their kids, it is published by HMSO, priced £4.95, but we have 50 to give away to readers.
Mark your postcard ‘Road safety book’.
WHAT'S ON WHERE?
100 guides
There's no excuse for holiday boredom when you can dip into the AA/Kodak guide,2000 Days Out in Britain .
It's a county-by-county cornucopia of ideas for family outings.
It costs £3.99, but we have 100 for readers.
Mark your postcard ‘AA/Kodak guide’.
NEW NOSTALGIA
80 knit kits
Tradition returns to baby knits with Peter Pan Baby Wools' new Nostalgia II pattern book.
We are offering the book plus wool and trimmings to knit two delicate matinée coats (worth around £17) to 30 readers, and the book plus wool and trimmings to knit one garment (worth around £10) to the next 50.
Mark your card ‘Baby Wool’.
SLY VIEWING
50 Rocky V videos
For teenage fans of Sylvester Stallone, a chance to watch Rocky Balboa win the big fight, but almost lose his own spirit, in Rocky V (PG; MGM/UA Home Video).
It retails at around £11, but we have 50 to give away.
Mark your card ‘Rocky video’.
SAFE SWIMMING
12 flotation suits
Mothers gain peace of mind when kids take the plunge wearing Bami gear.
The swimsuits and trunks have attached foam shoulders to help keep kids afloat.
For ages two to six, normal price is £35, but we have 12 to give away.
Mark your card ‘Bami suit’ and give age and sex of child.
(Stockists include Selfridges, or tel:.)
To apply for your treat send a postcard (no envelopes please), clearly marked with the treat name, to SHE May Treats, PO Box 501, Leicester L99 0AB, by May 31, 1992.
The treats will be sent to the first names picked out of the postbag after that date.
main picture, from left: Sweat top, £39 approx. jersey trousers £40, Chipie.
Scarf from a selection, American Classics.
Striped dungarees, £45 approx, Chipie.
Straw hat £18.50, The Hat Shop.
Top, from left: Red and white striped shorts £5.99, Hennes.
Scarf from a selection at American Classics.
Gingham dungarees, £33.99, Benetton 012.
Red gingham hat £20 approx, Chipie.
Above, from left: Gingham shorts £18 approx, white vest £10 approx, Tinkers.
Bandanna from a selection, American Classics.
Red gingham hat as above.
Gingham dress £25 approx, Tinkers.
FASHION
beached!
Young beachcombers cry freedom and take off in fresh cottons and ginghams and striped dungarees
Top: Blue gingham dress £11.99, Hennes.
Scarf from a selection, American Classics.
Straw hat £20, Chipie.
Centre, from left: Navy/white top £32.50, Burberry.
Cotton trousers £8.99, Hennes.
Jelly shoes £8, Buckle My Shoe.
Sailor hat £3.50, Chimera.
T-shirt £12.99 for a pack of three (M84088), Next Directory.
Cut-off trousers from £35, New Man.
Scarf from a selection, American Classics.
Above: Shorts £9.99, top £19.99, Cou Cou.
Straw bag £25 approx, Chipie
From left: Cotton T-shirt from £12, Tinkers.
White shorts £12.99, Benetton 012.
Jelly sandals £8, Buckle My Shoe.
Embroidered dress with shorts £19.99, Jeffrey Rogers.
Striped jean jacket £52, New Man.
Cotton T-shirt from £12, Tinkers.
Striped jeans £13, Sun & Sand.
Hat £39, Fred Bare.
Dungarees £8.99, Hennes.
Stockists are on page 217.
CALL TRUDY CULROSS ON THE SHE CAN HELPLINE
Our problem page is enormously popular and Trudy Culross has helped many SHE readers.
Since Trudy is unable to answer each of your letters personally, we have set up a special SHE helpline which covers some of the topics that most frequently crop up in Trudy's postbag.
You can listen to her advice on our pre-recorded tapes (each lasting four minutes).
Calls are charged at 36p per minute cheap rate and 48p per minute at all other times.
For helpful advice, dial Trudy on any of the subjects listed right.
1.
I suspect my partner is having an affair
2.
We rarely make love any more
3.
I never realised how everything would change once we had a baby
4.
I don't think I'm in love any more
5.
My partner has lost his job
6.
How can we get the passion back into our relationship?
7.
Knowing when to leave him
8.
Life after the big split
OFFER/COMPETITION DETAILS
COMPETITION RULES OF ENTRY
Entries must be accompanied by the relevant competition entry token of entry coupon (except Supercrozzle), and the sender's name and address.
The entry taken allows six entries unless otherwise stated.
Please put all six attempts on one postcard, if possible.
Otherwise, use two or more cards, attach entry token to the top postcard and send them to us in an envelope.
Prizes will be awarded to entries with correct answers and, in the opinion of the judges, the most original tiebreakers.
All entries to the Supercrozzle will be put in a drum and the first correct entries drawn out will be the winners.
The Editor's decision is final and no correspondence will be entered into.
Employees (and their relatives) of the National Magazine Company, the sponsors and their associated companies may not enter.
No cash alternatives to prizes.
Competitions are open to residents of the UK and those using BFPO numbers.
Competitions are subject to complete rules of entry; for a copy apply to Competitions Dept, SHE.
DECEMBER SUPERCROZZLE
Each of the 11 winners of our December 1991 Supercrozzle received a luxury Christmas Hamper, to the value of £70, from the Achiltibuie and Alness Smokehouses of Summer Isles Foods.
The winners are: Mrs D Annand (Devon), Ms M Bawden (Wiltshire), Mrs B Craft (Cheshire), Mrs P Frazer (S Glamorgan), Ms D Jackson (London), Ms D Lawes (Glos), Mrs J Ramsay (Beds), Mr A Rudd (Hants), Mrs J Taylor (Nuneaton), Mrs J Taylor (Preston) and Mrs M Webster (Somerset).
The solution to April's Supercrozzle will appear in June SHE.
SMALL BUSINESS COMPETITION
See page 56.
This competition is open to anyone who has been trading for less than three years (ie since May 1989).
Tell us, in no more than 1,500 words, when and why you started your business, how you went about setting it up, what stage you are at and your plans for the future.
You can be sole trader, in a partnership or limited company, in the manufacturing, retailing or service industries.
Please include information about your service of product, plus information on who uses or buys it, and give a detailed description of the product and how it is make (you may sent pictures).
Also mention how you promote and finance your product/service.
Finally, don't forget to tell us something about yourself and why you have chosen this path.
The judges will be looking for businesses with innovative ideas, a foreseeable profitable future as well as success to date, ideas for future expansion, commitment to equal opportunities, steps taken for job-share/part-time (where applicable), creativity, products which are environment-friendly and efforts to enhance the working environment.
The winners will be the businesses the judges feel have come closest to achieving these criteria.
Entries should be typed (double-spaced) on A4 paper.
On the top sheet of your entry, write your name, address, telephone number(s), name of business and product/service provided.
Send entries, with entry coupon (below) attached, to SHE/Midland Bank Small Business Competition, SHE, 72 Broadwick Street, London W1V 2BP, to arrive by June 1 1992.
Please read rules of entry (above).
Entries will remain copyright of the entrant but can only be returned if they are accompanied by a large stamped addressed envelope.
For information about the products mentioned:
Apple Computer, dial 100 and ask for Freefone Apple.
Royal Mail, tel: 071–320 7133.
Betacom, tel: 081–804 9909.
Pentagon, tel: 0256 479111.
Topps of England Keytime Management System, tel: 0444 235141.
Fellowes, tel: 0302 885331.
Institute of Business Counsellors, tel: 06285 28499.
DISNEY COMPETITION
As well as a huge range of toothbrushes, Jordan makes a dental tape, floss and sticks which help eliminate plaque and prevent decay.
Jordan products are available from branches of Safeway, Gateway, Morrisons and selected chemists.
Destination USA offers more independence than traditional package holidays.
You can choose the airline, type of hire car, hotel and resort.
There are discounts of up to 70% for children aged 2–11.
For information/brochure, tel: 081–891 3131.
DEATH IN PARADISE COMPETITION
Our November/December 1991 competition required powers of detection — novelist Lesley Grant-Adamson set her murder mystery on the Caribbean island of St Lucia.
The first prize of a family holiday in Club St Lucia was won by Lucy Tizzard from Surrey, who worked out whodunnit.
The solution:Roger Wickens' death was murder, not suicide; he was left-handed and could not have shot himself as described.
The killer was Irene Blackburn, one of the victims of Wickens' embezzlement.
After her husband told her they had been ruined by Wickens, she stormed off to confront him, only to see him setting off on his bicycle.
When she tackled him in the wood, he produced the gun to frighten her off but she wrested it from him and shot him.
Next day, she staged the discovery of his body with maximum disturbance.
THAILAND COMPETITION
The winner of our December 1991 competition was Hilary Hadden from Devon.
Her prize is a fabulous two-week holiday for two in Thailand, flying by the award-winning Royal Orchid Service of THAI Airways International and staying in luxury hotels in Bangkok, Mae Hong Son and Ko Samui, courtesy of The Imperial Family of Hotels.
JANUARY SUPERCROZZLE
The ten winners of the January 1991 Supercrozzle each received an Equator attaché case from the E200/Scholar range, worth £57.50, plus a matching folio worth £57.50, plus a matching folio worth £28.75: Mrs M Benford (Surrey), M Brister (Surrey), A Cousens (Reading), Miss J Dale (Wakefield), Ms S Marshall (Lanc), Miss N Matthews (Glos), Mrs M Miller (Hants), A Morgans (Middx), Ms F Reece (Middx), Miss L Rowcroft (Co Durham).
STOCKISTS
Telephone numbers are given for information and stockist details           
SHE mail
A CRY FOR HELP
Anorexia (The safe rebellion , February SHE) creeps up when least expected.
At 15, our daughter knew the calorific contents of every morsel and was making herself sick by drinking vinegar.
Amazingly, she escaped teenage anorexia.
At 26, however, dieting and abnormal exercise took over her life.
Her friends told her she looked wonderful, but her periods stopped and she was nervy, edgy and hard to be with.
She moved abroad but kept in touch and eventually we persuaded her to see a doctor.
‘You're fine,’ he said.
‘Nothing abnormal about not having a period for two years.
Once you've stopped dieting your periods will return, but you may need a little help if you want to have a baby…‘
I was horrified and sought help.
One recovering anorexic advised, ‘Talk to her!
Anorexics are crying out inside and can't believe that no-one has noticed how thin they have become.’
I flew out to see her and, carefully choosing the right time, confronted her with anorexia.
She denied it, but her attitude changed — she seemed to be petulantly relieved.
I said she had to change her lifestyle and eating habits or I would insist she came home.
The cure was slow; she ate a little more each day, cut down on the aerobic treadmill and her periods returned.
She became happier.
But we are not out of the woods.
She came for a visit with her favourite slimming magazine.
‘I hate my fat knees,’ she said, and went off for a ten-mile hike.
Name and address supplied
I, too, suffered from anorexia which started when I was 15.
I have a twin brother and it seemed that he was allowed to do all the things I wasn't.
I began to believe that he was better than me, and that I was an unattractive person, inside and out.
That's how it started.
I would binge and vomit or just not eat at all.
This went on for 13 months until my parents realised that I needed medical attention.
By this time I was 5ft 7in, weighed six stone, was covered in boils, had a mouthful of ulcers and hadn't had a period for four months.
I still thought I was fat.
The doctor at the hospital told my mother I would grow out of it.
I was 19 before I was completely well and able to accept the real me.
I hope the health service's attitude has changed because anyone suffering from anorexia feels isolated and needs as much support as they can get — from doctors and their family.
Name and address supplied
BEDROOM FARCE
I laughed and nodded in agreement all the way through Forget sex: are you good in bed together ?
(March SHE).
My husband and I have had separate bedrooms for three years.
We are extremely happily married but totally incompatible in bed.
He goes to bed late, thrashes around, snores and yanks the duvet over to his side.
I'm a working mother and need all the sleep I can get.
I also lie diagonally, go to bed early and sleep lightly.
If I mention our separate sleeping arrangements to friends, they are horrified.
Thank you, SHE — I thought our sleep incompatibility was unique!
Name and address supplied
THE LITTLE WHITE LIE
Having read If you can't make it, fake it (February SHE), all I can say is, don't.
I spent ten years faking it, and hating it, and it didn't get me anywhere.
When I met my husband, I knew he was the one for me, and I knew that I would have to be honest if our marriage wasn't to be based on a lie.
I confided in him and we worked at it together and I found a way to have an orgasm.
It was my problem, not my husband's, but he had the patience and the imagination to try everything in the book!
It's not a sin to lie about it but, in my opinion, it's far better to tell the truth.
Name and address supplied
ROLE REVERSAL
Christopher Middleton (Why can't you women leave us alone?,
February SHE) is obviously under the impression that all women are clinging, whining and rather pathetic creatures.
His belief that a female wants to change everything about her man is shortsighted.
Some women aren't obsessed with the shirts their partners wear, and aren't utterly downcast if their men go off to play sports.
Women often have more important — and interesting — things to think about.
He also presumes that ‘all pressure for change comes from one direction only’.
I have met men who tried to squash my independence and iron out my eccentricities.
Perhaps he has only met one type of female and doesn't realise that a woman can value time alone and isn't forever fretting over her partner's choice of underwear.
BREASTFEED OR BUST?
I was most concerned about the implication that breastfeeding leaves breasts looking drained, saggy and helpless (Little or large?,
January SHE).
In fact, most damage to breast shape happens during their often rapid growth during pregnancy, then when filling with milk a few days after birth.
This will happen whether or not the mother chooses to go on breastfeeding.
Provided a breastfeeding mother looks after herself by wearing a good supporting bra, no further damage should be done to her figure.
As breastfeeding is often difficult enough for women to manage, please do not further discourage other women from breastfeeding when it is not this factor which is mainly responsible for the loss of shape.
MACHO MALADY
Geraldine Lynn hit the nail on the head with Sick blokes (February SHE).
Men are babies when it comes to being ill.
My husband and I both suffer from migraines and we have identical symptoms: sickness, blurred vision, sensitivity to loud noises and a banging headache.
When he realises that he has a migraine, my husband retires to bed for a few hours then spends the rest of the day in an armchair.
I carry on as usual.
Need I say more…?
Please send your letters to SHE, National Magazine House, 72 Broadwick Street, London W1V 2BP.
Please give a daytime telephone number, if possible.
£10 goes to the writer of each letter on this page.
Letters submitted must be your own original work and must not be offered for publication elsewhere at the same time.
COLUMNIST OF THE YEAR
maureen lipman has the last word!
It's almost 17 years since I was last hauled up a mountainside with a metal bar across my bum, two poles in one hand and my arm around the anorak of an unknown Austrian whose only English was ‘Bend ze knees’ and ‘Open ze legs’.
Seventeen blissful years with nary a thought of green sunblock, purple reflective goggles or navy blue knockers and not a knot in my stomach, in anticipation of hurtling off a glacier with sweat running down my longjohns into my boot-bindings.
You know, you've been there, you with your own triangular boots bag and Rossignol skis.
You probably go with a gang of friends to the same chalet every February.
You have progressed from nursery slopes to post-graduate slopes, struck up a personal, and possibly a carnal, relationship with Walter (with a V) and can make your own raclette.
Not so I. I'm a natural.
A natural beginner.
And never more so than recently in Switzerland on holiday with Jack, and friends Julia and Gerry.
Only Gerry really intended to ski, a fact which was emphasised by an extra piece of luggage, eight inches wide and six feet long, which had its own special rack on the car roof.
‘Here go the English on holiday,’ I mused as we drove from Geneva airport, ‘four people and two skis.’
The scenery, it goes without saying, is a miracle of mind over Matterhorn.
To have towering, snow-spattered mountains everywhere you look, to gaze down into valleys, dotted — as it says in the brochures — with carved wooden chalets with roofs like lyres — to have all this and chocolate, too, is almost obscene.
No wonder they  keeps themselves to themselves.
They've got their fall-out shelters under moulded hills, their neutral army, their numbered bank accounts — what do they want with the European butter market and Albanian refugees hanging from boats?
They've got more important things on their minds.
Like quartz clocks, aluminium fondue sets, embroidered hankies and whether the neighbours are taking baths too late at night.
Oh, and where were the cows and goats?
Not one animal did we see all week — or hear, for that matter — although the small-windowed barns on the mountain paths, the frequent smell of liquid manure and the amount of cheese melting on menus indicted that there must, somewhere, be some.
The snow was on the turn after a mild spell and the chalet in Moléson, which must look picturesque under a blanket of neige , looking decidedly Pontins decked in half-grass and half-ice.
‘Never mind — it's fine !
Oh, look, there is linen.
Oh, look at this sweet little picture of a cow…heavens, they've left a bag of oranges.
Oh, here's the opener — for God's sake, let's have a Campari!’
Thus it was that both the sun and our faces were shining when we took the telecabin to the top of the nearest mountain and developed a habit which was to stick like glühwein: rösti — a Swiss potato cake, fried, with two eggs on top.
It slides crisply into the mouth and settles snugly on the thigh section of the ski pants.
This became our daily opiate — where to get the best one, whether to have it en haut or la bas and, ultimately, whether the telecabin, which took us waveringly up, would manage the much heavier journey down.
And so it came to pass that on the third day we journeyed to Gstaad and skied.
Not Jack, of course.
He's got his head screwed on right.
And his right hip, as it happens.
Gerry went into the big boys' class and Julia and I into the kindergarten where infants of three flew past us effortlessly.
Our instructor was a disaster.
Bellowing ‘Vatch me!’ he took off to show how it was done and then stood chatting at the bottom while we failed to do it.
‘My friend has never skied before,’ I panted, after picking her up out of a picket fence.
‘She doesn't know how to stop.’
‘Yes, yes, she must not vurry…relax…vait, I show…’ and off he went again.
Showing us.
After a triumphant journey of 30-odd feet, unfortunately executed backwards, Julia propelled herself neatly into the nearest restaurant and ordered an early rösti.
I, however, plodded on in the dolt's group.
Once the instructor had got us up, by lift, to where the air is rarefied, he disappeared.
For an hour.
His party of eight stood around grumbling and scuffing their skis.
Except me.
I sat down, leading to the biggest problem so far: getting up.
It took 20 minutes, four helpers, a Kama Sutra repositioning and the removal of one ski.
As I stood up, exhausted, Walter returned and began barking out his inaudible orders.
We followed lamblike, dropping like ninepins at each turn.
It was war.
The next time I went down, I stayed down, tearing blindly at my bindings.
‘Put ze ski back on,’ yelled Volly.
‘You put the bloody ski back on, mate!
I'm walking!’
I threw down my fibreglass extensions and made as polished an exit as possible, given that my huge orange plastic boots were not made for walking.
It took me an hour to zig-zag down that pesky Alp, and it will be at least another 17 years before I go up a mountain for anything other than rösti or a yodel.
On the final day, we were entering the Restaurant de la Tour when we heard the cow.
It was very close.
We ran across the road to see it but the area remained a cow-free zone.
The ‘moo-ooooo’, however, was as loud as ever.
We finally tracked it down to a small covered trailer behind a parked car.
A cow on its way to its own funeral.
‘Oh God,’ said Julia as we crossed back to the restaurant.
‘Don't anybody have steak for lunch’.
‘Noo-ooo-oo!’ said the cow under wraps.
‘Noo-ooo-oo.’
She sounded as piste-off as I was.