

We will thoroughly investigate any complaints notified to us in writing by our readers of any unsatisfactory transactions entered into following any matter published in this magazine.
However, we shall not be responsible for death, injury, loss, damage or delay of any kind whatsoever to any property or persons howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly from the use in any manner whatsoever of information including advertisements printed in this magazine.
Any course of conduct followed or any transaction entered into by the reader arising from anything published in this magazine is so carried out or entered into at the reader's sole risk.
The views expressed by the contributors are not necessarily those of the publisher and accordingly we do not accept any responsibility in relation thereto.
CIRCLES OF TIME
Part One
This, the first of a series of articles into the existence of an underlying geometrical pattern which governs our countryside, starts with an investigation as to whether the Circles of Churches discovered by Messrs David Wood (Genisis ) and Henry Lincoln (with Michael Baigent and Richard Leigh in The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail ) have a basis in fact.
We should consider also, that if they do exist then they may be but a part of a much larger pattern which stretches not only access the tiny and remote areas of south-western France but across western Europe and possibly other parts of the world.
If it can be proved that the pattern exists, then there is a strong possibility that by tracing this pattern, certain locations will be revealed to which the metal detectorist would be well-advised to direct his search.
Whilst these articles may make slight demands upon your mathematical skills, be assured that your indulgence will bring its own reward.
My intention is to bring a little common sense to bear on the claims made by the authors mentioned above, because claims that buildings and landscape have been laid out geometrically can at least be checked.
I merely ask that you keep a sceptical, but open mind and ask for nothing more than that you check the figures given to you.
Accept nothing on trust.
Then, and only then, will you be in a position to make up your own mind as to whether the pattern exists and, if so, profit by it.
Abbe Berenger Sauniere's famous library tower built overhanging the precipice of the plateau at Rennes-le-Chateau with the missing crenellations
Rennes-le-Chateau
When David Wood discovered his circle of churches at Rennes-le-Chateau in France, in 1982, it was a remarkable discovery — that four ancient churches, a chateau and a megalithic feature stood exactly on the perimeter of a gigantic circle seemed too miraculous to be true.
When further research showed that other circles of almost six miles radius (double that of Rennes-le-Chateau) had already been found in the county Wiltshire and the midlands and were even more clearly marked by ancient building, I determined to investigate the phenomenon.
My research in the following few years was to lead me first to Rennes-le-Chateau to check Wood's discovery and then to Wiltshire's Marlborough Downs, which have since also become home to the world's corn circle phenomenon.
I finally turned to Kent, not because of what had already been discovered there but because it was on my doorstep and a lot more accessible than either France or Wiltshire.
If the theories for the circles were to have any weight, they would have to be tested on ‘virgin’ territory and for that reason and the ease of access, Kent fitted the bill.
If I am right, then the circles discovered so far are only the tip of the iceberg.
I believe that they are extant throughout Europe and that our ancient villages did not just grow up according to the ribbon development and river crossing theory of geography, but conform to a larger, geometric pattern.
This pattern should afford innumerable opportunities for detectorists for many of the places are situated on virgin, unsearched territory.
In this first article I will retrace my first steps to Rennes-le-Chateau and the beginning of the mystery.
It is a treasure tale well-worth telling and contains everything a detectorist could wish for: concealed documents, codes and treasure of various forms.
In the first part of this century a shepherd, returning from his upland pasture near Rennes-le-Chateaux, stumbled and fell into a fissure in the limestone escarpment, breaking his leg.
When daylight dawned he found that he was sharing space with a hoard of gold ingots, one of the lost treasures of the area.
When the shepherd eventually limped back to civilisation and told his unlikely tale, the authorities located the treasure and imprisoned the shepherd for theft.
The thought that the position of this find and others might be located by map using basic geometry is an intriguing one, but at least one tomb of a Knight Templar has been found to lay exactly on an important map intersection in the Rennes Valley.
Treasure trail
Treasure and the maps to locate it are the stuff we dream of, whether the treasure be a golden Celtic  torque or a Roman pottery shard is not as important, perhaps, as the quest and excitement of making the find.
To enhance our chances of making such discoveries many of us use maps of one kind or another.
To Schliemann, the modern discoverer of Troy, his ‘map’ was the reading and interpretation of Homer, rather than the more conventional ‘inch to the mile’Ordnance Survey map.
Although he was promoted to begin his search for Troy because of an obscure literary reference to the lost city, he was at heart doing the same thing as modern detectorists; albeit, some might say, at a more scholarly level — searching for something lost and using his wits to find it.
However, it should be remembered that, at the time, most of his academic peers thought him quite mad!
Fortunately, in this series of articles we will use more conventional maps to set us on the treasure trail, because it is my belief that correctly interpreted, the Ordnance Survey maps of the British Isles already contain most of the information necessary to track down some of the treasures that time has so cunningly concealed!
The beauty of this method is that it is not only fascinating but incredibly cheap and will not need large capital expenditure to put it to the test.
First, though, I must set the scene and beg the indulgence of any reader who feels the ground somewhat familiar, as this story begins where another's ends.
The starting point of my research was  Rennes-le-Chateau in the department of the Aude, in south-western France.
The time was the middle 1970s, marked by a series of ‘Chronicle’ television programmes, made by the author Henry Lincoln.
Lincoln's first episode was entitled ‘The Priest, the Painter and the Devil’ and captured the imagination of millions.
The story concerned the priest of Rennes-le-Chateau, Berenger  Sauniere , who was appointed in the 1880s.
Although his yearly stipend only amounted to £6.00 or so in today's values, he was soon witnessed to be spending the equivalent of thousands of pounds on various good works for his village.
He paid for water to be piped from the valley 1,500ft below the village and for a proper tarmacadam road to be constructed, linking it to the twin towns of Couiza and Montazels in the valley below.
Sauniere achieved this only after he had started renovating his church at Rennes-le-Chateau; a fact that didn't escape the attention of the Church or the villagers.
From all accounts, the church was badly in need of repair.
Witnesses at the time stated that it was roofless, which was bad news for any building in the foothills of the Pyrenees, where the wind always blows and snow regularly falls.
It was during the restoration of the church, which dates from the Visigothic period (approximately 460–700 AD), that Sauniere started behaving suspiciously.
He is known to have defaced a gravestone in the churchyard, rendering it illegible.
Accounts also tell how he used to lock himself in the church all night.
On other occasions, he had been seen walking in the surrounding countryside at the dead of night, carrying sacks full of rocks.
After a while, the villagers suspected that their priest must have stumbled across some sort of treasure, for how else could the funding of his good works be explained?
However, the Catholic Church at Carcassonne had its own ideas about Sauniere's riches and accused him  of simony — the selling of pardons — a charge which was eventually dropped.
A good mystery
In all, Rennes-le-Chateau contains all the ingredients of a good mystery, with treasures ranging from that of the Temple of Solomon, the treasures of the Visigoths, who made Rhedae (Rennes-le-Chateau) their capital, to the Knights Templar in the nearby le Bezu and the Cathars, who were exterminated at Montsegur at the end of the Albigensian crusades.
Of course, neither should we forget the shadowy Priory of Sion, the organisation that Lincoln spent much time on in his excellent bestseller The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail.
Whatever  Sauniere had stumbled across in the 1880s, the French author, Gerard de Sede, wrote about it nearly eighty years later.
Lincoln, in turn, came across the mystery in de Sede's book Le Tresor Maudit (The Cursed Treasure), which he had picked up for some light holiday reading.
De Sede states that Sauniere came across ciphers written on parchment and concealed in a hollow, Visigothic altar pillar, whilst renovating the church at Rennes-le-Chateaux.
De Sede published details of the encoded documents but not their solution.
Lincoln solved the codes during his holiday and on his return home contacted de Sede and asked him why he hadn't published the solution.
De Sede, in turn, feigned surprise and stated that he hadn't given the solution because he didn't know it.
Lincoln was intrigued and started his quest, which resulted in the three television programmes and his book The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail.
I confess that I was completely hooked on Lincoln's work, but like most other people I could not agree with his conclusions or refute them as I had no knowledge of Rennes-le-Chateau, its area or history.
The visit
And so the matter rested until 1982.
That autumn, I was working in a vineyard in the Medoc, north of Bordeaux, and with time to spare when the vintage finished, I decided to visit Rennes-le-Chateau and see for myself what all the fuss was about.
The journey was a long-winded one, first by train to Carcassonne and then to Couiza-Montazels.
Although the lack of signposts made it difficult to locate the road to Rennes-le-Chateau, I eventually found it and trudged the 4.7km to the village.
The road climbs steadily to 1,500ft following the contours of the hillside which are covered in part by small vineyards.
It was an exhausting climb which took nearly an hour and a half to complete in the midday heat of 90°.
When I arrived, I was treated to magnificent views of the Pyrenees in the distance, but was disappointed to find the church, which was the reason for the trek, was closed.
A notice in the porch stated that the church-keys were available from the first house in the village.
I retraced my steps but to no avail.
There was no-one in.
I made this round trip between church and house three times and settled in the end for slaking my thirst from a tap in the churchyard.
Apart from witnessing the now infamous inscription Terribilis ist locus est (‘This is a terrible place’), incised above the church porch, I had journeyed in vain.
Time was marching on an in order to return to the hotel in Carcassonne I needed to leave in good time.
I tried the church door one last time in the vain hope that I had mistakenly found it closed, but closed it remained.
I called for the last time at the first house in the village and pressed the buzzer, but on getting no reply resigned myself to the long walk down the mountain.
I had taken the first step when an elderly man touched my shoulder and asked in the lilting, Spanish-accented French of the region, if I wished to view the church.
When I said that I did, he led me up the narrow street to the church and unlocked the ancient door.
The old man  stretched out his hand towards me and demanded ‘un Franc’ which he fed into an electricity meter, causing the church lights to blaze into life.
Out of the shadows, appeared a grotesque statue of the devil (thought to be Asmodeus) supporting a benitier of angels.
He left me to wander about on my own for twenty minutes before returning to lock up.
Although I do not propose to go into the details of the church here, suffice to say, it struck me as a very curious place with many things strangely out of kilter.
For example, inside, the stations of the cross had been arranged counter-clockwise and the decorations were way ‘over the top’.
Outside, a weather vane had been built in the lee of the vicarage next door, hardly an ideal position; especially, when I discovered that its arrow pointer had been fixed to point in the direction of the ruined castle Blanchefort in the nearby mountains.
Curious indeed!
More research
In the year following that first visit, I read and devoured everything I could about Rennes-le-Chateau.
When I returned by car the following October, I was at least ready for the place.
I had considered that perhaps the clues to the  several lost treasures were concealed in the fabric of the buildings, that clues might be readily available for the discerning eye — although, logic would surely dictate otherwise.
I fixed my attention on the tower of the library which the priest, Sauniere, had built on the edge of a precipice overlooking the distant village of Esperaza.
I thought it possible that directional sightings could be made from the centre of the tower through the crenellations and was intrigued to find that one of them had disappeared since my previous visit.
I imagined that this might have been done to obliterate a directional ‘fix’ to throw treasure hunters off the scent.
There were some strange people around Rennes-le-Chateau that autumn, some wearing jewellery decorated with mystic signs.
One group rode mountain ponies, with spades and metal detectors sticking out of their saddle-bags.
Rennes-le-Chateau was obviously a Mecca for all manner of people.
That evening I visited a bookshop in neighbouring Rennes-le- Chateau, some three miles further along the valley of the Sals.
There, I asked the proprietor if there were any really old places I could visit and he directed me to a farm called La Valdieu.
Situated on a high plain, behind Rennes-le-Chateau, La Valdieu was at the end of a very rough track.
I stopped the car in the entrance to the farm and would the window down an inch or two.
I greeted the first man to approach the car in my broken French and to my surprise, he asked if I would prefer to continue the conversation in English.
I sheepishly agreed.
All the inhabitants of La Valdieu turned out to be English and when they had explained that they had all independently ended up at the farm without having had any conscious intention of doing so, my sceptical  antennae started twitching.
I asked what was the oldest part of the farm and was shown a flagstone path leading down to a valley.
Whether it was the disappointment showing on my face I shall never know, for my guide quickly added that it was a Celtic path and, perhaps, more than 4,000 years old.
I walked down it from the top to bottom and could only marvel at the way it had been constructed.
Not only were there flagstones underfoot but they were also used to line the hillside, to prevent minor earth slips covering the path.
On our return from the Celtic path, I asked my guide if there was anything else I should see or know about.
He asked me if I knew anything about ley lines and I confessed my ignorance.
He said that it would be senseless telling me things that I was incapable of understanding.
Suitably rebuffed, I asked if there was anything else he would care to mention.
He told me that during the nine months he had been at the farm he and the others had noticed that the landscape had changed.
When I questioned him about this, he replied enigmatically that certain rock formations which had existed when they had arrived, had since disappeared and that he could swear that the rocks in some places had moved closer together.
This strange, unsolicited statement was to have further ramifications later on.
With a final piece of advice that I should climb the hill opposite La Valdieu the next day, I look my leave of the little group, wondering whether they or I were perhaps a little insane.
The next day, taking their advice, I climbed to the top of the hill through steep, dense undergrowth, clambering from tree to tree like a demented chimp.
The journey was not in vain, for I quickly realised that I was walking on man-made terraces.
Closer inspection revealed vertical walling of Cyclopean dimensions — walls built of stone blocks measuring 3ft x 2ft and weighing hundreds of pounds.
A further search of the area revealed mill-stones and a stone bridge some 20ft long, slightly arched, but with each end perfectly jointed into the bedrock on each side of a rushing stream.
Perhaps it was more evidence of a Celtic past.
 Whatever its origins, it certainly doesn't appear on any maps of the area, ancient or modern.
Definitive pattern emerges
My next visit was in 1987 when, armed with the necessary maps and a compass, I started to try and untangle the mystery of Rennes-le-Chateau.
Yet another crenellation had been removed from Sauniere's library tower, reinforcing my instinctive belief that it was an integral part of the story.
The find on that trip lay, though, in another book purchase:Genisis by an English author, David Wood.
I stayed up most of the night, totally engrossed in the book only to find that David Wood had published what I had only just begun to suspect, a definite pattern  underlying  the whole region of Rennes-le-Chateau .
The crux of his research was the discovery of a circle of churches which included that of Rennes-le-Chateau.
Certainly, on the printed page and, therefore, at a fairly small scale, it looked impressive.
It also tied in the now famous tomb on the road to Arques, which supposedly features in Poussin's painting of ‘Les Bergeres d'Arcadie’, into the geometry.
Wood's scholarship seemed sound and his research well-thought out.
Later, I managed to contact him and after a preliminary meeting, which lasted some thirteen hours, he was gracious enough to supply me with large-scale copies of maps of the area for me to be able to check his work — generosity indeed!
David Wood's contention was that a  circle of radius 2.94 miles connected the churches of the Rennes-le-Chateau, Bugarach, Coustaussa and le Bezu with the chateau at Serres.
A megalithic feature called Toustounes also straddled the circle.
Working with the 1:25,000-scale French IGN map, the idea of the circle seemed scarcely feasible.
The area was mountainous with several peaks between 2,000ft and 3,000ft.
The thought that churches and castles had been laid out to fit some geometrical pattern on the scale suggested seemed farfetched.
Nevertheless, enough weight had been given by several sources to make it worthwhile checking.
Unfortunately, as always seems to be the case, the area in question falls across two adjoining maps and the only way to check the theory is to join the two maps together using double-sided Sellotape.
A circle of 189.26mm radius (representing the 2.94 miles radius) was drawn on an acetate sheet and the resulting overlay superimposed on the map.
It showed that not only was Wood's circle feasible but that it definitely seemed to exist, at least within the limitations of maps and acetate overlays.
If true, then the question that Wood's discovery posed was how had a series of  churches and a chateau of proven antiquity (with each building nearly 1,000 years old), been positioned in mountainous countryside?
Subsequent meetings with David Wood, far from resolving the enigma of Rennes-le-Chateau, only revealed greater complexity as new geometry was discovered.
Wood has been able to bring several skills to his work — his Ordnance Survey abilities, learnt during his army service, and various mapping techniques — which must have proved invaluable.
Whether the circle of churches exists, or whether it is a figment of a map-maker's imagination remains to be seen.
In order to confirm or disprove the phenomena, certain criteria have to be decided in order for the theory to have any value.
Is the method of offering a pen-drawn circle on a sheet of acetate to a map satisfactory?
What about map-stretch?
I know from my photographic experience that both paper and acetate readily stretch and shrink with changes in humidity and that even the finest 0.10mm line represents 2.5m on the ground.
If the Circle of Churches could be proved to exist, the implication would be staggering — that hundreds if not thousands of years before history would allow, ancient man had seemingly developed the ability to survey and measure the land with astounding accuracy,accuracy not matched until the dawn of the space age .
So, before setting off on my search, I resolved to check the existing evidence as critically as I could.
Next month, I shall deal with the examination of the French Circle of Churches and the setting-up of the necessary parameters such research requires.
The strange, fixed weather vane that stands in the lee of the vicarage at Rennes-le-Chateau.
The letters on the vane are of course the cardinal points of the compass in French, Nord, Sud, est & ouest.
What is also curious, is that if the vertical pointer is lined-up with the vertical stroke of the letter ‘E’ so that it becomes an ‘I’, the name SION can be read.
John Rymouth stands on the 20 foot single piece, arched stone bridge across a mountain stream and points to the Cylopean walls discovered on a hill top in the Rennes valley
Team member Dennis Garvey unearths several ‘mill-stones’ on the hill-side near the village of Rennes-le-Chateau
Coustaussa Serres Toustounes Bugarach Circle of Churches St Just Rennes-le-Chateau
Castle's Corner
John Castle
Middleham scam?
The Middleham jewel has been ‘saved’ for the nation at a cost of £2.5 million, most of it being public money.
It was the buyer's intent (or threat) to export the jewel that did it.
All very neat.
A bit too neat, maybe?
Consider the facts:
The jewel was sold at auction for the then amazing sum of £1.3 million in 1987.
Afterwards it vanished without trace and the buyer remains unknown.
Now, four years later, the buyer is threatening to export the jewel, which is now worth £2.5 million.
A very nice little earner for the buyer!
Some questions arise:
How was the present value of £2.5 million arrived at?
Surely, only another auction would have revealed it — or otherwise?
Was there any real intent to export the jewel?
Was the original purchase made with such a money-making end in mind?
Over to you — the jury.
Spy versus spy
Quite by accident, I learned of a secret meeting between a Kent arkie and Kent detector users and representatives.
Some detector users living in Kent might have expected an invitation but didn't get one, while at least two of those invited (who have made no mention of the meeting on the several occasions I have spoken to them) do not live in Kent.
Interesting.
Furthermore, I have it on good authority that the same arkie has been invited to attend the South of England Rally this year.
Speaking after the meeting to someone who did attend it, I was told that the arkies' interference with the rally last year comprised bluff and empty threats!
The organisers and the NCMD fell right into that one, didn't they?
So why invite them this year?
I smell a sell-out!
There are those who are calling for improved minimum standards at rallies.
If this includes an official arkie presence, please don't bother to invite me.
It's not that we have anything to hide.
Anyone, arkie or not, is entitled to pay their entrance fee and participate, or just look round.
Protecting our heritage?
Two tapestries valued at £125,000 were stolen from a National Trust property, Packwood House, on 2 August 1991.
A rare piece of Dresden china valued at £35,000 has been stolen from Hereford City Museum.
English Heritage has been severely criticised for allowing a Georgian chimney-piece to be removed from Stedcombe House in Devon, which is a listed building, and sold by the present owner.
It is for sale at £750,000.
Another nice little earner.
English Heritage — again
As English Heritage do not like us, it is with some glee that I report dissent in their own ranks.
Since the appointment of Mr J Stevens as its new chairman, some wonderful phrases have appeared in the media about both Mr Stevens and English Heritage in general.
Phrases such as:
‘Like appointing King Herod as Minister for Childcare.’
‘A tragedy, quite terrifying, beyond belief.’
‘Any passer-by would be preferable.’
‘Well, that's it for English Heritage.’
‘Innumerable bureaucrats still reeling at the news.’
Mr Stevens is said to have little patience with bureaucrats, which endears him to me no end.
If he is that different from the present denizens, perhaps his influence may extend to more tolerance toward detector users?
A new word was recently coined to describe bodies such as English heritage: quangaroos — hopping about in a random fashion, getting in everyone's way and generally making a nuisance of themselves at good rates of public pay.
Very apt, I wish I'd thought of it.
Recoveries
We had three requests to find lost rings at the shop in one day recently.
The first ring was thrown out of a window after a row.
We lent the husband a cheapie and he found it, 8ft up in a tree among the ivy.
The second ring was also slung out of a window after a row.
In this case, the husband had searched the garden on his hands and knees, clipping the longer grass with snips!
My son Charlie took a 1265-X to have a go.
It teemed down, so back came a soaked Charlie and 1265-X.
Next day the weather was fine so Maureen, with a 1235-X in tow, popped round to have a go.
She found it within five minutes.
A nice basket of flowers arrived at our house the next day.
The third ring was lost in a garden.
We loaned the wife a basic machine.
She came back the next day.
No luck yet, but her husband was very interested in the detector and wanted to buy it!
One way of selling detectors, I suppose.
A fairy tale
I note the circles in wheat-fields, alleged to have been caused by extra-terrestrial visitors, are again in the news.
Are the miscreants aware that they are guilty of trespass and criminal damage?
Will they be prosecuted if caught?
How will they pay any fine?
Perhaps they are nighthawks from space!
If so, then it's no wonder they don't hang about.
Boo hoo
One of our customers works at the Royal Mint.
Many large bags (not the small plastic things they gave us to put change in) of old 5ps have been returned by banks for disposal.
A few of these bags were full of never-used pre-decimal silver shillings!
More silver coins than any of us would find in a lifetime, all into the melting-pot.
Any bank managers out there reading this, please send any pre-1947 English silver coins to me.
I would be glad to exchange them for the same face value as the increasingly worthless and derisory folding stuff.
I'll even give you a pound for every gold sovereign sent.
Law matters
A recent court case in Norfolk was interesting.
Four guys were caught using detectors on a farmer's field at night.
The jury unanimously voted to acquit them.
They judge said that, if landowners don't want trespassers on their land, they should erect fences and ‘no trespass’ signs to keep them out.
One of those accused told me that a proper legal defence cost him only £140.00 with legal aid, which he got back because they won.
The police had to hand back their metal detectors etc, in the court.
If judges and juries regard such trespass as trivial in the extreme, who are we to argue?
This question will be thrown into sharp focus when the pending NCMD policy statement document is published.
Back-handed compliment?
It is very rare for a farmer to allow us access to his fields once he has seeded them.
I heard of a notable exception recently, where the farmer almost encouraged two detectorists to search his seeded fields.
Puzzled, they asked him why he allowed it.
He said that the few holes they had dug and refilled would not  affect his crop and, more importantly, they were the best ‘scarecrows’ he'd ever known!
I suppose the scarecrow approach is one way of getting sites.
Newbury Rally
Unfortunately, I was only able to get to the Newbury Rally for one day this year.
It was, as usual, a great rally with many natural finds, good prizes and events.
No arkies to vex us either.
To judge from the smooth and professional way things progressed, organising and running a rally is easy.
Not a bit of it!
That Newbury goes so well is entirely due to Mick and Julie Turrell and their long experience as organisers, plus their willingness to work hard for those who attend.
The fact that attendance figures grow each year is testament to Newbury's deserved popularity.
I'm sure all of those who attended this year's rally will join me in a sincere vote of thanks to Mick and Julie Turrell.
See you all next year!
News & Views
Telford exhibition
A few weeks ago the Wrekin Council in Shropshire banned the use of metal detectors from its 5,000 hectares of land.
Many reasons were given, from Health and Safety Regulations, destroying the environment, to trespassing on to archaeological sites.
Despite many letters sent to councillors by detecting partners John England and Colin Ayling, and members of the Shropshire Antiquities Group, the council would not change its stance.
Rather than carry on with such negative action, John and Colin decided to do something more constructive and let the general public know just what their activities involved.
They decided to set up an exhibition showing all aspects of their hobby at a venue where thousands of people would be able to see their exhibits.
After some deliberation they chose the spacious shopping complex at the Telford town centre.
They had envisaged a two-month period to put the exhibition together but Central Promotional Services of Leicester, who manage the Centre, offered free exhibition space on 17 August, just ten days after their initial inquiries.
Colin takes up the story: ‘I was busy making the display cases at home, whilst John made inquiries regarding tables we could use.
We both decided that we needed more detector users to help us on the day, so John contacted members of the Shropshire Antiquities Group, who were more than willing to lend a helping hand.
Despite the short time available, ideas were formulated quickly into action and an overall package began to emerge.
‘My inquiries with the RSPCA Wildlife Division were very fruitful.
They were extremely pleased with the knowledge that we remove large amounts of lead during our searches, which poisons the wildlife.
Unfortunately, the posters they sent to us arrived too late for the exhibition but they will be used at future venues.
It is gratifying to know that such an organisation supports us in our endeavours and appreciates the good that we do.
‘Everything was now arranged and John and I were pleased with ourselves; despite the short time available to us, all systems were no go.
‘On the Friday night I had stayed up to watch the late film, and at 3.30am I decided that it wasn't worthwhile going to bed as I had to be at John's house at seven o'clock.
Bleary-eyed, at the appointed hour I loaded the car at John's with two large display cases, posters, boxes of lead, a bag of pre-decimal coinage, two folding chairs, a roll of velvet material — and the kitchen sink!
John and his brother Dave went to fetch three large tables.
On the day
‘The centre's management supplied us with the display screens, upon which we quickly pinned up posters, photographs and press-cuttings.
The tables were covered with the velvet Dave had found and the exhibits laid out in an orderly fashion.
Then, I thought, we could finally sit down and take it easy.
‘Take it easy, did I say!
It was all go from 8.00am until we finally finished at 5.00pm.
The interest shown by the public surpassed all our expectations.
We were continually answering questions and giving away pre-decimal coins, badges and keyrings to young children, who were fascinated by our finds.
We had numerous inquiries about buying a detector and taking up the hobby.’
Gratitude
Colin and John wish to thank White's Electronics for the posters, key-rings and badges they supplied and Denise Rushton, who not only let them have exhibition space free of charge, but also travelled from Leicester to Telford to meet them on the day.
They felt her interest was very genuine, which was appreciated by all concerned.
Last, but not least, they offer their sincere thanks to Paul, Garry and Ken of Shropshire Antiquities Group.
To ask people whom you have previously never met to stand for nine hours answering questions is testament to their love of the hobby.
Exhibition
On Saturday 25 May 1991 the North-Western Federation of metal Detecting Clubs held an exhibition of metal detecting finds at Preston Guild Hall.
The day was a huge success, despite a small drop in attendance figures.
Eight clubs from the North-Western Federation attended and were busy putting up their stalls by 8.00am.
Having been involved in displays of this kind for some years, the northwest clubs' displays were very elaborate and some clever display techniques were seen.
White's Finders, C-Scope, HIS Publishing and Regton Limited were there to represent the trade.
A special stand was erected on behalf of the North-Western Federation.
The public was shown how the hobby is organised, obtained copies the hobby's Code of Conduct, as well as a list of manufacturers and retailers of detectors and associated equipment.
Malcolm Jubb and Jim Ridge of the Ribchester Museum acted as judges and had a very difficult task.
After much deliberation the following results were announced by the newly-elected North-Western Federation Chairman, John Fargher.
Best Overall Display : South-Lancashire and Cheshire.
Best Individual Find : Silver Cromwellian buckle  (Gareth Leech — South-Lancashire and Cheshire.
Best Coin and Best Beach Find : Mold Club.
Theme Category — Buckles : West Lancashire Club.
Hundreds of raffle tickets were sold and the winning tickets drawn.
Proceeds from the raffle went towards offsetting the high expenses of the event.
A special vote of thanks went to the organiser, Graham Davies.
Stolen
Four Minilab Sovereign detectors which were intended for export to Belgium were stolen from the premises of Search Technology on 30 August 1991.
Since these machines were for export, they were adapted for that market and so are unique.
If anyone can offer any information as to their whereabouts, contact Richard Ellis, Search Technology, New House Farm, Latton Common, Harlow, Essex CM17 9NR.
Tel:(0279) 416880.
Newbury Rally
Once again, the Newbury Rally has proved to be a great success, with around 700 detector users and their families attending the weekend of events.
This is the eighth  Newbury Rally that Leisure Promotions have organised and both this and last year's events were well-attended and enjoyed by all.
When Mick and Julie Turrell arrived early Friday morning, they were surprised to see several groups of detector users already on site ready to set up their tents.
By late Friday evening, the campsite was already half full with more campers arriving by the minute.
Members of the Leisure Promotions team take turns throughout the night to police both the event areas and campsite.
From their viewpoint high over the campsite, they were amazed at how soon after daybreak people appeared and started making use of the free detecting areas.
The scouts were also working hard to keep up with the many breakfasts they cooked that morning.
By 9.30am the campsite was buzzing with anticipation as everyone made sure that their equipment was working.
The first field to be searched consisted of sixty-acres.
At the start of the event, one whole side was full of detector users ready for the off!
Whilst all this was going on, back at the marquee all of the manufacturers and traders were preparing their stands.
By the end of the day, many of them said that they had not talked to so many people since the last Newbury Rally!
As the Saturday evening went on and everyone made use of the food and drinks on site, the Leisure Promotions team set about arranging the well-known Night Event.
This event starts at 10.00pm in complete darkness!
The only equipment required is a detector and a set of headphones, as nothing is buried.
Trowels and torches are definitely not allowed!
The event had just started when a woman screamed.
In the long grass she found a massive, black, hairy spider.
Later, she realised it was made of plastic.
There were several shouts from other detector users, who must have found something similar.
Several people had tokens in their hands that had come out of what they hoped was a pile of ‘blancmange’— there were plenty of cows in the field beforehand, so it could have been something else.
There were loads of coins spread about and we know of at least one enterprising youngster who got down on his hands and knees, without the aid of a detector, using his hands to find nearly ten pounds in modern coins and two of the much sought-after tokens.
Sunday: the day started off very much as the day before, only with many more people present.
The two main event arenas comprised nearly 200 acres of ploughed and rolled fields.
Although several hundred detector users were present, they were quickly lost in the massive fields.
Nobody had any problems in finding a space of their own to search in peace.
The problem with such large fields is that it means a lot of walking, but the alternative is to search in smaller fields, which is not a good alternative.
By the end of the day, only a small proportion of tokens had not been found, perhaps one in twenty, but considering the size of the fields, this was not a bad ratio.
Although not only really big natural find came to light, nearly every family group took home a few Roman coins and, perhaps, the odd hammered medieval coin as well.
Certainly, everyone was pleased with how the weekend had gone.
Prize-giving
This followed the same successful formula that proved so popular at the 1990 Newbury Rally.
Owing to the perfect weather the tables were all taken outside and detector users sunbathed on the grass, whilst checking their tokens to see if their number was going to be chosen for a major prize.
Numbers were quickly drawn and the lucky winners came forward to collect their prize from the manufacturers and dealers who donated them.
The last prize to be given was £1,000 in cash.
It was nice to hear everyone give the chap a big cheer as he came forward, obviously overcome with excitement.
It was also nice to see him give the young girl who had drawn his winning number a £20.00 note as a way of saying thank you.
Verdict
In all, it was a very successful and enjoyable rally.
Probably the most pleasing aspect is the number of families now taking an active part in the rally scene, as this can only bode well for the future of metal detecting in this country.
Plans are already in motion for next year's Newbury Rally and details of this will be given in this magazine later in the year.
Strawberry Fair
The Brentwood Metal Detecting Club attended the English Strawberry Fair at the Orsett Showground, Orsett, Essex, which was held during the weekend of 27–28 July this year.
The club raised over £100.00 for the Orsett Hospital Fund and provided the opportunity for many visitors to the fair to try their hands at using a metal detector for the first time.
Many people were genuinely interested in the wide variety of finds on display and showed a keen interest in the hobby in general.
Some of them have since attended the club's regular meetings.
During both days, tokens were buried and prizes were given to the finders.
Joan Allen Electronics Limited, Biggin Hill, and White's Electronics Limited, Inverness, donated the prizes.
Shropshire Antiquities Group exhibition at Telford
Stuart Levitt receives his Eagle II from George McRae (Right)
Brentwood MDC still at Orsett
Club Round-Up
HDMDS
The glorious summer weather we have recently experienced offers much to the avid detectorist.
Combined with a club meeting, this must have all the ingredients of a satisfying hobby.
What more can a member wish for?
The august meeting of the Herts and District Metal Detection Society, while not up to its usual high attendance, owing to many people managing to get away for a few weeks holiday, still managed to attract forty-five members.
However, the evening provided a variety of attractions for those who attended, mainly, a show of display cases of individuals finds, the raffle, the Find of the Month Competition and a healthy discussion about current events in the metal detecting world.
The discussion came about after the disclosure that at a recent meeting of the Southern Federation, there had been some discussion about a publication which was being produced by the police, covering details such a Treasure Trove, responsibilities of landowners and more.
Certainly, on the information available to club members, it appeared that their own case had not been fully represented and that the printing and distribution of such information did not reflect the feelings and attitudes of those present, as well as the many thousands of other members throughout the country, who may not be aware of the proposed publication.
Furthermore, as it appeared to have popular support from within the hobby, more detailed information was needed before reacting any further.
A successful recovery job took place in a Hampstead garden, Andy Kountouri and Agapios Kyriacou, alerted to the fact that a valuable ring had been lost, sprang into action.
Armed with their trusty detectors, they searched the garden thoroughly.
After an hour or so, they came across the ring in some garden rubbish.
Another satisfied and delighted lady owner who'd lost jewellery which has now been found.
It's one aspect to the hobby which spreads our good name around the area, thus counteracting the mud being thrown by those who would consider responsible detectorists in a different light.
A Roman jug-handle and a Stephen silver penny (1135) were the winning items in this month's Find of the Month ‘Artefact’ and ‘Coin’competitions.
Well done to the happy winners, who were, respectively: Martin Crowson and Ted Cane.
These items go forward to the Finds and Finder of the Year Competitions to be held in December.
For the future, the club's AGM is to be held in November and the annual Christmas party is scheduled for December.
Swindon club
With grass knee high and crops waist high, like most clubs, our ‘Finds Table’ has been almost empty this summer.
So, it was well-received when, at our last club meeting our chairman Ray Hammond informed us that he had received a telephone call from an archaeological unit director.
It seems that he asked the club to supply two or three detectorists each day for about three weeks to search the spoil heaps of a Roman temple site.
I know it's an emotive subject but we have a good working relationship with the archaeological unit concerned.
In fact, they cannot understand why our own local unit does not use our services.
Still, to quote the unit director, ‘Their loss is our gain: we welcome your assistance.’
On the following Monday morning three of us arrived at the site.
We were shown around by the site director, who pointed out some of its features and also the spoil heaps.
A daunting task lay ahead, as the spoil heaps covered an area of about 300 square yards.
We were soon hard at work using small hand-rakes to drag away the soil prior to detecting over it.
Some good-condition coins were retrieved from one end of the heap, so we decided to concentrate in that area.
We were amazed at just how much the archaeologist's had missed, even using small trowels and brushes as they do.
It's no wonder the unit director ‘Welcomes our assistance.’
During our ‘breaks’ we talked to some of the archaeologists on site.
They, too, were  surprised at what they had missed.
We were able to exchange ideas and opinions with them — so much so, that by the end of the day one archaeological student was using my detector over the spoil heaps, while I turned my hand to the ‘trowel and brush.’
We found more than 100 coins from the spoil heaps, plus two small disc brooches and a nice iron key.
Not a bad three weeks' detecting but, more important, it was a helpful exercise in improving relationships between the archaeological societies and, hopefully, all metal detectorists.
Plymouth DC
The Plymouth Detector Club attended three local fetes this year.
The first fete was held on 15 June at Albaston, near Gunnislake in Cornwall.
The public came out in droves to see the well-known actor ‘The Equaliser’, Edward Woodward, who was signing autographs.
The fete season progressed with the club attending the Rotoract Club fete at Callington, Cornwall, on 29 June.
The final fete of the year was held at the Plymouth Hoe on 20 July, where fine weather and crowds of people ensured much support for local charities and boosted club finds.
Various detector companies sent donations of gift which were given away at all three fetes.
Many thanks to: Joan Allen Electronics Limited, White's Electronic Limited and TH for their support.
Thanks were also extended to all the club members who gave of their time and hard graft to ensure that fun was had by all.
Especially, Geoff Kingswell, for his generous donations of sweets for the children, and Terry Wood for his thoughtfulness and time.
For more information about the Plymouth Detector Club, contact Bob Bright.
Tel:(0579) 83985.
New club
Efforts are now underway to form a treasure hunting club in the Chester area.
For further information contact B Moss, 8 Treborth Road, Blacon, Chester, CH2 5RD.
Banbridge MDC
The Banbridge Metal Detecting Club, Northern Ireland, wishes to express their gratitude to the following people, who responded so positively to the Lyndsay Fairley Cerebral Palsy Fund and the Romanian Orphans Appeal Fund.
They are David Wood, PROFID; Colin Hanson, secretary, FID; David Kennedy, landowner; Patrick Duffy, Manager of Gosford Forest Park, Markethill, County Armagh; Bryan Coburn, chief recreation/Tourist officer of Down District Council; and  Dawnpatrick Coca-Cola for their sponsorship.
The photograph shows, from left to right: Samuel Cantley, Rev Martin Smyth MP, Fred Owens and Colin Baxter during the presentation of the £500.00 in the aid of the Romanian Orphans' Fund.
For further information contact Fred Owens, 53 Clime Road, Banbridge, County Down BT32 3HT.
Agapios Kyriacou (left) and Andy Kountouri
The Roman temple site
Banbridge MDC: £500.00 to the Romanian orphans
THERE'S MORE THAN A BUZZ TO BEACHCOMBING
Glance at an Atlas of the British Isles and you will surely spot the bulge of land that thrusts into the North Sea just below the Wash.
The two main centres of population hereabouts are Great Yarmouth and Cromer.
Between them, on a stretch of featureless coastline that runs for about forty miles, is a score of small, isolated settlements.
Their outward appearance gives no hint as to the wealth of amazing finds that have come from local beaches in the past.
Two hundred years ago the villages looked quite different.
Virtually every house on the coast was built from stout oak planks, each timber bearing unmistakable signs of having once formed part of a wooden ship.
And every family had two sources of income: fishing and collecting the flotsam and jetsam that was washed ashore with every tide.
Their wave-cast harvests included kegs of brandy, cases of gin crates of oriental crockery, baskets of fresh fruit and large quantities of ships' fittings.
As for the clothes, money and jewellery sported by many locals, they came from the gruesome supply of drowned bodies that were washed ashore each morning on the high tide.
Happisburgh Sandbank
One village in particular, Happisburgh, had a reputation for the number of drowned bodies found on its adjacent beaches.
Nowadays, its residents see most of their cadavers as actors on their evening TV screens.
But there are many old residents in the neighbourhood who prefer to stroll along the beach to sitting in front of the goggle-box.
He (or she) won't find a dead body in the foreshore, but he might well return home with a few cans of paint, a drum of oil, a host of seaborne lost offerings, or even a net of Spanish oranges tucked under his arm.
After violent storms the haul will often include valuable items dating back to the days when drowned sailors on the local beach was commonplace.
The source of this never-ending supply of wealth lies ten miles offshore: a huge seabed mound called the Happisburgh Sandbank which has caused countless maritime disasters down the centuries.
It must hold a king's ransom in los gold and silver.
Who can blame old Happisburgians for taking advantage of its generosity and picking up whatever the local currents and tides cast ashore after a storm at sea?
Such beachcombing activities go on at numerous places around our ‘sceptred Isle’.
They have provided a way of life for generations of mudlarks living close to the tidal foreshores of the Thames and the Medway.
In Cornwall the sea's non-fishy harvest helps more than one local family survive the harsh out-of-season months.
And on the Lancashire coast (and elsewhere) the loses of summer-time visitors provide the jam on winter-time bread.
Learn a little about the likely finds and you can add a valuable second income to your usual treasure hunting activities.
As well as keeping their eyes peeled for surface coins and jewellery, beachcombers also look for non-metal items on their foreshore hunting grounds.
These include fossils and gemstones.
Several years ago a man working the beach not far from Happisburgh spotted what looked like a hunk of dull yellow glass lying on the sand.
Attracted by its unusual colour and shape the beachcomber picked it up.
It proved to be a large specimen of amber worth £3,000.
Another enthusiast working further up the east coast recovered the fossilised remains of a dinosaur.
A museum paid him a four-figure sum for it.
Smaller, but equally welcome amounts of money have changed hands for pieces of driftwood and other finds worked on by artists and later sold to tourists.
If you have any skill at carving or painting you can certainly add more value on to many finds!
Equipment
As a detector owner you probably already possess most of the equipment used by beachcombers.
Wellies or waders are essential.
So is a suitable sand-digging tool.
You will also need a strong crowbar to help you lift and overturn large boulders.
A good pair of binoculars can also prove extremely useful, especially if you search foreshores overlooked by cliffs or high sand dunes.
From such a vantage point you can scan up to a mile along many beaches and spot objects cast up by the tides.
Probable finds
Even without a metal detector, you will find lots of lead fishing weights on most beaches.
They turn up regularly beneath large boulders on any stretch frequented by shore fishermen.
If you want to make a quick pound or two, or if you'd welcome a meal of freshly caught fish, try selling or bartering your discoveries when the next groups of fishermen gather.
Rich hauls of lead weights also come from beneath the matted seaweed that  grows at the foot of harbour walls and breakwaters.
Here you will also find other non-ferrous metals, such as copper and brass, if the harbour provides a safe haven for a flotilla of small boats.
Their owners never seem to tire of tossing scrap metal into the waters of their harbour home.
If you carry out any of your beachcombing along England's east coast ( Hull–Harwich ), make sure you carefully examine pieces of yellowish glass that catch your eye as you wander on the foreshore.
Any piece of ‘glass’ that feels too lightweight for its size must be checked with greater care.
if it's not a hunk of worthless plastic, it might be amber.
This strange substance, known as ‘electron’ in ancient times, is the fossilised resin of monkey-puzzle trees.
It floats in salt water and can be carried hundreds of miles by strong currents.
Most pieces picked up on British beaches have bobbed across the North Sea from the Baltic regions.
The spectacular pieces found during the past fifty years off the east coast have often contained prehistoric dragonflies, trapped thousands of years ago by the oozing liquid as it flowed from the tree trunk.
You can expect much more than £1,000 if you make such a beachcombing discovery.
Semi-precious stones will also attract your eye by their colours.
East coast walkers will soon spot such gems as cornelians and agates.
Scottish beachcombers can expect even more: cornelians, agates, rock crystals and cairngorms, as well as occasional garnets and small diamonds.
There's nothing boring about Scottish sand!
Indeed, I've heard whispers about a patch of coastline in Scotland said to hold gold dust among its sand grains.
Yorkshire beaches hold a substance prized almost as much as gold by ancient Romans: black pebbles of high-quality jet.
They look quite dull and uninteresting when lying on the beaches around Whitby and Scarborough, but they take a brilliant polish and look wonderful when mounted as jewellery.
To distinguish a jet pebble from other black pebbles, perform a ‘streak’ test.
Rub the pebble on a flint.
If it leaves a brown streak, then it is probably jet.
The same Yorkshire beaches, together with foreshores in Dorset and along the east coast of Scotland, can also hold valuable fossils.
Crocodile, fish and dinosaur bones millions of years old might come to light when you use a crowbar to overturn a large rock left undisturbed by a lazy geologist.
Bait-diggers
If you work regularly on beaches with your detector, you will have seen bait-diggers at work.
Like us, they are persecuted minority who have to put up with all sorts of abuse from harbour officials in order to earn their living.
Befriend them.
Patches of sand alongside good worm colonies often prove remarkably rich in finds for detectorists.
If the detecting shows little profit why not join the bait-diggers?
Anyone who can provide shore fishermen with fresh and regular supplies of ragworms and other delicacies enjoyed by fish will make a steady profit from the foreshore.
Let me finish by reminding you that, like successful detectorists, beachcombers work with nature.
Some will not visit their usual hunting grounds for weeks.
Then a storm breaks, or a particularly high tide rushes in.
Within the hour the good beachcombers are on the spot and loading their sacks with all manner of bounties cast at their feet by providence.
Why not join them the next time your barometer begins to fall rapidly?
Dragonfly in amber
EURO-TOUR: UPDATE
Tim Corser and his wife Linda have moved on from Benidorm and are continuing on their extended journey through Europe.
This update on their travels begins in the Algarve, Portugal.
Tim takes up the story thus far.
Portugal
Although the Algarve is supposed to be the warmest place in Portugal in winter, suffice to say, that in the eleven days we were there, we had one sunny day.
The Algarve stretches about 125 miles along the bottom edge of Portugal, from the Spanish border to Sagres, or Fin del Mundo —‘End of the world’, as the Portuguese call it.
There, on a promontory into the Atlantic, you can walk over the same cobblestones once walked on by Price Henry the Navigator, and see the stone compass rose set into the courtyard with which, it is thought, he taught the early Spanish adventurers how to navigate across the oceans.
The walls surrounding the courtyard used to protect what was once a fortress but which is now a youth hostel.
Yet another fortress stands on a promontory only half a mile away.
In fact, the Algarve coastline seems to be littered with a succession of castles and fortresses, some of which date back to Moorish times.
The fortress at Silves has a courtyard that was lined and pinned and partly excavated by the time we arrived in the pouring rain to look at it.
Inside the fortress is an interesting old church containing Moorish relics.
A visit to the castle at Loule, where the tourist information office is set in the remnants of the castle walls between two towers, elicited the answer to my enquiry whether there were Roman or Moorish sites on farms nearby.
The Christians had destroyed all the Moorish buildings and built on the sites; two of which were Roman: at Villa Maura, and Estoi.
Linda and I spent two hours riding around Villa Maura later in the week trying to find the site.
Unfortunately, Villa Maura is now a golfer's paradise and veritable warren of timeshare villas.
Every road junction has a multitude of signposts in a variety of languages, but we didn't see on that would have directed us to the Roman site.
The Algarve coastline has many beautiful beaches and covers that are well-worth searching for modern losses, as well as a few older Portuguese coins and the occasional ring.
If you really want to get to grips with inland detecting, then I suggest you learn a little Portuguese and try to make yourself understood to any of the farmers who invariably can be seen selling oranges by the roadside.
Before you detect on the beaches in Portugal, you are supposed to obtain permission from the local Captain di Maritimo (something like our local harbour-master), but I could never find him.
At Albufeira no one ever bothered me and the local fishermen were only too happy to accept the lead fishing weights I found, so I don't suppose they reported me.
Gibraltar
From Portugal we moved on towards Gibraltar.
The Queens Hotel in Gibraltar may sound very posh, but when I tell you that the furniture and decor haven't changed since the ‘fifties it may put it into its proper perspective.
In addition their cheapest rooms cost £30.00 per  night, so you can see why we stayed there only two nights.
Gibraltar is an intriguing place, with loads of history.
The Museum, although having a modern exterior, was originally built around a Moorish bath-house Commemorative plaques of the Rock's historical past have been posted all over the streets and buildings.
At the Trafalgar Cemetery, you can see the gravestones of some of Nelson's men who were killed.
For the detectorist, there are only three small coves of shingle and Eastern beach, which lies at the end of the airport runway.
On Main Street the shop Liberties Number III sell detectors, but the proprietor told me that there are no regular detectorists on the Rock as the military authorities seem to frown upon it.
I asked the proprietor of an antique shop with Byzantine and Roman artefacts on display (see photo) if anything in his window has been found with a metal detector.
After hesitating a moment, he admitted that they were all detector finds.
‘On the rock?’
I asked.
‘No, in Spain,’ he replied.
Further questioning revealed that he was only able to sell the artefacts in Gibraltar because they had been found illegally on a site in Spain.
Cartiera
The following day, a Spanish lady gave us a guided tour of Cartiera, a partly excavated Roman town only three miles from Gibraltar.
The site was off-limits to the public but the resident warden's wife let us look around the bath-house area as a favour to our guide who was a friend of hers.
We had been looking around for about five minutes or so, when a jeep containing two members of the Guardia Civil (The National Police) arrived.
Thankfully, they just smiled, nodded, looked at our English number-plates, and went on their way.
The Cartiera excavation site covers a large expanse of land behind an oil refinery, and dates to 171 BC.
As we left the site I took a photograph of a Roman bridge.
Fuengirola
From Gibraltar, we went on to spend two days at Fuengirola.
Unfortunately, beach detecting was a waste of time, as an extra foot of sand had been deposited on the beach to enhance the tourist trade.
In the water I found only a few coins because the beach dropped off quite steeply into the water, making it difficult to detect.
One good thing about Fuengirola is that there is a Moorish castle ruin on the beach at the southern end.
A small river runs into th sea at one side, but on the other there is a large expanse of grassland which runs down from the walls almost to the sea.
A local farmer grazes his cattle on the slope, so I thought it might be possible to get permission to detect on his land.
Unfortunately, I was on the other side of the river when I saw him, and by the time I'd got round there, he'd vanished.
I did get some nice pictures of the castle, though.
There have been quite a few happenings since then, but my fingers are getting tired, so I'll save them for another article.
Until next time.
‘Compass Rose’ inside Fort Sagres, Portugal
Fisherman's Beach, Albufeira, Portugal
Fuengirola — Castle on beach
Artefacts on sale in Gibraltar
IN THE FOOTSTEPS OF A SNOB
When Dr A B Granville published his famous and best-selling guidebook,The Spas of England in 1841, he made very clear in the opening chapters of his mammoth work his distaste for what he regarded as ‘the lower orders of society’.
Were he alive today, and in any position to dictate on such matters, I'm quite sure he would ban all detectorists from the environs of Harrogate, his favourite English watering place.
He preferred to visit this famous spa town during those months because he felt reasonably confident that his shoulders would rub against aristocracy rather than artisans.
Dr Granville wrote: ‘July is much too early to see Harrogate to advantage.
In July it is full of clothiers from Leeds, and cutlers from Sheffield, and red-nosed Cockneys who can barely afford the one-guinea subscription to the sulphur well.
But at the close of July Harrogate's streets begin to empty of carts and gigs, their places taken by coroneted coaches and post-chaises bringing their cargoes of nobler-blooded visitors.
The tails of the unwashed vanish as the heads of the exclusives appear.
‘Soon those opulent manufacturers, whose ideas of supreme happiness at a spa are limited to taking their spotty wives and daughters to a moderately dear hotel, will be recalled to the smoke of their native places.
With the complexions of their previously pimpled damsels well-polished by the sulphur bath, they depart the luxury of Harrogate for the homeliness of Manchester.
‘Then the Right Honourables, the MPs, the baronets, and their ladies pour into Harrogate, chase [sic]away all the vulgar before them, and fill the Dragon Hotel and the Granby Hotel with ‘Ha-ha's’ and ‘How-do's’.
Then begin the real gaieties of Harrogate, then the money flies, and what the landlords of those two establishments take in six weeks keeps them during the rest of the year.’
Well, at those prices I'm sure none of us would have wished to accompany the old snob.
But I can't help drooling at thoughts of the enormous quantities of top-quality drooling of top-quality jewellery and purses bulging with sovereigns that must have slipped unnoticed to the ground while all of those ‘gaieties’ were taking place.
Would it not make a wonderful detecting trip to retrace the fellow's footsteps and survey the ground once denied to us?
In these egalitarian times it would take no more than the price of an off-season's weekend bed and breakfast and the permission of a landowner or two.
Important clues
Luckily, the social-climbing medico found space in his guidebook to record in some detail how the top people of that early Victorian era spent their time when not imbibing the chalybeate or soaking in the sulphur.
He provides what amounts to a site guide for any seeker equipped with a good discriminating detector and a 1:25,000 Ordnance Survey map.
In the 1840s the Montpellier Pleasure Gardens was a favourite place for visitors to take a constitutional stroll before breakfast.
These grounds had their own sulphur well.
According to the doctor: ‘It (Montpellier Pleasure Gardens) furnished a larger proportion of stinking gas than any other well in town.’
Around it a variety of flower beds and grassy banks provided a backdrop for several undulating footpaths.
Visitors paid two shillings per week each to walk several circuits of these paths after taking their curative waters.
For that sum they could parade up and down the grounds at any time of day or sit on the grassy banks at will.’
Most of the private houses within a short distance of the Montpellier were let at up to ten guineas per week during August.
Each house had its own private rear garden.
Imagine the losses that must have occurred in them during the years of Harrogate's greatest popularity.
Harrogate and Cheltenham
Knowing that large crowds mean a large number of losses, I'm sure you can also imagine how rich the ground must be at certain spots on Harrogate's common.
Here, according to the author, ‘situated in a little hollow or swampy piece of ground at the east corner of the common,’ was a chalybeate spring called Tewit Well.
Its curative reputation caused visitors to congregate there.
They all congregated in the grounds of the nearby High Harrogate Church.
After services many people strolled the adjacent footpath through fields that led from the church to Low Harrogate.
Picnics hereabouts were commonplace.
On higher ground not far from there the wooden slopes that formed part of another stretch of pleasure grounds (the Cheltenham spa grounds) also attracted large crowds.
Here's how the doctor described the area:
‘In the Cheltenham spa grounds there are two lines of paths so that the visitor may take very agreeable strolls, mostly very much sheltered by lofty forest trees.
There are also grassy slopes with seats and tents for convenience of strollers.
At one point a stream has been blocked to provide a lake with a one- thousand foot path skirting it, and on the lake (there is) a boat for such visitors as [sic]prefer the exercise of rowing after drinking at the saline spring in the morning.’
Studley Park
Doctor Granville pointed out that one of the most difficult problems facing those taking cures at Harrogate was that of ‘the best mode of killing time while waiting for the waters to take effect.’
He recommended excursions into the surrounding  countryside, and for his class of people he could think of nowhere better to go than to the grounds of the ancestral mansion of Studley park, some ten miles from the town.
They were open to visitors ‘of the best sort’; hundreds flocked there daily for walks, picnics and to view the ruins of Fountain's Abbey which stood within the park.
The doctor described this diversion in glowing terms:
‘Often I have bent my way to the great entrance of Studley and seen twenty or more carriages waiting, unhorsed, for the return of the parties they had deposited in the morning and who were now rambling in all directions.
At an appointed time they would all gather on the borders of the great outer lake for a picnic organised by the kind proprietress of the mansion.
‘Later in the day many would go on to view the celebrated ruins of the abbey, the Mecca of every pilgrim attracted to the spot.
The favourite place from which to view and sketch them is a clump of trees on the banks of the River Skell, about one-eighth of a mile from the ruins.
Here a visitor will find benches purposely placed for enjoyment of the magnificent spectacle.’
Well, I doubt if I have a single drop of aristocratic blood in my veins, but I certainly plan to seek an invitation to enjoy those grounds if I can win permission for a search.
The ‘grounds’ that most interest me are about 6in beneath those once trod by the aristocrats, so I'm sure the snobbish doctor's ghost will tolerate my company for an afternoon.
A portrait of Dr A B Granville, author of the best-selling Victorian guide, The Spas of England
How many pieces of expensive jewellery, or very collectable coins, did these Victorian visitors lose as they did the social round and took their cures?
ON YOUR BIKE: A WEALTH OF EDWARDIANA
This article explains how you can rapidly increase your finds rate by putting yourself on the saddle of an imaginary bicycle and travelling back in time to the turn-of-the-century.
Ninety years ago two-wheeled pedal power carried far more people than did the four-wheeled internal combustion machines.
At weekends throughout the summer months cyclists in their tens of thousands cycled out of cities and towns into the countryside.
They took with them packed lunches, jewellery, silver penknives, enamelled badges, Art Nouveau watches, substantial amounts of silver and gold coinage — not to mention the fascinating tools and equipment carried in their bulging rucksacks and bicycle bags.
If only we knew where they took them, what spectacular finds we might make!
Edwardian adventurers left very precise and detailed records of their journeys.
Thanks to that wonderful institution, known as the second-hand bookshop, such information will guide us to some delightful discoveries.
Productive guides
The second-hand books you must look for if you want to embark on a research programme for this period go by the tradename of ‘Contour Road Atlases’ and were published in many forms between 1890 and 1920.
They usually consist of a small, leatherbound pocked-book containing page after page of diagrams drawn on gridded paper to show the heights and gradients of hills Edwardian cyclists might have encountered during their travels.
For example,The Contour Road Book of Northern England, published in 1905 by Gall and English at one-shilling per copy, includes more than five-hundred diagrams and maps of northern England from the Scottish border to Lincolnshire and Cheshire.
I bought it for £3.00 — a bargain, in spite of its ragged cover and broken spine.
You should have no trouble finding similar copies at that price in your own second-hand books' emporium.
Southern readers might do better with the edition covering their own counties.
Anyone taking a detecting holiday in Northumberland, the Lake District, the Yorkshire Dales or in Derbyshire's Peak District will have all the late-Victorian and Edwardian sites one could ever hope for, when armed with a copy of the northern edition.
Easy to use
The preface and introductory pages explain how a Contour Road Atlas works:
‘Each gridded diagram shows a profile of the recommended route divided by vertical lines into miles and by horizontal lines into hundreds of feet.
The vertical scale has been enlarged out of proportion in order to emphasise the steepest gradients.
‘Cyclists should dismount and walk up all gradients greater than 1-in-17, especially on roads which are poorly constructed and have rocky surfaces.
Inns and hotels recommended as overnight stopping places are marked on the diagrams by asterisks and are mentioned in the text.’
A closer look
When I enlarged and looked more closely at some of the diagrams in the book, I noticed that they also carried marks indicating where an Edwardian cyclist would have encountered a crossroad, a sharp bend, even a humpback bridge.
Used in conjunction with the other clues given in the text and the illustrations, this information soon guided me to some very productive search areas.
Take, by way of example, the first route in the book: the Newcastle to Berwick road via Alnwick.
The gridded diagrams show very clearly that an Edwardian cyclist, lacking the eighteen gears of a modern mountain-bike, would have had to dismount on several occasions along the Earsdon Mill (West Linkhall section of the route).
It is also suggested that the hilltop crossroad site between Newton-on-the-Moor and Cawledge Bridge might have been where cyclists once paused to rest and admire the view.
(I later confirmed this with one or two nice finds around that spot.)
The text reads: ‘The road is somewhat lumpy at first, with a dangerous descent to Felton Bridge.
Particular care must also be taken when descending to Lion Bridge just outside Alnwick and on the steep hills beyond it.
After that there is a splendid road the whole way to Berwick, with only one steep mill at Belford.
‘Principal objects of interest include Gosforth Park and Racecourse, Malcolm's Cross on the road north of Alnwick, and the delightful scenery around Felton.
Good country inns will be found at Causeway Park, Warenford and Beal.’
I can personally vouch for the usefulness of the information in guiding me to places where turn-of-the-century cyclists had rested on roadside verges — and   lost money and valuables.
My detector helped me to cream off the best of the finds, but I hope that fact will not deter you from carrying out your own investigations along the 499 remaining routes, if you can obtain a copy of the book.
Where to go
For readers who don't manage to obtain a copy, I suggest a search and research trip along ‘route twenty-nine’: the Hexham-Alston road.
The book describes it thus: ‘A good road as far as Whitfield Inn, but Staward Bank doubles back on itself three times and makes some dangerously sharp turns.
Despite that difficulty this route is the easiest in the Lake District, with excellent viewpoints and scenery around Whitfield.’
When you get on your bike and follow these routes, I'm sure you'll find a wealth of finds, courtesy of our Edwardian forebears.
Good hunting!
Left: Bicyclette 1879 Right: Kirkpatrick bike 1839
Right Velocipede 1820
CIVIL WAR COIN AND RELIC HUNTING
Do you often experience a surge of interest in a particular period of history after turning up a find that appears to connect with those years?
If so, you will sympathise with my own feelings when I unearthed my first coin dating from the English Civil War: a Charles I shilling, probably minted in Oxford in 1642.
The King's bust looks out from the obverse; the reverse carries an abbreviated version of Charles' declaration to ‘defend the Protestant religion, the liberties of Parliament and the laws of England,’ together with his prayer for ‘the scattering of the enemies.’
A coin dealer later offered me £100.00 for my find, which he described as ‘a common type in a little better than F-grade.’
I told him what to do with his money.
His numismatic appraisal of the discovery does not accord with mine.
I think it's a wonderful relic from a truly romantic period of our history — and I found it.
As I cleaned the little beauty and mounted it in my new display case, I promised myself that I would do everything possible to provide it with a few companions in the months that followed.
New strategy
But making that promise proved a lot easier than carrying it out.
When I visited the sites of three major Civil War battles (Edgehill, Marston Moor and Naseby) I encountered a number of obstacles that soon forced me to rethink where and how the additions to my collection would be made.
The obstacles included reduction of potential search areas as a result of house-building, roadworks and other developments; anti-detectorist propaganda spread by professional archaeologists; and (most disheartening of all) news that other detector owners had already searched these obviously attractive sites or had reached exclusive arrangements with their landowners.
I went home empty handed and uncertain about what to do next.
Raking through the out-of-date but always interesting ‘History’ shelves at a local second-hand bookshop several days later, I chanced upon a thirteen-year-old volume, titled Sieges of the Great Civil War , by Brigadier Peter Young and Wilfrid Emberton.
What caught my eyes were its maps.
They are drawn in a pictorial style which not only does away with the need to use abstract symbols, but seems to bring each incident to life in a most convincing way, especially when studied alongside the text (see two examples form the book accompanying this article).
Turning to the volume's introductory pages, I read some encouraging words that at once led me to hope that I might yet track down a few potential search areas that had not already received too much attention.
One passage ran: ‘The battles of the Great Civil War of 1642–46 have captured the imaginations of the historians in plenty, while the sieges of the period have been largely neglected.
This book was planned to fill the apparent gap.’
It went on to explain that when war broke out many country gentlemen, as well as the burgesses of a number of cities and towns, chose to serve the King not by joining his armies in the field, but by pulling up their drawbridges, slamming their gates, and challenging the enemy to contest the issue.
Inevitably this led to sieges.
As a detectorist I now know that it also led to the loss of Civil War coins, militaria and other relics in the vicinities of sieges.
The book is not an exhaustive account of all the sieges of the war.
Rather, the authors have made a selection and described them fully in order to explain and illustrate several different military strategies.
The problems of laying, and of withstanding a siege, are dealt with very comprehensively from the point of view of both sides in the cases of Portsmouth, Farnham Castle, Reading, Bristol, Gloucester, Hull, Plymouth, Lathom House, Lyme, York City, Winchester   Castle, Basing House, Skipton Castle, Chester, Donnington Castle and Newark.
If you don't live within travelling distance of one of those places mentioned, you should still make every effort to buy any copy of this book you can lay your hands on, new or secondhand.
I recommend it not only for its excellent chapter on 17th century siege warfare, but also for the many clues it throws up en passant about where you might begin searching if you know of, or read about, a siege in your locality that is not in the book's contents list.
The accounts of the aforementioned sieges are dotted with references to the importance of neighbouring churches as lookout and artillery directing points; of local hills used by signallers; of the construction of ‘sconces’(outlying strongholds); of the siting of artillery pieces on rising ground, or in woods within range of the besieged; of troops lying in ambush in local lanes; of the use of church bells to sound alarms and of church registers to record the names of those slain in skirmishes.
But, especially, they show that whenever a siege occurred at neighbouring villages invariably suffered a s a result of heavy billeting, garrisoning, or even the mustering of armies on their greens and in their fields.
Losses of personal possessions, money and items of kit inevitably took place at these spots.
They happened at every siege; they have left rich and often still untouched pickings for the determined detectorist.
Civil War finds
Even though more than three hundred years have gone by since the last Roundhead besieged the last Royalist (and vice versa), evidence of their actions can sometimes still be seen on the ground.
The authors mention Newark:
‘In the majority of the villages occupied during the sieges of Newark, there are traces of the earthworks thrown up by the besiegers, most consisting of a few eroded banks or ditches.’
I found my second Civil War relic by detecting on the slight traces of such an earthwork after reading the above passage in the book.
I had learned about a minor siege connected with an important river crossing not far from my home.
The defenders decided to place several artillery places on the river-banks to overlook the road down which the enemy would have to attack in order to get across the liver to lay siege to their objective.
As the banks were rather steep the defenders spent several days cutting entrenchments and embrasures in expectation of battle.
In fact, the skirmish never took place because the enemy crossed the river further upstream and took their objective ‘by the back-door’.
The defenders on the river-side fled across the river with their artillery places, leaving only the earthworks behind.
Well, not quite.
One soldier left a lovely silver buckle.
I know because I found it, 349 years later.
Follow the tips I've given above and you will soon be making a start on your own collection of Civil War coins and relics.
SAUCERS AND SAUCE-BOATS
Although it is now used with a cup, the saucer had a very different origin.
The name indicates this, coming from the French word ‘saucière’, a dish for holding sauce.
These saucers were deep, flat dishes with low upturned rims, about 6in across.
As late as 1730 the definition of a saucer was still ‘a small dish to hold sauce’.
The services of tableware always included numerous saucers which were invariably made of white silver; they were not gilded owing to the constituents of the sauces, such as lemon juice, which would tarnish the gilded metal.
When Charles I was captured in 1647, among his tableware were two white saucers.
Some of the saucers at this time had ring handles, either flat or shell-shaped, to facilitate their use.
By the late 17th century, however, these handles had been omitted.
Saucers continued in use for this purpose during the reigns of George I and George II.
By the early Georgian period, they had also started to be used with tea and coffee cups, as these refreshments had become both fashionable and popular.
However, during the reign of James I, saucers were given rims and lips to facilitate pouring sauce from them; these probably being the first ‘sauce-boats’ in England.
Such a pair belonged to Sir William Ingleby of Ripley, Yorkshire, in 1617 and were listed in his inventory as ‘shipp sawceres’.
In 1630 some sauce- boats were sent to be assayed at Goldsmiths Hall, London.
Circular saucers continued to be used for pickles and various flavoured relishes until the mid-18th century.
By this time saucers were also being lined with glass so they could be gilded.
English silverware
The early sauce-boats have a French style in appearance, but this changed as English sauce-boats were made.
Sauce boats as examples of English silverware are scarce before 1720, but during the reign of George I their use became commonplace.
The early English examples are boat-shaped vessels, hence their name.
They are oval and rest on a low, oval foot with the rim shaped into two curving spouts, one at each end of the vessel.
At each side is a loop or scroll handle that had been soldered to the convex sides.
Made of silver, they were later copied in Chinese porcelain.
The double-spout type, however, did not last long.
By 1730 it was replaced with a sauce-boat of an oval shape, with a spout at one end and a double scroll handle at the other.
Some examples still had a moulded foot pedestal, while others had four short, cast and chased legs.
The latter was eventually replaced with three legs: two at the rear and one beneath the spout, having shell, bird-like, paw or hoof-shaped feet.
Also present was the Georgian love of rococo and foliate work as decoration on the sauce-boat's rim.
Handles were varied, too, some being complete loops formed of linked scrolls, while others curved upwards, sometimes ending in the head of a marine creature.
This free-scrolling handle, dating from about 1740, was known as a flying scroll handle.
Sauce-boats with such marine motifs were usually intended to serve fish sauces.
Between 1740 and 1760 there was introduced and popularly used a sauce-boat in the shape of a shell, sitting on a short-stemmed, moulded foot.
The handle was sometimes shaped like a bird, usually a heron, capturing a fish.
These were mostly silver but less expensive examples were made in creamy-white or coloured porcelain.
Covered sauce-boats
In the mid-18th century covered sauce-boats resembling soup tureens were introduced with a silver, porcelain or earthenware ladle.
As with tureens, these had neither a pouring lip nor spout.
In the Adam period they were also shaped like urns, with ring handles and a knopped-lid, and an aperture at the spout to accommodate the ladle.
Sometimes the foot rim was raised to resemble a short pedestal.
At the beginning of the 19th century this design was replaced by a convex sauce-boat with a ring handle on the lid, scroll handles at each end and standing in four feet.
There were also some extravagant silver sauce-boats.
Robert Hennell, 1741–1811, a London silversmith, made one with a handle in the form of a nymph and the base as a dolphin, decorated with shells and rocks — all covered with a frosted finish.
Some silver sauce-boats originally fulfilled a different purpose.
They comprised a handleless boat-shaped vessel with a spout used to feed infants, the elderly and invalids.
Later, legs and a handle were added to convert the vessel into a sauce-boat, perhaps long after it had been made obsolete as a feeding vessel by the introduction of the first feeding bottles.
Ceramics
The majority of house-holds used ceramic sauce-boats, which had been introduced as early as the 1740s.
These were made of white, mouldcast, salt-glazed stoneware with spouts resembling the open mouth of a fish, while the  handle looked like a fish's tail.
Some of these ceramic sauce-boats were also produced to the original silver style, having a double spout at each end and a curved handle at each side, with gilding and overglaze enamelling.
However, by the 1780s the use of stoneware was succeeded by porcelain and earthenware sauce-boats.
Some extremely fine sauce-boats were produced in these materials from Worcester around the mid-1750s, based on a silver sauce-boat with scroll-moulded panels painted with Chinese ladies on a landscape.
By the late 1750s all the major potteries: Chelsea, Bristol, Bow, Lowestoft, Derby, Longton Hall and Liverpool — were manufacturing and selling hundreds of porcelain and earthenware sauce-boats.
For example, potteries in Bow manufactured large sauce-boats with a very high-arching handle, whereas potteries in Liverpool manufactured smaller sauce-boats which have high handles in comparison to their size.
Bow sauce-boats have a swept double-scroll handle with a female mask below the thumb-rest; the ornament being decorated with a bright-blue underglaze applied to moulded flower wreaths and other motifs.
Some were also gilded.
All these sauce-boats were low and flat-bottomed with waved or scooped rims and concave sides, later followed by examples with a rounded body, spout and handle; the low foot rim being developed into a short stem.
There were also three-footed examples.
Some have their interior and base coloured or decorated.
Other examples had scroll-bordered cartouches on the sides in which were painted flower posies.
Novelty sauce-boats
There were also novelty sauce-boats in the form of an animal, bird, fish, whale or dolphin, with the head as the spout and the upturned tail as the handle.
The duck was commonly used for earthenware sauce-boats, with the head and neck creating the handle and the tail an ill-suited spout.
Some potteries also produced curious amalgams of two subjects.
An example from the late-18th century is shaped like a fox's head but with a swan's or duck's head as the handle.
An interesting development came with the introduction of ceramic sauce-boats shaped like leaves or scallop shells etc.
Innovative devices
There were also some innovations to keep the sauce piping hot if the kitchen, banqueting hall or dining-room were far apart.
From the late-18th century onwards, devices containing hot water were placed under or around the sauce-boat to keep the sauce hot.
One of these was the Argyll, said to have been invented by the 4th Duke of Argyll, who died in 1770.
It was shaped like a coffee or teapot, with the spout at right handles to the handle.
The Argyll had a container for the gravy and was heated either by hot water being poured into a lining around the gravy or by a hot iron that fitted into a socket.
They were made in silver, Sheffield plate or earthenware and were in vogue from the mid-18th century until about 1820.
The cream boat or cream jug were introduced from about 1740 and are similar to the sauce-boat, though smaller.
These also have a low, boat-shaped body, narrowing to a pouring spout at one end, a handle at the other and a splayed base.
Silver examples have an open scroll handle and three feet.
Many silver pap boats were converted into cream boats by adding a handle and feet.
A pair of George III silver sauce-boats and Tureen with cover
Top:A pair of 19th c silver sauce-boats of George II style.
Middle: Set of four Victorian silver sauce-boats of George II style 
A set of four Victorian silver sauce-boats, Charles Johnstone-Hill, 1885, of George II style
BRITISH INFANTRY HEAD-DRESS BADGES
Part Eight
The War of the Spanish Succession is the name given to a period of European conflict from 1701 to 1714, fought between Britain, Austria.
The Netherlands, Portugal and Denmark on one side, and France, Spain and Bavaria on the other.
The hostilities were caused by Louis XIV of France when he accepted the throne of Spain on behalf of his grandson, Philip, in defiance of the 1700 Partition Treaty, under which the Spanish crown was to pass to Archduke Charles of Austria.
The war brought about the raising of a number of British regiments, five of which are covered in this article.
At the time of their raising John Churchill, First Duke of Marlborough, was Captain-General of the British Army and, in consequence of the William and Mary rule, was also commander of the Dutch Republic's forces.
The East Surrey Regiment
The senior component of what became The East Surrey Regiment under the 1881 Cardwell Reforms had been raised in Huntingdonshire in 1702 as The 31st Regiment of Foot.
In fact, it was The 70th Regiment of Foot, linked with the 31st in 1881.
The 70th was raised in Surrey in 1756 and as a result it was the junior of the two regiments.
From 1881 the helmet-plate centre featured the arms of the City of Guildford, the county town, in white metal on a brass shield which was encircled by a band inscribed: EAST SURREY.
Officers' helmet-plates had the Garter motto Honi Soit Qui Mal Y Pense in place of the regimental title.
There were two alternative forms of the Queen Victoria Crown surmounting the plate centre: one flat-topped and the other of normal crown form.
A cap badge with the Guildford arms was continued in bi-metal form after 1902 with the King's Crown; the only radical variation being made after the Second World War when a beret badge of about ⅔rd size was introduced.
The two sizes were later issued, both surmounted by the Queen's Crown.
In 1959 The East Surrey Regiment was amalgamated with The Queen's Royal Regiment (West Surrey) to form The Queen's Royal Surrey Regiment, as part of the Home Counties Brigade; the bade of this formation being worn until 1970 and the demise of the brigade system.
Since then, the badge of The Queen's Regiment had been used.
The Territorial 6th Battalion of The Royal Surrey Regiment originally wore a blackened Maltese Cross with the inscription: SOUTH AFRICA on the top arm and 1900–02 on the lower arm in honour of The 3rd Volunteer Battalion that contributed volunteers for the Boer War.
Another version had inscribed: SOUTH AFRICA 1900–02 on the lower arm.
The centre of both versions had the arms of Guildford on a shield within a start, enclosed in a band carrying the battalion's title.
After 1926 this territorial battalion wore a blackened badge of the regular pattern.
Another East Surrey territorial battalion   was the 7th which, until 1937, was titled The 23rd London Regiment.
The unit had stemmed from two volunteer rifle corps (the 7th raised in Southwark in 1859 and the 26th, raised in Clapham in 1875).
The two corps were amalgamated in 1880 as The 7th Battalion.
The title was changed to The 4th Volunteer Battalion in 1887, and to The 23rd (County of London) Battalion The London Regiment in 1908.
After a period as part of The Royal Tank Regiment during the Second World War, the battalion reverted to an infantry role in 1956 as The 23rd London Regiment (TA).
In 1961 the 23rd was amalgamated with The 6th Battalion of the East Surrey Regiment to form The 4th Battalion The Queen's Royal Regiment.
A volunteers' battalion, raised in June 1915 by the Mayor of Wandsworth, Lieutenant-Colonel Sir Archibald Downay, was entitled The 13th (Volunteer) Battalion and had on its badge the arms of Wandsworth in place of those of Guildford.
Otherwise, it was similar to the regular pattern.
Finally, there was the 1st Surrey Rifles, raised in 1859 at Camberwell as The 1st Surrey (South London) Rifle Volunteer Corps.
When the territorial force was established in 1908, the corps became The 21st (County of London) Battalion The London Regiment.
It was made part of The East Surrey Regiment in 1916, and in 1935 was converted to an anti-aircraft role as part of The Royal Engineers.
The Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry
Regimental traditions have influenced the badge patterns of The Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry, which was formed in 1881 by linking The 32nd Regiment of Foot (Cornwall), raised in The 1st Surrey Rifle Volunteer Corps 1702, and The 46th Regiment of Foot (South Devonshire), raised in 1741.
With the 83rd Highlanders, the 32nd were defenders of Lucknow during the Indian Mutiny.
The story goes that the ends of the bugle strings on the badge are in the form of thistles in remembrance of the regiment's association with the Highlanders in battle.
The 46th Regiment of Foot (which became The 2nd Battalion The Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry) while engaged in the American War of Independence in 1777, defeated an American force at Brandywine.
The Americans, who wore similar uniforms, threatened revenge so, to help identification within the regiment, the 46th wore red feathers in their caps.
The tradition was maintained by the wearing of a red felt patch behind a white metal buglehorn.
The incident also gave rise to one of the regiment's nicknames, ‘The Red Feathers’.
Another nickname is ‘The Lacedaemonians’.
Again, during the American War of Independence, their colonel is said to have given a long speech under heavy fire about Spartan discipline and the efficient military system of the Lacedaemonians.
Being light infantry, the regimental helmet-plate centre featured a stringed bugle-horn which was superimposed on a castle over which were two crossed feathers.
The encircling band bore the title: DUKE OF CORNWALL'S LIGHT INFANTRY.
The cap badge worn at the turn-of-the-century was a white metal normal light infantry stringed bugle-horn surmounted by a ducal coronet.
Later, a scroll was added with the inscription: CORNWALL.
This pattern was worn until 1959 when a merger with The Somerset Light Infantry resulted in The Somerset and Cornwall Light Infantry being established; since then the plain white metal bugle-horn of the light infantry has been worn.
Duke of Wellington's Regiment
This regiment was raised in 1881 upon the merger of The 33rd Regiment of Foot (raised in 1702), in which the Duke served as a major and later as colonel, and The 76th Regiment of Foot (raised in 1787) in which he had started his careers as a subaltern.
The 76th was known as The Hindustan Regiment because of its distinguished service in the Hindustan Campaign of 1803–1805.
It also earned the nickname ‘The Immortals’ because almost every survivor of the campaign had been wounded.
The regiment's first official title after the 1881 merger was The Halifax Regiment (Duke of Wellington's) but this was changed after a few weeks to The Duke of Wellington's (West Riding Regiment) and again in 1920 to The Duke of Wellington's Regiment (West Riding).
The helmet-plate featured in its centre is the Duke of Wellington's crest: a demi-lion issuing from a coronet, encircled by a band inscribed: WEST RIDING (not illustrated).
The cap badge continued using the crest motif with the motto: Virtutis Fortuna Comes (‘fortune favours the brave ’)— all in white metal above a scroll  inscribed: THE WEST RIDING.
This badge continued to be worn until 1958 when The Yorkshire Brigade was formed and the brigade badge adopted.
In 1969 permission was granted to revert to the old regimental badge.
The Border Regiment
In the Peninsular War The 34th Regiment of Foot (raised in 1702) captured an entire French regiment.
To commemorate this achievement the 34th's successors parade with its drummers beating on the captured drums.
In 1782 the 34th was given the title of The Cumberland Regiment.
At the same time, The 55th Regiment of Foot was entitled The Westmorland Regiment.
Under the 1881 Cardwell Reforms, both were linked to form The Border Regiment which, over the years, has had a considerable variety of head-dress badges.
The helmet-plate centre had as its motif a Chinese dragon with a laurel wreath.
Above this was the tablet inscribed CHINA in honour of the regiment's service there — all within a band carrying the title BORDER.
After 1902 the large head-dress badge under the King's Crown was produced in white metal, with a cross of the Order of the Bath superimposed on a star, similar to that of the Order of the Garter.
The arms of the cross carried eleven battle honours.
In the centre was the Chinese dragon below the tablet inscribed: CHINA in honour of the regiment's service there — all within a band carrying the title BORDER.
After 1902 the large head-dress badge under the King's Crown was produced in white metal, with a cross of the Order of the Bath superimposed on a star, similar to that of the Order of the Garter.
The arms of the cross carried eleven battle honours.
In the centre was the Chinese dragon below the tablet inscribed: CHINA.
This was encircled by a band inscribed:Arroyo Dos Molinos 1811 after the battle in which the French regiment was captured.
Below this was a scroll carrying the regimental title.
The lower part of the centre was backed with red felt to represent the colour of the shako pom-pom of the captured French regiment at Arroyo dos Molinos.
In 1953 a Queen's Crown version of the badge was issued.
In 1959, when The Border Regiment and The King's Own Royal Regiment (Lancaster) was amalgamated into The King's Own Royal Border Regiment, both components had to wear the bade of the newly formed Lancastrian Brigade.
In 1970, with the demise of the brigade system, The King's Own Royal Border Regiment was given an entirely new badge: a white metal lion within a brass laurel wreath surmounted by a Queen's Crown.
Border Regiment TAs
Territorial battalions of The Border Regiment make an interesting story.
In 1860 eleven independent Cumbrian rifle corps were grouped together as The 1st Admin Battalion of Cumberland Rifle Volunteers.
At the same time six Westmorland Rifle corps were brought together as one unit.
In 1880 the eleven battalions were merged as The 1st Cumberland and 1st Westmorland Rifle volunteer Corps.
In truth, these became The 1st and 2nd Volunteer Battalions of The Border Regiment.
In 1908 they were amalgamated to form The 4th Battalion (TF).
This had a white metal badge with a similar pattern to that of the regulars, except that the arms of the cross did not carry battle honours.
The centre had the numeral ‘4’ within a band inscribed: SOUTH AFRICA 1900–02 to mark the regiment's service in the Boer War.
Below, there was a three-part scroll inscribed: BORDER, CUMBERLAND AND WESTMORLAND and REGIMENT.
The 5th Battalion white metal badge was similar to that of the 4th.
The numeral ‘5’ was carried in the centre and the dates were shown as 1901–02.
The three-part scroll had the regimental title shown in a slightly different form: BORDER, CUMBERLAND and REGIMENT.
In 1941 this battalion transferred to the Royal Armoured Corps.
In the First World War Lord Lonsdale raised The 11th (Lonsdale) Battalion and issued silver badges at his own expense to the volunteers.
Unfortunately, most of these were stolen while the battalion was camped on Salisbury Plain, so subsequent issues were in brass.
The 11th's badge had the Chinese dragon in outline with a two-part scroll below inscribed: BORDER REGIMENT.
The Royal Sussex Regiment
The 35th Regiment of Foot was raised in Belfast in 1701 by the Earl of Donegal.
The regiment's uniforms had orange facings that had been chosen in honour of King William III.
The nickname given to the regiment was ‘Orange Lillies’, because of the colour of the facings and the white plumes taken from the French Regiment of Roussillon, which was defeated at Quebec in 1759.
In 1881 the 35th was linked with The 107th Regiment of Foot, which was raised in 1854 as part of the Bengal Infantry.
The helmet-plate centre of The Royal Sussex Regiment was a laurel wreath  with the Order of the Garter cross set upon the Roussillon plume.
The encircling band was inscribed: ROYAL SUSSEX.
The star of the Order of the Garter had been adopted in 1881 from the old badge of The Royal Sussex Militia.
The Garter and Roussillon plume were featured on head-dress badges in white metal.
Below the brass scroll was inscribed: THE ROYAL SUSSEX REGIMENT.
With the introduction of the Brigade system in 1959, The Royal Sussex Regiment was allocated the badge of The Home Counties Brigade.
In 1966 The Royal Sussex Regiment became the 3rd Battalion The Queen's Regiment.
Since 1970, when the Brigade system was abandoned, the new Queen's badge has been adopted.
The Territorial 5th Battalion (Cinque Ports), formed from four volunteer rifle corps, wore a brass badge based on a Maltese Cross with the Roussillon plume behind.
Superimposed on the cross was a shield bearing the arms of the cinque Ports.
Below, there was a scroll inscribed: CINQUE PORTS.
Next month, we shall look at some more regiments, the senior components of which were raised in the early eighteenth century.
The Duke of Wellington's Regiment (West Riding):A Badge of The Yorkshire Brigade, 1958–1969.
B Cap badge of the Yorkshire Brigade
The Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry :A Pre-1881 forage cap badge of The 32nd Regiment of Foot.
B Helmetplate, 1881–1902.
C Cap badge, c1900.
D Cap badge, c1902–1959.
E Badge of The Light Infantry, worn since 1959
The Border Regiment :A Post-1881 officer's helmetplate.
B Cap badge, 1902–1953.
C Badge of the Lancastrian Brigade, 1959–1970.
D Badge of The King's Own Royal Border Regiment, worn since 1970.
E Badge of The 4th Territorial Battalion.
F Badge of The 5th Territorial Battalion, worn until 1941.
G Badge of The 11th (Lonsdale) Battalion, 1915–1919.
The Royal Sussex Regiment :A The Royal Sussex Regimental cap badge, which was worn until 1959.
B Post 1902 helmet-plate.
C Badge of The Home Counties Brigade, 1959–1970.
D Badge of The Queen's Regiment, worn since 1970.
E Badge of The 5th (Cinque Ports) Battalion, 1908–1943.
TRY YOUR LUCK OFF THE BEATEN TRACK
In recent months several TH contributors have treated us to a wealth of extremely useful information, advice and tips on how to achieve success with a detector when searching the country's transport routes.
In this piece I suggest that extremely good finds can also be made by moving slightly to left or right of some present-day road alignments.
In medieval times the word ‘road’ denoted something rather different to the meaning we give it today.
The term was used to signify a right of way between one place and another, rather than a physical entity defined by roadside verges with pavings underfoot.
Even close to major cities and towns where the passage of thousands of feet, hooves and occasional wheels had the effect of beating out a route's direction very clearly, there was no local Department of Highways, or even a town plan to enforce legal limitations on the line of a particular road.
Bear in mind that most of the ‘highways’ leading out of medieval London were no more than bridle paths.
In fact, nobody had made paved roads in Britain since the Romans left our shores.
Indeed, during almost a thousand years the only important legislation concerning English highways was a statute dating from the reign of Edward I. It required lords of manors to supervise the felling of trees and undergrowth up to 200ft on both sides of any ‘highway’ that led from one market town to another.
The lord had to employ labourers to chop the growth back once every year; the same men were to fill in large holes and ruts in the highway with stones and boulders removed from flanking fields.
Well-used tracks
As you drive about the countryside next weekend, and especially if you find yourself approaching a town or village once famous for its market days, look out for places along the route where flanking hedges stand back several yards off the road.
They often represent the last vestiges of the ancient practice of hacking back the vegetation along well-used tracks.
Gradual encroachment by landowners stealing a few feet whenever they cultivated adjacent fields had severely reduced the width of the original ‘cordons sanitaire’.
If you could travel back in time to the Middle Ages, you would find yourself surprised by the almost total lack of hedges and fences.
They were rarely made in the days before the first Enclosure Acts.
This meant that when a traveller came upon a stretch of road made impassable by ruts, holes or waterlogging, he simply led his horse or walked off the highway and into the flanking fields.
In time, this practice led to highways with up to half a dozen parallel tracks; the one in use at any given moment depending on the weather and on how much maintenance local labourers had carried out.
Strings of pack-animals (up to thirty per string) carried bulky loads when the distances involved were too great for cumbersome carts, or the job too urgent for river transport.
Men who could afford the luxury owned their own horse, plus one or more horse-litters for their family.
Packmen and poor folk rode Shank's pony.
But they all used the same broad highway.
Trading routes
Even though these routes were ill-defined, they served the nation's long-distance trading needs.
Recently, I came across references to pack-horse teams from Kendal in Cumbria making weekly journeys to Southampton, carrying bales of cloth for export to the Continent.
Records i Southampton archives confirm that the heavily laden animals, each carrying about two hundredweight, plied the long route from about 1400 AD to 1650 AD.
Despite cutting back the undergrowth to keep routes open, footpads and other outlaws haunted most lonely stretches of road.
To combat this menace people usually travelled in groups, perhaps from one inn to the next, and they commonly carried arms to defend themselves and carried arms to defend themselves and their property while on the journey.
Bands of travellers, often twenty or more (pilgrims, merchants and drovers returning home after delivering their herds) were common sights.
Eager to keep together, they tended to widen any track they used rather than tramp along it in single file.
Roadside sites
How can these few facts help to improve your finds rate when searching ancient routes?
Well, I strongly recommend that you try your luck on any wide verges close to towns.
I have found Roman, medieval and Georgian losses  within a few yards when working suburban grass verges.
The ravages of modern roadworks, gas-pipe digging and telecom line-laying seem only to bring interesting finds to the surface on such sites.
True, you will have to put up with unearthing all manner of car parts, everything from exhaust-pipes to wheel trims, but mixed in with them you can expect to find plenty of items lost by earlier travellers.
You will soon discover that ancient routes deviated widely from their central lines in hilly districts.
Shoe-buckles, harness fragments and tunic buttons spread outwards from them for many yards when the gradients become steep, marking places where panting packmen and their contemporaries sought easier paths up the slopes.
Sometimes the lines of alternative paths further down the hillside can be mistaken for terracing.
In the countryside
When an old path runs across a valley bottom, you might also improve your chances of good finds by working off the beaten track.
Medieval travellers usually had to pick a way over boggy ground as they came off the hills.
Try you luck ten or twenty yards from left to right of the present-day path.
When seeking old routes ‘by eye’ rather than with the aid of a map, I have often found it useful to stand in the middle of an old bridge and look towards the nearest hills.
Slight traces of lost routes can sometimes be spotted heading in the general direction of the river or stream crossing.
And don't forget that the hilltop you cast your eye over when looking for an old route would have caught the eye of a medieval traveller as a good place to rest — and to lose coins.
The medieval track was often a six lane highway
‘when overtaking spread out’
COINSHOOT: GRAND  CAYMAN 
Just seventy minutes by air from Miami is Grand  Cayman Island, British West Indies.
This beautiful island, along with its sister islands of Little  Cayman and  Cayman Brac, offers some of the most interesting metal detecting locations available today.
These three islands share a history that reads like a pirate novel and it takes very little research to find documented facts detailing pirate treasure and shipwrecks galore.
Many of these wrecks were caused by storms, but a large number of these ships were purposely led to their demise by islanders patrolling the beaches at night with lanterns to lure a careless ship on to the reef offshore.
I became aware of these ‘treasure islands’ while on holiday during the Easter weekend in April 1990.
As soon as I walked onto the beach behind the resort where I was staying, I realised its potential.
The beach was literally covered with neat rows of deck chairs on the white sand, and a continuous flow of swim-suited tourists streamed from the beach to the protected swimming area.
The potential for lost coins and jewellery seemed staggering.
I could hardly wait until late evening when the beaches would be less crowded.
In the meantime, my companion, Vicky Chance, suggested we stroll on the beach and pinpoint the places where groups of the people congregated.
It soon became obvious that almost everyone using the beach left the area via the 6ft wide path leading to the outdoor shower, and from there to the rear entrance of the resort.
Most of them placed their beach-bags on a picnic table or on the ground next to the shower.
When they had finished with the shower, they recovered their belongings and headed for the resort.
That evening I decided to begin my search around the shower area.
People's curiosity
Vicky and I returned to the resort, had an early dinner and headed back to the beach about two hours before dark.
As we walked through the open-air lobby on our way to the beach, we drew a lot of curious looks from the other guests at the resort.
If you practise this hobby for very long, you'll get used to, and even enjoy, the curiosity of people when they see you with a metal detector.
As I got to the beach and began setting up my machine, several people came up to me and asked questions about my detector.
I was courteous, but didn't encourage conversation too much because I wanted to start detecting before it got too late.
I dropped each denomination of  Cayman coin on to the sand to see how the machine responded to  them .
It was immediately obvious that as the  Cayman quarter mostly comprised aluminium, it registered as a foil on the meter of my Whites 5900 Di Pro SL.
The other  anomaly was the size of the  Cayman coins: both the  Cayman penny and nickel are the same size as an American dime, the  Cayman dime is the size of an American nickel, and the  Cayman quarter is the size of an American quarter.
Several minutes later, I had calibrated my machine and was ready to begin.
I started searching around the shower area as I had planned earlier and immediately heard a signal indicating a quarter-sized coin, 3in down.
I detuned my Whites, pinpointed the coin and recovered an American quarter from the sand — one of only eight American coins I would find that evening.
My next find was a  Cayman dime, in poor condition.
By the time I left the shower area, I had recovered sixteen coins.
My next target was the deck chair area, which was liberally sprinkled with coins.
By the time darkness finally stopped my search, I had recovered forty-seven assorted coins, mostly  Cayman , five motel keys and one earring.
Not a bad couple of hours' detecting by any means, but I was disappointed with the lack of jewellery finds.
Vicky pointed out that we had deposited our own jewellery in the safe in our room and that other guests had probably done the same.
Based on the small quantity of jewellery I had found, that may very well have been the case.
The next morning we had to pack up and leave, as we had made reservations to visit the other  Cayman Islands before returning home.
I knew that I would return to this island again when I would have more time to search.
Seven Mile Beach
If you get an opportunity to visit the  Caymans , I suggest you visit Seven Mile Beach on Grand  Cayman .
One spot in particular that looked interesting was the public section of Seven Mile Beach.
It appeared to be heavily used and had a large, sandy carpark that simply begged to be searched.
To get there just ask any taxi driver to take you to the public beach near the village of Hell.
And no, I'm not kidding about the name.
For more information about detecting in the  Cayman Islands, tel: 1 809 948 7317, and ask for Raymond Irvin Scott.
He is very knowledgeable about  Cayman history and has been metal detecting all over the  Cayman Island.
Raymond will accept calls (9.00am to 5.00pm local time) from people wanting more information on where to detect in the Islands.
Above:Almost all of the signals were coins, owing to the beaches being so free of litter.
Right:The beach was literally covered with deckchairs lined up in neat rows
Surprisingly few finds were jewellery losses
THE WRECK OF HMS IMPREGNABLE
In 1987 members of the 308 Club Sub Aqua Association were trying to locate the wreck of the Caducius , a composite sailing barque, which was iron framed, with timber decking and hull, and sheathed in brass or copper to prevent worm damage.
We were engaged at the time on a pre-disturbance survey of HMS Hazardous , a man-of-war which sank in November 1706.
The site of HMS Hazardous was being eroded; the seabed levels on the site were dropping and the ship's timbers, guns and artefacts were becoming exposed.
We wanted to know whether this was occurring along the coast.
Our archaeological advisers suggested that we set up control points on the wreck-site and also on the beach opposite the site to monitor seabed and beach movements at regular intervals.
We also decided to monitor seabed movements on adjacent wrecks at the same depth as HMS Hazardous .
800m east of HMS Hazardous was an LCT or Canadian tank-landing craft that sank in 1944.
West of our site was the Caducius which was thought to be fairly easy to locate as it was marked on the Admiralty Chart.
Caducius had been found by Alexander McKenn and Maurice Harknett in the 1960s and dived on for a period of time before being forgotten.
As a fair amount of iron was used in the construction of Caducius , we used a proton magnetometer to locate her position, this is a sensitive instrument that is towed behind the boat and measures the disturbance created by a mass of iron in the Earth's magnetic field.
Caducius was built at Sunderland in 1857, and was en route to Salerno with a cargo of coal when she sank in bad weather.
She had settled on the bottom with her bows more or less on a north-south line.
A surprise in store
A Sunday in June found us off the entrance to Chichester harbour, close to where the Caducius sank.
We put a marker  buoy over the site and a pair of divers went over the side to investigate.
We had not found the Caducius but something much larger.
It was older, too, with large bronze pins about 5ft long sticking out of large square timbers (see Fig 1 ).
Heaps of iron ballast and cannonballs were also present (see Fig 2 ).
This was the wreck of a very large ship.
The bronze fastenings dated the wreck after 1750; prior to 1750, she would have probably been fastened with iron and tre-nails (wooden dowels).
HMS Impregnable was a large warship that was thought to have been lost further west nearer the harbour entrance of Langstone.
It was too much of a coincidence for there to have been two wrecks of similar size and age.
We were convinced that we had located, by accident, the last resting place of HMS Impregnable .
The ship's history
The events which led to the loss of HMS Impregnable make interesting reading and through research, we have been able to obtain a transcript of the court-martial.
The ship's specifications were: 178ft long, 49ft in the beam and she drew 25ft of water.
Built at Deptford in 1786, she weighed 1,877 tons and carried a crew of 750 men.
She was armed with ninety-eight guns, most of which were 32-pounder cannons.
Although a large ship of the line, she did not see a lot of action during her service.
However, while off Ushant on 1 June 1794,HMS Impregnable , together with a fleet of twenty-five other ships under the command of Admiral Earl Howe, went into action against the French.
Although not in the thick of it, she suffered some damage and lost seven killed and twenty-one wounded.
British losses in the engagement totalled 290 killed and 825 wounded, including three captains killed and three admirals wounded.
The French fared very badly, with some 7,000 men killed, wounded or taken prisoner.
19 October 1799 ; off the southern tip of the Isle of Weight she had been escorting a convoy of merchant ships through the English Channel until, in comparative safety, the convoy dispersed to their destinations.
Captain Jonathon Faulknor handed over command of HMS Impregnable to his sailing master, Michael Jenking, for the final leg of the voyage into Portsmouth harbour.
At this time the weather was good, although the wind was blowing strongly from the south.
HMS Impregnable was forging ahead at about ten knots.
At 6.00pm the cliffs of Dunnose were sighted about two miles off, bearing north by east.
In the failing light with the wind increasing, the visibility was diminishing rapidly.
Captain Faulknor was worried about the speed of the ship in the confined and dangerous approaches to Portsmouth.
During the next half hour or so he asked his sailing master if he was happy with the speed of the ship.
Jenking replied, ‘She is going very well.’
Captain Faulknor was still concerned about the ship's speed and said to Jenking, ‘that it would be better to stand out to sea for the night.’
‘No,’ replied Jenking, ‘I'm quite confident.’
With a strong following wind Jenking hoped to berth HMS Impregnable at Portsmouth harbour or Spithead, the naval anchorage, by nightfall.
However, as time when by, it was obvious they would not.
At 7.00pm, they anchored off St Helens, a safe anchorage off the Isle of Wight, near Bembridge.
The ship's course was altered to north-northeast to enable HMS Impregnable to clear the notorious Bembridge ledges.
Sails were hauled in and the ship started to slow down.
Jenking was still confident and appeared to know exactly the ship's position.
However Captain Faulknor was not so sure.
He was impatient to come to anchor and was heard asking Jenking, ‘Shall we anchor here?’
Jenking let the ship run on for another fifteen minutes or so.
For the first time Jenking was becoming worried, and he started to check the compass frequently and ordered leadsmen in to the chains to take soundings.
Disaster
As the depths were called out by the leadsmen, it was obvious that all was not well.
From the port side depths of seven fathoms were sounded, but only twelve from the starboard side.
A few minutes later: port, six fathoms and starboard, ten fathoms.
Jenking and Faulknor could hardly believe that it was possible to have such a difference from either side of the ship.
It was obvious that the ship was running alongside a sand bank with a shoal water on the port side.
HMS Impregnable came to anchor in the pitch darkness and no one was sure where they were.
As the ship's bow was manoeuvred into the wind and with about a third of the anchor cable out, she ran aground at 7.30pm.
Captain Faulknor's worst fears were realised: they were in shoal water, position not known, and the wind was increasing into a gale.
Jenking said he thought they were on the Dean and that they would soon beat over it into deeper water.
Unfortunately, the anchor did not hold and they dragged further through the shoal water.
By now the ship was firmly embedded in the shoal and the breakers were forming around the ship.
After fifteen minutes the rudder was broken off and she was broadside to the weather.
HMS Impregnable's position was desperate, for if she broke up no one would survive in the conditions.
The captain ordered the carpenter and his mates to standby, as it was going to be necessary to cut the masts away to lighten the ship.
Two hours later the order was given to cut down the masts.
Although she still struck the bottom it was not so often or as hard.
So, with luck, they hoped to weather the storm.
During the night they fired the distress gun at regular intervals, as they knew they were not far from Portsmouth.
At first light it became clear that HMS Impregnable had carried five miles across shoal water from the Dean to a position about half way between Langstone and Chichester harbours, approximately half a mile from Hayling Island.
Attempted rescue
It was not long before two sloops from Portsmouth dockyard were on the scene.
The HMS Fairy and HMS Snake was followed later by HMS Carmilla and HMS Regular .
Various dockyard salvage ships and lighters also arrived, one of which carried James Parke, the Master attendant on Portsmouth dockyard.
James Parke surveyed the situation:HMS Impregnable was lying with her bow pointing northeast, the hull was intact, although she was firmly imbedded in the soft seabed.
They tried to haul the ship 5ft by taking the ship's cables and anchors from the stern of other craft to firm holding ground and then winching the ship free on the capstan.
The strain provoked leaks in the hull and she started taking in water, but not seriously at first.
It was decided to remove the guns with their powder and shot to lighten the ship; this was carried out on Sunday's high tide.
Then they tried to winch here out — it did not work, so they removed all the provisions during Sunday night to lighten her further.
On Monday morning's tide they started on the capstan again.
Slowly, she heaved herself out of the sand and then, with a sickening crack she crashed back again.
Her back had broken.
From the point on she was lost.
By 8.00am there was 16ft of water in the hold which the pumps could not reduce.
A message was relayed to Admiral Milbank at Portsmouth for immediate assistance to save all on board.
Between 1.00pm and 2.00pm in the afternoon the rescue of the ship's company was complete.
Shipwrights and workmen arrived to start stripping the wreck to the waterline.
On 6 November what was left of HMS Impregnable was sold to a merchant in Portsmouth.
Court-martial
A court-martial was assembled on board HMS Gladiator in Portsmouth harbour to enquire into the loss of HMS Impregnable and to try Captain Jonathon Faulknor, his officers and ship's company for their conduct on that occasion.
President of the court-martial was Sir Richard Bickerton- Bart, Rear Admiral of the Blue and Second Officer in Command of His Majesty's Ships and Vessels at Portsmouth and Spithead Sitting on either side of him were twelve captains.
Nearly sixty officers of HMS Impregnable attended.
The court-martial found Captain Faulknor carried no blame and was acquitted.
However, Michael Jenking, the sailing master, was found guilty of negligence and dismissed from the service.
The present…
The remains we have found, i.e. the keel and ballast are conducive to the site having been  blown apart — some of the large bronze pins have been bent and distorted by the force.
These bronze fastenings protrude through the keel and would have secured the main station frames of the hull.
After the ship became flooded some stores and equipment deep in the holds were probably not recovered and may still be buried in the sand around the wreck.
However, to try to salvage these items would be very costly.
The 308 Sub Aqua Club project is to carry out a predisturbance survey of the remains and form a site plan.
The wreck will then probably be used as a training site for divers interested in learning the basic skills of underwater survey and drawing.
Crushed remains of a Copper cauldron
Cannon balls and lead musket shot
LOCAL COUNCILS AND RELATED MATTERS
One of the many functions of local councils is the care and maintenance of local parks and commons etc, used by the public for recreation purposes.
We have a perfect right to use such areas in the responsible pursuit of our hobby, yet this right is often denied to us, usually by manipulative application of bye- laws.
While we all think that everyone should have unlimited access to public areas, we have to live in the real world and accept that all sports and hobbies are controlled in some way or other.
If we are to proceed in our quest or to search our land we have to accept that we are unlikely to do so, unless we accept some measure of control ourselves.
This already exists on private land, and we all accept that we can only search with permission and not at all when crops are growing.
Certain fields containing livestock will be out of bounds for a variety of reasons.
We show the land-owner what we find and treat him and his land with respect.
We gladly accept all these  rightful strictures and if we are to enjoy the same success with councils we have to accept their bye-laws, too.
However, it goes against the grain to have to say this, as it is our land after all.
But we must live in the real world, as I said earlier.
There are councils which are not anti-detectorists at all and allow free detecting, providing not justifiable complaints are made.
The lucky detectorists who live in these areas will, hopefully, find at least some of the following of use.
Other areas have councils which are very anti indeed.
Yet others find undecided councils who can be persuaded to come down on our side if the right approach is made.
The following, based on my own experiences, is along the lines of the right approach.
If it doesn't work try again when council members may have changed following elections.
Immediately before an election is a good time, too!
Councillors take their duties very seriously and the ‘damage to the ground’ aspect will be very firmly in their minds, as far as you are concerned.
You have to convince them differently and be prepared to swallow the ‘What about fairgrounds churning up the park?’ type of comment.
Whatever your problems, or lack of them, I trust my comments will be useful.
Get organised
Councils prefer to deal with organisations.
They are an organisation themselves and appreciate the notion of collective responsibility.
An organisation implies responsibility and carries with it an air of determination and seriousness.
An approach from an organisation which begins: ‘We represent…’ is far more likely to be heeded than one from an individual which begins ‘I want…‘.
You should represent an NCMD-affiliated club.
If you have no club, form one and join the NCMD.
The NCMD should not be regarded as merely a means to obtain sites and impress councils or other bodies.
Once you are in, take part.
Attend your federation meetings and make your voice heard.
United we stand!
Get to know your council
Your initial approach should be to your own local councillor(s) (those serving on the Leisure and Amenities Committee are particularly useful).
Win the committee over and their recommendations in your favour are almost certain to be approved by the full council.
Councils rarely override the recommendations of their sub-committees.
Council officials (Leisure Officers etc,) will be most unlikely to give you detecting permission, since they often do not understand our hobby and may have already formed very definite wrong impressions about us.
Further, authorisation to give permission may well be outside their terms of reference.
Neither would they wish to assume the responsibility in any event because of the repercussions which may fall on their heads from the council, who also rarely understand us.
You should seek an interview with your local councillor.
Don't just 'phone him and say: ‘Er…we want to go detecting in the park.’
Don't forget to begin with ‘I represent…
’. Your councillor is your elected representative and should grant you some of his/her time.
I have always found councillors very approachable — very different from the image the media gives them.
At the interview you should be polite and friendly.
Do not be aggressive or start laying down the law about your rights.
If you get his/her back up, even if you're right, you're dead!
Councillors should be treated as intelligent people who make decisions based on information.
It is up to us to ensure they get the right information about our hobby.
Show your credentials (club and NCMD membership card) and point out the membership of the CCPR via the NCMD.
When Public Liability Insurance crops up, you will be able to produce your copy of the NCMD's policy.
Take with you a few park-type finds, plus some examples of the dangerous junk we dispose of safely.
Do not try to pre-empt the situation by going to the media.
Such action will be construed as unfair pressure and your councillor will resent it.
The media may well be anti anyway, which may kill any hopes of further progress.
You may need more than one interview.
Questions of disposal or retention of finds may have to be done in to, plus the strictures of archaeology and museum.
You are not likely to find anything of archaeological interest, but museums may be inclined to keep a watchful eye on you!
You may well have to accommodate them, at least to some extent, if you are to progress further.
They are funded by your council and will thus have a say in things.
The interview(s) with your councillor(s) is the most important hurdle.
Ensure you get over it smoothly.
Don't ask for everything
You will not be given carte blanche to wander around with your detector when or where you like, so don't ask.
You should have already completed research into your local area and know where you can or cannot detect safely.
All games’ pitches and ornamental areas are out of bounds, even though the areas adjoining them should be okay.
You should regard the summer months as out of bounds, since there are too many people about, and there is the risk of dry grass dying when you recover finds.
I know that this is unlikely in many areas, but it's best to play safe.
Suggest that you be allowed to search some parts of your local parks from the end of September to the end of April once or twice per month; this should sound reasonable enough to your councillor and, hopefully, your council.
Numbers allowed access on any given area will doubtless be restricted, but if you can search several of them at once, then all of your club members should be able to participate; otherwise a rota system will have to be drawn up.
I have not found this a problem because many of our members had their own private sites and were not interested in coinshooting.
Be responsible
It goes without saying that you must not leave holes or junk.
It's easy to be tidy, just carry a plastic sheet or bag upon which your excavated earth is placed.
After recovery tip it all back in the hole and tread down your turf flap.
You should see little, if any, sign of your recovery.
Be polite to members of the public who stop to speak.
Anti ones need to be handled with kid-gloves.
Show them your finds and point out they would be lost forever without your efforts.
Giving their children a few old pennies works wonders, as does showing them the pieces of jagged cans one finds on these places.
You never know, some of the people who come to watch you may well be councillors…
Hand over all keys and gold rings etc to the police — especially, if it's obvious that they are recent losses.
Put something back
As I would disagree with the notion that we are taking anything away from society, the notion of ‘putting something back’ may sound misplaced.
But certain things should be done as a matter of course.
Besides found property, supporting local fetes and charity events is fun and worthwhile.
We have nothing to hide, so putting the hobby on display, as it were, will help to consolidate your standing within the council and society in general .
The main purpose of charity events is to raise money for them and rightly so, but it cannot go amiss if our reputation is enhanced in the process.
Every club should offer the public a free recovery service.
Travelling expenses are acceptable, but no more than that.
Any reward should go to charity.
A commission to find something coming from an insurance company is a different matter.
You may well save them a large amount of money and a fee should be negotiated.
Payment by results is a principle I favour — no find, no fee.
We are a hobby, not a business.
A donation from your club to the mayor's charity each year is a small price to pay for some good coinshooting sites.
It will be appreciated by your council.
Integrate yourself
Our hobby is often portrayed as a kind of shady sub-culture, outside the mainstream of society.
Such a notion is utterly false and should be exposed as such.
The fact that we like to mind our own business in many cases is no different to everyone else.
Metal detecting is an integral part of society and any member of the public is welcome to join us.
A public exhibition of your finds at a library or other public building is a very useful public relations exercise.
Talks to schools, women's institutes and other societies, even historical ones are fun, challenging and rewarding.
Metal detecting has already become very much ‘part of the scene’ and much of the hysterical media clap-trap has abated.
Become a part of your local scene and it may well disappear altogether, except when your activities arouse friendly interest.
I have not found the media to be hostile to us, provided we talk to them.
The ravings of the anti brigade make good, sensational reading, so cultivate your local press and radio stations before they do.
The presentation of a list of ‘achievements’, as above, plus friendly media coverage will go far towards moving even the most obdurate council in your favour.
Don't be elitist
Detectorists who are not members of your club may think the parks are open to everyone with a detector if they see you there.
You must deal with this whenever possible, as it will be bad for you if park-keepers constantly have to do it.
Therefore, your club must not be a closed shop.
Remember, they are poll tax payers, too, and the parks should not be closed to them.
Just tell them the score and invite them to join your cub.
It will undoubtedly be somewhat unpleasant if they refuse, but you may have fought long and hard to gain acceptance and this should not be too jeopardised by people who seek to undo your good work.
To prevent your club becoming too large, restrict its catchment area.
Detectorists outside your area should form their own clubs with a view to approaching their own councils.
None of this applies to private land, because anyone is free to seek permission from any landowner.
Play your cards right
An organised approach has the best chance of success in those areas where local councils are anti or are teetering on the verge of becoming so.
You have a right to use public areas in the pursuance of your lawful hobby in the same way as everyone else has.
However, all rights are qualified.
No-one has the complete freedom to do anything in our modern, regimented society.
Accept that and formulate an organised plan of action and you're nearly there!
Planning and executing your campaign is fun and can be very rewarding if you're successful.
You will learn a lot about people and your communication skills will increase, which will be handy for getting sites!
Our hobby, and the fact that we fund it ourselves, is something to be proud of.
So come on, folks!
The domino effect can work for us as well as against us if we play our cards right.
FLIGHT OF DISCOVERY
It was an aerial photograph that first drew my attention to the site — and not a very clear photograph at that.
It had been taken after some of the wettest Spring weather we had ever experienced in Norfolk.
Even the farmers and growers were complaining about the awful conditions.
Ideal conditions are when there has been no appreciable rain for some months, followed by a sizzling hot June and July.
This makes the ground bone dry and the marks of the ancient habitation easy to spot from an aircraft.
I'd arranged with the local flying club to go up in a small ‘Cub’ training aircraft, which is well-suited for aerial photography as it has a very slow cruising speed.
I left the trip until late July, of the local farmers cut their wheat and barley at the beginning of August.
After harvesting all cropmarks vanish.
I must admit to being worried the week before my flight, as one local farmer had already started cutting great swathes through his fields with his combine, and I was afraid some of the other growers might follow suit.
Fortunately, he harvested only one field, declaring the humidity wasn't quite right for combining.
Breathing a sigh of relief, I drove over to the local airfield and arranged for the flight to take place a week earlier, just in case.
In the air
Later, as the aircraft swooped down over many of the fields that were so familiar to me in my detecting rambles around the countryside, I soon realised that the weather had taken its toll on the cropmarks.
Everything looked  uniformly flat and boring — not a mark to be seen.
Even the Roman Villa site with its 3ft thick walls just under the subsoil showed nothing.
It seemed the weather had beaten me and that I was wasting my time.
Despite the absence of strong cropmarks, I still took photographs of anything that looked remotely suspicious.
My camera was an old Practica SLR with a 2X yellow filter.
What my eyes missed, I hoped to capture on black and white film.
One area I photographed was a huge field of sugar beet.
In fact, this contained some reasonable cropmarks in the form of ring ditches, which were the ploughed-out vestiges of burial burrows (probably of Iron Age origin), plus other strange marks.
It seemed that the sugar beet, being on the side of a steep hill, was well-drained and, therefore, in drier soil than the surrounding farm land.
Owing to poor light conditions, these particular marks did not photograph well.
I used up the last of the film and we headed towards the airfield.
As we did, I could see combines in some of the fields.
I realised that I had only just been in time before all traces of cropmarks had been obliterated.
Fine results
It took another week before my photographs were developed and I saw the result of my airborne activities.
The prints weren't too bad, considering that I was hanging out of the back window of the plane with just a thin safety belt between me and the farm land 200ft below.
I carefully examined every photograph in minute detail through a magnifying glass so as not to miss a thing.
Any interesting marks, blemishes and odd shapes on the photographs were transferred to a 1:2500 Ordnance Survey Pathfinder map with a pencil for further reference.
All in all, it has  been an interesting experience.
The camera uncovered marks I had failed to see while on the ground.
One mark in particular caught my eye.
It was in a field at the far end of the village where I live, just across from the playing field and cricket ground.
I had detected on some of the fields close to this one and had discovered the site of two Georgian cottages in one field, together with coinage of the period, crotal bells and foot patents, plus some other items too numerous to mention.
The cottages had proved to be a very fruitful searching ground.
The cropmark was similar to a large square, only some parts of the square were missing, almost if they had been rubbed out with a large eraser.
I assumed the square was a ditch surrounding the site, as ditches often show as dark lines.
Such sites do not always show up at all well, because crops grow differently over old infilled ditches.
There are many reasons for this, but it is mainly because the infilled ditch contains more moisture than the surrounding dry soil.
Consequently, the crops over the ditch have a different growth rate.
I already had permission to search all the surrounding fields, so I waited until the field was harvested before I gave it a thorough going over with my detector.
Further inquiries
In the meantime, I made inquiries with the old-folk of the village to see if they remembered any house or cottage ever standing on that particular field.
One old man remembered a cottage in the corner of the field when he was a boy, which had been demolished in the mid-1900s.
I showed him the photograph but he declared that the cottage had stood close to the road, nowhere near my site.
It made me wonder what changes had  taken place over the years with regards to the field.
Had it been a series of small fields now merged into one ten-acre field?
As I watched the big mechanical blades of the combine tear into the barley, I just had to get out there on to that hallowed ground and start detecting.
First finds of the day
When the harvester moved off into another field, I moved in.
I had a rough idea from the photograph where the site was, but on the ground everything looked different.
Fortunately, the corner hedge of an adjacent field was in a direct line with the site, so I moved forward a few paces, switched on my metal detector and started swinging it in an arc before me.
At first there was nothing, just a background hum of ironisation in the soil.
Then I hit the jackpot!
A strong signal brought to light a big cartwheel Penny of George III dated 1797.
It was in poor condition, but, nonetheless, it was the first find of the day.
As I moved closer to the edge of the site, I felt a sense of optimism welling up inside me.
Another good signal located a George III half-penny dated 1806.
By now I had an inkling that the site was of Georgian origin.
After all, I had two Georgian coins to prove it.
as if to prove myself wrong, a faint signal turned up a ‘Maltravers’ farthing of Charles I. I began to wonder just how old this site really was.
Another sweep along the side of a deep furrow produced a rusted iron belt-buckle of unusual design.
This I found impossible to date.
It was obviously old, but so corroded that it almost fell to pieces in my hand.
Further into the middle of the site and positive iron became a nuisance.
I ran into a mass of nail signals and rusted pieces of iron, as well as the deep, solid signals that denoted lead.
I was at the heart of the site.
The nails indicated some wooden structure had once been in situ, and the lead indicated this site had once been occupied.
The Romans in particular loved the stuff.
It seemed my aerial escapade had been worthwhile.
But more surprises were in store as I unearthed my first Roman coin.
It was a Follis of Maximinianus, who was Emperor no less than three times.
This was quickly followed by three very corroded Roman minims which were impossible to identify as the markings had been completely erased.
It was heavy going searching through the stubble, but the result had been well-worth all my efforts.
As I dug up a bronze Roman belt-stud, I realised that the site was a mixture of historical periods.
There has obviously been some continuity of habitation on the site but, quite honestly, there is no way I could classify it other than, perhaps, Romo-Stuart-Georgian!
follis maximinianus
The newly discovered site
Roman ornamental stud
Questions & Answers
Assortment
Can you identify these items from my drawings:
Item No. 1: is a patinated bronze lion of St Mark in a gondola.
The Latin inscription is illegible.
Item No. 6: looks like a jewellers' blow torch, having a fine patination.
The small pipe has been formed from a flat sheet of bronze, the seam incorporates a plain butt joint, and there is a crudely formed inscription: 32TP1.
If the chamber is filled with combustible fuel and a mouth pressure pipe is attached, a needle-thin jet of liquid is produced.
Item No. 9: is this brooch a Roman apostolic artefact, representing the twelve apostles with Christ in the centre?
Item No. 1: this winged lion of St Mark in a gondola is the typical sort of item you would expect to find attached to the top of expensive furniture.
Item Nos 2–3: these medieval cloth fasteners are most ornate, and are desirable finds.
Item No 4: is part of an 18th century watch-key.
Item No 5: is a sandwich-type buckle-plate, dating from the 14th to 15th century.
Item No 6: is a most unusual find.
I agree with you, the pointed base does suggest that it may have been used by a travelling craftsman.
Items Nos 7–8: are two medieval heraldic pendants, both in excellent condition.
Item 9: is a rare brooch, I have never seen so complete a version until now.
Your drawing shows that much of the enamel is still intact.
This exciting find dates from the 2nd century.
Research
Please can you identify this Roman coin for me?
I have searched through Seaby's Roman Coins and Their Values but cannot find it, neither can I identify some bronzes in my collection.
There must be many coins not included in that catalogue.
Can you help?
In the preface, the editor of the catalogue makes it clear that only a representative selection of coins is listed.
To find the others, consult the five volumes of Seaby's Roman Silver Coins & Their Values .
As you are involved with bronzes, you'll need to refer to the British Museum Catalogue or Roman Imperial Coins .
Your denarius of Vespasian is designated according to the catalogue numbers: RSCV II 291, BMC 28, RIC 16b.
It shows a statue on a pedestal, surrounded by the imperial titles.
It is worth £80.00 in GVF condition.
 Phoenix 
Could you please identify and date this copper alloy or brass  phoenix , which has traces of iron around the fixing hole on the base?
So far, I have found three of these artefacts on a site that has produced over a thousand 18th–19th century items.
M Tunncliffe, North Wales 
Finding three of these items is very interesting and leads to various questions.
First, was it a house site where they were found?
Second, have any military items been found, such as buttons and badges?
They date from 18th–19th century.
As there is only one fixing point, this being on the base, it would have had to have been fastened to a stable item, such as furniture.
I feel that they have military connections.
18th century spoon
Can you give your opinion as to the use and age of this spoon, which measures 4.5cm, found on farm land near my home?
I think it is made of lead and the handle and bowl are designed to resemble shells.
top
bottom
side
This small spoon is probably made of pewter, not lead as you suggest.
The shell design was very popular during the 18th century.
Its most obvious use would have been in a pharmacy.
Fireman's medal
Could you help to identify this French fireman's medal made of white metal, possibly silver?
It is the Mé  d'Honeur des Sapeurs Pompiers (‘firemen's medal of honour’).
This award was instituted in 1900 in recognition of French firemen who distinguished themselves through their courageous actions; or those who completed thirty years of irreproachable service.
Arrow-head
Will you identify and value this bronze arrow-head from ancient Greece?
actual size
view from top
view from side
Bronze arrow-heads from this period were usually of a flat manufacture; the drawing appears to show an armour-piercing, square sectioned arrow-head.
These were made of steel and popular after the 12th century with the advent of full body armour.
Without seeing and handling the find, it is very difficult to make a detailed evaluation.
Yorkshire finds
Enclosed are two photographs of items found in Richmond, Yorkshire.
The first is a pilgrim's ampulla (I know this from reading past issues).
Could you give me any further information, ie what period?
The second object is 25mm long and 13mm wide and has traces of gilt.
Could it be some form of horse decoration.
Item No 1: is a nice example of a pilgrim's ampulla.
The photograph unfortunately does not show the design clearly enough.
We can say that yours can be dated c 1350–1530.
Item No 2: is a leather decoration from the 16th to 17th century.
With such small pieces it is difficult to decide whether they were attached to personal dress or horse-furniture.
Lead decoration
Can you identify this lead object which has a flower motif on its front?
On the reverse side, in the centre, is a protrusion measuring ⅜in long and ¼in diameter.
As it is made of lead, an indication of its age is the white powder which covers the surface after being buried in the ground for any length of time.
The daisy pattern was popular in the 18th century.
It was probably attached to another item, as your find is decorated only on one side.
I believe that it was attached to leather or wood; perhaps a harness decoration or cabinet.
Silver handle
I enclose photographs of a silver object found by a friend while digging for leaf-mould in a wood.
He thinks it's a riding-crop handle, while my detecting partner and I fancy it to be a parasol-holder.
Could you please identify and date the object?
In this size there can be little double that this is Victorian parasol handle, despite its right-angled form.
The utility purpose of a right-angled handle on a riding crop is to enable a rider to open and close a farm gate without dismounting, but this object would lack the required strength.
Pectoral cross
Among my first finds with a metal detector are this silver cross and two coins.
Can you tell me what they are?
This is a typical mid-Victorian pectoral cross.
It's unlikely to be silver, as there are no assay marks, but the registered design mark is still legible.
From what we can see, the registration was made on 15 December (A) 1874 (U).
Many people spend years detecting without ever finding Roman coins.
Your find is a silver denarius of Emperor Vespasian (69–79 AD).
He is depicted seated in State as the High Priest (Pontifex Maximus).
The larger bronze coin is that of Vespasian's son, Domitian (81–96 AD).
The soldier on the reverse represents the Emperor's Valour (Virtuti Augusti).
If in good condition, each coin should fetch between £60.00 and £70.00.
Spindle-whorl
Would it be possible to identify the object in my sketch?
It appears to be made of lead.
The pattern is clear on one side but worn on the other.
You have found a Romano-British lead spindle-whorl.
These were similar to miniature flywheels and added extra momentum while spinning the thread.
There is said to be many decorated examples using dot and line relief, but I have found only two such decorated ones during my twenty years of detecting.
Brass
Please can you identify and date these items?
Item one: is a brass pipe-bowl with a threaded end.
There are two holes, one on each side, and a pattern around the edge of the bowl.
Item two: I believe to be a brass candle snuffer.
Item No 1: over the years I have seen dozens of these items yet, I have still not discovered their true purpose.
However, I have unearthed one with the wooden shaft inset.
Various ideas have been put forward; though, they are not from drain or flue brushes.
Someone out there must know their true use.
item No 2: is a candle snuffer of the type used with a candle dish and dates from the late 18th century.
English penny
Please identify this coin which was found on the Thames foreshore.
Your penny dates from the reign of Eadred and Aethelstan (946–955 AD); the observe is clearly marked: EADRED REX
The moneyer MONETA AELFSTAN is shown on the reverse.
As to the coin's value, much depends on the quality of the portrait.
Retail prices range from £350.00 to £1,000.
Two from London
Will you identify and date these two artefacts found on the same field, near an ancient trackway which has produced a quantity of musket balls from the Civil War.
The first item is a copper or bronze purse-bar.
It has several criss-cross patterns along the bar with a rest-type design and hole through the centre-piece.
The second item weighs between ¼–½oz and is an oblong-shaped ball, which appears to have traces of gold gilt on it.
Item No 1; this is indeed a purse-bar, dating from late-15th to 16th century.
It is nicely decorated and the centre appears to be of a fleur-de-lys design.
Missing from this bar is the suspension loop, which was possibly oval-shaped.
If you search the site again, you might be lucky enough to find the missing bar .
Item No 2
Item No 2: I am afraid I can be of no help, though I doubt if it is a weight.
If made of bronze and gilded, it is possibly a knife or dagger pommel.
Celtic and Roman
I found this broken object, which is possibly a dog, in a field with Celtic and Roman coins, I have been told that it may be the end of a knife as there are fragments of iron on the base of the dog.
The bronze head was also found on the same field.
Can you date it, please?
Item No 1 actual size
Item No 1: purse bar — Two from London
Item No 1: this is a Celtic knife pommel; these are by no means common finds .
Item No 2 actual size
Item No 2: a few more details would have helped.
For example, is there any rust visible and was it broken from a larger object?
Such items are often found on Roman sites and are normally classed as votive offerings.
Roman finds
Please identify these two bronze objects which were found in a rural part of South Wales ?
My young son put them into a  barrelling machine to clean them, so they may have changed colour as a result.
Item No 1 Item No 2 actual size
Both items appear to be Roman in origin.
The first item is either a toy or votive offering.
The second item could be part of a 2nd century trumpet brooch or earring.
Artefacts must not be cleaned in a  barrelling machine.
Such methods of cleaning can remove evidence vital to their identification, if not destroy them completely.
Drawer decoration
Will you please identify this bronze item found at a depth of 4in?
I have outlined its possible shape with dotted lines, but, of course, this is pure guess-work.
This item is 1mm thick in the centre and tapers towards the periphery.
The loops are of a plain design.
This item is a 17th century escutcheon plate from a drawer
Giulii
Can you identify this hammered silver coin, which is about the size of a 10p piece (29mm)?
I found it difficult to take a rubbing so, despite my lack of artistic ability, I've drawn a sketch.
On the one size are saints Peter and Paul.
The reverse shows crossed keys above a shield and is inscribed: JULIUS II PONT MAX.
Was there a Pope Julius II?
Indeed, there was a Pope Julius II.
He held office from 1503 to 1513 and, among other things, he was responsible for building the beginning of the great Church of St Peter's.
He was patron to  Michelangelo , some of whose best sculpture were intended for Pope Julius' tomb.
These broad silver coins were first minted under his orders and they became known as Giulii for that reason.
Your coin must be in a reasonably good state if you can read the lettering, so it should be worth at least £50.00, probably more, depending on its condition.
Keys
I recently obtained permission to search the grounds of a medieval house which had been built upon the site of a wall- enclosed 14th century residence.
Item No 1: is a key found on the wall.
Item No 2: appears to be a pair of tweezers.
Item No 3: this key was found in a quarry within the enclosure and seems to have been deliberately buried near an old tree.
Do you have any suggestions as to their age and applications, please?
It is very difficult to date these artefacts, owing to their poor condition, but here goes:
Item No 1: is probably a medieval key.
Item No 2: I am certain that these are not tweezers, but I cannot identify them.
Can a reader help?
Item No 3: this key was probably made around the 1800s.
Weapon?
Can you identify this item found in a ploughed field close to a small stream near the ruins of Inch Abbey?
It is made of iron and features a concave depression in the middle of the blade.
Could it be a spearhead or arrow-head of some kind?
I am not convinced that this find is a weapon (it is very difficult to make an accurate judgement from the rough sketch).
The depression on the ‘blade’ and the overall shape suggest to me that it is some sort of agricultural implement, such as a weeding paddle or potato lifter.
Weight and coin
The following items were both found on pasture-land.
Item No 1: is a James I coin-weight.
The obverse bears a beaded border and the initials IR BRI.
The portrait is clearly distinguishable.
The reverse also has a beaded border and bears a crown with the letter x and s.
What denomination of coinage would this weight have been used for during James I reign?
Item No 2: is a small bronze Roman coin which has an excellent patina and a portrait of the Emperor Elagabalus.
The legends are (reverse): PMTRP IIII COS III PP and (obverse): IMPAVOTONINVS-PIUS AUG.
Item No 1: this weight was used to weigh a gold ten-shilling piece.
Item No 2: this is an Elagabalus denarius which depicts the Emperor standing at a sacrificial altar.
Herculean task
Can you provide any info about this copper or brass object found in a grass field, while searching with fellow members of the Stour Valley and Research Club?
I have a theory that it may be a commemorative horse-brass of William and Mary.
The two central figures have baffled me, though.
The crown with two fleurs-de-lys is repeated on the blank reverse, but it is upside down in comparison.
The two figures in the centre are allegorical.
Hercules is often depicted holding a club and draped with a lion's hide.
The two figures could represent the Herculean task faced by William and Mary as they were offered the English throne in 1688.
Royal Brass commemorative horse-brasses did not appear until Victorian times and, in any case, the shape cannot be described as traditional.
Lead head
Please identify this object I found recently on ploughed farm land.
It has been suggested to me that it may be the pommel of a knife or dagger, and that it is probably quite old.
hollow base
This is an odd-looking object!
If it has been made of lead, then I would also have suggested that it was a pommel.
However, lead is a very soft material for this use.
It appears that part of the object is missing, such as the jaw.
You might find the other part when you next search the area of its discovery.
Help us to help you
Help our experts to identify your finds.
Please do not send the artefacts or coins, but provide either good quality drawings or photographs of front and reverse, and include details of dimensions, material or manufacture and any other helpful information.
Do please send your full address (for office use only).
Good Hunting!
TREASURE HUNTING COUNTY GUIDE
TREASURE HUNTING ADVERTISING RATES & INFORMATION