

From the Vice-Chancellor
Something strange is happening in the University.
At least, something which has not been seen for more than 20 years.We are talking about expansion.
Deans, Head of Schools, Heads of Departments are having to think about the opportunities and problems presented by the prospect of the University expanding by 10% — more than 1,000 students — over the next few years.
After all the cutbacks and retrenchment over the last decade or so, this may come as a surprise to you and has certainly caused us to reassess the way we approach our planning.
But the fact is that the government is looking for a huge expansion in student numbers nationally and we at Birmingham are keen to play our part, not least because we know that there are many more people who can benefit from a university education (as you have done) than are able to at present.
The growth won't be uncontrolled.
We have been working out in which Schools we have the capacity to grow without incurring unacceptably high new costs.
So the expansion programme has to be linked to our building capacity as well as to student demand and national need.
It seems that in our existing academic buildings, provided we choose our areas of growth carefully, we can accommodate these extra students.
This is also tied up with the new contract bidding system, about which you may have read in the press.
The University's funding in future will come through a contract, awarded by the Universities Funding Council, to teach a certain number of students in certain subjects for certain prices.
In quoting a price we have to work out everything needed to teach students.
And I mean everything.
Not only teachers and libraries, but also laboratories, equipment, buildings, student residences, the sports centre, the administration and so on.
This is a completely new way of funding the universities, and although we think at Birmingham that we can give good value for money and provide a good education at a fair price, this is new territory for us and there could be some surprises on the way.
You may be wondering where all these new students will come from.
Well, many, of course, will be from the traditional 18 year-old age group, but we are also thinking hard about widening access to our courses.
There are people, especially in this region, who would like to follow a university course but who do not fit the usual pattern of an undergraduate student.
They may be older, they may have different qualifications, they may come from a family background where entering higher education is not a traditional path to a career.
We mean to work out ways of using new course structures, perhaps with part-time study, new ways of teaching and an innovative approach to university admission which could enable more people from Birmingham and the West Midlands to benefit from their local university.
This is just one way in which we remember our regional roots.
Elsewhere in this magazine you will read of another…the re-opening of the galleries in the Barber Institute.
I am very keen that the Barber should be seen as a regional resource as well as a University gallery.
In addition to its obvious use as a cultural asset, we might also provide part-time courses for local people to come in to learn about Art History and to use the collections in the Barber as their source material.
It wouldn't surprise me is some of the people who come to these continuing education courses, of which there is an ever-growing and more exciting list, were existing alumni.
The strength of loyalty to and interest in the University which you show continues to impress me.
One of the consequences of the questionnaire which we sent to you a year ago was that we are making particular links with alumni who are teachers.
For obvious reasons we have a close professional tie with those of you in the educational world.
We are always delighted to send you information about courses, prospectuses and (later this year) to send you a new video about the University which may help you in advising your own pupils about the possibilities and benefits of following a course at Birmingham.
A group of alumni teachers came to a specially organised programme at the Schools Open Day this year and we laid on an ‘Any Questions’ panel so that they could grill our Admissions Tutors about what really goes on when they receive an application from a sixth former.
The teachers told me that they found this very helpful, and we certainly find it helpful to hear from you about what is going on in your particular professional world and how the University can make an impact there.
When we held our first University reunion outside Birmingham, in London, I was delighted that more than 200 of you came along to hear what is going on in the University now.
We all had a pleasant evening, and I was very impressed that at the end so many people came and said, ‘How can we help the University?’
I told them, as I tell alumni wherever I meet them, that the best thing you can do for the University is to remember its strengths, and in your normal professional and daily lives to be prepared to speak up on the University's behalf when you think it is appropriate.
I must thank you for replying so promptly to the questionnaire which we enclosed with the last issue of The Birmingham Magazine .
We are delighted that 90% of you say that you like the magazine, and you will see that on the strength of that we have followed a similar kind of format: a mixture of news about the University and articles by alumni.
We also learned a good deal from that questionnaire about the kind of support and services you would like to see provided by the Alumni Office.
The Office is now up and running and is beginning to provide support to alumni in a number of ways.
There is the magazine, of course, but many of you have by now attended Year, Departmental or Hall of Residence reunions which the Alumni Office has assisted in organising.
Some of you have taken your own initiatives to make contact with counterparts and we can help you there too.
You say that you value receiving more information and having closer links with your university, and encouraged by that we shall carry on working hard to make that contact easy and pleasurable.
In return, I hope very much that you keep on telling us what you think about the alumni services we provide, telling us what's going on in your professional world and how you think the University ought to take account of it.
And, as always, telling us where you are so that we can keep sending you our mailings and the next edition of The Birmingham Magazine .
Professor Michael Thompson, DSc, FInstP, Vice-Chancellor and Principal  
The BIRMINGHAM MAGAZINE
CONTENTS
THE DAWNING OF PERESTROIKA AT BIRMINGHAM by Ron Amann 
SUCCESS IN ACCORD
USUALLY RELIABLE SOURCES by Nigel Hastilow 
PEACE AND FAST FOOD IN OUR TIME by Ted Nield 
GARDINER'S QUESTION TIME
NEWS
TESTING TIMES TO COME by Rachel Waterhouse 
NEWS
GETTING TOGETHER
WHAT ARE YOU DOING NOW?
PROUD TO BE A BRUMMIE by Carl Chinn 
TRAVELLING WITH RESERVATIONS BY MICHAEL COLLIE 
NEWS
THE BARBER'S BRIGHT FUTURE by Richard Verdi 
That's what you think
It was encouraging to learn from your answers to last year's questionnaire that most of liked the first edition of ‘The Birmingham Magazine’.
Some people were worried: ‘It's great, but can you keep the standard up?’
I hope that this issue will reassure you.
There's no shortage of ingredients for the blend of feature articles and news that you say you enjoy; the list of talented and distinguished alumni who are willing to write for the magazine is impressive and the University itself is a rich source of news.
The results of last year's survey have done more than affirm the style and future of the magazine.
Thanks to the excellent response — nearly a third of the University's 65,000 alumni replied — we now know enough to build a framework on which the University can base its future plans for alumni relations.
We have learned, for example, that when you think of your University days, your department and your friends feature most frequently in your thoughts; that you prefer the idea of reunions of your department or your contemporaries to University-wide events; that you like the idea of the regional ‘roadshows’; and that you very much want to know where all your old friends are and what they're up to now.
We asked you what we should do, and now we're doing it.
The first roadshow was held in London in January.
The next will be in the North of England early next year.
It will be held in a central location, perhaps Leeds or York, and we shall send details to alumni within reasonable travelling distance and to anyone who ticks the box on the questionnaire to say they are interested.
In the coming year we will publish a ‘Where are you now?’
Directory, so if you would like to be included and haven't told us yet, please fill in the appropriate part of the questionnaire.
You also may hear from your old department or your hall of residence about reunions they are organising.
Last year's alumni survey has told us a lot.
But we still don't know it all.
Please keep telling us what you think and what you want from the University.
And please, if you have not already done so, keep us informed of where you are and what you are doing now.
We have sent you another questionnaire with this magazine to help you to do this.
Cover: Degas —Jockeys before the Race from the collection in the Barber Institute of Fine Arts
THE DAWNING OF PERESTROIKA AT BIRMINGHAM
by Ron Amann
Professor Ron Amann obtained his first degree, Master's and PhD at Birmingham.
A former Director of the Centre for Russian and East European Studies, he is now Dean of the Faculty of Commerce and Social Science.
He is married to another Birmingham alumnus — Susan Peters, who graduated in 1965.
He has published widely on the theme of science policy and the politics of economic reform in the USSR, and has advised the House of Commons Foreign Affairs Committee and the Committee on Science and Technology about recent developments in the USSR.
Birmingham's Centre for Russian and East European Studies is wide acknowledged to be a world leader in its field.
In recent months, members of the Centre have been consulted, quoted, and courted for their opinions on the momentous events in the Soviet Union.
But for them, the glimmer of perestroika appeared on the horizon long before the spectacular dawn heralded by the mass media.
Ron Amann, Professor of Soviet Politics, explains why, like other members of CREES, he is a little overwhelmed by recent events, but not entirely surprised…
Researchers in the social sciences must accept the fact that their subject lacks a ‘Eureka element’.
Not for them the sudden exhilaration of Crick and Watson on discovering the structure of DNA (a rare thrill, even in the natural sciences).
There is no shortage of theorizing, of course, but the complexity of human society, the intangibility of cause and effect, make it difficult to test major theories in rigorous conditions or to overturn a consensus view once one has become established.
Soviet and Far East European Studies, which suffer from an acute shortage of reliable information, lie at the more impenetrable end of the social sciences.
Here they share an uneasy border with intuition and mystique.
The political environment in which Western academic studies of the Soviet Union have had to operate for most of the post-war period was built around several widely share assumptions; that the USSR was a ‘threat’, that socialism was a failure, that the Soviet state was incapable of rational modernisation.
Immobility ruled.
These various assumptions were to become increasingly incompatible and awkward to reconcile — but they were deeply held in government circles and resistant to challenge from academics, who were few in number and had to rely on patchy ‘open sources’ for evidence of change.
Up to the early 1960s not many academic contestants had climbed into the ring and when they did so they most failed to deliver a telling punch and lost the fight in the opening rounds on a technical knock-out.
CREES was a department geared up for asking awkward questions
Whey I joined the Centre for Russian and East European Studies (CREES) as a postgraduate student in the mid-1960s, soon after its foundation, I was vaguely aware of its national reputation in the field.
Birmingham had a tradition going back to the inter-war period for ‘tough’ and ‘realistic’empirical research on the Soviet economy, which was unique among British universities.
By the 1960s, this tradition was well established.
The new ‘Hayter’ Centre, which was set up in 1963, was committed to applying the most advanced research techniques drawn from a range of academic disciplines to the study of the USSR and Eastern Europe (from Engineering and History as well as from the Social Sciences).
The ‘black-art of Kremlinology’ was rejected; the emphasis was to be not on the seating order of officials at Kremlin receptions but upon the careful analysis of policies and structures of power.
CREES was a department geared up for asking awkward questions about the general trend of Soviet development if the evidence warranted it.
As a result of the opening up of new research areas, that evidence began to grow and be pieced together.
1962 is a good year to begin the story.
As one of its responses to the International Statistical Year, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development had commissioned a comparative study of national R and D efforts, based on an officially agreed definition of research and development activity; the so-called ‘Frascati definition’, named after one of a number of pleasant resorts favoured by the OECD for conferences.
The main report was written by Chris Freeman and his colleagues at the University of Sussex but, lacking expertise on the Soviet side, they turned to Bob Davies and Geoffrey Barker at Birmingham for a special section on the Soviet Union.
The Soviet statistics were terribly messy and scattered all over the place but Davies and Barker finally succeeded in teasing them out and knocking them into some sort of shape.
The results were remarkable.
For the first time it became clear that in manpower terms the USSR was deploying the largest R and D effort in the world.
The political implications of this discovery were far-reaching so it needed to be checked carefully.
In particular, the Soviet statistics alluded to a whole range of research institutes and agencies whose precise functions were virtually unknown in the West.
To remedy this area of ignorance, the OECD sponsored a new major study on Soviet Science Policy, employing Mike Berry and myself under Bob Davies' direction.
The result of our labours, a 600 page volume, was eventually published by the OECD in 1969.
The nature and sheer scale of the problem facing the Soviet government slowly began to dawn on us.
We became aware of a paradox.
On the one hand, the commitment of the Soviet leadership to scientific and technical progress, as  reflected in the comparative size of the R and D effort, was confirmed in the new larger study; on the other hand, it was clear that the institutional framework was excessively bureaucratic and give rise to economic behaviour which actively discouraged innovation.
This basic point proved to be a key to understanding the story of perestroika as it unfolded.
Ironically, we heard through the grapevine that the Soviet government had made its own translation of the OECD report for circulation within a narrow circle of officials in the State Committee for Science and Technology!
This highlights another paradox of Soviet experience — the fact that the main elements of the growing economic crisis were known to Soviet officials and Western specialists long before they became part of the public political agenda on either side of the iron curtain.
The situation unfolded like a bad dream with vague premonitions of the events to come.
Studying the Soviet economy (as distinct from politics and society) in the pre-Gorbachev era had its own special charm.
Soviet scholars and journalists could hint in their writings at problems in specific factories or could criticize particular managers or officials, but the censorship prevented them from generalising their observations into a critique of the system.
Western Sovietologists, however, laboured under no such inhibitions.
Contrary to popular belief, Soviet economic sources provided rich picking for the researcher, as long as the right subject was chosen.
Having feasted on this rich diet of generalisable material, however, a few hard questions about its reliability began to surface.
Was Soviet technological performance as bad objectively as Soviet writers in their hundreds said it was?
Was it universally backward or were there variations between different sectors and branches of industry?
At this point the Social Science Research Council (now ESRC) cam forward with another substantial tranche of research funding and, as a result, Julian Cooper joined the research team.
The principal focus of attention now turned to particular Soviet industries, calling for the analysis of specialised technical journals and monographs, which had never been looked at previously by Western researchers.
It is a testimony to the magnificent holdings of the Centre's Alexander Baykov Library, that much of this research could be done without setting foot outside the University Campus (or, indeed, outside the Ashley Building).
By the mid-1970s our collective view was that, with a few notable exceptions, Soviet technology was on a distinctly inferior plane to that found in the major Western industrial countries and, moreover, had shown no signs of catching up in the previous 15–20 years.
This central finding of the study was intensely controversial since it implied, firstly, that the USSR showed signs of fundamental weakness and was less of a ‘threat’ and, secondly, it appeared to run counter to the view of some econometricians that developing countries, especially those purchasing advanced foreign technology in large quantities, must eventually catch up.
As it turned out, the sceptics were wrong and Birmingham was proved right.
By the late 1970s, therefore, the entire scene was set for radical reform: the main ingredients were technological backwardness, bureaucratic stagnation and the failure of all partial attempts to tinker with the system.
Philip Hanson's empirical work on international technology transfer laid bare the limitations of borrowing as a survival strategy.
Its success depended upon a major economic reform and was not an alternative to one.
Already we were beginning to talk among ourselves about the feasibility of a Hungarian-type reform to replace the central planning mechanism which Stalin had created in the 1930s.
These were the ‘vampire’ institutions, to quote Milovan Djilas, which had been prolonged beyond their natural life to suck the blood of later generations.
In 1979, the economic crisis deepened and real premonitions of doom began to be felt.
At the beginning of his term as General Secretary, Brezhnev had been seen as a leader pursuing the art of the possible but by the end of his life, his leadership was seen, more pointedly, as the avoidance of the necessary.
Brezhnev died in December, 1982.
His successor, Yuri Andropov, who died after only 15 months in office, initiated a national debate on reform, though still in guarded terms (today's undergraduate students who have become accustomed to Gorbachev's candour can hardly make sense of an Andropov speech — yet at the time his pronouncements seemed rich in fresh insights).
It was no longer a question of whether there would be a major reform but, rather, when and how.
We now know the answer to that.
But before perestroika finally arrived, there was one last twist in the process of anticipation.
In December, 1986, I faced one of those rare ordeals in academic life where the researcher had to state, without the usual contortions and caveats, what he knows about his subject: the Inaugural Lecture.
With some trepidation, I suggested that a major economic reform in the Soviet Union would not be introduced without a major political reform.
The latter, about which there was little evidence at the time,(perestroika was just another word in the dictionary) would be needed to overcome resistance to reform and to compensate for the pain of the economic transition.
After the lecture, every day threatened refutation, but so far I seem to have got away with it.
This brings us to the present.
Conjecture is at an end and we can now study the actual reform that has unfolded before our eyes.
It is truly astonishing, even to those of us who have anticipated it.
But that is another story which we cannot yet look back on.
The interior of the Moscow based M. V. Khrunichev machine building plant, famous for its production of children's bicycles, in which, it was disclosed, other items were being produced.
This photo is of the assembly shop for ‘Proton’ rocket carriers and space modules for the orbital space station ‘Mir’.
FINE ARTS BRASS: SUCCESS IN ACCORD
In 1980, a group of young musicians met in the University for the first rehearsal of what has since become one of the country's leading brass ensembles.
Fine Arts Brass of England this year celebrates its tenth anniversary.
During this period it has built up an impressive reputation for its concerts, broadcasts and recordings, having given over 1000 concerts in Britain, played in almost 50 countries spanning four continents and broadcast over 100 times for the BBC alone.
Fine Arts Brass Ensemble takes its name from the University's Barber Institute of Fine Arts, where the group had its first rehearsal in 1980.
Although the players come from a variety of musical backgrounds, there is a strong Birmingham connection.
Two of the members, trumpeter Bryan Allen and horn player Stephen Roberts graduated from the University Music Department in 1980, Stephen Roberts having previously studied at the Royal College of Music and held orchestral positions with the BBC.
Simon Hogg, trombonist, studied at the Royal Academy of Music and came to Birmingham to do a PGCE.
Andy Culshaw, the other trumpeter, studied at the Birmingham School of Music, while tubist Richard Sandland hails from Tamworth and also studied at the Royal College of Music.
Links with Birmingham have always remained strong, with regular concerts in the area.
The group now work as Artists in Residence in a joint scheme between the University and Conservatoire.
Fine Arts Brass has always been actively involved in educational projects, and as well as coaching students, is involved in a nationwide series of schools concerts under the banner ‘Legal and General Concert for Children’, which has recently bee expanded to include concerts in Schools for the deaf.
Although it was not easy in the beginning attracting regular work, the players all had sufficient confidence in the quality of the product, that they decided to concentrate their energies on the ensemble, rather than seek the immediate security of orchestral contracts.
Anyone who has been to a concert by Fine Arts Brass will know the group combines virtuosity with versatility, playing music of all styles with equal flair and placing the emphasis very much on entertainment.
They have often been described as a brass version of the famous King's Singers.
A typical programme starts with popular classical works and specially commissioned pieces, and finishes with jazz and slapstick!
Many of Britain's leading composers have written especially for the ensemble, including the University's own lecturers in composition, John Joubert, John Casken and Jonty Harrison.
Fine Arts Brass have played in many exotic locations, often at the invitation of the British Council.
Regular tours are undertaken throughout Europe, America, Canada, and Japan, while more unusual bookings have included India, Africa, the Middle east and South East Asia.
Since appearing on a BBC Christmas programme from Pebble Mill in 1981 Fine Arts Brass has built up a long and varied list of TV and radio credits, including its own series of light entertainment shows on BBC Radio 4, now in its third series.
An ever increasing list of gramophone recordings, includes all aspects of the group's repertoire.
An exciting period lies ahead for Fine Arts Brass, with concerts on an increasingly larger international stage at major Festivals and Concert Halls, several recording projects and further TV and Radio appearances.
A busy schedule of dates is booked well into 1992, but the group remains based in Birmingham and intends to maintain strong local connections, particularly with the University.
In January 1990 it entertained Birmingham alumni at the University's London reunion.
USUALLY RELIABLE SOURCES
by Nigel Hastilow
Nigel Hastilow, who left the University with an English degree in 1978, recently completed three years as Political Correspondent of The Birmingham Post , based at the House of Commons.
He has now returned to Birmingham, where he is the newspaper's Assistant Editor.
Here, he defends the workings of Westminster's controversial lobby system which has been under attack from several newspapers, including The Independent and The Guardian .
There is a room in the Palace of Westminster that does not officially exist.
Yet every afternoon, a group of journalists weaves its way along several gloomy corridors and up various flights of stairs to a cold, windy place with impressive views over the gilded roof of the Houses of Parliament, Westminster Bridge and the River Thames.
By the time they reach this eyrie, most are out of breath.
The journalists in question consider themselves to be the media equivalent of the praetorian guard.
They belong to a charmed group known collectively as ‘the lobby’ and reviled in some quarters as the slavish lackeys of the Government.
They are the political editors and senior correspondents of most of our television stations and national and regional newspapers.
They have trooped along to the lobby room to glean information from the Prime Minister's press Secretary, Mr Bernard Ingham.
The lobby has been operating even longer than MI5 and is almost as well known but unlike the secret service, the existence of the lobby has still not been officially acknowledged.
However, it is well-known that the lobby meets staff from the Downing Street press office twice every day — at Number Ten in the morning, in the lobby room in the afternoon — as well as other politicians more infrequently.
Nobody apart from an accredited lobby correspondent is allowed into the lobby room without prior invitation but eventually most members of the Cabinet as well as senior members of the Opposition find it desirable to seek an invitation to meet this group of journalists.
At these meetings, the great issues of the day are discussed, sometimes for little more than a few minutes, on other occasions the questions and answers can take an hour.
At the end of it all, the journalists are free to report what they have been told without question, they may seek to check the information they have been given with other sources or use it as background on a later occasion.
The only constraint is that the information is ‘off the record’ which means the source of the information must remain anonymous.
Some newspapers publicly reject the lobby and all its works.
The trend was started by The Independent , and taken up by The Guardian , more for commercial reasons than as a principled stand.
Their basic complaint is that the correspondents are fed ‘the Government line’ which they then regurgitate undigested over the pages of tomorrow's newspapers or on tonight's television screens.
Critics also argue that, because statements made under the lobby rules mean that they cannot be directly attributed to Mr Ingham, his colleagues or Government Ministers, they are less credible than if they had been made on the record.
It is argued that the lobby is used to channel dis-information to a gullible public.
Yet however ludicrous the conventions and rules surrounding the operation of the lobby, the stand taken by newspapers like The Independent is both perverse and hypocritical.
Their attitude scarcely stands up to scrutiny.
The most simplistic answer to critics of the lobby is that if it did not exist, politicians and journalists would have to invent it.
For politics and political reporting are not only concerned with set-piece events in the House of Commons but with the gossip, nuances and flavour of what is going on.
A brief aside from a senior Minister can tell you more about the real thinking of the Cabinet than half a dozen statements in Parliament.
That is why reporters at Westminster spend half their time drinking in the bars or taking politicians out to lunch and dinner.
Over the port, some hint or tip is slipped in, deliberately or by accident, which provides the basis of a story.
Though such stories are also unattributed, they are not connected with the lobby system itself.
It is sometimes interesting to see two papers running a political story nobody else has got.
Keen observers will be able to deduce which pair of reporters entertained which Minister to lunch.
And it is not unusual for The Independent and The Guardian to indulge in unofficial lobbying of this sort.
Though cynics may say something else, long lunches are part of the job description for a working hack.
Given that private conversations between journalists and politicians take place all the time as the former seek their exclusives and the latter seek to further their policies or careers (or to wreck other people's), it is strangely perverse to ignore perhaps the most authoritative off-the-record source of all, Mr Bernard Ingham.
For Mr Ingham, like his predecessors, has the ear of the Prime Minister.
In the case of the present Downing Street press secretary, his influence cannot be understated.
It is frequently the case that the words Mr Ingham uses to the lobby on a Wednesday to describe the Prime Minister's view of something will be repeated, often word for word, by Mrs Thatcher herself at Prime Minister's Question Time the following day.
Mr Ingham, though officially an impartial civil servant and a one-time Labour Party candidate, is a staunch Thatcherite, sometimes justly described as the real Deputy Prime Minister.
On one occasion, for instance, a lunch between a journalist and a Minister resulted in a front page story suggesting the knives were out for Mr Kenneth Baker.
That same day, another Minister visited Mr Ingham to disown responsibility for the story — the Minister feared Mr Ingham would want him re-shuffled out of the Cabinet because of the attack on Mr Baker.
And it was a notorious lobby briefing which alerted the world the Mr John Biffen, then Leader of the House of Commons, was on his way out.
He was described as ‘a semi-detached’ member of the Cabinet.
A few months later, he became fully detached.
Is it wrong, then, to pay heed to Mr Ingham's remarks merely because one cannot say who made them?
It hardly seems sensible for a reporter doing his or her job properly to ignore a source so influential and so close to the seat of power.
Mr Ingham blusters and inveighs against the perfidious press at the drop of a hat — any story using the words ‘bunkum and balderdash’ as part of a denial are certainly based on his remarks — largely because they do not always print what he wishes to see.
This suggest that, in many cases, it is not true to say that lobby correspondents slavishly follow the Downing Street line on a story.
From the first day as a cub reporter, journalists are repeatedly told to ‘get both sides of the story’.
Ignoring the views of the Prime Minister is hardly in line with the basic training every local hack receives before being sent into combat.
Thus we can charge those who refuse to participate in the lobby with hypocrisy (they use unattributed stories from other sources), perversity (they ignore perhaps the most important source of all) and of failing to do their job properly.
Finally, they could sometimes be accused of deception and dishonesty — it has been known for reporters from The Independent to lobby the lobby.
That is to say, they accost the more naive members of the lobby on their way back from meeting Mr Ingham and ask what he said.
They then use the information in their stories but retain their holier-than-thou attitude by writing: ‘Mr Bernard Ingham told lobby journalists…’
PEACE AND FAST FOOD IN OUR TIME
by Ted Nield
On 21 February 1990, scientists from all over the world met at the University of Birmingham to celebrate one of the century's most significant inventions.
Exactly fifty years earlier, two scientists in the Physics Department demonstrated a device which changed the course of history, and which can now be found in 48% of British homes.
The cavity magnetron was simple, rugged and cheap, and produced short wavelength radio waves — microwaves.
But in 1940, nobody was looking for a new type of cooker.
Then, the race was for radar.
The idea behind radar was to send out radio waves and listen for echoes from enemy craft.
But a system which could be carried in aircraft for use against submarines (and distinguish periscopes against the water) had to be small.
And the key to being small was to use short radio waves.
Short wavelengths, sent out in a beam, could also resolve small targets close together, such as aircraft in formation.
But nobody knew how to make powerful pulses of radio waves less than 50cm long.
Charles Wright, Director of Admiralty Scientific Research, prophesied that the first country to develop such a device would win the war.
In the autumn of 1938 Marcus Oliphant, Professor of Physics at the University of Birmingham, was called to the Air Ministry and charged with the task.
Oliphant, a nuclear physicist, was new to radio technology — as were most of those he later recruited.
But having to go back to first principles proved a decisive advantage.
Among his recruits were John Randall and Harry Boot.
After a discouraging start, they began thinking of a totally new approach — using a device called a magnetron.
The magnetron, as it then existed, was a hollow copper block pumped out to a high vacuum, through which ran a heated wire.
When an electric potential was applied between the central wire and the surrounding block, electron travelled through the space, towards the block.
A strong magnetic field made the electrons swirl around and so shed energy in the form of radio waves.
But power output was small and wavelengths variable.
Randall's crucial modification was to drill cylindrical cavities into the copper block, communicating with the central space by slits.
The diameter of the cylinders was such as to ‘tune’ the wavelength of microwaves emitted.
Randall and Boot were aiming to achieve wavelengths of 10cm.
The built their machine, dubbed the ‘dog's breakfast’, under the floor of a lecture theatre.
It finally worked on February 21, 1940.
From the first moment, Randall and Boot could tell that considerable power was being emitted.
Cigarettes could be lit from the output, and — in the first example of microwave cookery — the hand holding the cigarette became uncomfortably warm.
The power output was indeed high by the standards of the time — 400 watts.
The vital wavelength proved to be 9.8cm.
They had cracked it.
But much remained to be done.
Early magnetrons tended to switch suddenly from one wavelength to another — just as a simple tube (like a bugle) can play several notes.
This problem was solved by another Birmingham physicist, James Sayers.
By the end of the war, cavity magnetrons were emitting up to 3.5 million watts of power at stable wavelengths.
But to turn the technological breakthrough into war advantage, hundreds of thousands of magnetrons were needed, which Britain could never hope to produce unaided.
So, in 1940 Churchill and Roosevelt signed the ‘lease-lend’ agreement, whereby Britain supplied the inventions and the US carried out development and manufacture.
The cavity magnetron crossed the Atlantic.
By the war's end, the USA and Canada had produced over a million.
Radar was the key to early warning, but it's first effect was to break Doenitz's North Atlantic blockade within months of being introduced.
And in the later stages of the war, radar enabled 50% of V1 rockets to be shot down safely.
Boot became Senior Principal Scientific Officer at the Ministry of Defence.
Randall and Sayers both became professors and Randall was knighted.
Oliphant, who was also knighted, went on to work on the atomic bomb, and subsequently returned to his native South Australia, where he became Governor.
Today, 2.5 million magnetrons are made each year for the microwave oven market.
Both Randall and Boot were always modest about their achievement.
In a 1975 interview, Sir John Randall said: ‘I think we were damned lucky, really’.
But the truth was, freedom was damned lucky to have the University of Birmingham on its side.
This article is taken from a longer piece first published in The Independent on 19 February 1990.
Dr Ted Nield is Science Officer at the University's Information Unit of the Committee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals.
Dr Harry Boot and Sir John Randall in a reconstruction of a 1940s laboratory for BBC Television Secret War Series, ten years ago
The experimental cavity magnetron made at the University
GARDINER'S QUESTION TIME
by Tony Gardiner
Mathematics competitions in the UK have traditionally been elitist affairs designed to single out a few extraordinary individuals and effectively to exclude the rest.
Countries in Eastern Europe, Canada and Australia have led the way in showing how competitions can be used as a genuine stimulus for a much larger proportion of the population.
In only its third year the UK Schools Mathematics Competition — based in this University — attracted 42,000 entries from 770 schools.
Its goal is to involve half of the 5,000 secondary schools in the UK within ten years.
(The Australian Mathematics Competition reaches 85% of High Schools each year!)
A university depends on the community of which it is a part.
Yet too often English universities have made no attempt to relate to that community.
They presumed that compulsory education up to the age of 16 would automatically provide both a regular supply of suitable undergraduates and an enlightened public who would understand why universities are important.
The experiences of recent years have challenged this presumption, but the nettle has still not really been grasped.
It may not be a comfortable fact, but there are clear signs that public appreciation of science and the humanities, of research and scholarship are perhaps worse than they ever were, and that most members of the public see these things as simply irrelevant to their daily lives.
How can one communicate the importance of culture, the painstaking values of scholarship and of science in a society dominated by the superficial values of consumerism?
The challenge is clear enough; the response is not.
One approach is that of the ‘populariser’.
This has great potential, but has two limitations which are particularly serious in the case of mathematics.
Popularisations encourage a passive, armchair view of the discipline being popularised: the readers or viewers sit back while the canvas is unfolded before them.
Moreover they tend to serve an audience of converts, who already have some basic understanding and who are sufficiently interested to want to know more.
In science and the humanities this constituency is small, but is nevertheless important; in mathematics it is much smaller.
Hence part of the challenge is to find ways to getting through to the uninitiated so that a much larger proportion of adults have some insight into what mathematics is about.
Mathematics is not a spectator sport.
The way to a man's mathematical heart is to get him (and her!) grappling with characteristically mathematical problems and enjoying the experience.
Fortunately this is much easier than explaining the latest technical developments.
Mathematics explores a mental universe; and the characteristic way a good mathematical problem requires us to juggle imagined entities in seeking a solution has a curious fascination for all human beings.
This is what the UK SMC seeks to exploit by setting unusual, but meaningful problems that pupils in the first years of secondary school want to solve.
Any reader who would like further information should write to UK SMC, at The University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT.
Dr Tony Gardiner is Reader in Mathematics and Mathematics Education in the University's School of Mathematics and Statistics.
1
In how many different orders can four children be arranged in line for a photo if John and Julie refuse to stand next to each other?
2
Which is the largest of these measurements?
3
If I write one digit per second, how long will it take me to write out all the numbers from 1 up to 1991?
4
The goblin population in Mirkwood fluctuates wildly.
In four consecutive years the changes relative to the previous year were as follows: 20% increase, 20% decrease, 20% increase, 20% decrease.
What was the net percentage change in the goblin population over the four years?
5
I want to assemble twenty seven unit cubes into a strong 3 by 3 by 3 cube.
Where two small cubes meet fact to face I shall put glue on one of the two faces.
How many small faces do I have to put glue on?
6
If all cats purr and all cats have whiskers, which of the following statements is necessarily true?
7
Use the digits 9, 7, 6, 4, 2, 0 to make the smallest possible even six figure number.
Which digit should you put in the hundreds column?
8
The angles of a triangle are all perfect squares.
How big is the smallest angle?
9
Emma has seven coins in her purse: two 1ps, one 2p, one 5p, one 10p, one 20p and one 50p.
What is the smallest amount she cannot make using these coins?
10
A man's stride is 80cm, his son's is 25cm.
Roughly how many more steps does the boy have to take if they walk together for half a kilometre?
For administrative reasons the problems we set have to be multiple choice.
This is not as much of a constraint as one might imagine.
The following selection should illustrate the kind of problems we use.
Have a go at them for yourself; then check your answers with those on page 29.
NEWS
EDWARD HEATH OPENS AVON PAPERS
The personal archive of the former British Prime Minister, Sir Anthony Eden (later Lord Avon) was formally unveiled by the Rt Hon Edward Heath MP, himself a former Prime Minister, in the Avon Room of the University Library.
Anthony Eden was a member of Parliament from 1923 until 1957.
He first held ministerial office in 1932, served as Foreign Secretary three times and was Prime Minister from 1955 to 1957.
His term of office covered periods of world turmoil, and his papers reflect complex negotiations at the highest level of statesmanship throughout that time.
Lord Avon was Chancellor of the University from 1945 to 1973.
He died in 1977.
The Avon Papers are now available for study by research workers on application to the University Library.
Copy of a letter from Winston Churchill to the King, from the collection of Lord Avon's papers held in the University Library.
Mr Edward Heath and Lady Avon at the Opening of the Avon Papers.
AN ENTERPRISING INITIATIVE
The University has introduced an important new scheme in collaboration with IBM, which will help to prepare students for the working environment.
‘Access to Enterprise’ is a programme of development which equips students of all disciplines with personal and information technology skills.
The programme was selected by the Government's Training Agency for funding in competition with schemes from other universities.
‘Access to Enterprise’ is primarily an educational development programme aimed at influencing the curriculum and teaching methods of the undergraduate courses in the University.
Its main objective is to make curricula more skill-based and student centred.
The University will expect the students to take more responsibility for their own learning experiences, and more opportunities will be provided for them to develop personal skills like independence and initiative, leadership, flexibility and team work, communication skills and so on; in short , the qualities which will help people to succeed in a wide variety of jobs after graduation.
A particular focus of the scheme in Birmingham is to include information Technology training for both staff and students, because this will be a key tool for the future both inside and outside the University.
A purpose-built training facility, the IBM Information Centre, is being established to give members of staff the opportunity to enhance their own skills in this direction.
DOUBLE HONOURS
Professor Raymond Smallman, Vice-Principal of the University, former Head of Metallurgy and Materials, and a Birmingham alumnus, has received a double accolade this summer.
Two universities have made awards to him in recognition of his scientific distinction.
On the occasion of its 30th anniversary, the University of Novi Sad in Yugoslavia awarded him the Honorary Degree of Doctor of Science; and this month at the annual meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science he is to receive an Honorary DSc from the University of Wales.
MORE POWERFUL STEAM
If the efficiency of large power stations could be improved by 1%, the nation's fuel bills would be cut by £36 million.
That is why it is important to extract the maximum amount of power from steam — the driving force for most of Britain's power stations.
A group directed by Dr Freddie Bakhtar in the School of Manufacturing and Mechanical Engineering has developed a major new experimental facility to investigate the behaviour of the water droplets formed as the steam condenses — one of the key factors in steam turbine efficiency.
The new facility, which occupies part of large laboratory in the Mechanical Engineering building, is to a thermo-dynamic engineer the equivalent of a wind tunnel.
TWO PRIZES FOR DAVID LODGE
David Lodge's screenplay of his novel Nice Work , which was the subject of his article in the last edition of The Birmingham Magazine , has received two awards since it was televised last autumn.
It has won the Silver Nymph Award at the International Television Festival in Monte Carlo and the Royal Television Society's Award for ‘Best Drama Serial’ of 1989.
Meanwhile, David Lodge's first stage play ‘The Writing Game’ had a three-week run at the Birmingham Rep earlier this summer.
A Birmingham graduate, Professor Lodge taught in the English Department until 1987, when he retired to become a full-time writer.
HIGH-TECH FIBRE UNITES THE CAMPUS
Birmingham is one of the first universities in Europe to commit to the provision of a high speed data communications network using fibre technology.
The 3½m budget has been agreed for the project and the first phase of the programme, costing approximately £500,000, is due to be completed soon.
This work has involved the laying of a ‘spine’ of fibre cable across the campus — to which ultimately all faculty and school computer networks will connect — and the installation of satellite networks in all the Schools of the Engineering Faculty together with the provision of hardware bridges to allow their linkage to the main ‘spine’.
This network will provide high speed, high band width information transfer which will enable the University to carry out leading edge research particularly in areas requiring the use of visualization techniques and rapid access to data banks.
TESTING TIMES TO COME
by Rachel Waterhouse
How will the British consumer fare in the single European market?
Whom should we believe when we read conflicting reports of the risks of salmonella or ‘mad cow disease?’
And will the new regulatory bodies really protect our interests as water supplies, energy and communications are privatised?
Dame Rachel Waterhouse, who graduated with a PhD from Birmingham in 1950, was Chairman of the Council of the Consumers' Association from 1982 to 1990.
A distinguished public figure, she was awarded an Honorary Doctor of Social Science Degree by the University this July.
For more than thirty years, the Consumers' Association has been testing, reporting and campaigning on behalf of the British consumer.
Dame Rachel Waterhouse, Birmingham graduate and, until this year, Chairman of the Consumers' Association, looks to its role in the 1990s.
Rather more than 20 years ago, over a lunch in Staff House, I was persuaded by three eminent lecturers of this University to allow them to nominate me for the Council of Consumers' Association.
Coming from the disciplines of law, economics and politics, they were all keen supporters of the consumer movement.
We were all members, at that time, of the Birmingham Consumer Group.
Only Leonard Tivey is still here, now Professor of Political Science.
Colin Harbury moved elsewhere as Professor of Economics.
Gordon Borrie was promoted to the Chair of English Law and in 1976 became Director-General of Fair Trading, exercising that most important function for consumers, the protection of competition.
Which?magazine was already established, the quality of its research and its independence wide recognised.
Since then it has expanded far beyond its original ‘washing machine’ image, but the underlying principles remain the same.
Consumers need choice in the market-place; they need information, without which no sensible choice can be made; they need to be assured that goods are safe; and they need redress if things go wrong, with proper access to complaints mechanisms.
Recognition of these, and the existence of consumer movements, can be a pretty fair test of how the rights of the individual are regarded in any particular country.
Much of the work of consumers' organisations is responsive.
They can never tell what will hit them next, and their concern is very much with the immediate.
Nevertheless, it is possible to identify a number of matters which are likely to demand much attention in the early nineties.
They will almost certainly include food and health, freedom of information, the European single market, new complaints  mechanisms and the regulation of newly privatised industries where they tend to state or local monopoly.
Scares bout food-borne illnesses from salmonella in eggs, botulism in yoghurt or listeria in soft cheeses to ‘mad cow disease’ have kept us all on our toes throughout 1989 and 1990.
These problems suddenly appeared quite separately from those dietary concerns about fats, fibre, sugar and salt which arose from the COMA report in 1984, and which have been so widely used in food manufacturers' advertising claims.
CA has a clear responsibility to give wherever possible clear advice, exposing fads and gimmicks, but at the same time analysing problems where they exist.
Involvement of the whole food chain makes this difficult.
Among the foremost issued to be addressed is whether the current division of responsibility between the Department of Health and the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, each with other responsibilities, including in MAFF's case, responsibility for producers, is the most appropriate way of devising and implementing a national food policy.
CA's view is that it is not.
Information and transparency are essential to consumer and democratic power.
Which?has been in the information business for 33 years, but is still hampered by lack of any freedom of information legislation comparable with that in the United States.
The removal of the public interest defence from the Official Secrets Act has made the position worse rather than better.
Much Government information continues to be filed inaccessibly away at central and local level, often classified as commercially confidential.
Commercial confidentiality is understandable, but resistance to giving information often seems to be endemic among producers.
Universities by contrast have a tradition of publishing and disseminating the results of their research for peer approval.
Scientists have gained by this an enviable reputation for truth.
Yet already, as they have been increasingly drawn into Government and industry, they seem to be losing public confidence.
Transparency and communication must be emphasised to re-establish the perceived independence and honesty of scientists as we move into newer and more complicated areas of technology.
How will British consumers fare in Europe?
There are some encouraging signs that they may benefit from rigorous application of competition policy.
The Commission, for example, is looking at the price differentials of the same car models in different member states — a campaign which CA initiated many years ago.
Consumers' Association and the National Consumer Council have worked hard to break the monopolies on air fares in Europe with some sympathy from the Commission.
In general, however, the Single Market seems to be designed more for the producer.
As manufacturers and financial houses take advantage of the new opportunities, consumer organisations are looking, too, at the possibilities of more joint testing and publication on a European scale.
The Belgian consumer organisation is already marketing a consumer magazine in Spain.
CA is planning to build a laboratory in Milton Keynes to provide in part for more tests with other European Organisations.
The effectiveness of European Directives will depend, however, on implementation and enforcement by member states.
The Commission has made speedy progress with the adoption of Directives, many of which have so far been largely ignored at national level.
In the case of the Product Liability Directive (1987), individual states, such as the UK, against determined consumer opposition, have taken full advantage of the possible exemption for development risks.
Indeed the UK Government went outside the bounds of the directive.
Complaints from CA, beginning in 1987, and from the European Bureau of Consumers' Unions, have resulted in the Commission initiating proceedings against the UK for incorrect translation of the directive.
The Commission has not so far brought the matter to the European Court of Justice.
Even if it succeeds, it cannot, of course, achieve more than a proper implementation by the UK of the exemption from development risk.
The eighties have seen in the UK the establishment of several ombudsmen, particularly in the financial services industry.
Insurance, building societies, unit trusts, banks have each developed an ombudsman scheme.
They could almost form a club of their own.
The building society scheme is statutory, the others voluntary.
Under the Financial Services Act, each self-regulatory organisation must have in place a system for dealing with consumer complaints.
Most of the schemes provide a simpler and cheaper route than resort to a court of law, without taking away the right of consumers to go to law if they should wish to do so.
Proliferation of such schemes will make it essential both to try to avoid consumer confusion, and also to ensure that gaps and overlap are guarded against, but they are all to be welcomed as a recognition that a proper complaints and redress system is necessary if justice is to be done.
With newly-privatised industries consumers will rely heavily on the Directors-General of the Office of Telecommunications (OFTEL), the Office of Water Services (OFWAT), the National Rivers Authority (NRA), the Office of Gas Supplies (OFGAS), and the Office of Electricity Regulation (OFFER).
In due course the Independent Television Commission will replace the Independent Broadcasting Authority.
In each case, the tension between the near-monopoly powers of the industry and the needs of consumers for better service and more competitive pricing will provide a considerable challenge.
If these regulatory bodies succeed, it will be one of the most interesting developments of the nineties.
The consumer programme shows no sign of losing momentum, indeed difficult decisions have to be made on the most effective use of resources available.
Consumer organisations cannot, and should not, attempt to do everything, but they will not be able to ignore the effects of, for example, environmental or protectionist policies, or new threats to health or safety.
Their horizons stretch even further as they seek to listen, respond to, and support, individual consumers world-wide.
INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Taking the lead in European law
As the countries of Europe become more united, and more boundaries disappear, there is an increasing need in Britain for training and expertise in European law.
The University has established an Institute of European Law.
The Institute will be major regional and national resource, providing teaching and research in all aspects of European Law.
Its founding Director is Professor L. Neville Brown who will lead a team of ten academic lawyers, members of the Law Faculty, including several foreign-trained legal experts.
A new Chair in European Law has been created, made possible by an initial commitment well in excess of £100,000 by the Birmingham law firm of Wragge & Co.
The Institute is directed by Advisory Committee drawn from the judiciary, the legal profession, commerce and industry under the Chairmanship of Sir Julian Bullard, Pro-Chancellor of the University and former British Ambassador to West Germany.
Researchers in the Institute have already applied their expertise to a major study in preparation for the Single European Market in 1992.
The Law Societies' of England and Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland have funded a team of researchers led by lecturer Dr Julian Lonbay, to draw up a report on the professional qualifications and training of lawyers, in order to help them determine how to implement the EEC Directive on a general system for the recognition of higher education diplomas awarded on completion of professional education and training of at least three years duration, which comes into force on 4 January 1991.
The task of the research team, which also included Professor Neville Brown and Mr Takis Tridimas was firstly to establish what were the comparable legal professions in the other ten Member States (Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Spain and Portugal), and then to determine their exact educational and training requirements.
The resulting two-volume Report dealt with over forty-four legal professions that operate in the non-Common Law jurisdictions of the Community.
A thumbnail sketch of their functions and modes or organisation was also given.
The Report is shortly to be published as a book by the Law Societies with additional materials on the legal professions of the UK and Ireland.
The Law Societies have renewed the research contract to enable the Report to be kept up to date, and to help assess how the other Member States are implementing the Directive.
ANOTHER COBUILD MILESTONE
Hot on the heels of the highly successful COBUILD Dictionaries, comes Collins COBUILD English Grammar.
As with all COBUILD materials, the emphasis is on English as it is really used today, drawing on the evidence of the COBUILD corpus devised by Professor John Sinclair's English Language Research team in the University's School of English.
ENVIRONMENT GROUP LEADS PROJECT ON GLOBAL WARMING
The Environmental Research and Management Group, a University-wide team of 110 researchers interested in environmental science, is working on a major research programme with funding of $0.84m from the US Environmental Protection Agency.
The programme which will be jointly run with NASA in the US, involves 80 agricultural experts in 15 countries around the world in an effort to estimate the implications for global food supply of warming due to the greenhouse effect.
The work will involve the linking of crop-climate (those that simulate how plant growth responds to weather) to complex economic models of the world food systems (its tariff structure, pricing mechanisms, etc).
The EPA intends that initial results from the project should be ready to table at a discussion of global warming by the UN General Assembly in December.
This meeting and a subsequent schedule of talks at the ministerial level are intended to lead to a global convention on climate change by 1995.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT THROUGHOUT THE WORLD
There is continuing demand from all over the world for the expertise of members of the Development Administration Group in the University's School of Public Policy.
The Group provides advice, training and research in local government administration.
This year DAG has continued its long-term training partnerships in India and Indonesia.
The special Urban Management course for India in partnership with the Town and Country Planning Organisation in its sixth year conducted its field study module on intermediate towns in Gujerat, producing a methodology for rapid urban economic appraisal.
The special rural development course continued in partnership with the National Institute of Rural Development, Hyderabad, with which a programme of trainer development is now beginning.
An Indonesian collaborative programme in its eighth year continued to support local government finance training at the University of Indonesia.
DAG's three-man team returned from Sri Lanka in September on completion of a large-scale programme over three years of local government training under the Urban Programme Unit's Performance Improvement Programme.
In Nigeria a new five-year programme has started at Ahmado Bello University, Zaria to support training for rural local authorities in rural planning and management.
Finally in October a new stage was reached in the Group's exchange programme with Jiao Tong University, Shanghai by receiving Professors Ye Dun-ping and Wang Qin-he of the Department of Social Science and Social Engineering.
The four week visit furthered the process of mutual understanding of local government systems, which is expected to lead to joint research activities.
AROUND THE WORLD IN 100 WAYS
Birmingham students come from all over the world — in a typical year, more than 1000 students from 100 countries in addition to the 9000 from the UK.
This map shows the home countries we know about.
If you are reading this from somewhere else, please let us know.
ASSAULT ON SALT
In many countries where the climate is hot, salt in the ground and in groundwater can cause serious damage to road surfaces.
A team in the School of Civil Engineering is undertaking field trials on the road from Nata to Maun in Northern Botswana, as part of a research contract to develop a twin bituminous pavement surfacing treatment which will resist salt damage.
The work, which is funded by the overseas unit of the UK Transport and Road Research Laboratory and the Botswana Roads Department, is part of an international programme designed to provide a set of guidelines for road building in saline areas.
In addition to the established and highly successful Master's Degree Course in Highway Engineering for Developing Countries, the School of Civil Engineering is now setting up a parallel Masters' Course in Traffic Engineering for Developing Countries.
The School has also launched a new nine-month Diploma in Water Resources Engineering for Developing Countries.
Combining taught material with individual project work this course is complimentary to the existing MSc (Eng) in Water Resources Technology which since 1965 has produced more than 300 graduates, many of whom are now in senior positions in the water industry throughout the world.
NEWS
TOP BANK GIVES £½M FOR CHAIR IN INTERNATIONAL FINANCE
The Tokai Bank Ltd of Japan, one of the world's largest financial institutions, has given the University £500,000 to establish the Tokai Bank Chair in International Finance.
The Bank's support will enhance the work of the University's Business School in its new MBA programme in international finance, and will facilitate significantly increased specialisation in Far East/Pacific Studies.
QUEEN'S AWARD FOR CLINICAL CHEMISTS
A team working in the Wolfson Research Laboratories of the University's Department of Clinical Chemistry has won the Queen's Award for Technological Advancement.
The Award was made for a breakthrough which is already improving the diagnosis and monitoring of treatment of major diseases including cancer, AIDS, hepatitis, rubella, and fertility disorders.
The team of Dr Larry Kricka, Dr Gary Thorpe and Professor Tom Whitehead developed the technique known as enhanced chemiluminescence.
This is a major improvement on traditional laboratory techniques which use radiation.
By harnessing similar reactions to those which make glow-worms glow and fireflies flash, the scientists have produced a technique for examining patients' blood samples which makes the early detection of diseases quicker, safer and cheaper.
The idea of using chemiluminescence has now been developed commercially by Amersham International.
Because the technique is simple and does not use radioactivity, it is ideal and safe for use in many non-specialist laboratories and throughout the world.
‘RT’ RETIRES
Mr Ronald (RT) Jones will be remembered by many readers of this magazine as the much-respected Permanent Secretary of the Guild of Students during the 'forties, 'fifties and 'sixties.
Mr Jones retired in September 1989, sixty years after he first joined the University as clerk in the Registrar's Office.
Dashing dons at the Daily Telegraph NUS fun run, which was held on the University campus.
The fun-run has raised £30,000 so far for OXFAM's work in Southern Africa.
REVERSING THE BRAIN DRAIN
In the midst of gloomy reports about Britain's brain drain, a new appointment at Birmingham attracted widespread media attention.
In line with the Vice-Chancellor's policy of attracting top academics to senior posts in the University from wherever they are in the world, Professor Maxwell Fry left the West Coast of the USA and the University of California to become Professor of Development Finance at Birmingham.
He is one of a number of distinguished new professors to join the University this year.
RESPONDING TO DEMAND
Many readers of the first edition of The Birmingham Magazine have asked for more information about current courses ran by the University.
It is impossible to list here the hundreds of post-graduate, professional, and continuing studies courses that might be of interest to alumni.
The following list is just a sample of new courses and schemes, many of which illustrate the way that the University is developing new ideas to meet the needs of people who want further training but who are not in a position to commit themselves to full-time study.
If you would like to know more about these or other courses run by the University, please write in the first instance to the Editor at the address on page 3.
Diploma in Social Learning Theory.
This part-time course, run jointly by the School of Psychology and Glenthorne Youth Treatment Centre, Birmingham, provides training for practitioners in the use of behaviour therapy.
Part-time courses in teacher training.
From September 1990 the School of Education will offer two-year part-time PGCE courses in teacher-training in science, mathematics or modern languages.
To help those whose domestic arrangements or distance from the University makes travel difficult, the courses will require attendance at the University for only one day a week.
A substantial amount of the training will be done in teaching practice at local schools and using distance learning methods.
Theology Day Schools.
About six day schools are arranged each year by the Department of Theology.
Two invited speakers address topics of current theological interest, leading to discussion and debate.
Diploma in Development Administration.
The range of options in this course has been extended to provide specialised Diplomas in Local Government, Project Management and Information Management as well as Development Administration.
Education from a distance.
The School of Education is developing a ‘sandwich’ PhD enabling students to continue working in their home country while following a part-time PhD at Birmingham, and a ‘collegiate term’system whereby teachers on in-service courses in their own countries spend a term at Birmingham as part of their degree.
The School also offers distance-learning courses for teachers of the visually impaired and of hearing-impaired people, and for teachers of children with speech and language disorders.
At present these courses are for UK based students, but they may be available in future for people in other countries.
African Studies.
A Masters Degree in African Studies is now being offered jointly by Centre d'Etude d'Afrique Noire at the University of Bordeaux and this University's Centre of West African Studies.
Students spend four months in Birmingham and four in Bordeaux.
GETTING TOGETHER AND KEEPING IN TOUCH
The network of Birmingham alumni groups throughout the world continues to grow.
The University's Alumni Office can provide help and advice to groups, whether they consist of a few friends who meet informally from time to time, a group from a particular department or year who wish to arrange a special reunion, or a more established society like the ones described on these pages.
If you would like to know more about any of the groups listed here, the contact person will be delighted to hear from you.
If you are thinking of setting up a new group, or want to arrange a reunion, please contact the Alumni Office, at the address on page 3.
Manor House Association.
Manor House does it again!
Two more very successful events.
An ‘At Home’ in June 1989, and, most recently the Annual Reunion Dinner with the highest turnout yet, over 120 ex-Manorians returning to enjoy one another 's company over a good meal.
Two members in particular had a splendid time — John Tinkler and Paul Bishop.
They had not met since they graduated over 20 years previously!
After an absence of over 20 years John recently rejoined the JCR when he had an accommodation problem whilst working on a contract in Birmingham.
His comment on Manor and the present JCR ‘its great, it hasn't changed, I still feel at home!’
MHA hopes to have a reunion for anyone who was at Manor during the 1980s.
If you were at Manor then and would like to attend a reunion dinner, please contact the General Secretary, care of Manor House.
A further development is the Manor House Dining Club.
This is a branch of the Association devoted to the more senior ex-Manorians who would like to meet up with old friends, but who find it difficult to join in with the annual reunions.
The first dining night is planned for the end of September.
If you would like to have more details, please contact the General Secretary of MHA.
If you are an ex-Manorian but have not yet joined the Association or been to a reunion, send for details to The General Secretary, Manor House Association, Manor House, Northfield, Birmingham B31 2AE.
Chancellor's Hall Association.
The Association is still flourishing.
Its last reunion dinner was attended by 50 members from all years from 1927 to 1970.
The date of the next reunion dinner has been provisionally fixed for 20 July 1991.
Details will be sent to members in due course.
Members who have lost touch with the Association are invited to contact The Honorary Secretary, Dr J. W. Binns, at the Centre for Medieval Studies, University of York, King's Manor, York YO1 2EP stating what years they were in Hall, whereupon they will be added to the mailing list.
Duannians.
If you studied for a two-year teachers' certificate at the University before the early 1980s, you qualify to join the Duannians.
Each June a group of Duannians meet together for an informal reunion.
Members from many distant places make the effort to attend and find it well worthwhile.
Plans for 1991 are being made for a reunion on a Saturday as near to the middle of June as possible.
If you are a Duannian, or know anyone else who is, please write to me, so that I can communicate in time for Reunion 1991.
Mrs Norah M. Grocott, 54 Heaton Road, Solihull, West Midlands B91 2DZ.
A group of distinguished Manorians, but who are they and where are they now?
Fifty Years of Sports Science
In July 1989 the School of Sport and Exercise Sciences invited former students to share a special celebration to mark its 50th anniversary.
The School's forerunner, the Department of Physical Education, was set up in 1939 in response to concern about the health and fitness of the nation, with Mr A.D. Munrow as its Director and one other member of staff, Mr Max Madders.
Now a part of the Faculty of Science, the School takes 60 students a year, has 13 staff and offers a range of undergraduate and postgraduate degrees.
Many former students including the Department's first graduate, Mr Eric Jones, enjoyed an afternoon of reminiscences and renewed friendships.
A repeat performance if planned for 2039!
History Graduates 1970–80.
If you graduated in history between 1970 and 1980, you are invited by the School of History to a special reunion on Saturday 15 September 1990.
If you would like to know more, please contact the Alumni Office, on 021 414 6878, or write to the address on page 3.
Sands Cox Society.
The 10th Annual Meeting of the Sands Cox Society (of Medical and Dental Graduates) will be held on Saturday, 29 September 1990, from 9.30 am to 5.00 pm at the Medical School.
The theme of the subsequent Scientific Meeting will be Medicine and Ethics.
The Society's Annual Dinner will be held at the Birmingham Medical Institute, at 7.00 pm the same evening.
Non-members who wish to attend should write to The Secretary, Sands Cox Society, Medical School, Birmingham B15 2TT as soon as possible.
Members will receive booking forms and further details in the Society's journal, AESCULAPIUS.
This edition will include a sequence of articles on Immunology.
The Overseas Meeting will be held at the Birmingham Medical Institute on Friday 28 September, from 9.30 am.
Overseas graduates who would like to contribute to these meeting are invited to write to Mr Arnold Gourevitch, Sands Cox Society, Medical School, Birmingham B15 2TT.
University House Association.
The Association is open to all ex-residents of the JCR and SCR of University House.
Members are kept in touch with House through an annual Newsletter and a Summer Reunion, and are eligible for membership of UH Club and bar when living in, or visiting Birmingham.
present residents may receive some personal financial help in special cases through our Bursary Fund, and we have two annual prizes for the JCR Co-Presidents, endowed in memory of two past Wardens, Margery Fry (1904–14 and Julia Friend (1954–68).
UHA and University House have suffered two sad losses during the year with the deaths of Arthur Butterworth, who was Warden 1968–81, and Alice Godsell, a faithful supporter to many since her student days of the early 1920s, and UHA wishes to commemorate them through some lasting gifts in House.
Any past resident interested in joining the Association, or wanting information about the memorials, or the 1991 Reunion on July 6th should write to Hon Sec UHA, c/o University House, Edgbaston Park Road, Birmingham B15 2TX.
The Holdsworth Club.
15 March 1991: Holdsworth Club Presidential Address and Annual Dinner.
President: The Vice-Chancellor The Rt Hon Sir Nicholas Browne-Wilkinson.
For further information, contact Ann Worley in the School of Law, who is also always delighted to have news of alumni and is anxious to be told of changes in address.
WHAT ARE YOU DOING NOW?
The following information about Birmingham alumni has been collected from recent news reports.
A Directory, giving the present whereabouts of Birmingham alumni (though not their personal addresses) will be published in the coming year.
The Directory will only list and be sent to those who have indicated — either on this year's or last year's questionnaire — that they would like to be included.
AN INSPECTOR CALLS ON THE CITY
Sue Best joined the police force immediately after graduating in Biological Sciences from Birmingham in 1975.
Most of her University friends will remember her by her maiden name, Sue Adams.
‘Unfortunately I have lost touch with many of my fellow graduates.
I would be interested to hear from them and discover what paths their careers have taken’.
Inspector Sue Best has exchanged her navy blue uniform for a smart city suit, and left Stoke Newington police station for the prestigious West End headquarters of the Trafalgar House Group.
She is one of a new breed of high-flying police officers who are giving up their regular beat for a spell in industry.
Her secondment is typical of number being planned by the Metropolitan Police to improve their management techniques and to broaden the experience of talented officers.
Home Office officials are keen to watch the progress of these schemes and in future could include them as a qualification for senior police posts.
Insp Best left the inner city problems Stoke Newington, north London, for the glitzy offices of Trafalgar House, ensconced between Piccadilly and the stylish shops of New Bond Street.
The three-month attachment was agreed after a chance conversation between Metropolitan Police Commissioner, Sir Peter Imbert, and Mr Eric Parker, chief executive of Trafalgar House.
Insp Best said: ‘I have come here with a very open mind but what I want to do is to develop the skills I have already and I am hoping it will give me more confidence.
I also have time to reflect on my own job and go back with energy and enthusiasm.’
Her assignments with the construction firm are to assess the training for ship's officers on the QE2, to develop a management training programme for Russian engineers, and to examine the company image in the undergraduate market place.
‘I work as a manager at Stoke Newington, managing the rotas of officers,’ she said.
‘It's my job to provide the service to the public and ensure it is an efficient and professional service.
When I back there I am sure I will have changed to a certain extent and I hope it will have helped to develop my managerial skills.’
PROUD TO BE A BRUMMIE
by Carl Chinn
J. B. Priestley thought Birmingham was ‘beastly’.
Sir John Betjeman, on the other hand, described it as one of the industrial towns which are ‘the hope and life of England’.
Dr Carl Chinn, Birmingham graduate, former bookie and soon to be Community Historian in Birmingham Studies at the University, speaks out in defence of his home city, which in 1989 voted him ‘Brummie of the Year’.
‘They came from Birmingham, which is not a place to promise much, you know, Mr Weston.’
The nonchalant dismissal of the worth of Birmingham by Jane Austen's Mrs Elton seems to sum up the attitudes of many people towards the city.
Today, antagonism towards Birmingham remains as strong as when Jane Austen wrote the words in Emma in 1816.
At the least, the city is regarded as unappealing; at the worst, it evokes a loathing which can be as unkind as it is jaundices.
Modern aversion is encapsulated by a notice about Heartlanders , a 1989 community play celebrating Birmingham's centenary as a city.
Robert Thornber of The Guardian described its three writers as authors of ‘national stature’.
However, he found it ‘quite unfathomable’ that they had ‘chosen to live in the city of which Mike Harding quite sensibly said that if Britain broke wind that's where it would come from.’
Brummies tend to shrug off such prejudices comments.
After all, they have had a long time to become used to them.
As far back as the seventeenth century, Dryden described the devil as ‘the Brummijam uniter of Mankind’, whilst also penning the lines, ‘Twas coined by stealth, like groats at Birmingham’.
Moreover, does not the Oxford English Dictionary confirm the city as the home of the dishonest?
For does it not define Brummagem — the dialect name for Birmingham — as an adjective meaning counterfeit, cheap and showy?
During the Industrial Revolution, many Birmingham goods were cheap to buy, but does cheapness justify the pejorative term worthless?
More importantly, the city has long been a centre of manufacturing excellence; why then should it still arouse such hostility; is there something deeper to the disapproval of Birmingham than the quality of its goods.
I believe there is.
Birmingham is a working city, a preeminent place of industry, and a home to manufacture.
Many people dislike its close connection to industrialisation, and would concur with George Gissing's abhorrence of machinery, expressed in 1895 in his novel,Eve's Ransom .
‘That's the end of the human race will come to,’ said Hilliard.
‘It'll be driven mad and killed off by machinery.
Before long there'll be machines for washing and dressing people — machines for feeding them — machines for…’
His wrathful imagination led him to grotesque ideas…
Unsurprisingly Hilliard was in Birmingham when he made this impassioned outburst against machinery.
For those who believe in a mythical golden age, when men and women lived in an idyll unspoilt by machines, then Birmingham is a brutal reminder of the victory of the Industrial Revolution.
It is this which causes Birmingham to be scorned.
Its name is a metaphor for a manufacturing spirit; a substitute for hard, dirty and spiritless work; an analogy for all things industrial.
This revulsion at industrialisation, with Birmingham as its easily-targeted object, was expressed no more vividly than by J. B. Priestley in 1933 when he wrote English Journey .
For him, Birmingham was symbolic of industry's gloom, epitomising the spirit of pessimism created by manufacture.
‘I only know that during the half-hour or so I sat staring through the top windows of the tram, I saw nothing, not one single thing, that could possibly raise a man's spirits.
Possibly what I was seeing was not Birmingham but our urban and industrial civilisation.
The fact remains that it was beastly.
It was so many miles of ugliness, squalor, and the wrong kind of vulgarity, the decayed anaemic kind…
This was, I suppose, the common stuff our of which most our big industrial towns are made.’
It is difficult to rid people of this despondent impression of Birmingham.
Justifiably, the city's defenders can point out that whilst life for working-class Brummies was and still can be hard, it is better than the lot of an agricultural labourer in the eighteenth century.
We can agree that the city does not always look good, that mistakes have been made in its redevelopment, but we emphasise that the picture of the city is not as bad as it is painted.
We can quote Sir John Betjeman in our support, when he wrote so truthfully:
‘Do not judge these industrial towns by their faces; they are the most alive places in England; they are more interesting than the little dead country towns which we so like to look at: think of Manchester, Birmingham with their concerts, theatres, parks and art galleries…
To someone who likes people as well as buildings, the industrial towns are the hope and life of England.’
Yet, such well-founded statements all seem to no avail.
Birmingham is still declaimed as smoky, grimy, unpleasant and philistine.
We can retort that the city has more miles of canals than Venice; that it has more parkland than any other city in Western Europe; that it has a world-famous symphony orchestra, a marvellous Art Gallery; that it…the list goes on.
We can prove that Birmingham is a nice place; we can embarrass ourselves by straining each nerve, adopting all blandishments to try and make its detractors like our city.
Our task is in vain.
Our opponents do not want to be persuaded.
But yet there is hope.
Tens of thousands of outsiders come to this city to learn and work at its University.
Whilst they are here, we hope that they rub away at the image of Birmingham  and find its reality.
As David Lodge put it in the first issue of The Birmingham Magazine:
‘Indeed, writing the novel (Nice Work)was for me a process of discovery — of hitherto unknown aspects of the city in which I had lived for nearly thirty years.’
Using David Lodge as an example, we would say to visitors to our city, ‘Whilst you are in Birmingham, discover Birmingham.’
More than this, if — like Sir John Betjeman — you like people, then take the time to meet Brummies and to talk to us.
Ignore the self-righteous and the pompous who slur Brummies precisely because they are an industrial people.
Don't be put off by J. B. Priestley's description of us as ‘extraordinarily ugly’ and ‘really unpleasing to look at closely.’
Pass by his unflattering comments that Brummie women are ‘either much too fat or far too thin’, whilst we Brummie men look ‘like lopsided oafs, gnomes, hobgoblins.’
Instead take more note of his remark that though he thought us ugly to look at, we are not ugly to be with.
Look beneath the exterior of Birmingham before you condemn; find the real Brummie spirit before you attack it.
Unlike Beryl Bainbridge, who in 1984 followed in Priestley's foot-steps in both a spiritual and physical sense, allow yourselves time before you judge us and our city.
Do not denigrate our streets as terrible after just one day in Birmingham; do not believe that the only person you will find reading a book will be a ‘broken winged angel’ guarding a tomb in the city centre!
Yes, I'm proud of Birmingham.
Despite its many faults, it is striving to build a better future for all its citizens — of whatever colour, creed or origin.
It is people who make a city for me.
Brummies have made a city to be proud of.
It may be difficult to discern at first glance, but stay awhile and look and it will become apparent.
The pride of Birmingham is its people.
That is why I'm proud to be a Brummie.
TRAVELLING WITH RESERVATIONS
by Michael Collie
Michael Collie graduated from the Department of Drama and Theatre Arts in July 1985.
He now works as a freelance journalist for a number of publications and programmes, primarily Country File on BBC Television and You and Yours on BBC Radio 4.
He was recently quest of honour at a formal dinner at Lake Hall, where he spent his early University days.
To be honest I blame Maria at Kidderminster ticket office.
Not that there were any problems until we got to Preston.
The weather was fine, as was the blue chequered luxury of ‘H’.
Maria had allocated ‘H17’ back to me, and certainly I had no complaints; nobody, it seems had been allocated ‘H17 front’.
Much relief.
Two site foremen from Coventry had H19 and H20 ‘front’, but that was across the aisle.
In ‘H16 front’ sat a red tee-shirted twenty year old (sex, of any, unknown), being amused in a somewhat vacant way by the compulsory tch-tch-tch personal stereo and watered by a straw from a box of Vimto.
So, other than the odd slurp and percussive explosion from the headphones, plus sotto voce undertones from the foremen across the aisle, all was peace, the Clansman was taking the strain, and the feet were visible uncurling.
Leon ‘Relax’ Redbone would be proud.
Until we got to Preston.
One moment coach ‘H’ was gloriously tranquil, the next heaving.
The Monday morning exodus to the Highlands was on.
Not the interminable M6 for this crowd.
The train it had to be: my train; my carriage.
There used to be techniques for keeping your personal space personal; the sort of essential info that every seasoned traveller knows.
Action plans included laying coats and baggage over every nearby seat, spreading the wrappings of the BR egg'n'cress far and wide (before the new Sir Clement shrink-wrap) or simple feigning noisy sleep at every station.
Less commonly used initiatives included burying oneself deep inside a quality newspaper, and ignoring the whimpers of, ‘Is there anyone sitting by you?’
This gave the impression of being on a different plane altogether — or even a different train altogether — and most passengers would soon pass by.
Alternatively one could simply say the seats were actually all taken, and that all three occupants happened to be in the toilet at the time.
But that was really outside the Approved Rules, being a lie.
Fairly unbelievable as well.
(Have you ever tried getting three people in a BR toilet?
I did once, but that is another story).
At the other end of the scale for maintaining personal space was, ironically, the Open and Welcoming Approach.
This involved beaming heartily at all newcomers to the carriage and exuding humour, warmth and trivial monologue.
The hope, of course, was always that one would be left on one's own.
Occasionally that plan backfired and a genuine neurotic would arrive, soon to engage all and sundry in a lengthy discourse about the cold, the warmth and the fact that the automatic door wasn't being automatic why oh why oh why do people keep leaving it open, can't they think of others for a change, you'd have thought it wasn't too much trouble…
But now it has all changed.
British Rail the great social class divider (‘First Class in the front of the train, Standard Class hanging off the rear’) is actively working to bring the world together, better even than the Coke advert.
No longer can you sit firmly in your own world, feet outstretched and uncurling, because three Prestonians are going to sit next to you.
You don't want them and they don't want you.
But none of you has any choice because you all have reserved seats.
And theirs are reserved next to you.
It amazes me that the fine for moving a seat reservation card is actually more that the one for pulling the communication cord.
Did you know that you can stop a train four times for the price of a seat change?
Fascinating, but a digression.
The fact is that at Preston station I lost my personal space.
Lost to an executive type with a poser-phone and two senior citizens, husband and wife, with National Holidays labels on their Gladstones.
There we all were, as the Clansman sped through the Cumbrian countryside and on into bonnie Scotland, all ignoring each other.
It was as if our personal bubbles still remained, intact, unencroached, as our shoulders bumped and our feet kicked.
(Why do other people always stretch out their legs?)
The train hummed, the stereo tch-ed, and then the phone rang.
The conversation was brief, embarrassed.
Carrying a poser-phone is one thing, it seems.
Answering it on a train is another.
its owner apologised.
‘Oh no,’ said the woman, ‘don't worry.
My daughter's got one of those.
She's in carpets you see.’
Being in carpets was where the conversation started.
Where it ended I forget.
Edinburgh, I think.
The man with the phone was not in carpets; he was in aircraft parts or something similar.
But the woman's husband was in the RAF once.
Really?
Really.
And on it went.
Being in neither carpet nor the RAF left me out of the conversation, until the tea trolley came round.
Would I like a tea?
Oh yes please.
Thank you.
Particularly good tea this.
I remember when…
It was a happy, fun journey really.
Rob Phone, Mr and Mrs National Holidays, and the journalist they met on the train have all gone their separate ways now, but perhaps a little enriched, a little relaxed, by a modicum of light, meaningless conversation.
People coming and going.
People whom you would never meet if you could do the old coats-on-the-seat trick.
Or be buried in The Times when the fateful question is asked.
Maybe British Rail should start to reserve seats according to what sort of conversation you would like to have.
‘I'll have a problems-of-driving-in-urban-traffic conversation please.
Yes, general cross-section.
Thanks.’
In the meantime, it's obviously pot-luck what and who you get.
But perhaps the demise of the days of the personal space tactics is not all bad.
From one surprisingly satisfied traveller, thanks, Maria.
NEWS
Degrees of Distinction
One of a University's most pleasant tasks is to select men and women who have achieved outstanding distinction in their chosen fields, for the award of honorary degrees.
In 1989/90, the University of Birmingham has honoured fourteen highly distinguished people in this way.
This list is as varied as it is impressive.
The University's new honorary graduates are:
Lord Briggs, Provost of Worcester College, Oxford and Chancellor of the Open University.
Doctor of Letters.
Professor Gerry Brown, Professor of Theoretical Physics at the State University of New York, and former Professor at this University.
Doctor of Science.
The Revd Stuart Burgess.
Chairman of the York and Hull District of the Methodist Church.
Master of Arts.
Sir Adrian Cadbury, a prominent public figure, Chairman of Cadbury Schweppes and former industrialist.
Doctor of Laws.
Councillor Frederick Chapman, Lord Mayor of Birmingham, Doctor of Laws.
Mr Tony Gill, Chairman and Chief Executive of Lucas Industries.
Doctor of Engineering.
Miss Sue Lawley, journalist and broadcaster.
Master of Arts.
Dr Patrick Moore, astronomer.
Doctor of Science.
Mr Didymus Mutasa, Speaker of the Zimbabwe House of Assembly.
Doctor of Laws.
Mr Tae Joon Park.
The founder of the Pohang Institute of Science and Technology (POSTECH) in South Korea.
Doctor of Engineering.
Professor Michael Rutter, Professor of Child Psychiatry at London University's Institute of Psychiatry.
Doctor of Science.
Miss Tessa Sanderson, international athlete.
Master of Science.
Mr Duncan Watson, Chairman of the Royal National Institute for the Blind.
Doctor of Law.
Dame Rachel Waterhouse, Chairman of the Council of the Consumers Association.
Doctor of Social Science.
70TH BIRTHDAY SYMPOSIUM
More than 80 alumni, scientists and engineers, attended a special symposium organised by the School of Metallurgy and Materials to mark the 70th Birthday of Sir Alan Cottrell.
Sir Alan is a graduate of the University, having been awarded his BSc in 1939 and his PhD in 1942.
In 1943 he was appointed lecturer and then Professor of Physical Metallurgy in 1949.
He left the University for Harwell in 1955.
Sir Alan was Chief Scientific Adviser to HM Government from 1971 to 1974 and Vice-Chancellor of the University of Cambridge from 1977 to 1979.
WORDS AND PICTURE
The Rt Hon Denis Healey MP visited the University earlier this summer to unveil a portrait by Henry Mee of Lord Zuckerman of Burnham Thorpe, OM, KCB, FRS.
Lord Zuckerman, who is pictured below with Mr Healey, was Professor of Anatomy at the University from the 1940s until 1968.
He has held many distinguished posts since then, including Chief Scientific Adviser to the Secretary for Defence and the Government.
The next Briggs Memorial Lecture on ‘Happiness’ will be given by Mr Healey in the Great Hall of the University on 15 November 1990.
The Lecture begins at 6.00 and is open to everyone.
Sue Lawley and Tessa Sanderson after the Degree Ceremony
IT'S A MAN'S LIFE IN ENGINEERING
But why is it?
The University's Faculty of Engineering has appointed Dr Ann Morton as Coordinator for ‘Women in Engineering’.
Her job is to encourage more women to consider a career in engineering by making links with potential employers, engineers and, most importantly, looking at ways of increasing the number of women students applying for places on engineering courses.
TOUCHING THE ROCK
Ten years ago, Professor John Hull, who is now Dean of the Faculty of Education and Continuing Studies, began to lose his sight.
His experiences of coming to terms with blindness are described in Touching the Rock , published by SPCK earlier this year.
The book is based on a diary which Professor Hull kept on cassette.
It describes everyday experiences, like crossing the Bristol Road, getting lost in University Square, and some of the problems of teaching and researching as a blind scholar.
Touching the Rock has been featured in the Sunday Telegraph and on BBC Radio 4's Sunday and In Touch programmes, and is shortly to be the subject of Michael Burke's 40 Minutes on BBC2.
This book will also be published in the USA and in Australia in the coming year.
AGENDA
Taking the Credit
Soon you will be able to impress your friends by using a University of Birmingham Alumni credit card.
Under a special arrangement with a leading bank, you will be able to use a distinctive new card offered exclusively to Birmingham alumni.
The card will have the University name and photograph printed prominently on it.
Unfortunately the bank is not able to offer the scheme to people living outside the UK.
Details will be sent to all UK members of the Alumni Association this autumn.
Alumni can also continue to take advantage of the range of concessions and discounts announced last year.
These include:
Automatic external membership of the Guild of Students
Use of University facilities including the library, bars and restaurants
Booking residential accommodation on the Campus
Discounts at the Alexandria Theatre, Birmingham
Discounts on Avis Rent-A-Car
Discounts on BUPA membership
For details, please contact the Alumni Office 021–414 6878.
ALUMNI ASSOCIATION AGM
The Alumni General Meeting of the Alumni Association will take place on 22 September 1990.
Details are enclosed in this Magazine.
Please come to the meeting if you can — this is an important opportunity to elect new officers and to discuss Association business and future plans.
ASSOCIATION OF SCIENCE EDUCATION MEETING
More than 5000 are expected to attend the ASE Conference at the University from 4–7 January 1991.
There will be a special meeting during the programme for those delegates who are Birmingham alumni.
If you are planning to attend the Conference and would like to know more, please write to the Editor at the address on page 3.
A WAY TO HELP
Several alumni have asked how they can make provision in their wills for a bequest which will help future students at Birmingham.
Of course, the University very much welcomes bequests.
Over the years they have significantly enhanced the quality of the education and the facilities available to our students.
There are number of ways of doing this, such as bursary funds or contributions for equipment.
University officers will be pleased to advise anyone considering this possibility on how such bequests can best be arranged in a way which will be of greatest benefit to present and future students.
If you would like to know more, please write in the first instance to the Editor at the address on page 3.
AN INVITATION TO TEACHERS
Following the success of the first Alumni Teachers' Meeting at the University's Schools' Open Day, it is intended that such meetings will become a regular event.
The next meeting will be on the second of the 1991 Schools' Open Days, Friday 26 April.
All alumni who have returned a questionnaire indicating that they are teachers or careers advisers will receive an invitation.
The programme will consist of a presentation, a panel discussion when guests will have an opportunity to talk to University Admissions Tutors about current issues, lunch, and an opportunity to visit departments.
If you would like to know more, and did not receive an invitation last time, please complete and return the enclosed questionnaire.
We would also welcome any suggestions you may have on subjects that might be included in the programme.
THE BARBER'S BRIGHT FUTURE
by Richard Verdi
The Barber Institute of Fine Arts has a leading part in Birmingham's cultural renaissance.
In this article Richard Verdi, Professor of Fine Arts and Art History, talks about the Collection's developing role in teaching and as part of the University's and the City's artistic heritage.
Rossetti — The Blue Bower
Rembrandt — The Parting of David and Jonathan
Murillo — The Marriage Feast at Cana
Toulouse-Lautrec — La Songeuse
Gainsborough — The Harvest Wagon
Simone — St John the Evangelist
Birmingham's cultural renaissance is in full swing.
Initiated by the CBSO under its electrifying young conductor, Simon Rattle, it will soon receive another boost, when Sadler's Wells Ballet takes up residence in the refurbished Hippodrome under its new name, the Birmingham Royal Ballet.
Added to these is the popular success of the City of Birmingham Touring Opera, which recently staged a production of The Magic Flute in Longbridge in which 48% of the audience was attending an opera for the first time.
Together with the wealth of music and dance recitals staged regularly by smaller groups throughout the city, these have succeeded in consolidating the reputation of Britain's second city as an international musical centre, recalling memories of an earlier era, when composers of the stature of Mendelssohn, Dvorak and Elgar could rely upon regular patronage from the enlightened city fathers.
But what about the state of the visual arts in the home of David Cox and Edward Burne-Jones?
This, too, has never looked healthier.
During the past year, the Birmingham Museum and Art Gallery, which already boasted one of the handsomest displays of any gallery in the country, has hosted two major international exhibitions — neither of which was seen in London.
In October it staged an important loan exhibition of Dutch 17th century paintings, which included more than 140 works from Holland's Golden Age drawn from collections throughout the country, including those of the National Gallery and HM the Queen.
This is followed, in March of this year, by a major exhibition devoted to the French Impressionist painter, Camille Pissarro, which subsequently toured to the Burrell Collection, Glasgow.
Plans are now afoot for an important exhibition of Canaletto in England and another devoted to the more unexpected theme of dogs in art, enterprisingly planned to coincide with Crufts' arrival at the NEC early next year.
The Museum is also overseeing the conversion of the Gas Hall, behind the Council House, into a major venue for large art exhibitions from home and abroad.
When added to the innovative shows regularly staged by the Ikon Gallery and the newly-established Midlands Contemporary Art, which specialises in the work of local artists, this makes Birmingham the equal of any other provincial city in the country as a mecca for art lovers — and potentially much more besides.
Much of that potential now rests with the city's other outstanding centre for music and the visual arts, the University of Birmingham's Barber Institute of Fine Arts, widely regarded as one of the finest collections of its kind in Britain and, along with the Shakespeare Institute, surely the University's greatest cultural asset.
The Barber Institute was founded in 1932 by Lady Barber (1869–1933) in 1932 by Lady Barber in memory of her husband, Sir Henry Barber (1860–1927), a wealthy Birmingham solicitor and property developer.
The Institute is housed in a fine building located at the south-east corner of the University campus, which was designed by Robert Atkinson and opened by Queen Mary in 1939.
It is administered by a Trust and was bequeathed to the University ‘for the study and encouragement of art and music’.
The Institute houses the Department of Music and contains a lecture theatre, concert hall, and art gallery, in addition to an outstanding library of 35,000 volumes on the fine arts.
But its chief glory is a superb collection of works of art, purchased by the Trustees over the past fifty years on advice from the Director.
By any standards the collections of the Barber Institute are of national importance and should prove a source of pride to the Trustees of the bequest, the University, and the citizens of Birmingham.
Heeding Lady Barber's wish that the ‘purchases for the Collection shall be of that standard of quality required by the National Gallery and the Wallace Collection’, the Trustees have succeeded in acquiring over the years a group of paintings, drawings, sculptures, and objet d'art of exceptional merit, a number of them undisputed masterpieces.
Among the earliest purchases for the collection was a poignant portrayal of St John the Evangelist by Simone Martini, dated 1320, which is one of only four works by this master in Britain — another of which is owned by the Art Gallery at Chamberlain Square.
Also among the treasures of the Barber are two early paintings by Giovanni Bellini and major canvases by such  later Italian masters as Veronese and Tintoretto.
The outstanding collection of seventeenth century pictures includes an exhilarating landscape by Rubens and works by Poussin, Claude, Frans Hals and Murillo, the last of whom is represented by a grandly orchestrated Marriage Feast at Cana , one of the undoubted gems of the collection.
Key works by more recent artists include Gainsborough's Harvest Wagon , Roubiliac's terracotta bust of Alexander Pope, and notable examples by Turner, Delacroix and Corot.
Finally, the impressive array of late nineteenth century pictures includes one of Degas' most audacious racing scenes, Whistler's Symphony in White No.
III — the first of this artist's works to bear a musical title — and fine works by Manet, Monet, Renoir, Gauguin and Van Gogh.
Though the terms of the Barber bequest originally forbad the purchase of works painted after 1899, this stipulation has since been altered to permit the acquisition of works of art at least thirty years old — an alteration which has made possible the purchase under the present Director, Professor Hamish Miles, of important pictures by Redon, Gwen John, Leger and Magritte.
Housed in the spacious and handsomely decorated galleries on the upper storey of the Institute, this collection ranks among the finest of its size anywhere in the world.
The fact remains, however, that the Barber Institute is woefully underused, neglected not only by residents and visitors to the City but by the staff and students of the University itself.
Recently described in the national press as ‘one of Britain's best-kept secrets’, the Institute has never attracted the attention it deserves.
Nor has it fulfilled the wishes of the Vice-Chancellor under whom Lady Barber made the original bequest ‘that the University of Birmingham would be the first of the modern universities to give effective expression to the claim of the Fine Arts’ as ‘an academic discipline and an indispensable element in humane and liberal studies’.
For, although the Institute has provided undergraduate teaching and postgraduate supervision over the years, it has never offered a degree course in the History of Art in the manner of other British universities with outstanding collections, such as Glasgow, Manchester, London or East Anglia.
But all of this seems set to change.
In 1989, the University decided to establish a combined honours course in the History of Art, which will admit its first intake this October.
Students will be able to study this subject in combination with virtually any other discipline taught within the Faculty of Arts.
In their third year they will also have the opportunity to combine their chosen subjects in an inter-disciplinary course which will permit them to explore the links between the two.
Study trips to major collections in Britain and continental Europe will also form an important part of the course.
But its initial focus will be the rich holdings of Birmingham's own museums.
What better place to start than on our own doorstep, with the world famous collections of the Barber Institute?
The Institute itself has recently reopened after a five year refurbishment which included the installation of a new metal and glass roof and the conversion of the former tapestry gallery into one suitable for displaying pictures.
Already thronging with music students and hosting a regular series of free concerts and recitals by distinguished musicians, it will soon provide the new home for undergraduates in the fine arts and gain a new lease on life.
But there is still much more to be done to improve the Barber's image.
Better publicity for the collections, together with regular events staged around them, are both badly needed.
The last of these poses a special problem, since the terms of Lady Barber's bequest make it impossible for temporary exhibitions to take place within the building.
Here too, however, the future looks brighter for the Barber.
Plans are now in motion to stage exhibitions featuring paintings from the collection in the Museum and Art Gallery in the city centre, where they are certain to attract attention to the University's artistic riches and forge a new link between town and gown.
Poussin — Tancred and Erminia
Magritte — The Taste of Sorrow
Canaletto — Capriccio
A WELL DESERVED REPUTATION
A University needs a good and well-deserved reputation.
Many influences, some ephemeral and some substantial, affect that reputation.
The last Birmingham Magazine reported on the results of an opinion survey designed to assess the University's reputation with important groups including sixth-formers, managers in industry and the public.
Two further surveys have shown that the University's reputation is moving upwards.
‘NICE WORK’ WORKS NICELY
A million people think the University has an attractive campus after seeing it on BBC TV's Nice Work drama serial in October.
This is revealed in a survey conducted by MORI.
MORI found that 61% of viewers feel that the campus featured in the programme is attractive.
And even though the story is about a lecturer at ‘the University of Rummidge’, a majority of all viewers mentioned spontaneously that the programme was filmed at Birmingham.
The University was asked by the BBC if the campus scenes in the serial could be filmed on the Birmingham Campus.
This was a natural choice because the writer of the television serial, and of the novel upon which it is based, is David Lodge, until recently a Professor in the School of English.
In agreeing to the filming, University authorities had in mind a previous survey conducted by MORI.
This showed that the general public, school teachers and sixth form pupils all think that the University of Birmingham is in the top ten in the UK.
But some people — when they hear the word ‘Birmingham’— assume wrongly that the campus will be urban and unattractive.
ONE OF THE BEST
‘Modern’, ‘really attractive’, ‘well-designed’, ‘easy to use’; these are some of the enthusiastic comments made by sixth-formers in a recent survey carried out by the MORI organisation, to discover what readers thought of the University's newly-designed Prospectus.
Last year, the University made a significant investment to improve the quality and appearance of the Prospectus, which is the most important aid in the recruitment of the brightest and best-motivated undergraduate students.
The Prospectus was re-written, the contents reviewed and re-organised and professional designers and photographers were commissioned to ensure that the appearance was attractive and coherent.
The MORI survey was conducted to measure the success of the Prospectus and to provide feedback for the second edition, which has now been published.
Sixth-formers were asked to comment on the Prospectus in terms of its content, layout, readability, positive aspects and drawbacks.
The response was overwhelmingly positive.
The majority of those questioned considered it to be one of the best prospectuses published, easy to use, attractive and informative.