

A new consciousness
Mysticism Design Business Meaning Creativity Language Awareness Advertising Technology Nature
You have the Power
How admen conquer greed
Why the future of business is female
NASA discovers the language of enlightenment
Philip Glass — music for a new America
The dreadlocked prophet of Virtual Reality
Plus: The Media Lab, Glasnostalgia, World Party, Suicide at the Wall.
You're great.
in fact, you're fantastic
At this early point in the 1990s, we appear to be on the edge of ‘something’.
Some say a new era of enlightenment is around the corner, some say that consciousness is quietly entering the mainstream, while others see a grim world of confusion and chaos (not chaos theory but just plain chaos).
Wave is for all those who are bewildered and bemused by reality and think that's an appropriate response.
Not sorted out, decided and convinced but curious and open in strange and often wondrous times.
Our brief is to report on the more fascinating aspects of this period of intense change — the meeting of consciousness and business; the search for meaning in our information society; the need to empower ourselves, discover a new global heart and become our own politics.
If this sounds your cup of tea, welcome to Wave .
Paul Miller, Publisher.
Contents
Cover Story: Beyond Greed
Can advertising be used to conquer greed?
Wave asked Britain's most radical agency to investigate.
The results are strange and unsettling.
No guilt, no punishment but a campaign that aims to inspire people to change.
Music: Philip Glass
Composer Philip Glass has managed to create a new kind of music.
Mesmeric and hypnotic, his prodigious output evokes strong reactions.
As Glass prepared for his forthcoming European tour, Simon Jones talked to him at his home in Greenwich Village about rhythm, transcendence and his dad's record store.
Technology: Virtual Reality
It is not everyday that we discover a new world.
But that is what Jaron Lanier claims for Virtual Reality.
Step into a Dali painting or fly to Mars — the possibilities are endless.
So can we expect a glorious future where dreams and technology merge or are the implications more sinister?
Business: Female Corporatism
A once in 200-year-revolution is sweeping through the business world.
Bombarded by change, the established values and ways of working are proving inadequate.
But business gurus believe the way out of corporate chaos is clear — group-based, intuitive and built around relationships — the future of business is female.
Language: Mysticism
What makes Sanskrit unique is that this ancient Indian language of enlightenment was not ‘thought up’ but heard by yogis in meditation.
Surprisingly, this voice of the infinite is being adopted by scientists as the most precise and perfect language for Artificial Intelligence.
Regulars
Information Shortwave Wavelength Media Brainwave 
This is a jacket
Inner Space Outer Space
Why are pioneers in artificial intelligence — among them NASA — fascinated by Sanskrit, the ancient Indian language of enlightenment?
When Rick Briggs was exploring the possibilities for artificial intelligence (computers that can think) at NASA in 1985, he made a strange and exotic discovery.
Professor Briggs had been investigating how a ‘natural’ language might be used in computer processing.
Prevailing thinking at the Research Institute for Advanced Computer Studies (RIACS) held that only an artificial language could deliver the necessary precision.
Bur Briggs discovered that Sanskrit, an Indian language of meditation dating back more than 3,000 years, contained a grammatical structure identical to the languages being developed for NASA's extensive artificial intelligence programme.
His research revealed that early Sanskrit linguists, unlike most modern language theorists, analysed sentences on the basis of the message the speaker wanted to communicate.
Briggs found this approach suited his work perfectly.
But Briggs found himself at odds with colleagues within the NASA scientific establishment.
The NASA community, which currently spends £30 million a year on AI research, was troubled not only by the age of Sanskrit but also by its reputed origins.
What makes Sanskrit unique is not just its structure, grammar or syntax, though all these qualities make it an enviable language for use by computer scientists.
What sets it apart is where it comes from.
Normally a language is developed by human beings from guttural sounds that eventually become verbal symbols for objects and actions.
But Indian spiritual teaching maintains that Sanskrit was not ‘thought up’ but ‘heard’as vibrations on  the inner planes of meditation by yogis.
Sanskrit is a series of mantras, the food of meditation, arranged into a working language.
It is a passport to altered states of consciousness and ultimately to self-realisation.
Not quite standard NASA fare.
But it was this mysterious history that intrigued Briggs.
With other languages he found something lacking.
Writing in Artificial Intelligence magazine in 1985 he said the AI community in NASA and beyond were arrogant in their refusal to examine ‘anything more than a couple of centuries old.
The relevant field is the philosophy of language, and it is necessary for AI researchers to delve into all relevant traditions’.
Natural languages arise unconsciously, haphazardly, while artificial languages lack expressiveness.
But, in Briggs words, ‘there is no reason in principle why one cannot have the best of both worlds’, he believed he had found just that in Sanskrit — a bridge between natural and artificial languages.
As Alistair Shearer and Peter Russell say in their translations of the Upanishads (a collection of verses devoted to Indian mystical knowledge), the world view which shaped Sanskrit was holistic.
Objects are defined by their function, while actions and those who perform them are viewed as connected parts of a greater whole.
Sanskrit is an ‘atomised’ language.
In other words, it is easily reduced to the most basic units which makes it simple for computers to process.
It is also a straightforward matter to create new words — and so to frame new concepts — by the use of prefixes, suffixes, etc, a quality sanctioned rather than frowned upon by the Sanskrit grammarians.
For example, the word ‘mushika’ comes from the root ‘mush’which means ‘to steal’.
‘Mushika’ means ‘that which steals a mouse’.
The word ‘mushikarati’ comes from ‘mushika’and ‘rati’, and means literally, ‘that which delights in, or stops, the mouse’, meaning a cat.
But Sanskrit exists on subtle levels.
‘Mushika’ also symbolises the Self, the unattached pure consciousness.
The Self, in assuming an identity, ‘steals’ that which does not really belong to it, so ‘mushikarati’symbolises the realised man —‘he who enjoys the Self’.
The form of Sanskrit used by Briggs is ‘Shastric’ or ‘scientific’.
Sanskrit, an extremely terse language used in scientific treatises, whose purpose was to clear the  way for unambiguous expression without redundancy or obscurity.
Treatises were written in Shastric Sanskrit on subjects such as law, philosophy, religion, archery and even dance.
A particular branch, the Grammatical Shastra , was formulated using the Sanskrit vocabulary as a substratum, with no ambiguity whatsoever.
But what put the grammarians millennia ahead of their time?
For Briggs it was the purity of their aims.
‘They wanted to understand language for its own sake.
Knowledge itself was the goal.’
The grammarians sought to discover the nature of reality.
Briggs felt he had a mission to bring this approach to the notice of his AI colleagues, who. he said, were ‘either above looking at ancient approaches to the same problem, or…simply ignorant that such work has gone on’.
But Briggs was not alone.
In December 1989 the ‘First National Conference on Knowledge Representation and Inference in Sanskritam’ was organised by the Computer Society of India in Bangalore, bringing together for the first time linguists and computer scientists from all over India.
In the West it had been left to researchers outside of the mainstream AI community.
Typical is Krishnamurhty Lakshmi Kanthan, a computer scientist living in New Jersey, who regards Briggs as a maverick but nevertheless a pioneer.
For his work, Kanthan has returned to the best known Sanskrit grammarian, Panini.
Panini formulated his rules of language in the Ashtadhyayi .
His style is concise, with rules organised scientifically.
Srisa Chandra Vasu says in his preface to the Ashyadhyayi , ‘What the geometry of Euclid has done towards the development of the Western intellect, the Ashtadhyayi fulfils in India’.
Jean Le Mee, professor of Mechanical Engineering at The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art in New York, believes that we must now broaden our vision to progress in AI.
‘Computers must interpret, extract meaning from messages and react appropriately.
Such problem-solving operations are essentially grammatical.
The requirement is for precision.
The ancient Indians knew something of this.
Their technology was concerned with the practice of the Vedic Sacrifices, depending on each utterance being letter-perfect’.
Le Mee has actually developed an expert AI system using these Sanskrit principles to teach design to engineering students.
‘What if a group — say a bunch of expert systems — were to communicate using the  language of enlightenment’, asks Le Mee.
‘Western logic is ceasing to be adequate for all our needs.
Things don't necessarily happen in straight lines, in neat, casual packages.
The language of enlightenment can help us see this.’
Le Mee sees that Sanskrit ‘gives you more flexibility in looking at reality’.
It is not a view shared by the scientific establishment.
Le Mee says: ‘I think they are missing something.
If something new is presented like this there is a tremendous (negative) reaction to it.’
Le Mee put this down to the language's association with mysticism.
This aspect of Sanskrit is an attraction, however, for enthusiasts like Vyaas Houston, a teacher of Sanskrit in the United States for 18 years, who says the precision play of Sanskrit with computers could awaken the capacity in human beings to utilise their innate higher mental faculty with a momentum for transformation.
He believes that the mere learning of Sanskrit by large numbers of people in itself would represent a quantum leap in consciousness.
‘At the moment researchers are interested in the language mainly for its technical qualities.
But Briggs saw how much the ancients have to teach us,’ says Houston.
With the current growth of interest in Briggs' work, it is intriguing to note that Briggs only ever published one paper on Sanskrit which, at the time, was poorly received and thought to be a cul-de-sac or at best a side road.
As one of Briggs' former colleagues, Dr Peter Friedland, now head of RIACS, politely expressed it: ‘People thought it was not a substantial contribution’.
After NASA, Briggs' life takes on a mysterious tone, since he subsequently left NASA for Delphin Systems, a computer firm in San Jose and then on to Santa Clara.
That was Briggs' last known stopping place; he has since vanished without trace.
So we have now reached the stage where, as Briggs said, it is no longer enough for Western scientists to close themselves to knowledge from other cultures simply because ‘meditation is spiritual and we are scientists’.
Certainly, many contemporary physicists — most prominent being Fritjof Capra author of the acclaimed ‘Tao of Physics’— have realised that their scientific discoveries were anticipated by ancient mystics and sages.
In quantum physics the Big Bang is seen as a point of infinite density within which the whole universe is contained and from where the universe springs.
This accords with the Indian idea of the Nada Bindu — the blue pearl out of which the Universe begins.
Einstein, himself something of a mystic, discovered that time collapses into a ‘point’ at the speed of light and was aware that Indian sacred texts — the Tantras — maintain that the soul is a sublime point of the light of consciousness.
As Einstein expressed it: ‘The world that we have made at the level of thinking we have done so far, creates problems we cannot solve at the same level of thinking’.
The machine thinks
As he lay in a grassy field near Cambridge in the Thirties, Alan Turing, a young logician, day-dreamed about a machine that would operate on symbols, according to the rules of logic.
A machine that would imitate, however crudely, human thought.
Till then, computers had been number-crunchers, built to perform one specific function — calculation — at speeds humans could not approach.
After the Second World War, American scientists, Herbert Simon and Alan Newell, took up the idea that the computer could embody intelligence.
In 1956 Simon returned from a Christmas vacation to tell his bemused students that he and Newell had spent the festive season inventing a ‘thinking machine’.
The basis for this kind of work was ‘people-directed’.
Newell and Simon wanted to know how our brains and minds function; they wanted to discover the quintessence of intelligence.
This is the basis of artificial intelligence work.
A traditional computer approaches a problem in a primitive way.
1.
Mary is walking down the street.
2.
There are footsteps behind her.
3.
She runs away as fast as she can.
As human beings, we would come to what seems the obvious explanation of this chain,(that the woman was scared) bringing to bear all our knowledge of how things happen in the world.
A standard computer would proceed one step at a time, while we approach the issue from many different angles at once.
A human neurone is about a million times slower than a switch in a digital computer.
In a tenth of a second it passes on only six digits of code to other neurones yet the brain works seemingly simultaneously.
A ‘connectionist’ computer used in AI works like the brain.
Each processor is brought to bear on a problem at once.
Processing is shared out over the network; connections, once made, are remembered and become knowledge.
Not just discrete little bundles of inert information but a system of stronger and weaker connections between different knowledge areas.
The more this happens, the more sophisticated becomes the response to the world.
Inferences can be made form incomplete knowledge, alternative explanations and possibilities can be weighed up.
‘Memory becomes interpretation’, as Jeremy Campbell says in his book ‘The Improbable Machine’.
The machine thinks.
At the moment most AI systems have to be told what to do.
But the first computers that can learn by discovery are with us; the Fifth Generation computers in Japan ‘understand’ rather than just process information.
AI expert Ivan Havel sees the AI computer as ‘an on-line extension of the human brain.
AI research awakens our desire for greater self-understanding’.
The Universe's DNA
‘Prepared, Cultivated, Refined’.
This is one definition of Sanskrit.
Another is ‘that which has been adorned, decorated or transformed’.
The word is usually translated literally as the ‘perfected’.
Virtually unchanged for more than 3,000 years, the language has given cohesion to India's spiritual lineage.
Part of the Indo-Aryan family, Sanskrit arose as a North-West Indian dialect around 1,800 BC and was first standardised by Panini.
Nowadays a form of classical Sanskrit is used for learned communication between scholars, and as a medium for some original writing in India.
There is at least one Indian village of 3,000 people who speak the language as their mother tongue and interest is growing strongly among Westerners who want to learn ‘the language of the infinite’.
Like many ancient languages, it has a highly logical, mathematical structure.
Each word has component parts which can be traced back to one of 800 roots.
These monosyllabic roots are the building blocks of the language.
Sanskrit is unique as these monosyllables are held to represent the basic energies of the universe.
All syllables derive from the primordial syllable — OM.
The power of Sanskrit is seen graphically when OM is sounded near a tonoscope, a tube suspended over a thin membrane and covered in chemical dust.
A perfect circle then forms within which a powerful geometric shape used in worship appears.
Swami Muktananda, regarded as one of the 20th century's great Indian meditation masters, says in his book, ‘Where are you going?’
‘Modern scientists are beginning to recognise, as our ancient sages did, that there is a vibration which reverberates ceaselessly throughout the cosmos.’
That sound is OM.
As the language of the Vedic scriptures, Sanskrit has always been looked down upon by tradition as the language of the divine.
Proficiency in the language has been traditionally regarded as a sacred achievement.
The Vedas are said to be direct renderings of the structure of the universe, ‘the Universe's DNA’.
Opposite: Intergalactic message written by President Jimmy Carter that was placed on Voyager 1 and 2 spacecraft in 1977.
It was reduced to a digital data on a phonographic record on the side of the craft.
Behind it is the comet Kohoutek, photographed by the crew of the third manned Skylab mission.
‘This is a present from a small, distant world, a token of our sounds, our science, our images, our music, our thoughts and our feelings.
We are attempting to survive our time so we may live into yours.
We hope someday, having solved the problems we face, to join a community of galactic civilizations.
This record represents our hopes and our determination, and our goodwill in a vast and awesome universe.’
Jimmy Carter, President of the United States of America.
 Ferranti engineers at work on the ‘Electronic Brain’ in Manchester, 1955.
Tantric Buddhist monk in meditation in Bodhgaya, India
Albert Einstein's response when asked to smile for his birthday in Princeton, 1951
Shortwave
Clothing designers from the ‘cutting edge’ of their profession believe that slavery to fashion will all but disappear in the Nineties.
The reason — say designers Pam Hogg, Jasper Conran and Moschino — is that personal liberation and self-expression will mark this decade, inspiring a sense of the individual, ill-suited to following the dictates of glamour.
But are these mavericks simply following the ‘fashionable’ statements of the moment ready to change their tune next year?
By all appearances they mean business.
Maschino is running Daliesque adverts featuring no clothing at all, while Hogg avoids what she calls ‘boring and unimaginative’ fashion by using bald-headed ‘Doctor-Martined’models.
Conran has gone so far as ending catwalk exhibitions totally in favour of presentation by video.
What is the opposite of fashion-victim?
Michelle Olley.
No precise figures are available yet but when the Berlin Wall fell, several East German soldiers committed suicide.
Rather than attempt to make the painful transition to a new reality where those who were yesterday's ‘enemy’ today become the ‘friend’, some guards preferred the strange safety of death.
For Dr Petruska Clarkson, Director of the Metanoia Psychotherapy Training Institute the disturbing picture now emerging is a brutally clear example of how difficult it is for a human being to adjust to a radically different reality.
Clarkson felt compelled to see just what was happening in Berlin when the celebrations began.
‘The city was caught in a mass of conflicting emotions; joy and fear certainly, but also pain and fear of the unknown.
The East German guards had no preparation, no time to adjust to a psychological fall-out — instead they faced a void,’ she says.
This sudden feeling of emptiness is one of the possible side-effects of change.
‘It's the experience of the void or the ‘now what?’ phenomenon’, she says.
‘How do we let go of old ideas?
We must allow ourselves time to grieve for the past but the guards had no such time.
Their world changed in an instant.’
Exact numbers of suicide are not known as it is not something officials are keen to pursue.
‘There will always be casualties of freedom.
The shock of the new can liberate one person and trap another’, says Dr Clarkson.
Elizabeth George.
It seems popular science writing is being redefined thanks to the arrival of a clutch of lavishly-packaged works that investigate new realms where the once-separate worlds of physics, spirituality and human adventure emerge.
The trigger for this new genre of ‘science mysticism’ has been the extraordinary success of Stephen Hawking's best-seller A Brief History of Time — which has sold three million copies and forms the basis of a forthcoming documentary about Hawking by film producer Stephen Spielberg — aided by the popular surreal case studies by psychiatrist Oliver Sacks.
The most clearly appealing of the latest recruits to this rapidly-changing tapestry of new writing is The Newtonian Casino (Thomas A Bass, Longman, 12.90), which reveals how a group of brilliant young physicists raided Las Vegas with computers hidden in their shoes.
Their true story spans chaos theory, something called strange attractors and the inner marvels of microprocessors.
The Emperor's New Mind (Roger Penrose, Vintage, £6.90), winner of the 1990 Science Book prize (which interestingly jumps from £1,000 to £10,000 next year), covers the spheres of computers, the mind and cosmology.
While The Arrow of Time (Peter Coventry and Roger Highfield, WH Allen, £14.95), maintains it will deliver ‘everything you wanted to know about time that Stephen Hawking didn't tell you’.
Superforce (Paul Davies, Unwin, £5.50) offers the search for a grand, unified theory of nature while The Fifth Essence (Lawrence Krauss, Vintage, £6.99) explores ‘dark matter’, the holy grail of particle astrophysics.
Soldiers in the Australian Army are facing a new and unexpected enemy — the silence of the country's desert regions.
Army psychologists are attempting to curb fear among troops, used to life in the cities along Australia's eastern seaboard, of the vast, still space they encounter during operations in the Outback
The era of the passive media consumer — or ‘couch potato’— may be drawing to a close if they discoveries of the ingenious Media Lab at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology are any indication.
Media products and gadgetry on the near-horizon are likely to shift the stance of the average individual from one of passivity before a television set to one of activity when faced with ‘Total Vision’.
Director of The Media Lab, Nicholas Negroponte, forecasts that interactive media (next year sees the launch of Commodore Dynamic Total Vision and Compact Disc Interactive) will mean that future generations are likely to regard our media decades as an epoch of inertia.
While the CDTV and interactive compact discs from Sony, Philips and Matsushita will allow the viewer full control over what they watch, such as letting the viewer select an ending to a film, the next phase may bring ‘publishing’ into the hands of the consumer.
At that time a new media syntax combining computer games, hypermedia (a way of making data easy to find), print, pictures and sound will evolve in our homes and offices, says Negroponte.
‘By the end of the decade we shall all be publishers.’
David Collier.
How do you measure how good corporate executives are at communicating and being honest?
Simple — set them an exam and then award a pass or fail certificate.
This is the antidote being offered for employer anxiety over the rise of so-called ‘soft-skills’— such as understanding, relationships and integrity — in modern corporate life.
The idea behind the launch this autumn of the new Certificate in Management is to allow employers to reduce difficult to assess abilities to a tangible level.
The impetus for change comes from the Management Charter Initiative (MCI), an employer-led pressure group which hopes eventually to transform all management qualifications into quantifiable ‘competences’.
To achieve Element of Competence 1.7.3 would-be managers must, ‘Establish and Maintain Relationships with Colleagues’.
The candidate must prove to the examiner that ‘open, honest and friendly behaviour is encouraged’ under his regime and that ‘time is taken to establish and maintain honest and constructive relationships with colleagues’.
Bit tricky in an exam room — however intimate the setting.
When the notion of Competences was first put to business, the main objection was not just how do you really assess ‘honesty and relationships’ but what about the knowledge and understanding to put such capabilities into practice.
Undaunted by suggestions that some things may simply be beyond quantifying, the MCI has set up the Knowledge and Understanding project to investigate.
Heard in the Global Village
Glasnostalgia Fatwa Eyelizer Tifosi
The number of new words entering the English language is rising faster now than at any time in history.
And the task of deciding what is ‘new’ falls to dictionary compilers who are struggling to catch the range of jargon, technical terms and ‘sublanguages’that each year flow into usage.
Genuinely ‘new’ words are rare.
Less than one percent of entries added to dictionary updates are original — most are compounds created by stringing together existing words (global warming; crack house; butterfly effect; daisy age rapper).
But while new forms may be few, the flow of new language is strong.
The reasons are partly the growth of new research in technology and science but as important is the current of ideas and information generated by modern global media.
There are simply more words being spoken, written and seen.
The ‘media’ factor includes foreign imports with each week's news bulletins.
‘Intifada’ is incorporated to mean ‘uprising’; ‘fatwa’is used rather than‘religious decree’.
Glasnost we already use frequently, but a recent arrival is ‘Glasnostalgia’— meaning fond memories of the Stalinist regime.
Strange newcomers include ‘tifosi’ meaning those who cheer racing driver Nigel Mansell's Ferrari or ‘eyelizer’being a breathalyser that works on the eyes.
Certain fields attract certain styles of words.
Computing, being a popular science for many, innovates in the vernacular such as‘hack attack’ for a storm of computer hackers while California delivers its own ‘valspeak’for inhabitants of the San Fernando Valley outside Los Angeles.
Some meanings change totally.
‘Bad’ which has its roots in the Black English of the US jazz scene in 1928 is now in the Oxford English Dictionary meaning ‘very good’.
Jeremy Clear.
Actor Dennis Lawson directs the latest corporate video from Playback .
For the first time in their history the Tuareg — the largest tribe of Nomads in the Sahara Desert — recently delayed their annual migration for 10 days so as to catch the final episode of Dallas
Rhythm for a new America
East meets West and Schoenberg merges with Shankar via Charlie Parker in the explorations of innovative composer Philip Glass.
Philip Glass's latest opera is about the discovery of the New World by Christopher Columbus.
The commission looks to be an inspired choice on the part of New York's Metropolitan Opera House, who will stage the premiere in October 1992, for Glass is one of the few contemporary composers who could claim to have a made a journey in any way comparable to that of Columbus.
Glass has written nine operas, numerous film scores, compositions for violin and piano, music for ballet and the theatre.
What makes his work interesting, however, is not simply its quantity or variety: it is its quality.
The hallmark of Glass's music is a mesmeric rhythm that provides the structure in which melodic phrases, often of ethereal beauty, undergo a gradual transmutation in which time appears to stand still.
The distinctive characteristics of Glass's music appeared after he had worked with the Indian sitarist, Ravi Shankar, in 1965.
At the time Glass was living in Paris, studying composition under the celebrated teacher, Nadia Boulanger.
When Columbus reached America he had been trying to find India; when Glass discovered the music of India he found his new world.
Talking at his home in the East Village, New York, he remembered the shock of being confronted by a musical system ‘comparable to anything in the West, but built on different foundations’.
It contradicted everything he had learned.
He said: ‘There was no acknowledgement when I was a young man that the field of world music was populated by traditions of equal value.
Somehow it (the music of Africa and Asia) was considered aesthetically inferior to the West’.
Glass had been earning some money by transcribing Ravi Shankar's score for the film, Chappacqua.
As Glass recalls in his book,Opera on the Beach : ‘He would sing the music to me, and I would write it down, part by part.
In other words, if the piece was, say, three minutes long, he would first sing the entire three-minute flute part, then the entire three-minute violin part, and so on through our small orchestra of about nine players.’
Another difficulty Glass faced was that Western notation, bar lines are used to divide the music, thus encouraging the emphasis of some notes at the expense of others.
Shankar and his tabla player, Alla Rakha, held the apparently preposterous view that all notes were equal.
The only way Glass could overcome this irreconcilable difference was by doing away with the bar lines completely.
The effect of meeting Shankar and being exposed to Indian music was immediate.
Glass withdrew all the music he had previously written, about 70 pieces.
If this was a dramatic act it was carried out quietly.
There was no ritual destruction, no burning, no fuss.
The music was simply put into cardboard boxes and left in his brother's basement.
Glass was ready to change.
Although the theatre in Paris excited him, especially the plays of Samuel Beckett and Jean Genet, he found the city musically desolate.
Messiaen and Boulez were the focus of attention, composers who for him were an intellectual dead-end.
Even before he had left America, he felt he had exhausted the possibilities of the European 12-tone composers and the American tonalists who had provided his early models.
‘I liked Charles Ives, our American avant-gardist of that time.
I liked Webern, Berg and Schoenberg, all the stuff that sounded weird and that later I rebelled against.
My rebellion came on a solid base of love, admiration and imitation which I had done when I was very young.’
At the time Boulanger provided comfort albeit of a peculiar kind.
Glass goes so far as to describe her as ‘a monster’ though it is clear she had his complete respect.
Her regime was relentless: harmony, counterpoint, analysis and score-reading, with the emphasis on Bach and Mozart.
‘You slaved for her with six or eight hours of technical studies a day besides practising…
You didn't dare show up without the work completed and damned near perfect.
At that time she had something like 50 years of practice in beating up on students.’
When Glass started his studies, Boulanger was 75 and she went on teaching until the age of 92.
Glass credits her with raising the general level of musicianship in the United States and the debt he owes to her tyranny is ‘a sense of  style, accomplishment and a technique that I simply didn't have before.’
Glass had first started writing music seriously when he was at the University of Chicago, although he had been playing the flute since he was eight.
While at University Glass's musical taste was somewhat surprising.
He got to know the players of bluegrass music with which he was familiar from his youth and listened to blues singers like Big Bill Broonzy.
He also loved jazz though it was often difficult for him to get into the clubs because when he started he was only 15.
Bud Powell was one of Glass's favourites.
‘He was a strange sort of man.
At that point in his life, he would sit at the door of a club when he was playing and he would glare at the people who came in.
He was very anti-social, very hostile.
I guess he was sick in some way.
But he was a wonderful musician.’
At the Cotton Club he also heard Billie Holliday sing though it was towards the end of her life.
He remembers ‘her voice was tiny.
The instrument was faded but the musician was there.’
Charlie Parker, too, was appearing on the South Side.
Hearing him was not difficult, but seeing him was.
Parker turned out out be one of those people whom Glass only saw ‘through the windows of the clubs I couldn't get into.’
Of this period Glass says; ‘I loved Charlie Parker and Bud Powell but it never occurred to me to play their music.
That was their voice.
The question was, what was my voice?’
Glass's eclectic taste came from his childhood.
His father owned a record shop in Baltimore and before he went to university he had become the buyer for the shop, a job which provided an unlikely education.
On one occasion Glass became ‘very excited’ when the Juillard Quartet recorded the Schoenberg Quartets and he ordered four boxed sets of the records.
When the records came in his father joked that his son was trying to put him out of business.
‘he put them on the shelf and said, ‘Let's watch over them and see how long it takes to sell them’.
For years I would come back to the store and walk over to where they were.
We finally sold them.
It took six to eight years.’
The records in the Glass household were by-products of the same inverted selection process.
‘In the end the collection we had at home was mainly classical because those were the works that didn't sell very well.
Things like Beethoven quartets,
Shostakovitch cello sonatas and Prokofiev symphonies.
We're talking here about the late Forties and early Fifties and that was modern music then…’
When he returned to America late in 1966, Glass was already on the track of a new modernity.
He met up again with Shankar, who was then a visiting professor at the City College in New York, and studied for a while with Alla Rakha.
Rhythm, the primary revelation of Indian music for Glass, preoccupied him to such an extent that one of his pieces at this time,Play , consisted of two lines for soprano saxophones. each instrument using only two notes.
As the different rhythms of these two-note pulses were combined they formed a simple moving pattern of sound.
As an exercise, it was valuable for Glass even if it aroused a great deal of hostility.
In Opera on the Beach he put it simply: ‘Actually, most other musicians thought I was just.’
Yet these were experiments with a purpose, the prelude to a far more expressive music.
In fact, Glass was, in his own way, trying to escape the curse of the modern classical composition: the music the public does not want to hear.
‘I grew up when that kind of modernism was running rampant — it still is — when to be a respectable composer meant that you had to acquire a defiantly difficult style and I just said to myself, ‘surely there's another way to do this?’
For a while Glass found it difficult to find people to perform his work, so he formed his own ensemble (which continues performing at a prodigious rate).
This group used amplified instruments (including electric piano and organ) because of their portability and allowed Glass to fulfil his dream of being a composer-performer after the model of Shankar.
By 1974, when he finished Music in Twelve Parts , Glass's ideas had crystallized in two techniques he calls ‘additive process’ and ‘cyclic structure’.
Additive processes could hardly be simpler although it can lead to procedures of great complexity: a musical phrase of a certain number of notes is repeated several times, one note is then added and the new phrase again repeated.
This process continues with a figure expanding and contracting, the melody essentially remains the same but the rhythm alters because of the addition or subtraction of notes.
The essence of cyclic structure is similarly straightforward though it is pursued in a distinctly roundabout manner.
Fixed repeated patterns of different rhythmic lengths are combined, the time it takes for both to return simultaneously to their starting point depending on the length of each pattern.
In a period of, say, 30 seconds, pattern A might repeat six times (being of five seconds duration).
During the 30 seconds they would begin together, gradually move apart and then merge together again.
When the two techniques are combined with harmonic progressions, the results can be fascinating.
The sense of timelessness in Glass's music comes directly from this characteristic structure.
The visual equivalent of it would be driving down a long street.
At the end of it, you suddenly find yourself driving down it again, only this time the street would have changed in all sorts of little ways.
When you reach the end of it the second time, you start driving down it again and now you can see some things which seem to have  changed considerably while others seem exactly the same.
At a certain point you may appear to be back where you were before but you cannot quite be sure.
Our usual sense of time is dependent on measurable changes proceeding in a linear sequence and this having been thoroughly and very pleasantly disrupted, a kind of musical clairvoyance is created in which past, present and future seem to intermingle.
From such rigid, uncompromising and unpromising beginnings, Glass has created a sound language of great eloquence and diversity.
When I talked to him, he was engaged on a project with the Gambian musician Foday Mosa Suso, a man who has ‘about a thousand years of history memorised in song’.
He had just released a record called Passages , made with Ravi Shankar.
On it there are two pieces by Glass from themes by Shankar and two compositions by Shankar based on themes of Glass.
Also just completed is the score for Hydrogen Jukebox in which he has set 20 poems by Allen Ginsberg to music.
Ginsberg and the sculptor, Richard Serra, are both friends of Philip Glass.
‘What they share and why I like to be around them is they have the capacity for ecstasy which is unusual…
They're kind of transcendentalists.’
Hydrogen Jukebox , which Glass hopes to bring to London soon, is subtitled The Fall of America .
It will be recorded next spring.
‘The decline of America is something we all sense.
We're talking about the dissolution of empire and the formation of something else.
And with it tremendous social chaos…
If you live in New York in 1990 you absolutely have to think about the world you're living in a very clear way because otherwise it's an impossible situation.
From a social point of view these periods of chaos are very painful.
From a personal point of view they can be tremendously valuable.’
Glass is obviously comfortable in a city whose citizens, by all contemporary accounts, are growing increasingly fearful because of the increase in random killings and the accidental murder of by-standers in street shoot-outs.
When Glass bought his house, the area where he lives was full of crack dealers so he does not scare easily.
Nevertheless he looks mildly concerned when he relates that his son has, to his surprise, decided to live in the city.
His personal landscape includes a number of artists.
Jasper Johns used to live nearby, in an old bank.
Fittingly, he kept his pictures in the vault.
‘Once I saw in the studio one of the Target paintings, but it was the wrong year.
I knew those had been painted over ten years before, I said to him, ‘Is this an old painting or a new painting?’ and he said, ‘Well, I've been working on it.’
The painting was so fresh.
I was impressed by the dedication and concentration.’
Glass's interest in the visual arts is reflected in his opera,Einstein on the Beach , written in collaboration with Robert Wilson in 1976.
By that time he had found a very individual voice.
Einstein became the success of the 1976 Avignon Festival and established Glass's reputation in America when it was brought to the Metropolitan Opera House later that year.
Its accomplishment is as much pictorial as  musical, its images dissolving and recombining in a strange and haunting manner, In the piece there is no narrative and the character of Einstein appears playing the violin (one of the physicist's hobbies).
One critic likened it to a titanic High Mass on Mars.
Einstein , which had been written for the Philip Glass Ensemble, was followed by Satyagraha (‘truth-force), a more lyrical opera utilising full orchestra which was concerned with Gandhi's early years in South Africa and the development of his philosophy of non-violence.
Since Satyagraha (1980) was in Sanskrit it posed a different set of problems for the singer than Einstein in which there were no words at all(other than spoken monologues), the text being composed of numbers and solfege syllables (do, re, mi etc).
The third in the trilogy was Akhnaten (19830 in which the singers had to contend with ancient Egyptian, Babylonian Akkadian, biblical Hebrew and the language of the country in which the performance was taking place.
No one could ever accuse Glass of a lack of ambition.
The link between these operas is that they are about men who had changed the world through the power of ideas.
Curiously, for someone with such interests, Glass himself does not seem to like theorising about music, disliking what he calls ‘polemics’.
yet the practical results of his thinking are attracting a growing world-wide audience.
Not everyone is convinced, however, of Glass's worth.
Music and Musicians , for instance, described his recent opera,The Making of the Representative for Planet 8 , a collaboration with Doris Lessing, as ‘piffle’.
Glass, however, appears remarkably detached about critical attacks.
‘With almost every opera I've done, the first thing is it's announced as a failure.
The next thing that happens is it's announced a masterpiece.
The truth lies somewhere else.’
The cycle may continue with The Voyage , his opera about Columbus, which he promises will create a new kind of sound world, one that combines narrative, non-narrative and fantasy elements.
The opera has been finished two years ahead of schedule, but for productions of this scale that time is needed just for design and casting.
Part of Glass's need to create may rest, paradoxically, on his feeling that ‘in terms of social change we, as artists, are powerless.’
As he has grown older he has become more involved with the social content of his work yet he sees his relationship to the audience in very personal terms.
‘If I play at the Royal Albert Hall, there may be 3,000 people there, but it's still one-to-one because that's the way I operate.
There's only one person at a time listening in a certain way, in a purest existential way.’
On this personal level he is aware that change happens all the time and what is important to him, as it is to any composer, are ‘those moments when people come up to me and say, ‘this work has changed my life’’.
Glass says he has a naturally high level of production.
Perhaps he feels the need to make one-to-one contact with everyone on the planet before he leaves it.
Whatever the reason, he is already at work on another opera Through the Eye of the Raven , with Robert Wilson.
It will have its first performance four months before The Voyage and is based on the Portuguese explorations of Brazil, Japan, China and India which took place in the decade from 1490 to 1500.
It is a homage to the kind of spirit that would have felt at home in Philip Glass.
Mystical allure
The musical method employed by Philip Glass draws widely on non-Western sources.
In addition to Shankar, another Indian influence was the tabla player Alla Rakha, with whom Glass studied.
Glass had his first contact with non-Western music in Morocco where he became fascinated by the geometric repetitions of Islamic art.
Has since travelled extensively in Africa, India and South America.
In the Sixties, largely because of the Beatles, Indian music became fashionable.
Yet the Western absorbed the Eastern, pop music displaying its phrases as psychedelic cues often without any real attempt to learn from it.
Serious composers, such as John Cage, were more influenced by Eastern philosophy which was used to provide authority for the insertion of chance events in the performance of music.
Unlike Cage and his followers, Glass leaves no room for the intrusion of the random, his music being highly structured.
Apart form some early experiments, which can be extremely sparse, his compositions largely avoid the reductionism fundamental to the serialists who attracted so much attention in the Sixties.
The end result is a music in which rhythm and pattern dominate.
A simple melodic theme is repeated over and over again, transmuting itself by a slow and subtle alchemy into something which is not quite as it was before.
As in an Indian raga, a particular sequence of notes serves as the basis for variations that could continue to infinity; eventually, however, it returns to its theme.
The difference is that a raga is improvised, Glass's music is not.
Perhaps the best description of his composition has come from the New York Times’ John Rockwell, who called it a mixture of mathematical clarity and mystical allure.
In his notes to Einstein on the Beach Glass describes his approach in the following way: ‘As the music develops, the key centres begin to exchange the metrical characters.
Later, these form complex accumulations of metres in the same key before returning to the central key…this accumulative process continues until the original key/metre associations are lost in an overall texture of harmonies and metres.’
Born Chicago
Philip Glass born Chicago, 31 January 1937.
Began flute studies at Peabody Conservatory at the age of eight.
Entered University of Chicago at 15 to study mathematics and philosophy.
Studied at Juillard School of Music, New York, majoring in composition 1957–61.
Composer in residence with Pittsburgh public school system.
1961–64.
Influenced particularly by Ravi Shankar, whose film music he had been hired to score for Western musicians.
By the age of 30 his work had changed radically and he withdrew all his previously published music.
Returning to America in autumn 1966, he composed and performed with the Philip Glass Ensemble and the Mabou Mines Theater.
Worked as a cab driver, plumber, and studio assistant to the sculptor, Richard Serrs.
Started attracting interest in downtown Manhattan.
Along with Steve Reich and La Monte Young, he is classed as a minimalist, a term he later rejects.
In 1976 he wrote Einstein on the Beach in collaboration with the performer-director, Robert Wilson.
Two further portrait operas followed (works in which a succession of images, rather than a narrative, are married to music): these are Satyagraha which deals with Gandhi's early life and uses a Sanskrit text taken from the Bhagavad Gita , and Akhnaten , about the Egyptian pharaoh (1375–1358 BC) who is credited with the invention of monotheism.
Collaborated with Doris Lessing on The Making of the Representative for Planet * which received its European premiere at the English National Opera in 1988.
Unlikely projects include music for the opening and closing ceremonies for the 1984 Los Angeles Olympic and Sons form Liquid Days (words by, among others, Paul Simon and Suzanne Vega).
he has written film scores for The Thin Blue Line ,Mishima , and the trilogy by Godfrey Reggio:Koyaanisqatsi ,Powaqqatsi and the as yet uncompleted Nagoyqatsi .
Glass gives up to 100 concerts a year and is coming to Europe in 1991 to perform the music from Powaqqatsi .
Indian sitar player Ravi Shankar.
Glass near his home in the East Village, New York City
‘I loved Charlie Parker and Bud Powell but it never occurred to me to play their music.
That was their voice.
The question was, what was my voice?’
Koyaanisqatsi: A Hopi word meaning:
1.
Crazy life
2.
Life in turmoil
3.
Life out of balance
4.
Life disintegrating
5.
A state of life that calls for another way of living.
Scene from the film Koyaanisqatsi for which Glass wrote the score
Glass in performance
The Female Revolution
Leading management gurus have seen the future of business — and it's female.
Towards the end of a gruelling management conference, Tom Peters, perhaps the best-known of the American business thinkers, softens his voice to deliver an alarming forecast to his predominantly male audience of senior executives:
By the year 2000, management as we know it, will not exist.
In its place will be a network of relationships, partnerships and alliances.
The corporation of the future will be essentially female in character.
A sea of slightly dazed and anxious expressions greets this prediction.
Not surprising, given that 90 percent of Peters' guests are men drawn from the upper management ranks of many large UK and European companies.
It is not that men in management —MIM s as they are labelled by the pages of popular business handbooks — are unused to talk of a corporate future marked by chaos, turmoil, and ‘reality turned upside down’.
The daily diet in 1990 for executives of all Westernized economies is rich with the language of intense change.
Thanks to a growing body of business writers, executives are only too aware that, like it or not, they have the dubious privilege of being alive during a once in 200 years revolution that is transforming the business world.
What is disconcerting is that Peters, well-known for his fondness for overstatement but highly valued as the co-author of In Search Of Excellence , is describing a future where the characteristics and skills displayed by men are not only worthless but may even be harmful.
The standard reaction when faced with the latest prediction from Peters, one of the main catalysts behind the 80s obsession with quality and service, is simply to dismiss him — generously.
He may be the author of the best-selling management book of all time but ‘that's Tom for you.
he's a great talker and showman but he lacks the depth, the insight — after all, he's hardly a Peter Drucker’.
Which is fine except for one fact, In this  instance, Professor Drucker, the most important management thinker of the post-war era, happens to agree with Peters.
Peters describes the successful organisation of the future as ‘flat’ in the sense of non-hierarchical, co-operative and rich in communication.
Drucker selects the metaphor of orchestra as the model for the corporate world to follow but the conclusions are much the same.
Alone each musician is noise.
yet with the guidance of the conductor, an orchestra creates music and harmonies.
There are no layers of middle managers relaying messages — the environment is perfect for communication and intuition.
In business, such ingredients come naturally to women.
It is difficult to dismiss such insights when they come from 81-year-old Drucker, credited with having invented the concept of ‘management’ in The End of Economic Man in 1939.
In fact, Peters and Drucker are now part of an ever growing body of respected opinion that believes that the values for survival (and success) in the business environment are those that we have historically, at least, considered to be female.
The thinking is that, in a time of fierce economic and social change in Westernised economies, all companies — from home-based one man/woman bands to the ICIs and IBMs — are having to adapt to new organisational structures and ways of working.
Being big, top-heavy, obsessed with strict titles and job roles, no longer makes sense.
Not only is it increasingly a recipe for lower profits but also results in higher staff turnover, struggles in recruitment (graduates prefer the lean and adaptable to the slow and inflexible) and a gradual loss of customers as competitors win the race to innovate.
Hierarchies of authority must go.
The new organisation will be more akin to an organism, adopting the language of biology rather than the machine.
The talk is of ‘spider webs’ and networks.
Down with walls and up with relationships is the pioneering cry from the New York corridors of one of the world's largest banks, Citicorp, to small software companies in France.When, at Imagination, a highly profitable London-based design group.
Founder Gary Withers discovered that the timesheet system was annoying his 200 staff, he gathered all the offending papers and ceremoniously burnt them in the car park.
This lack of corporate egoism generates an environment in which the company ceases to be the centre of its own universe but instead is conceived only ‘in relationship to’ its suppliers, customers and subsidiaries.
The era is marked by co-operation.Gone are the star employees and in their place teams abound.
Teams that cut across departments and layers of seniority — in the evocative language of the management thinkers this is the time for ‘adhocracies’ to replace bureaucracies.
Ford Motors has adopted the slogan ‘no more heroes’ to underscore its new participative management style.Fluidity and constant improvement are the characteristics of the new success.
Akin to a spiritual teaching, it is the ‘journey' that becomes important, not the destination.
In the words of a senior manager at 18,000-staff MCI Telecommunications Company in the United States: ‘We like people who are comfortable in an unstructured environment.
You are rarely told to do anything.
You can never have the final word.
Nobody is in charge.’
Long-term partnerships and alliances are emphasised replacing the calculative ‘dog eat dog’ model.
Shrewd behaviour is still encouraged but adversarialism loses out to co-operation.
In this intuitive workplace, values and beliefs begin to dominate rules.
A hallmark is the encouragement of learning among all staff and suppliers.
Examples tend to be scattered more widely in the United States than Europe.
The radical idea that the office might be a place for life-long learning is nowhere better demonstrated than by Harry Quadracci, chairman of $500 million turnover Quad Graphics of Wisconsin.
‘The workplace is regarded as a university with the feel of an  educational setting’.
Employees of this 4500-person printing firm spend one day a week learning whatever they want.
‘A day a week for life,’ says Quadracci.Peters says such traits closely match women's inherent strengths and men's inherent weaknesses.
‘The company of the future is based upon values that at least traditionally we have thought of as female’, he says.
This view is attracting strong support.
In the Seventies and early Eighties the general opinion was that for women to ‘make it’ they had to act like men but now the rules are different, says author Sally Helgerson in her recently published bestseller The Female Advantage: Women's Ways of Leadership .
After examining women at senior executive level in the US she discovered that while men were annoyed by perpetual interruptions, women took them as opportunities to cement relationships, commend staff and to learn.The ‘ecology of leadership’ as Helgerson labels it, promoted the long-term and sees daily events within a larger, historical and unfolding context.
In the key area of negotiation, women scored highly.
Men were found to be ‘win-loss’ oriented while women saw discussions with customers as part of a continuing relationship.
The view of the company as part of a web was marked and the tendency among women was towards inclusion rather than exclusion of others.
Helgersen is blunt in her conclusion: ‘What business needs now is exactly what women are able to provide.’
It is not that she believes this evolving female corporate future has yet been reflected by numbers of women employed at senior levels but that it is inevitable it will do so during the next decade.
Already in the US, Peters believes, the numbers of women active in political and corporate fields is reaching a critical threshold.
While Europe is estimated — at least by American authors — to be around five years behind the US in terms of female representation, Pam Roderick, head of human resource, development and training at Digital Equipment Corp in the UK, predicts rapid and dramatic change.
‘This change to female-based values is absolutely here,’ she says.
‘We are not describing it as such yet but essentially that is what my work with senior managers in the UK involves.
As male control at senior level wanes, the flood gates will open and change will be intense and lasting.’
Roderick believes the impact is showing itself clearly already.
‘DEC is a fairly enlightened company generally but certainly women here tend to take more time and are not so stressed by interruptions.
Men do not like disruptions and the effect is that staff feel less inclined to initiate conversations if they feel the receptivity isn't there.
Even in electronic mail I could find myself — and I see this among women colleagues — adopting a more relaxed approach.
We add little comments about life outside work.
In fact, work and life are not separate for women.’
So, is the female corporation a place devoid of men?
‘No, it's not that men are excluded from these new values but that they have to adapt; learn to change,’ says Roderick.
‘I spend my time helping men make the often painful shift that comes from relinquishing a now inappropriate way of working.
The change is from control through the exercise of authority to a more collaborative leadership role.’
In one classic case, a high-powered senior sales executive had to restructure his business.
‘He was simply unable to make the decision so I asked him, ‘What do you want from your life?’
He was shocked and unable even to reply.
Then something hit home about the division between his life and career’, says Roderick.
‘A fundamental shift deep inside took place.
Since then his way of working has changed.
In tangible business ways, efficiency and profitability were improved.
This new corporate shift is to female values but it involves men — but men thinking in a new, more conscious way.’
Roderick believes that women obviously have a head start as they have been reared with values of nurturing, partnership and growth.
‘Younger men find it easier to learn the language of self-expression and emotion but for some older men it is a jump that is simply not possible.
For them, leadership means loneliness not partnership.’
Since the scales are now balanced in favour of women, why are there still so few senior executive level females in major UK companies?
‘Good question’, says Denise Collis, training, recruitment and management development manager at Midland Bank.
‘Time is needed.
The forces of change may be moving rapidly but the corporate response is slower, says Collis.
‘The powerful change is really in the communication and participative skills needed in modern business.
Women had to clamber over men to succeed 10 years ago.
Now I do see that it is men who are having to learn what comes more naturally to us.
Softer values are the winning values and this is radically changing male-dominated organisations.
Where this leads is unclear.
But the process will not let up.
Men's habit of working through power and domination, with all the related politics, simply doesn't work in a more personal environment.
You cannot manage like that when staff are mobile, aware of skill-shortages and demanding of reward, participation and acknowledgement,’ she adds.So are there no voices of dissension?
Is this shift in fundamental ways of working free from obstruction?
Naturally there are both voices and obstacles.
One of the strongest messages of disagreement comes from Dr Rosabeth Moss Kanter, the first woman editor of the prestigious Harvard Business Review .
Professor Kanter, who was recently voted one of the 100 most important women in the United States by a leading business magazine, does not dispute that the agenda for change is based around the so-called ‘softer’ values.
But despite her own  achievements, she does not believe women are any better equipped for communication, emotional expression and partnership than men.
‘Men are among the leading exponents of these new management structures,’ she says.
‘What I see is that men are adapting well and, if anything, are leading this corporate transformation.
The idea that women have a headstart through upbringing is strange.
We are taught to raise families and that is a hierarchy that shows no sign of becoming a network.
Women are in favour now as they are the outsiders and anyone who looks and acts differently is preferred currently.
The growth of the meritocracy lends an edge to women but we have not yet solved the problem posed by women's desire to raise a family — work and family still often creates overloading.’
Perhaps, more predictably, certain chief executives have been outspoken in their opposition to any new era for the organisation.
‘I don't care what is said — from my personal point of view Unilever will be a hierarchy until I leave,’ says Floris Maijers, Chairman of Unilever N V. For John Drummond, a consultant on business ethics and co-author of Good Business , Kanter is missing a crucial point.
‘The reason why men are pioneering many new ideas in this field is that in terms of numbers they are still the large majority.
We have undertaken corporate studies that show that women are more closely aligned generally with the networked, more ethical and responsible business.
Dr Kanter is not making allowances for the disparity in actual numbers,’ he says.
And to Maijers and other custodians of the pyramid of authority, it is Kanter herself who has the clearest response.
Writing in the pages of the Harvard Business Review she explains: ‘Some managers experience the new managerial work as a loss of power because so much of their authority used to come from hierarchical positions.’
But no matter what debate is stirred about the true nature of present changes, when the futurists enter the picture, the debate ends.Technically, John Naisbitt and Patricia Aburdene, authors of Megatrends 2000 — published on 1 January 1990 — call themselves ‘presentists’ but their subject matter is the run-up to the year 2000.
A tenth of their 338-page book, a best-seller in the US and Germany with Japan showing even greater interest, is devoted to The 1990s: Decade of Women in Leadership Their views are graphic: ‘To be a leader in business today, it is no longer an advantage to have been socialised as a male.
Women hold a slight advantage since they need not ‘unlearn’ old authoritarian behaviour.’
From the present they venture ahead in time to outline ‘Why women will lead…why women in business are on the verge of a revolutionary change…why the new corporate archetype is a woman.’
They point to the structural changes in business groups, relationships and so on— and foresee that, as women take their place in the senior ranks a profound change will take place in the nature of work, childcare and maternity.What Naisbitt and Aburdene forecast is effectively a new work ethic.
They envisage a world where the ‘boss’ is extinct, giving way to an ethically-based network of individuals loosely attached to an organisation.Hard to imagine, perhaps.
But as Peters says when tired executives yearn for some reassuring words: ‘You are alive during what is at least a once in 200 year revolution and just possibly a once in 2,000 year revolution.
And the truth is that whatever it is that has been unleashed, it's barely out of the box.’
Younger men find it easier to learn the language of self-expression and emotion but for some older men it is a jump that is simply not possible
Pam Roderick of Digital Equipment Corporation helping executives make a fundamental shift
Gary Withers, founder of London's Imagination design group
Business adopts the language of biology
Tom Peters — US management thinker and author of Thriving on Chaos 
You are rarely told to do anything.
You can never have the final word.
Nobody is in charge
Wavelength
Being Human
It comes as no surprise to learn of NASA's resistance to Sanskrit as a language for AI.
Western science — like our medicine — is notoriously dismissive of anything that smacks of the spiritual life that our civilisation seems so carelessly to have thrown away.Yet if we are to survive for another thousand years, we desperately need to rediscover this aspect of being human; not only as a reaction to the yuppie ‘me first’ generation of the Eighties but as the only means of re-establishing the synergy between man and planet.This requires a radical shift in our attitudes.
Were NASA to adopt a more open-minded policy towards this ancient, spiritual and very logical language, it would not change the world overnight but at the least it would be a start.
Wild Thinking
If this is the kind of wild thinking I can expect from Wave, then I for one am happy.
Can advertising be used to overcome the seemingly stubborn aspect of human nature called greed?
The jury is out on this and I am sitting firmly on the fence.
What is important is the idea that the newest and most powerful media, namely ads, might be used to beneficial ends.
It certainly makes me regard the next car commercial with a new pair of eyes.
Organic Intelligence
It is not surprising but always pleasant, to discover useful information about activities in one's own country form a publication elsewhere on the planet.
It is also not surprising to discover that Sanskrit could serve as a model for advanced computer language.
This fact is not widely discussed in the United States for the (I'm assuming now) obvious national security risks.
An ancient language of the spirit more advanced than our own scientists???!!!
What is surprising is that such a fact was so well narrated in a general circulation magazine from anywhere.
A Wave washed ashore and within its rushing sound I heard some hope from periodical land — that most finicky home to all media junkies everywhere.Rather than offer up another fascinating glimpse of some consumable, this Wave challenged me to look into myself and wonder whether organic intelligence is what we should be seeking.This story, Inner Space Outer Space has all the trappings of a mystery thriller, except the mystery is ancient and it is us.
It is a crucial reminder of how much knowledge is available and how much more we really need to know.Thank you — All the best for full and foamy Waves in the future.
Peace and love.
Macho Corporatism
As one of the growing number of management consultants here in Australia attempting to show that business can be both profitable and have an ethical approach, it is heartening to see that at least some directors think we need a profound change in how we work.
What you don't mention is a vital ingredient in the new work ethic.
Fun.
Here we reckon we are building up a specialisation in this aspect of human development.
Let's face it, a factory or studio or even a taxi firm that has fun in what they do is likely to communicate more, work more co-operatively and generally loosen up.There's a hell of a way to go in changing our businessmen (and women) from the habits of macho corporatism but with fun as the name of the new game, the future looks rosy.
Future or Past
In your Brainwave section it seems to me that your futurists, Christine and Kirk McNulty, are looking at the future with the eyes of the past.
They give no reasons for their belief that modern physics, analytical psychology and the perennial philosophy will be the driving forces of the new world that we are approaching.
These are all approaches which have been around for some time — in the case of the perennial philosophy a very long time — and while, no doubt, they have a great deal to contribute, it is surely probable that the impulse for any paradigm shift will come from an unseen direction.
Getting Virtual
At last a technology that is like our dreams.
I've never been into virtual reality but as I guess I'm on the younger side of your readership at 18 I bet it will feature strongly by the time I enter the working world.
They say commuting will be out of fashion — sounds great to me.
Full Glass
I was really knocked out by your article on Philip Glass and I think it contained the best description of Glass' music I have ever read.
I wonder, however, whether we could have had more discussion of the worth of these compositions.
Sometimes, I think they are amongst the most stimulating of modern scores.
At other times, there seems a tendency towards thinness, to an almost absurd amplification of the inconsequential.Certainly Glass seems to bridge the gap between serious and popular music in a way that no other post-war composer has managed.
But has he achieved this without compromising his new language of sound?
When Change Becomes Commercial
Can advertising be used to transcend greed?
Wave asked Britain's most radical and imaginative agency to investigate.The idea seemed simple.
Take the medium most skilled in communication and see how it could be used to tackle the seemingly intractable problem of human greed.
Ecological ruin, burgeoning Third World debt, homelessness in the urban West — all point a finger at personal and national greed.
So is it just part and parcel of ‘human nature’ or can we evolve, change and even move beyond it?
Howell Henry Chaldecott Lury has the kind of reputation that suggests even the switchboard ought to answer with ‘Howell Henry Chaldecott Lury — the most controversial and innovative agency in Britain’.
Both qualities helped in this project.
For creative partner, Steve Henry, pushing aside the frontiers of advertising suited his agency and the people in it.
‘We liked the idea of taking the field with the worst reputation for stimulating unnecessary materialism and see if it could be turned around’, he says.
‘There is something nicely paradoxical about advertising selling the unsaleable — selling the idea of NOT wanting to buy.’
Thanks to its work with First Direct, Fuji Film and Pepe Jeans, HHCL is used to testing its medium to see how it can be deepened and directed towards ‘advertising that respects the integrity and dignity of those to whom it communicates.
The typical Eighties ads were driven by greed.
Such thinking is now out of date— and dangerous’, says Henry.
‘We believe people will increasingly buy values, not just products.
The division between commerce and morality will evaporate — it is time to stop pretending.
Conquer greed?
Absolutely.
By the year 2000 such an idea will not be strange.
It will be natural, practical — smart.’
The idea may have seemed simple but  its execution was not.
After three weeks of intense work and numerous rejected ideas the creative team of copywriter Liz Whiston and art director Dave Shelton felt they had been trying to solve one of humanity's great challenges.
Not surprisingly, they believed they had only made a stab at it, From the start Wave and HHCL were determined to build the campaign around an organisation with a sound commercial and practical justification for funding such advertising; someone with a vested interest in curbing consumer greed.
Anything less would smack of pie-in-the-sky thinking.
The United Nations was chosen because of their consistent concern about the economic imbalance between the Northern and Southern hemispheres.
The North consumes too much and the South suffers through debt, food shortages and lack of resources.This is of direct importance to the UN and a campaign to address the problem could be justified from the recommendations of the Willi Brandt report ‘A Programme for Human Survival’.
To ease consumption, the UN would mount an advertising campaign to change attitudes and behaviour at street level.
To change people's attitudes, advertising has to make an impression.
Advertising has to surprise and provoke so people make an effort to think.
‘The standard approach would be to devise adverts that play on guilt’, says account planner, Fiona Clancy.
‘Tell us how bad we are for eating, buying, selling so much, through pictures of starving children or selfish indulgence — this is the style favoured by charities.
Or we could feature a pious spiritual message in the style of a religious body.’
Both approaches were rejected.
‘It is a poor motivation to ask people to change by making them feel bad or unworthy.
How many people try to compensate for a sense of inadequacy or restore their personal confidence by going and buying themselves something whenever they feel miserable?
What if we took a radically different stance and presented a positive, invigorating reason to transcend greed — make people feel they are ‘enough’ without it?’says Clancy.
It's a slow-burn strategy: meaning if you have a sense of your own value you will not seek to boost your self-esteem by buying things unnecessarily.The theme was empowerment, inspiration and well-being.
The audience would be destabilised but encouraged to feel ‘good’ not ‘guilty’.
The campaigns were designed to run as television or cinema commercials and as large street hoardings — media that is seen by people in groups rather than in isolation as would be the case of newspapers.
After all, the UN is a public body and though the message is aimed at the individual, public media encourage a connection with global identity.
‘People are being inspired to personal change for human survival,’ says Clancy.
‘That is not something you can achieve on your own.’
Imagine the commercial break during News at Ten.
You have just seen three adverts for coffee, a new car and a new kitchen gadget.
Cut to blank screen onto which is projected an expensive jacket.
The shot is matter-of-fact, simple.
The words on the screen say, ‘This is a jacket’.
This almost surreal tone runs throughout and you are left with That's all they are on your screen and United Nations Campaign against Greed .
Wouldn't you be disoriented by this?
What does it mean?
Why are they saying this?
The idea is to make people question the real value of things.
It should be surprising but liberating: and undermine the other ads in  the commercial break.
Questions are raised but not answered and the next car commercial appears — but are you now seeing it through a different pair of glasses?
‘This is just a car’.
‘This is the straight answer to the Wave brief,’ says Henry.
‘Simple and direct but nothing that unusual.
The fact that the ad sits in between other normal commercials gives it added impact, but the trouble is it tackles the symptoms, not the cause and could feed on guilt.
As the words are not spoken you cannot control the tone of voice.
The ending with the UN sign-off tells the viewer who is communicating the message and lets them then make the connection.
It's not the best of the campaigns but it sets the parameters,’ he says.The message from the ‘Mouth’is far more strident and inspiring.
It throws the viewer off balance but speaks to the part of each person that is capable, potent and dignified.
You are left with a sense of your  personal ability to change and choose.
The advert does not say ‘go beyond greed’ but it leaves you in a place where greed — at least for that moment — is obsolete.
You are enough — as you are.To then introduce ‘Change yourself and you change the world’ shows how this feeling can be harnessed for the good of humankind.
The message is that for true change to happen on earth it must happen in the hearts and minds of the population.
Only then can it affect political institutions.
In the third television advert the empty screen is pink.
The word ‘Love’ is sounded at a strange vibrational frequency — like a mantra — throughout the commercial break.
The words that flow silently across the screen in rolling credit type are:‘Every word has its own vibrational frequency.The tone you are hearing is that of the word ‘Love’.
During the next 60 seconds it will induce feelings of warmth.You will feel as if you have everything you could possibly want.Let these feelings fill your whole consciousness.These effects aren't permanent.
When the tone stops you will be back to normal.However, it's easy to experience them again.
You just need the right attitude of mind.United Nations.Change yourself and you change the world.
The attempt is deliberately to alter the state of consciousness of the viewer.
Adverts induce altered states by their nature so why not an alteration that is overt, short-lived and thrilling?
On a lighter note, imagine passing by these posters while you are on the back of a number 42 bus?
The idea is to make the audience feel good and smile.
Then they see the UN sign-off and are taken into a more thoughtful and dynamic context.
Why is the UN saying this?
What are they trying to sell?
Are they trying to sell nothing?
In an actual campaign we would research these approaches with trial groups to see what changes need to be made.
It is not an obvious answer to the brief and we would want to see what reaction this would get.
Indifference and immediate acceptance would be reactions which would worry us.
We would expect the best response from people who are re-evaluating their lives — a change of work, home or relationship — allowing their beliefs to be re-considered,’ says Henry.
‘We would build on this initial campaign with tangible suggestions of what people could do to put their new sense of personal power and responsibility into action.’
So obviously the UN would not try such a strange idea — or would it?
In the words of Zohreh Tabatabai, Chief of Public Services of the United Nations in New York; ‘If this had come a year ago, we would have said ‘no way’.
But we are now changing — we've had two campaigns this year on human rights and the environment thanks to Ted Turner at CNN (the news network).
We are seeing that we have a message to communicate.
This campaign is — what shall I say — unusual but interesting.
The Under-Secretary General Madame Therese Sevigny and I will discuss this.
It needs investigation but if agreement was reached the campaign could be tried in the UK as a test with space donated by local UK media.’
Watch this space.
‘Conquer greed?
Absolutely.
By the year 2000 such an idea will not be strange.
It will be natural, practical — smart’
You can do anything you want right now.
Anything.
Change yourself and you change the world.
The world is privileged to have you in it.
Yes, you.
MOUTH Voiceover: The thing I love about humans is their ability to do things previously considered impossible, when things are at their very worst.
Like the woman who lifts the car off her child trapped beneath it.
How many times have you said, ‘I can't’ only to find you can?
Imagine how good it would feel to harness that power and use it when things are at their very best.
You have the power.
You decide how to use it.
United Nations.
Change yourself and you change the world.
JACKET This is a jacket.
This is a pair of shoes.
This is a stereo system.
This is a car.
That's all they are.
United Nations Campaign Against Greed
The boy in HHCL's First Direct Commercial — taking a leap in advertising terms
Music
Betty Page.
New Age music has been cast aside from the mainstream, vilified for being either hippy nonsense or an adjunct to achieving altered states of consciousness.
The situation is so extreme that the New Age Music Association has been formed to gain a fairer hearing for its exponents.
But the fact is music touches us physically and emotionally and any music that allows us to achieve a transcendent state of mind is evocative of a new age.
One type of music that has always had it s roots in the spiritual realm is traditional Irish.
Van Morrison has long had associations with mysticism and his legacy are bands like U2, The Hothouse Flowers and The Waterboys.
Karl Wallinger was once a Waterboy but then branched out to form his own World Party.
Karl is a serious musician who missed out on the nihilism of the Seventies punk and largely retained Sixties hippy values.
His new album Goodbye Jumbo seems to have put him at the top of the list of those eager to nominate a spokesman for the green generation.
Although Wallinger makes quite a straightforward, if powerfully direct, rock noise there are many who have been impressed by his abilities as a natural communicator — especially at his live shows.
Matthew Geffen, manager of New Age emporium Mysteries, sees World Party as the band of the moment and Wallinger as some kind of leader.
Wallinger makes no such claims and discourages any connection with New Age philosophies.
His old band, The Waterboy's fifth album Room To Roam continues their exploration of traditional musical styles and Celtic mysticism.
Chief Waterboy, Mike Scott, has plainly been influenced by his visits to Ireland.
Song From The End Of The World is inspired by Dingle Bay, on Ireland's west coast, and makes reference to the god Pan and his recurring influence on that landscape.
What unites both artists is not musical style but an awareness of wider issues.
Both releases are thanks to Ensign Records, the label responsible for Sinead O'Connor.
This mixture of soul and mysticism is what makes Ensign releases special.
Not that they are alone in this.
World of Records has just released a single version of the classical spiritual text Desiderata by the exuberant Pop Tarts.
As singer Randy Barbato puts it: ‘We wanted to do Desiderata because this cosmic thing is in the air.’
Advertising
Lewis Blackwell
Much is written about New Advertising.
Its disciples talk of new values, its detractors say there's no such thing as new when you're a hardened pro — just good and bad, successful and unsuccessful.
So, what's with this New Advertising?
Where do you find it and can you buy it?
And is it going places?
Let's start at the end and work back.
With death.
There's not a lot of death in advertising.
People and animals don't die in that alternative reality presented by advertising.
Things do, of course, indeed they seem to succumb to The Second Law of Thermodynamics at a rate that must occasionally surprise even the most paranoid of entropy theorists.
But just to make life a lot easier — and that helps when you only have a 30 second commercial in which to get your philosophy and bargain offer across — advertising agencies have edited out death.
A recent advert for Pepe jeans tried using the closing line ‘Buy Pepe jeans — because one day you'll die’.
No said the television watchdog — ITVA — you will not ‘die’.
Instant view immortality.
The only place where this rule is broken is in the cycle of drink/drive adverts by the Central Office of Information.
In an effort to get on with people, most other unpleasantries have been removed.
Research shows that nine out of 10 people, or thereabouts, are similar to their Whiskas-guzzling cats in preferring something tasty.
And, though the cats have not been polled on this point, I suspect they would share human mistrust of the new and unknown when approached with it by advertising researchers.
Into this situation have come a few rude intrusions.
Commercials that don't abide by the rules.
The views and attitudes of the innovative agency Howell Henry Chaldecott Lury are explored elsewhere in Wave so I won't dwell on them here.
But while not alone in advertising, HHCL is rare in its testing of its medium.
Its work includes the often-baffling campaign that launched the ‘branch-less bank’ First Direct.
Dull photographs of domestic details (Wellington boots, a washing basket and a lawn) were shown in stark contrast to the glamorous image of advertising.
Just how successful the campaign has been in straight money terms (costs per account opened) is unclear but the advertising is undoubtedly asking to have a different relationship with the viewer than the more passive tradition of the medium.
Given this passivity, can advertising step beyond its obvious role and move on to discussing ideas, rather than just reinforcing them?
One commercial, or perhaps ‘propaganda film’ is a better description, that does this is a controversial piece arguing against Third World debt and calling on viewers to lobby their MPs.
It intercuts footage on Nazi death camps with that of starving children in Ethiopia.
It compares the numbers of dead, suggesting a kind of genocide is taking place encouraged by Western banking practices.
This film, written under the direction of Dave Trott, will not get many showings.
It is deeply offensive, some people find it wrong-headed and ill-informed.
But it attempts to do what advertising rarely does.
It mentions human death, pulls no punches to please and is transparent in its will to manipulate.
In its small, brief and brutally simplistic way, it is trying to use the language of advertising to discuss fundamental issues about human life and the structure of world politics.
I think it fails but it makes a point.
And if there is a sea-change in our values, then we may see more advertising that follows this bold example in taking the gloves off commercial communication.
Pop Tarts in typically cosmic pose.
Scene from a drink/drive campaign last Christmas — the only place where death features in television commercials
Books
Re-visioning our economy is the opportunity James Robertson holds out in Future Wealth — A New Economics for the 21st Century (Cassell).
A new economics is necessary because, ‘the present path of economic development is leading the world to catastrophe.’
A new economics is possible, maintains Robertson, which ‘should be systematically enabling for people; it should be systematically conserving of resources and environment; it should treat the world economy as a multi-level one-world system, with autonomous but interdependent parts at all levels.’
Robertson shows how these principles relate to all aspects of economies from the role of the individual to the world economy.
Each section outlines proposals for change, setting out a radical agenda which, refreshingly, cuts across the political spectrum.
Poverty is seen to be caused both by dependency and lack of opportunity.
This is economics on a human scale.
To follow through, one could subscribe to New Economics , the newsletter of the New Economics Foundation.
It charts the progress of the new economics and gives general update on new ideas.
The current issue features a report on The Other Economic Summit in Houston, Texas which has, in recent years, shadowed that of the G7 group of major industrial countries.
An approach to the 21st century comes in Francis Kinsman's sociologically acute Millennium 2000 — Towards Tomorrow's Society (W H Allen).
He analyses three social groupings: sustenance driven, primarily concerned with survival, outer directed, concerned with status and achievement, and inner directed, concerned with personal growth, autonomy and quality of life.
Kinsman traces three future scenarios in which each of these groups is in turn dominant.
The scenarios are offered as possibilities: which one we choose is up to us.
Implicit in the new economics and in Kinsman's work is the need to recover a sacred dimension and relate that to all aspects of our life.
This is also at the heart of The Chalice and The Blade by Riane Eisler (Unwin & Hyman)
Could it be that the bloody human history of the past 5,000 years is nothing more than an evolutionary side-road?
Our heritage may be plotted in textbooks by events, such as the Viking massacres, the slaughters of the Crusades, Hitler's Germany and, more recently, Ceausescu's Romania, but that picture may be woefully incomplete.
New interpretations of archaeological discoveries suggest that the Garden of Eden and the lost civilisation of Atlantis are the true folk memories of our distant past and that the cudgel-wielding caveman has no more historical truth than do The Flintstones.
Eisler traces our prehistoric origins back to a goddess-worshipping people, for whom ‘feminine’ values of nurturing and sharing were revered, and who based their relationships on partnership rather than domination.
Far from being impossibly Utopian, these attitudes were a survival necessity and eventually flowered into the extraordinarily peaceful and creative Minoan civilisation of ancient Crete.
When the goddess and the life-giving symbol of the chalice were usurped by male gods of war and the worship of the blade, our cultural evolution was forced onto the path of domination — and onwards to the nuclear age.
Eisler says we are now at a crossroads.
Once again our very survival depends on partnership, linking man and woman, nation and nation, humankind with nature.
Our prehistory tells us that this is not a dream but a real possibility.
Riane Eisler: ‘No truth in the flintstones’
It's Real — Virtually
Virtual Reality is a world where technology and imagination meet.
The gadgetry is impressive but what are its human applications?
Everything about Virtual Reality is bewildering.
Simply to grasp how it works requires a leap into unknown territory.
A new reality generated by technology?
What does that mean and what does it feel like?
Such questions seem the only natural response when faced with the discovery of an electronic ‘world’ into which we can journey.
So far, due to its cost,(around £90,000) and hence its scarcity, few have actually experience VR.
If they had, they would discover, as even Jaron Lanier, the 30-year-old pioneer of VR admits, that it is still ‘fairly basic’.
But while such consideration may present a practical obstacle, they impose no limit on the imagination of VR's innovators to speculate on its possibilities; possibilities they believe to lie years rather than decades away.
VR is a three-dimensional computer-generated reality.
You step into this world by wearing ‘eye-phones’ in which your eyes see two miniature video screens linked to a powerful computer.
Sensors monitor the movements of your head — as your head moves, what you see changes.
Add headphones and an electronic glove and all you see, hear and feel is now held within this electronic world.
Your normal senses are ‘covered’ by the  equipment.
At first you might find yourself in a ‘virtual’ room; you would see the room and ‘feel’you are there.
Tilt your head up and you see the room's ceiling, down and you see the floor.
Through the dataglove , your fingers can do the walking for you.
Move your fingers and you pace across the ‘virtual’ room.
You can begin to run, jump and fly around in your VR room.
The normal limits of your body disappear.
You become tiny or huge and your first VR journey begins.
To those new to VR, this new world appears bizarre, even nightmarish but Lanier says VR does not feel strange.
‘Wrapped in your VR equipment, your brain and nervous system fill in the gaps.
They tell you that what you are experiencing is real,’ he says.
‘Reality itself is an illusion that our nervous system puts together for us.
When you enter VR it doesn't feel crude.’
His company, VPL, is one of a small group of VR innovators in Silicon Valley, California, where advanced technologies appear to sit easily alongside research into human consciousness.
After your early VR forays, you will want to expand as you find your VR feet.
You notice a saxophone and start to play.
As you play you create mountains in the distance (remember that normal rules of reality do not apply in this field of dreams).
You play on and are transported to the mountains where you start tramping through the ranges.
It may seem appropriate that since VR marks the first true merging of technology and imagination, it is sometimes hard to tell where current technology ends and its imagined future begins.
‘You can go to distant planets and sit on the rings of Saturn,’ says Lanier.
‘Enter the prehistoric world of the Tyrannosaurus or fly across cities.
Not yet — but it's coming.’
But what is already here is VPL's Reality Built For Two which lets two people meet in virtual space.
Lanier sees such a meeting as an extension of the telephone and the Californian telephone company, Pacific Bell, appear to agree, having financed some of VPL's research.
Time to project ten years ahead; it is the year 2000 and you step into your VR room.
On the wall of your VR room is a rack of fish tanks.
You stare at one and see miniature scenes — a football game, a council meeting and a pop concert.
You can go into any scene.
You go to the council meeting and are present at the ‘open’ meeting and everyone will ‘see’you have arrived.
You can express your concerns before heading off to the pop concert.
The people you meet are all in VR themselves — the meeting is in VR, so is the band, so is the audience.
Or you can decide you do not need to commute to work but instead will participate in the 11am meeting in VR.
Your colleagues are there — some from Japan, some from your office, some from Europe.
Or you could step into a VR of the Louvre Art Gallery and attend a class about the painting of the Mona Lisa.
And on it goes, possibility after possibility.
When the Wall Street Journal ran a story about Lanier on its front page, it described VR as ‘electronic LSD’.
But comparisons with drugs are misleading, says Lanier.
‘VR is a world you enter in a waking state.
It is not addictive or dangerous.’
Yet one time evangelist of LSD, Timothy Leary, has also been drawn to VR.
At a recent VR lecture tour in Amsterdam, Leary, the founder of multi-media software company Knoware, acknowledged that these are early days for VR (most of the audience were disappointed by what they saw but impressed by what they heard).
‘We've only just started’, says Leary.
‘The important thing is that we are learning a new language.
A new space has been created where the ability for a much more precise communication between people than words is possible.
For instance, you and your friend are jacked in and you want to describe a ball falling out of a tree.
Your friend can share the experience of you seeing the boy.
His hair, the kind of tree, how he falls — your friend sees what you mean precisely.’
VR began life thanks to the research into simulated realities carried out by NASA and, perhaps due to its roots in the defence industry, not everyone is as enthusiastic about VR as Leary and Lanier.
Some wonder about its darker possibilities.
William Gibson, author of the cyberpunk fiction that has mirrored the development of VR, is not too impressed by what he sees as our VR future.
‘When people say ‘It's going to change everything’ I think I've heard it all before.
I'd like to see some talk of the severely negative possibilities.
Like VR as an instrument of state terror, or brainwashing or a virtual jail where you keep someone plugged in.
But I just don't have the heart to explore these ideas’, says Gibson.
Todd Rundgren, composer and owner of software design company Utopia Grokware, has less nightmarish worries.
His complaint is with the attachment VR has to effect rather than content.
‘This will happen until artists and others get hold of VR and realise that the medium is not necessarily the message,’ he says.
‘Hopefully VR may be an overlay on the reality we have at present; enhancing it but not replacing it.
The best thing for VR is to provide a place where homicidal maniacs can kill as many virtual victims as they want and leave the rest of us alone,’ says Rundgren.
But Leary insists on the positive implications.
‘Just because you go into VR doesn't mean you can't walk, talk, dance or swim.
It's not either/or.
That's the number one defence of the closed mind.
Within 10 years many of us will be spending almost all our time zooming around inside the digital ocean and interacting with others.
Face to face meetings will be reserved for special, intimate, precious, sacramentalised events.
Flesh encounters will be rare.
The quality of live encounters will be raised to mythic drama’, he believes.
For Leary this is liberation.
Work will disappear as we know it.
‘The mid-western farmer will go into VR as he reclines in Rio and operate his automated plough.
Such forecasts are the stuff of VR.
After all, as Lanier says; ‘This is something — and we haven't had a something for quite a while.’
VPL's Reality Built For Two — where two people can meet in Virtual Reality even if physically located in different continents
‘Flesh encounters will be rare.
The quality of live encounters will be raised to mythic drama’.
Brainwave
Confused by reality?
So you should be say futurists Christine and Kirk McNulty.
After all it's not every day you get caught up in a paradigm shift.
People often say they are confused by what is going on in the world; it no longer seems to make sense.
News of terrorism, drug problems, global warming, regional conflicts, and recession fill our days with anxiety.
Stock markets fluctuate wildly, economists have difficulty forecasting performance or prescribing remedies; the indicators and institutions that used to provide us with reliable and reassuring benchmarks no longer seem to be functioning properly.
Nothing seems to follow the rules anymore.
Is this normal?
Have we always seen such change and uncertainty and responded to it in the same way?
Or is something else going on?
Change is with us constantly; but it usually is an evolutionary or incremental change which can be anticipated.
However, on rare occasions — perhaps twice before in recorded history — a change occurs so profound and so far-reaching that the entire orientation of society is altered completely in a relatively short period.
On the basis of several years of research, we at Applied Futures believe that the West is in the middle of such a period of profound change.
Futurists call this kind of fundamental transformation a paradigm shift , although the term is now a misused buzzword for any change.
So, how big a change are we talking about?
As great as the Renaissance and Reformation/Counter-Reformation.
In the medieval/religious paradigm the clergy and the church were at the centre of life; in the scientific/industrial paradigm the scientist and economist have replaced them.
This momentous shift took 300 years from church to factory, say, 1360 to 1660.
Our evidence which shows that the first glimmerings of our new paradigm emerged around 1860 and we expect that by 2010 the shift will be virtually complete, although it will take longer for its changes to affect everyone.
So, if society's view of the world is changing that much, that fast, people should be confused.
The industrial paradigm has been based on the idea that the purpose of life is the satisfaction of our physical needs (including our intellectual need to understand what is going on in the physical universe).
This contrast with the previous medieval/religious paradigm where the purpose of life was the salvation of the soul and man had no need to  understand the physical universe, only to celebrate it as God's creation.
The fragmentation we see around us is typical of social paradigms approaching the end of their life: they polarize around some fundamental issues.
The medieval/religious paradigm split on issues of theology; our materialistic paradigm has split on the basis of our economic systems, with socialism and capitalism at the extremes of the shift.
The thing that brings a paradigm shift to its turning point is a war between the poles of the incumbent paradigm.
The Cold War has been a paradigm war, and in that conflict both powers have exhausted themselves economically, so they have had no choice but to seek a rapprochement.
In saying that the scientific/industrial paradigm is giving way and that something new is taking its place, we are not suggesting that economic activity will cease.
But as the new paradigm emerges economic activity will become more a means to an end, and less a primary social goal.
In the new paradigm.
the purpose of life in Western society will no longer be simply the satisfaction of physical needs.
In seeking solutions to such global problems as hunger and environmental issues we will no longer seek only material solutions.
So what will the new paradigm look like?
There are three strands which we believe will be the major driving forces:modern physics ,analytical psychology ,the perennial philosophy .
Physics is the most important of the physical sciences which have been the foundation of our materialistic paradigm.
But modern physics (since, say, 1905) has presented to us a very strange picture of the world.
Most surprising of all, it has demonstrated that the scientific method, as it is presently formulated, is not adequate to explain even the physical universe, let alone human beings and their psyches.
Some interpretations of modern astrophysics go so far as to suggest that a conscious observer is necessary for the physical universe to exist at all— the observed needs an observer.
The significant word is conscious .
Work in analytical psychology suggests that psychological maturity is not the same as physical maturity, and may even be completely separate from it.
As more and more people concern themselves with psychological growth, we anticipate extensions of intellectual, emotional and creative capabilities.
For example, in one new branch of medicine — namely psychoneuroimmunology — evidence suggests that people can learn to control their immune systems psychologically.
Some seem to be able to cause their bodies to cure or to prevent certain diseases and even prevent themselves from acquiring genetically inherited ones.
Here we are talking about a degree of conscious awareness that allows the individual to understand and control what is happening to him.
Once again the significant word is ‘conscious’.
The third strand — the perennial philosophy — deals specifically with consciousness; combined with the other two strands, it gives us the new paradigm.
We call it the Conscious Paradigm.
In this emergent consciousness paradigm it will be taken for granted that human beings have psychological capacities; capacities largely unrecognised today and almost entirely unsuspected 50 years ago.
Human being s will be seen to have a psyche requiring a form of training which continues after the physical body matures.
This training, quite different from the acquisition of knowledge, skill and technique which makes up education today, will be directed towards the understanding of one's self and releasing the unique potential of each person.
Certainly the new paradigm will have problems of its own but at the moment at least, its dominant characteristics seem to be those of caring, individuation, personal responsibility, individual freedom, self-exploration and personal fulfilment.
Christine McNulty is managing director of Applied Futures, a future research consultancy whose clients are multi-national companies.
her husband, Kirk, is a non-executive director and author of the forthcoming book, End of Materialism.