

WORKING MUMS: what you told us SOLVENT ABUSE The tragic waste of a boy called Danny WIN!
A fabulous summer car ENTER BY PHONE YOU AND YOUR TAN Why it's still safety first!
DANGER!
Why I want to warn every mum-to-be EXCLUSIVE Why I'd hate to fall in love with Craig HOME and AWAY'S JANE The trouble with my DAD!
FATHER'S DAY SPECIAL
When I was 10, smoking was the worst social crime you could commit as a boy, and that, I suppose, was part of its charm.
I remember a gang of us once roamed the streets looking for fag ends from which we shook the remaining bits of tobacco to roll our own.
My Dad (who smoked!) caught us on that occasion and my punishment was being forced to smoke a whole cigarette (which I didn't want) in front of my friends who were called into the front room especially to witness the humiliation.
These days all that seems innocent stuff — occasional cigarette smoking isn't enough for schoolkids in the Nineties.
What many of them use now to get their highs are solvents which, as you can read on page 28, can and do kill.
It's worth reminding readers who are parents of this with the start of the school holidays next month — apparently it's the prime time for solvent abuse.
So — please — do watch your kids extra carefully.
I've had a couple of letters asking me whether I ever managed to give up smoking as I promised a few months ago.
I blush to admit my failure but I have cut down by half and the will to stop completely is as strong as ever.
The Durman body, actually, is in its best shape for years: I've lost over half a stone on my How-To-Stop-Them-Laughing-On-The-Beach diet, I'm taking more exercise and generally feeling better all round.
All this was prompted by a week in Spain where I encountered something I haven't experienced in years — fresh air — and it's quite gone to my head.
See you, I hope, next week.
DAVID DURMAN, EDITOR
It's all in woman THIS WEEK
HEALTH
Health Watch — two pages of the latest medical news.
Plus Dr Alan explains Down's syndrome
BEAUTY
Tanning: All you need to know to get a safe and healthy tan this summer
FASHION
Jump to it!
Fun-to-wear T-shirts and shorts in summer's brightest colours
FEATURES
‘Why I'd hate to fall in love with Craig’ by Home and Away's Josephine Mitchell
Reader's open letter — a daughter tells her Mum: ‘I'm so proud of you’
Claire Rayner: How to cope with fear
‘Why I want to warn every mum-to-be’ Leslie Ash speaks out on a hidden danger
‘Why I won't speak up for fat people’ by She-Devil star Julie T Wallace
The tragic waste of a boy called Danny — and his family's fight against solvent abuse
Working mums — what you told us
The butterfly has landed — whatever happened to Butterflies star Russell?
‘Why I didn't go to bed with Warren Beatty’ by actress Sean Young
KNITTING
You'll love our easy-to-make cream cotton cardigan with crochet border
HOME
Our home's just full of memories — take a look at one family's house
This month in the garden 
WIN! a new car worth over £9,000!
See page 23
ACTIONWOMAN
Just the medicine!
What your doctor's prescription really means
FICTION
A Gift from Joe — a short story for Father's Day, by Buzz Rodwell 
SIMPLY DELICIOUS
The taste that proves summer's here
See page 35
woman EXTRA
Two pages packed with news and reviews.
Plus the WOMAN crossword
OFFER
Bike it!
Our family mountain bikes top the lot — from just £89.95!
EVERY WEEK
You and Us — your weekly letters page
Jonathan Cainer's stars for the week ahead
Tessa Wood
Doctor Alan Maryon Davis
Sue Frost on all your personal problems 
THE TROUBLE WITH MY DAD!
Britain's kids speak out!
See page 54
FATHER'S DAY SPECIAL
YOU AND US
A funny story?
You want to let off steam?
Some good news?
A cause for concern?
Then tell us.
We'd love to hear from you!
Please send your letters to YOU and US, WOMAN, King's Reach Tower, Stamford Street, London.
We'll pay £5 for every original letter published
STAR LETTER
One morning I was driving along the road when I saw an old man frantically waving a walking stick at passing cars.
Like other motorists ahead of me, I drove past.
No doubt we were all thinking he was crazy, or that if we stopped we'd be late for work.
However, I went back to see if he was alright.
He explained he was having a dizzy spell and couldn't make it to the doctor's, so I drove him there.
He was 88 years old and the smile he gave me as we said goodbye made my day.
Winners receive an anniversary set from Pyrex, currently celebrating their seventy-fifth birthday
ROLE REVERSAL
As teenagers tend to get a bad name for being moody, rude and irresponsible — to name but a few choice descriptions often used — I'd like to tell your readers about my teenage son.
The other evening I went to pick up my other son from his friend's house.
I was offered a cup of tea and stayed ten minutes longer than I thought I'd be.
Suddenly, the phone rang.
It was my 15-year-old demanding: ‘Where have you been?
I've been worried sick about you.
Do you realise it's almost nine o'clock?’
So after years of worrying about him when he's late home from school or a friend's house, the roles have reversed.
I'm quite touched that, despite the arguments we have, he does love me really.
Needless to say, I went home and apologised for being late.
DRESS OPTIONAL
When visiting a church on the south coast, I saw the following notice for the Young Wives' Social Evening: ‘If your husband has nothing on, bring him along to join in the fun!’
EARLY BIRDS
We wanted to make an early start for home after a caravan holiday in Cornwall but I was so worried that we'd oversleep, so my husband said he had an idea.
he asked me for a few slices of bread which he broke into pieces and scattered over the roof.
We were woken at the crack of dawn by the pitter patter of seagulls as they pecked for their breakfast.
SMALL TALK
I was taking my mother out with my two boys, Thomas and Henry.
My mother was talking about my niece who had chicken-pox when Thomas, four, suddenly asked: ‘Nanna, does that mean Samantha can lay eggs?’
He couldn't understand why we burst out laughing.
NO FLATTERY
One Sunday when our relatives were visiting, the whole family was sitting around the table enjoying a lovely roast dinner when my mum said to my elderly gran: ‘Mum, is your dinner all right?’
I couldn't help but laugh when she replied: ‘Oh, don't worry, I'm making the best of a bad job!’
TOO SLEEPY
Unlike our other two children, our daughter Alicia has given us a few problems with her nightly stirrings.
In despair, I told my husband I'd bought a book on how to cure children's sleep problems.
‘Have you found a solution?’ asked my husband, hopefully.
‘No,’ I replied, ‘I've been too tired to read it!’
VOTE WINNER
Although we aren't a politically active family, I was discussing Prime Minister John Major's plan for a classless society with my sister Lynn when my niece Natalie said: ‘Will this mean we won't have to go to school any more?’
PIC OF THE WEEK
My son Adam, who's two and a half years old, loves making everyone laugh — especially by wearing his funny face!
GREEN-EYED
I was moved to write to you when I read Sue Frost's comment in You And Your Kids recently: ‘The child who shouts ‘yummy’ at a plate of Brussels sprouts hasn't yet been born.’
Yes she has!
She's my younger daughter and she was born over eighteen years ago.
From the age of two, a plate of sprouts would bring a smile of delight to her face — as would cauliflower, broccoli, turnips and cabbage.
In fact, I had a job tempting her to eat anything else.
And now she often has extra vegetables instead of a dessert.
Who can account for this?
Certainly not I!
SKIN COMPLAINT
My five-year-old daughter Hollie was studying my face with great concentration one day when she suddenly said: ‘You've got spots.’
I laughed and said: ‘I've only got two on my chin.’
She quickly replied: ‘But you've got a molehill on the side of your face!’
She was, of course, referring to my raised mole.
SWINGING SIXTY
I was very put out to read in your article on Rachel Friend, her answer to the question: ‘What do you think you'll be like when you're 60?’
Well, she can be an old lady with her hair done up in a silver bun if she likes (what a picture that conjures up!).
But I'm 63 this year, still naturally blonde, I have a good job as a secretary and dash around in my new car to visit my three married children and four grandchildren.
I enjoy a night out and drink every week and I love going to restaurants and generally enjoying myself.
Rachel sounds as if she'll be sitting with a shawl around her shoulders when she's 60.
They say you're as young as you feel and I'm certainly not going to give up on life for a long time to come!
BAD TIMING
It used to irritate me but now it just makes me laugh.
I'm referring to the habit shopkeepers have of leaving a note on their door saying: ‘Back in half an hour.’
Half an hour from when, for heaven's sake!
DASHED DREAMS
‘I think you could get a job as a stewardess on that airline, Mother,’ said my daughter on return from our holiday.
For one wild, mad moment I had a picture of myself strutting glamorously up the aisle on a jumbo jet, flying to exotic faraway places.
But then she added: ‘They're all very plain and I reckon that some of them must be over 60!’
OBVIOUSLY!
When viewing a house we were interested in buying, we asked the owner if it had rear access.
You can imagine the expression on our faces when she promptly replied; ‘Oh yes, it's around the back.’
SCARED FOR LIFE
Way back in 1960 when my husband and I were courting, we were at the cinema one evening watching the original screening of Psycho.
As weird Norman Bates was climbing the stairs in that awful, old dark house, the tension was so frightening that I almost screamed aloud, when my then boyfriend grabbed me by the arm and said: ‘Let's watch horror films together for the rest of our lives!’
Yes, that was my husband's way of proposing to me all those years ago and we have indeed watched many horror movies together since — but it wasn't very romantic, was it?
TASTELESS JOKE
My friend, who's a very economical shopper with a keen eye for a bargain, was doing a bit of shopping at her local market.
On a fruit stall she spied some big bunches of asparagus.
When she asked the price she was told £1.
She thought it was very cheap so she bought it and hurried home, with wings on her feet and her taste buds going wild, to prepare the dinner.
Fish done, spuds on, she got out the asparagus and found they were plastic!
I had a good laugh about it and eventually she saw the funny side.
I bet the stallholder hasn't stopped laughing.
THE ODD COUPLE
We live in Hastings and have relatives to stay most summers, the highlight of which is usually an evening out on the town, finishing up at a plush restaurant for dinner.
Last year this was arranged as usual but I was so busy looking after my guests during the day that I had to rush getting ready for the evening out.
We were walking along the promenade feeling really good in our best gear, when I looked down at my feet.
I went cold with horror — I was wearing odd shoes!
They even had a different height heel.
I spent the rest of the evening with my relatives in close rank around me, hoping nobody would notice the idiot in the middle with two completely different shoes.
WHERE ARE THEY NOW?
Wendy Jones would like to hear from her ex-penpal, Staff Sgt Jeff Wilson, last known 3 Squadron, 13 Signal Regt, BFPO 45.
Michelle Butler would like to hear from Wendy Williams, last known living in Bembridge, I O W.
Patricia Gingell (née Morgan) is looking for Helen Ames (Née Jacobs) last known in Addington, Surrey.
Raye Snook is looking for Kathleen and Marion Far, possibly living in Minster, Sheerness, Kent.
Write to us and we'll pass your letters on.
TAROT
Do your cards know something you don't?
Our special Tarot line number may be the most important call you'll ever make.
Ring it and you'll hear details about your love life, your money, your career — all the important things that affect your life now and in the future.
Tarot is believed to be one of the most accurate forms of prediction.
And our service offers a personalised reading by expert Frances Wood, based on cards that you help to select.
All you have to do is to ring the Woman Tarot Line.
If you have a push-button phone, you can choose your reading by pressing any number from 1–78.
Don't worry if you haven't, as our Tarot computer will select a number for you from which Frances will make her reading.
Remember, Tarot is a powerful and personal way of revealing the truth about your life and loves.
Now, knowing what the future holds is just a phone call away.
Ring our special Tarot Line any time.
Our line is open now, 24 hours a day.
JUMP TO IT!
Style IN THE 90s
BRIGHT SPARKS
Go on, dazzle 'em with this bright patchwork T-shirt, teamed with loose-fitting, bright pink cotton voile shorts.
SPORTY SET
Go for the long, lean look — team a loose-fitting T-shirt with a pair of matching figure-hugging shorts.
Great if you've got good legs but need to hide any extra bulges!
COLOUR MAD
There's no danger of being a shrinking violet in this technicolour multi-print baggy T-shirt and matching shorts.
POP ART PAIR
Tightly-fitting with a bold design, these shorts are bound to get you noticed!
If you're a bit large on the hips, top them off with a loose T-shirt.
They're colourful, bright and lots of fun to wear.
And this summer's shorts come in so many different shapes there are enough styles to suit practically everyone
NEXT WEEK: IT'S ALL WHITE!
WHY I'D HATE TO FALL IN LOVE WITH CRAIG
Thousands of lovestruck fans would willingly take her place in Home and Away as the girl who wins Craig McLachlan's heart.
But Josephine Mitchell is glad it's only make-believe.
Erica Goatly reports.
Main picture by John Paul
With her porcelain skin, china doll face and fragile figure, Josephine Mitchell is the last person you'd expect to find strong-arming thugs around Summer Bay, let alone pinning down macho man Craig McLachlan in a passionate clinch.
But looks are deceiving and, despite her daintiness, Jo's no lightweight — for, as Home and Away's policewoman Jane Holland, she's proving that you don't have to be big and brawny to act tough.
Yet while she's been pulling no punches as the dynamic young WPC, Jane's been wrestling with the thorny dilemma of whether she can find lasting love with teacher Grant Mitchell played by Craig McLachlan.
Having fallen in love with each other, the couple are now setting up home together at lightning speed.
But they will soon be battling to resolve the differences in their personalities.
‘The relationship begins to fall apart because they're too young to live together,’ reveals Jo.
‘Jane's 22 and Grant a bit older but she's very intense and tries to force a commitment, while he's very airy-fairy and doesn't want to think about the future.
She's consumed by love for Grant and just can't grasp the idea that she could be doing something else if he goes out with his mates and, understandably, he resents the way she intrudes on the time he spends with them.’
The crunch comes when Grant, concerned about the risks posed by Jane's work, asks her to give up her job with the police force.
‘She wants him to ask her to get married and he wants her to give up her job, which is the only thing she's ever wanted to do.
They're asking too much of one another and just aren't managing to meet in the middle.
It's clear that neither Jane nor Grant want to split up but, in Jo's view, they should stop living together if they want to save their relationship.
‘They rushed into it so fast there was quite a lot of raised eyebrows in Summer Bay.
I think they should take things a lot more slowly and live apart,’ she says.
But while Jane anguishes over the painful choice of either pursuing her love or her career, Jo has no such doubts.
‘I would never put my career before love, it's not worth it,’ she says.
‘I think having a good relationship is the most important thing in the whole world.’
Here Jo is the voice of authority as she is living happily with her director boyfriend Chris.
They've been together for the past six years — which she cites as one very good reason why she didn't fall for Craig McLachlan while playing his leading lady.
‘It's weird how people think that Craig and I are together — they assume we must be going out or having an affair,’ says Jo.
‘I didn't hesitate about working with Craig because I already knew him and he's a wonderful guy.
He's a great person — but no competition for Chris!’
Even though her relationship with Craig is strictly platonic, Jo believes it's only too easy to fall for an actor when acting out an on-screen love affair.
‘You're in such a closeted atmosphere and you do get into the character, but I'd hate to fall in love that way because it would be so artificial.
Actors are very emotional people who get caught up in their own make-believe — I wouldn't trust an actor at all!’
Though Craig and Jo have a number of sexy scenes together in Home and Away, she says the advantage of her real-life relationship with someone in the same industry is that her partner fully understands that romantic clinches with an international heart-throb are just part of the job.
‘It's odd kissing someone you don't want to kiss but you're just creating something as an actor for your audience,’ she explains, admitting there are still times when she feels awkward.
‘You'll get talked about no matter what you do.
Once someone in the crew told my boyfriend that a love scene I'd done with Craig really sizzled — and I could have kicked her because it was just a scene, it wasn't real.’
Jo accepts that despite Craig's well-publicised engagement to his former co-star Rachel Friend, his fans will scrutinise every leading lady who crosses his path as a possible new love interest.
And while Jo's able to shrug off the speculation, she can understand why Craig, who's just as down-to-earth, might shun the limelight.
‘It's a bit scary that he's such a big star — I wouldn't want to be because you get so isolated from everybody, without much contact with normal people,’ she says.
‘Craig has to be remote because of all the stuff that flies around about him and Rachel.’
But even though he strives to protect his privacy, Craig's still larger than life at work, always joking, teasing and larking about.
‘He'll entertain a whole load of people watching while we're out on location but he can turn it on and off like a light — the cameras roll and he's totally into Grant Mitchell.
He's very professional.
Craig's greatest impact on Jo has been teasing her into taking work less seriously.
‘The less you respond to him the more he tries to get to you — I know I can be a bit intense so it's really good that he taught me to have fun at work and loosen up.’
Ironically, 25-year-old Josephine had made it as a TV star when Craig was a pipe layer dreaming of fame.
In her first job after leaving school, she played sparky teenager Jo Loveday in A Country Practice.
from then she became one of the best-known faces on Australian television but quit after four years to try new acting challenges.
‘I was keen to play a policewoman in Home and Away because it was so different and a very strong physical role — I even got the chance to throw people around a bit which was really good fun!’ she says.
Within her well-scrubbed prettiness, she's a natural choice for young parts.
But this doesn't win her enough of the meaty character roles she'd love to play.
And unlike most of the blondes popping up in Aussie soaps she doesn't fit  into the bimbo mould either, which rules out many of the high-profile parts.
‘I'd love to do a real bimbo role, but I don't look like one,’ she explains.
‘I'm stuck with a certain look and unfortunately it's not a very popular one.’
Jo's now concentrating on learning to adapt her appearance and style to increase her acting options.
‘I'd like to change because I think good actors do alter the way they look and it's something I plan to work on for my career in the future.’
Another career handicap is, Jo believes, her reluctance to join the Aussie Brat Pack social circuit where ambitious young actors make it their business to seize the limelight and worm their way into gossip and social columns.
‘People do get work that way but it's horrible to sit and watch at those parties where there's so much competition and everyone's running around in tight frocks getting drunk’, she says.
‘I always have chats to myself before I go to parties.
I say; ‘You should do this, do that, wear a tight frock, go and circulate — you can do it!'
But then I get there and I can't because it's just not me’, says Jo, grinning ruefully.
She clearly finds it hard to play the self-promotion game, but then Jo is the kind of girl who keeps her feet planted very firmly on the ground.
‘I lead a relatively quiet life, though I have a few friends in the industry because it's important to have a grape-vine.
But I don't like actors that much — I find them egotistical and difficult to cope with,’ she says.
Instead, Jo maintains close ties with three schoolfriends and a handful of others who willingly accept her as a person rather than a TV personality.
‘My friends are people that I trust and I don't have to put on airs with them — they know me and don't assume that I'm a terrific snob if I happen to be very quiet.’
Jo sees the theatre as the natural direction for her talent and has recently formed her own theatre company.
‘Ultimately, I don't know whether I'll make it with acting.
If not, I'll do production instead,’ she says.
Fame and fortune have come easily but Jo worries that the joblessness faced by most actors will inevitably come her way.
‘Not working is very disheartening — I don't want to get to the stage where I do bad parts but being forgotten would be awful.’
Jo's relationship with Chris gives her the security to pursue her career and in him she's found the man of her dreams.
‘I'd like kids’, she says.
‘I believe in marriage but I'm not in any hurry.
It's a lot different from living together and my parents are divorced, so I'm wary because you just don't know how it will turn out — that bit of paper makes such a difference.’
Meanwhile, Jo's happy to count her blessings and remains quietly confident that hard work, professionalism and talent will keep her riding high.
‘I know I've been lucky in my career but I really do believe that something will always turn up,’ she says.
Screen clinches: people assume that Craig and I are having an affair.
Real love: ‘A lot of stuff flies around about Craig and Rachel’, says Jo
NEWS…
HELP…
ADVICE…
woman HEALTH WATCH
BY JOHN ILLMAN
Cayenne pepper to stop cold feet, camomile for children's diarrhoea.
This book's full of ideas that herbalists used effectively long before aspirin and antibiotics, and which are becoming increasingly popular again.
A fascinating browse.
Rider, £8.99 
Touching, inspiring story of a mother's fight to accept — and then overcome — the deafness of her two daughters.
Not just one woman's battle but a plea to all of us to understand the problem.
Beautifully done.
Penguin, £4.95 
If you have any sort of problem — or if you just want to put some magic back into your sex life — you'll find the answer here.
It's illustrated, with explicit photographs, so don't leave it lying around.
Dorling Kindersley, £14 99.
New tests for cancer drugs
A common complaint among cancer patients is that the treatment can seem worse than the disease.
Some suffer side-effects from drugs only to find they don't work anyway.
But doctors are now trying to see which drugs do work before they're given to patients.
Up to 50 drugs are being tested on the cancer cells from the blood of leukaemia patients in Bath.
One patient was treated with a drug not normally used for the condition after it had successfully been tested on her blood.
Scientists hope to extend the technique to other types of cancer.
UPDATE
The British Digestive Foundation has compiled two very useful leaflets for holiday makers.
For free copies of Travellers' Diarrhoea and Avoiding Viral Hepatitis, send an sae to Travellers' Advice, BDF, 3, St Andrews Place, London.
About 2,000 abortions a year are carried out due to abnormalities found in unborn babies.
Now there's a handbook to help couples deal with making such difficult decisions.
Price £2.50 from Support After Termination for Abnormality (SATFA), 29/30 Soho Square, London.
When they don't SLEEP TIGHT
Doctors are warning parents not to treat snoring in children lightly.
It may be linked to recurrent tonsillitis and the broken nights can cause sleepiness during the day, aggressive behaviour and difficulty with homework.
If it continues over a long period it could even lead to stunted growth.
The answer could be to remove the tonsils or adenoids, according to a study of 60 children in Oxford.
The Lancet medical journal reports that children who were underweight before the operation had a growth spurt afterwards.
This may be because the tonsillitis affected their appetites, or because the disturbed nights affected the growth hormone that's produced as the child sleeps.
The trend now is to avoid taking children's tonsils out, but the Lancet report calls for a review of this policy in the cases of children who are severely affected by snoring.
You no longer take your vitamins in pill form these days — the latest trend is to rub them into your skin.
Hot on the heels of the Vitamin C ointment being tested in the USA comes the launch of a Vitamin D cream in Britain.
Available on prescription, Calcipotriol is advised for the skin condition psoriasis.
Known as the sunshine vitamin because it's absorbed from the sun, Vitamin D is a well-known treatment for psoriasis.
Quicker ops for gallstones
They've melted them, dissolved them, cracked them and fished them out — now they're going to attack them with an electric whisk.
It's the latest hi-tech development in the battle against gallstones, which affect thousands of people in this country each year.
Under a local anaesthetic, a whisk-like device will be passed down a fine tube into the gall bladder and rotated at 30,000 revolutions a minute, mincing the gallstones to a paste which is then sucked out through a tube.
Gallstones are lumps that develop in the gall bladder when the chemical balance of the bile is upset — and women are two or three times more likely to have them than men are.
YOU AND YOUR BODY
This Week: Down's Syndrome
DR ALAN MARYON DAVIS
About one baby in 650 is born with Down's syndrome — a congenital disorder that results in physical and learning difficulties varying from slight to severe.
But thanks to advances in long-term care and support for children and adults with Down's syndrome, their prospects for a happy and fulfilling future have never been brighter.
What causes it?
An extra chromosome in one of 23 pairs of chromosomes in every cell of the body.
One particular ‘pair’, No. 21, is a triple cell instead of a double.
Chromosomes are the DNA which carry the ‘blueprint’ for the whole human body and the extra chromosome causes all the typical features of Down's.
Why does it happen?
There are several possible reasons, but by far the most likely occurs when the mother's eggs are being formed.
Instead of each chromosome in that pair going into a separate egg, they both go into the same one, so that when the egg is fertilised, the triple chromosome is created.
The failure of a chromosome to split properly is much more common in women over the age of about 35 — the older the woman is the more likely she is to have a baby with Down's.
A less frequent cause is one in which part of the chromosome is attached to another.
This type runs in the family — the parents are unaffected but their children run the risk of inheriting the extra bit of chromosome.
This rarer type of Down's syndrome can happen whatever the mother's age.
Can it be predicted?
Most cases can.
Pregnant women over the age of about 35, those who have a close relative who has Down's, or those who've already given birth to a baby with Down's, are usually offered a test to see if their foetus is affected.
Two tests are widely available — amniocentesis, in which a small sample of the fluid surrounding the foetus is withdrawn and analysed, and chorionic villus sampling, in which a tiny piece of placenta is checked.
If the disordered chromosome is detected, the woman may be offered a termination of the pregnancy.
However, a number of babies are born with Down's whose mothers weren't in an obvious at-risk category.
Researchers are currently developing a blood test which can be offered to all pregnant women, regardless of the age or medical history.
What help can be given?
People with Down's syndrome can be greatly helped by having extra time spent with them.
Down's people are capable of much more than people realise.
And as anyone who's known a Down's child will testify, they're very loving and gentle.
Special teaching and therapy, plenty of encouragement and stimulation can work wonders.
People with Down's love to be involved with whatever's going on and have a great sense of fun and community.
For further information, help and advice write to Down's Syndrome Association, 155, Mitcham Road, Tooting, London SW17 9PG enclosing a large sae.
Mother-in-law jokes AREN'T funny
She tends to be seen as bossy and interfering — a favourite target of comedians and a figure of fun on seaside postcards.
And she's very upset by it, according to research by Dr Estelle Phillips of Birkbeck College, London.
She told the British Psychological Society that many mothers-in law were upset about their image — and they all hated mother-in-law jokes.
‘Some women were actually reduced to tears.
They felt they couldn't be natural, couldn't be themselves,’ said Dr Phillips.
Even if mothers-in-law made every effort to be scrupulously careful in what they said or did, they worried that the children still saw them simply as interfering busybodies.
SEXTALK: When you've been abused
BY SUE FROST
There's never been more public discussion of sexual abuse and the misery it causes, but there are still women who keep the bitter memories to themselves because they're ashamed to speak out about the torment they've been through.
Whether it's rape by a former boyfriend, abuse by an older authority figure, repeated groping by a brother or cousin, or assault by a casual acquaintance, the emotional scars go deep and a woman's life can be destroyed if she doesn't get help in coping.
Unless the man is a total stranger — and sometimes even then, too — a woman may blame herself for somehow having failed to prevent the attack.
Even women who were constantly abused as children by fathers, stepfathers, uncles or family ‘friends’ can grow up with the idea that they're somehow guilty themselves.
For them, it's often difficult, sometimes impossible, to have a relaxed, fulfilling relationship later in life.
Abuse is shameful, of course, but the blame lies squarely with the perpetrator and never with the victim.
The way to recovery lies in learning to place that blame where it belongs, to use the anger it arouses and to give yourself the praise you deserve just for surviving the abuse.
The Courage to Heal by Ellen Bass and Laura Davis (Cedar, £5.99) sets out a self-help programme for women who've been victims of incest.
If you need further help, incest survivor groups or rape crisis centres can offer confidential support.
Your library or Citizens Advice Bureau will know which groups are operating and may also have lists of private counsellors.
Your GP can refer you for therapy if appropriate and may also know of any specialist help available locally.
If you need more information, ring Rape Crisis on 071-837-1600 (do keep trying if you can't get through), and if you want to know how to set up a group in your area, write to Incest Survivors in Strength, c/o 34, Margate Rd.
Clapham SW2 5DT and please enclose a large sae and 50p.
A garden for the blind, designed by the National Deaf-Blind League and Kew Gardens, has now opened at Rainbow Court, Peterborough.
All the plants are labelled in Braille.
READER'S OPEN LETTER
Dear Mum,
You always taught me that I had so much to be thankful for, but there are still a lot of things that I wish had never happened.
It was so hard to see you suffer when I knew you'd always been the most gentle, caring person in my life.
I longed to help you that afternoon you collapsed.
I could see the fear and terror in your eyes when you gripped my arm and sobbed like a young child.
I was confused, not realising why you couldn't speak to me to tell me what was wrong.
I didn't cry until the ambulance had left.
Although I was 17 I didn't really understand what having a stroke could mean.
At first I didn't dare visit you in hospital.
I was too scared — you'd had two more strokes the night you were admitted.
Some of our friends and neighbours were very cruel to me.
They just stood on the doorstep and said: ‘Don't you want to see your mother?’
But I knew what I'd be confronted with at the hospital — my mother speechless and locked in a paralysed body.
They couldn't understand I didn't want to visit you until I was sure I had the strength not to cry.
I couldn't bear to let you see me so upset.
Although the neighbours made me feel like an evil, uncaring daughter, I knew in my heart that you'd understand because you always did — I loved you and that was all you needed to know.
The hospital was across the road from my college.
After three days I skipped a lesson and came to see you.
We both broke down and this time it was I who held desperately on to you.
From then on the hospital became my second home.
I spent most evenings and every free period from college by your bedside.
I watched you progress slowly to being able to point out words letter by letter on an alphabet board so we could communicate; I heard you gradually learn to speak again; and I saw you take your first steps, shaky as they were.
I was so proud of you — as proud as though you'd been a child of mine trying to walk.
And I was thrilled as you began to learn to feed yourself again.
The doctors told me they had high hopes that in a year you'd have made a full recovery.
But then they allowed you to come home.
dad had spent weeks adapting our house to take your wheelchair.
Suddenly, things started to go wrong in my mind.
I'd accepted your disabilities while you were in hospital because to me that was the place where people were supposed to be ill.
But because you were home I felt that you should be completely better and everything should be back the way it was.
Suddenly our roles seemed to have been reversed.
I felt as if I was your mother and you were my child.
You could no longer do the things I'd taken for granted, like making a cup of tea and sitting down for a gossip when I came in from college.
conversations were tedious and tiring because your speech was still very slurred.
I started to feel I couldn't stay in the same room as you.
I was so scared you'd notice I was avoiding you — that was the last thing I wanted — but I simply couldn't bear to watch you struggle.
I used to lock myself in my bedroom sobbing and praying that my real mother would come back to comfort me.
I felt tremendous guilt the whole time, I felt so ashamed of these terrible thoughts locked inside me.
I was too scared to talk to anyone about them, because I didn't think they'd understand, and I never wanted you to find out as I though it would destroy you.
I suppressed so many feelings that I ended up having an emotional breakdown.
I confided in a teacher and she referred me to a counsellor.
He was terrific and made me realise the only reason I had these thoughts was because of the enormous love I have for you.
He wanted me to talk to you about it but I couldn't.
How could I have possibly explained without hurting you that I couldn't bear to be near you, because you no longer felt like my mother?
My counsellor pushed me, though, to talk to someone, so I tried to tell my boyfriend.
But he seemed to think because you'd had your stroke almost a year ago that I should be over it; his exact words were that I was looking for sympathy.
He set me back weeks.
I refused to see my counsellor for almost a month.
He sent me a letter saying how concerned he was and I finally found the courage to go back, but it was quite a while before I'd open up to him again.
You knew nothing of my breakdown, although you were very concerned about my tremendous physical tiredness; and my college attendance dropped considerably.
I'm sorry you had to worry about me because I wouldn't let you know what was going on in my mind, but I hope now you'll realise why I kept silent for so long.
It's taken us both a very long time but I feel stronger and emotionally much more stable now.
And you've struggled enormously to achieve the things you have, although you are still suffering.
What I want to say now is that you are my mum and you feel like my mum again.
I love you enormously and I pray you can understand.
I'm so proud of you, Mum.
Your daughter.
ALL YOU NEED TO KNOW ABOUT TANNING
Which suncream is the right one for you?
How can you stop the damage if you do burn?
What about going topless?
And how should you protect the kids?
Caroline Hogg tells you how to get a safe — and healthy — tan this summer.
WHY SUNBATHE?
We've all heard the warnings — it dries out your skin, you'll get terrible wrinkles, it could give you cancer.
But every year we still head for the beaches and strip off, hoping to turn that white skin a lovely golden bronze.
So, why do we do it?
Well, it's mostly vanity.
We tell people who've got a tan how healthy they look but, while there's no doubt the sun's rays give you a small boost of vitamin D, you get that from day-to-day exposure anyway.
So there's really no need for you to boost it by spending hours on the sun-lounger.
If sun-bathing makes you feel good, it's got more to do with the fact that you feel you look good, and that you've allowed yourself to unwind.
And who are we to knock that?
As long as you're careful, there's no reason why a laze in the sun shouldn't be just what the doctor ordered!
DOES BLACK SKIN BURN?
The pigment in black skin acts as a natural protection against UVB rays — and how effective the protection is depends on the darkness of your skin.
If it's very dark it can have a natural protection equivalent to a SPF 15 suncream.
But people who have lighter brown skin will need an SPF 2 or 4 cream.
If you don't want to get any darker, use a total sunblock.
Dark skin has no natural protection against UVA rays, however, so they'll still age your skin.
HOW DO I KNOW I'M BURNING?
If your skin tingles or feels hot and itchy, the chances are you've overdone it.
Check the skin around your swimsuit — if there's a red line, you've definitely had enough sun.
But as long as you spot the early signs you should be okay — just keep the red bits covered for a few days.
Take the heat out by having cool showers (use a water-resistant suncream if you're cooling down in the pool) and use an aftersun lotion to ease the tingling and to stop your skin drying out.
Try Boots Soltan Cooling After-Sun Gel with aloe vera, £3.06 for 100 ml.
But let the burning be a warning.
You may need a stronger suncream with a higher sun protection factor.
HOW DANGEROUS IS IT REALLY?
Unfortunately, it can be extremely dangerous — unless you're careful.
The links between sunbathing and skin cancer are too strong to ignore.
And the worst thing you can do is give your skin a short period of intensive exposure to sun — exactly what we go in for when we jet off on our summer holidays.
About 3,500 cases of malignant melanoma (cancerous moles) are diagnosed in Britain every year — and about 800 people die of the disease.
There's an 80 per cent increase in 10 years, with younger people — especially women in their twenties and thirties — particularly at risk.
Women are twice as likely as men to get skin cancer and experts put that down to the fact that we're more fond of sunbathing.
WHAT SUNCREAM SHOULD I CHOOSE?
You can work out exactly how long each cream will allow you to stay in the sun.
Just think of how long you can stay without any protection before you'd burn (for example half an hour), multiply that by the SPF rating on the cream (for example SPF 4) and that gives your sunbathing time (in this case, two hours).
But the basic rule is play safe.
And if your skin is at all fair or sensitive, you shouldn't start off with anything less than an SPF 15 suncream. remember there are two kinds of rays from the sun — UVB rays which work on the skin surface and can burn, and UVA, the deeply penetrating rays which damage and age the skin.
So be sure to check that your suncream offers protection against both kinds.
HOW LONG DOES IT LAST?
If you bought suncream last year and it's been stored unopened in a cool place, it's fine to use now.
But once a cream or lotion has been opened and there's air in the container, it'll start to lose it's effect after about six months.
So make a point of throwing away all those half-empty bottles — they probably won't protect your skin properly any more.
I WANT TO GO TOPLESS?
It goes without saying — be very careful.
Always use a total sunblock on your nipples and a high protection cream on your breasts.
The same applies to the tops of your legs, especially if you're wearing a high-cut swimsuit.
Start off with the highest SPF cream and only change gradually to a lower rating.
People whose hair is thinning can also have problems with the scalp.
use a high protection suncream on your head — try Vichy MultiReflective Total Sun Screen, factor 20, £7.66 for 40ml — and get a sun hat, too!
CAN I MAKE MYSELF TAN MORE QUICKLY?
Not really.
Tan accelerators claim to speed up production of melanin — the pigment produced by your skin in the sun — but there's no evidence that they work.
There are also herbal tablets containing substances called psoralens which make the skin more sensitive to UVA rays.
You will tan more quickly but the tablets may increase the damage UVA rays do to your skin.
Also, with some tablets you'll turn a yellowy-orange. generally, doctors don't recommend them.
DO MY KIDS NEED SPECIAL PROTECTION?
Yes.
A child's skin is much thinner than an adult's and so more prone to burning.
Also, by failing to protect them from the sun, you may cause problems for your kids later.
Experts say that children who get sunburnt are more likely to develop skin cancer as adults.
So do make sure they're smothered in a high protection cream.
Worth trying: Hawaiian Tropic Baby Faces and Tender Places SP 15, £6.18 for 125ml.
And don't think kids are safe in the shade — more than three quarters of the sun's rays filter through the clouds.
Babies under six months have very little natural protection and should be kept out of the sun altogether.
WHAT ABOUT SUNBEDS?
They're a good way of starting off your suntan before you go on holiday.
But only about one person in three gets a good suntan from a sunbed alone.
And, although the skin thickens in the sun to protect itself, it doesn't on a sunbed.
So when you first go down to the beach, no matter how brown your skin, you should treat it as if you weren't suntanned.
Like the sun's rays, sunbeds accelerate ageing and increase the chances of getting skin cancer.
HOW CAN I MAKE A TAN LAST LONGER?
There's nothing quite so depressing as watching your tan fade along with the memories of that wonderful holiday.
Unfortunately, it will happen inevitably as your skin cells replace themselves.
You can keep that golden colour a bit longer by giving your skin a good clean before you start sunbathing.
Use a body scrub or a loofah to get rid of all those dead skin cells and once you start to go brown, keep feeding your skin with a rich moisturiser to try to stop the skin flaking.
If your tan starts fading, you can mix a fake tan cream with your body lotion.
But make sure you apply it evenly or you'll end up looking horribly streaky!
HOW TO FACE UP TO FEAR!
by Claire Rayner
Obsessed with the thought of getting cancer?
Concerned that you could lose your job, your partner, your looks?
Fear is an ugly four-letter word yet, at times it takes hold of all of us.
Can it be controlled/ Here's what Claire thinks
Fear has to be the worst feeling of all.
And not just in your mind — the physical manifestations can also be truly horrible.
Your heart beats so much you think you will choke, you feel sick, your innards churn, you shake, you sweat, you're pale and weak.
We've all experienced it and most of us would move heaven and earth to avoid it.
Indeed, many things we do are attempts to shield ourselves from the effects of fear.
Superstitious attachment good luck symbols and mascots are attempts to keep fear at bay.
And at a higher level, religion, too, has much basis in the fear of the unknown and is in part an effort to make the fearful understandable and therefore more easily manageable.
Fear isn't all bad, of course.
It's a very necessary protective mechanism.
The child who's been burned learns to fear fire and so to treat it with respect.
And for all of us, the short, sharp shock of illogical fear (the brakes temporarily fail on your car, or someone comes at you with a knife) is helpful.
It makes your body pour out masses of adrenalin to give you the strength to draw on your reserves to protect yourself and fight off the danger.
And although it takes a while to recover from such fear, for most of us at least, it does eventually subside.
But how do you cope if the fear doesn't go away?
If it sits at the bottom of your belly, glowering like a smouldering fire, threatening to explode suddenly at any time and paralyse you?
It's like that for many people, a large number of whom are women.
And they all desperately need a strategy for coping.
WHERE DOES IT COME FROM?
In essence the root of all fear is the threat of loss.
It can be a fairly minor loss, like social status or face — some people suffer agonies for fear that someone will laugh at them or sneer at their taste or intelligence, for example.
Or it can be fear of a major loss, like health or even life itself, either for yourself or those you love.
And in between, there are a great many potential losses — love, possessions, job, income, your home or your looks.
These can matter hugely and often to disproportionate degrees.
There are men who lead lives of constant distress for fear of losing their hair, and women who hug terror to themselves because they're afraid of losing their youth.
All of these could be called private fears — they arise out of your own life pattern and needs.
But there are also public fears which threaten to have a direct effect on your private life and which also arouse your feelings of human togetherness and compassion.
Fear of war and fear of pollution come into this category.
Then there are the intermediate fears which are in a sense both public and private.
Fear of economic recession is an example — if jobs are collapsing and money is losing its value, we all feel threatened.
Even if we do have jobs and incomes we all know we could be touched personally by public events at any moment.
And finally there are abstract fears which afflict a great many — the ‘might be’ fears.
Being afraid of going to hell after you die is one.
There are people who suffer from this, as do those who, although perfectly healthy, are afraid of getting ill at some time in the future.
Also into this category comes fear of death which, although based on genuine reason because obviously it will eventually happen to us all, is quite abstract in healthy people.
yet some spend their entire lives haunted by thoughts of death.
HOW CAN YOU CONTROL IT?
The only way to control fear is to confront it.
You need to know your enemy before you can make it your friend and yes, fear can become your friend.
First you have to think logically about your fears.
Write them down — it really helps to organise thought.
List your private fears to start with, then your public ones, if any.
Then separate each list into two: fears you can act to change and those you can't.
For example, you can't end a war.
But you can talk to your boss about the fear that you might lose your job.
You can't stop a lot of the environmental damage being done but you can make efforts to reduce it by acting ‘green’.
So make definite plans to deal with the fears that you can control.
It may mean facing that boss.
It may mean being courageous and seeing your doctor about that lump, this discharge, that very private symptom — but do it!
Dealing with fear is the only way to control it.
Once you manage to do that the relief is enormous.
The fear dwindles, the physical symptoms diminish and you're left with a great sense of self-esteem that prevents the fear from coming back.
But what of those fears you can't deal with directly?
The fear of losing your children as they grow up, that the man you love is going to walk away or stop loving you?
These are just as important and often the most painful types of fear.
WHAT YOU NEED TO DO
In this case, don't look at your fears but at the source of the fear — the children, the man.
If there's absolutely no reason to fear for your children's love, and equally no reason to doubt your man's attachment to you, then the problem has to be  rooted in you as a person.
You need to find the courage to face the fact that your fears are unreal.
It may be easier to be fearful of all sorts of things than to be honest and say to yourself: ‘The way I feel is entirely my own problem.
I can't keep pretending it's someone else's fault.
It's my own responsibility.’
There can be no doubt that for many women fear of loss is built into us by the way we've been reared.
As children we may have been made to feel inadequate, silly or useless because we were never praised.
In adult life, some may be submissive and ingratiating, expecting to be in the wrong, expecting to be discarded and unwanted.
And surprise, surprise, they get just that sort of treatment.
The only way to stop it happening, and therefore to stop the fear of it, is to develop self-esteem.
Learn to be assertive, stand up for yourself and your own value.
That way people will see you as even more lovable.
That is what I mean by making fear your friend.
If your subject to these irrational fears, then use that fear as a trigger to change your attitude.
It could revolutionise your life.
Of course, it is always possible there are just causes for fear of losing someone's love.
Maybe your man is about to leave you and finds you less lovable than you'd like.
Maybe your children are growing away from you (as all children must do, if they are to grow up).
In this case you still need to deal with yourself.
You can't change them — you can't force a man to love you when he doesn't, can't hold children's progress to adulthood back.
Better to make yourself more self-reliant, more able to cope if the worst happens.
Then at least the fear won't be there if it does.
LEARNING TO ACCEPT IT
Not all your fears can be dealt with by changing your approach to life, of course.
Some will never go away.
Take the fear of economic recession — will you or your partner lose your job?
Run out of money?
Get into debt?
Again, you have to face the fear head-on.
Tell yourself to prepare for the worst.
Don't just hope it'll go away.
It won't.
So assess your finances, look at where you can make cuts in expenses.
You may not need to yet but it'll be easier to plan now than when you're under pressure.
Look at where you can make money.
Do you have skills you can exploit from home?
Can you cash in on unwanted space or possessions?
There was a time when, with babies and a large mortgage we had to do it.
And instead of finding it miserable and increasing the fear, we found that taking vigorous action to make the best of what we had made us feel proud.
We were in control, you see, not the fear.
And because we'd found self-esteem, we had the courage to go and sell ourselves successfully to employers.
When it comes to fear of war or local problems, like the fear of being mugged, you don't have to sit back spinelessly and let it happen.
Doing that makes you helpless and inert, and hurls you into a sick, cold terror.
You can drown in that sort of fear.
Instead, seek others who share your fears and work with them.
The simplest protest — organising a meeting or launching a petition — may help.
Much legislation to control pollution has been triggered by ordinary people but even if that doesn't happen, acting on your fears can make you feel less helpless.
Fear of illness, death or pain can be handled in much the same way.
Don't let fear overcome you — fight back.
Many cancer patients have done just that and felt a lot better for it — and remember quality of life is as important as quantity.
Bereaved people have done it too, perhaps starting a fund to commemorate a person they loved in order to help other sufferers of the same condition.
It doesn't restore your loss but it does remove your fear.
I know from experience that fear can be handled if you refuse to let it take over.
Even if the worst happens and you lose your job, your lover, your hair, your hope of a long life, you're only defeated if you let yourself be.
You can fight back.
Try it.
You've nothing to lose but feeling sick, shaky and weak — the worst feeling there is.
Fear.
If you let it, fear will hurl you into a sick, cold terror.
You can drown in that sort of fear
ACTIONWOMAN CONSUMER NEWS YOUR RIGHTS
LATEST NEWS
WHEN CHEAPEST IS BEST
If the summer weather has brought out your sporty side, don't feel you've got to rush out and invest in a bank-breakingly expensive pair of trainers.
Although a well-designed sports shoe should absorb the impact on the 28 bones in each foot, claims about miracle technology, making your feet feel fantastic while helping you to attain Olympic standards, should be taken with a pinch of salt.
Unless you're a real fanatic, you won't need shoes specifically designed for the action.
A cross-trainer (multi-purpose) shoe will be your best buy, according to a survey carried out by the Consumers' Association, and as long as your feet are well supported and cushioned you shouldn't pay more than around £40.
JOIN THE FREE BANKING CLUB
Most big banks make the same charges for club accounts as for ordinary personal ones — which means that you may have to pay up to 70 pence for every cheque you write.
But now Girobank are offering free banking to clubs and voluntary organisations as long as the account stays in credit.
For further details just ask at your local post office.
Sorry, we can't answer your general consumer queries either by letter or phone calls to the WOMAN office.
JUST THE MEDICINE!
WHAT YOUR PRESCRIPTION MEANS!
Prescriptions are a series of meaningless squiggles to most people, but Vivienne Parry explains why they're so important and how pharmacists can help with your general health problems
Darren Young, 11, has been prescribed a course of the antibiotic amoxycillin for an ear infection.
Here's his prescription and what it means.
1.
Age is a vital piece of information for the pharmacist because different strengths and dosages of medicine may be required for the very young or the elderly.
Also, for these age groups a liquid form of antibiotics (if that's what's prescribed) is more appropriate.
2.
Specifying the number of days treatment allows the pharmacist to work out the exact number of tablets required, rather than the doctor having to do it.
Darren's prescription states one capsule three times a day, so 15 capsules are needed.
3.
Because the doctor hasn't struck out the letters NP (Latin for ‘mark the name on the prescription’), the name of the drug will appear on the label.
But if you're taking several medicines, you might forget which medicine is for what.
If, for instance, a doctor prescribes sleeping tablets for occasional use only, he might strike out the NP and put ‘sleeping tablets’ in the NP box.
The label on your pills would then just read ‘Sleeping Tablets’.
4.
Here, the doctor has specified the generic or chemical name of the medicine — it's like asking for own brand baked beans rather than Heinz in a supermarket.
Hospital pharmacists can substitute a non-brand equivalent to save money, but ordinary pharmacies have to give exactly what the doctor orders, even though there may be a cheaper alternative.
You might wonder how pharmacists decipher a doctor's scrawl but don't worry that you'll get the wrong drugs — a pharmacist will never dispense a prescription unless he or she is sure it is correct and will often ring the doctor.
Sometimes, the pharmacist may need to ask why you've been prescribed the medicines just to clear up any confusion.
5.
The doctor has written ‘three times a day’ but many doctors use abbreviations of Latin words to specify dosage.
The most common ones are: a c (ante cibum) before food; p c (post cibum) after food; b d (bis die) twice daily; o d (omni die) once daily; o m (omni mane) every morning; o n (omni nocte) every night; t d s (ter die sumendus) three times a day.
Of course, they'll be written in everyday English on the pills, medicine or ointment the pharmacist gives you.
6.
Once the prescription is dispensed, it's sent to one of several pricing offices, which use this column to mark down how much the medicines or other products (eg hosiery, dressings etc) cost.
The pharmacist is then paid.
As they know the prescribing GP or practice, the pricing office can also check how much individual GPs or practices are spending — important now so there's so much attention on doctor's spending.
7.
The left-hand column is for the pharmacist's notes relating to pricing.
If the GP has asked for a drug to be dispensed in a special calendar pack, or has prescribed a small quantity of an unusual medicine that is only available from wholesalers in large quantities, the pharmacist will want to make sure that the pricing authority is aware of the extra costs.
8.
This is the space left for the pharmacy's stamp, so that the pricing authority knows who to pay and who to address any queries to.
AND ON THE BACK
This is where you sign if you — or the person you're getting the prescription for — can claim exemption from prescription charges.
Sign it before you give it to the pharmacist.
If you aren't exempt and need medication regularly, it might be worth buying a pre-payment certificate.
Instead of paying the normal £3.40 for each prescription, you can pay £17.60 for a four month ticket, or £48.50 for a yearly one.
Get form FP95 from the Post Office.
WHAT ELSE CAN THE PHARMACIST DO?
Pharmacists are not only willing to talk to you about medicines but about many other aspects of health as well— and in private if you prefer other customers not to hear.
Pharmacists are trained scientists who've taken an intensive four-year course before they qualify.
They have a very detailed knowledge of medicines and how they work.
If you've got a cold or sore throat, they can advise which over-the-counter medicines to take.
They can also advise about the side effects of medicines and how to minimise them — for instance, by taking certain tablets after food.
They can tell you which medicines not to take if you suffer from a condition like asthma and what to do if you miss a dose of medicine.
They can also tell you whether it's safe to take two types of medicine at the same time.
And if they think your problem needs sorting out by a doctor, they will recommend that you go to see one.
10 WAYS THEY CAN HELP
Leaflets.
If you've been prescribed suppositories and you're not sure how to use them or are too embarrassed to ask, the pharmacist will have explanatory leaflets.
They also have literature on the correct use of things such as eye drops and inhalers.
Emergency prescriptions.
Pharmacists can sometimes dispense emergency supplies of prescription-only medicines.
They'll want to speak to you and ask why you need an emergency supply and check that you have had a previous prescription for the same medicine.
Patient medication records.
Some pharmacies now keep these.
They can be very useful, especially for those with chronic conditions, and for the elderly where a mix of medicines may result in undesirable side-effects.
Special bottles and braille labels.
If you're arthritic and can't manage those child-proof tops, your pharmacist will give you an ordinary bottle to use.
Braille medicine labels can also be supplied on request.
When you're pregnant.
The pharmacist will advise which medicines are safe to take and how to cope with problems like heartburn.
Tests for blood pressure and cholesterol levels.
Some chemists now offer testing for both of these.
Advice on giving up smoking.
Your chemist will help you with leaflets and advice on various anti-smoking preparations.
 Pregnancy testing.
Your pharmacist will advise you how to interpret unclear results from both pregnancy and ovulation detection kits.
Incontinence aids.
Most pharmacists have a catalogue of special incontinence aids.
Minor first aid.
The chemist can advise you what to do if you have a minor burn, scald or graze and how to treat things like nits and head lice.
WHY I WANT TO WARN EVERY MUM-TO-BE by Leslie Ash
When actress Leslie Ash was pregnant she was told she was suffering from toxoplasmosis and that her baby was in danger.
It's a common disease, so why do we know so little about it?
By Suzy King Picture by David Magnus
Life was at its rosiest for Leslie Ash in the summer of 1988.
She was a successful and sought-after actress, happily married to professional footballer Lee Chapman and she was expecting their first, much-wanted child.
Lee's transfer to a French soccer club was the icing on the cake.
Leslie, best known for her starring role in the TV series C.A.T.S Eyes, was happy to put her career on hold and move with him.
Early check-ups in England had shown a normal pregnancy and she was looking forward to being able to indulge in her favourite French foods.
Everything seemed set for a happy and relaxed nine months.
But almost as soon as she had crossed the Channel, Leslie began to feel ill and off-colour.
‘I was about four months pregnant when I started to feel quite poorly,’ says Leslie.
‘I was very lethargic but I just put it down to the first months of my pregnancy.
Then, although I'd never had any morning sickness, I began to feel pain after I'd eaten.’
The results of one of her routine antenatal tests she'd had on arrival in France showed she had raised levels of antibodies in her blood.
Leslie's body was fighting off an infection known as toxoplasmosis.
Leslie and Lee were told that unless the infection was tackled and the level of toxoplasmosis dropped swiftly, there was a danger their baby would be born dead or damaged, either physically or mentally.
Leslie was devastated by the news, having tried for a long time to have a baby.
What made it worse was that the infection was traced to some undercooked meat she'd eaten in England.
Despite her efforts to have a healthy child, she had unwittingly endangered her baby.
‘There I was being really good,’ Leslie says, ‘I'd given up smoking seven months before I became pregnant to get it all out of my body.
So it was awful to find I'd done something wrong.
The French doctors started me on a long-term course of antibiotics that are commonly used in France to fight toxoplasmosis and my blood tests were stepped up to once a week.’
But the medicine Leslie took made her feel very drowsy and tired.
‘All I could do was lie on the bed’, she says, ‘it made me feel very ill and because of that I felt slightly depressed.
I also had dreadful nightmares — of awful things like giving birth to a cat because they can be carriers of toxoplasmosis.
I got more and more upset and worried.’
But slowly another emotion began to take over — anger.
‘I was annoyed that I'd never been told about this illness in England’, says Leslie.
‘By the time it was picked up in France I'd had toxoplasmosis in my bloodstream for two months.
I'd never heard of it before, yet it's so easy to catch — I got it purely from food.
And it's something that can be avoided so easily.
It's absolutely ludicrous that it's not advertised and that no one does anything about it.
What's amazing is that in France they do all these blood tests throughout your pregnancy.
I'm sure they must be capable of doing it here.
After all, if you're going to have one blood test, you might as well have them all.’
Leslie says.
sighing.
‘I know that the National Health hasn't  got the money it would like but when it's so important, I think it should be done.
And it doesn't cost anything to give a woman advice.
There must be hundreds of women walking about who don't even know they've got toxoplasmosis.’
As it turned out, Leslie's baby was destined to be born in England after all, for Lee was transferred back after three months.
But those three months are something Leslie will always be thankful for as it was in France that they diagnosed the toxoplasmosis so early.
She arrived back in England seven months' pregnant, her blood levels of toxoplasmosis greatly reduced.
Joseph Chapman was born on January 30 1989 — a perfect, healthy baby boy.
It was the end of a nightmare.
‘We'd had six months of worrying whether everything was going to be all right— what Joseph would look like, or whether he would be all there,’ says Leslie, her relief still evident.
But Fiona Meyer was not so fortunate — because she was living in England.
A qualified doctor working as a senior houseman in a hospital pathology department she discovered she was pregnant in November 1988.
This was a precious baby: four months earlier Fiona, then 31, had miscarried at 13 weeks and was determined that this time things would go well.
‘I was completely single-minded about this baby,’ she says.
‘I took extra care about everything and, after the last time, we decided to wait until three months before telling everyone.’
Just after Christmas, Fiona and her husband James broke the news.
Her family was delighted although Fiona remembers her sister-in-law in America asking anxiously about the kitten James had given her for Christmas.
‘She was very negative about the cat,’ says Fiona.
‘Her first thought was: ‘You've got a cat — haven't you heard of toxoplasmosis?
Cats can carry it.’’
‘I knew toxoplasmosis existed, but thought it was very rare and so did my doctor friends.
When I asked them about it they all said: ‘Oh, you've had cats all your life, you won't get it’’.
Nonetheless, the niggling doubt had been implanted and, at 13 weeks pregnant, to allay her own and her family's fears, Fiona decided she would have her blood tested by her colleagues.
The test came back positive and Fiona's doctor referred her to the top London expert in toxoplasma.
‘It was discovered I'd had an acute infection for two or three months,’ she says, ‘which meant I was ill when I became pregnant in November — the worst possible time for a developing foetus.
That let the Christmas kitten off the hook — and, thinking back, I remember having swollen glands and feeling a bit run down after eating some very rare lamb at a lunch party we went to around the time I conceived.’
The options were clear — and bleak.
Fiona could continue with her pregnancy, taking strong drugs, the side-effects of which were not yet really known, or she could have a termination.
‘I spent hours in the library looking up all the journals I could find — and the thing that kept coming back to me was that even if you had the treatment, there was a chance that the effects of toxoplasmosis on the child might not come out until years later.
How could I live with a child who might be born alright but who may have gone blind, or worse, later on?
Finally, Fiona asked the specialist for help.
‘I said I didn't know what to do,’ she says.
‘I explained that I was 31, I'd had a history of infertility, and that this was my second pregnancy and I really wanted a child.
After some thought he said; ‘Well, I have a daughter your age, and if she were to come to me with the same question I would advise her to terminate.’
So I did.’
Shortly afterwards, Fiona and James moved to Belgium, where they decided to try for another baby.
Fiona's first appointment with her obstetrician was an eye-opener.
‘I'd been advised to wait nine to 12 months so that my blood levels could go down,’ she says.
‘Then the doctor said: ‘You Britons know nothing about toxoplasmosis.
You've had the infection.
What are you waiting for?’
‘The information there is brilliant — everyone knows about toxoplasmosis, so as soon as you realise you are pregnant, you know you should be careful.
And you're tested throughout your pregnancy.
Why can't we do that?
I know the test is fairly expensive but it's certainly not more than the cost of caring for babies born with the defects.’
Fiona and James' first son, Theo, was born on April 7 1990 in Belgium.
‘I now have a wonderful little boy who is absolutely perfection,’ she says, ‘I know I might have had another wonderful child but I would have been riddled with doubt for most of its life.’
What's this Disease?
Toxoplasmosis infection is caused by a parasite and it affects 50 per cent of us by the time we're 70.
Once we've had the disease — and there aren't always symptoms — we're immune for life.
It isn't dangerous to a healthy adult or child, but it can be harmful to a foetus.
Babies infected in the womb early in pregnancy may be miscarried or stillborn.
Those born with it can develop mental retardation, epilepsy and blindness — sometimes years later.
In Britain there's no routine test for toxoplasmosis in pregnancy, in spite of evidence that two in 1,000 women here are affected.
Experts are divided over whether routine screening is a good idea — but they'd like to see women are tested before they conceive.
The Toxoplasmosis Trust advises pregnant women who aren't immune to: avoid raw or undercooked meats and unpasteurised cheeses, not to empty cat litter trays, to wash fruit and vegetables thoroughly and to wear gloves for gardening.
For fact sheets and advice on toxoplasmosis, write to the Toxoplasmosis Trust, Garden Studios, 11–15 Betterton Street, London WC2H 9BP 
Happy ending: Now Fiona has a son who is ‘absolute perfection’
PICK UP A PHONE…
BE A WINNER!
WIN!
A BRAND NEW CAR
IT'S WORTH MORE THAN £9,000
It's stylish, sporty and safe — a truly exceptional car is how Rover describe it.
And this brand new Metro Gta could be yours in our latest fabulous competition.
The engine, which runs on unleaded petrol, is the all-British, award-winning 1.4k series and the car has a special sports suspension for a smooth, easy ride.
Inside, it has been designed to combine comfort with an elegant, sporty appearance.
And it comes complete with a stereo radio/cassette player to give you years of happy motoring…
Fancy taking to the road in style?
Then why not enter our fantastic competition now…
EASY TO ENTER…
GUESS THE YEAR!
All you have to do is guess what year we're talking about from the clues we give you.
Just phone any one of the five lines shown on the panel below to hear your clues — to make it even easier you'll be given a choice of three years from which to pick your answer.
Then leave your name, address and phone number.
You can phone as many times — and as many different lines — as you like.
We'll put the names of everyone who answers correctly into a bag from which our winner's name will be drawn.
Lines are open from June 10 until midnight June 21 1991.
Each telephone call lasts approximately three minutes.
Good Luck!
Rules: Normal Woman rules apply.
Employees (and their families) of IPC Magazines, printers of Woman IPC Telemarketing, Rover and their agents are not eligible to enter.
The competition is open to all readers over the age of 18 in Great Britain, Northern Ireland, Jersey, Guernsey and the Isle of Man, but not Eire.
Sorry, but this is one competition where we cannot accept entries by post.
WHY I WON'T SPEAK UP FOR FAT PEOPLE!
We first saw actress Julie T Wallace in The Life And Loves Of A She-Devil.
Now she's back  playing another big, frumpy housewife in Selling Hitler, which starts this week.
By Val Sampson.
Main picture by Richard McLaren
Julie T Wallace has never been a shrinking violet — which is probably just as well, as it would be almost impossible for her to fade quietly into the background.
She cheerfully describes herself as a ‘big girlie’.
And at almost six foot tall, with a mane of thick hair and a fascinating face which can be transformed from seriously plain to startlingly attractive — witnessed by her TV debut success in The Life And Love Of A She-Devil — she has an extra-large helping of outspoken opinions to match.
For a start, she has no desire to plead the case of Britain's size 16s and over.
‘I absolutely refuse to become The Fat Person's Spokeswoman,’ she declares.
Of course she feels strongly that as 65 per cent of women in Britain are actually larger than size 14, clothing manufacturers ignore them at their peril.
And yes, it infuriates her when magazines run ‘Big Is Beautiful’ features as if they're indulging a minority of readers.
‘Why can't they get models who are size 14 and a bit podgy?’ she enquires.
‘After all, we're not all five foot eight and size 12.’
But she has no inclination to pick up a banner and protest about it.
‘I've turned down modelling offers because I don't want to be labelled.
If anything, I'd like to show people what they can do by themselves.
I tend to buy nice material and see what will come out of it.
I'm happy if I can go up several flights of stairs and not get out of breath.
If you feel healthy you are healthy.
I see it as a personal thing.’
So, instead of toying with a carrot and lettuce leaf, 30-year-old Julie tucks into a delicious, three-course meal at a smart London hotel, declining chocolates and coffee only because she's given up caffeine.
‘I really did get a buzz from it and that was bad.
Now I feel better.’
She certainly looks well.
Dressed in intriguingly pinkish-blue Levi 501s (‘I put them in the washing machine with a pink sweatshirt’) and a lemon coloured blouse, her hair's pulled back into a simple ponytail.
She wears no make-up at all and has wonderful clear skin with an attractive sprinkling of freckles.
In her latest small-screen role in Thames TV's Selling Hitler, Julie plays Edith, another frumpy housewife.
It's the story of the fraudulent Hitler's Diaries and is due to be screened in five episodes starting on June 11.
She plays opposite Alexei Sayle who plays the conman.
‘Edith's very fond of food and she's a bit wacky.
She's a large, slouchy lady with a big pot belly which she doesn't try to hide.
In fact, she's just like one of my relations — I can't tell you who because she'd kill me.
Edith's in love with her husband but it's a boring love, nothing exciting ever happens and she probably goes to bingo.
I wore a polyester-type wig like a naff perm and I looked quite hideous.’
Five years on from The Life And Loves Of A She-Devil, Julie is still recognised as Ruth, the dowdy, downtrodden housewife who adopted a wide range of disguises and underwent major plastic surgery to wreak revenge on her unfaithful husband, played by Dennis Waterman.
Julie lost no sleep when Roseanne Barr and Meryl Streep replaced her and Patricia Hodge as the leading ladies in the diluted Hollywood film version of the Fay Weldon novel.
‘I'd only have done it for the money,’ she admits, ‘It was a bit of a mish-mash.’
Making the TV series taught her to value herself.
She's finally abandoned any fantasies that if she were five foot two and blonde, life as an actress might be easier.
‘As an actress all I have is my body and my voice.
Luckily, I've come to terms with my height and now it's to my advantage,’ she says.
‘When I was at drama school, they paired me off with a lovely actor who was only five foot eight and we had to play husband and wife!
I'll never forget the embarrassment.
Then I thought: ‘Stuff it — why not?’
And, after all, a lot of small males are attracted to big females.’
Not many people are likely to learn if Julie's partner is bigger or smaller than she is.
She guards her relationship zealously and only accidentally reveals the sex of her baby when she says; ‘I call her heffalump.
There, you can say that I'm happy in a relationship with a man and I have a little girl.’
Julie's mother, actress Julia Wallace (Julie adopted the T for Thereze, her middle name, to avoid any confusion) provides invaluable support for the baby and also helps make most of Julie's clothes.
‘I can't even thread a needle,’ says Julie, sighing.
‘My mum's brilliant and I go to a lovely young designer called Richard Kinlock, who's superb.
I don't want to be a fashion victim.
Richard made the gown I wore to meet Charles and Di at the premiere for The Living Daylights and I felt like a million dollars in it.’
In that film, Julie played the Bond villainess Rosika, which offered her the dubious acting delight of smothering a man between her 49-inch breasts.
‘I turned up for the interview, amid all these Bond beauties, in my tight black jersey dress  on a really hot day, with false nails and false eyelashes sliding down my face,’ Julie recalls with a smile.
‘And they gave me the job.’
Her role in Selling Hitler offered Julie, one of five children, the opportunity to work with the director Alistair Reed.
He has also worked with her father, Scottish character actor Andrew Keir, and her sister, TV producer Deirdre.
‘I've never worked with either my sister or my dad — I wouldn't want to be like certain families in this business,’ she says, just a touch scornfully.
But coming from a theatrical background has prepared her for the highs and lows of an actor's life.
‘I'd always seen what it was like — going on location with my dad, having money and not having money, seeing when Dad was a hit and when he wasn't a hit.
I never imagined myself doing anything but acting,’ she says with a wide grin and then breaks in to a quick burst of singing: ‘There's no business like show business…’
At school she was more at ease belting out Jasper Carrot's Funky Moped than she was deciphering textbooks.
‘I was the class clown and enjoyed being the centre of attention.
I still love chatting but if people are out of order, I can be twice as rude back.
‘What infuriates me is when you see scummy people dropping litter.
They ought to be made to pick it up and eat it.
And I can't watch football any more because of the way white fans shout racist insults at the black players.
I think it's disgusting.
Our top sportsman, Linford Christie, is black so what's going on?’
Julie recently finished three months filming The Lunatic, directed by Lol Creme, formerly of the hit band 10cc, in Jamaica.
She stars as an off-the-wall German fraulein.
‘She's an outrageous character who goes to Jamaica and falls in love with the local lunatic.
She fancies herself as another Madonna, so I had to wear a black bra with dungarees over the top — it looked gross.
‘I keep getting weird, wacky roles like that.
At drama school I'd get the roles they couldn't cast.
Now casting directors think: ‘Who can we get?
Mmm, Julie T Wallace’.
‘Who knows, if I lost weight and got shoulder pads I might get the Joan Collins parts.
But really I'm happier in an acrylic wig.’
Beaming, she adds: ‘I'm not exactly having a run-of-the-mill career — but then of course, I'm not a run-of-the-mill person, either.’
IF LOOKS COULD KILL
When Julie took on the role as Ruth in The Life And Loves Of A She-Devil, it could have destroyed her confidence in her femininity for ever.
Huge hairy warts were stuck on her face and the make-up artists asked if they could cover her facial hair in mascara, giving her an instant moustache.
Julie, probably the least vain actress in the world, agreed to every potentially humiliating request and even added an extra three stone to her 12-stone frame.
‘It's hard to act fat,’ she explains, puffing out her cheeks.
‘It's not the same as actually being fat — when you feel embarrassed about squeezing into a small space behind a table, or when you pull your shirt tail down so no one sees the fat hanging over the top of your jeans.
‘There were megastars up for the part but old Wallace here got it.
I'll be eternally grateful for that.
I honestly don't care if I'm known as The She-Devil until my dying day.’
Big role: ‘I don't care if I'm known as The She-Devil until my dying day’
Selling Hitler: ‘I looked hideous — I keep getting these wacky roles’
BIKE IT!
In the last few months, we've sold thousands of bikes as part of our service to readers.
Both types were great value, and you loved our mountain bikes offer in April.
So this week we're offering your family another chance to buy these brilliant mountain bikes — and at less than half the usual price for machines of this type.
There's a choice of four great family models and each one carries a 10-year guarantee.
Mountain bikes need to be strong and sturdy — whether you use them in cities or for cycling through the countryside — and our bikes are precisely that.
Their extra wide tyres cushion you perfectly over the roughest of roads and each bike has easy-to-use gears.
But best of all, perhaps, is the price.
Our ladies' and gents' models cost just £99.95.
The kids' bikes are a fantastic £89.95 — and both prices include delivery.
Real bargains…so if you want to make the most of your summer, send off your orders now and, if you're not completely satisfied, we'll give you your money back.
PS There's no need to worry about after-sales service: our bikes are supplied by one of the country's leading distributors with over 1,200 dealerships nationwide.
The girl's bike has the same specification as the boy's but comes with mudguards and a carrier at the back.
Colour: lavender and white.
Mum's bike has a 19 ½in frame and 26in wheels.
Colour: turquoise and white.
All models conform to British Safety Standards BS6102, parts 1 and 2.
The boy's bike is for youngsters aged from nine to 13 and up to 5 ′ tall.
It has an 18in frame, 24in wheels, 12-speed gears, reflectors and comes in red and white.
dad's bike is exactly the same but has a 23in frame and 26in wheels and comes in blue and white.
THE TRAGIC WASTE OF A BOY CALLED DANNY
He was a happy, outgoing teenager until his life was destroyed by the nightmare of solvent abuse.
Now his family is trying to save other youngsters from the same fate.
By Carol Thompson.
Main picture by Charlotte Winn
David Linacre had dozed off on the sofa one evening when his daughter Heidi came in and asked who was in the shower.
‘No one,’ David told her.
‘Danny had one a couple of hours ago.’
But the shower was still running and David, suddenly worried, opened the bathroom door.
His 14-year-old son was lying on the floor beside the shower.
‘I thought he'd slipped and banged his head,’ David says.
‘He wasn't moving so I started to give him mouth to mouth.’
It was then that David realised his son's mouth was full of the taste of the air-freshener spray that was kept in the bathroom.
Stunned and disbelieving, he fought on and on to make Danny breathe, while Lyn, Danny's mum, rang for a doctor and ambulance.
The doctor arrived within minutes and took over the resuscitation attempts.
David and Lyn went with their son in the ambulance to hospital and watched as electric charges were pumped into his chest in a last, desperate attempt to get his heart going.
And they sat numb and silent in a small hospital office, as a doctor gently told them that Danny was dead.
‘It was all too much for us to take in,’ says David.
‘A couple of hours earlier he had been at home watching television, eating his tea, just our Danny as he always was — a 14-year-old boy full of life, energy and cheek.’
Danny's death was the first David, 42, and Lyn, 41, knew of their son abusing solvents.
He was a lad like any other in his town, Thornton, near Blackpool.
He was a member of the football team his dad coached, he loved to go out with his friends, he didn't always pay enough attention at school but always did well in exams.
There was absolutely nothing to indicate that Danny had discovered the brief, often lethal, high, which inhaling air freshener spray can give.
He died on October 8 last year and at his funeral hundreds of his schoolfriends, his football squad and his local pals came to mourn him.
And it was the thought of all the children who, like Danny might have experimented not knowing that they were dicing with death, that prompted David to try to stop any more parents having to go through his own agony.
‘We've never known where Danny found out about it, but we're sure he was just experimenting.
Danny didn't have any big problems, he always seemed happy.
he can't have known what he was doing — it was just like putting his head in a gas oven.
The oxygen in his blood was replaced with butane gas — that air-freshener was 97 per cent butane and three per cent smell.
‘Losing Danny so suddenly and so pointlessly has been terrible.
Lyn and I have been over and over it to see if there was anything we could have done but that kind of abuse gives very few signs.
We were told he might have got aggressive or moody but he hadn't been any different from usual.
That's one of the main reasons why we think he can't have done it very many times.’
David coped with his grief by trying to save other youngsters from solvent abuse.
He went to Danny's school and spoke to the 200-strong football squad.
He got together with the head of the local shopkeepers' association to try to make shopkeepers understand how important it is not to sell solvents to young people.
‘The trouble is there are so many things around most homes which contain solvents and which can be sprayed or sniffed, so it's important parents understand what could happen,’ he says.
For David, Lyn, Heidi, who's 18, and her younger sister Carla, 10, Danny is still very much present in the home.
‘We talk about him a lot and feel that he's with us.
And we'd do anything to prevent another child dying in the same way.
It's such a pointless, sad way to die.
We think of all the things we wanted for Danny — a job, a happy marriage, children.
They'll never come.
‘We wonder why it happened to our Danny and right now we just can't find the answer to that.
I try to accept that one day, somehow, I'll understand.’
Kirsty's story has a happier ending.
Until she met the Crowley family she was a lost, lonely and abused teenager who was doing so much damage to herself that social workers said she'd never see her eighteenth birthday.
Kirsty was 17 and had grown up mostly in care, after being neglected by her mother.
Early in her teens she discovered drugs and solvents.
‘If she could sniff something she would,’ remembers Brian Crowley, Kirsty's foster dad.
‘You name it, she'd tried it.
It was one of Brian's three daughters, Karen, who got to know Kirsty.
She told her parents, Brian and his wife Dolly, about the sad, sick girl, who was then in a psychiatric unit in Exeter.
‘We went to visit her there and she was like a trapped animal.
She was on guard all the time and not used to having any kind of affection.
‘We couldn't forget her and we started to write and visit.
She couldn't understand why we cared, but we did — very much.
‘She was released from the unit into a bed-sit, where she lived totally alone.
It wasn't suitable for her at all.
then one day she rang and asked to come over — and  we went to collect her and she's been with us ever since.
We got her a flat in the same block as ours, although she spends most of her time in here.
‘At first she wanted to sit up until four or five in the morning, just talking.
She wanted to make sense of what had happened to her, why her mother hadn't wanted her.
It's very hard and painful for a kid to face that.
We never got angry with Kirsty or condemned her.
We treated her as a girl with problems, not a problem girl.
And we let her know from the start that we trusted her.
‘She found it so hard to give up all the solvents.
At one point she'd given a talk on Sky TV about all the signs to look for in a youngster abusing solvents.
And one day I said to her: ‘Kirsty, I think you're still taking the stuff.’
She asked me how I knew and I told her she'd taught me what to look for.
After that she tried even harder and now, at last, she really is off them for good .’
Kirsty's solvent abuse has left her with serious health problems.
Her lungs are badly scarred, her throat is damaged, her sense of taste and smell have almost completely gone and she suffers severe mood swings.
But now, at almost 19, Kirsty has found she loves painting and writing poetry and is hoping to be a social worker to help other youngsters like herself.
‘I sniffed solvents to blot out my problems.
I knew it would kill me, but in the end I didn't want to die.
I wanted to reach 18 — and then I found Mum and Dad.’
Now Mum and Dad — Brian and Dolly — have taken in another youngster, Nick, who has similar problems.
And they've started their own helpline for solvent abusers called Stepping Stones.
Brian, who's now unemployed, puts all his energy into it.
‘It was something Kirsty wanted to do’, he says, ‘we just helped her.
The local youth centre raised the money for us to have a phone installed and we got a FreeFone number for the Exeter and Devon area.
We're waiting to register as a charity and eventually we hope to get a national FreeFone line.
We make sure that one of us is beside the phone 24 hours a day.
Dolly and I, Kirsty and Nick, all take turns, and our three daughters drop in to help.
Often the kids we talk to have no self-esteem, and they feel they're failures.
They need to have a reason to give up the abuse and want to live.’
Meanwhile, with Brian and Dolly's help, Kirsty and Nick are fighting to regain their health and to build themselves a future.
‘It's funny,’ says Brian, ‘they're both so like my own kids that we often say the stork must have dropped them in the wrong homes the first time around.
Luckily for us someone really wanted them to be here.
Now we've got another daughter and a son and they've got a home which will always be here for them.’
•To contact Stepping Stones: if you're in the Devon and Exeter area, ring 100 and ask for Stepping Stones Young Concern Lifeline.
Outside that area you can ring them on 0803 851005.
A GROWING PROBLEM
There are now around 120 people a year dying through solvent abuse, more than are killed by heroin.
The numbers have increased dramatically recently: until 1977 fewer than 10 a year died but by 1988 it was 130.
More boys than girls die, most are teenagers under the age of 19 and many of them are inexperienced or first time abusers.
The youngest victim was just nine years old.
The range of products they try — from glue to lighter fuel — grows all the time and the fashionable solvent changes from one year to another.
All adults need to learn about solvent abuse and to be aware that it could happen to their children.
Watch out for household products being used up too fast or appearing in places where they are not usually kept.
And be alert to the signs: habitual sniffers may appear drowsy and unco-ordinated, forgetful or unwell, and their personalities may change.
If in doubt than check with the doctor.
Re-Solv, the Society for the Prevention of Solvent Abuse, is the only national charity which campaigns and educates about solvent abuse.
It is short of funds and needs more support to spread awareness.
Family grief: ‘We talk about Danny a lot and would do anything to prevent another child dying in the same way’
Loving concern: ‘We never got angry with Kirsty or condemned her’
Fatal experiment: ‘Danny couldn't have known what he was doing’
woman Extra
NEW THIS WEEK!
TV…after the Australian soaps, here come the mini-series from Down Under.
Look out for Flair on ITV this Tuesday and Wednesday.
It's a story of high drama in the glossy fashion world — and it's full of familiar faces from neighbours in much meatier roles.
Video…the applause has nearly died down after it's highly successful cinema run but here's one of the weirdest films of the year, ready to bring the screams into your sitting room.
The starts of Flatliners (15)— including off-screen lovers Julia Roberts and Kiefer Sutherland — find a way to die for a few minutes just to see what life is like ‘on the other side’.
Rather them than us but it's still a great film.
Well worth a watch.
BANGERS AND…
A French housewife recently thought that she had discovered the world's first metal potato — until she realised that the object she was trying to peel was in fact a Second World War hand grenade, which had probably been scooped up by a potato picking machine before it found its way into her groceries.
SUPERTIPS
Free flow: dust your scales with flour when you're weighing treacle to help it flow off a little more easily.
Bright Eyes: you can keep shampoo out of babies' eyes by smearing a line of Vaseline just above their eyebrows.
Last drops: use a rolling pin to squeeze the remains out of tubes of toothpaste.
Butter up: if you add a teaspoon of oil to butter when frying it will prevent the butter from burning.
Egg head: prick eggs before boiling to prevent them cracking.
Inside out: hang navy or black skirts inside out to guard against them being covered with dust or fluff.
Chop chop: when making mint sauce, chop the mint with the sugar, It'll help to bring out the flavour
Tinned meats: to slice tinned meat more easily, freeze for an hour first.
This week's Supertips come from Wendy Hiller, Blackpool Lancs, who wins £50.
AMAZING REDUCTIONS!!!
It's a sad fact that you can walk down almost any High Street in Britain and get conned by false ‘sale’ posters in shop windows.
John Evans, spokesman for the Institute of Trading Standards says: ‘It's a widespread problem and some leading chain stores are among the culprits.’
One trick is to plaster all the shops in one particular chain with ‘Sale’ and ‘Massive Discounts’posters while prices have only really been reduced in one branch.
Another is to put prices up during a quiet period, then later offer what seem to be big discounts.
John Evans says: ‘We're very concerned about these abuses and we want to see the 1987 Consumer Protection Act stiffened.
We advise people to be wary of discounts claimed against ‘Recommended Retail Prices’ and of offers of ‘Money off next purchase’vouchers.
There are honest discounts to be had but often it's just hype, designed to create sales euphoria.’
There's nothing illegal going on here — but do be careful!
THE NERVE!
Little wonder we're suspicious of people coming to the front door!
Someone employed on the Census in April was forced to resign after trying to sell life insurance as he called at homes in London to collect people's forms!
WHY IT'S AUF WIEDERSEHEN HOUSEWORK
German housewives are so fed up with their lives their 4,000-strong union is going on strike.
This week for 24 hours they're refusing to cook, shop or even help the kids with their homework because, they say, they should get a regular Government wage for all the time and effort they put into the home.
We agree that most housewives are very undervalued and there should be far higher state benefits for the less well-off — particularly one-parent families — but isn't this taking things a bit too far?
10 THINGS YOU WISH LASTED LONGER
1.
Your first ever holiday in the sun
2.
Toilet rolls
3.
Your first ‘proper’ kiss
4.
Hot summer weekends
5.
The first series of The Darling Buds of May
6.
That last glass of wine
7.
Children's homework
8.
Fast food
9.
A finger of fudge
10.
All party political broadcasts (only joking!)
WHO SHOT SETH?
Not everyone in Britain can understand everything Seth Armstrong and the other regulars at The Woolpack say in ITV's country soap Emmerdale.
So imagine the confused looks on the faces of viewers in America, where the PBS network has just started to show the Yorkshire Dale's soap for the first time.
Actress Malandra Burrows, who plays Kathy, says she hopes screening the show in the States will make Emmerdale ‘as big as Dallas’.
We just hope that success in America doesn't inspire a Who Shot Seth Armstrong? storyline!
EASY —PAINT IT YOURSELF
We loved this fun way from Dylon of personalising children's T-shirts.
You simply squeeze Colourfun Image Maker over a picture they like, place it face down on the garment and roll with a rolling pin.
Any sort of picture will do — from newspaper cuttings of sports heroes, and pictures of pop starts, to photographs from the family album.
Great fun at only £1.99 from department stores.
And the T-shirt's still washable.
PS
Thumbs up to Oprah Winfrey: ‘Happiness doesn't depend on the size of your thighs!’
COMPLETE SHORT STORY…
A GIFT FROM JOE
by Buzz Rodwell
I thought we'd been getting on pretty well but as Father's Day approached, Joe made it clear that I couldn't hope to be any more than just second best
I watched Joe carry out the hammer in his small, 10-year-old hands, with a dozen nails clenched in his fist.
‘Your son looks busy,’ I said, ‘what is he making?’
Lucy shrugged.
‘Not sure.’
She sounded distinctly evasive.
‘Something in the garden, I think.’
‘I already figured that out,’ I said, laughing.
‘So, what's it going to be, a life-size model of the Titanic?’
The idea seemed to fit Lucy's current expression, as though all hands had already gone down for the third time.
‘Or, aren't I meant to know?’
‘It's a secret.
He made me promise I wouldn't say anything about it.’
She shrugged again.
‘It's for Father's Day.’
‘Father's Day, eh?
Does that mean it's for me or Joe's dad?’
‘It's for you, of course,’ she said.
quickly.
‘It's going to be a tree-house.’
She glanced at me in an odd way.
‘For you to live in.’
By the time I moved in with Lucy and Joe, she'd been divorced for a couple of years and her ex-husband had emigrated to America.
There he'd met another woman whom he eventually married and she was then expecting their first child.
Joe's dad had passed from being a weekend to an entirely absent father and it wasn't long before even the sporadic invitations for his son to holiday in the States petered out altogether.
When I arrived on the scene, Joe was trying to come to terms with the situation but it was a difficult time all round.
Gradually, however, Joe came to see me less as an interloper and increasingly as a friend who happened to share both his home and his mother with him.
Now the onset of summer drew near to marking our first year together and I began to sense a distinct cooling in Joe's attitude to me.
‘So I'm not exactly flavour of the month, anymore,’ I said, watching him shin up the old lime tree.
‘And I thought we'd been getting on pretty well together.’
‘Oh, I don't think it's you exactly, Mark,’ Lucy sighed.
‘It's just this time of year.
Father's Day used to mean something really special to Joe.’
‘And I thought it was simply an invention of the card manufacturers!’
Lucy looked thoughtful.
‘Rather depends on the type of father involved, I suppose.
Joe didn't see a great deal of his dad during the year, with his trips abroad and everything, so they used to reserve at least one day when they could do things together.’
‘It doesn't strike me that Joe's dad has given his son a great deal of thought this year,’ I said, bluntly.
‘He would have completely forgotten his birthday if you hadn't reminded him.’
‘He's got his own family now.’
She still hadn't quite lost that tone of bitterness when talking about Martin.
‘And he's always been a very busy man.’
‘So Joe resents his father's neglect,’ I said, digging deeper.
‘And I'm not turning out much of a substitute by the looks of it, am I?’
‘Give him time, Mark.
he'll come round sooner or later.’
‘Anybody at home?’
I called up into the branches.
‘How's the building going?’
I knew he was up there but only silence followed.
Then there was a rustle of leaves and Joe's face appeared above me.
‘I suppose Mum told you,’ he said petulantly.
‘She promised that she wouldn't.’
‘I dragged the secret out of her,’ I said, brightly.
‘I think it's a great idea.’
‘Do you?’
He looked puzzled.
‘Did she tell you what it's for?’
‘Me, you mean?
Yup.
I understand I'm to take up residence at Number One, The Lime tree.’
‘It's not ready yet.’
He looked a little crestfallen.
‘I can't get the floor right.’
‘Well, I'm a dab hand with the old hammer and nails.
Why don't I come up and help you?’
Joe paused, contemplating the idea of me sealing my fate with such obvious enthusiasm.
‘I dunno.’
‘They say two hands are better than one, you know.’
I reached up to the nearest branch which seemed likely to hold my weight.
‘This way?’
Joe made room for me with the same amount of good grace he might have afforded an enemy invading his castle and we sat for a few minutes without speaking, inspecting the view.
‘I think I'm going to like it up here.
I've always wanted to live in a penthouse.’
‘Have you?’
He fiddled with his shoelaces.
‘I don't know what a penthouse is.’
‘Oh, a penthouse is like any other home, only it's right up on top of a building and you can see for miles and miles just by looking out of your sitting room window.’
I smiled at him.
‘This is just a tree-house,’ he said defiantly.
‘It hasn't got any rooms.’
‘I don't know.’
I pointed to a cluster of thick branches to the right of our heads.
‘We could build a sitting room up there.’
‘Could we?’ he asked, suddenly enthusiastic.
‘Show me!’
I got busy with the hammer, whistling away, and before long Joe too was lost in the mechanics of it all.
By the time I'd sawn the wood to the right length and we'd nailed the pieces together to form a floor, we were both sweating.
‘What say we call a tea-break?’
I suggested, mopping my forehead.
‘I think we both deserve a nice, cool lemonade.’
Lucy greeted us uncertainly.
‘You two been having fun?’
‘Well, I don't know about Joe,’ I said, pouring us a drink.
‘But I've really enjoyed myself so far.’
‘What about you, Joe?’
Lucy asked gently.
‘How's it going?’
‘S'all right.’
He took a large gulp.
‘Mark's pretty good at building, actually.’
‘Praise indeed!’
I laughed.
‘We've done the ground floor, if that's the correct term, and next we're going to tackle the sitting room, aren't we, Joe?’
He didn't answer and drank the rest of his lemonade in silence, glancing between me and Lucy.
‘Right!
End of lemonade break.
Back to work, mate.’
Joe didn't speak again until we'd finished the second stage.
‘Do you really want to live here?’, he asked, handing me a nail, ‘in a tree-house?’
‘I'd rather live in the house with you and your mum,’ I said, smiling, ‘but if it's what you want, then I'm happy to oblige.’
‘It might get cold.
You could fall out at night.’
‘Oh, I'll manage all right.’
He kept the nail in his fist.
‘I like you,’ he muttered.
‘I like you too, Joe.’
I took the nail deliberately from him and hammered it in.
‘And your mum.’
‘But you're not my father.’
He paused.
‘Even if he doesn't live with us, he's still my dad.’
I reached over and ruffled his hair and this time he didn't pull away.
‘Of course I'm not your dad.
I'm not trying to take his place, Joe.’
I put my hand under his chin and lifted his face.
‘But I happen to have fallen in love with your mother and, well, you're part of the package, if you see what I mean.’
I laughed.
‘Sounds awful, doesn't it?’
‘A bit,’ he said, beginning to grin in spite of himself.
‘My dad's got a new son, now.’
‘But you're still his son, Joe, wherever he's living now.’
I put the hammer down beside me.
‘That's the kind of bond you can never break, even if you don't see much of each other.’
I didn't know how much of what I was saying he understood.
‘It would be nice, though, if you could come to see me as, I don't know, your second father, maybe?’
He didn't answer and I saw his lips quiver slightly.
‘I wish he was here,’ he sobbed.
‘For Father's Day.
Just for Father's Day.’
‘I know Joe,’ I said, putting my arms around him.
‘I'm sure he would come if he could but some things get in the way.’
I took his shoulders and made him look at me.
‘I tell you what.
If we can manage to get the tree-house finished by tomorrow, I'll show you a way we can give him a piece of it for Father's Day.’
Joe hadn't the faintest idea what I was talking about but he worked away enthusiastically and by the next afternoon we were ready to hang the rope-ladder.
We called Lucy out for the Grand Inspection.
‘Well, what do you think?’
‘It's lovely,’ she said, glancing at us both.
‘Now what?’
‘First, we attach the stairs,’ I said, tying the rope to the overhanging floor joists.
‘Then I go inside and get my camera.’
I ordered Joe up into the tree-house and he sat, staring down at the lens.
‘Now,’ I said.
‘Say Tarzan!’
We had the film developed at one of those new 24-hour places and together we made a card for Father's Day.
I carefully pasted the photograph of Joe waving on the front, and inside, in his best handwriting, he wrote, ‘Happy Father's Day, Dad.
Lots of love, Joe.’
‘We've got plenty of time for the post to get to America,’ I said, sticking down the envelope.
‘And when your dad opens this next week, Joe, he'll have his very own tree-house with you in it to look at, won't he?’
‘Do you think he'll want it?’ he asked anxiously.
‘Of course he will, Joe.’
I grinned at Lucy.
‘Your dad's very proud of you and he'll think you're really clever, making a tree-house.’
‘But we made it together, Mark.
I didn't do it by myself.’
‘That,’ I said, whispering, ‘can be our secret.’
‘Okay!’
Martin telephoned on the morning of Father's Day to say thanks for the card, and before he knew it Joe was telling him all about how we made the tree-house together.
‘It doesn't matter,’ he said, cupping the receiver and looking at me.
‘We don't really have to keep it a secret.’
‘And’, he told me afterwards, ‘you don't really have to go and live in the tree-house, Mark.’
‘I'm glad to hear it, Joe,’ I laughed, ‘to tell the truth, I wasn't looking forward to it much.’
I glanced out of the window.
c ‘Even if it is the best tree-house I've ever seen.’
Joe trotted off and came back a couple of minutes later, holding a parcel.
‘It's for you,’ he said, handing it to me.
‘Open it.’
‘Well, thanks, Joe,’ I said hardly suppressing my surprise.
I tore off the wrapping paper to reveal a framed version of exactly the same photograph we'd sent to Joe's dad.
‘Are you sure that this is for me, Joe?’
‘Of course it is,’ he said.
‘Mum gave me a hand with it.’
He took it from me and put it on the mantelpiece.
‘It's a present,’ he said, grinning.
‘It's for Second Father's Day.’
SIMPLY DELICIOUS!
You really can't beat the taste of fresh strawberries and raspberries.
They're delicious on their own but why not try one of Anne Hildyard's special summer desserts as well?
Pictures by Ian O'Leary
RASPBERRY AND NUT LAYER
Serves 6.
Cost £2.85
Time to prepare: 20 mins.
Time to cook: 15mins.
Pastry:
6oz (175g) butter
4oz (100g) caster sugar
8oz (225g) plain flour
6oz (175g) toasted chopped hazelnuts
½tsp (2.5ml) ground spice
Filling:
8fl.oz (240ml) double cream
10oz (280g) fresh raspberries
2tbsp (30ml) redcurrant jelly
1.
Cream butter and sugar until light and fluffy.
Stir in the flour.
grind hazelnuts, stir into mixture with mixed spice.
Mix to a firm dough.
gently knead until smooth.
2.
Divide the dough into four.
Shape into four 7in rounds on baking parchment on baking sheets.
3.
Bake at 375 °F, 190 °C, Gas 5 for about 15 mins.
Cool.
4.
Whip 6fl oz (180ml) cream, carefully fold in the raspberries.
Spread one third of cream mixture on to one round, top with another.
repeat twice more, ending with a hazelnut round on top.
5.
Whip remaining cream, pipe rosettes round the edge.
6.
Arrange reserved raspberries on top.
Put redcurrant jelly in a small pan.
Heat gently until melted and brush over raspberries.
HAZELNUT AND STRAWBERRY GATEAU
4oz (100g) self-raising flour
2oz (50g) rice flour
40z (100g) caster sugar
9tbsp (135ml) sunflower oil
4 egg whites
½pt (300ml) double cream
12oz (340g) strawberries
2oz (50g) toasted chopped hazelnuts
2 plain chocolate squares
1.
Sieve flours and sugar together in a bowl.
Mix oil with 9tbsp (135ml) hot water.
Stir into flour mixture Whisk egg whites until stiff, fold into mixture.
Pour into a 7in round cake tin.
2.
Bake at 325 °F, 170 ° C gas 3 for about 40 minutes.
Leave to cool in tin.
Turn out on to wire rack.
3.
Cut into three layers using a serrated knife.
Lightly whip the cream.
Slice ⅔ of the strawberries.
Use half the cream to layer the sponges.
Spread sides and top with most of remaining cream.
Coat sides with hazelnuts, pipe remaining cream on top, decorate with remaining strawberries and quartered chocolate squares.
STRAWBERRY CHOUX
1 ×8in (20cm) shortcrust pastry circle
1 egg, size 3
Choux pastry:
4 ½oz (115g) strong plain flour
Pinch salt
1 tbsp (15ml) caster sugar
3½oz (90g) butter
4 fl oz (120ml) milk
4 eggs, size 3
Caramel:
3oz (75g) sugar
Filling:
80z (225) cream cheese
1tbsp (15ml) icing sugar
2tsp (10ml) vanilla essence
2oz (50g) chopped pistachios
8oz (225g) strawberries
1.
Place shortcrust pastry circle on to a baking sheet.
Beat egg, use to brush pastry.
Prick base with fork.
2.
To make choux pastry: sift flour, salt and sugar on to a sheet of greaseproof paper.
Cut butter into pieces, place in pan with 4fl oz water and the milk.
Heat until butter is melted, then bring to the boil.
Remove from heat, add flour all at once.
Beat well over heat until smooth and rolling off sides of pan.
3.
Cool pastry for 5mins, then beat in eggs one at a time until mixture is firm, glossy and elastic.
Pipe or spoon 16 × 1in (2.5cm) balls on to baking sheet, then pipe or spoon the remainder of choux pastry in a single circle around edge of shortcrust pastry.
4.
Bake both pastries at 400 °F, 200 °C, Gas 5. remove choux balls, but leave shortcrust pastry base for another 10 mins.
Pierce balls to release steam.
Cool
5.
To make caramel sauce: place sugar and 1tbsp (15ml) water in a pan.
Heat until sugar dissolves, then boil until pale amber.
Remove from heat, and cool quickly by standing pan in cold water.
Once cool stand the pan in hot water to keep the caramel liquid.
6.
Dip tops of choux balls in caramel, stick on to the edge of choux pastry round with more caramel.
7.
Mix cream cheese, icing sugar, vanilla essence and pistachio nuts.
Spoon into case.
Slice strawberries on top.
BERRY TARTS
Pastry:
6oz (175g) plain flour
½tsp (2.5ml) ground cinnamon
3oz (75g) butter
1 egg yolk, size 3
Filling:
2 egg yolks, size 3
2oz (50g) caster sugar
 (20g) flour
½oz (15g) cornflour
½pt (300ml) milk
Few drops vanilla essence
1lb (450g) strawberries and raspberries
2tbsp (30ml) redcurrant jelly
1tbsp (15ml) cassis
1.
Sieve flour and cinnamon in a bowl, rub in the butter.
Add egg yolk and sufficient cold water to make a stiff dough.
Knead lightly.
2.
Roll out pastry.
Use ti line eight 3in tartlet tins.
Bake blind at 400 °s; F, 200 °s; C, Gas 6 for 10 mins by lining each pastry case with greaseproof paper or foil and baking beans.
remove beans.
Return cases to oven for 5 mins then remove from tins.
3.
Beat the egg yolks with sugar.
Sieve flours together, add to mix.
4.
Bring the milk to just under boiling point.
Stir into egg mixture, return to rinsed-out pan, heat until thickened, stirring continuously.
Take off heat, stir in vanilla essence.
Cover with damp greaseproof paper.
Leave to cool.
5.
Divide the mixture between tartlets.
Hull and slice the strawberries, arrange on top of mixture with the raspberries.
6.
Heat the jelly and cassis until melted.
Brush over tartlets.
CHOC AND STRAWBERRY CHEESECAKE
4oz (100g) shortcake biscuits
1½oz (40g) unsalted butter
8oz (225g) cream cheese
8oz (225g) curd cheese
60z (175g) plain chocolate
½pt (300ml) double cream
5tbsp (75ml) double cream 3¼oz (80g) good quality white
chocolate.
20z (50g) chocolate flakes
4oz (100g) strawberries
2tbsp (30ml) strawberry jam
1.
Crush biscuits either in a polythene bag using a rolling pin, or in a food processor.
Melt butter.
Mix with biscuits.
Press into a 7in spring form tin.
Chill.
2.
Mix cheeses. melt plain chocolate in a bowl over a pan of simmering water.
Cool slightly and fold into cheese.
3.
Whip ½ pint cream until softly peaking, fold in cheese mixture.
Transfer half of mixture to tin.
Whip the 5tbsp double cream.
Melt 3oz white chocolate, fold into cream.
Spread white chocolate layer over plain chocolate in tin, then add remaining chocolate layer.
Chill
4.
Remove from tin.
Break up chocolate flakes, press some around sides and decorate with strawberries and the remaining chocolate flakes.
Grate the remaining white chocolate and sprinkle on top.
Melt jam, sieve and brush over the strawberries.
ALMOND RASPBERRY ROULADE
4 eggs, size 3
4oz (100g) caster sugar
Few drops almond essence
1½oz (40g) ground almonds
1½oz (40g) plain flour
Icing sugar, for sprinkling
Filling:
7fl oz (210ml) double or whipping cream
12oz (340) raspberries
To decorate:
10z (25g) plain chocolate
Small raspberry or rose leaves
Icing sugar, to dust
1.
Whisk eggs, sugar and essence for 5 mins until pale, very thick and whisk leaves a trail.
2.
Sieve almonds and flour.
Fold into mixture with a metal spoon.
3.
Grease a Swiss roll tin 12 ×8in.
Spoon mixture into the tin.
Bake at 375 °s; F, 190 °s; C, Gas 5 for about 15 mins, until golden brown.
4.
Turn on to sheet of greaseproof paper sprinkled with icing sugar.
Remove lining paper.
Trim edges.
Roll up from short edge.
5.
Lightly whip cream.
Unroll roulade.
Spread with ⅔ of the cream.
Scatter with 10oz raspberries.
Roll up.
6.
Melt chocolate in bowl set over simmering water, brush over leaves.
When set, peel off leaves and discard.
7.
Pipe remaining cream down centre, put reserved raspberries and leaves on top.
WHAT YOU TOLD US!
A reader's letter about married mums who go to work aroused some strong feelings.
Here are some of your views…
Oh, how I agree and sympathise with Joan Hamer.
I'm in the same position as she is and share exactly the same sentiments.
I live in an area of high unemployment and it drives me mad when married mothers go back to work just to get out of the house.
While I appreciate that some married mothers do need to work for financial reasons, there are many who don't.
I also hope that these schemes to encourage married mothers back to work won't discriminate against young, single people with employers rushing to recruit mature returners.
Jobs should go to the young, single people who really need them, not the married mums whose children need them.
Women of the Nineties have been brainwashed into thinking that they should go back to work.
But that's no reason to brainwash them into staying at home.
Women should be free to choose what suits them — and their families — best.
It is sad if mothers who would rather be with their children have to go out to work to make ends meet.
But it's just as sad if highly qualified and trained women lose everything they've worked for because they have to stay at home.
Some jobs can be done part time.
Most careers can't.
The decision whether to work or not must depend on each woman's circumstances, abilities and finances.
I totally agree with what Joan Hamer says.
Once a woman has a child, motherhood becomes her chosen career.
What's the point of returning to work and allowing someone else to bring up the child?
I'm 33 and decided very early on that my career would be my chosen path.
Some have called me selfish — but surely those women who leave their jobs to have babies and then return to work are the selfish ones?
They're depriving their children of the maternal love that is the child's by right.
I hope these so-called mothers never wonder why the child they gave birth to, grows up to be a stranger to them.
I find Joan Hamer's attitude appalling.
I'm 27 years old with two young children and I've chosen to have them before I start a career.
This is because I want to enjoy my children's early years.
I think I'll have a more mature attitude to work when I'm a bit older and I won't feel I've got to interrupt a career to start a family.
I, like many other married women, hope to achieve some kind of independence and don't want to rely on my husband for everything all the time.
Just because we're married doesn't mean we're not entitled to work outside the home.
After all, how would Ms Hamer like to work for an empty pay packet, day in and day out, like so many housewives do?
Yes, Joan is right — mothers should stay at home to look after their own children.
I haven't worked for 30 years, since my first child was born.
I have five children and not much money and not one of them has gone wrong and they all treat me with great respect.
Children only grow up once.
If you miss their childhood, you lose a lot of memories.
Married doesn't mean redundant and most definitely doesn't mean brainless.
Everyone who is capable and wants to work should be able to do so, regardless of age, gender and marital status.
These days, most women have to work to make ends meet and that means time away from their much-loved children and men.
And they then go home and struggle through another day's work.
In fact, I think it's a selfless effort.
So if all this poses a threat to a 19-year-old getting a job, something is wrong as it's still quite obvious that employers prefer people with no ties.
To be an employed, married mum is quite an achievement and I think I speak for us all.
I was shocked and saddened by Joan Hamer; saddened that a woman should wish to remove women's choices and turn them into second-class citizens; shocked that she's so young yet so old-fashioned.
Education may broaden her outlook.
I started work at 16, married a wonderful man at 20 and left my job to have my first child at 21.
Nine years later, I still have a wonderful marriage and four beautiful daughters.
My family's complete and life for me is just beginning.
I study at college, fitting in classes to suit my family.
My ambition is to do teacher training when my youngest is at school full-time.
I enjoy being a mum but it can be hard work.
I devoted my twenties to my family but I intend now to achieve the career that I never had before.
These days, as soon as her children have one foot through the school gates, a woman has to rush out to pursue ‘a brilliant career’, shunting her children around.
There's a stigma attached to the stay-at-home mum, as if she hasn't a brain between the ears!
The Government is encouraging women back into the workforce — I think stay-at-home mums should be encouraged, too.
I have two girls aged six and two and I don't like leaving them one bit.
I wish I could afford to stay at home — in fact I did for two years.
But because of the recession, my husband and I couldn't afford to pay our mortgage, so I had to go back to work and I don't enjoy it at all.
What keeps me going is knowing that I'm doing this for my children, not out of choice.
So Joan Hamer, think — before you start criticising working mothers.
Most of us do this because we have to.
Joan Hamer says that married women with children have ‘had their careers’.
Exactly how long does she think a career lasts?
Many, like mine — teaching — span one's whole working life.
She also assumes that once a woman marries and has children she is financially provided for.
Nothing is more soul-destroying than being completely dependent on another person.
In this country, married women with no work outside the home are entitled to precisely nothing!
I wanted to reply to your star letter about the lady who wanted to work but had small children and found it difficult.
Well, like her I think I've got brains and, at 19, I'd also like a career.
I, too, have lost count of the number of jobs I've applied for.
And I blame married women returning to the job market.
I think they're being selfish, they've had their careers, so how about looking after the children and home, and giving youngsters a chance!
THE BUTTERFLY HAS LANDED!
Andrew Hall's back in the limelight now that the BBC is showing re-runs of Butterflies — but where has he been hiding and what has he been up to all this time?
Report by Garth Pearce.
Main picture by David Porter
Andrew Hall played the laid-back son Russell to perfection in the television situation comedy series Butterflies: he was tall, good-looking, streetwise and fill of withering remarks aimed at his middle-aged parents.
Then there was the actor who played his younger brother Adam, Nicholas Lyndhurst.
He was gormless, spoke in a funny nasal accent and looked as if he could do with a kick up the backside.
Based on the evidence of those first episodes of Butterflies back in 1978, which of those two would most of us have put our money on to become a TV star?
Would it have been the handsome, confident Russell?
Or Adam, the twit?
Come on…be honest.
So how wrong can you be?
Nicholas, now starring in series like Only Fools And Horses and The Piglet Files, was this year nominated for a BAFTA Best Actor Award — while Andrew seems to have disappeared from our TV screens altogether.
He's back in the limelight now, of course, as all 27 repeated episodes of Butterflies are currently gathering a huge Sunday night audience on BBC 1.
But what sort of man has he become?
And, indeed, where is he?
It's immediately clear that Andrew doesn't regret his slip from fame for an instant.
‘Any more comedy or light entertainment at that point was simply not for me,’ he says, cheerfully, ‘I'd set myself different targets — and I'm happy with them.’
Andrew, who's now 37 — he was 24 when he played a 19-year-old in Butterflies — lives with his pretty, dark-haired wife, Abigail and their children Joshua, three, and 18-month-old Kate, in an isolated cottage surrounded by beautiful Surrey countryside.
He has been in work constantly, either in lead roles in provincial theatre or at the prestigious Royal Shakespeare Theatre in Stratford-upon-Avon, with occasional TV appearances in programmes such as Brookside.
‘The very next job I did after Butterflies was a Greek tragedy at a theatre in Leatherhead’, says Andrew.
‘And that set the pattern.
I then went to Coventry Belgrade for six months, where I did everything from Malcolm in Macbeth to the play Charlie's Aunt.
‘I had always wanted to do drama on TV or theatre work, and that was exactly what I was doing.
But my real ambition was to appear at the Royal Shakespeare Theatre, which I did eventually.’
So while Nicholas Lyndhurst was playing Rodney ‘the plonker’ in Only Fools And Horses, Andrew was on stage in Richard III or playing Osric in Hamlet and Tybalt in Romeo and Juliet.
‘I knew that Nick was going to have an incredible television career,’ says Andrew.
‘He already had a background in TV when he started in Butterflies, while for me it was my first acting job.
‘I'd been an assistant stage manager and a deputy stage manager at the Northcott Theatre, Exeter, before I went to drama school.
Then I spent three years there and it was only three weeks after I'd left that I was offered the part of Russell in Butterflies.
‘Nick's about seven years younger than me but he has tremendous talent.
He has great timing and is naturally very funny but he was always a gentleman and very professional as well.’
But didn't Andrew feel just the slightest twinge of regret?
Wasn't there a tiny nagging feeling on watching the re-runs of Butterflies that perhaps he would have been better off sticking to television comedy series and enjoying their rich rewards?
‘Not at all,’ he says, with a good-natured shake of his head.
‘I still think the great moments in acting are when a theatre audience lets out a big laugh at just the point when you want them to laugh — or when you can hear a pin drop because you've got them totally captivated in the drama.’
Although no longer playing teenagers, Andrew still has a slim, youthful look about him.
But he admits to cringing at some of the fashions and hairstyles from the late Seventies in his Butterflies days.
‘It's just like getting the old family snapshots out, he says.
There are plenty of recent family photographs around the Hall's cottage.
Andrew's wife, Abi, a former production manager, has been a freelance photographer for the last five years.
her assignments have included taking pictures for a record sleeve for Jimmy Nail and working for the Australian bicentennial celebrations.
‘I'm immensely proud of Abi,’ says Andrew.
‘She was an exceptionally good production manager and did lots of work at the BBC — and now she's managed to switch careers successfully, too.’
They met at stage school 13 years ago and it was love at first sight.
‘We lived together virtually from day one,’ says Andrew.
‘And that's how it stayed for a long, long time.
We both believed that a marriage certificate wasn't that important.
But when we decided to start a family, things had to change.
The actor Paul Blake and his wife Kate, who are friends of ours, have two young daughters and Abi and I found we really enjoyed their company.
So we said, Okay; it's about time we started having kids of our own.
‘Then we discovered that if we  weren't married and Abi, say, died suddenly, I wouldn't have an automatic right to the children — there would be complicated adoption processes to go through.
‘So we decided to get married — and had a wonderful day with the reception at our house and a marquee on the lawn.
‘At first, it was a shock calling Abi ‘my wife’.
I kept thinking: ‘Hold on, I haven't got a wife.’
And as Abi still works under her maiden name, it was a bit confusing to start with.
‘But honestly, marriage and children have to be the biggest thrill there is in my life.
I think we made the move at the right time.
Had I been a father in my early twenties I would have been dreadful because there were so many things I still wanted to do.’
For Abi, being married to an actor came naturally.
She had witnessed both the joys and the stresses with her own parents, the late actor, Tony Sharp and actress mother, Margaret Wedlake.
‘When I first met Abi, I looked up her father in the Theatre Who's Who and his entry ran to four pages,’ says Andrew.
‘I thought: ‘I've got a lot to live up to!’
‘He wrote a play in the Fifties called Royal Assent, about Thomas, Earl of Stratford, who was Charles I's Prime Minister.
I was knocked out by how brilliant it was when I first read it eight years ago, and now I want to put on a national tour and direct it.’
Andrew's face lights up when he talks about such projects and his conversation is punctuated with the names of theatres, directors and actor's actors — people well-known in the business but not to a wider audience.
On the night of his second child Kate's birth, Andrew was on stage 12 miles from the hospital in the comedy Noises Off.
He had taken the job on the strict understanding that he could be released during rehearsals for the expected arrival.
‘But she was very late — which is almost unheard of for a second birth,’ he recalls.
‘Then the play opened and on the first Friday it looked set to be the day.
‘But even then, nothing happened.
So I gave myself just half an hour to get to the theatre and prepare for curtain up — and phoned home at each interval.
The moment the play was over, I was off.
I didn't even wait for the curtain call and the audience must have seen me charging through the lobby as they made their way out.
‘I burned rubber in the car all the way to the hospital.
Luckily, I made it in time.
There's nothing like the birth of a baby to get life into perspective.
Nothing at all.’
Andrew hardly seems the sort to need reminding.
He talks proudly of his stage career he's chosen to follow, but despite consistently first-class reviews and a stream of successful roles, his family is obviously the most important thing in his life.
He's very much a man of the Nineties.
‘Abi and I share looking after the children — but from choice and because I enjoy it.
I do have to admit, though, that when I'm working away from home it's not a case of going out on the town — but going straight to bed to catch up on a good night's sleep.
‘I haven't had a dramatic life,’ he adds.
‘I know a life like that makes a good story but it takes its toll on the person.
I admire people who can throw aside everything and everyone in the pursuit of what they want.
‘My hero is Lenny Bruce, for example— but I would hate to live a life like his.
Like every adolescent I wanted to lead a short and dramatic life.
But once the kids arrive, then everything changes — now I know I want to be around for a very long time.’
Andrew gives a relaxed, reflective smile.
‘If Russell looked at my life now, I dread to think what he'd say…’
And, what's more, Andrew couldn't care less.
Classic comedy: ‘I knew that Nick would have an incredible TV career
‘Honestly, marriage and children have to be the biggest thrill there is in life’
Constant work: Andrew's roles range from being in Brookside to Macbeth
‘The birth of a baby gets life in perspective’
Have a great time with woman 
THE MAGIC OF ITALY
Give yourself something really special to look forward to this winter with a wonderful trip to two of the most beautiful cities in Italy.
Florence and Rome are stunning to visit at any time of the year — but in the winter they have a charm of their own.
With fewer tourists around, you get a real taste of Italian life — and the weather is far more comfortable for visiting the sights or shopping.
Your holiday begins with an evening flight from Heathrow to Rome and three nights bed and breakfast at the comfortable Hotel Nova Domus.
You can explore the majesty of St Peter's, marvel at Michelangelo's Sistine Chapel and remember to throw a coin into the Trevi Fountain to make sure you return to this fascinating city.
On the fourth day of your holiday you'll make the easy coach journey from Rome to Florence, where you'll stay for four nights at the Hotel Columbus.
This beautiful Renaissance city, in its lovely setting beside the Arno river, has something of interest for everyone.
The fantastic art treasures of the Uffizi Gallery, the ancient gold and silversmiths' shops on the Ponte Vecchio and the bustling pavement cafés on the wide, elegant squares — it's full of beauty and atmosphere.
And, as in Rome, you'll find it hard to resist all the wonderful shops — especially the beautiful leather shoes and handbags.
An optional half-day tour of the city, which includes a visit to the Coliseum, is available to help you get your bearings.
And if you can manage to tear yourself away, there are optional excursions to the nearby attractions of Pisa with its cathedral and leaning tower, and Siena — home of the famous Palio horse race — and the charming medieval town of the towers, San Gimignano.
Remember to book early for this wonderful holiday — it's got to be the perfect way to banish those winter blues.
7 nights from £289
Three nights in Rome
Four nights in Florence
Optional excursions to Pisa, Siena and San Gimignano
Flights from London Heathrow
Trevi: throw a coin in the fountain
Mythical Rome: make this a holiday you'll always remember by visiting all the wonderful sights of the capital
Price is per person based on two people sharing a room on the December 7 1991 departure and doesn't include meals other than breakfast, holiday insurance, passport costs, optional excursions and any personal expenditure.
Jonathan Cainer
This week's predictions
Gemini: MAY 22–JUN 22
There'll be lots of trouble this week but it won't matter, because however many upheavals you go through, or how confused a certain matter becomes, you'll end up feeling renewed, refreshed and re-inspired.
The final outcome will be exceedingly positive — and it isn't far away.
Cancer: JUN 23–JUL 23
Although you're reaping the rewards for many of the brave decisions you took earlier this year, it seems you're still paying the price for some others!
Don't have any self doubt or regret, just carry on going boldly ahead.
By the end of the month you'll be given what you need.
LEO: Jul 24–Aug 23
Just get used to seeing a cheery forecast here each week — there'll be a lot of good news in the next few months.
Even if this week brings conflict with an authority figure or a reminder of an obstacle to conquer, it can't do you too much harm.
Your long-term outlook is excellent.
VIRGO: Aug 24–Sep 23
There will be a lot of what they call in Yorkshire ‘trouble at t'mill’ early this week.
But you'll see why they say there's ‘nowt so queer as folk’ because life will get vastly better within days.
Your outlook reminds me of another saying: ‘Where there's muck, there's brass.’
LIBRA: Sep 24–Oct 23
You've got a battle on your hands this week and, frankly, you can't expect to win it…ye!
So don't waste energy banging your head against a brick wall.
Admit temporary defeat with good grace, retreat, reconsider and wait.
Next week's outlook will be very sunny.
SCORPIO: Oct 24–Nov 22
People very rarely say what they mean but you're the exception and it's important to remember that.
Don't assume you're being told the whole story this week just because you can't imagine how anyone could distort it.
Keep digging for the truth and when you find it, you'll smile.
SAGITTARIUS: Nov 23–Dec21
The planets insist it's a wonderful week ahead.
But if you choose to dwell only on the aspects of life you find upsetting, you may not experience as much joy as you could.
However, if you make an effort to be positive, you'll get swept away on a tidal wave of valid enthusiasm.
CAPRICORN: Dec 22–Jan 20
Expect events in the coming week to cost you money, stretch your patience and strain your brain!
Prepare to be led a merry dance — perhaps emotionally, perhaps materially — and prepare also to deal with a series of tough situations.
But it's not so bad — it all ends in triumph!
AQUARIUS: Jan 21–Feb 19
Don't let a successful venture or pleasing gain early this week lull you into complacency.
You'll need all your wits about you to tackle the weekend's infuriating drama.
There'll be a lot of pressure so it's best to try to seek a compromise rather than a perfect solution.
PISCES: Feb 20 –Mar 20
It seems you keep having to hold the same conversation over and over again.
Somehow the message isn't getting through — or worse, it's getting twisted.
This week, be ready for irritating news and yet another fruitless attempt at communication.
But the penny will drop very soon.
ARIES: Mar 21–Apr 20
Weeks like this don't crop up very often so make the most of the window of opportunity when it opens before you.
Dare to dream, shrug off any criticism or doubt and set off on the journey that you hope will eventually take you to a better world.
It has to be the right thing to do.
TAURUS: Apr 21–May 21
You'll have your determination tested by a series of developments that seem to squash many of your hopes and plans.
The logical response is to give up, but there's more at stake than logic.
So stick with what your heart tells you and something will give way very soon.
OUR HOME'S JUST FULL OF MEMORIES!
When Mary Jane and Simon Cole gave up their travels and settled in London, they filled their home with reminders of the bright, exotic countries they'd seen.
By Jacki Barnwell.
Pictures by Steve Hawkins
From the outside, the small, terraced house looks like all the others in the quiet south London street.
But as soon as you step inside the door, you can see it's something different — with ideas and inspiration from all over the world.
Simon and Mary Jane Cole have lived here for nearly eight years.
And in that time, the three-bedroomed house has grown from a busy couple's base to a family home for them and their two-year-old daughter Emily.
But Simon and Mary Jane have filled their house with reminders of the travels of their younger days, when they loved to visit exotic places such as Indonesia, Morocco, Thailand, Burma and Australia and New Zealand.
‘It's difficult to go on that sort of holiday now we've got Emily and we tend to stick to Europe,’ says Mary Jane.
‘So it's nice to have reminders of the places we enjoyed going to.’
But it's more the feel of the house that reminds you of foreign countries.
The front door opens directly into a large living-come-dining room where the walls have been painted a natural oatmeal colour and the carpet is a plain beige.
The contrasting colour in the room comes from the bright rugs and the furniture, and, Mary Jane says; ‘We love things with natural vegetable dye shades.
I spent a year living in Italy and I fell in love with the rustic feel and lifestyle.
If I had my choice, I'd whitewash all the walls and have very little furniture — not terribly practical for a house in London!’
When the Coles bought their house, two of the downstairs rooms had already been knocked into one.
Where once there was a corridor and two doorways into separate living and dining rooms, there's now one large living area.
Mary Jane says that she loves the feeling of space but the only drawback is not having a hallway to put the wet coats and muddy boots in when it rains.
The biggest surprise comes when you walk down the corridor into the kitchen.
It's covered with a bold, dark, patterned paper, which not only covers all the walls but the ceiling as well.
‘It was already here when we moved in and to start with I thought it would make the room seem too gloomy, but it's grown on me and I really like it now,’ says Mary Jane, who works part-time as a physiotherapist.
The kitchen does have that rustic look Mary Jane's so fond of and the rest of the fittings add  to a farmhouse feel, too.
The built-in wooden dresser was already there, as was the exposed brick chimney breast — which, with the cooker slotted into the fireplace, looks rather like an old-fashioned kitchen range.
The beautiful wooden units were made by Simon — quite an achievement for an advertising executive whose only previous contact with carpentry was putting up shelves!
‘It happened by accident, really.
We'd just moved in when we discovered we had a mouse in the kitchen.
We had to lift some floorboards and they turned out to need replacing.
Whilst we were at it, we thought we'd strip the floor and varnish it.
That's when Simon got the idea of making kitchen units, too.
He's done a great job — and it was a real labour of love,’ says Mary Jane.
It took Simon three months to finish it, working just at weekends.
He designed and made the units from timber he found locally and then tiled the worktops.
The kitchen leads to the garden room, which has a real Mediterranean feel.
‘This has always been my favourite room,’ says Mary Jane, ‘and it's turned out to be a perfect playroom for Emily and her friends.
They can make as much mess as they like and when the weather's nice they can spill out into the garden.’
Their garden is tiny but very pretty and the couple have added splashes of colour by planting lots of tulips and snapdragons.
Apart from the kitchen, the only other major work was on the bathroom, which was at the back of the house, through the third bedroom.
‘Not at all convenient when we had friends or family to stay,’ says Mary Jane.
‘But luckily, we found out that the council were giving grants for home improvements to old properties.’
And this helped them to pay for knocking down and putting up walls so that they could move the bathroom to a lovely sunny spot off the main upstairs landing.
Simon and Mary Jane's bedroom is full of more  mementoes , this time of Mary Jane's family in Scotland.
‘They've given me a lot of furniture and other things that have been passed down through the generations.
I like old furniture and Scotland has some great junk shops where you can buy things that look nice, are good quality but aren't that expensive.’
Mary Jane says she enjoys things that bring back memories and this really is a home where every object tells a story.
The secluded garden is a perfect playground for Emily.
And Mary Jane has continued its Mediterranean feel with terracotta flooring in the garden room at the back of the house.
The kitchen, with its bold wallpaper,— on the ceiling as well as the walls — breaks all the rules but the Coles love its cosy atmosphere.
It was cheap to do, too, as Simon designed and made all the units himself.
The large  living-cum-dining room is mostly in earthy natural shades — they're easy on the eye and a perfect setting for the colourful rug and furniture which the Coles bought to remind them of their travels
Because it's small, the Coles decorated their bathroom in light colours and put in a white suite and white tiles.
Mary Jane chose a pretty Laura Ashley floral wallpaper and had some of the white tiles colour-washed to match.
In Emily's bedroom, she sprayed an old cot with white lead-free gloss paint and sponge-painted furniture she bought at sales and local junk shops to match the mint green walls.
Their sunny main bedroom is the perfect home for older pieces of furniture, most of which have been handed down through the generations — Mary Jane's mother made the tapestry fireguard and her great-grandmother made the beautiful bedspread
WHY I DIDN'T GO TO BED WITH WARREN BEATTY
Sean Young's rollercoaster career is on a high this week as her new film comes out.
But when she resisted the charms of Hollywood's legendary romeo it hit an all-time low.
Report By Garth Pearce.
Main picture by Terry O'Neill
Depending on who you talk to, she's either Hollywood's answer to Joan of Arc or a direct descendant of Lucretia Borgia.
Not since the hey-day of Bette Davis has there been an actress who's attracted so much loathing — and so much admiration.
And if you believe there's no smoke without fire, Sean Young must be a towering inferno.
If only half the stories are true, this is someone who attracts trouble.
She was unceremoniously dumped from the blockbuster Dick Tracy after just seven days filming because, she says, she rejected Warren Beatty's advances.
She lost a coveted role in Batman after a mysterious riding accident.
She annoyed everyone on the set of Wall Street so much, Charlie Sheen pinned a note on her back saying: ‘I'm the biggest! &? * in the world.’
Nice guy Michael Douglas refuses even to speak about her.
And if all that wasn't enough, she was also accused by her former lover and co-star James Woods of trying to put a curse on him.
However, when you meet Sean Young she's disarmingly polite and looks as if butter wouldn't melt in her mouth.
Very slight, with short, dark hair, bright, dark eyes and painfully thin arms and shoulders, she doesn't look like a toughie at all.
Ask her about those stories circulating Hollywood and she widens those beautiful eyes.
‘My problem is that I've been too open and trusting,’ she says sweetly.
‘I've been like a little kid.
I've always liked to believe the best of people.’
No matter what people say about her character, they have to grudgingly admit that she's a stunning actress.
She was first noticed playing opposite Harrison Ford in Blade Runner, then as Michael Douglas' wife in Wall Street, and finally in her steamy love scene with Kevin Costner in No Way Out.
Now she's about to make our hearts stop in A Kiss Before Dying, which comes out this week and co-stars Matt Dillon.
It has been written and directed by James Dearden, the man who had us all on the edge of our seats with Fatal Attraction.
So what is the truth about Sean Young?
Well, one thing's for sure— if people are rude about her, she makes sure she gives as good as she gets.
She takes a sip of mineral water before launching into James Woods and his girlfriend, Sarah Owen: ‘I've a theory that James and his girlfriend had so many problems they had to turn it all on me.’
The facts behind this bizarre legal suit are hard to untangle: Sean did or didn't have an affair with Woods, now 44, while they were making The Boost.
He then accused her of sending him hate mail, photos of dismembered animals and putting a mutilated doll outside his home.
Sean totally rejects the accusations.
‘He was seeking damages of two million dollars,’ she says.
‘It was totally absurd.
But it did begin to worry me.
I thought: ‘Maybe I should get out of this business.
Maybe someone's trying to tell me that I would be happier doing something else.’’
Sean Young was awarded £120,000 as settlement of her costs and no further action was taken.
She says it means she was right.
James Woods will only say: ‘She's a little offbeat but she's a wonderful actress and a beautiful girl.
I like her very much.’
And that's after she's supposed to have put a curse on him!
For a while afterwards, it seemed that it was Sean who had been cursed.
She won the star  female part in Batman against competition from almost every actress in the US — but when she came to England to start filming, she had to drop out because of an accident and lost the role to Kim Basinger.
Sean says that, ironically, the accident happened because she was trying to live down her reputation as a ‘difficult actress’.
‘I allowed myself to be talked into riding a horse by a stuntman,’ she says.
‘I'm frightened of horses — but I was aware of all the rumours about me being ‘difficult’ to work with, so I got on the horse to avoid causing any problems.
‘Of course, I fell off, broke my left shoulder and lost the part.
I started thinking: ‘What's going to happen to me next?’’
What happened next was the answer to every actress's prayers — an offer to play Tess Trueheart in Dick Tracy, starring opposite Warren Beatty.
However, things went horribly wrong yet again.
After just seven days filming, Sean was sacked.
‘I made a mistake casting her in the part and I felt very badly about it,’ was all Warren Beatty would say.
But Jeffrey Katzenberg, chairman of Walt Disney, says: ‘She seems to be a person who stirs up publicity for herself by attacking her directors and leading men.
The facts are that I asked Warren Beatty not to cast Sean Young in the role for Dick Tracy.’
And after seeing the results of three days filming, he was the one who asked Warren to replace her.
Nonsense, said Sean.
‘Basically, Beatty sacked me because I wouldn't sleep with him.’
This shot her into Hollywood's Hall of Fame — the one girl who said ‘No’ to Warren Beatty.
‘In the seven days we worked together, he kept making sexual advances,’ she says.
‘He tried to kiss me.
I was unresponsive and kept joking with him about it — but I made it clear I wasn't interested.
He wouldn't take the hint, though.
Once I had to push him away and say: ‘Stop it!’
On another occasion he drove me back to my hotel and I had to make it very clear it wasn't on.
‘What it really boiled down to was immense immaturity in a grown man.
I think he's obsessed with sex and feels he needs to conquer women.’
So, Sean claims, Hollywood's Casanova took his revenge.
‘I think he was very hurt when I wasn't interested in him.
He felt strange being with someone like me who was open with him yet didn't want to be involved.
Then I had a call from my agent saying that Warren had fired me.
‘He hadn't come up with any specific reason.
He never told me himself.
He just wiped me out.’
The result was that Sean was replaced in her role as Tess Trueheart by the unknown actress Glenne Headly — and Dick Tracy went on to become one of the biggest hits of last year.
Sean admits it was a tough time and it taught her some hard lessons.
‘It made me realise that people in showbusiness are really rather nasty,’ she says.
‘Just because they're charming doesn't mean you can trust them.’
She says she just couldn't have made it through those times without the support of her actor boyfriend, Robert Lugan.
‘I'd never have expected him to be as supportive as he was,’ says Sean, ‘but it brought us closer together.
I'm sure he felt like attacking Woods — but, in fact, he also felt sorry for him.’
Sean met Robert while filming Love And Orchids in 1985.
‘My worst film,’ says Sean.
‘I'm like a mannequin.
The consolation was Robert.
We met in a bar.
I looked up and the light was shining through some leaves across his face.
He has beautiful skin; it was love at first sight.
‘Since then, he's seen me through some incredible times.
Fortunately, he's tremendously secure.
It's hard for most men to be with successful women but Robert is very proud of me.’
The couple live in Arizona and have an apartment in New York.
It's a deliberate decision to stay away from the glitter and tinsel.
‘During 1989 and 1990 I never showed up in Hollywood,’ says Sean.
‘I don't go to parties and I hate the atmosphere where people are always comparing and judging.
‘I can put on a dress and go to an awards ceremony.
But to live in that environment and make friends with people who are fairly lost is difficult.’
You can see why Sean Young has never really fitted in.
‘If I don't like someone I simply can't hide it,’ she says.
She's strong, forthright and doesn't mind who she upsets — yet she still survives at the top of her profession.
Whatever else people might think about Sean Young, they certainly can't ignore her.
Warren Beatty: ‘He's obsessed with sex and needs to conquer women’
Screen Bride: Sean co-stars with Matt Dillon in A Kiss Before Dying
Happy couple: ‘I met Robert in a bar: It was love at first sight’
‘People who are in showbusiness are really rather nasty’
TESSA WOOD
There are days when it's best to pretend that the children are someone else's
How can you place a value on memories?
There was love in that sofa, I said to George, love for which the Morrisons would have paid a fortune if he hadn't been so prissy.
He said that I was greedy.
I said that greed didn't come into it.
Pride did.
‘Oh, yes?’ he said, ‘And what about the children?’
There are days when it's best to pretend that the children belong to someone else and yesterday was one of them.
But none of it matters now The sofa's gone.
The reason our house has looked like a junk yard since 1985 is because a three-seater the colour and shape of junk has been there.
George finally saw this last week and agreed to buy a new one, although not until 1997 when we might have the money.
I said this was daft.
We could raise at least half the cost of a new one by selling the old one.
I see hope where George sees rejection.
He said who would want a battered old thing with broken springs and stains down the back?
I said plenty of people because the stains represented life.
‘Forget it!’ he said.
But I didn't.
I advertised it —‘Enormous family sofa, solid as a rock, potential heirloom.
Bargain!’
Two people replied — a man who offered to take it away for a fiver and Mrs Morrison, who dropped in for a quick look and said she wanted something for her playroom.
I told her ours was perfect.
I told her I'd breast-fed the children on it and taught them to read by the fire on it, and that it had been wonderful as a family gathering place for many years.
All it wanted was a new cover, I said, and she almost looked convinced when I said I was sure we could reach a price that suited us both.
She said she'd come back with her husband and I said fine because my husband was the business head of our family as well.
This was sales talk.
It took George several hours to get used to the fact that I was deceitful and irresponsible, but eventually he agreed that we might as well get as good a price as we could — £10, he thought, if they hadn't spotted the broken springs.
‘Are you off your head?’
I bawled at him.
I told him the love and character evident in that sofa was worth at least £50.
I'd have told him all about the breastfeeding and bonding if the Morrisons hadn't chosen that moment to arrive on the doorstep with Christopher and Katy who'd been to Bertelli's for their weekly dose of colourings, preservatives and sugar.
They followed us into the sitting room
‘My husband thinks £150 is a fair price,’ I said.
Mr Morrison looked instantly distraught, possibly because of the air which whistled down George's nostrils as he gasped in horror, or perhaps because of the children who were ferreting down the sides and back for valuables.
George moved to stand on my foot just as Katy discovered a pound coin and Christopher yelled it was his.
I laughed gaily so the Morrisons would see how jolly the sofa could be.
Mrs Morrison said: ‘I was hoping to pay £50.’
Christopher, making a grab for the money, lunged and fell into George who fell into the coffee table and knocked over a vase of daisies, drenching the sofa, the carpet and a large part of Mrs Morrison.
I knew at once that George foresaw a lawsuit.
He leaped into action, hurling towels at Mrs Morrison and urging her to have the sofa, now it was ruined, for whatever she liked.
I said all right, £50, and he had it tied to the roof of their car before they could make a run for it.
Now we have nothing to sit on.
But there's a stain on our carpet which will join the store of indelible memories left by the sofa.
JUNE IN THE GARDEN
LET THOSE ROSES GROW ON YOU!
by Stefan Buczacki
Summer just wouldn't be the same without them.
But if you haven't got roses in your garden, it's not too late to plant now.
You can even grow them in pots for a balcony
The rose is one of our national flowers and this month sees it in its full glory.
But can you actually plant roses in June?
Well, the old gardeners would have been horrified at the idea but with modern container-raised plants anything's possible.
And the good thing about choosing roses now is that you can see them in flower before you buy.
Choose plants with plenty of lush foliage without any thin, spindly shoots.
Check that the roots are well covered — careless planting in the container and continual watering can leave the upper roots exposed.
Also avoid any containers with the surface of the compost covered in moss and weeds.
Prepare your planting spot by digging in some organic matter, then fork in a handful of bonemeal to encourage the roots to spread out into the soil.
Water well, then carefully remove the container and gently tease out the outer roots, so they don't develop in the wrong direction.
Do the planting on a cool evening, then finally water well.
Bush roses are the types that you'll see massed in public parks.
They're divided into hybrid teas, which normally have one large bloom at the end of each stem and are often quite highly scented, and floribundas, which have a group of smaller blooms and usually less scent.
All need annual pruning but many flower for long periods and come in lots of colours.
My favourites are the shrubs.
Most are tall-growing, need little pruning and often have delicious perfume.
Most flower for just a short season and usually have white, pink or red blooms.
Miniature roses need little pruning and are ideal for planting around terraces or in pots.
Some are likely to be baby floribundas, others are perfect scaled-down hybrid teas.
Most of the climbing roses are varieties of the main rose groups.
So there are climbing hybrid teas like the pale yellow Dreaming Spires, climbing floribundas such as the fiery red Danse du Feu, and even some miniatures like the little pink Pompon de Paris.
KEEP WEEDS IN CHECK
Whatever weather we have now, the weeds will love it.
What you do depends on the type of weeds concerned, the time of the year, the weather and where they grow.
Annuals like shepherd's purse and groundsel must be dealt with before they've set seed, and preferably before they've flowered.
If they're in borders and shrubberies, use a thick organic mulch, which will starve the young seedlings of light and air.
But among vegetables, soft fruit and annual bedding plants, it's best to use a hoe.
Or if they're well grown, use a rake to collect them together for composting.
In very wet weather you may need to resort to a weedkiller like Weedol to kill annual weed seedlings, although chemicals are best kept for really problematic weeds.
Lawns may need a selective weedkiller to get rid of dandelions and other weeds yet leave your grass unharmed, while the systematic weedkiller, Tumbleweed, will deal with bindweed and ground elder.
But do read the directions carefully to ensure you're using the correct weedkiller in the right way.
TIPS FOR THE MONTH
Houseplants, like the rest of us, enjoy a summer holiday, so give them the benefit of a spell in the fresh air — they'll love it.
Their foliage will be washed by the rain water and they'll enjoy the natural variations in temperature.
Choose a semi-shady spot to avoid scorching the leaves.
Plant out bedding plants, hanging baskets and window boxes now.
As strawberries ripen, push some straw or plastic sheeting under them so they can't rot on the soil.
And once they've been picked, cut the foliage back hard to a few centimetres from the crowns to stimulate new growth.
If you're planting aquatic plants use purpose-made planting baskets and fill them with soil — don't use organic matter or fertiliser.
Q
I think I should have pruned some of my flowering shrubs this spring, is it too late now?
A
I have two rules with pruning ornamental shrubs: if the shrub is like jasmine or forsythia and flowers before midsummer, prune it as soon as the flowers have faded.
If it flowers after midsummer, leave it until the autumn or very early next spring.
If you're in any doubt about it, don't — you'll do less harm if you leave it than if you prune at the wrong time.
FATHER'S DAY SPECIAL
THE TROUBLE WITH MY DAD!
They come in all shapes and sizes, from tall and skinny to short and round, with every conceivable variation in between.
Some sport Gazza crops, while others lost their hair back in the mists of time.
Gruff and grumpy, sweet and saintly, or as changeable as the British weather, no two dads are alike.
But this Sunday they've all got something in common— it's Father's Day, the one day of the year when they can expect to be thoroughly pampered and spoiled by the rest of the family for a change.
It's a chance for them to forget the washing up and their household chores, put their feet up and settle down for a comfortable snooze in front of their favourite television programme (which really doesn't sound much different from normal, does it?)
To find out exactly why dads are so special, June Walton asked a group of children from Pirton Lane Infants School in Luton to tell us about theirs.
The answers they gave were very revealing…
‘My dad is nearly 32.
He can fix everything — washing machines, the fridge and the car.
Sometimes we go out to McDonalds.
He saves all his coppers and keeps them in his tin.
Me and Mummy know where he hides it and my mum takes some.
He says to her: ‘Don't you nick my money.’
My dad's funny looking and he's got hair just like Jason Donovan.
We call him Jason Daddy.’
‘My dad looks very like me, he has everything the same as me — even the same hair and freckles all over his face.
He really likes Gazza.
When he took me to a football match we saw Paul Gascoigne and I was allowed to go on the pitch.
The nicest thing about my dad is that he often takes me along to work with him.
You must know what my dad does — he's a tipper-lorry driver.’
‘My dad has blue eyes and black hair.
he's big.
He's more than ten — he's 41!
He likes making things out of wood.
He's helping me to make a chair.
He plays with me and helps my mummy.
On Father's Day he'll have a lie-in and get loads of presents — a chocolate, a jumper and a T-shirt, which he'd probably like ‘Daddy’ written on.’
‘My dad can fix cars.
He wears glasses because he can't see clearly.
He's very, very clever and he teaches me sums and helps me with my homework.
At bedtime he reads me stories.
When he sees a video of me on our telly, he says: ‘Oh no, not her again!’
‘My dad is quite a small man.
When he isn't at work he likes to go out shopping, especially for food.
On Father's Day I think what he'd like best is to go shopping and then he'll take me out, to Dunstable Downs to see the gliders.’
‘My dad plays tricks on me and I play them on him.
Every night at bedtime I hide his hairbrush in his pillow and sometimes he hides my shoes in the washing machine.
I call my dad Roderick and he calls me Louiserick.’
‘My dad likes making models and playing football.
He comes from Scotland, that's why I'm called Scott, but he doesn't wear a kilt.
The best thing he does is play football with a spongy ball in the hall.
Once he kicked it and broke a picture.
I'm buying him a model for Father's Day.
We had robbers but the police found the stuff they nicked.’
‘My dad has got very spiky hair and glasses and his face looks like mine, but he still has all his teeth.
He isn't a very funny man.
What he'd like best is to stay in bed on Father's Day.
He works very hard and when he's not working at his job he likes to work on the car.’
‘My dad builds houses but he didn't build my house.
God made my house.
I have a sister — a twin — but I'm older than Sinead.
My dad calls me Tiger and calls her Tiger, too.
I helped my dad clear up the house — he's very good at that.
My dad says I can't have sweets because I had to have some teeth out.
And he doesn't play games because he's too big now — he's 34.’
‘My favourite thing is when my daddy gives me a piggy-back.
He smokes and he drinks a lot of beer.
He plays golf but he's lazy — he falls asleep afterwards!
He's an electrician but he isn't any good in the house.’
‘My dad's got brown hair and glasses and he's a funny man.
The nicest thing is he cuddles me.
I think he likes to clean the car.
He's good about helping my mum in the house.
When my sister was a baby he used to get up in the night to see her.
I'm going to make him a card with Happy Father's Day on it and a star on it.
His name is Jeff.
he calls me Steph but sometimes he calls me Piggy.’
‘He's got black hair and he goes to work but I don't know where, and he wears this blue thing over his clothes.
He plays catch with me but he doesn't like it because he broke his leg playing football.
He's good at dropping milk bottles, so he hates the bottles but he likes milk.
The best thing about him is that I like him.
When I'm fighting my sister he kicks me on the wotsit.’
‘My dad is very tall and he puts lots of gel on his hair sometimes because he thinks it looks nice.
He works in the roller factory.
When he isn't at work he likes to take us out to visit our nanny.
The thing he's very good at is opening bottles and he's quite clever at other things, too.
I wouldn't want to change my daddy for anyone else ever, because I really like him just how he is.’
‘He used to play rugby but he doesn't play now because he doesn't like it anymore.
On Father's Day he'll ask me and my brother to bring him cornflakes in bed and a cup of tea.
Sometimes he drinks too much beer and goes to sleep in the toilet.’
‘My dad's got all his teeth’
‘He plays golf but he's lazy’
‘Sometimes he calls me Piggy’
‘My dad's good at dropping milk bottles’
‘He goes to sleep in the toilet’
‘He often takes me to work with him’
‘He's got hair just like Jason Donovan’
‘Dad's very, very clever and he teaches me sums’
Dear Dr Alan
Dr Alan Maryon Davis answers all your health questions and medical problems — he's here to help and advise you
HAS HE GOT AN ULCER?
For the past few months my husband, who's 43 and a smoker, has been getting a sharp pain in the pit of his stomach, which he's been ‘curing’ with a glass of milk.
I'm worried it might be an ulcer but he refuses to see a doctor.
What do you suggest he should do?
It certainly sounds as if he might have a peptic ulcer — especially as the pain is eased by milk.
As many as one person in 10 has an ulcer at some time in their lives — mostly men and mostly in early middle age.
The most common type is a duodenal ulcer, which is aggravated by the three Ss — stress, smoking and skipping meals.
If he sorts these out (easier said than done, I know), there's every chance the ulcer will heal itself.
Try to persuade him to make a real effort to give up smoking — he may put on a bit of weight but he can tackle that later — and to eat frequent snacks throughout the day instead of two or three heavy meals.
He should also avoid drinking alcohol.
If his pains don't subside within a few weeks, he really ought to see the doctor.
There's now very effective medication for ulcers.
SHOULD I TAKE VITAMINS?
I'm 63 and for the past six years I have been taking two tablets each day for myxoedema of the thyroid.
I've heard there's a link between this condition and senile dementia.
Is there any vitamin I should be taking to avoid this happening?
No, it really isn't necessary — if you're eating a healthy balance of foods then no extra vitamin is going to make any difference.
Anyway, now that you're having treatment for the myxoedema, the risk of dementia has all but gone.
As you know myxoedema is a form of mental and physical slowness caused by an underactive thyroid gland and it is indeed one of the many causes of dementia.
But treatment soon reverses the effects.
The tablets you're taking are thyroxin (thyroid hormone) and they work wonders in speeding you up again.
Keep taking them and the chances are you'll stay as mentally sharp as ever.
MY PERIODS WON'T START
Three years ago I stopped taking the Pill because we wanted to have a baby.
But my periods were very few and far between and I also had excessive and embarrassing hair growth.
I eventually saw a specialist who prescribed something to ‘kick-start’ my periods.
Happily, I became pregnant and the hair disappeared.
My daughter's now 10 months old and I still haven't started my periods again.
What's going on?
It sounds to me as though your hormones are a bit sluggish.
The menstrual cycle is governed by a complex system of hormones from the hypothalamus area of the brain, the pituitary gland just  beneath it and the ovaries themselves.
Although the system works brilliantly in most women, it can easily be disrupted — by stress or crash dieting for instance.
But of course pregnancy and breast-feeding are the most common causes.
Another frequent cause is the Pill, which can make the ovaries produce excessive androgens (male-type hormones)— hence the hairiness.
Ten months is quite long enough to wait and you should try to get back to the specialist for another course of the ‘kick-start’ treatment.
I'VE GOT CONSTIPATION
Please can you tell me what to take for constipation and wind?
I keep getting awful pains in my side and it makes me go all hot.
I'm 69 years old.
Poor you — it's obviously very uncomfortable.
The first thing is to make sure your diet isn't the cause.
Are you eating enough foods rich in fibre to get the roughage you need to smooth the passage of the motions through your system?
Have a high fibre (wholegrain) cereal for breakfast, eat chunky wholemeal bread sandwiches, and have at least two good portions of vegetables and two pieces of fruit per day.
After a week or so of this high fibre diet, your constipation should ease and your normal bowel habits return.
Don't be surprised, though, if the wind is still a problem for a while.
It takes some weeks for the normal bowel bacteria to adjust.
For that ask your chemist for charcoal biscuits or a preparation for flatulence — but avoid laxatives and purgatives, which don't solve the basic problem.
If your constipation doesn't improve, especially if it happened for no obvious reason after years of no trouble, then see your doctor.
At your age it may be caused by diverticulitis, a polyp, or some other disorder of the colon, which might need specialist treatment.
THEY NEED A CURE
Both my son, 24, and daughter, 21, are suffering from glandular fever.
They've both had recurring attacks and have lost a lot of weight.
My daughter is really knocked out by it and very depressed.
Can you suggest anything to hasten their recovery?
I'm afraid it's mainly a matter of waiting until their own natural defences beat off the viruses that cause it.
Glandular fever is an infectious disease that hits many older children, teenagers and young adults.
It causes a flu-like illness with high fever and swollen lymph nodes.
Severe cases may cause temporary jaundice.
Recovery takes about a month but bouts of fever and liverishness can keep returning for some while.
Loss of appetite, fatigue and depression can linger longer still.
If they've had it for more than a month, encourage them to get out for some fresh air but not too much vigorous exercise.
They should eat a balanced diet supplemented with multivitamin tablets, avoid alcohol and get plenty of sleep.
Dear Sue
Don't just sit there and worry alone — if you've got a problem and you feel you need some help, write to Sue Frost
SHOULD I STAY MARRIED?
I'm 21, I've been married for four years and I have two children aged three and one.
I haven't been happy for the last few months and when an old girlfriend asked me out I went along and enjoyed myself.
My husband told me I ought to be getting out more, so my friend and I began to go out once a fortnight.
Now I've met someone.
I was devastated when he said he fancied me but we've started a relationship.
I know his feelings towards me are genuine and he wants me and my children as part of his life.
Although I still love my husband, we haven't been happy since my son was born.
I even suspected him of having an affair.
What should I do — stay married and unhappy, or go with a man who's more loving than anyone I've ever known?
Life with your lover might look more appealing now but unless you discover what's gone wrong between you and your husband, it's likely that you'll end up feeling just as discontented with another man.
No partnership has a guarantee of happiness, and if you give up at the first hint of discord you'll never find the rewards a mature and honest relationship can bring.
Accept that the months after a birth are often very difficult and talk to your husband about how you feel.
Even if you decide there's no future for you together, you owe it to your children to give this marriage your very best shot.
DO YOU THINK I'M BISEXUAL?
I feel so ashamed.
I'm turned on by the thought of making love to women.
I've never had a lesbian relationship and I've had lots of boyfriends.
I've been with my current boyfriend for four years and we have a daughter.
Sex with him never really satisfies me and only works if I imagine I'm with a woman.
Could I be bisexual or is this just a fantasy?
I also feel it would be unfair to my daughter to have an affair with a woman.
One thing's certain: you're dissatisfied with your boyfriend and this should be tackled.
Improving your sex life shouldn't be impossible, providing you still care for him.
If not, it's time to ask what can be salvaged from the partnership.
But whatever you eventually discover about your sexuality, your love for your daughter demands that you deal with her father sensitively.
If you'd like to talk over your sexual feelings, ring the Gay and Lesbian Switchboard.
There's no need for you to feel ashamed.
I MET HIM ON HOLIDAY
On holiday I teamed up with the nicest boy I've ever met — but everyone says it's just a holiday romance.
Now I cry every time I write to him and I daren't go out in case I meet somebody else.
I've never felt this way before.
Please tell me holiday romances can work out.
They do.
But it's rare and it depends on all kinds of things — like how mature you both are, how much experience of relationships you have and how well you could cope with time spent apart.
If you're scared of going out because you may meet someone else, I'd say your chances look slim.
But don't give up.
Keep calm and see how things develop.
I CAN'T STOP LOVING HER
Last summer I split up with my girlfriend after five tumultuous but happy years.
We wanted to marry but circumstances didn't permit, and when I lost my job I decided to leave.
I didn't want to go but I thought she deserved a better life than I could offer.
She can't forgive me for leaving and I've had to accept that our relationship's finally over.
But I can't stop loving her.
When I wake I think of her.
All day she's in my thoughts.
I miss her terribly and I'm so lonely.
I can't imagine ever loving anyone else as much.
I now have good career prospects but I feel as if I've lost my soul
I suspect you're not viewing the past entirely clearly.
There's no situation so dire that people who love each other can't see it through.
And as your career prospects have changed so dramatically in just a year, I'd say your girlfriend was probably justified in feeling you left her for no good reason.
Maybe for her the tumult of your years together outweighed the happiness.
Whatever, you must put this relationship in perspective.
It was far from perfect and now it's over.
If you learn from it there's an excellent chance that love will come your way again, this time with a happier outcome.
THIS MAN'S SO PERSISTENT
I'm a widow of 70 and for the past eight years there's been a very persistent man in my life.
He's now 80 and he wants me to live with him — he says he wants to take care of me.
I've always been poor — my husband died when I was 34 — and this man's very well-off.
I've spent all this time trying to make up my mind.
I'd be comfortable, of course, but I'd like to be happy, too.
I've told him I don't love him and he calls me daft, saying he's got enough love for both of us.
But I have two lovely daughters and two sons, and they've always looked after me and loved me.
Also, I've been on my own for 30 years and I'm rather set in my ways.
Am I silly to pass this offer up?
I don't doubt your friend's sincerity — but as he's 80 the brutal truth is you might find yourself looking after him!
Of course, you might live perfectly happily together but you might also hanker for your lost independence.
You could ask your children what they think — that might help you make up your mind.
But as you've spent so long thinking it over, I suspect that, deep down, you've decided it isn't really worth the risk.
Why not just keep the friendship going?
HOW CAN SUE HELP?
You can phone Sue Frost on our special helplines.
Just dial the number next to the topic that interests you — at any time, day or night.
Calls are charged at 34p per minute at cheap times and 45p per minute at all other times.
We hope you find these advice lines useful.
Are you eating too much?
How to cope with an unwanted pregnancy
How to cope with the menopause
How to be friends and lovers with your partner
Should you divorce or not?
How to cope with sexual abuse
What to do if you can't conceive
How to cope with infidelity
What to do if your partner hits you
Have you gone off sex?
How to beat depression
How to beat anxiety