

WORLD EXCLUSIVE Why my daughter means so much YASMIN LE BON WIN! 20 quick 'n' easy microwaves DEAF AND BLIND Read this woman's remarkable story CLAIRE Two cheers for the new abortion pill REAL LIFE ‘My son's a GAMBLER’ Fighting for you…
LYNN FAULDS WOOD RACHEL Why I hate my stomach and love eating out with Craig SLIMMING I lost 5½ stone in a year…
So could Odette help you ?
HAVE A GREAT TIME WITH WOMAN 
CALIFORNIA AND HAWAII
Bargain hols!
This really is the holiday of a lifetime — the excitement of California's most famous, fabulous cities and a week — or two — of relaxation on some of the most wonderful beaches in the world.
You'll swim in the clear blue water of the Pacific, sit on palm-fringed beaches watching magical sunsets and see Hawaii's lush plantations and forests.
YOUR ITINERARY
Day 1
You'll fly with Delta Airlines from Gatwick to Los Angeles and transfer to the Hollywood Holiday Inn for three nights.
Facing the Hollywood Hills, it's close to the shops, restaurants and the world-famous Hollywood Boulevard, and has a swimming pool and spectacular revolving restaurant.
Day 2 and 3
Free to explore.
Beverly Hills, Bel Air, the fabulous Disneyland Magic Kingdom and Universal Studies are all nearby.
Day 4
Fly to Honolulu, where you'll be greeted by the traditional garland of flowers, the lei.
We'll take you to the lively and colourful resort of Waikiki and the Outrigger Village Hotel, just five minutes' stroll from miles of golden sand.
All bedrooms have air-conditioning, colour TV, shower and WC, and there's a swimming pool, bar and several restaurants.
Day 5 to 10
Time will fly by as you relax in the glorious sunshine, practise your water sports or sip an exotic cocktail under the cloudless sky.
Whatever your taste in food, you'll love Waikiki's lively restaurants.
And if you want to book an extra week at Waikiki, it will cost just –49.
Day 11
Leave Honolulu and fly to San Francisco where you'll stay for two nights at the Holiday Inn Golden Gateway.
Day 12
Free in San Francisco to explore Chinatown, browse in the shops of Fisherman's Wharf, ride a cable-car up and down the steep streets or visit the grim fortress of Alcatraz.
Day 13
Fly from San Francisco to Gatwick via  Cincinnati to arrive on the morning of day 14.
Do join us!
DEPARTURE DATES
Weekly from October 3–November 28 1991 and April 2–May 28 1992 
Three nights in LA, two in San Francisco and seven in Hawaii
Excellent hotels
An extra week in Hawaii for only £49
13 nights from £849
•Price is per person, based on 12 nights hotel accommodation, for Oct and Nov departures.
It doesn't include insurance, passport costs, optional excursions, meals or personal expenditure
For full details send the reply coupon below or phone our 24-hour brochure service on 0533 559855
Hawaiian dream: soak up the sun and the happy, lively atmosphere of the golden sands of Waikiki Beach
Riding high: the San Francisco streets — which overlook Alcatraz
Bright lights: live life in the fast land in downtown Los Angeles
I don't know why, but we don't have a microwave.
We don't have a dishwasher either but I'm assured that these two things can Totally Change Your Life and you wonder how you ever lived without them.
The problem is, I'm not sure what you do with all the spare time these two machines (and all the rest) suddenly provide.
I discovered that with our video: we tape things we could watch at the time, just to prove, I suppose that video recorders are wonderful things.
Then we sit there talking and reading, thinking we'll catch up with the recording in a couple of days — only we never do.
Strange thing, progress.
Anyway, if they'd be wasted on me, I hope our giveaway of 20 free microwaves in this issue will be a great help to you.
You can find out how to apply for yours on page 37.
Good luck!
As promised last week, there's also a four-page report on slimming which I've found really interesting since it involves one of the finalists in our recent 16+ Model Of The Year competition.
Her name is Odette Smith and when I helped judge the finals, I had no idea what lay behind her fight to look as good as she did on the day.
With plenty to read, I hope you enjoy this week's issue and, as a tantalising PS — look out for news of more smashing free gifts in WOMAN later this month.
It's all in woman THIS WEEK
YOU AND US
A funny story?
You want to let off steam?
Some good news?
A cause for concern?
Then tell us.
We'd love to hear from you!
Please send your letters to YOU and US,WOMAN , King's Reach Tower, Stamford Street, London SE1 9LS.
We'll pay £5 for every original letter published
STAR LETTER
Why do magazines assume that women who are obsessed with their figures always want to lose weight.
I'm 17 and need to gain weight.
It's very annoying to be faced every week with magazines introducing new slimming diets.
Those women who need to gain weight are treated like a rare breed.
Do we ever see articles or helpful hints aimed at us?
No!
Putting on weight isn't as easy as it seems — it's not just a matter of eating calorie-crammed foods.
We still have to eat healthily.
Winners receive an anniversary set from Pyrex, currently celebrating their seventy-fifth birthday
MANY THANKS
I'm 70 and housebound having suffered two strokes.
I'd just like to say thank you to WOMAN (and my son) for bringing the outside world to me.
Thank you,WOMAN , for helping me to take pride in myself again, by giving away a free lipstick and perfume recently.
My advice to all housebound people?
Keep your pride and remember you're not helpless just because you're not active any more.
CHEAP TO BOOT!
I was out with my children when we passed a shoe shop with some wellington boots outside.
There were three styles in a row with a big notice saying: ‘Wellingtons — £1’.
My youngest piped up: ‘Look wellies three for a pound!’
SECRET SNIP
The things children say!
My sister's neighbour has five small children.
Imagine our laughter when one of them told us her daddy had gone into hospital.
Concerned, we asked why and over came the five-year-old's reply: ‘Oh, because we're not allowed to have any more babies!’
The very private little operation had been well and truly let out of the bag.
HAPPINESS IS…
Reading a letter in WOMAN about the definition of happiness, I decided to write and give my idea of what it is.
Two years ago I became very ill and couldn't get out of bed or even a chair without help.
But thanks to my doctor and my husband's help, I'm able to walk again.
The first time I walked in the park, it was marvellous.
I was so thrilled, I cried.
Walking is such a simple thing and yet we all take it very much for granted.
HAPPY DOGS…
I felt I must congratulate you on your recent issue featuring a wonderful picture of doggie megamum Poppy and her beautiful litter of puppies.
How refreshing it was to see ordinary, normal-looking dogs after all the fuss and pomposity of the so-called pedigree dogs at Crufts.
Those lovely pups looked more appealing than any pedigree breed I've seen.
Thanks once again for a charming picture — it made me smile all day.
…
UNHAPPY DOGS
I feel I have to respond to the article by Mandy Bruce describing her experience of breeding puppies from her bitch, Poppy.
It was a funny article and I thoroughly enjoyed it.
However, in the last paragraph she says: ‘The biggest worry is finding homes.’
Surely she should have thought of this before breeding from Poppy.
There are so many unwanted dogs on the streets that an extra litter of unplanned puppies only adds to the problem.
SMALL TALK
For a Sunday treat we took our three girls, Sarah, aged seven, Becky, aged three, and baby Charlotte to the zoo.
They were having a great time looking at the animals and listening as we explained which countries they were all from.
But when we reached the kangaroos, a couple of them started mating.
I was wondering however to explain what they were doing when Becky shouted: ‘Look Mummy, one's giving the other one a piggyback!’
 Winners receive a BaByliss Aqua Massager and 10 bottles of Slazenger Sport Shower Gel
STONED FRUIT
I couldn't help smiling when I read a recipe for nectarines in liqueur.
The first line read: 6 nectarines, stoned Well they would be, wouldn't they?
I can't wait to try them!
WE'RE RICH
My seven-year-old daughter, Victoria, recently lost a couple of teeth and the tooth fairy dutifully paid a visit.
A couple of days later I was telling my sister over the phone how short of money I was.
At the end of the conversation, my lovely daughter handed me her tooth money and said: ‘It'll be all right, Mummy.
I've got plenty more teeth in my mouth!’
HIDDEN FRUIT!
We've never been keen gardeners but last year we decided to make a special effort and bought a big selection of plants and seeds.
We were showing off our handiwork to some friends but admitted we were puzzled by the bedding plants, grown from seed, which produced attractive foliage but nothing else.
Our friend looked at them, then lifted the leaves to expose a lovely row of radishes we never knew we had!
HUMOROUS VEIN
After careful scrutiny of my poor old varicosed legs, my grand-daughter Theresa turned to her mother and asked: ‘Why does Granny wear her legs inside out?’
It made me feel like an old sock!
A REAL BARGAIN
My just married son decided to build a wall in his back garden and went along to a bricklayer's yard to buy a quantity of bricks.
When he asked the sales assistant about the cost, the reply was: ‘The more you buy, the cheaper they are.’
After a moment my son said: ‘Okay, just keep loading them into the van until they're free!’
SALES TECHNIQUE
My son was having trouble selling his car until he put a newly-worded advert in the local paper: ‘…extortionately priced at £1,100 but I relish a good argument!’
He sold it in no time — at the price he originally wanted.
THIS BEAUTIFUL BRACELET FREE
If you buy the whole set for £8 we will send you these delightful 18-carat gold-plated stud earrings free
This is the second week of our great jewellery offer.
And now's your chance to claim this beautiful simulated pearl bracelet ABSOLUTELY FREE.
Simply collect two of our special vouchers and send them, with an sae, to the address below.
This is the second voucher.
Don't worry if you missed the first one last week, just make sure you get next week's issue — it will have another voucher inside, but that will be the last one.
You can also buy matching necklaces and earrings at bargain prices.
The simulated pearl necklaces are in two lengths — 16″, £2; or 24″, £3.
You can buy two pairs of earrings, drops and studs, for £3 and extra bracelets for £1 (sorry, only one free bracelet per household).
And if you buy the whole set for £8, we'll send you these delightful 18-carat gold-plated stud earrings absolutely free.
VOUCHER 2 All you have to do is save two of these special vouchers for your free bracelet.
One more voucher will appear in WOMAN next week.
EARN YOUR STRIPES!
They're bold, bright, fun to wear and yes, they really can be flattering.
Get into line with our strong stripes.
Val Savage reports.
Pictures by Chris Lane
YOUNG STRIPES
You're guaranteed to make an impact in this great top with matching leggings.
We added a bright shirt as a dramatic contrast.
Red cotton men's shirt, £34.99, S–XL, by BSCO (081 451 2155).
Cotton/Lycra top, £20, and leggings, £28, both SML, from French Connection.
Red canvas plimsolls, £24.95, sizes 6½–13, by Converse
SMART STRIPES
A classic blazer is always a good buy and this one complements a look that's smart or casual.
Grey and white viscose/linen jacket, £39.99, sizes 10–14, from Hennes.
Linen/polyester mix skirt, £50, sizes 10–16, by PTA (071 437 8569).
Top, £12.99, sizes 8–18, by George at Asda.
Shoes, £27.99, sizes 3–8, Dolcis.
Earrings, Doreen.
Tights, Pretty Polly.
Scarf from Cornelia James 
MIXED STRIPES
If you're mixing stripes there are two things to remember: don't choose too many colours — you'll just look messy — and keep accessories to a minimum.
Navy and white cotton T-shirt, £12.99, and fine cotton/Lycra striped shorts, £12.99, both SML, from Hennes.
Red canvas plimsolls, £24.95, sizes 6½–13, by Converse
CASUAL STRIPES
This is the loyal look — casual separates with a mix of red, white and blue.
Red and white cotton striped T-shirt, £6.99, SML, from Hennes.
Navy cotton trousers, £33.99, sizes 8–16, by BSCO (081 451 2155).
Navy leather loafers, £29.99, sizes 3–8, Dolcis.
Belt, Next.
Earrings, Next.
Bracelets, Adrien Mann 
Style IN THE 90s
NEXT WEEK: KIDS' STUFF — GREAT CHILDREN'S CLOTHES
Hair and make-up by Natalie Jackson
WHAT'S NEW, WHAT'S GOOD, WHAT'S WHAT!
LOOKING GREAT!
ME and my LOOKS BY JAKKI BRAMBLES
She's a top Top Of The Pops presenter and the regular voice on Radio One's Drivetime.
But how does Jakki Brambles, 24, keep looking so good?
Q Your long hair looks so healthy.
How do you keep it like that?
A My hair is so thick, it's a hairdresser's nightmare — it takes ages to cut and blow-dry.
I wash it every other day and change my shampoo and conditioner every three months.
At the moment I'm using Wella's Sanara range, which I like as it's so gentle.
Q Are you happy with the way you look when you're on TV?
A No.
They put too much make-up on me, so I've decided to do it myself.
I use a light foundation with a little translucent power, beige and brown eyeshadow to highlight my greeny-blue eyes, a dark brown mascara, very little blusher and a light shade of coral lipstick.
Q What's your favourite way to relax?
A My husband's family live in a remote part of the Isle of Arran in Scotland, so we go there and do lots of walking.
It's a great way to exercise and enjoy the fresh air.
And it helps you get a good night's sleep.
Q How do you manage to stay so slim?
A I might look slim but I'm actually quite curvy — I take a size 12 in trousers and size 14 in tops.
When I first left home at 17, I was a lot bigger because I used to eat loads of junk food.
But my husband, Jim, straightened me out.
He's a vegetarian and cooks some amazing dishes — my favourite is lentil curry.
I've lost weight by eating healthier meals.
We both stay fit by playing squash and swimming twice a week.
Q What do you look like when you're not going off to do television or radio?
A Unrecognisable.
I don't wear any make-up, just a little tinted moisturiser to make my pale skin look a bit warmer.
And I usually pin my hair up and stick it under a baseball cap.
FREE!
FREE!
We've got 150 Efamolia Moisture Creams, usually £4.95 for 50ml, to give away.
Suitable for normal to dry skins, it contains evening primrose oil and vitamins A and E to keep skin smooth and supple.
Send your name and address on a postcard to WOMAN /Efamolia Offer, Vilma Barraclough PR, PO Box 767, Slough, Berkshire.
The first 150 names to be picked out of the bag after the closing date, April 15 1991, will win.
Good luck!
SPRING INTO SHAPE
It isn't too soon to start thinking of summer and what you'll look like in a swimsuit.
If you're not happy with what you see in the mirror, maybe you could do with changing your eating habits or getting more exercise.
The National Dairy Council has produced a 16-page booklet, prepared by nutritionists, called Off To A Fresh Start With Food And Fitness.
It includes everything you need to know about healthy eating, sport and exercise, along with tips on looking good and relaxation.
For a free copy, send a stamped addressed 6in x 9in envelope to The National Dairy Council, 5–7 John Price's Street, London W1N OAP.
Did you know…
Your head is big business — it weighs about 10lb or 4½kg and your hands weigh about 1lb or half a kg each.
Your brain accounts for about two per cent of your body weight.
A woman's body weight includes 36 per cent muscle and 28 per cent fat, but man has 42 per cent muscle and 18 per cent fat — isn't that unfair!
Our bodies have 556 muscles.
COTTON ON!
Still one of the best buys ever — for you or him.
Cotton cord jackets, £55.99 each, sizes S–XL, from Wrangler (0602 655000).
Her: cotton polo-sweater (man's) £24.99, SML, from Next.
Cotton floral leggings with elasticated waist, £23.90, XS–L from Benetton.
Suede pumps, £29.99 sizes 3–8, from Dolcis.
Him: cotton sweatshirt –24.99, S–XL, from Wrangler.
Jeans from Levi.
Canvas boots, £10.99, sizes 6–11, from Saxone.
Looks FOR THE 90s
5 TIPS FOR FABULOUS NAILS
Soak your nails in warm olive oil once a week to keep them in good condition.
When you use a hand cream, massage it into your nails, too.
Try a dual-purpose hand and nail cream such as Ultracare 3 Rich Hand Cream, £1.06 for 75ml.
Always use a base coat under varnish to prevent the colour staining your nails.
Choose a one-coat polish to save time — try Maxi Quick Coat, £2.15, or Mavala Formula 2000, £2.26.
If you have brittle nails, keep them short and rounded.
Set aside 15 minutes a week for a mini manicure.
Shape nails, push back your cuticles and apply nail varnish.
Q
My husband complains that his aftershave stings.
Can he borrow my moisturiser instead?
A
Aftershave is one of the worst things you can use if you've just shaved.
As well as stinging, it also dries out the skin.
More men are now using a skin balm after shaving, and there are lots around, with or without fragrance.
As they help to soothe and moisturise, they're ideal for people with sensitive skins — and yes, men have them, too.
So get your husband to try some.
He probably hasn't got the same skin type as you, anyway, so don't let him dip into your moisturiser!
TRIED AND TESTED
FOOT CREAMS
It's nearly time to give up the tights and get out the sandals.
But how can you make your feet look really soft and smooth for summer?
Our panel tested some of the most popular foot creams:
LOOK OUT FOR…
New additions to the Sainsbury's J range of skincare products.
They've been specifically made for the over-35s, and some contain vitamin E and sunscreens to moisturise and protect skins from ultra-violet rays.
They're all fragrance-free, and prices start at around £2.
Immac's Special Touch Roll-On Lotion hair remover, £4.20.
It comes in a clever pack with an on/switch to control the flow of lotion on to the roller.
Just leave lotion on for five minutes.
Removing unwanted hair has never been so simple.
Curl Forme, £3.95 for 75ml, by top hairdresser Trevor Sorbie.
Designed to make the most of your hair's natural movement, it can be sprayed on wet or dry hair and will encourage any natural curls or waves that you have and add body and shine.
Suitable for all types of hair, it's available from major branches of Boots.
WHY I'M HELPING OTHER MOTHERS by Yasmin Le Bon
Yasmin Le Bon is envied by women the world over.
Perfect looks, a happy marriage, a successful career.
But her happiness is clouded by having to leave daughter Amber behind.
By Caro Thompson.
Main picture by Alan Olley
She has one of the most beautiful faces in the world.
Week after week it's splashed across fashion magazines, alongside tales of her jet-setting travels, stunning performances at fashion shows and star-studded lifestyle.
Yasmin Le Bon is a super model, the girl whose ability to transform a piece of clothing into an event means she's a favourite with top designers everywhere.
And she's married to Simon Le Bon, lead singer with Duran Duran, still the idol of countless teenagers.
What more could a girl possibly want?
Yasmin, who looks lovely even when she's not trying, smiles a little sadly when she hears that.
‘I know it all sounds good,’ she says, ‘but what I want most of all is to spend more time with my little girl — and that's the one thing I can't do at the moment.’
Amber Rose Tamara Le Bon is 20 months old, bursting with energy and as lovely to look at as her mum.
Her birth was a special triumph for Yasmin, who had suffered the misery of two miscarriages.
Now her daughter is the centre of her world, a reason to race home so she can enjoy every moment they have together.
Yasmin is expecting another child in the autumn and, although she will have to make some difficult decisions about whether or not to continue with her career after the baby is born, she is still determined to carry on working for as long as she can.
‘I'm working harder than ever now,’ Yasmin says.
‘Everyone thought I was marvellous to be back on the catwalk seven weeks after Amber was born.
But the bills were dropping on to the doormat and I felt I had no choice.
I'd taken a year off just before I found out I was pregnant, because I'd badly needed a break and then I couldn't work looking fat.
So it was relief to find that people still wanted to employ me.
‘My job means I have to travel.
I've been to eight countries in the last two weeks.
But it sounds a lot more exciting than it is.
I lose track of where I am and all I know is that my baby is on the other side of the world.
The other day, in America, the driver of my car said: ‘I don't know how you can leave her,’ and I felt like smacking him in the face.
Just because I'm smiling doesn't mean I'm not being tortured inside.’
While Yasmin's busy working, Simon's mum, Anne, looks after Amber at the Le Bons' home in London.
‘We've been terribly lucky,’ Yasmin says.
‘I was desperate when I rang Anne and asked for her help.
I couldn't bear the thought of leaving my baby with a stranger.
And neither Simon nor I fancied a stranger moving in with us.
Anne is divorced from Simon's father and was living alone, so she came to live with us and it has worked wonderfully.
She's a very special person.
I adore her, and it means the people in Amber's life are constant.’
The result is a happy little girl who is secure, confident and much loved.
‘She was running around at 10 months and she loves to sing all day long.
She even makes up her own songs,’ Yasmin says.
Simon is a devoted dad who always tried to be around as much as possible.
‘Because I was working, he saw more of her than I did when she was a baby,’ Yasmin says.
‘He did all the nappies in the early days.
He loves being a parent as much as I do, so we're looking forward to having another  baby.
Having Amber has definitely brought us closer together.
We love each other so much.’
Now Yasmin is pregnant again she is prepared for bouts of morning sickness.
‘With Amber I felt sick for the first five months,’ she says.
‘I put on lots of weight but I didn't weigh myself ever, and I didn't read any books.
I just thought I'd leave it to the experts.
‘So when I went into labour I hadn't really thought about whether or not to have an epidural.
Simon was with me all the time, holding my hand.
And after two and a half hours, the doctor made the decision for me and gave me the epidural.
Amber was born 12 hours later.
I then found out that I'd had an infection and raging temperature all the way through and Amber was born with it, too.
But she was very health and in a couple of days, we were both fine.
Twenty-six-year-old Yasmin says it took about a year and a great deal of hard work to get her figure back into shape, so she knows she'll have a hard task in front of her after the birth of her second baby.
But she says it was the tiredness she was unprepared for.
‘For the first six months with Amber, I was totally exhausted.
I think women should have at least four months with their baby without any other demands.
I kept going, but I began to feel useless and that I was no good as a wife, a mother or a model.
There's so much pressure on the woman to feel that you've got to do everything.
I had to learn to be more relaxed about things, to let other people take over.’
Yasmin says that she didn't start out to be a model.
‘When I was little, I thought I'd like a job helping people.
I did modelling as a stop-gap.
But the work has never stopped.
Even so, I'd still like to do something else — like studying architecture.
‘The hardest part for a model is not being allowed to have an off-day.
You have to keep smiling the whole time.’
Despite the drawbacks, Yasmin has been able to earn a lot of money.
‘I'm very lucky,’ she says.
‘And I try not to forget others who aren't so lucky.
Every month I write cheques for causes that I feel strongly about.’
One of Yasmin's causes is Y Care International.
‘It concentrates on mothers and children,’ she says.
‘And when I think of the Third-World mothers who don't even have a roof, and who still manage to love and care for their children, it's very humbling.
‘It makes me very sad to think about the children in the world who are suffering.
Y Care caught my imagination because they're being so positive.
‘Since Amber came along, I've thought even more about women who cope on so little.
I wish I could do more for them.’
For Yasmin, the highlight of any trip is coming home.
‘Amber always runs up for a hug when I walk through the door’, she says.
‘It's so wonderful — all I want is to be with her and I get terribly possessive.
I don't know how I'll ever let her go to school.
‘But it's wonderful to watch her growing and changing.
I don't have great plans for Amber's future — I don't mind what she does.
I'd rather she wasn't a competitive person because that breeds discontent.
Otherwise all we want is for her to have fun, and to enjoy happiness and health.’
SO HOW CAN YOU HELP?
As always, money is the answer to the problem of helping Y Care maintain and improve its remarkable work around the world.
Just £2, for example can feed someone in the Sudan for a whole month.
Just £12 — that's the equivalent of six packets of cigarettes — will provide drugs and medicines for a whole month at the Martandem health project in India.
And £18.50 is enough to pay for a year's supply of medicine and special foods for a sick child in San José.
Will you help Y Care?
No amount is too small for all the women and children who desperately need the support you can give them.
Please send what you can to WOMAN Appeal, Dr Judith Ennew, Director Care International, FREEPOST, London E17 3BR.
No stamp is needed.
Please make cheques or postal orders payable to Y Care International.
Thank you!
THANK GOD SOMEONE CARES…
Few people know about the work of Y Care International, the charity that Yasmin le Bon supports so enthusiastically.
Founded seven years ago by Terry Waite, the Archbishop of Canterbury's special envoy, who's still being held hostage in Beirut, it works with mothers and their families in some of the world's poorest countries.
And it's when you see these mothers there that the question: ‘Why Care?’ receives its most direct answer.
For in developing countries, it's women who do most of the work and receive least money.
So when famine strikes, it's women and children who suffer first.
As the most deprived section of the population, they need the most help — and urgently.
Y Care, the overseas relief and development agency of the YMCA, offers practical help to mothers.
It sets up health programmes to teach women about nutrition, hygiene and child care.
It has set up childcare facilities so that mothers can work knowing their kids are safe and well.
And all this is just part of a programme that seeks to help women help themselves.
In the Sudan, for example, two feeding centres have been set up near Khartoum.
In Madurai, India, Y Care staff from a health centre regularly visit 53 villages.
And in Martandem, another education project teaches mothers about family planning.
In San Jose, Costa Rica, Y Care has set up a mother and baby project to help refugees from neighbouring countries.
All these projects need urgent help.
The blue box (right) tells you what you can do!
Devoted Dad: ‘Simon loves being a parent just as much as I do’
Glamorous couple: ‘We've been so lucky.
We love each other so much’
Loving mum: ‘I don't have great plans for Amber's future.
I'd rather she wasn't competitive as that breeds discontent’
‘As a model you're not allowed to have an off-day’
ADVICE…
NEWS…
HELP…
woman HEALTH WATCH
BY JOHN ILLMAN
Autogenics, bio-feedback, colonics — confused?
There are so many forms of alternative medicine and there's no doubt it's getting more popular.
This is an excellent, balanced guide and tells you how to find out more.
Piatkus, £15.
This isn't a series of children's exams but a clear and readable guide to how your child will develop from birth to the age of five.
The trouble is that it will leave mothers feeling terrible if their child doesn't keep up.
Dorling Kindersley, £12.99.
Everyone suffers from them — and for many people they mean days of agonising pain.
This book explains the causes of headaches and migraine and offers advice on self-help, with easy-to-follow relaxation exercises.
Optima, £6.99.
HRT — what your doctor needs to know…
Family doctors don't know enough about hormone replacement therapy, according to a new study.
The treatment can offset some effects of menopause, including brittle bone disease — osteoporosis — but the study reveals that the wrong kind of HRT could expose them to the risk of womb cancer.
This can be stopped by giving the hormone progesterone as well as the normal dose of HRT.
But the study showed over 10 per cent of GPs were prescribing oestrogen only.
Linda Edwards of the National Osteoporosis Society says: ‘We're concerned that some GPs don't know about the different types of HRT.
Some tell women with side-effects that HRT doesn't suit them, without trying other preparations.’
An HRT booklet is available from the National Osteoporosis Society, PO Box 10, Radstock, Bath BA3 3YB, £1.27 inc p&p.
Keep cool to avoid cot deaths
New mothers are so terrified of their babies getting cold that they may run into the opposite danger.
Research shows that keeping babies too warm can be fatal.
The message is ‘Keep Cool’.
A report in The Lancet told how one baby who died was so hot its temperature was five degrees about normal five hours after death.
Doctors advise regular temperature checks, and a new thermometer allows you to do this without disturbing the baby.
It's simply placed between the mattress and the baby's upper body and normal, low and high temperatures are shown in different colours.
The Newborn Thermometer is available from shops or from Liquid Crystal Devices Ltd, Stonefield Way, Ruislip, Middlesex YA4 OYW (081 423 6070), £4.95 inc p&p.
OH, FOR A GOOD NIGHT'S SLEEP
If your man's snoring keeps you awake at night, just check his neck.
It seems me with a collar size of 17 inches or more are more likely to be heavy snorers.
That's one of the results of a survey carried out by Dr John Stradling, which found that 36,000 people in Britain suffer from sleep apnoea — it prevents air flowing freely to the lungs and results in loud snoring.
Dr Stradling says that although snorers may appear to be sleeping sounding, in fact they don't get enough proper rest.
The result is extreme fatigue and the risk of falling asleep while driving or operating machinery.
There may also be an increased risk of stroke, heart attack and high blood pressure.
It isn't a laughing matter — heavy snoring can kill, and sufferers should see their doctors.
Are you addicted to making love?
It sounds like a joke on a seaside postcard — what do you do if you're addicted to sex?
Well, psychiatrists now say that people who can't stop having sex need help just as much as alcoholics or drug addicts.
It's claimed that for some men and women it's like a drug they can't do without — and they end up like any other addict, ruining their lives, desperate for the next ‘fix’.
Now there's an organisation called Sex and Love Addicts Anonymous to help people overcome the problem.
British expert Dr Andrew Stanway says sex addiction is caused by emotional problems in early life.
‘It must be stressed that these people are having sex, not making love.
Ironically, they're on a never-ending search for the love they've never had,’ he says.
For those seeking help, the cure might seem drastic — like Alcoholics Anonymous, the group says the only way to beat the addiction is total abstinence!
A champ for diabetic kids
Many parents try to discourage their kids from reading comics — but this one is a must for diabetic children.
The Champion features a little boy called Owen and tells how he copies with the illness.
Drawn by Barry Appleby, of Beano fame, it's free from Ames Division, Bayer Diagnostics, Strawberry Hill, Newbury, Berks RG13 1JA.
UPDATE
Smokers may be storing up disease for their unborn children, according to the latest research.
A report in the American journal of Epidemiology says that a father's sperm and a mother's womb may be damaged by smoking and that the chances of cancer developing in their children were 20 per cent higher when the man smoked and 30 per cent higher when the woman smoked.
The Brook Helpline is the first 24-hour telephone helpline offering young people practical advice on birth control, emergency contraception, pregnancy, abortion, sexually transmitted diseases and other sex-related problems.
Ring 071 410 0420.
YOU AND YOUR BODY
This week: Cystic Fibrosis
A generation ago, a child with cystic fibrosis (CF) had little chance of surviving to adulthood.
Today, many adults with CF are enjoying life to the full.
CF is an inherited disorder that affects mainly the lungs and intestines, but also sometimes the nasal passages, liver and other organs.
The disorder interferes with normal secretions — the lungs clog up with sticky phlegm, digestive juices don't run properly so certain nutrients aren't absorbed, the sinuses get blocked and other problems, including diabetes, can occur.
What are the symptoms?
The commonest symptom is a persistent cough, with frequent bouts of chest infection.
Another is failure to put on weight, caused by poor absorption of nutrients.
Some symptoms can occur immediately after birth — the baby's first bowel movements may be too thick or sticky for him or her to pass.
Male sufferers are nearly always infertile because of a lack of sperm, but female fertility is usually unaffected.
How common is it?
It affects about one in 2,500 babies in this country — that's about 250 babies a year — boys and girls equally.
The gene that causes CF is carried (without causing the disorder itself) by about one in 20 of the white population, but it's very rate in black and other ethnic groups.
Who's most at risk?
Cystic fibrosis only occurs if a baby inherits a matched pair of CF genes, one from each parent.
A baby whose parents are both carriers has a one in four risk of inheriting the disorder.
Can it be prevented?
Unfortunately, as yet there's no simple test to tell if someone's a carrier.
But a test called chorionic villus sampling is available to check the developing embryo in mothers who've already had an affected child.
If the embryo is found to have matched CF genes, the parents will then be offered a termination.
How is CF treated?
The mainstay of treatment is a twice daily form of physiotherapy, usually done by the child's parents.
They lay the child with his head down and slap his chest to help drain the lungs.
Because there's a constant risk of chest infection, antibiotics are usually given at the first sign of a temperature.
Pancreatic enzymes are given to help improve digestion — and a high-protein, high fat diet with added vitamins is needed to make up for poor absorption of nutrients.
Treatment should be co-ordinated at cystic fibrosis centres or clinics, where the necessary expertise is to hand.
In very severely affected cases of cystic fibrosis it's sometimes necessary to perform a heart-lung transplant.
For further information:
Write to the cystic Fibrosis Research Trust, Alexandra House, 5 Blyth Road, Bromley, Kent BR1 3RS, enclosing a large sae.
Next week: Squints
ALTERNATIVE HEALTH
BY MICHAEL VAN STRATEN
Does your blood need a boost?
Poor circulation in the hands and feet is usually caused by a narrowing of the very tiny blood capillaries.
As these blood vessels nourish skin cells, when they don't work properly not enough nutrients get to some areas of the skin.
When this happens, you may be prone to chilblains and other circulatory problems.
Prevention is the answer and should combine both external and internal protection.
Caffeine, nicotine and alcohol are major culprits because they make blood vessels contract.
Don't forget that caffeine isn't just found in tea and coffee — it's a major component of cola drinks and chocolate, whether in a cup or a box!
Exercise is essential.
It doesn't matter what sort as long as it's regular and brisk enough to stimulate your circulation — you'll know this when you start to sweat and your cheeks develop a tingling glow.
Regular means at least three times a week and ideally you should exercise for 30 minutes every day.
Another aid to circulation problems is contrast bathing.
You'll need two plastic buckets, a couple of pounds of ‘pea shingle’ from the local builders' merchant and a few drops of rosemary oil available from health stores or chemists.
Put the shingle in one bucket and fill it with cold water.
Fill the other one with hot water and five drops of the oil.
Stand in the hot water for two minutes, then step into the cold water and ‘walk’ on the stones.
This increases the blood flow and works wonders for varicose veins and chilblains.
Massage, particularly aromatherapy, stimulates circulation in much the same way.
Extra vitamins — 400 units of vitamin E and of vitamin C — may also help.
FIGHTING FOR YOU!
She's television's top consumer expert and each month in woman , Watchdog presenter LYNN FAULDS WOOD writes about everything you need to know!
SLEEP TIGHT AND SAFELY
When it comes to going to bed at night I do all the wrong things — and I'll bet you do, too.
I don't shut all the internal doors and I certainly don't pull most plugs out at the socket.
Yet that is what fire chiefs say we should be doing if we want to make our homes safer.
A closed door stops draughts spreading the flames, and dramatically slows the progress of a fire.
Pulling plus out at night reduces the chances of faulty appliances causing a fire, or the flames spreading quickly around your electric circuit.
Once a fire has started, you could have as little as two minutes to get out before heat or toxic fumes overcome you.
Be careful, too, about leaving appliances on when you're about to go out, or even using Economy 7 overnight.
Some manufacturers now indicate in their instructions if their dishwashers, toasters or irons can be left switched on when you're not around.
TIP Check in the maker's manual or by consulting the company's customer services department whether or not your appliances are safe to leave on.
Keep a torch handy or buy smoke detectors with lights.
And practise a family fire drill.
CHILD'S PLAY
The idea behind play-pens is to keep a child playing safely and happily in one place.
Unfortunately, it appears that some play-pens themselves are dangerous.
The problem is the padded rims which are designed to cushion the child.
In fact, the plastic or cloth covering can come apart, exposing the foam padding.
Then it's all too easy for a baby to chew off a chunk and choke on it.
Play-pens are now having to be made to a new British Standard, which involves using a simulated ‘bite’ test.
They should be available in the next few months, so if you're thinking about buying a new one, look out for the label marked BS4863.
TIP If you've already got a play-pen of this kind, be sure to check the rim covering regularly.
DON'T GET CAUGHT AS AN APRIL FOOL!
With a new financial year starting next week, beware of clever sales gimmicks popular with companies.
Some send out letter claiming that special offers are available at this time of year.
Treat these with caution.
Watch out, too, for sales staff or reps who encourage you to ‘buy now’, implying that prices are about to go up on April 5.
In fact, prices can go up at any time, not necessarily in April.
To confuse customers, one company printed a new price list with the date of the previous financial year!
Some companies do have genuine offers after April 5 because they've begun a new accounting period and will be keen to impress their investors.
But if you have doubts, check with the Trading Standards office or Citizens Advice Bureau about any existing complaints against a particular company.
TIP Get several estimates, or recommendations from friends or consult Which? magazine before deciding whether any goods or services you're offered are in fact good value.
IS THERE DANGER IN YOUR DISHWASHER?
Even companies like M&S have to do it from time: warn customers that something they've bought could be dangerous and needs to be returned, either for repairing or a cash refund.
But what happens if, despite Press ads and publicity, the warnings don't reach everyone?
Zanussi, for example, had problems with some of their dishwashers which caught fire.
They've tried hard to reach owners of models that could be a potential problem but have still reached only 70 per cent of them.
They've recalled models Z30 and Z50, serial numbers 8212 to 8408, and batches of the slimline DW15, DW20, Di50 bought before August 88.
They also want to modify DW400 models bought before 87.
So check if you've got one of these machines.
If you have, ring 0800 777300.
PS To stop your child's head rolling around in cars when they doze off, try the Sleepy Head Support Cushion from Bettacare Ltd (0306 888299).
PLEASE HELP ME SAVE MY WOBBLY BOY
Young Thomas Cottingham may be in a wheelchair by the time he's 10.
But he's fighting against his fate with enormous courage.
By Melanie Whitehouse.
Pictures by Chris Harper
Caring IN THE 90s
Thomas Cottingham is only three years old next week but he knows that there is something wrong with him.
Some nights when his mum Beverley gets home from work, he'll look up at her and say: ‘Mummy, I'm such a wobbly boy.’
The disease Thomas suffers from is a rare condition called A-T which makes him unsteady and prone to infections — and cancer.
For the past year, he's been fighting a massive tumour in his chest with gruelling bouts of chemotherapy and painful lumbar punctures in hospital.
But he is an enduring — and endearing — child.
It might take him twice as much effort to climb the stairs but that won't deter him.
He takes his hand, puts his blond head down and wills himself to go on until he reaches his yellow bedroom with teddies stencilled around the walls.
Thomas is exceptionally bright.
He can recite the alphabet and hold an intelligent conversation.
It's his body, not his mind, that's affected.
Thirty-nine-year-old Beverley says: ‘He's very aware of it.
When he's had a bad day he looks really sad.
He'll say: ‘Mummy, I kept falling over.’
I feel for him such a lot.
He's not fully aware of what's wrong with him but he knows that he's wobbly and has difficulty with certain things.
He gets tired quickly struggling to stay upright — but he's a trier.’
He has to be.
A year ago, there was a strong chance that he wouldn't live to be three.
Although he's survived the cancer so far, it hasn't altered the fact that he will probably be in a wheelchair by the age of 10 — or that A-T could kill him before he's 20, unless a cure is found.
Beverley was 36 when she had Thomas.
‘Like many women who have a baby quite late in life, the birth of my child was a moment of sheer happiness — and the start of even more joy,’ she says.
‘When Thomas was born he was very healthy.
But at 15 months I noticed he was walking badly and was unsteady on his feet.
He seemed to bump into things and fall over more than other children.’
Thomas was sent for tests but nobody knew what the problem was.
Beverley, though, was convinced that something was seriously wrong with her son.
‘I felt very tense about it — I had a gut feeling there was something awful around the corner,’ she says.
‘Then Thomas developed a gurgling cough.
We took him for an X-ray.
The doctor told us that he had a tumour.
‘I felt the whole world was swallowing me up.
He was rushed to intensive care.
The gurgling noise was the rattling of Thomas trying to breathe through a restricted windpipe.
The tumour was growing rapidly and there was a danger the windpipe would close up completely.’
For three long weeks his anxious parents waited for the results of more tests which would confirm whether he had this almost unknown condition, A-T.
‘At least with the cancer, we had been told Thomas had a 50/50 chance,’ says Beverley.
‘But that would reduce with A-T as it  complicates the treatment.
The fear of finding out there was something awful wrong was like torture.
When we were finally told, it was like the world caving in, but in a dreadful way it was a relief to know what we were up against.’
To date, there is no test to discover who are carriers of A-T.
‘We only knew we were carriers when Thomas was diagnosed,’ says Beverley.
‘There's a one in four chance that any child we have would suffer from the same condition.
But we love Thomas desperately and we've never wanted to be without him.
He's unbelievably lovable and that keeps us going.’
As well as looking after Thomas, Beverley holds down a busy job as an executive with Boots in Nottingham.
It was a hard decision to carry on working, leaving Thomas with his nanny at their country cottage in the quiet village of Colston Basset, Notts — but she took advice from mothers of other sick children who told her: don't give up.
Beverley keeps her feelings tightly reined in as she talks.
But occasionally the pain breaks through.
‘At times I feel almost like I can't go on.
The unfairness of it all and how desperate it is for Thomas seems to be overwhelming emotions.
All I want to do is sit and cry.
Then the other bit of me says: ‘This won't get you anywhere.’
If I gave up what kind of childhood would he have?’
She has been with Peter Cottingham, 44, for five years.
Peter, who works for the East Midlands Electricity Board, has three daughters by a previous marriage — Tara, 19, Sophie, 16, and Amy, seven, who adores Thomas.
He says: ‘There are times when the enormity of the challenge makes you want to pull a blanket over your head.
We have a child who's very bright — but there's this huge sword of Damocles hanging over his head.
‘I think the way Bev has coped has been incredible.
She's amazingly strong.
She's a bit of a visionary,’ says Peter admiringly.
And it's this that inspired the pair of them to set up the Thomas Appeal.
‘Thomas has been unbelievably brave,’ says Beverley.
‘He has been an inspiration to us.
He drives us on.
We knew that if Thomas survived the cancer his only chance of a halfway normal life was to find a cure for A-T.
‘My one wish in all the world is to find a cure for my son.
If enough people care long and hard enough it can and will be done.’
In the appeal's first year, locals, family and friends raised money from marathons, sponsored walks, swims and jumble sales.
A group of burly Nottingham firemen even dressed themselves up in leotards and challenged a fitness group to a dancing lesson!
‘We had to think long and hard about making it so personal to Thomas,’ says Beverley.
‘But knowing the little person he is, he'll want to do something about the problem he has because he knows it will help other children, too.
One day I started crying because I was so upset about how poorly he was.
He put his arm around me and said: ‘Mummy, don't worry.’
That's the sort of child he is.’
LITTLE TOM'S WALKING TRAGEDY
A-T — Ataxia Telangiectasia — is a rare, inherited disease.
The first signs usually appear when children begin to walk.
Initially, like Tom, all children are unsteady, but with A-T the wobbliness gets worse because the nervous system is affected.
Speech becomes slurred and sight difficult.
Because the disease can cause severe immune problems, even a cold can be fatal.
There is also an increased risk of cancer and high sensitivity to radiation means that radiotherapy can't be used.
And, tragically, A-T is — as yet— an incurable disease.
WHO DOES IT AFFECT?
Between 100 and 150 children have it, although some scientists believe that up to 3,000 may be affected.
Diagnosis is difficult and some cases are wrongly treated.
It affects children of both sexes and is passed to them by both parents.
There is no test to identify who the carriers are although up to two per cent of adults could transmit A-T.
It is one of over 4,000 genetic diseases, and in this country alone these affect the lives of nearly a million under 25s.
About one child in 20 admitted to hospital has some kind of genetic disorder.
These cause half of all deaths in infancy and one in 10 childhood deaths in hospital.
Apart from road accidents, cancer is still the major killer of children, with one in every 600 getting some form of the disease.
In Leicestershire, for example, one child is diagnosed as having cancer every 14 days.
HOW CAN YOU HELP?
Research into A-T is desperately underfunded.
Now Beverley and Peter have set up the Thomas Appeal.
The £50,000 it raised last year will help to pay for a researcher at the Department of Cancer Studies at Birmingham University.
But they want to raise at least as much again for work on related disorders.
Although A-T is rare, potentially millions of other people could benefit from the research.
If you would like to send a donation, make your cheque or postal order payable to Thomas Appeal, mark your envelope WOMAN and send it to Angel Cottage, Colston Bassett, Notts NG12 3FD.
We'll let you know how much money is raised.
Brave boy: up to 3,000 children may be suffering like Thomas
‘I had this gut feeling something awful was wrong’
‘My one wish in all the world is to find a cure for my son.
If enough people care, it can and will be done’
Family support: ‘Thomas has been an inspiration to us,’ says Beverley
UP FOR THE CUP!
The days of the dainty cup and saucer seem to have disappeared for ever.
Teatime is a bright, bold affair now, so here's our selection of what's worth buying.
Sally Gillam pours!
Style IN THE 90s
Something fishy: you could easily get hooked on this lovely fish design by Hinchcliffe and Barber, part of a 19-piece set.
This 10-inch (25½cm) plate is £10.99 (phone 0258 452481 for stockists)
Big mugs: if you like drinks in a big way, get these colourful French-style breakfast mugs and saucers, £6.99, from The Reject Shop
Bird call: from a wide range of earthenware called Chanticleer.
The dinner plate is £7.25 and cup and saucer £7.50, from John Lewis
Flower pot: raise a titter at teatime with this fun teapot, £7.65, from Spoils Kitchen Reject Shops (0728 603731 for stockists)
Fruity number: this pretty, hand-decorated plate, £7.99, from the Bordeaux range at BHS
The blues: our favourite, stunning, blue cup and saucer, £10, from a range by Emma Bridgewater
Wild thing: pricey at £17, but this hand-painted mug from Honiton Pottery is almost a work of art.
Phone 0404 42106 for stockists
So potty: another of the seven novelty teapots from Spoils, £9.95.
Stockists are as above
Tray chic: pine and cork tray by T&G Woodware, £9.99, from department stores.
Napkin, 99p and place-mat, £2.49, The Reject Shop
Character mugs: kids will love these Disney mugs, £1.39 each, Woolworths
Tea total: make a bold choice with this sunny yellow teapot, £7.99, from Littlewoods.
Other plain colours are available
Sunday best: brighten your table with the Florence range at John Lewis.
Side plate is £5.25; sugar bowl, £11.50
Pieces of eight: this fun octagonal mug, £1.25, from Littlewoods give teatime a totally new dimension!
In store: keep your biscuits and crackers crisp and fresh in this airtight jar, £10.99 from BhS stores
Animal magic: cheerful china from Brixton Pottery (0872 222907 for stockists).
Prices range from £5.36 for an egg cup to £21.32 for the coffee pot NEXT WEEK: POTS OF STYLE 
WHY I GIVE THE NEW ABORTION PILL TWO CAUTIOUS CHEERS
A drug treatment that's being used instead of surgery to end the pregnancies of many women in France may soon be arriving here.
Yet just how helpful will it be to us?
By CLAIRE RAINER
Issues OF THE 90s
Just three years ago a French doctor, Professor Etienne-Emile Baulieu of the University of Paris, saw the launch of the pill he'd researched for years.
He called it mifepristone, its medical name.
The French pharmaceutical firm who market it called it RU 486, its project number.
Together they offered it to the world's women.
As what?
A final protection, at last, against women's bounding fertility?
Or a weapon to be used against future generations?
It now seems possible that the Abortion Pill, as it's come to be called, will be available some time next year.
How should we react?
WHAT IS IT?
Mifepristone is one of a range of new drugs which are anti-hormones.
Some of them are of great value in treating cancers, but mifepristone acts by blocking the hormone progesterone, which is essential for the maintenance of a pregnancy.
It isn't used alone, but in conjunction with another drug, a prostaglandin, which is a different kind of hormonal-type drug and which causes the uterus to contract and expel its contents.
Prostaglandins are also used to help in childbirth.
HOW IS IT USED?
The Abortion Pill is best used in the early weeks of a pregnancy — certainly in the first three months, although in some cases it can be used later.
In the UK it will only be used under the law according to the 1967 Abortion Act, so no one will be able to get it over the counter at the chemist's, nor will it be prescribed by GPs.
It requires three visits to a hospital after a woman has been accepted as legally entitled to an abortion — which means she must have the agreement of two doctors and ‘qualify for’ the abortion only on certain grounds.
At the first hospital visit, the woman is given a mifepristone pill.
This usually has no effect (although a few users have been sick, in which case another form of abortion is offered) and she's then sent home.
Forty-eight hours later she returns to the hospital and is given a prostaglandin pessary, which is put inside the vagina and dissolves to release the drug.
She stays in hospital and, within a few hours (usually between four and six) she has a blood loss, like a heavy period, which expels the fertilised egg and the uterus lining.
Soon after, she has a final check-up to ensure the abortion is complete.
If it isn't a surgical operation will be needed.
In about 95 per cent of cases, there's no problem.
The blood loss — which can last a week or so — is generally regarded as tolerable and there are no unpleasant side-effects.
In France, since January 1989, 60,000 women have chosen this method of termination in preference to surgery.
THE ARGUMENTS FOR AND AGAINST
In favour of the Abortion Pill is its medical safety.
Although modern operations and anaesthesia are very safe, there's still an element of risk.
This is removed entirely with a non-surgical treatment.
It's also more ‘natural’ an experience for a woman, mimicking a spontaneous miscarriage.
It's less costly than surgery.
Gynaecologist Mr Ian Mackenzie of the John Radcliffe Hospital in Oxford, has noted that it could save the NHS between £10 and £15 million a year, which could be used to shorten waiting-lists for other forms of gynaecological care.
(The difference in cost is about £270 for a surgical abortion — a D and C or vacuum extraction — and £75 for the Abortion Pill treatment.)
Finally, it gives women more control over their own fertility — a logical extension to the contraceptive Pill.
Against it is the fact that the woman is fully aware throughout the process.
For some women, an abortion is so traumatic they want it done quickly.
For them a D and C would be preferable.
There may be pain.
Just as with a heavy period there may be cramps and nausea, so it can happen with this treatment.
There may be cases of a severe haemorrhage.
In one per cent of cases in French and UK trials, blood transfusion has been required.
(The fact that the pill is used in hospital under careful medical supervision is helpful, of course.)
A MATTER OF POLITICS
Any drug or treatment involved with women's bodies and women's fertility, arouses a huge reaction.
According to the anti-abortion lobby, this is ‘chemical warfare against the unborn’.
According to the French Minister of Health (who stepped in when attempts were made by the anti-abortion lobby around the world to stop it being sold), this pill is the ‘moral property of women’.
Your views on which of them is right will, of course, be coloured by your own religious beliefs.
The Catholic Church, for instance, is strongly opposed to all fertility control apart form voluntary abstinence.
But the Church isn't the only body that rejects abortion.
Others do so for more earthly reasons: they see the power of women as some sort of threat.
In my view, in very simple terms, it's a fight between Right and Left; right-wing politics tend to be masculine and punitive by nature, and arguably anti-women; left-wing politics on the other hand, tend to be more feminine and caring in essence, and pro-people.
WHAT DO WOMEN WANT?
No one can speak for all women, but we can draw some conclusions.
Women want to love and be loved — especially by their children.
They want to have babies, but only as many as they can care for.
They want those babies to have a high life and health expectancy.
They no longer want the sort of world in which women gave painful birth to nine or 10 children in the hope of managing to rear three or four to adulthood.
They also want the chance to use their minds and energies in a wider sphere than just the home.
Women are not, by and large, of an ‘either-or’ persuasion.
They want to be able to do more than one thing with their lives — and they're rather good at it.
Fertility control is one of the ways in which a woman may achieve her hopes.
She can then control how many babies she has  and when she has them.
Fertility control in the hands of others — be it her partner or the State — is less able to give her what she wants, because only she knows what her needs are.
This is why many women see no wrong in abortion on demand — which is what most politicians abhor.
Legal abortion is available here in a grudging way; and if a woman is refused one for any reason, her only resort is a private operation if she's determined to control her own body — or to go ahead and have the baby.
This is why access to safe, reliable, legal abortion is what most women want.
WILL THE NEW PILL HELP?
Because of all the publicity this pill has been give, many women have been led to think it will be simple to get an abortion.
This isn't so.
Even if this pill is licensed for the UK, it will be used under the umbrella of the existing law.
It will only be available to women in the first nine weeks of pregnancy (that's the only licence for which the makers have asked), so not all women who could benefit from it will do so.
At present, half the abortions in the UK are performed in the first 12 weeks; delays in getting from GP to clinics or consultants mean some women aren't seen until after the nine-week stage has passed.
For this new pill to be of real help, we need a change in the law, making it easier to get abortions.
There should also be more investment in counselling for unwillingly pregnant women, more support for the lone mother who would keep her pregnancy if she could see a way of coping, and fewer politicians using our bodies as debating points to be scored over opponents.
If we had all this, I believe the new Abortion Pill would be an asset.
But I fear that if this pill is licensed, access to surgical abortion may be reduced.
Many women have benefited from mifepristone's availability in France — but even there, not all women want it: according to a spokesman for the makers, about a third in need of abortion opt for a swift operation.
Will we still have that choice under a hard-pressed NHS which might welcome a system of abortion provision that saves cash?
Taking it all round, I give the Abortion Pill two cautious cheers.
Yes, it's another way of carrying out a procedure most of us prefer never to need, but are realistic enough to know is sometimes inevitable.
Yes it could be less distressing for some women.
But could it also be the focus of yet more vigorous attempts by the religious lobby to take away what little help we have?
Well, what do you think about the new pill? do let us know and we'll publish a selection of your comments.
Letters please to: Abortion Pill, Features Dept,WOMAN , King's Reach Tower, Stamford St, London SE1 9LS.
HOW CAN CLAIRE HELP?
You can phone Claire Rayner on our special helplines.
Just dial the number next to the topic that interests you — at any time, day or night.
Calls cost 33p per minute at cheap times and 44p per minute at all other times.
We hope you find these advice lines useful.
PMS — what you need to know
Cervical smears — what you need to know
All about women's sexual problems
All about men's sexual problems
Coping with loneliness
Coping with a new baby
Coping with post-natal depression
How to survive a break-up
How to beat a drinks problem
Understanding jealousy
How to beat stress
How to boost your self-esteem
‘With fertility control in her own hands, a woman can decide how many babies she has.
And many women want abortion on demand’
RING FOR YOUR STARS
You can phone us to find out your full guide to what the stars have in store for you this week.
Hope it's good!
REMEMBER your line is open NOW 24 hours a day
Calls cost 33p per minute cheap rate, 44p per minute at all other times
STUNNING FOR SPRING!
Only £27.99 post paid
Superb two-piece in 100% cotton jersey
Machine washable
Sizes 10–20
You really will look stunning wearing this week's great offer.
It's a fashionable two-piece, made in comfortable cotton jersey, and comes in three lovely colours, so you can pick what's best for you.
It's the kind of outfit every woman needs: worn together, the two-piece is perfect for a special occasion, or you can wear the top and skirt separately and mix'n'match with your other clothes.
And we've chosen three classic colours for you: black, red and stone.
The top has an attractive squared neck with short, set-in sleeves.
It measures 24in (61cm) from nape to hem and the flattering four-gore skirt measures 31in (79cm) from under its elasticated waistband to hem.
Made from 100 per cent cotton jersey, it's machine washable and the outfit comes in three sizes: small (10–12); medium (14–16); and large (18–20).
At £27.99 post-paid, it's fabulous value, too.
And if you're not fully satisfied, it comes with the WOMAN money-back guarantee.
Don't miss out on our super spring offer: order our great two-piece now!
If you have any queries on this offer, please phone 0279 635348
HERE'S HOW TO ORDER: make your crossed cheque or postal orders payable to MS WOMAN OFFERS and send to WOMAN /Jersey Two-piece Offer, Ref.
No.
MS/W/166, P.O. Box 50, Harlow, Essex CM17 ODZ (0279 635348)— general enquiries only).
Available only in the UK and Channel Islands.
Despatch within 28 days but allow time for carriage.
You will be notified if a longer delay is expected.
Closing date: May 31 1991, subject to availability.
Return order within seven days of receipt for replacement or refund if unsatisfactory.
WHY THAT DRINK CHARGE WAS UNFAIR by Nigel Havers
He's known as a bit of a smoothie but Nigel Havers has been given a harder edge in his new series, Sleepers, starting next week.
And off-screen, too, he's had reasons to be less than charmed by life.
Steve Clark reports
He has a stunning new wife, a daughter in her early teens and two stepsons and that, says actor Nigel Havers, is all the family he wants.
He and his wife, Polly, have decided not to have any children of their own.
‘Fatherhood is lovely,’ says Nigel.
‘But Polly and I think that three between us are enough.
And Polly says she's too old,’ he smiles.
‘At the moment she enjoys flying around the world after me and having a child would make that more difficult.
I'm not the one having the baby, after all.’
Fatherhood isn't what instantly springs to mind when you think of Nigel.
But that's only because of the parts he's played.
He became a household name after his role as the caddish Ralph Gorse in The Charmer — and even in those Lloyds Bank ads, he plays a smoothie with an eye for a pretty girl.
But now Nigel is changing course in his career.
This week he stars in a very different role, playing an inactive Russian spy in the BBC comedy drama, Sleepers.
Probably the only thing that hasn't changed about Nigel recently is his looks.
Now 40, Nigel admits he certainly doesn't feel his age.
‘I don't know how I've done it.
I've tried everything to get rid of these fresh-faced looks,’ he laughs.
‘I've even tried staying out until three in the morning!’
Then he grins: ‘No, I don't actually do that.
Not because I think I want to look young but just because I like to go to bed early.’
He goes to the gym three times a week but despite keeping in shape, Nigel is baffled by people who think he's handsome.
‘It's a mystery to me.
I don't consider myself good-looking.
I never go past a mirror and look at myself.’
But he does admit that being seen as attractive has advantages.
‘I'm sure being rather photogenic has helped me,’ he says.
‘The camera is quite kind to me where it's not to other people.’
Nigel and 39-year-old Polly have homes in London and Wiltshire, where his heart lies.
‘I lead a very, very ordinary life,’ he says.
‘People recognise me but they're very sweet about it.
‘I never get people who are awkward.
They say: ‘I'm so sorry to disturb you but could you sign this piece of paper?’
The general public are, in my experience, very nice people.’
The Press, however, are another matter.
They had a field day when Nigel walked out on his wife, Carolyn, just before Christmas 1987.
‘TV Charmer Dumps Missus,’ screamed the headlines.
‘Charmer Nigel is A Real Rotter!’— and they still make him wince.
It wasn't an easy decision to leave Carolyn and their daughter Kate, then nine years old, for Sixties model Polly Bloomfield.
Nigel moved into Polly's £750,000 luxury home in Kensington but then went back to Carolyn in a last attempt to save his marriage.
But within months, he was telling friends his marriage was over for good.
In January 1989, he and Carolyn were divorced and, just before Christmas  that year, he married Polly, who already has two sons by her previous husband, the property heir, John Bloomfield.
‘The Press can do what they like,’ says Nigel.
‘But I never had one bit of mail saying: ‘How dare you leave your wife.’’
The public may not be so sympathetic over his recent conviction for drink driving — he was banned from driving for a year last September.
‘I don't regret it at all,’ says Nigel firmly.
‘I thought the whole thing was pretty unfair.
I was 300 yards from home in a restaurant and had only used my car anyway because it was pouring with rain.
The police pointed out that I didn't have a tail light working as I was parking it.
‘I only had a few glasses of wine and I'm sure the police waited for me.
When I got in the car and put the key in the ignition, they probably said: ‘Right, gotcha!’
I was confident I wasn't over the limit.
But I was, by only three points.
I said: ‘I'll walk home and leave it here’ but they said: ‘No way.’
I got the same punishment as people who are three times over the limit.
I felt victimised, especially as the police know who I am.
It's very inconvenient, but when I'm working, I have someone who drives me about.’
When Nigel's not working, he retreats to his Wiltshire home, where his daughter Kate, now 13, and Polly's sons, William, 10, and eight-year-old Ben, are frequent visitors.
‘The children get on fine,’ says Nigel.
‘To the boys I'm a sort of mate.
They spend a lot of time with their father and treat me like a friend, which is great.’
Recently, though, he's noticed a change in his relationship with Kate.
He says: ‘I talk to her like an adult and she bosses me around.
She's not frightened of me at all and I like that very much.
She's beginning to be quite a young woman.
She's always been quite mature because she's an only child and she's got a good head on her shoulders.’
Kate often joins Nigel on the set when he's working.
‘She may go into acting herself,’ he says proudly.
‘I've just had a glowing drama report from her school.
But I'd be delighted whatever she did.
If she wanted to be mechanic I'd say fantastic!’
Nigel is currently filming a new ITV series with Keith Barron, called Good Guys.
And with Sleepers on our screens next week, his career looks set to soar again.
He plays Jeremy Conway, a spy who's been in Britain for years achieving a powerful position with a large London bank.
When the KGB make moves to track him down, he and another ‘sleeper’, union leader Albert Robinson (Warren Clarke, far left) decide they don't want to return to the USSR.
But the KGB dispatch Major Nina Grishin (Joanna Kanska, centre) to find them.
Nigel's father, former Lord Chancellor Lord Havers, was Attorney General when former spy Peter Wright was trying to publish his book Spycatcher and Havers senior fought a long battle on behalf of the British Government to ban the book.
But Nigel didn't ask him for help.
‘I don't talk about my work with my father,’ he says.
‘But he does take an interest.’
‘I've always enjoyed watching spy movies.
But I've never wanted to be a spy.
It's a lonely life and I'm not interested in working on my own.
I like to work as part of a team.’
SHOULD MORE BE TESTED?
Parliament recently overturned a move to bring in random breath testing to catch drivers who are over the legal limit.
The Minister for Roads and Traffic, Christopher Chope, told MP's that the police already ask motorists to take a breath test if there is any reason to suspect drinking and driving — as happened to Nigel Havers.
Since breath tests were introduced at the end of the Sixties, more than 25,000 people have been killed by drink driving.
Each year, 1,000 die and 22,000 are injured in drink-related accidents.
Supporters of random breath testing believe these figures would fall dramatically if it was introduced.
Labour MP Terry Lewis, who sponsored the Bill, says it's been successful in New South Wales, Australia, where alcohol related accidents have dropped by a third.
Here, motorists are now three times more likely to be breathalysed than in 1978, and around 2,000 drivers are prosecuted every week.
The Campaign Against Drink Driving will continue to lobby for random testing.
Says director Harry Cape: ‘We will persist in our efforts to get what we know to be right.’
CADD supports families of drink drive victims (091 281 1581).
woman EXTRA
NEW THIS WEEK
ITV…
Helen Mirren stars in this week's biggie: Prime Suspect about a female detective who gets her big break chasing a murderer.
It dominates the schedules with two, two-hour slots on Sunday and Monday, so it had better be good.
For once, it seems it will be.
ITV…here's a big welcome back, to an old favourite Perfect Scoundrels, starring Peter Bowles and Bryan Murray as two con artists never quite able to pull off a dodge deal.
Starts on Saturday.
VIDEO…
A Shock To The System, starring Michael Caine, won excellent reviews when it was released in the cinema.
It works really well on the small screen, too.
It's all about an ambitious executive out for revenge when he doesn't win the promotion he thinks he deserves.
Amusing black comedy (15).
SUPERTIPS
Sticky end: stick a button on the end of a roll of Sellotape so you can find where to peel it back easily.
Perfect pads: save the shoulder pads from your old blouses and dresses and glue them on to coathangers so that newer, delicate clothes don't tear.
Sweet carpets: if you've gone off your old talcum powder, shake it over the carpet before you do the vacuuming — it's a great freshener.
Slice of life: make cutting freshly-baked, soft bread easier by dipping your knife in very hot water.
Great idea: before grating orange or lemon peel, run the grater under the cold tap to prevent sticking.
Clean cutlery: give forks and spoons extra sparkle by standing them in soapy water an ammonia, then rinse.
Home and dry: use a hairdryer to dry the inside of wellington boots.
This week's Supertips come from Janet Scott of Penzance, who wins £50.
THIS IS OUR SHOW!
This Is Your Life brought to you by Persil.
Rumpole Of The Bailey brought to you by Coca Cola.
Maxwell House's The Krypton Factor…well, it could happen soon.
As part of a cost-cutting exercise in the year when their franchises are up for grabs, the ITV companies have singled out eight popular shows that may be available to commercial sponsors in the future.
They would be given a 15-second credit at the start of each programme, 10 seconds at the end and the chance to screen their name either side of the break!
THE HULK'S OVER HERE!
They took it off ITV; in a survey,WOMAN readers said no, they didn't want it back; it's fixed, it's theatrical and, at the end of the evening's entertainment, you feel every so slightly tacky.
It could only be wrestling and the worst sort — American wrestling.
But clearly someone out there misses it because promoters are bringing over The Incredible Hulk Hogan, The Ultimate Warrior and a gentleman called Randy Savage, for eight dates in April and May, and they're all sold out.
Fortunately!
THE DOG THAT HELPS!
Good luck to a new charity called Assistance Dogs for Disabled People, which aims to match highly-trained dogs with people who are severely physically disabled.
The dogs will learn 90 different commands, including opening and closing doors, turning switches off and on, carrying shopping and even pushing buttons in a lift.
Can you help with money?
Can you help with money?
For a leaflet giving further details, please send an sae to the ADDP at 23 Slipper Road, Emsworth, Hants.
HORROR FOR 9-YEAR-OLDS
With schoolkids at home for their Easter holidays, keep a special look-out for cans of gas lighter fuel.
It's become the leading cause of solvent abuse deaths.
In 1989, 113 people died this way — nearly half of them by inhaling fumes from lighter refills.
Some of the victims were as young as nine.
the average age was 15.
SO WHAT SHOULD WE BE EATING
Question one: if you want to avoid heart attacks, which should you eat — butter or polyunsaturated margarine?
Question two: if you want to avoid heart attacks should you drink a pint of milk a day?
The answers are butter and yes, according to the very latest research from a team in Wales and both of them stand conventional medical thinking on its head.
This jockeying for the truth may be fine for doctors engaged in expensive research, but where exactly does it leave the rest of us, constantly struggling to keep up with the latest medical thinking and changing our diets accordingly.
Answer: totally confused and perhaps a little angry that doctors seem as far apart in their thinking as President Bush and Saddam Hussein.
Will someone please decide once and for all what we can eat and drink!
THE WOMAN CROSSWORD
ACROSS:
8 Responsive sort of bean meal (8)
9 Name in the Spanish paint (6)
10 Long for a tree (4)
11 Gin can then become bewitching (10)
12 Slept badly — fur coats might be the answer!(5)
13 Casts torn raggedly, being diametrically opposed (9)
16 Joined strands together, and sped around 149 Romans retreating (7)
18 Means to organise indents (7)
20 Tighten, being severe after study (9)
21 Throw out the value (5)
24 Putting down a dictatorial tactic (10)
26 Dutch cheese made badly (4)
27 It hangs on in frosty weather (6)
28 Dim piece developed into an outbreak (8)
DOWN:
1 Several countries for MP in Northern Ireland (6)
2 Diverts ten trains following Eastern diversion (10)
3 Where the abbot rules in a location drab beyond belief (5)
4 Creator designed nuclear device (7)
5 Leaving, parted with gin cocktail (9)
6 Gone by in ship astern (4)
7 Endure it somehow, being together again (8)
14 Unusual meteor name measures wind speed (10) 15 Press indeed!
Down in the dumps as a result!(9)
17 to search for gold is the outlook for the future (8)
19 In part, describes old writers (7)
22 The best rag I can buy is sad within (6)
23 Very slow permanent householder (5)
25 Eric cultivated a staple food (4)
LAST WEEK'S ANSWERS
SHOULD FIRST-TIMERS GET THAT SPECIAL PERK?
Good luck to first-time house buyers, particularly during these troubled times.
But isn't there something wrong about the practice, common among building societies now, to offer them lower rates of interest in order to attract them as customers?
Financial writer Margaret Stone certainly thinks so.
She says of the building societies: ‘How dare they ignore the real needs of loyal customers by pursuing a marketing ploy which only benefits a few.
First-time house buyers are the last people who need assistance.
They know the cost of a mortgage today and they know whether they can afford it or not.
It's a far cry from the plight of the 1988 borrower, who took out a loan at a rate of under 10 per cent.
These families need every  minuscule cut in the mortgage interest rate that they can get — and soon.’
Loyal, long-standing customers are all too often ignored in the battle over mortgage rates, Margaret argues.
‘Maybe loyalty is an old-fashioned virtue.
But virtue needs rewarding from time to time…
’ Well, it's certainly an interesting and controversial point of view.
Why don't you write and tell us what you think!
WOMEN AND THEIR SELL-BY DATES!
Do women broadcasters have a sell-by date that doesn't apply to men?
Everyone has been asking this questions since it was announced that Holiday '91 Presenter Anne Gregg will be leaving the programme later this month at her BBC bosses' request.
Radio 4's excellent Margaret Howard, who presents Pick of The Week (and has done so for 17 years) is in the same boat.
She's been asked to leave her job next month.
Margaret is 52.
Anne is 51.
They're certainly both splendid and talented professionals.
So, is there a sell-by date?
It's almost too naive to ask!
COMPLETE SHORT STORY…
THE PRESENT
by Susan Udy
The men I know just don't give their wives gifts for no reason.
My husband Jim certainly doesn't.
But then Neil isn't your ordinary kind of husband…
Jessica held her right arm out.
‘Neil's latest present.’
Her triumphant smile told me that this time Jessica's husband had excelled himself.
‘Jessica,’ I exhaled slowly, ‘it's just so beautiful.’
‘Yes.’
Her smile took on a strange quality as she surveyed the bracelet at arm's length.
‘Isn't it?
Must have cost a packet — and it's not even my birthday.’
I released her fingers but I couldn't drag my eyes away from the gleam of gold as it winked tantalisingly at me.
‘I wonder what you'll get for that — your birthday, I mean.’
I spoke reflectively, glancing back at Jessica's face.
‘Mmmm, I wonder,’ she replied, her gaze moving to the window as if her thoughts were miles away.
‘If Neil's taken any notice of the hints I've dropped, it should be a new car.’
I didn't know what to make of Jessica any more.
She didn't seem altogether pleased with this, her latest present.
In fact, she hadn't seemed pleased with anything Neil had given her lately.
I was reluctant to think it but Jessica was becoming increasingly superficial, grasping even.
She hadn't always been like that — at least, not when I first knew her.
Jessica and I met when we joined the same company within a day of each other— both straight from school.
As the only new employees among so many, we were keen to help each other in those first uncertain days.
Inevitably, our friendship overlapped the boundaries of work and we began to meet in the evenings.
We'd go to the pictures, go dancing even make up the odd foursome with a couple of eager admirers.
And so, gradually, we became inseparable.
We'd had so much in common in those days, but now I wasn't so sure.
The Jessica I'd known then would have felt more enthusiasm for a Christmas cracker bangle than she was showing for her gold bracelet.
She seemed to accept Neil's presents as her right and, what's more, was increasingly taking it for granted they would be expensive.
And her remark about the car disturbed me.
The change in her had happened gradually, so gradually that at first I didn't notice.
It must be two years ago now since it all began.
My mind travelled back to that first occasion.
‘Cathy, look…
’ Excitedly she's thrust a hand at me, her rapture transparent in her broad smile and shining eyes.
My gaze dropped and I saw a ring — an iridescent opal, set in a circle of rich, blood-red garnets.
‘Neil gave it to me last night.’
‘Did he?’
I couldn't hide my surprise.
The men I knew just didn't give their wives presents for no reason.
Jim, my husband, certainly didn't.
But then Neil was different.
He's bought Jessica flowers and chocolates right from the start.
It became a weekly ritual.
But this ring was different.
That hadn't cost a couple of pounds — it can cost a small fortune.
Of course I knew that Neil was in an extremely well-paid job — even so, Jim was on a reasonable salary and he didn't buy me gifts like that — not even at Christmas.
But I did quite well then — he gave me a new watch, the year before a set of matching underwear.
All good things but not wildly expensive, not by any stretch of the imagination.
But whatever Neil's reasons, the ring had been the start of it.
Two months' later, he gave Jessica a second gift.
A necklace — 22-carat gold and again, clearly very expensive indeed.
But this time she hadn't seemed quite so overjoyed.
There had been a slight uncertainty about her.
‘He doesn't have to do this,’ she'd said.
‘I wish he wouldn't.’
‘For heaven's sake, Jessica,’ I'd retorted, ‘don't grumble.
What I wouldn't give for Jim to do something like this — just occasionally.
Neil obviously adores you.
And after five years of marriage, he wants you to know how much he still loves you.’
And so it continued over the next two years; more and more presents, each one more costly than the last.
Jessica had refrained from expressing any further disquiet over them — at lest to me.
Perhaps she sensed my growing discontent and was frightened of appearing to gloat.
For the truth was, no matter how hard I found to suppress it, I was becoming impatient with Jim.
Why didn't he ever buy me anything?
Nothing grand — I didn't want the type of gifts that Neil bought Jessica, but some flowers or a box of chocolates wouldn't cost the earth.
I knew I was being unreasonable, but I began to feel that my marriage lacked something, a fundamental excitement.
I religiously told Jim about each of Neil's presents, desperately hoping to provoke some sort of response.
Nothing.
He continued to limit to Christmases and birthdays — as if it were sinful to buy a present at any other time.
I even began to question Jim's love for me, telling myself it clearly wasn't equal to Neil's for Jessica.
Deeply ashamed of my wayward notions, I tried my best to contradict myself.
‘Of course Jim loves you,’ I'd tell myself.
‘He proves it in a hundred other ways.
He doesn't need to squander hard-earned money on flowers.’
But, despite all my sensible, reasonings, the doubts continued to gnaw at me.
So much so that one night I actually asked: ‘Jim, do you still love me?’
He glanced up form his newspaper and his dark eyes rested upon me.
‘Of course I still love you.
What's brought this on?’
He cast the paper aside impatiently.
‘Oh no, don't tell me — Jessica's had another present.’
‘No.’
My tone was sharp.
‘Then what is it, love?
You've not been yourself lately.
You're edgy, quick-tempered.’
‘I'm not,’ I retorted explosively, proving his point.
He was looking at me with his head to one side.
‘Let's get something straight.
I don't think expensive presents prove that love exists and neither would you if you were thinking properly.
In fact,’ he hesitated here, ‘if you ask me it proves the very opposite.’
He turned back to his newspaper and that was hurt.
I stormed, furious and hurt, into the kitchen.
Edgy?
Quick-tempered?
Was I?
Well I wouldn't be if he bought me flowers now and again.
I was behaving unreasonably, I knew, but I couldn't help myself.
Jim was so good in so many other ways — why couldn't he understand my feelings about this?
I needed something, some gesture, to lift me out of the realms of the ordinary.
Why couldn't Jim see that it's the little things that make all the difference?
I told myself again and again that he loved me and that was what counted.
But the niggle of discontent just wouldn't go.
The next night Jim walked in, his smile sheepish, his expression one of resigned acceptance.
‘Here…
’ He thrust a bouquet of delicate spring blooms at me.
‘Happy now?’
He grinned.
I hugged him.
I began to laugh, I couldn't help myself.
‘Oh, Jim, they're lovely.
Thank you.’
‘Do you think I can have some peace now?’ he asked, sweetly.
I  walked away, still grinning.
Now I would have something to show Jessica — for a change.
But her response to my gift was disappointingly subdued.
I felt the beginnings of irritation.
Suddenly she jangled a set of car keys in front of my face.
‘He hasn't?’
I squealed, as she led me outside.
There, at the kerb, was a red Golf GTi.
‘Oh, Jessica,’ I breathed.
‘My flowers seem pathetic by comparison.’
Jessica didn't say anything.
We went back into the house and I put the kettle on for our customary cup of coffee.
I eyed her.
‘Are you pleased with it?
I know I would be.
Not that Jim would ever…’
Her silence unnerved me.
‘It rather casts my poor daffs into the shade.
Wait till I tell Jim.
And just when he thought he'd cracked it…’
My words tailed off.
Jessica's face was alarmingly pale, her eyes two black holes.
She was sitting at the table, her fingers clasped beneath her chin.
She looked at me and said: ‘I'm leaving Neil.’
I stared at her.
‘You're what?
Jessica!
You're joking.
What's wrong?
The car the wrong colour?’
I began to giggle until I saw Jessica bury her face into her trembling hands.
‘I'm not joking.
Seriously, I'm leaving him,’ she told me.
I left the coffee and sat down.
I reached for one of her hands.
I felt shell-shocked.
I couldn't believe what I was hearing.
‘He's having an affair,’ she said.
‘Neil!’
I cried.
‘Having an affair?
I don't believe it.
Are you sure?’
She nodded.
‘Oh yes.
I've been sure about all the other, too.
I kept quiet about them, hoping they'd go away and he'd come back and settle down with me.’
Harsh sobs shook her then.
I don't think that in all the time I'd known Jessica, I'd ever seen her cry.
She'd always seemed so self-contained, so self-sufficient.
I put my arms around her.
‘Oh, Jessica.’
I rocked her back and forth, my mind reeling.
Neil?
Affairs?
More than one clearly.
My brain slammed into reverse — moving back to Jim's words the other night.
‘If you ask me it proves the very opposite.’
Of course, Jim had instantly seen what I'd missed all along with my stupid envy.
Neil had a guilty conscience and Jessica had known it.
That was the reason for her disquieting responses to the beautiful gifts and the disturbing change in her.
Eventually, when her weeping stopped, she told me everything.
She'd suspected it for some time, but last week had seen it for herself.
She'd seen him with another woman when he was supposed to be away at a conference.
Jessica had confronted him with what she'd seen when he got home two nights later from his ‘trip’.
He'd made no attempt to deny it.
All he said in his defence was that he'd always indulged in affairs — he needed them.
It needn't affect their marriage.
The gifts were his way of salving his conscience.
Each time he was about to embark on a new affair, he bought Jessica an expensive present — as if that made the whole thing right.
He didn't see what she had to complain about, he treated her well, she wanted for nothing.
Poor Jessica.
‘I can't live like that — not now I know for sure.
So I'm leaving — getting away.’
That was 12 months ago.
I hear from her every week.
She's found a job and is moving into a small flat.
There's even a man in her life — someone she met through work.
She divorced Neil; the decree nisi came through a month ago.
He didn't contest it.
In fact, he's about to re-marry.
Hope his new wife knows about his penchant for present giving.
As for Jim and I, I've never mentioned flowers or chocolates since.
I told him about Jessica and Neil, naturally.
We have no secrets from each other.
He didn't say anything, he just smiled his quiet, enigmatic smile and returned to his paper.
I also smiled to myself, at the same time thanking the good Lord that to date I hadn't received an opal ring, a gold bracelet or a necklace.
I'll happily wait for birthdays, Christmases and my set of matching underwear!
‘Neil obviously still adores you, Jessica’
‘I'm not joking,’ she told me.
‘I'm leaving him’
TAKE FIVE!
Cooking up wonderfully complicated meals is fine for special occasions, but what most of us want most of the time are great ideas for quick meals that taste good without the fuss.
All the recipes here use just five ingredients and are ready in well under an hour.
We know you'll love them.
By Sarah Lowman.
Pictures by John Elliott
TUNA RAVIOLI
Serves 4 Cost: £1.60
Time to prepare: 15 mins
Time to cook: 12 mins
8oz (225g) plain flour
4tbsp (60ml) chopped fresh herbs
5tsp (25ml) olive oil
2 spring onions
7oz (198g) can tuna
1
Sieve flour into a bowl with pinch salt.
Stir in herbs.
Make a well in the centre.
Add 3tsp (15ml) oil and about 2tbsp (30ml) warm water and mix to a firm, smooth dough.
2
Lightly flour work surface, knead dough for 5 mins.
Place in lightly oiled bowl.
Cover.
3
Finely chop onions and drain tuna.
Heat remaining oil in pan, add onions, cook for 3 mins, until softened.
Stir in tuna, salt and ground black pepper.
4
Roll half the dough very thinly on work surface to rectangle and cover with damp tea towel.
Repeat with the remaining dough.
5
Place ½tsp (2.5ml) filling at intervals on one half, brush water around edges.
Cover with remaining dough, pressing dough around filling with fingers to remove air bubbles.
Using round fluted cutter, cut out shapes.
6
Cook for 10 to 12 mins in boiling salted water.
Toss ravioli in a heated tomato sauce and serve with mixed green salad.
CHOCOLATE CAKE
Serves 6 Cost £1.70
Time to prepare: 15 mins
Time to cook: 40 mins
4oz (100g) plain chocolate
2oz (50g) unsalted butter
6 eggs, size 3
6oz (175g) caster sugar
3½oz (90g) ground almonds
1
Roughly chop the plain chocolate, place in a bowl with butter.
Set over a pan of simmering water until chocolate has melted.
2
Separate eggs, whisk the yolks with half the sugar, fold in ground almonds and chocolate and butter mixture.
3
Whisk egg whites in clean bowl until stiff, gradually whisk in remaining sugar.
Carefully fold into chocolate mix.
4
Turn into buttered 8½in (22.3cm) spring-clip cake tin.
Bake at 350°F, 180°C, Gas 4 for 35 to 40 mins.
5
Leave to cool in the tin for 10 mins.
Carefully remove from tin and dust with icing sugar and cocoa.
Serve with a little whipped cream, if liked.
FILO PASTIES
Makes 16
Cost: £1.70
Time to prepare: 20 mins
Time to cook: 15 mins
6oz (175g) tomatoes
4oz (100g) frozen peas, thawed
3oz (75g) feta cheese
2oz (50g) butter
6 sheets of large filo pastry, thawed
1
De-seed and chop tomatoes.
Stir together with thawed peas.
Dice feta cheese and stir in, season with salt and ground black pepper.
2
Melt butter, brush filo sheets with butter and layer three sheets together.
Repeat.
Cut into 4.5in (11.5cm) squares.
Divide the mixture between the squares, brush edges with water and fold to form triangles.
3
Arrange on buttered baking sheet and brush with remaining butter.
Bake at 375°F, 190°C, Gas 5 for 15 mins.
4
Serve with mixed bean salad.
RASPBERRY CHEESECAKE
Serves 6
Cost: £3.30
Time to prepare: 15 mins
Time to chill: 20 mins
6oz (175g) chocolate digestive biscuits
2oz (50g) butter or margarine
1 x 142g pkt raspberry jelly
10oz (280g) cream cheese
½pt (300ml) double cream
1
Crush chocolate digestives in a strong plastic bag using a rolling pin or in a processor.
Melt the butter and stir in the digestives.
Spoon into a buttered 6½ (18cm) loose-based tin.
Level surface and press firmly.
Chill in fridge while preparing topping.
2
Melt the jelly in 3tbsp (45ml) boiling water and leave to cool.
3
Beat cream cheese until smooth, beat in melted jelly.
Lightly whip cream and fold in raspberry mixture.
Spoon on to base, chill in fridge until set.
4
To serve: decorate top with raspberries brushed with redcurrant jelly and drizzled with chocolate.
CHEESE AND BACON BAKE
Serves 4
Cost: £2.50
Time to prepare: 15 mins
Time to cook: 30 mins
1lb 8oz (680g) even-sized potatoes
10oz (280g) back bacon
6oz (175g) red Leicester cheese
¼pt (142ml) carton double cream
2tbsp (30ml) grainy mustard
1
Peel potatoes, place in a pan with sufficient water to cover, bring to the boil then simmer for abut 3 mins, until tender.
Drain and slice thinly.
2
Grill the bacon until crisp and snip into small pieces.
Finely grate the cheese.
3
In a round oven-proof dish, layer potatoes, bacon and cheese, seasoning each layer with salt and ground black pepper.
4
Mix the cream and mustard together and pour over.
5
Bake at 375°F, 190°C, Gas 5 for 20 mins, until golden and cooked through.
To serve; sprinkle with mustard and cress.
WIN 20 MICROWAVES
Eating IN THE 90S
IT'S SO EASY!
MAKE IT IN A MICROWAVE
WATERCRESS SOUP
Serves 6
Cost: £1.10
Time to prepare: 15 mins
Time to cook: 11 mins
2oz (50g) butter or margarine
1 large onion
2tbsp (30ml) plain flour
1pt (600ml) milk
1pt (600ml) chicken stock
4oz (100g) watercress
1
Put butter in microwave-proof bowl.
Microwave on high for 30 secs.
Finely chop onion, stir into butter and microwave on high fro 3 mins, stirring halfway through.
2
Cream flour in a little milk, then stir in remaining milk and stock.
3
Cover with non-PVC clear film, microwave on high for 8 mins.
4
Reserve a few watercress leaves for garnish.
Liquidise remainder, adding liquid.
Season.
Serve hot or cold with garnish.
SALMON STEAK WITH HERB SAUCE
Serves 6
Cost: £7.50
Time to prepare: 10 mins
Time to cook: 10 mins
6 salmon steaks each weighing about 6oz (175g)
2tbsp (30ml) white wine
6 black peppercorns
1 tbsp (15ml) white wine vinegar
2 egg yolks, size 3
6oz (175g) unsalted butter
1tbsp (15ml) fresh chopped dill
1
Place salmon steaks in microwave-proof dish, add the white wine and black peppercorns.
Cover the dish with non-PVC clear film.
Microwave on high for about 6 mins, until the fish is cooked through.
2
Pour liquor into jug with the vinegar.
Microwave on high for 2 to 3 mins, until reduced by half.
Whisk in beaten egg yolks.
Return the mixture to microwave, cook on high for 30 secs, until it has thickened.
3
Dice butter.
Beat into sauce.
Stir in dill and season.
Microwave for 10 secs.
4
Skin and bone the salmon steaks.
Serve with the herb sauce and a selection of hot, fresh vegetables.
THREE CHOCOLATE TERRINE
Serves 6
Cost: £1.80
Time to prepare: 25 mins
Time to cook: 12 mins
1 egg, size 3
1oz (25g) caster sugar
½ (15g) cornflour
Few drops vanilla essence
½pt (300ml) milk
3oz (75g) plain chocolate
3oz (75g) milk chocolate
3oz (75g) white chocolate
¼pt (150ml) double cream
Sponge fingers, to serve
1
Beat egg, sugar, cornflour and essence with a little milk.
Microwave remaining milk on high for 5 mins.
Whisk milk into egg mixture.
Microwave on high for 3 mins, stirring occasionally.
2
Melt chocolates in separate bowls on high, plain for 2 mins, milk and white for 1 min each.
3
Whip cream, stir in custard.
Divide between chocolates.
4
Layer into 1pt (600ml) terrine, in 3 layers, freeze.
5
Serve with sponge fingers
WIN!
Our recipes were tested in the 850W Toshiba combination microwave oven.
Perfect for quick meals, it cooks and browns so the food tastes good and looks good, too.
We've got 20 of these great ovens to give away.
Send your name and address on a card to WOMAN /Toshiba microwave offer, Nelson Bostock Communications, 3 Portobello Mews, London W11 3DQ.
The first 20 names out of the bag after April 15 1991, the closing date, win!
TOSHIBA
NEXT WEEK: WONDERFUL CAKES
TAROT
Do your cards know something you don't?
RING 0898 223 997
Our special Tarot line number may be one of the most important calls you'll ever make.
Ring it and you'll hear details about your love life, your money, your career…
All the important things that affect your life now and in the future.
Tarot is believed to be one of the most accurate forms of prediction.
And our service offers a personalised reading by expert Frances Wood, based on cards that you help to select.
All you have to do is to ring the WOMAN Tarot Line.
If you have a push button phone, you can choose your reading by pressing any number from 1-78.
Don't worry if you haven't as our Tarot computer will select a number for you.
Remember, Tarot is a powerful way of revealing the truth about your life and relationships.
Now, knowing what the future holds is just a phone call away.
Ring our special Tarot line any time.
Our line is open now 24 hours a day.
RING 0898 223 997
Calls cost 33p per minute cheap rate and 44p per minute at all other times
WHY I HATE MY STOMACH AND LOVE EATING OUT WITH CRAIG! by Rachel Friend
Former Neighbours star Rachel Friend seems to have had everything on a plate.
She's attractive, successful and is engaged to be married.
But what's she really like?
By Suzy King.
Main picture by Richard McLaren
Who would you most like to look like?
Probably Grace Kelly — she was so beautiful and had such presence.
I guess that says it all really.
Who do you admire most?
That's a toughie.
When we did history back in school I was very taken by Gandhi, actually.
I think he'd be a bit of a hero for me — he managed to achieve such great things without using violence or hurting anybody.
What's best — and worst — about your character?
The best thing is my ability to ‘vague out’, as I call it.
When I get really stressed, I just switch off and don't get too upset about things.
The worst aspect is my worrying — my brother and sister used to call me a worrywart because I'm always so anxious.
I worry about anything so I suppose I must enjoy it!
What do you like — and hate — about your body?
There are a lot of things I could say I hate.
I hate my stomach — it's a bit pudgy.
But I like my feet.
What's in your handbag?
I have perfume, Panadols, heaps of tissues — mostly used — and everything from an umbrella to lipstick, diaries, clips and pens.
Who would you most like to have dinner with?
I'll be honest and say my fiancé, Craig.
We seem to have a good time whenever we're out and always have something to talk about, which is really great.
What was your most embarrassing situation?
Just recently I went out with my sister and girlfriend and we were in a restaurant looking for a table.
It was very much a situation where you helped yourself, so when we saw a family group move from their table, I rushed in and sat down.
There was a full bottle of wine left, so we got glasses and helped ourselves.
Then, about five minutes later, they all came back.
It was awful — we couldn't get out of  there quick enough!
Luckily they didn't recognise me.
We blushed scarlet — then all killed ourselves laughing.
What clothes look best on a man?
A good pair of jeans like Levi's — and a leather jacket.
What was your first proper date?
I guess my first proper date was an invitation to a finals night school ball.
I wasn't in my final year but the boy who took me was.
I was about 16 and I had a huge crush on him.
I had a little dress made — it was a strapless taffeta number, very girly and aqua blue.
I think Mum made it for me.
And I had a bit of tulle in my hair to match the dress…
What do you most like to wear?
It has to be bright, baggy tracksuit pants.
For casual clothes I like a make called Big Bop and for special things I like a designer in Australia called Jenny Bannister.
She does really young, fun, party clothes — a lot are in black but she always trims them with bright colours.
What's on your dressing table?
I've got a beautiful set of little Pierrot clowns, which I bought from the art department of the last mini-series I worked on — Golden Fiddles.
There's also a big, gold jewellery box that was given to me by my godmother.
It contains  my favourite things — a lot of junk really!
There's also some perfume — I like Beautiful and Chloe.
And as it's a big dressing-table, there's a television, too.
What do you spend most of your money on?
I'm a bit of a clothes freak.
I go shopping with a girlfriend in Sydney — where we have our own Oxford Street with designer shops — and together we cause havoc.
How long do you usually spend getting ready to go out at night?
Not too long — I generally leave it to the last minute.
I don't wear a lot of make-up or anything like that so it doesn't take me long — probably about 10 minutes or so.
What can make you cry?
A mushy film.
My favourite film of late was Ghost — I really had a good old cry at that.
Who's your best friend?
I have two best friends — both girls — and I went to school with them.
We do more or less everything together.
What do you think you'll be like when you're 60?
I hope I'll be an elegant old lady with silver-grey hair done up in a bun.
What's the worst lie you've ever told?
I hate revealing things like this!
It would have to be when I was at school and we broke into the tuck shop.
I was a prefect, so it didn't look too good.
So I tried to lie my way out of it.
What's your romantic fantasy?
Strolling along the beach in Greece at sunset with Craig.
Is there any other job you'd like to have?
I've always wanted to have my own restaurant.
I'm not really a great cook but I try.
Would you prefer to have been born a man?
No.
Even though women have children, I still think we have it easier.
What has been your best holiday?
The one I had in Bali last year with Craig.
It was wonderful.
Screen idol: ‘Grace Kelly was so beautiful and has such presence’
Romantic fantasy: ‘it has to be Craig’
Issues OF THE 90S
HOW WOULD YOU COPE IN JULIA'S DARK, SILENT WORLD?
Julia Gates is both deaf and blind — she's also fiercely independent.
She helped us try to understand just what life is like for her.
By Alison Legh-Jones.
Pictures by Chris Harper
It's not a pleasant experience for anyone to be pelted with stones by children.
But imagine how hard it would be to cope with if you were deaf and blind — like Julia Gates.
She was walking in the park when some youngsters squirted a water-pistol in her face and taunted her and her guide dog, Judd.
It reduced this brave young woman to tears of frustration and rage at the unfairness of it all.
But Julia doesn't shy away from everyday life.
And as Lisa Bloodworth, from the National Deaf-Blind League, is anxious to explain, there's no need to help Julia make coffee — she's quite capable of doing it herself.
The three of us met at Julia's Peterborough flat.
I soon discovered that it's almost impossible for anyone like myself, with normal sight and hearing, to imagine life without either sense — or to accept that, in many ways, 28-year-old Julia enjoys a nearly normal life.
At first sight, the ground floor council flat where she lives alone with two cats and Judd could belong to any young person.
The coffee mugs she can't see are gaily patterned and the kitchen utensils are all red — which was Julia's favourite colour before she lost her sight.
But the differences between this and other homes gradually becomes apparent.
A fan activates air in the dining room to let Julia know when someone rings at the doorbell.
There's a Braille clock, Braille dials on the kitchen appliances and a phone with Braille print-out and keyboard.
Small and slim, Julia is fairly typical of her age group.
Her disabilities are not particularly apparent — her speech is only slightly stilted and her walk remarkably confident.
We communicated through 18-year-old Lisa, who passed on my questions by spelling out words on Julia's hand.
It made me appreciate just how frustrated she must so often feel.
Julia contracted a rare eye disease, retinitis pigmentosa, when she was two; which meant she lost part of her retina and gradually her vision.
Both her brother Andrew, 31, and her sister Fiona, 26, however, have perfect sight and hearing.
‘Most of my sight had gone by the time I was five or six but at that age you seem to adjust without realising what's happening,’ Julia says.
It grew harder later, when she was sent to study at a special school for the blind — the other kids taunted her because, by then, she was also going deaf.
She shrugs philosophically.
‘blind kids can be just as spiteful as other kids.’
By the time she was 20, Julia's hearing had really deteriorated.
‘That was for more dramatic than losing my sight,’ she explains.
‘A lot of people think blindness must be worse than deafness but not being able to communicate is really maddening.’
Being certified deaf and blind doesn't necessarily mean that people live in total blackness or silence.
As Julia explains: ‘I can differentiate between light and dark and I can hear voices, though not what's being said, with my ‘ears’ in.’
Her ‘ears’ in?
‘I find saying ‘hearing aid’ embarrassing,’she confides.
‘I can also pick up music — without it I'd go absolutely berserk.’
When Julia was 20, a social worker put her in touch with the National Deaf-Blind League.
For a time she lived in one of their flats but she says: ‘They've got very thin walls and floors so that tenants can pick up vibrations.
The idea is that you're aware of people around you, but I was particularly sensitive to the vibrations and eventually they drove me mad.’
So for the last three years she's lived alone, existing on income support and other allowances totalling about £80 a week.
Julia's irritated by people's misconceptions about the blind and deaf.
‘There's an assumption that the blind need a set place for everything.
Well, I can't live like that.
The only thing that's ultra tidy is my record collection.
People also think I'm bound to have accidents, but I've only occasionally burnt or cut myself, and surely we all do that.’
She hasn't mistaken cans of cat food for other cans, either.
‘It's simple — cat good cans have more of a rim on the bottom,’ she explains patiently.
Shopping, which Julia loves, means relying on someone like Lisa to tell her about colours, which she can still visualise, and prices.
Being dependent on other people exasperates Julia.
So does being patronised.
‘I hate it when people talk about me rather than to me.
Some seem to think being blind and deaf means you're a total idiot.’
But her life can be pretty dull.
‘I wanted to start a cycle repair business after I took part in a tandem race.
The tandem was forever breaking down and I wanted to fix it — so I took a course in cycle mechanics.
But I couldn't get the support to set up the business.’
She failed, too, to get jobs in boarding kennels and at a vets' practice.
‘I was told it would be too dangerous.’
Had things been different, Julia might have become a vet or a professional horsewoman.
‘I love the freedom of horse riding and the power of being in charge.
And the sense of speed is something deaf-blind people can really appreciate.’
She also loves country music, hiking and hill walking.
And travelling isn't a problem — she's been to conventions in America and on holiday to Denmark, France, Germany and Holland.
She explains: ‘People are able to describe new places to me.’
Julia's not frightened of living alone.
Her parents see her regularly and she has a circle of friends.
She's had three boyfriends with normal sight and hearing but says: ‘The last one went off with another girl with normal sight and hearing.
I know anyone can get dumped but I do feel that in my case it was because of my disabilities.’
Even so, that was easier to come to terms with than those children throwing stones at her.
Being deaf-blind also means Julia's other senses are heightened.
‘I don't like to tell people,’ she laughs, ‘but I can recognise them by their smell.
I need to get close up to communicate!’
She also has something she describes as ‘gut feeling’.
I always know when people are near.
My first impressions about them are usually right and I can also tell if someone's pretty without seeing them.’
In spite of the inevitable bitter moment, Julia remains a remarkably positive person.
Later this year, she hopes to do a two-week sponsored horse ride — to raise both money and public awareness.
She explains: ‘In practical ways, the deaf-blind can be fare more competent than people think.
But we do need more friends and volunteers to help us get out and about so that we don't feel life's passing us by.’
She adds: ‘Two years ago, you wouldn't have caught me dead getting married but now I think it'd be nice to have a husband — and a little girl I could teach to ride.’
Clever communication ‘I spell out words on Julia's hand,’ says Lisa
WHAT'S BEING DONE FOR THE 11,000 DEAF AND BLIND?
Some people are born deaf, blind or both.
Others, like Julia, develop these disabilities later in life.
Tumours, accidents, genetic problems and meningitis can all cause deafness and blindness.
If a woman contracts rubella (German measles) during pregnancy, the baby may be born deaf, blind and with heart problems.
In an average year, about 35 babies suffer rubella damage, but an epidemic will normally claim about 70 victims.
In other cases the senses fail as a result of old age — so the number of deaf and blind is on the increase as more people lie longer.
There are about 11,000 in the UK whose sight and hearing are both severely impaired — in the street, they usually carry a red and white banded cane so that they can be recognised easily.
In 1928, a group of deaf-blind people and others with normal sight and hearing founded the National Deaf-Blind League, based in Peterborough.
THEY CAN BE INDEPENDENT
In 1963, the Deaf-Blind League built Rainbow Court in Peterborough, the only housing development in the UK specially designed so that deaf-blind adults can live independent lives.
There are now 12 self-contained flats and a community room.
And as many deaf-blind people live in institutions, Rainbow Court also includes a flat they can visit to learn about day-to-day living with the help of an advisor.
HOW TECHNOLOGY CAN HELP
New technology is helping deaf-blind people to communicate with others to a degree unimaginable even 10 years ago.
Closed-circuit televisions are now being used for those with a little sight left.
With the aid of photographic enlargers, these enable them to read printed matter such as books and pamphlets.
Also, amplified hearing aids are bringing fresh hope to the chronically deaf, and a new device called a handtapper means they can put their hands on a moulded plate and receive manual signals activated on a keyboard many miles away.
If you'd like any further information, contact the National Deaf-Blind League, 18 Rainbow Court, Paston Ridings, Peterborough, PE4 6UP (0733 73511).
TESSA WOOD
Not everyone has a marriage like mine and for that, many women will no doubt be very grateful.
In our marriage George worries about money and I worry about everything else.
It mightn't seem like a happy arrangement but after so many years it's become one.
Mrs Ledingham is married to a man who takes care of everything.
That would drive me around the bend, just as it's driven Mrs Ledingham around the bend.
The other day she put her head over the fence and whispered: ‘I think our husbands have worked something out together.
They're awfully good, aren't they?’
She was standing on the tree that had crashed across the fence, looking like a garden plant in need of marriage guidance.
We rarely see each other but since their rotten tree blew down, smashing the fence and my bulbs, it's been hard not to.
We aren't very comfortable with each other.
She talks about her husband as if he's a superior being — and she imagines George is one, too, which brings out the worst in me.
She looked startled when I snapped at her: ‘What have they worked out?’
‘Something about the fence,’ she said.
‘Replacing it with something metal.’
She giggled.
‘It's beyond me.
Jim just handles these things and they get done.’
I said: ‘George doesn't know anything about fences.
I'm the one in our family who understands fences.
I hate metal.
Jim should be dealing with me.’
‘Oh!’ she said in some confusion as she fell off the tree and crashed into a garden bed.
‘Oh dear, Jim's border.
I'd better fix it before he sees it.’
She began to scrabble about in the dirt.
‘Lovely to talk to you anyway, dear.’
Mrs Ledingham would deny that she's frightened of her husband — but she is.
If he told her the fence would be best in barbed wire she'd believe him.
And so, if it came to that, would George, whose only worry when the tree toppled was who was going to pay for the damage.
Whilst Mrs Ledingham fumbled with the border, I confronted him with his folly.
He was snoozing on the sofa.
‘What have you agreed about the fence?’
I said.
‘You don't know anything about fences.’
‘In a minute,’ he said, yawning.
‘I'm just watching this.’
I said: ‘Mrs Ledingham says that you've agreed to something metal.’
‘I most certainly did not,’ he said.
‘I said I didn't care what he put there, provided our privacy wouldn't be disturbed.’
‘Well, it will be,’ I said.
George said he hoped I wouldn't cause any trouble and nodded off.
Other people's husbands aren't the same as your own.
They're used to being married to somebody else, and Jim Ledingham is used to being married to Shirley.
I found him cursing her for the border.
‘Bloody woman,’ he said.
‘Clumsy as well as daft.’
She was by his elbow, smiling in adoration.
I said his bed looked gorgeous and added, just in passing, that I hoped he'd put up a wooden fence, as a metal one wouldn't do much for either garden.
He said he wanted metal because it was stronger.
I said we didn't need a strong fence as the one tree that could fall on it already had.
Shirley giggled and said I was a woman who knew her own mind, wasn't I, Jim?
Jim said I appeared to be: George had been happy with a metal fence.
I said George wasn't familiar with the term metal.
Shirley roared in amusement.
I wondered if Jim would hit her or me but instead he said he supposed wooden would be all right and Shirley laughed like a drain.
I told George we were having a wooden fence and he said: ‘That's your department.’
I beamed — I know when I'm well off.
‘George didn't mind what the fence was made of as long as he didn't have to pay for it’
woman MIND AND BODY PLAN
THIS MONTH: SLIMMING
Fat, as a famous book suggests, may be a feminist issue, but it's a masculine one, too.
Both sexes worry about their appearance; both are at risk from serious health problems if they can't control their weight.
Why do so many of us give up on diets?
And are women, in particular, pressurised into dieting?
Rachel Bartlett and Mary Frances report
When Odette Smith was a little girl, her mother used to thank her with sweets if she behaved well.
Cooking huge meals was another predictable way she had of showing love for her family.
Odette came to associate food with warmth and affection, rewards and treats.
But it set up a pattern of eating which would take Odette years to break.
By the time she was 10, she weighed 11 stone and wore a special tunic at school because she couldn't get a uniform big enough to fit her.
At 16, she was a size 18 and resigned herself to a life of being obsessed with food.
Eventually, she was caught up in a vicious cycle of bingeing and dieting — when she was depressed she ate, when she was bored she ate; a box of cakes and half a dozen Mars bars in one session was nothing unusual.
Her health suffered and her family suffered.
Her life was completely dominated by food.
Odette's weight went up to 17½ stone before she found the strength she needed to tackle her eating problem.
By then she was wearing size 24 clothes.
She was, in her own words, ‘grossly obese’.
And all that was just over a year ago.
But her story — as you can see from our pictures — has a happy ending.
Today Odette is five and a half stone lighter and her life has changed in all kinds of ways.
‘That was a lot of extra weight to carry around.
Now I feel so much fitter, it's wonderful,’ she says.
To match the physical change, there's been a psychological transformation, too.
‘I've become confident, outgoing and I've got much more energy.
It really has changed my life.’
Being overweight is a physical problem, of course, but we tend to forget that if affects the mental health of sufferers, too.
Because obesity often has its roots in childhood and adolescent experiences, it can be extremely difficult to overcome later.
Yet Odette has managed to do it spectacularly.
At 27, she works as a nurse with mentally handicapped children in Southend and looks after her own three children, Candice, five, Kieran, three and 14-month-old Kari.
It's a busy, demanding life — a far cry from the days when Odette would sit at home, too tired to do anything except console herself with chocolates.
‘I could never have done this much before, but keeping busy has been a very important part in losing weight and keeping it off,’ she says.
Odette remembers her childhood days vividly.
‘I know I wasn't born to be a size eight or 10,’ she says.
‘I'm five foot eight and take a size nine in shoes.
Perhaps I get my large build from my dad who's six foot four and 20 stone…
’ But  whatever the explanation, it doesn't excuse the stones she piled up during her childhood.
‘I was chubby even as a baby and it wasn't helped as a child by the fact that my mum believed in always feeding me up and rewarding everything with sweets.
It gave me a huge appetite and for all the wrong things,’ she says.
By the time Odette was 10, she was excessively overweight and unhappy.
‘It stopped me having a normal childhood.
I couldn't run and play like other kids and, inevitably, they called me names.
It was always my size they picked on,’ she remembers.
‘Then I had chronic asthma and doctors found I was breathless from being so heavy.’
They put Odette on a rigid, six-month diet and after losing two stone, she found her asthma did improve.
It was the first diet she'd ever tried and it made her feel good about herself for the first time, too.
‘It gave me a sense of control.
I realised I could help myself and didn't have to be this fat, unhappy child,’ she says.
Indeed, for a while, Odette managed to keep her weight stable.
It was a sort of victory but not for long.
At the age of 16, she weighed 12 stone.
‘I was actually satisfied with that, if only because I'd resigned myself to the fact that I'd never be thin,’ she admits.
Sixteen is a critical age in any girl's life.
And while her friends discovered clothes and boys, Odette wondered whether she'd ever share the same experiences.
It was then that she met tall, blond, thin Gary and he didn't give a damn about her weight.
They were married when she was 18.
By then, Odette was training to be a nurse at a hospital in Chelmsford.
Again her weight caused her problems.
‘Doing anything active in a job like that was such a strain and I'd come home absolutely exhausted,’ she remembers.
Her biggest problem wasn't work, however, but the fact that she'd done nothing to tackle her eating problems.
Getting pregnant was the excuse she needed to start bingeing again.
At 22, Odette had Candice, followed by Kieran, two years later.
Her weight shot up during both pregnancies, first to 16 then to 18 stone and her doctor worried about the risk of pre-eclampsia, a sudden rise in blood pressure which can lead to babies being born prematurely and cause complications for the prospective mother, too.
‘I felt ill and had to rest all the time,’ says Odette.
‘I also saw it as an excuse to eat.’
Home all day, she was surrounded by food.
It's a classic trap for a young mother fighting weight problems and stronger wills than Odette's have crumbled.
‘That really was one of the most miserable times of my life,’ she says.
‘I know I've always been a compulsive eater but my problems really began then.
I started to eat out of boredom and my body just ballooned up.
The need to eat completely controlled me.
‘I sympathise with anyone who has any eating disorder because it's a nightmare that affects your whole life.
With me, it wasn't just cakes and sweets — it was everything.
I'd spend hours cooking meals for Gary, then eat them before he got home so I'd have to cook more.
The quicker I could eat food, the better.
I'd go shopping and start eating things before I reached the car.
It was so bad, I'd be looking forward to the next meal before I'd finished the last one,’ she says.
These binges were always followed by feelings of guilt and depression.
‘Gary learned to keep out of my way but I did worry that I was taking it out on him and the kids,’ she shudders.
‘He never said so but I think he was bothered when I got that big.
Certainly our social life suffered.
I was always so tired I never wanted to go out — I felt I could never look nice, anyway.
Plus, my friends would only end up nagging me about my weight and that was the last thing that I wanted.’
At this stage she tried every calorie-counting diet going.
‘But I had such a huge appetite, my quota for the day would be gone by breakfast and I'd start on the following day's allowance.
It's no good someone like me being told they can't have any more when you're still ravenously hungry.
That's just an invitation to break your diet,’ says Odette.
Going back to work in a different job helped for a while, however.
Odette found she lost three stone keeping busy, then to her dismay found she was pregnant again.
‘Gary and I had said ‘no more’ after the problems with the first two but it turned out to be the real turning point for me.
I decided to use it as the chance to turn my life around.
I made sure I didn't put on too much weight and set myself a final goal — to get down to 13 stone.’
Odette went up to 16 stone during her third pregnancy but, a few months after baby Kari was born, she joined a local branch of Slimmer's World and she hasn't looked back since.
On the day she joined in March 1990 she weighed 15st 6lb.
Two months later, when she left to carry on by herself, she was 14 stone.
Today she's 12 stone — a stone lighter than the target she'd first set herself.
‘I weigh the same now as when I married,’ she says proudly.
We first met Odette when she was a finalist in a competition organised by WOMAN and Etam to find a size 16+ Model Of The Year.
Like many readers, we were concerned that the paper-thin parade of models normally featured in magazines and newspapers aren't representative of women as a whole.
That Sunday, Odette looked superb.
‘It was the best possible reward for all my efforts,’ she says.
These days, she can wear the clothes she likes.
She's bought an exercise bike to keep in shape.
And, most important of all, she's in control of what she eats.
‘I've re-educated my eating habits.
I'm still a big eater but now I choose all the healthy options, says Odette.
‘I really believe you are what you eat, and I'm certain that's why I feel so different in myself.
‘Because you associate it with depriving yourself, I think you've got to drop the word ‘diet’ from your vocabulary.
No one has to deprive themselves.
You've just got to be sensible.’
RING FOR MORE HELP
If you're on a diet and you've found that you've hit problems, ring Sue Frost on these special helplines.
All four lines are open now.
Hope they help!
I feel like breaking my diet 0898 400 828
Why won't those pounds stay off? 0898 400 860
Why can't I lose those last pounds? 0898 400 861
When some food is too good to resist 0898 223 917
Calls cost 33p per minute cheap rate and 44p per minute at all other times
FACT: 6m WOMEN ARE OBESE
Is the problem of losing weight just a question of vanity for most of us or a medical necessity?
Well doctors estimate that 32 per cent of women in Britain (and 40 per cent of men) are overweight to some degree.
However, nearly six million women are ‘significantly obese’(that is about 20 per cent or more about their ideal weight).
And it's these people who need to worry most.
Feminists argue that it's our male-dominated society that requires women to lose weight.
Whereas fat men are considered okay — men are supposed to be big and beefy, after all.
But fatness in either sex has nothing to do with beefiness: at its worst, it's the basis for heart problems, general ill health and a lot of emotional insecurity.
Greater self-control is the simple answer to most people's eating problems.
Unfortunately, that's the very thing most of us lack!
‘I feel great now.
But just over a year ago, I was grossly obese’
At 16, I resigned myself to the fact that I'd never really be thin’
‘I'm going to make sure my own kids don't make the same mistakes that I did’
T-shirts from Children's World and Nipper.
Odette's shirt from Freeman's
‘I weigh exactly the same now as the day I got married’
WORK IT OUT!
Exercise is just as important a part of slimming as eating less food.
So do more of it.
And to help tone up problem areas, TV-am's Lizzie Webb has devised eight special exercises to help.
Try to do each one eight times every day.
THIGHS/BOTTOM
1 Hug left knee towards chest, stand tall, don't lean forward.
Hold for a count of five.
Repeat with right.
2 Straighten left leg out behind you, keeping it off the floor.
Hold for a count of five.
If balancing is difficult hold on to a chair.
Repeat with right leg.
WAIST
3 Stand straight.
With legs a little bent and comfortable apart, lightly place right hand at the side of your head and lean gently to left to a count of five.
Straighten, then repeat to the right.
4 Clasp hands above head, bend right leg and lean to left.
Push gently to a count of five and repeat other side.
UPPER ARMS/WAIST
5 Position arms as picture.
Take out to sides and, in a continuous move, curve them above head again.
Repeat.
6 With both arms straight and outstretched to the sides, palms tilted up, circle your arms round.
‘Draw’ large circles eight times one way, and eight times the other.
STOMACH
7 Lie as here.
Fingertips on sides of head, sit up slowly and lie back.
Keep head off ground.
8 Draw up your right knee, foot flat on ground.
Cross left foot over right knee.
With your hands lightly placed at the sides of your head, sit up to touch left knee with right elbow.
Repeat and change sides.
Don't let your head fall back.
Q
I weigh 12 stone.
I'm 5 foot 10 inches and size 16 and I think I'd look pretty silly if I weighed much less.
I'm happy until I go shopping or see the ‘ideal woman’ who's half my size in a magazine.
Should I go on a diet?
A
No, it sounds as if you're quite a healthy weight for your height (see our chart below).
We take the view that if you're technically overweight but still healthy (and your doctor agrees), then stay the way you are.
No one should feel pressurised into slimming.
And we agree — magazines (WOMAN included) do need to do much more about using ‘bigger’ models.
And we will!
Q
I'm on a diet but find it hard to keep going.
In my first week, I lost nearly a stone but since then I've only lost a couple of pounds a week.
What am I doing wrong?
A
Nothing!
Your body is following the typical pattern for weight loss — and it's probably the most discouraging thing about dieting.
So many people give up because, after the elation of seeing the pounds fall off in the first few days, they lose heart when weight loss slows down.
The reason is that when you reduce your calorie intake, the first thing the body burns off is its stores of water and glycogen, which maintain your glucose supply.
These are quickly broken down, but it takes the body longer to shed fatty tissue, so weight loss slows down.
It's also why you should beware of any diet that sells itself on how much weight you can lose in a week — anyone can do that.
It's maintaining the diet for longer and keeping the weight off which is the tricky part.
Q
My teenage daughter is on a diet.
She needs to lose a bit of weight but I'm worried because she's become very faddy about her food and sometimes refuses to eat anything at all.
What should I do?
A
You're right to be concerned.
Teenage girls are more likely than anyone else to develop eating disorders such as anorexia or bulimia nervosa.
Keep a watch on how much your daughter eats but don't try to talk her out of dieting altogether — that's a surefire way to set up a conflict, which will only make the problem worse.
You can help by getting involved in her diet, preparing healthy, balanced meals and emphasising that this is the successful way to keep slim.
If you're still worried, do contact your doctor.
Eating disorders are a serious psychological problem that can take years to sort out.
Q
I'm on a diet but I find I'm so hungry all the time that I'm just miserable and can't concentrate on anything.
A
No one denies that it's difficult to diet, especially at the beginning.
You're effectively cheating your body by reducing your calorie intake and your body sends out different responses because it's confused.
Many people who have trouble with diets are used to eating lots of snacks during the day.
It's better to eat more at meal times.
If you must have a snack, keep to fruit or a stick of celery.
But do bear in mind, too, that hunger isn't always what it seems.
Sometimes it's just force of habit — the it's-four-o'clock-so-I-must-want-a-biscuit syndrome.
Or it can be your mood — many people eat when they're feeling tense or depressed.
If you find it hard to stick to a diet, try keeping a diary for a week where you record what you've eaten and when, how hungry you were and what sort of mood you were in at the time.
Understand your eating habits and you'll be one step on the way to changing them.
And one last piece of advice: be positive.
We know it's easy to say, but with any luck, you'll soon start to see (and feel) the benefits of dieting, providing you keep at it.
The end result should make all your present miseries disappear — we hope so, at any rate.
NEXT MONTH: He's gone!
What happens now?
EATING YOUR WAY TO HEALTH
Odette Smith's long and sometimes painful struggle to reach the weight she wanted is one that a lot of women (and men) will sympathise with.
There was no secret formula, no magic plan, however.
She did it by careful eating and taking more exercise and, whatever anyone else tries to tell you, that is the only way to be sure of losing weight.
Odette, for example, turned away from fattening foods to embrace a healthier diet: that means plenty of fresh fruit and vegetables, pasta, wholemeal products, beans and pulses.
She cut out things like cakes and biscuits (well, no one says dieting is easy) and used sugar-free jellies and tinned fruit in natural juice when she wanted something sweet.
‘If anything, the meals I cook now are tastier,’ says Odette.
‘I use herbs, spices and concentrated flavours and I never give biscuits or sweets to the kids.
I'm determined not to make the same mistake with them.’
Apart from disciplining herself, Odette also found Slimmer's World a useful ally.
Interestingly, when we tested slimming clubs recently, it was also Slimmer's World that came out on top.
(Phone 0773 811247 for details.)
The growth of slimming clubs is a reminder that many people find it helpful to lose weight if they're part of a group where they can swap stories and share experiences — but slimming clubs don't necessarily work for everyone.
If you're intending to go on a diet, it's advisable to consult your doctor first and seek his or her advice.
These days, there's plenty of it.
Ask friends what's worked for them or buy a paperback that offers a realistic diet and know you can keep to.
And why not involve the whole family?
Moving to a healthier diet is good news for you, your partner and your children.
Good luck!
READER'S OPEN LETTER
Dear Joan,
It was marvellous to see you the other day after so many years.
I did enjoy our cup of tea together, and thank you for trusting me enough to tell me about your husband's alcoholism.
It made me realise what a coward I've been over my own problem.
When you asked how Tom and the children were, you must have thought it odd that I told you what Tom, and Alison and Cheryl were doing without really mentioning Peter.
I just didn't want to talk about our son, to tell how he has driven us almost insane with worry.
He has become addicted to gambling, you see.
Suddenly I have a great urge to tell you about it, knowing that you will understand as you have suffered so terribly yourself.
Most people seem to think that those who fall for gambling are loners, haunting a twilight world of their own because they can't relate to others.
But this isn't always the case — Peter was sociable and popular.
Highly competitive, too.
He loved sport.
Peter's addiction started soon after his fourteenth birthday.
He went on holiday with a friend and his family.
It rained the whole nine days they were there, so they spent most of their time in the amusement arcades.
It seems awful that so often these places are the only type of indoor entertainment to keep youngsters amused.
Peter was hooked from the start.
He won two pounds, then three, then the jackpot on another machine.
He says he experienced a tremendous thrill when he heard the tinkle of money and saw a glittering stream of silver coins clattering down the chute.
He says that his afternoon in the arcade was the most exciting of his lie.
His modest bit of holiday money had miraculously multiplied and all from a single, small stake!
Apparently, young people fall into three main categories.
Most enjoy an occasional flutter but never become addicted, others simply dislike gambling in any form.
And a few unfortunates, like Peter, succumb to addiction with horrifying speed.
Incredibly, though, it was six months before I fully realised what was happening.
Oh, I had vague suspicions.
I suspected small sums were missing from my purse.
Peter came home from school ravenous, raiding the larder as soon as he got in.
I was told he'd been spotted playing the fruit machines at lunch-time.
With horror, I realised he was using his dinner money to feed his addiction.
Oh, Joan, I couldn't believe it.
In a panic I phoned tom to ask if he could come home early as I wanted to discuss Peter with him before the boy got home.
Of course, Tom has a short temper, so it wasn't a good idea.
He hit the roof as soon as Peter came in.
I'm so ashamed now but I joined in, screaming and ranting, making things a thousand times worse.
Peter denied everything.
He lied so convincingly I ended up almost apologising to him.
For a while I believed the bust-up had done the trick.
Peter seemed almost his old self again.
Then once again I suspected money was being taken from my purse.
Now I forced myself to check.
There was no denying it.
Money was definitely missing.
Again Peter denied it.
My formerly loving and truthful son had now become such a plausible liar.
As you can imagine, the strain on the whole family has been terrible.
Tom wouldn't talk about it and spent most of his spare time at his club.
The girls resented all the attention Peter got.
But I couldn't help it — I was so worried about him, everything else was driven from my mind.
Things really came to a head about a month ago.
Peter left school and got himself a sales job but he was discovered stealing from a customer.
Fortunately, his employer was lenient and he was let off with a caution.
But he lost his job, of course.
At that point, both Tom and I accepted the magnitude of the problem.
We knew that it wouldn't just go away if we swept it under the carpet.
So we joined a self-help group for parents of young gamblers.
Now we've met people like ourselves.
And it's been such a relief to be able to speak about it openly for the first time.
Although we must never give up hoping that Peter will recover from the terrible illness of addiction — for it is an illness — we've been told to face the possibility that this might just never happen.
So we must find the strength to face it somehow.
We can't allow it to ruin our lives or the lives of the rest of the family either.
You see, Joan, Peter left home last week but we don't know where he's gone.
Each day we look out for the postman — but so far there's been nothing.
We pray that Peter is all right.
I feel so much better now that I've written to you, Joan.
You are the first person I've told, apart from the self-help organisation, but you won't be the last.
I know you'll understand our anguish — you've been through so much with your husband's alcoholism.
And telling you about Peter's gambling has given me so much more strength.
Yours, Doreen 
‘My formerly loving and truthful son had now become such a plausible liar’
IT HAPPENED TO US
WE WERE STRUCK BY LIGHTNING!
There was only a million-to-one chance of it happening.
But when we set off walking that stormy day, I never dreamed we'd be so close to death
We'd really been looking forward to our trip to the Brecon Beacons.
I'm a boarder at a school in Derbyshire and a member of the school's Army Cadets, and we were going to the Beacons as part of a self-reliance exercise.
I'd been on one of these trips before and the weather had been brilliant.
But you can't expect it to be perfect all the time.
You have to test yourself in all conditions — that's the point.
There were around 80 boys from my school and we went straight to the mountains and settled into our base camp.
The next day, I was told what was in store for me and my schoolmates.
The only problem was that it didn't work out quite as we were expecting it to…
I'd been made a lance-corporal just before we left and had been put in charge of a group of boys.
We were to go into the mountains and spend one night in tents before making our rendezvous the next day.
It wasn't a difficult exercise and normally it would have been a very pleasant way of seeing some wonderful countryside.
But that day was awful.
The rain kept starting and stopping and it looked as if most of our march was going to be in the wet.
We weren't due to leave until the afternoon but our moods started to match the weather.
At about two o'clock, we picked up our packs and trudged off.
There was half a dozen of us and I didn't know my group terribly well.
But we started to chat and I thought that, in spite of the rotten conditions, there might be some fun in it after all.
For one thing, we wee entirely on our own and we all enjoyed the fact that there was no master around to tell us what to do.
That bucked us up a bit.
We set off over an hour late due to a problem with the truck which was supposed to take us to our setting-off point.
We had to cross the mountains, camp near a reservoir, then head home — but fate had decided otherwise.
Apart from the pouring rain, we had to contend with mist — luckily we were on a clear path.
Then came thunder and lightning.
It seemed to be getting nearer and nearer but we were still pretty cheerful.
We started to do the old trick of counting the time between the lightning flash and the thunderclap to discover how far away the eye of the storm was.
By then, the rain had really started coming down in  bucketsful .
Suddenly we nearly jumped out of our skins as there was an incredible clap of thunder.
We had made our break under the trees — the worst place to be in that dreadful weather — so I urged my group on.
By this time we were climbing towards a ridge.
We'd only gone a short distance from the trees when suddenly we were hit by a blinding flash.
We all keeled over and hit the ground.
We'd been struck by a lightning bolt.
That experience is something I'll never forget as long as I live.
The first thing I remember was a slight buzzing in my ears.
I couldn't move my arms or legs, my body tingled all over and I had a terrible splitting headache.
Slowly I looked around at the other boys.
They, too, were lying flat on the ground looking dazed.
Some of them were in a terrible state because they'd had an electric shock from the lightning.
Some were screaming with terror.
It seemed like an age but it was actually only about 10 seconds before I was able to move my arms and legs.
But many of the boys took a long time to get over their paralysed state.
I finally focused on Ben Slack who was 15 — a year younger than me.
He was blue in the face.
As I found out later, a metal necklace he was wearing had taken the full brunt of the lightning flash.
I kneeled down by Ben in the mud and found he was still unconscious.
I immediately started giving him mouth-to-mouth resuscitation and heart massage.
My father, a policeman, had taught me how to do this years before.
It was good job, too.
I kept doing all the things I'd been taught.
There was no response.
I thought Ben was dead.
But something told me I must carry on, so I did, rhythmically pushing his chest, praying for a reaction.
As a last resort, I tried mouth-to-mouth again.
Seconds later, Ben suddenly started spluttering and coughing — he was going to be all right!
Most people probably don't realise but, with this kind of emergency treatment, time is vitally important.
If Ben had stayed unconscious one minute longer, he would probably be brain damaged; up to five minutes and he wouldn't have lived.
I really believe more people should learn how to give mouth-to-mouth.
I was the only one in our group who knew.
If the lightning had struck me like it had Ben, it would have meant no hope for me.
While all this was going on, I'd sent some of the boys to get help.
During our wait, I found that one of the other boys had been badly hurt, too.
His jeans looked as if they'd been slashed with a knife.
And there was this repulsive smell hanging around.
I was told later it was ozone.
At last, RAF helicopters came and took Ben and the other injured boy to hospital.
Ben's injuries were so bad he needed regular check-ups for six months.
The other chap had a skin graft.
The rest of us made our way to a farm where we were given tea and biscuits.
It was the best cuppa I've ever tasted!
If we believed in omens or portents, then I think we should have taken notice of some of the things someone or something was trying to tell us that June day.
It's only now, I suppose, that all of us who were involved have started to realise just how close to death we were.
It has affected me and made me pause for thought.
If I had to face such a situation again, I'd be very careful if there was a storm around.
It's not that I won't be prepared to face such conditions, it's just that I realise what could happen.
It's also made me aware of the responsibilities involved in leading other people in bad situations — but I will tackle mountains again and I will go to camp again.
Despite what happened, it won't put me off.
After it was all over, we kept hearing about it being a million-to-one chance.
Tow days after this, I was going pot-holing and the problems of what might go wrong came up.
There was no mention of flooding and cave-ins and being trapped underground.
Then someone said the possibility was only a million-to-one.
In that case, I told them, you can think seriously about counting me out — and I meant it.
Kieran Bowers, pictured above left, with Ben Slack, was talking to Ray Hearn
‘I couldn't move my arms or legs’
Looks FOR THE 90S
A stunning colour, a beautiful, simple design, a generous size…
Hope you like this perfect cable cardigan.
Woman PLUS!
Our cardigan's easy to knit and easy to care for — it's machine-washable.
Dry it flat — the weight may cause it to stretch out of shape.
The pure wool comes in over 50 colours.
The pattern is a repeat of twisted rib going into simple cables, with reverse stocking stitch between.
woman — we put you first!
NEXT WEEK
Why I love Beryl Reid, my elbows and my best friend Tish!
SUE TULLY
How success slapped me in the face by JULIA ROBERTS
‘It's not just your rings they take…it's also your peace of mind!’
What you can do to BEAT THE BURGLARS!
ACTION WOMAN
Will you fake it this summer?
TANS Tried and tested
CLAIRE
Will your son grow up to despise women?
‘Why I had to plead for my baby's life’
Well, are you a cat or dog person?
What the experts say
RICH!
WICKED!
WONDERFUL!
Tuck in to some great cakes
3 page special
KIDS' STUFF!
Clothes that don't cost the earth
Jonathan Cainer
This week's predictions
Aries MAR 21–APR 20
I can't stress strongly enough how much positive potential you have between now and mid-May.
You might not be going through an easy time emotionally or materially but all the dramatic sagas now unfolding will eventually come together to produce and excellent outcome.
Taurus APR 21–MAY 21
This week brings old ITV shows to mind.
There is ‘no hiding place’ from whatever's now making you feel a ‘prisoner’.
You needn't be a ‘saint’ to face it, just brave enough to leave behind ‘all our yesterdays’.
Then you can ‘take your pick’ of several ‘golden shots’at success!
Gemini MAY 22–JUN 22
You have now set sail for a new destination and it's too late to turn back.
This week, however, when you find yourself all at sea, you may wonder whether you've chosen well.
If there are storms, weather them.
If there's an unnerving calm, relax into it.
Next week, you'll sight land!
Cancer JUN 23–JUL 23
I wish I could be a fly on the wall in your life this week!
I'd love to see the reaction once you finally turn the tables on an oppressive person or group and assert some of the strength and authority you've been holding back.
You'll be a force to be reckoned with — and about time too!
Leo JUL 14–AUG 23
Expect the unexpected this week!
Sorry I can't be more specific but for different Leos, the surprises will take different forms.
All I can tell you is that much will change, rapidly and dramatically, and that once you get over the shock you'll discover everything has worked out for the better.
Virgo AUG 24–SEP 23
There's serious talking to be done this week, especially is it now seems you aren't going to be able to escape an intense situation as quickly as you'd hoped.
While this may seem disappointing, there's still much to look forward to — even if it's all due to take longer than you want.
Libra SEP 24–OCT 23
Have you gone from the frying pan into the fire?
It may seem like that early this week as one apparent catastrophe follows another while emotional fever runs high.
By the weekend, however, you'll have the reassurance you crave and see it's all just been a storm in a teacup.
Scorpio OCT 24–NOV 22
It doesn't matter what you're up against, who's being unfair or where the financial and emotional pressure is coming from this week.
You're fine, as long as you stick to caution and sincerity.
But rise to the bait and you'll get sucked into a drama that will prove totally unnecessary.
Sagittarius NOV 23–DEC 21
This can be a magically rewarding week.
All you have to do is to be brave enough to stand up to those putting pressure on you or taking advantage of your desire to keep everyone happy.
Show your teeth in a firm but polite way — the thing you're afraid of will then become afraid of you.
Capricorn DEC 22–JAN 20
Let someone else do the driving this week while you take a back seat; the time to leap into action and seize control hasn't yet arrived.
Try to assert yourself too quickly and you'll end up making a counter-productive move.
Bide your time and you'll find plenty to satisfy you wile you wait.
Aquarius JAN 21–FEB 19
You can expect turmoil early this week — but don't let it get to you.
Things will seem far worse than they actually are for a few days — but once the drama dies down you'll see you're in a fine position after all.
Your biggest problem is one you yourself might create by over-reacting.
Pisces FEB 20–MAR 20
‘You can't win em all,’ they say, and this week you will probably have to admit defeat in one key area.
but although this may pain you, it's not the disaster you fear it is.
There's a hidden advantage in giving way now — and anyway you'll have a chance to regain any lost ground later on.
NOT TODAY THANK YOU!
The words are easy, so why do we have such trouble saying them?
Maybe we're just too polite.
And why is it that people always knock on the door when we're in the bath?
Mandy Bruce reports on those unwanted callers
Fun IN THE 90S
You should know by now that it's bound to happen.
You could even place bets on it…
There you are, starkers.
You've got everything planned: a rare treat.
An evening in and alone, a whole evening just to pamper yourself.
The leisurely bath has reached just the right temperature and the birthday bath salts are bubbling away beautifully.
Your hair is smothered in hot towels or olive oil — or worse, henna — and your face is a glowing beetroot after the face pack.
Then it happens — there's a knock at the front door.
Throwing on a dressing-gown and swearing like a trooper, you stumble to answer it.
The stranger smiles sweetly.
‘Good evening.
A windy night, isn't it?’ he says — which is self-evident as you shiver, peering at him past the security chain on the door while struggling to keep yourself decent.
‘Have you thought about double glazing.
We have a special offer at the moment…’
‘Not today, thank you.’
Ten minutes later you're back in the bath.
The water's rapidly getting cold and the bubbles are starting to burst, but you sink lower, relax…and rat-a-tat-tat, there it goes again.
This time it's the lady from down the road, asking you to sign a petition against plans to build on the local playing fields.
She looks at you in a state of undress with undisguised shock.
‘Oh — have I caught you at a bad time, dear?’
‘No, no, of course not.’
You lie feebly and sign the petition as quickly as possible, dripping exotic avocado body lotion all over the piece of paper.
If we could actually be bothered to work it out, a vast number of strange people beat a path to our front doors in the course of a year.
And Murphy's Law invariably applies: if you don't want anybody to knock on your door — because you're putting the kids to bed/washing your hair/making love/cooking something impossible like a souffl é/late; for just about anything/working to a deadline/just secretly reclining on the sofa with a packet of your favourite chocolate biscuits, watching Coronation Street — somebody always will.
If the postman knocks on the door to delivery the only parcel you've received in the past three years, you can guarantee it will be at just before eight on the first Saturday morning you've had a chance to have a proper lie in for months.
if the man comes to read the gas meter it will always be when you were supposed to be somewhere else half an hour ago and you've got one leg in and one leg out of a pair of tights.
If someone comes to ask you to move your car forward a bit so he can park his 10 ton truck which is completely blocking the road, it'll be when you've lost the car keys.
The milkman only ever knocks on the door to ask for his money when he's two hours earlier than usual and he's in a chirpy, joking and whistling mood — while you've got an awful hangover and no loose change.
But even the milkman's timing can't compare with those supremos who have perfected the art of appearing at the door at the most irritating time possible — the Jehovah Witnesses.
God forgive me, you think, as you try desperately to get rid of them — and try equally hard not to mention anything about blood transfusions.
Arguing with them is always fatal, inviting them in is worse.
So you buy the Watchtower in the hope that they'll go away and no come back, knowing full well that they will and that when they do, you'll hide in the loo and pretend you're out.
Then you start to feel guilty — they have a right to their beliefs.
But, you sigh, why can't they try converting next door instead?
And talking about next door, why is it that neighbours, just like friends, always seem to turn up unannounced when you and he are in the middle of the most flaming and spectacular row?
Whenever you visit their place unexpectedly it looks as if they've spent every waking moment cleaning and polishing.
They only ever come around to yours when the sink's full of washing-up, there's a pile of dirty washing on the kitchen floor, the sitting room looks as if it hasn't been Hoovered for a month, there are empty Smarties packets down the sides of the chairs, toast crumbs all over the tables, cobwebs in the corner and you've run out of coffee.
More guilt!
You're a failure as a home-maker, mother, superwoman, as Eagle Eyes from next door can see for herself.
Guilt plays a major part in the who's-that-at-the-door game.
As a nation, the British are inclined to say sorry whenever someone treads on our toes on the train, so simply saying ‘shove off’ to an  unwelcome caller makes most of us feel terribly wicked.
Ladies collecting jumble for the local church fête always make you feel terribly guilty.
They inevitably knock on the door on the one evening of the month when you're dolled up in your glad rags to go out on the town.
Aaaaargh!
Guilt, guilt, guilt.
You shouldn't be going out to enjoy yourself — you should be out there doing something useful, serving the local community.
So you don't actually mention that if you don't leave now you'll miss the first act of the play, and he'll be furious.
Instead, you end up handing over the wonderful chunky sweater you bought only last week — and a selection of his favourite paperbacks.
The ladies and gentlemen who deliver those little charity envelopes make you feel even worse.
They're giving up their valuable time to help others.
And what are you doing?
Wishing that they'd buzz off and leave you to watch Bergerac.
And just to rub it in, while you're being impatient and grumpy they're always cheerful and chatty — despite the freezing cold and the pouring rain.
The little boy down the road who's started his own car valet business at the age of 13 is certainly to be admired for his initiative.
But he's another one who only ever turns up when you're half-dressed.
And then, of course, only on the day after you took the car to the car wash for the first time in months.
There is never a good time for the tax-man to call.
And you only have to see a police uniform through the door to feel racked with guilt, even though you've done nothing wrong and he's only looking for a lost cat.
And talking of police, it's a dead cert that the very day a Neighbourhood Watch leaflet arrives, detailing all the recent burglaries in your area, is the one day you find yourself alone in the house.
And then you get lots of other unwelcome knocks on the door — one man who says he's looking for number 11, another who says he's a taxi-driver who's come to the wrong house — and he probably is but his timing is enough to make you rush about panicking and locking the place up like Fort Knox.
Professional salesmen should be the easiest people to get rid of.
After all, you're under no moral obligation to them.
But of course it isn't as simple as that.
So if you know that just by opening the door you're bound to end up with a space-age vacuum cleaner, 50 encyclopaedias, a new patio or a tarmac-covered drive, you could try hiding in the broom cupboard until he's gone.
Or hide behind the curtains and bark like a Rottweiler.
Or, of course, you could always just say: ‘Not today, thank you’— couldn't you?
Seriously thought…be careful.
Never let anyone into your home unless you're sure of their credentials.
And if you're at all suspicious of anyone who comes to your door — keep it firmly shut.
Dear Dr Alan
Dr Alan Maryon Davis answers all your health questions and medical problems — he's here to help and advise you
SHOULD HE BE CIRCUMCISED?
My son, aged five, has a very tight foreskin which doesn't pull back enough for me to clean underneath it.
This worries me in case germs collect there.
Will his foreskin loosen up or should I have him circumcised?
A tight foreskin (phimosis) is very common among baby boys and nothing at all to worry about.
About half of them loosen up enough to allow the foreskin to be gently pulled back by the time the boy is a year old.
And most of the rest do so in the next year or so.
But if, as in your son's case, the foreskin is still tight at the age of five or six, then it could lead to inflammation and discomfort — an infection could fester under the foreskin, causing redness, soreness and swelling.
But don't be tempted to force the foreskin back in an effort to stretch it — you might find that the tight band gets caught behind the head of the penis, impeding the blood flow and making the head of the penis swell alarmingly (paraphimosis).
Ask the doctor about circumcision to prevent these potential problems.
THIS LUMP TERRIFIES ME
Three weeks ago I found a lump in one of my breasts and since then I've been paralysed with fear.
It's a small, firm lump and seems to slip from my fingers when I try to feel it.
It's slightly painful to squeeze.
I can't find any other lumps anywhere.
What do you think it is?
I'm 27.
You've got to pluck up your courage and get it checked — either by your own GP or the doctor at the well woman clinic or family planning clinic.
And you should do this soon.
There are various possible causes — most of them more likely than cancer.
But the slight risk should ensure that any lump is carefully checked.
My hunch is that your lump is a ‘breast mouse’ or fibro-adenoma.
This is a common type of lump, especially in woman under 30, and consists of swollen tissue loosely attached within the breast.
This allows the lump to slip about easily — hence the name ‘breast mouse’.
Fibroadenomas are not cancerous.
Even so, you must get it properly checked — if only to reassure yourself.
It's likely that you'll have to have the lump removed, but that will be done through a tiny incision and it will be checked to make absolutely sure it isn't cancerous.
WILL HE EVER FULLY RECOVER?
My father is 74.
He had a stroke four months ago and it's left him extremely weak down the left side of his body.
His left leg is much better than it was, but his left arm is all but useless and he can't really grip firmly.
Can you suggest anything of help?
The two most crucial factors are his willpower and as much encouragement as you and the rest of the family can give him.
Recovery after a stroke is greatest in the first few days and weeks — but it doesn't stop there.
Gains can be made for months and perhaps even years afterwards.
The great enemy is depression — this must be overcome by giving him as much help and support as possible.
His doctor should arrange physiotherapy to teach him and his carers the right exercises to build up strength and co-ordination.
And social workers can arrange for extra equipment, handles and other aids about the house to make life easier for him.
His GP should also be able to put him in touch with his local ‘Stroke Club,’ where he'll be able to talk about his problems and progress with people in the same situation as himself.
Above all, though, never give up hope — thousands of people have made remarkable recoveries after strokes.
For more information, write to The Chest, Heart and Stroke Association, CHSA House, 122–127 Whitecross Street, London EC1Y 8JJ.
WHAT'S A HIATUS HERNIA?
My husband has suffered from heartburn on and off for years and has recently been diagnosed as having a hiatus hernia.
Could you explain what this is?
Hiatus hernia is a very common problem, especially among the over-fifties.
It's caused by too much pressure on the abdomen, which forces part of the stomach upwards through a gap in the diaphragm — the sheet of muscle between the abdomen and chest.
Hiatus hernias are more likely in smokers who've got a chronic cough, which puts repeated strain on the abdomen, and also in men who do too much heavy lifting.
They can also be a problem for women who've had children because the full womb can all too easily force the stomach upwards.
The main symptom is heartburn — a sharp pain behind the breastbone, caused by acidic stomach juices irritating the gullet, and sometimes a bitter taste in the mouth.
There are various ways your husband can help himself.
If he smokes, he should give up, and if he's overweight, he should slim.
He should also eat smaller meals, with savoury snacks in between if necessary, and avoid bending, stooping or lying flat after meals.
Finally, if he gets pain at night he should sleep on an extra pillow or raise the head of the bed a few inches to stop the gastric juices flowing upwards into his chest.
IS SHAVING BAD FOR ME?
I've always shaved my legs but I've been told that shaving makes the hair grow more strongly.
Is this true?
No, it's twaddle.
There's no way that shaving can stimulate the hair roots to work harder.
Hairshafts are totally dead, so cutting them can't send messages to the hair roots.
And hair roots can't respond to physical stimulation in that way.
If they could, then waxing or epilation (dragging the hairs out) would be far more likely to cause stronger growth.
The myth about shaving probably comes from the fact that this method only removes the hairs at the skin surface rather than below it — so that it grows back sooner (not faster).
And also because the razor chops the hairshafts at an angle, the stubble feels sharp and tough.
HOW CAN DR ALAN HELP?
You can phone Dr Alan Maryon Davis on our special helplines.
Just dial the number next to the topic that interests you, day or night.
Calls are charged at a rate of 33p per minute at cheap times and 44p at all other times.
We hope you find these recorded advice lines useful.
How to have a better sex life 0898 223 367
Should you worry about orgasms? 0898 500 203
Constipation and wind 0898 500 202
How to cope with panic attacks 0898 500 218
Copying with hysterectomy 0898 500 214
Sexually transmitted diseases — what to do 0898 500 227
What to do about painful intercourse 0898 223 371
How to cope with incontinence 0898 500 201
How to cope with hair loss 0898 500 217
Menopause — the problems explained 0898 223 369
AIDS — what you need to know 0898 500 204
The Pill — what you need to know 0898 500 219
Sorry, but Dr Alan Maryon Davis can answer letters only on this page.
Dear Sue
Don't just sit there and worry on your own — if you've got a problem and feel you need some help, write to Sue Frost
HE ISN'T AFFECTIONATE
I've been married for 16 years to a man I really love.
But lately he's been a real pain in the neck.
He comes in from work and sits in his armchair all evening, hardly talking to me, although he's great with our two kids and everybody else.
He's never been really loving towards me, never shows affection, except when making love.
I have told him he isn't the same man I married any more and he just takes me for granted.
I threatened to leave, so he promised he'd change.
And he did — but it only lasted a week!
How do I get him to pay attention to me?
I'm even tempted to go out with another man just to get some love.
Rather than criticising your husband, why not find out if there's something wrong?
Perhaps he's got worries he's not sharing, or perhaps he's simply been working too hard.
If he's never been particularly affectionate and you've never complained before, he may find your sudden demands puzzling and irritating, although I hope he realises that you're anxious to improve things for the sake of the marriage and not just for yourself.
All partnerships go through down patches and the way through is to communicate, to compromise and, sometimes, to wait.
Talk of finding another man is immature and foolhardy.
THERE'S NO OTHER WAY
I'm desperate for some kind of help.
My husband and I have totally different views about pornography.
He can't see any harm in it but when I've found him watching blue movies, I've felt suicidal.
He promised me he wouldn't watch them again, yet I know he does, even though he knows how much they upset me.
The only way I can think of getting out is to take my life, but if I did, I'd have to take my little girls with me.
I know this sounds terrible but sometimes it's the only solution I can see.
Am I the only person in the world who feels so strongly?
A lot of women feel extremely strongly about pornography but suicide is never a solution to anything.
And to talk of killing your little girls shows you've got the whole thing horribly out of perspective.
You should ring the Samaritans the moment you feel suicidal and get help as soon as possible from your doctor.
Once your health is restored, you'll be better placed to assess your feelings.
You may find you can overlook your husband's interest in pornography, or strike a compromise whereby none is brought into the house.
If, however, you feel that your husband's taste for this material says something about his whole personality that you simply can't stand, then you always have the option of leaving and taking your daughters with you.
DID I HAVE A MISCARRIAGE?
I'm 18 and worried that I miscarried when I was only three weeks pregnant.
My period was a week late but I was too scared to have a test.
Having a baby would mean leaving university and bringing shame on my family.
I told myself I'd have an abortion, although I knew I could never go through with it, and I was so relieved when my period came.
Then I got worried when my period lasted a month.
Could it have been a miscarriage?
Now I feel so unhappy and jealous when I see babies or pregnant women.
I haven't told anyone about this, not even my boyfriend.
A lengthy period, if it's unusual, can be an indication of an early miscarriage, so it's worth checking with your GP to see that all is well, simply to ensure that any future pregnancies go smoothly.
Your feelings of jealousy aren't perverse — even though you didn't want a baby, you'd probably imagined yourself being very pregnant or holding a baby.
Learn from this experience and use a reliable form of contraception until you want a baby.
Think, too, about your boyfriend.
What kind of relationship is it if you can't share something so important and traumatic?
ONLY HE CAN TOUCH ME
I'm 30 and I've been having an affair for the past five years.
He isn't married but lives with his girlfriend and their child.
I love him a lot but long to settle down and have a family of my own.
But I just can't do this with anyone else, because a long time ago I was raped, and my lover is the only man I could bear to touch me.
I still have bad dreams about the rape.
You must overcome your feelings about being raped.
I'd advise you to contact the Rape Crisis Centre (phone 071 837 1600) to get information about your nearest branch for counselling.
Perhaps your future lies with your lover, perhaps it doesn't.
But you won't be able to make any decision while you cling to him for fear of other men.
I'M SO TIRED ALL THE TIME
I'm 39, very unhappy and weary, and I'm under a great deal of stress.
I can't feel enthusiastic about the government training course I'm on and although I have a nice boyfriend, I'm trying to finish the relationship.
I'm a Christian and he's not.
He says I should wait to see how I really feel, but I don't want to get married and my religious beliefs exclude sex outside marriage.
My course will eventually qualify me for a good career but meanwhile I'm struggling on an allowance.
I worry a lot and even my religious beliefs don't help.
Check with a doctor to see if your tiredness has a physical cause, or if you're suffering from depression.
If there's nothing medically wrong, you'll have to ask whether this training course is really right for you.
Talk to your course tutor about it.
As for your feelings about your boyfriend and your crisis of faith, then open up to your priest or minister.
Don't struggle with all this on your own.
SUE'S ADDRESS
If you have a problem, please write to Sue Frost at this address:WOMAN , ADMAIL 13, London, SE1 9XA enclosing a large sae.
HOW CAN SUE HELP?
You can phone Sue Frost on our special helplines.
Just dial the number next to the topic that interests you — at any time, day or night.
Calls are charged at 33p per minute at cheap times and 44p per minute at all other times.
We hope you find these advice lines useful.
Are you eating too much? 0898 223 380
How to cope with unwanted pregnancy 0898 223 381
How to cope with the menopause 0898 223 384
How to be friends and lovers with your partner 0898 223 387
Should you divorce or not? 0898 223 376
Hope to cope with sexual abuse 0898 223 382
What to do if you can't conceive 0898 223 386
How to cope with infidelity 0898 223 388
What to do if your partner hits you 0898 223 385
Have you gone off sex? 0898 223 967
How to beat depression 0898 223 389
How to beat anxiety 0898 223 960