

A CALL TO MURDER
The call had come at 6.12 precisely.
It was second nature to him now to note the time by the illuminated dial of his electric bedside clock before he had switched on his lamp, a second after he had felt for and silenced the raucous insistence of the telephone.
It seldom had to ring more than once, but every time he dreaded that the peal might have woken Nell.
The caller was familiar, the summons expected.
It was Detective-Inspector Doyle.
The voice, with its softly intimidating suggestion of Irish burr, came to him strong and confident, as if Doyle's great bulk loomed over the bed.
 "Doc Kerrison?" 
The interrogation was surely unnecessary.
Who else in this half-empty echoing house would be answering at 6.12 in the morning?
He made no reply and the voice went on.
"We've got a body.
On the wasteland — a clunch field — a mile north-east of Muddington.
A girl.
Strangulation by the look of it.
It's probably pretty straightforward but as it's close…’
"All right, I'll come.
The voice expressed neither relief nor gratitude.
Why should it?
Didn't he always come when summoned?
He was paid well enough for his availability, but that wasn't the only reason why he was so obsessively conscientious.
Doyle, he suspected, would have respected him more if he had occasionally been less accommodating.
He would have respected himself more.
"It's the first turn off the Al42 after you leave Gibbet's Cross.
I'll have a man posted."
He replaced the receiver, swung his legs out of bed and, reaching for his pencil and pad, noted the details  while they were still fresh in his mind.
In a clunch field.
That probably meant mud, particularly after yesterday's rain.
The window was slightly open at the bottom.
He pushed it open, wincing at the rasp of the wood, and put out his head.
The rich loamy smell of the fen autumn night washed over his face; strong, yet fresh.
The rain had stopped and the sky was a tumult of grey clouds through which the moon, now almost full, reeled like a pale demented ghost.
His mind stretched out over the deserted fields and the desolate dukes to the wide moon-bleached sands of the Wash and the creeping fringes of the North Sea.
He could fancy that he smelt its medicinal tang in the rain-washed air.
Somewhere out there in the darkness, surrounded by the paraphernalia of violent death, was a body.
His mind recalled the familiar ambience of his trade; men moving like black shadows behind the glare of the arc-lights the police cars tidily parked; the flap of the screens, desultory voices conferring as they watched for the first lights of his approaching car.
Already they would be consulting their watches, calculating how long it would be before he could make it.
Shutting the window with careful hands, he tugged trousers over his pyjamas and pulled a polo-necked sweater over his head.
Then he picked up his torch, switched off the bedside light and made his way down-stairs treading warily and keeping close to the wall to avoid the creaking treads.
But there was no sound from Eleanor's room.
He let his mind wander down the twenty yards of landing and the three stairs to the back bedroom where his sixteen-year-old daughter lay.
She was always a light sleeper, uncannily sensitive even in sleep to the ring of the telephone.
But she couldn't possibly have heard.
He had no need to worry about three-year-old William.
Once asleep, he never woke before morning.
Actions as well as thought were patterned.
His  routine never varied.
He went first to the small wash-room near the back door where his wellington boots, the thick red socks protruding like a pair of amputated feet, stood ready at the door.
Pushing up his sleeves over the elbow, he swilled cold water over his hands and arms, then bent down and sluiced the whole of his head.
He performed this act of almost ceremonial cleansing before and after every case.
He had long ago ceased to ask himself why.
It had become as comforting and necessary as a religious ritual, the brief preliminary washing which was like a dedication, the final ablution which was both a necessary chore and an absolution, as if by wiping the smell of his job from his body he could cleanse it from his mind.
The water splashed heavily against the glass, and rising to fumble for a towel, he saw his face distorted, the mouth hanging, the heavily-lidded eyes half hidden by glistening weeds of black hair like the surfacing visage of a drowned man.
The melancholy of the early hours took hold of him.
He thought: "I'm forty-five next week and what have I achieved?
This house, two children, a failed marriage, and a job which I'm frightened of losing because it's the only thing I've made a success of."
The Old Rectory, inherited from his father, was unmortgaged, unencumbered.
This wasn't true, he thought, of anything else in his anxiety-ridden life.
Love, the lack of it, the growing need, the sudden terrifying hope of it, was only a burden.
Even his job, the territory where he moved with most assurance, was hedged with anxiety.
As he dried his hands carefully, finger by finger, the old familiar worry returned, heavy as a morbid growth.
He hadn't yet been appointed as Home Office Pathologist in succession to old Dr. Stoddard and he very much wanted to be.
The official appointment wouldn't give him more money.
The police already employed him on an item of service basis, and paid generously enough for each case.
That and the fees for  Coroner's post-mortems provided an income which was one of the reasons why his professional colleagues in the pathology department of the district general hospital both envied and resented his unpredictable absences on police work, the long days in court, the inevitable publicity.
Yes, the appointment was important to him.
If the Home Office looked elsewhere it would be difficult to justify to the Area Health Authority a continuing private arrangement with the local Force.
He wasn't even sure that they would want him.
He knew himself to be a good forensic pathologist, reliable, more than competent professionally, almost obsessively thorough and painstaking, a convincing and unflappable witness.
The Force knew that their meticulously erected edifices of proof wouldn't fall to pieces under cross-examination when he was in the witness box, although he sometimes suspected that they found him too scrupulous for complete comfort.
But he hadn't the easy masculine camaraderie, the blend of cynicism and machismo which had bound old Doc Stoddard so strongly to the Force.
If they had to do without him he wouldn't be greatly missed, and he doubted whether they would put themselves out to keep him.
The garage light was blinding.
The overhead door swung up easily to his touch and the light splayed out over the gravel of the drive and the unkempt verges of silvered grass.
But at least the light wouldn't wake Nell.
Her bedroom was at the back of the house.
Before switching on the engine he studied his maps.
Muddington.
It was a town on the edge of his area, about seventeen miles to the north-west, less than half an hour's drive each way if he were lucky.
If the laboratory scientists were there already — and Lorrimer, the Senior Biologist, never missed a homicide if he could help it — then there mightn't be much for him to do.
Allow, say, an hour at the scene, and with luck he would be home again before Nell woke and  she need never know that he had been away.
He switched off the garage light.
Carefully, as if the gentleness of his touch could somehow silence the engine, he turned on the ignition.
The Rover moved slowly into the night.
Standing motionless behind the curtains on the front landing, her right hand cupped round the pale flicker of her night-light, Eleanor Kerrison watched the sudden red blaze of the Rover's rear lights as the car stopped at the gate before turning left and accelerating out of sight.
She waited until the glare of the headlights hid finally faded from view.
Then she turned and made her way along the corridor to William's room.
She knew that he wouldn't have woken.
His sleep was a sensuous gluttony of oblivion.
And while he slept she knew that he was safe, that she could be free of anxiety.
To watch him then was such a mingled joy of yearning and pity that sometimes, frightened of her waking thoughts but more afraid of the nightmares of sleep, she would carry her night-light into his bedroom and crouch by the cot for an hour or more, her eyes fixed on his sleeping face, her restlessness soothed by his peace.
Although she knew that he wouldn't wake, she turned the handle of the door as carefully as if expecting it to explode.
The night-light, burning steadily in its saucer, was unnecessary, its yellow gleam extinguished by the moonlight which streamed through the uncurtained windows.
William, bagged in his grubby sleeping suit, lay as always on his back, both arms flung above his head.
His head had flopped to one side and the thin neck, stretched so still that she could see the pulse beat, looked too fragile to bear the weight of his head.
His lips were slightly parted, and  she could neither see nor hear the thin whisper of breath.
As she watched he suddenly opened sightless eyes, rolled them upwards, then closed them with a sigh and fell again into his little semblance of death.
She closed the door softly behind her and went back to her own room next door.
Dragging the eiderdown from her bed, she wrapped it round her shoulders and shuffled her way down the landing to the top of the stairs.
The heavily studded oak banister curved down into the darkness of the hall from which the tick of the grandfather clock sounded as unnaturally loud and ominous as a time bomb.
The atmosphere of the house came up to her nostrils, sour as a stale vacuum flask, redolent with the sad effluent of stodgy clerical dinners.
Placing the night-light against the wall she sat down on the top stair, humping the eiderdown high over her shoulders and gazing into the darkness.
The stair-carpet was gritty to her bare soles.
Miss Willard never vacuumed it, pleading that her heart couldn't stand the strain of lugging the cleaner from step to step, and her father never appeared to notice the drabness or dirtiness of his house.
He was, after all, so seldom there.
Sitting rigid in the darkness she thought of her father.
Perhaps he was already at the scene of crime.
It depended how far he had to drive.
If it were on the very fringe of his area he might not be back until lunch-time.
But what she hoped was that he would return before breakfast so that he would find her here, crouched lonely and exhausted on the top stair, waiting for him, frightened because he had left her alone.
He would put away the car quietly, leaving the garage open in case the thud of the door woke her, then sneak in like a thief at the back door.
She would hear tile swirl of water from the downstairs washroom, his footsteps on the tessellated floor of the hall.
Then he would look up and see her.
He would come running up the stairs, torn between anxiety for her  and fear of disturbing Miss Willard, his face suddenly old with weariness and concern as he put his arms round her trembling shoulders.
"Nell, darling, how long have you been here?
You shouldn't be out of bed.
You'll get cold.
Come on, old girl, there's nothing to be frightened of now.
I'm back.
Look, I'll take you back to bed again and you try to get some sleep.
I'll see to the breakfast.
Suppose I bring it up on a tray in about half an hour.
How would you like that?"
And he would guide her back to her room, cajoling, murmuring reassurance, trying to pretend that he wasn't frightened, frightened that she would start to cry for her mother, that Miss Willard would appear, censorious and whining, complaining that she had to get her sleep, that the precarious little house.
hold would fall apart and he would be parted from William.
It was William he loved, William couldn't bear to lose.
And he could only keep William and stop the court from giving Mummy custody if she were at home to help care for her brother.
She thought about the day ahead.
It was Wednesday, a grey day.
Not a black day when she wouldn't see her father at all, but not a yellow day like Sunday, when, unless on call, he might be there most of the time.
In the morning, immediately after break.
fast, he would be at the public mortuary doing the post-mortem.
There would be other autopsies too, those who had died in hospital, the old, the suicides, the accident victims.
But the body he was probably examining now would be first on the mortuary table.
Murder has priority.
Wasn't that what they always said at the Lab?
She mused, but without real curiosity, on what he might be doing at this very moment to that unknown cadaver, young or old, male or female.
Whatever he was doing, the body wouldn't feel its, wouldn't know about it.
The dead had nothing to be frightened of any more, and there was nothing  to fear from them.
It was the living who held the power to hurt.
And suddenly two shadows moved in the darkness of the hall, and she heard her mother's voice, pitched high, frighteningly unfamiliar, a strained, cracked, alien voice.
"Always your job!
Your bloody job!
And my God, no wonder you're good at it.
You haven't the guts to be a real doctor.
You made one wrong diagnosis early on and that was the end, wasn't it?
You couldn't take responsibility for living bodies, blood that can flow, nerves that can actually feel.
All you're fit for is messing about with the dead.
It makes you feel good, doesn't it, the way they defer to you?
The phone calls at all hours of the day and night, the police escort.
Never mind that I'm buried alive here in this bloody fen with dour children.
You don't even see me any more.
I'd be more interesting to you if I were dead and lain out on your slab.
At least you'd be forced to take some notice of me."
Then the low defensive mumble of her father's voice dispirited abject.
She had listened in the darkness and wanted to call out to him:
"Don't answer her like that!
Don't sound so defeated!
Can't you understand that it only makes her despise you more?"
His words had come to her in snatches, barely audible."
It's my job.
It's what I do best.
It's all that I can do."
And then, more clearly.
 "It's what keeps us." 
"Not me.
Not any longer.
And then the slam of the door.
The memory was so vivid that for a second she thought she heard the echo of the slam.
She stumbled to her feet, clutching the eiderdown around her, and opened her mouth to call to them.
But then she saw that the hall was empty.
There was nothing but the faint image of the stained glass in the front door where the moonlight streamed through, the ticking of the  clock, the bundle of coats hanging from the hallstand.
She sank back again on to the stair.
And then she remembered.
There was something she had to do.
Slipping her hand into her dressing-gown pocket she felt the cold slippery plasticine of her model of Dr. Lorrimer.
Carefully she drew it out through the folds of the eiderdown and held it close to the flame of the nightlight.
The model was a little misshapen, the face furred with fluff from her pocket, but it was still intact.
She straightened the long limbs and pressed the strands of black cotton she had used for hair more firmly into the scalp.
The white coat, cut from an old handkerchief, was particularly successful, she thought.
It was a pity that she hadn't been able to use one of his handkerchiefs, a strand of his hair.
The model represented more than Dr. Lorrimer who had been unkind to her and William, who had practically thrown them out of the laboratory.
It stood for the whole of Hoggatt's Lab.
And now to kill it.
Gently she knocked the head against the baluster.
But the plasticine merely flattened, the head lost its identity.
She remodelled it with careful fingers, then held it close to the flame.
But the smell was disagreeable and she was afraid that the white linen would burst into flame.
She dug the nail of her little finger deeply in behind the left ear.
The cut was clean and sharp, right through to the brain.
That was better.
She sighed, satisfied.
Holding the dead creature in her right palm she squeezed the pink plasticine, the white coat, the cotton hair into one amorphous lump.
Then, huddling deep into the eiderdown, she sat and waited for the dawn.
The car, a green Morris Minor, had been toppled over the edge of a shallow depression in the wasteland, and had lurched to rest on a grassy plateau about ten feet from the ridge like a clumsy animal going to earth.
It must have been there for years, abandoned to the plunderers, an illicit plaything for the local children, a welcome shelter for the occasional vagrant like the seventy-year-old alcoholic who had stumbled on the body.
The two front wheels had been removed, and the rusted back wheels with their rotting tyres were firmly embedded in the chalky earth, the paintwork was battered and scratched, the interior stripped of instruments and steering wheel.
Two mounted arc-lights, one directed downwards from the top of the bank and the other precariously planted on the edge of the plateau, illuminated its stark decrepitude.
Thus brightly lit it looked, thought Kerrison, like some grotesque and pretentious modern sculpture, symbolically poised on the brink of chaos.
The back seat, its padding springing from the slashed plastic, had been ripped out and hurled to one side.
In the front seat rested the body of a girl.
Her legs were decorously planted together, the glazed eyes were slyly half open, the mouth, devoid of lipstick, was fixed in a drool elongated by two small trickles of blood.
They gave a face which must have been pretty, or at least childishly vulnerable, the vacuous look of an adult clown.
The thin coat, too thin surely for a night in early November, was pulled waist high.
She was wearing stockings; and the suspender clips bit into plump white thighs.
Drawing close to the body, under the watchful eyes of Lorrimer and Doyle, he thought, as he often did at  such a scene, that it looked unreal, an anomaly, so singularly and ridiculously out of place that he had to stifle a nervous impulse to laugh.
He didn't feel this so strongly when a corpse was far advanced in decay.
It was then as if the rotting maggot-infested flesh, or the tags of matted clothing, had already become part of the earth which clung to and enclosed them, no more unnatural or frightening than a clump of compost or a drift of decaying leaves.
But here, colours and outlines intensified in the glare, the body, still outwardly so human, looked an absurd burlesque, the skin of the pallid cheek as artificial as the stained plastic of the car against which it rested.
It seemed ridiculous that she should be beyond help.
As always he had to fight the impulse to fasten his mouth over hers and begin resuscitation, to plunge a needle into the still warm heart.
He had been surprised to find Maxim Howarth, newly appointed director of the Forensic Science Laboratory, at the scene, until he remembered that Howarth had said something about following through the next murder case.
He supposed that he was expected to instruct.
Withdrawing his head from the open door he said:
"It's almost certainly a case of manual throttling.
The slight bleeding from the mouth is caused by the tongue being caught between the teeth.
Manual strangulation is invariably homicidal.
She couldn't have done this herself."
Howarth's voice was carefully controlled."
I should have expected more bruising of the neck."
"That's usual, certainly.
There's always some damage to the tissues, although the extent of the bruised area depends on the position of the assailant and victim, the way in which the neck is grasped as well as the degree of pressure.
I'd expect to find deep-seated internal bruising, but it's possible to get this without many superficial signs.
This happens when the murderer  has maintained pressure until death; the vessels have been emptied of blood and the heart stops beating before the hands are removed.
The cause of death is asphyxia, and one expects to find the usual signs of this.
What is so interesting here is the cadaveric spasm.
You'll see that she's clutching the bamboo handle of her bag.
The muscles are absolutely rigid, proof that the grasp occurred at or about the moment of death.
I've never before seen cadaveric spasm in a case of homicidal manual throttling, and it's interesting.
She must have died extraordinarily quickly.
But you'll get a clearer idea of what exactly happened when you watch the post-mortem.
Of course, thought Howarth, the post-mortem.
He wondered how early Kerrison would expect to get down to that job.
He wasn't afraid that his nerve would fail him, only his stomach, but he wished he hadn't said lie would be there.
There was no privacy for the dead: the most one could hope for was a certain reverence.
It now seemed to him monstrous that tomorrow he, a stranger, would be looking unrebuked at her nakedness.
But for the present he had seen enough.
He could step aside now without loss of face.
Turning up the collar of his Burberry against the chill morning air, he climbed up the slope to the rim of the hollow and stood looking down at the car.
This must be what shooting a film was like: the brightly lit scene, the ennui of waiting for the chief actors to appear tile brief moments of activity, the concentrated attention to detail.
The body could easily be that of a actress simulating death.
He half expected one of the police to dart forward and rearrange her-hair.
The night was nearly over.
Behind him the eastern sky was already brightening, and the wasteland, which had been a formless void of darkness above the lumpy earth, was assuming an identity and a shape.
To the west he could see the outline of houses, probably a  council estate, a trim row of identical roofs and square slabs of darkness broken by patterned squares of yellow as the early risers switched on their lights.
The track along which his car had bumped rock-strewn and silver, alien as a moonscape in the glare of the headlights, took shape and direction, became ordinary.
Nothing was left mysterious.
The place was an arid scrubland between the two ends of the town, litter-strewn and edged with sparse trees above a ditch.
He knew that the ditch would be dank with nettles and sour with rotting rubbish, the trees wounded by vandals, the trunks carved with initials, the low branches hanging torn from the boughs.
Here was an urban no-man's-land, fit territory for murder.
It was a mistake to have come, of course, he should have realised that the role of voyeur was always"gnoble.
Few things were more demoralising than to stand uselessly by while other men demonstrated their professional competence; Kerrison, that connoisseur of death, literally sniffing at the body; the photographers, taciturn, preoccupied with lighting and angles; Inspector Doyle, in charge of a murder case at last, impresario of death, tense with the suppressed excitement of a child at Christmas gloating over a new toy.
Once, while waiting for Kerrison to arrive, Doyle had actually laughed, a hearty guffaw, filling the hollow.
And Lorrimer?
Before touching the body he had briefly crossed himself.
It was so small and precise a gesture that Howarth could have missed it, except that nothing Lorrimer did escaped him.
The others seemed unsurprised at the eccentricity.
Perhaps they were used to it.
Domenica hadn't told him that Lorrimer was religious.
But then his sister hadn't told him anything about her lover.
She hadn't even told him that the affair was over.
But he had needed only to look at Lorrimer's face during the past month to know that.
Lorrimer's face, Lorrimer's hands.
Odd that he hadn't noticed how long the fingers were or  with what apparent gentleness they had taped the plastic bags over the girl's hand to preserve, as he had tonelessly explained, conscientious in his role of instructor, any evidence under the fingernails.
He had taken a sample of blood from the plump flaccid arm, feeling for the vein as carefully as if she could still flinch at the needle's prick.
Lorrimer's hands.
Howarth thrust the tormenting, brutally explicit images out of his mind.
He had never before resented one of Domenica's lovers.
He hadn't even been jealous of her dead husband.
It had seemed to him perfectly reasonable that she should eventually wish to marry, just as she might choose, in a fit of boredom or acquisitiveness to buy herself a fur coat or a new item of jewellery.
He had even quite liked Charles Schofield.
Why was it then that, even from the first moment, the thought of Lorrimer in his sister's bed had been intolerable.
Not that he could ever have been in her bed, at least not at Leamings.
He wondered yet again where they had managed to meet, how Domenica had contrived to take a new lover without the whole laboratory and the whole village knowing.
How could they have met and where?
It had begun, of course, at that disastrous dinner party twelve months ago.
At the time it had seemed both natural and civilised to celebrate the taking up of his directorship with a small private party at his house for the senior staff.
They had, he remembered, eaten melon, followed by boeuf stroganoff and a salad.
He and Domenica liked good food and, occasionally she enjoyed cooking it.
He had opened the 1961 claret for them because that was the wine he and Dom had chosen to drink and it hadn't occurred to him to offer his guests less.
He and Dom had changed because that was their habit.
It amused them to dine in some style, formally separating the working day from their evenings together.
It hadn't been his fault that Bill Morgan, the vehicle examiner, had chosen to come in  open-necked shirt and corduroys; neither he nor Dom had cared a damn what their guests chose to wear.
If Bill Morgan felt awkward about these unimportant shibboleths of taste, he should learn either to change his clothes or to develop more social confidence in his sartorial eccentricities.
It had never occurred to Howarth that the six senior staff sitting awkwardly around his table in the candlelight, unmellowed even by the wine, would see the whole occasion as an elaborate gastronomic charade designed to demonstrate his social and intellectual superiority.
At least Paul Middlemass, the Principal Scientific Officer Document Examiner, had appreciated the wine, drawing the bottle across the table towards him and refilling his glass, his lazy ironic eyes watching his host.
And Lorrimer?
Lorrimer had eaten practically nothing, had drunk less, pushing his glass almost petulantly aside and fixing his great smouldering eyes on Domenica as if he had never before seen a woman.
And that, presumably, had been the beginning of it.
How it had progressed, when and how they had continued to meet, how it had ended, Domenica hadn't confided.
The dinner party had been a private and public fiasco.
But what, he wondered, had the senior staff expected?
An evening of solid drinking in the private snug in the Moonraker?
A free-for-all jollification in the village hall for the whole laboratory including the cleaner, Mrs Bidwell, and old Scobie, the Laboratory attendant?
 "Knees Up Mother Brown" in the public bar?
Perhaps they had thought that the first move should have come from their side.
But that was to admit that there were two sides.
The conventional sophistry was that the Laboratory worked as a team harnessed by a common purpose, reins lightly but firmly in the director's hands.
That had worked well enough at Bruche.
But there he had directed a research laboratory with a common discipline.
How  could you direct a team when your staff practised half a dozen different scientific disciplines, used their own methods, were responsible for their own results, stood finally alone to justify and defend them in the only place where the quality of a forensic scientist's work could properly be judged, the witness box of a court of law?
It was one of the loneliest places on earth, and he had never stood there.
Old Dr. Mac, his predecessor, had, he knew, taken the occasional case, to keep his hand in as he would say, trotting out to a scene of crime like an old bloodhound happily sniffing after half-forgotten scents, doing the analysis himself, and finally appearing, like a resurrected Old Testament prophet in the witness-box, greeted by the judge with dry judicial compliments, and boisterously welcomed in the bar by counsel like a long-missed old reprobate drinking comrade happily restored to them.
But that could never be his way.
He had been appointed to manage the Laboratory and he would manage it in his own style.
He wondered, morbidly introspective in the cold light of dawn, whether his decision to see the next murder case through from the call to the scene of crime to the trial had really arisen from a desire to learn or merely from a craven wish to impress or, worse, to propitiate, his staff, to show them that he valued their skills, that he wanted to be one of the team.
If so, it had been one more error of judgment to add to the bleak arithmetic of failure since he had taken up his new job.
It looked as if they had nearly finished.
The girl's rigid fingers had been prised from her handbag and Doyle's hands, gloved, were spreading out its few contents on a plastic sheet laid on the bonnet of the car.
Howarth could just make out the shape of what looked like a small purse, a lipstick, a folded sheet of paper.
A love letter probably, poor little wretch.
Had Lorrimer written letters to Domenica? he wondered.
He was always first at the door when the post arrived, and  usually brought his sister her letters.
Perhaps Lorrimer had known that.
But he must have written.
There must have been assignations.
Lorrimer would hardly have risked telephoning from the Laboratory or from home in the evenings when he, Howarth, might have taken the call.
They were moving the body now.
The mortuary van had moved closer to the rim of the hollow and the stretcher was being manoeuvred into place.
The police were dragging out the screens from their van, ready to enclose the scene of crime.
Soon there would be the little clutch of spectators, the curious children shooed away by the adults, the Press photographers.
He could see Lorrimer and Kerrison conferring together a little way apart, their backs turned, the two dark heads close together.
Doyle was closing his notebook and supervising the removal of the body as if it were a precious exhibit which he was frightened someone would break.
The light was strengthening.
He waited while Kerrison climbed up beside him and together they walked towards the parked cars.
Howarth's foot struck a beer-can.
It clattered across the path and bounced against what looked like the battered frame of an old pram, with a bang like a pistol shot.
The noise startled him.
He said pettishly: "What a place to die]Where in God's name are we exactly?
I just followed the police cars."
"It's called the clunch field.
That's the local name for the soft chalk they mined here from the Middle Ages onwards.
There isn't any hard building stone hereabouts, so they used clunch for most domestic building and even for some church interiors.
There's an example in the Lady Chapel at Ely.
Most villages had their clunch pits.
They re overgrown now.
Some are quite pretty in the spring and summer, little oases of wild flowers."
He gave the information almost tonelessly, like a dutiful guide repeating by rote the official spiel.
Suddenly he swayed and reached for the support of his car door.
Howarth wondered if he were ill or whether this was the extremity of tiredness.
Then the pathologist straightened himself and said, with an attempt at briskness:
"I'll do the P.M. at nine o'clock tomorrow at St Luke's.
The hall porter will direct you.
I'll leave a message.
He nodded a goodbye, forced a smile, then eased himself into his car and slammed the door.
The Rover bumped slowly towards the road.
Howarth was aware that Doyle and Lorrimer were beside him.
Doyle's excitement was almost palpable.
He turned to look across the clunch field to the distant row of houses, their yellow brick walls and mean square windows now plainly visible.
He's over there somewhere.
In bed probably.
That is, if he doesn't live alone.
It wouldn't do to be up and about too early, would it?
No, he'll be lying there wondering how to act ordinary, waiting for the anonymous car, the ring at the door.
If he's on his own, it'll be different, of course.
He'll be creeping about in the half-dark wondering if he ought to burn his suit, scraping the mud off his shoes.
Only he won't be able to get it all off.
Not every trace.
And he won't have a boiler big enough for the suit.
And even if he had, what will he say when we ask for it?
So maybe he'll be doing nothing.
Just lying there and waiting.
He won't be asleep.
He didn't sleep last night.
And he won't be sleeping again for quite a time."
Howarth felt slightly sick.
He had eaten a small and early dinner and knew himself to be hungry.
The sensation of nausea on an empty stomach was peculiarly unpleasant.
He controlled his voice, betraying nothing but a casual interest.
 "You think it's relatively straightforward then?" 
"Domestic murder usually is.
And I reckon that this is a domestic murder.
Married kid, torn stump of a  ticket for the local Oddfellows' hop, letter in her bag threatening her if she doesn't leave another bloke alone.
A stranger wouldn't have known about this place.
And she wouldn't have come here with him even if he had.
By the look of her, they were sitting there cosily together before he got his hands on her throat.
It's just a question of whether the two of them set off home together or whether he left early and waited for her."
 "Do you know yet who she is?" 
"Not yet.
There's no diary in the bag.
That kind don't keep diaries.
But I shall know in about half an hour."
He turned to Lorrimer.
"The exhibits should be at the Lab by nine or thereabouts.
You'll give this priority?"
Lorrimer's voice was harsh.
"Murder gets priority.
You know that."
Doyle's exultant, self-satisfied bellow jangled Howarth's nerves.
"Thank God something does You're taking your time over the Gutteridge case.
I was in the Biology Department yesterday and Bradley said the report wasn't ready; he was working on a case for the defence.
We all know the great fiction that the Lab is independent of the police and I'm happy to go along with it most of the time.
But old Hoggatt founded the place as a police lab, and when the chips are down that's what it's all about.
So do me a favour.
Get moving with this one for me.
I want to get chummy and get him quickly."
He was rocking gently on his heels, his smiling face uplifted to the dawn like a happy dog sniffing at the air, euphoric with the exhilaration of the hunt.
It was odd, thought Howarth, that lie didn't recognise the cold menace in Lorrimer's voice.
"Hoggatt's does an occasional examination for the defence if they ask us and if the exhibit is packed and  submitted in the approved way.
That's departmental policy.
We're not yet a police lab even if you do walk in and out of the place as if it's your own kitchen.
And I decide priorities in my Laboratory.
You'll get your report as soon as it's ready.
In the meantime, if you want to ask questions, come to me, not to my junior staff.
And, unless you're invited, keep out of my Laboratory."
Without waiting for an answer, he walked over to his car.
Doyle looked after him in a kind of angry bewilderment.
"Bloody hell!
His Lab!
What's wrong with him?
Lately he's been as touchy as a bitch on heat.
He'll find himself on a brain-shrinker's couch or in the bin if he doesn't get a hold of himself."
Howarth said coldly:
"He's right, of course.
Any enquiry about the work should be made to him, not to a member of his staff.
And it's usual to ask permission before walking into a laboratory."
The rebuke stung.
Doyle frowned.
His face hardened.
Howarth had a disconcerting glimpse of the barely controlled aggression beneath the mask of casual good humour.
Doyle said:
"Old Dr Mac used to welcome the police in his lab.
He had this odd idea, you see, that helping the police was what it was all about.
But if we're not wanted, you'd better talk to the chief.
No doubt he'll issue his instructions."
He turned on his heel and made off towards his car without waiting for a reply.
Howarth thought:
"Damn Lorrimer!
Everything he touches goes wrong for me."
He felt a spasm of hatred so intense, so physical that it made him retch.
If only Lorrimer's body were sprawled at the bottom of the clunch pit.
If only it were Lorrimer's cadaver which would be cradled in porcelain on the post-mortem table next day, laid out for ritual evisceration.
He knew what  was wrong with him.
The diagnosis was as simple as it was humiliating: that self-infecting fever of the blood which could lie deceptively dormant, then flare now, into torment.
Jealousy, he thought was as physical as fear; the same dryness of the mouth, the thudding heart, the restlessness which destroyed appetite and peace.
And he knew now that, this time, the sickness was incurable.
It made no difference that the affair was over, that Lorrimer, too, was suffering.
Reason couldn't cure it, nor, he suspected, could distance, nor time.
It could be ended only by death; Lorrimer's or his own.
At half-past-six in the front bedroom of 2 Acacia Close, Chevisham, Susan Bradley, wife of the Higher Scientific Officer in the Biology Department of Hoggatt's Laboratory, was welcomed by the faint, plaintive wail of her two-month-old baby, hungry for her first feed of the day.
Susan switched on the bedside lamp, a pink glow under its frilled shade, and reaching for her dressing-gown, shuffled sleepily to the bathroom next door, and then to the nursery.
It was a small back room at the back of the house, little more than a box, but when she pressed down the switch of the low-voltage nursery light she felt again a glow of maternal, proprietorial pride.
Even in her sleepy morning daze the first sight of the nursery lifted her heart; the nursing chair with its back decorated with rabbits; the matching changing table fitted with drawers for the baby's things; the wicker cot in its stand which she had lined with a pink, blue and white flowered cotton to match the curtains; the bright fringe of nursery-rhyme characters which Clifford had pasted round the wall.
With the sound of her footsteps the cries became  stronger.
She picked up the warm, milky-smelling cocoon and crooned reassurance.
Immediately the cries ceased and Debbie's moist mouth, opening and shutting like a fish, sought her breast, the small wrinkled fists freed from the blanket, unfurled to clutch against her crumpled nightdress.
The books said to change baby first, but she could never bear to make Debbie wait.
And there was another reason.
The walls of the modern house were thin, and she didn't want the sound of crying to wake Cliff.
But suddenly he was at the door, swaying slightly, his pyjama jacket gaping open.
Her heart sank.
She made her voice sound bright, matter-of-fact.
"I hoped she hadn't woken you, darling.
But it's after half-past six.
She slept over seven hours.
Getting
 "I was awake already." 
"Go back to bed, Cliff.
You can get in another hour's sleep."
 "I can't sleep." 
He looked round the little nursery with a puzzled frown, as if disconcerted not to find a chair.
Susan said:
"Bring in the stool from the bathroom.
And put on your dressing-gown.
You'll catch cold."
He placed the stool against the wall and crouched there in sullen misery.
Susan raised her cheek from resting against the soft furriness of the baby's head.
The small, snub-nosed leech latched on to her breast, fingers splayed in an ecstasy of content.
Susan told herself that she must keep calm, mustn't let nerves and muscles knot themselves into the familiar ache of worry.
Everyone said that it was bad for the milk.
She said quietly:
 "What's wrong, darling?" 
But she knew what was wrong.
She knew what he would say.
She felt a new and frightening sense of resentment that she couldn't even feed Debbie in peace.
And she wished he would do up his pyjamas.
Sitting like that, slumped and half-naked, he looked almost dissolute.
She wondered what was happening to her.
She had never felt like this about Cliff before Debbie was born.
"I can't go on.
I can't go into the Lab today."
 "Are you ill?" 
But she knew that he wasn't ill, at least not yet.
But he would be ill if something wasn't done about Edwin Lorrimer.
The old misery descended on her.
People wrote in books about a black weight of worry, and they were right, that was just how it felt, a perpetual physical burden which dragged at the shoulders and the heart, denying joy, even destroying, she thought bitterly, their pleasure in Debbie.
Perhaps in the end it would destroy even love.
She didn't speak but settled her small, warm burden more comfortably against her arm.
"I've got to give up the job.
It's no use, Sue.
I can't go on.
He's got me in such a state that I'm as useless as he says I am."
"But Cliff, you know that isn't true.
You're a good worker.
There were never complaints about you at your last lab."
"I wasn't an H.S.O. then.
Lorrimer thinks I ought never to have been promoted.
He's right."
"He isn't right.
Darling, you mustn't let him sap your confidence.
That's fatal.
You're a conscientious, reliable forensic biologist.
You mustn't worry if you're not as quick as the others.
That isn't important.
Dr. Mac always said it's accuracy that counts.
What does it matter if you take your time?
You get the answer right in the end."
"Not any longer.
I can't even do a simple peroxidase test now without fumbling.
If he comes within two feet of me my hands start shaking.
And he's begun checking all my results.
I've just finished examining the stains on the mallet from the suspected Pascoe  murder.
But he'll work late tonight doing it again.
And he'll make sure that the whole biology department knows why."
Cliff couldn't, she knew, stand up to bullying or sarcasm.
Perhaps it was because of his father.
The old man was paralysed now after a stroke and she supposed that she ought to feel sorry for him lying there in his hospital bed, useless as a felled tree, mouth slavering, only the angry eyes moving in impotent fury from face to watching face.
But from what Cliff had let slip he had been a poor father, an unpopular and unsuccessful schoolmaster yet with unreasonable ambitions for his only son.
Cliff had been terrified of him.
What Cliff needed was encouragement and affection.
Who cared if he never rose any higher than H.S.O.?
He was kind and loving.
He looked after her and Debbie.
He was her husband and she loved him.
But he mustn't resign.
What other job could he get?
What else was he suited for?
Unemployment was as bad in East Anglia as it was elsewhere.
There was the mortgage to pay and the electricity bill for the central heating they couldn't economise there because of Debbie needing warmth — and the hire-purchase on the bedroom suite to find.
Even the nursery furniture wasn't paid for yet.
She had wanted everything nice and new for Debbie, but it had taken all their remaining savings.
She said: "Couldn't you apply to Establishment Department for a transfer?
The despair in his voice tore at her heart.
"No-one will want me if Lorrimer says I'm no good.
He's probably the best forensic biologist in the service.
If he thinks I'm useless, then I'm useless."
It was this, too, which she was beginning to find irritating, the obsequious respect of the victim for his oppressor.
Sometimes, appalled by her disloyalty, she could begin to understand Dr. Lorrimer's contempt.
She said:
 "Why not have a word with the director?" 
"I might have done if Dr. Mac was still there.
But Howarth wouldn't care.
He's new.
He doesn't want any trouble with the senior staff, particularly now when we're getting ready to move into the new Lab."
And then she thought of Mr. Middlemass.
He was the Principal Scientific Officer Document Examiner, and she had worked for him as a young S.O.
before her marriage.
It was at Hoggatt's Laboratory that she had met Cliff.
Perhaps he could do something, could speak to Howarth for them, could use his influence with Estabs.
She wasn't sure how she expected him to help, but the need to confide in someone was overwhelming.
They couldn't go on like this.
Cliff would have a breakdown.
And how would she manage with the baby and Cliff ill and the future uncertain?
But surely Mr. Middlemass could do something.
She believed in him because she needed to believe.
She looked across at Cliff.
"Don't worry, darling, it's going to be all right.
We're going to think of something.
You go in today and we'll talk about it in the evening.
"How can we?
Your mother's coming to supper."
"After supper then.
She'll be catching the quarter to eight bus.
We'll talk then."
 "I can't go on like this, Sue." 
"You won't have to.
I'll think of something.
It's going to be all right.
I promise you, darling.
It's going to be all right."
 "Mum, did you know that every human being is unique?" 
"Of course I did.
It stands to reason, doesn't it?
There's only one of every person.
You're you.
I'm me.
 "Pass your Dad the marmalade and keep your sleeves out of that butter" .
Brenda Pridmore, recently appointed Clerical Officer/receptionist at Hoggatt's Laboratory, pushed the marmalade across the breakfast table and began methodically slicing thin strips from the white of her fried egg, postponing, as she had from early childhood, that cataclysmic moment when she would plunge the fork into the glistening yellow dome.
But indulgence in this small personal ritual was almost automatic.
Her mind was preoccupied with the excitements and discoveries of her wonderful first job.
"I mean biologically unique.
Inspector Blakelock, he's the Assistant Police Liaison Officer, told me that every human being has a unique fingerprint and no two types of blood are exactly the same.
If the scientists had enough systems they could distinguish them all, the blood types I mean.
He thinks that day may come in time.
The forensic serologist will be able to say with certainty where the blood came from, even with a dried stain.
It's dried blood that's difficult.
If that blood is fresh we can do far more with it."
 "Funny job you've got yourself." 
Mrs. Pridmore refilled the teapot from the kettle on the Aga hob and eased herself back into her chair.
The farmhouse kitchen, its flowered cretonne curtains still undrawn, was warm and cosily domestic, smelling of toast, fried bacon and hot strong tea.
"I don't know that I like the idea of you checking in bits of body and bloodstained clothes.
I hope you wash your hands properly before you come home.
"Oh Mum, it's not like that The exhibits all arrive in plastic bags with identifying tags.
We have to be ever so particular that all of them are labelled and properly entered in the book.
It's a question of continuity of evidence, what Inspector Blakelock calls the integrity of the sample.
And we don't get bits of body."
Remembering suddenly the sealed bottles of stomach contents, the carefully dissected pieces of liver and intestines, looking when you came to think of it, no more frightening than exhibits in the science laboratory at school, she said quickly:
"Well, not in the way you mean.
Dr. Kerrison does all the cutting up.
He's a forensic pathologist attached to the Laboratory.
Of course, some of the organs come to us for analysis."
Inspector Blakelock, she remembered, had told her that the Laboratory refrigerator had once held a whole head.
But that wasn't the kind of thing to tell Mum.
She rather wished that the Inspector hadn't told her.
The refrigerator, squat and gleaming like a surgical sarcophagus, had held a sinister fascination for her ever since.
But Mrs. Pridmore had seized gratefully on a familiar name.
"I know who Dr. Kerrison is, I should hope.
Lives at the Old Rectory at Chevisham alongside the church, doesn't he?
His wife ran off with one of the doctors at the hospital, left him and the two kids, that odd-looking daughter and the small boy, poor little fellow.
You remember all the talk there was at the time, Arthur?"
Her husband didn't reply, nor did she expect him to.
It was an understood convention that Arthur Pridmore left breakfast conversation to his women.
Brenda went happily on:
"Forensic science isn't just helping the police to discover who's guilty.
We help clear the innocent too.
People sometimes forget that.
We had a case last month — of course, I can't mention names — when a sixteen-year-old choir girl accused her vicar of rape.
Well, he was innocent."
"So I should hope!
Rape indeed"
"But it looked very black against him.
Only he was lucky.
He was a secreter."
 "A what, for goodness sake?" 
"He secreted his blood group in all his body fluids.
Not everyone does.
So the biologist was able to examine his saliva and compare his blood group with the stains on the victim's…"
 "Not at breakfast, Brenda, if you don't mind." 
Brenda, her eyes suddenly alighting on a round milk stain on the table cloth, herself thought that breakfast wasn't perhaps the most suitable time for a display of her recently acquired information about the investigation of rape.
She went on to a safer subject.
"Dr. Lorrimer — he's the Principal Scientific Officer in charge of the Biology Department — says that I ought to work for an A-level subject and try for a job as an Assistant Scientific Officer.
He thinks that I could do better than just a clerical job.
And once I got my A.S.O. I'd be on a scientific grade and could work myself up.
Some of the most famous forensic scientists have started that way, he said.
He's offered to give me a reading list, and he says he doesn't see why I shouldn't use some of the laboratory equipment for my practical work."
"I didn't know that you worked in the Biology Department.
"I don't.
I'm mainly on Reception with Inspector Blakelock, and sometimes I help out in the general office.
But we got talking when I had to spend an afternoon in his laboratory checking reports for courts with his staff, and he was ever so nice.
A lot of people don't like him.
They say he's too strict; but I think he's just shy.
He might have been Director if the Home Office hadn't passed him over and appointed Dr. Howarth."
 "He seems to be taking quite an interest in you, this Mr. Lorrimer." 
 "Dr. Lorrimer, Mum." 
"Or.
Lorrimer, then.
Though why he wants to call  himself a doctor beats me.
You don't have any patients at the lab."
"He's a Ph.D., Mum.
Doctor of Philosophy."
"Oh, is he?
I thought he was supposed to be a scientist.
Anyway, you'd better watch your step.
"Oh Mum, don't be daft.
He's old.
He must be forty or more.
Mum, did you know that our Lab is the oldest forensic science lab in the country?
There are regional labs covering the whole country but ours was the first.
Colonel Hoggatt started it in Chevisham Manor when he was Chief Constable in 1860, then left the manor house to his force when he died.
Forensic science was in its infancy then, Inspector Blakelock says, and Colonel Hoggatt was one of the first Chief Constables to see its possibilities.
We've got his portrait in the hall.
We're the only lab with its founder's name.
That's why the Home Office has agreed that the new Laboratory will still be called Hoggatt's.
Other police forces send their exhibits to their regional laboratory, North-East or the Metropolitan and so on.
But in East Anglia they say.
 "Better send it to Hoggatt's" .
"You'd better send yourself to Hoggatt's if you want to get there by eight-thirty.
And I don't want you taking any short cuts through the new Lab.
It isn't safe, only half-built, especially these dark mornings.
Like as not you d fall into the foundations or get a brick down on your head.
They're not safe, building sites aren't.
Look what happened to your Uncle Will."
"All right, Mum.
We're not supposed to go through the new Lab anyway.
Besides, I'm going by bike.
Are these my sandwiches or Dad's?"
"Yours, of course.
You know your Dad's home to dinner on Wednesdays.
Cheese and tomato this morning, and I've put you in a boiled egg."
When Brenda had waved goodbye, Mrs. Pridmore sat down —for her second cup of tea and liked across at her husband.
 "I suppose it's all right, this job she's found for herself." 
Arthur Pridmore, when he did condescend to talk at breakfast, talked with the magisterial authority of head of his family, Mr. Bowlem's bailiff and People's warden at the village church.
He laid down his fork.
"It's a good job, and she was lucky to get it.
Plenty of girls from the grammar school after it, weren't they?
An established civil servant, isn't she?
And look what they're paying her.
More than the pigman gets at the farm.
Pensionable too.
She's a sensible girl and she'll be all right.
There aren't many opportunities left locally for girls with good 0-levels.
And you didn't want her to take a job in London."
No indeed, Mrs. Pridmore hadn't wanted Brenda to go to London, a prey to muggers, I.R.A.
terrorists and what the Press mysteriously called "the drug scene" .
None of her infrequent, but uneventful and pleasant, visits to the capital on Women's Institute theatre excursions or rare shopping trips had failed to shake her conviction that Liverpool Street was the cavernous entry to an urban jungle, where predators armed with bombs and syringes lurked in every Underground station, and seducers laid their snares for innocent provincials in every office.
Brenda, thought her mother, was a very pretty girl.
Well, no point in denying it, she took after her mother's side of the family for looks even if she had her dad's brains, and Mrs. Pridmore had no intention of exposing her to the temptations of London.
Brenda was walking out with Gerald Bowlem, younger son of her father's boss, and if that came off there's no denying it would be a very satisfactory marriage.
He wouldn't get the main farm, of course, but there was a very nice little property over at Wisbech which would come to him.
Mrs. Pridmore couldn't see the sense of more examinations and all this talking about a career.
This job at the lab would  do Brenda very well until she married.
But it was a pity that there was all this emphasis on blood.
as if reading her thoughts, her husband said:
"Of course it's exciting for her.
It's all new.
But I daresay it's no different from other jobs, pretty dull most of the time.
I don't reckon anything really frightening will happen to our Brenda at Hoggatt's Lab."
This conversation about their only child's first job was one they'd had before, a comforting reiteration of mutual reassurance.
In imagination Mrs. Pridmore followed her daughter as she pedalled vigorously on her way; bumping down the rough farm track between Mr. Bowlem's flat fields to Tenpenny Road, past old Mrs. Button's cottage where, as a child, she had been given rice-cake and home-made lemonade, by Tenpenny Dyke where she still picked cowslips in summer, then a right turn into Chevisham Road and the straight two miles skirting Captain Massey's land and into Chevisham village.
Every yard of it was familiar, reassuring, unmenacing.
And even Hoggatt's Laboratory, blood or no blood, had been part of the village for over seventy years, while Chevisham Manor had stood for nearly three times as long.
Arthur was right.
Nothing frightening could happen to their Brenda at Hoggatt's.
Mrs. Pridmore, comforted, drew back the curtains and settled down to enjoy her third cup of tea.
At ten minutes to nine the post van stopped outside Sprogg's Cottage on the outskirts of Chevisham to deliver a single letter.
It was addressed to Miss Stella Mawson, Lavender Cottage, Chevisham, but the postman was a local man and the difference in name caused him no confusion.
There had been Sproggs living in the cottage for four generations, and the small  triangle of green in front of the gate had been Sprogg's Green for almost as long.
The present owner, having improved the cottage by the addition of a small brick garage and a modern bathroom and kitchen, had decided to celebrate the metamorphosis by planting a lavender hedge and renaming the property.
But the villagers regarded the new name as no more than a foreigner's eccentric fancy which they were under no obligation either to use or recognise.
The lavender hedge, as if in sympathy with their views, failed to survive the first fen winter and Sprogg's Cottage remained Sprogg's.
Angela Foley, the twenty-seven-year-old personal secretary to the Director of Hoggatt's Laboratory, picked up the envelope and guessed at once by the quality of the paper, the expertly typed address and the London postmark what it must be.
It was a letter they had been expecting.
She took it through to the kitchen where she and her friend were breakfasting and handed it over without speaking, then watched Stella's face as she read.
After a minute she asked:
 "Well?" 
"It's what we feared.
He can't wait any longer.
He wants a quick sale, and there's a friend of his who thinks he might like it for a weekend cottage.
As sitting tenants we get first refusal, but he must know by next Monday whether we're interested."
She tossed the letter across the table.
Angela said bitterly:
"Interested of course we're interested He knows we are.
We told him weeks ago that we were writing round trying to get a mortgage.
"That's just lawyer's jargon.
What his solicitor is asking is whether we're able to go ahead.
And the answer is that we can't."
The arithmetic was plain.
Neither of them needed to discuss it.
The owner wanted sixteen thousand pounds.
None of the mortgage societies they had approached  would advance them more than ten.
Together they had a little over two thousand saved.
Four thousand short.
And, with no time left, it might just as well be forty.
Angela said:
 "I suppose he wouldn't take less?" 
"No.
We've tried that.
And why should he?
It's a fully converted, reed-thatched seventeenth-century cottage.
And we've improved it.
We've made the garden.
He'd be a fool to let it go for under sixteen even to a sitting tenant."
"But, Star, we are sitting tenants.
He's got to get us out first."
"That's the only reason why he's given us as long as he has.
He knows we could make it difficult for him.
But I'm not prepared to stay on here under sufferance, knowing that we'd have to go in the end.
I couldn't write under those conditions."
 "But we can't find four thousand in a week And, with things as they are, we couldn't hope for a bank loan even if…" 
"Even if I had a book coming out this year, which I haven't.
And what I make from writing barely pays my part of the housekeeping.
It was tactful of you not to say so.
She hadn't been going to say it.
Stella wasn't a conveyor-belt writer.
You couldn't expect her novels to make money.
What was it that last reviewer had said?
Fastidious observation wedded to elegantly sensitive and oblique prose.
Not surprisingly, Angela could quote all the reviews even if she sometimes wondered what exactly they were trying to say.
Wasn't it she who pasted them with meticulous care into the cuttings-book which Stella so affected to despise!
She watched while her friend began what they both called her tiger prowl, that compulsive pacing up and down, head lowered, hands sunk in her dressing-gown pockets.
Then Stella said:
"It's a pity that cousin of yours is so disagreeable.
Otherwise one might not have minded asking him for a loan.
He wouldn't miss it."
"But I've already asked him.
Not about the cottage, of course.
But I've asked him to lend me some money.
It was ridiculous that this should be so difficult to say.
After all, Edwin was her cousin.
She had a right to ask him.
And it was her grandmother's money after all.
There was really no reason why Star should be cross.
There were times when she didn't mind Star's anger, times even when she deliberately provoked it, waiting with half-shameful excitement for the extra-ordinary outburst of bitterness and despair of which she herself was less a victim than a privileged spectator, relishing even more the inevitable remorse and self-incrimination, the sweetness of reconciliation.
But now for the first time she recognised the chill of fear.
 "When?" 
There was nothing for it now but to go on.
"Last Tuesday evening.
It was after you decided that we'd have to cancel our bookings for Venice next March because of the exchange rate.
I wanted it to be a birthday present, Venice I mean."
She had pictured the scene.
Herself handing over the tickets and the hotel reservations tucked into one of those extra-large birthday cards.
Star trying to hide her surprise and pleasure.
Both of them poring over maps and guide books, planning the itinerary of every marvellous day.
To see for the first time and together that incomparable view of San Marco from the western end of the Piazza.
Star had read to her Ruskin's description.
 "A multitude of pillars and white domes, clustered into a long low pyramid of coloured light." 
To stand together on the Piazzetta in the early morning and look across the shimmering water to San Giorgio Maggiore.
It was a dream, as insubstantial as  the crumbling city.
But the hope of it had been worth steeling herself to ask Edwin for that loan.
 "And what did he say?" 
There was no chance now of softening that brutal negative, of erasing the whole humiliating episode from her memory.
 "He said no." 
"I suppose you told him why you wanted it.
It didn't occur to you that we go away from here to be private, that our holidays are our own affair, that it might humiliate me to have Edwin Lorrimer know that I can't afford to take you to Venice, even on a ten-day package tour.
 "I didn't." 
She cried out in vehement protest, horrified to hear the crack in her voice, and feel the first hot, gritty tears.
It was odd, she thought, that it was she who could cry.
Star was the emotional, the vehement one.
And yet Star never cried.
 "I didn't tell him anything, except that I needed the money." 
 "How much?" 
She hesitated, wondering whether to lie.
But she never lied to Star."
Five hundred pounds.
I thought we might as well do it properly.
I just told him that I badly needed five hundred pounds."
"So, not surprisingly, faced with that irrefutable argument, he declined to hand out.
What exactly did he say?"
"Only that grandmother had made her intentions perfectly plain in her will and that he had no intention of upsetting them.
Then I said that most of the money would come to me after his death, anyway — I mean, that's what he told me when the will was read — and it would be too late then.
I'd be an old lady.
I might die first.
It was now that was important.
But I didn't tell him why I wanted it.
I swear that."
"Swear?
Don't be dramatic.
You're not in a court of law.
And then what did he say?"
If only Star would stop that agitated pacing, would only turn and look at her instead of questioning her in that cold, inquisitorial voice.
And the new bit was even harder to tell.
She couldn't explain to herself why it should be, but it was something which she had tried to put out of her mind, for the present anyway.
One day she would tell Star, the moment when it was right to tell.
She had never imagined being forced into confidence with such brutal suddenness.
"He said that I shouldn't rely on getting anything in his will.
He said that he might acquire new obligations.
Obligations was the word he used.
And if he did, the will would no longer stand."
And now Star swung round and faced her.
"New obligations.
Marriage.
No, that's too ridiculous.
Marriage, that desiccated, pedantic, self-satisfied prude.
I doubt whether he ever deliberately touches a human body except his own.
Solitary, masochistic, surreptitious vice, that's all he understands.
No, not vice, the word's too strong.
But marriage!
Wouldn't you have thought…"
She broke off Angela said:
 "He didn't mention marriage." 
"Why should he?
But what else would automatically set aside an existing will unless he made a new one?
Marriage cancels a will.
Didn't you know that?"
 "You mean that as soon as he married I should be disinherited?" 
 "Yes." 
 "But that isn't fair!" 
"Since when has life been noted for its fairness?
It wasn't fair that your grandmother left her fortune to him instead of sharing it with you just because he's a man and she had an old-fashioned prejudice that women shouldn't own money.
It isn't fair that you're only a secretary at Hoggatt's because no-one bothered  to educate you for anything else.
It isn't fair, come to that, that you should have to support me."
"I don't support you.
In every way except the unimportant one, you support me."
 "It's humiliating to be worth more dead than alive." 
"If my heart gave out tonight, then you'd be all right.
You could use the life assurance money to buy the place and stay on.
The bank would advance the money once they knew you were my legatee."
 "Without you I shouldn't want to stay on." 
 "Well, if you do have to leave here, at least it will give you an excuse to live on your own, if that's what you want." 
Angela cried out in vehement protest: "I shall never live with anyone else but you.
I don't want to live anywhere but here, in this cottage.
You know that.
It's our home."
It was their home.
It was the only real home she'd ever known.
She didn't need to look around her to fix with startling clarity each familiar loved possession.
She could lie in bed at night and in imagination move confidently around the cottage touching them in a happy exploration of shared memories and reassurance.
The two Victorian lustre plant pots on their matching pedestals, found in The Lanes at Brighton one summer weekend.
The eighteenth-century oil of Wicken Fen by an artist whose indecipherable signature, peered at through a microscope, had provided so many shared moments of happy conjecture.
The French sword in its decorated scabbard, found in a country sale room and now hanging above their fireplace.
It wasn't just that their possessions, wood and porcelain, paint and linen, symbolised their joint life.
The cottage, their belongings, were their joint life, adorned and gave reality to it just as the bushes and flowers they had planted in the garden staked out their territory of trust.
She had a sudden and terrifying memory of a  recurrent nightmare.
They were standing facing each other in an empty attic room, bare walls squared with the pale imprints of discarded pictures, floorboards harsh to the feet, two naked strangers in a void, herself trying to reach out her hands to touch Stella's fingers, but unable to lift the heavy monstrous bolsters of flesh that had become her arms.
She shivered and then was recalled to the reality of the cold autumn morning by the sound of her friend's voice.
"How much did your grandmother leave?
You did tell me, but I've forgotten."
 "About thirty thousand, I think." 
"And he can't have spent any of it, living with his old father in that poky cottage.
He hasn't even renovated the windmill.
His salary alone must be more than enough for the two of them, apart from the old man's pension.
Lorrimer's a senior scientist, isn't he?
What does he get?"
"He's a Principal Scientific Officer.
The scale goes up to eight thousand."
More in a year than I could earn from four novels.
I suppose if he jibbed at five hundred he'd hardly part with four thousand, not at a rate of interest we could afford.
But it wouldn't hurt him.
I've a good mind to ask him for it after all."
Stella was only teasing, of course; but she recognised this too late to control the panic in her voice.
 "No, please, Star No, you mustn't" 
 "You really hate him, don't you?" 
"Not hate.
Indifference.
I just don't want to be under an obligation to him."
 "Nor, come to that, do I. And you shan't be." 
Angela went out to the hall and came back pulling on her coat.
She said:
"I'll be late at the Lab if I don't hurry.
The casserole is in the oven.
Try to remember to switch on at half-past five.
And don't touch the regulator.
I'll turn down the heat when I get back."
 "I think I can just about manage that." 
"I'm taking sandwiches for lunch, so I shan't be back.
There's the cold ham and salad in the fridge.
Will that be enough, Star?"
 "No doubt I'll survive." 
 "Yesterday evening's typing is in the folder, but I haven't read it through." 
 "How remiss of you." 
Stella followed her friend out to the hall.
At the door she said:
 "I expect they think at the Lab that I exploit you." 
"They know nothing about you at the Lab.
And I don't care what they think."
"Is that what Edwin Lorrimer thinks, too, that I exploit you?
Or what does he think?"
 "I don't want to talk about him." 
She folded her scarf over her blonde hair.
In the antique mirror with its frame of carved shells she saw both their faces distorted by a defect in the glass; the brown and green of Stella's huge luminous eyes smeared like wet paint into the deep clefts between nostrils and mouth; her own wide brow bulging like that of a hydrocephalic child.
She said:
 "I wonder what I'd feel if Edwin died this week; a heart attack, a car accident, a brain haemorrhage." 
 "Life isn't as convenient as that." 
"Death isn't.
Star, shall you reply today to that solicitor?"
"He doesn't expect an answer until Monday.
I can ring him at the London office on Monday morning.
That's another five days.
Anything can happen in five days."
"But they're just like mine!
The panties I mean.
I've got a pair like that!
I bought them from Marks and  Spencer's in Cambridge with my first salary cheque."
It was 10.35 and Brenda Pridmore, at the reception desk at the rear of the main hall of Hoggatt's Laboratory, watched wide-eyed while Inspector Blakelock drew to-yards him the first labelled bag of exhibits from the clunch pit murder.
She put out a finger and tentatively slid it over the thin plastic through which the knickers, crumpled and stained round the crotch, were clearly visible.
The detective-constable who had brought in the exhibits had said that the girl had been to a dance.
Funny, thought Brenda, that she hadn't bothered to put on clean underclothes.
Perhaps she wasn't fastidious.
Or perhaps she had been in too much of a hurry to change.
And now the intimate clothes which she had put on so unthinkingly on the day of her death would be smoothed out by strange hands, scrutinised under ultra-violet light, perhaps be handed up, neatly docketed, to the judge and jury in the Crown Court.
Brenda knew that she would never again be able to wear her own panties, their prettiness contaminated for ever by the memory of this dead unknown girl.
Perhaps they had even bought them together in the same store, on the same day.
She could recall the excitement of spending for the first time money she had actually earned.
It had been a Saturday afternoon and there had been a crush round the lingerie counter, eager hands rummaging among the panties.
She had liked the pair with the sprays of pink machine-embroidered flowers across the front.
So, too, had this unknown girl.
Perhaps their hands had touched.
She cried:
"Inspector.
Isn't death terrible?"
"Murder is.
Death isn't; at least, no more than birth is.
You couldn't have one without the other or there'd be no room for us all.
I reckon I won't worry over-much when my times comes."
"But that policeman who brought in the exhibits said that she was only eighteen.
That's my age."
He was making out the folder for the new case, meticulously transferring details from the police form to the file.
And his head, with the cropped dry hair which reminded her so of corn-stubble, was bent low over the page so that she could not see his face.
Suddenly she remembered being told that he had lost an only daughter, killed by a hit-and-run driver, and she wished the words unsaid.
Her face flared and she turned her eyes away.
But when he replied his voice was perfectly steady.
"Aye, poor lass.
Led him on, I daresay.
They never learn.
What's that you've got?"
"It's the bag of male clothes, suit, shoes and underwear.
Do you think these belong to the chief suspect?"
 "They'll be the husband's, likely as not." 
"But what can they prove?
She was strangled, wasn't she?"
"No telling for certain until we get Dr. Kerrison's report.
But they usually examine the chief suspect's clothes.
There might be a trace of blood, a grain of sand or earth, paint, minute fibres from the victim's clothes, a trace of her saliva even.
Or she could have been raped.
All that bundle will go into the Biology Search Room with the victim's clothes."
"But the policeman didn't say anything about rape!
I thought you said this bundle belongs to the husband."
"You don't want to let it worry you.
You have to learn to be like a doctor or a nurse, detached, isn't it?"
 "Is that how forensic scientists feel?" 
"Likely as not.
It's their job.
They don't think about victims or suspects.
That's for the police.
They're only concerned with scientific facts."
He was right, thought Brenda.
She remembered the time only three days previously when the Senior Scientific Officer of the instrument section bad let her look  into the giant scanning electron microscope and watch the image of a minute pill of putty burst instantaneously into an exotic incandescent flower.
He had explained:
 "It's a coccolith, magnified six thousand times." 
 "A what?" 
"The skeleton of a micro-organism which lived in the ancient seas from which the chalk in the putty was deposited.
They're different, depending on where the chalk was quarried.
That's how you can differentiate one sample of putty from another."
She had exclaimed:
 "But it's so lovely!" 
He had taken her place at the eyepiece of the instrument.
 "Yes, nice, isn't it?" 
But she had known that, while she looked back in wonder across a million years, his mind on the minute scrape of putty from the heel of the suspect's shoe, the trace which might prove a man was a rapist or a murderer.
And yet, she had thought, he doesn't really mind.
All he cares about is getting the answer right.
It would have been no use asking him whether he thought there was a unifying purpose in life, whether it could really be chance that an animal so small that it couldn't be seen by the naked eye could die millions of years ago in the depths of the sea and be resurrected by science to prove a man innocent or guilty.
It was odd, she thought, that scientists so often weren't religious when their work revealed a world so variously marvellous and yet so mysteriously unified and at one.
Dr. Lorrimer seemed to be the only member of Hoggatt's who was known to go regularly to church.
She wondered if she dared ask him about the coccolith and God.
He had been very kind this morning about the murder.
He had arrived at the Laboratory over an hour late, at ten o'clock, looking terribly tired because he had been up that night at the scene of crime, and had come over to the reception desk to collect his personal post.
He had said:
"You'll be getting exhibits from your first murder case this morning.
Don't let them worry you, Brenda.
There's only one death we need to be frightened of, and that's our own."
It was a strange thing to have said, an odd way to reassure her.
But he was right.
She was suddenly glad that Inspector Blakelock had done the documentation on the clunch pit murder.
Now, with care, the owner of those stained panties would remain, for her, unknown, anonymous, a number in the biology series on a manila folder.
Inspector Blakelock's voice broke into her thoughts:
 "Have you got those court reports we checked yesterday ready for the post?" 
"Yes, they've been entered in the book.
I meant to ask you.
Why do all the court statements have "Criminal Justice Act 1967 sections 2 and 9" printed on them?"
"That's the statutory authority for written evidence to be tendered at committal proceedings and the Crown Court.
You can look up the sections in the library.
Before the 1967 Act the labs had a hard time of it, I can tell you, when all scientific evidence had to be given orally.
Mind you, the court-going officers still have to spend a fair amount of time attending trials.
The defence doesn't always accept the scientific findings.
That's the difficult part of the job, not the analysis but standing alone in the witness-box to defend it under cross-examination.
If a man's no good in the box, then all the careful work he does here goes for nothing."
Brenda suddenly remembered something else that Mrs. Mallett had told her, that the motorist who had killed his daughter had been acquitted because the scientist had crumbled under the cross-examination; something to do with the analysis of chips of paint  found on the road which matched the suspect's car.
It must be terrible to lose an only child; to lose any child.
Perhaps that was the worst thing that could happen to a human being.
No wonder Inspector Blakelock was often so quiet; that when the police officers came in with their hearty banter he answered only with that slow, gentle smile.
She glanced across at the Laboratory clock.
Ten-forty-five.
Any minute now the Scene of Crime course would be arriving for their lecture on the collection and preservation of scientific evidence, and this brief spell of quiet would be over.
She wondered what Colonel Hoggatt would think if he could visit his laboratory now.
Her eyes were drawn, as they so often were, to his portrait hanging just outside the Director's office.
Even from her place at the desk she could read the gold lettering on the frame.
Colonel William Makepeace Hoggatt V.C.
Chief Constable 1894–1912 founder of Hoggatt's Forensic Science Laboratory.
He was standing in the room which was still used as a library, his ruddy face stern and bewhiskered under the sprouting plumes of his hat, his braided, be-medalled tunic fastened with a row of gilt buttons.
One proprietorial hand was laid, light as a priestly blessing, on an old-fashioned microscope in gleaming brass.
But the minatory eyes weren't fixed on this latest scientific wonder; they were fixed on Brenda.
Under his accusing gaze, recalled to duty, she bent again to her work.
By twelve o'clock the meeting of senior scientists in the Director's office to discuss the furniture and equipment for the new Laboratory was over, and Howarth rang for his secretary to clear the conference table.
He watched her as she emptied and polished the ashtray (he didn't smoke and the smell of ash offended him), collected together the copies of the Laboratory plans and gathered up the strewn discarded papers.
Even from his desk Howarth could see Middlemass's complex geometrical doodles, and the crumpled agenda, ringed with coffee stains, of the Senior Vehicle Examiner, Bill Morgan.
He watched the girl as she moved with quiet competence about the table wondering, as always, what, if anything, was going on behind that extraordinarily wide brow, those slanted enigmatic eyes.
He missed his old personal assistant, Marjory Faraker, more than he had expected.
It had, he thought ruefully, been good for his self-conceit to find that her devotion didn't, after all, extend to leaving London where, surprisingly, she had been discovered to have a life of her own, to join him in the fens.
Like all good secretaries she had acquired or at least known how to simulate, some of the idealised attributes of wife, mother, mistress, confidante, servant and friend without being, or indeed expecting to be, any of these.
She had flattered his self-esteem, protected him from the minor irritations of life, preserved his privacy with maternal pugnacity, had ensured, with infinite tact, that he knew all he needed to know about what was going on in his Laboratory.
He couldn't complain about Angela Foley.
She was a more than competent shorthand typist and an  efficient secretary.
Nothing was left undone.
It was just that for her, he felt that he hardly existed, that his authority.
meekly deferred to, was nevertheless a charade.
The fact that she was Lorrimer's cousin was irrelevant.
He had never heard her mention his name.
He wondered from time to time what sort of a life she led in that remote cottage with her writer friend, how far it had satisfied her.
But she told him nothing, not even about the Laboratory.
He knew that Hoggatt's had a heartbeat — all institutions did — but the pulse eluded him.
He said:
"The Foreign and Commonwealth Office want us to take a Danish biologist for two or three days next month.
He's visiting England to look at the service.
Fit him in, will you, when I'm free to give him some time.
You'd better consult Dr. Lorrimer about his diary commitments.
Then let the F.C.O. know what days we can offer."
 "Yes, Dr. Howarth." 
At least the autopsy was over.
It had been worse than he had expected, but he had seen it through and without disgrace.
He hadn't expected that the colours of the human body would be so vivid, so exotically beautiful.
Now he saw again Kerrison's gloved fingers, sleek as eels, busying themselves at the body's orifices.
Explaining demonstrating, discarding.
Presumably he had become as immune to disgust as he obviously was to the sweet-sour smell of his mortuary.
And to all the experts in violent death, faced daily with the final disintegration of the personality, pity would be as irrelevant as disgust.
Miss Foley was ready to go now and had come up to the desk to clear his out tray.
He said:
 "Has Inspector Blakelock worked out last month's average turn-round figures yet?" 
"Yes, sir.
The average for all exhibits is down to twelve days, and the blood alcohol has fallen to 1.2  days.
But the figure for crimes against the person is up again.
I'm just typing the figures now.
"Let me have them as soon as they're ready, please.
There were memories which, he suspected, would be even more insistent than Kerrison marking out with his cartilage knife on the milk-white body the long line of the primary incision.
Doyle.
that great black bull, grinning at him in the washroom afterwards as, side by side, they washed their hands.
And why, he wondered, had he felt it necessary to wash.
His hands hadn't been contaminated.
"The performance was well up to standard.
Neat, quick and thorough, that's Doc Kerrison.
Sorry we shan't be able to call for you when we're ready to make the arrest.
Not allowed.
You'll have to imagine that bit.
But there'll be the trial to attend, with any luck."
Angela Foley was standing in front of the desk, looking at him strangely, he thought.
 "Yes?" 
"Scobie has had to go home, Dr. Howarth.
He's not at all well.
He thinks it may be this two-day"flu that's going about.
And he says that the incinerator has broken down."
 "Presumably he telephoned for the mechanic before he left." 
"Yes, sir.
He says it was all right yesterday morning when Inspector Doyle came with the court orders authorising the destruction of the cannabis exhibits.
It was working then."
Howarth was irritated.
This was one of those minor administrative details which Miss Faraker would never have dreamed of troubling him with.
Miss Foley was, he guessed, expecting him to say something sympathetic about Scobie, to enquire whether the old man had been fit to cycle home.
Dr. MacIntyre had, no doubt, bleated like an anxious sheep when any of the staff were ill.
He bent his head over his papers.
But Miss Foley was at the door.
It had to be now.
He made himself say:
 "Ask Dr. Lorrimer to come down for a few minutes, will you please?" 
He could, perfectly casually have asked Lorrimer to stay on after the meeting; why hadn't he?
Probably because there might have been an echo of the headmaster in so public a request.
Perhaps because this was an interview he had been glad to postpone, even temporarily.
Lorrimer came in and stood in front of the desk.
Howarth took out Bradley's personal file from his right-hand drawer and said:
"Sit down will you, please.
This annual report on Bradley.
You've given him an adverse marking.
Have you told him?"
Lorrimer remained standing.
He said:
"I'm required by the reporting rules to tell him.
I saw him in my office at ten-thirty, as soon as I got back from the P.M."
"It seems a bit hard.
According to his file, it's the first adverse report he's had.
We took him on probation eighteen months ago.
Why hasn't he made out?"
"I should have thought that was obvious from my detailed markings.
He's been promoted above his capacity."
In other words, the Board made a mistake?"
"That's not so unusual.
Boards occasionally do.
And not only when it comes to promotions."
The allusion was blatant, a deliberate provocation, yet Howarth decided to ignore it.
With an effort he kept his voice level.
"I'm not prepared to countersign this report as it stands.
It's too early to judge him fairly."
"I made that excuse for him last year when he'd been with us six months.
But if you disagree with my assessment you'll presumably say so.
There's a space provided."
"I intend to use it.
And I suggest that you try the effect of giving the boy some support and encouragement.
There are two reasons for an inadequate performance.
Some people are capable of doing better and will if judiciously kicked into it.
Others aren't.
To kick them is not only pointless, it destroys what confidence they have.
You run an efficient department.
But it might be more efficient and happier if you learned how to understand people.
Management is largely a matter of personal relationships."
He made himself look up.
Lorrimer said through lips so stiff that the words sounded cracked:
 "I hadn't realised that your family were noted for success in their personal relationships." 
 "The fact that you can't take criticism without becoming as personal and spiteful as a neurotic girl is an example of what I mean." 
He never knew what Lorrimer was about to reply.
The door opened and his sister came in.
She was dressed in slacks and a sheepskin jacket, her blonde hair bound with a scarf.
She looked at them both without embarrassment and said easily:
"Sorry, I didn't realise you were engaged.
I ought to have asked Inspector Blakelock to ring."
Without a word, Lorrimer, deathly pale, turned on his heels, walked past her and was gone.
Domenica looked after him, smiled and shrugged.
She said:
"Sorry if I interrupted something.
It's just to say that I'm going to Norwich for a couple of hours to buy some materials.
Is there anything you want?"
 "Nothing, thank you." 
"I'll be back before dinner, but I think I'll give the village concert a miss.
Without Claire Easterbrook the Mozart will be pretty insupportable.
Oh, and I'm thinking of going up to London for the best part of next week."
Her brother didn't reply.
She looked at him and said:
 "What's wrong?" 
 "How did Lorrimer know about Gina?" 
He didn't need to ask her if it was she who had told him.
Whatever else she may have confided, it would not have been that.
She went across, ostensibly to study the Stanley Spencer set in the overmantel of the fireplace, and asked lightly:
"Why?
He didn't mention your divorce, did he?"
 "Not directly, but the allusion was intended." 
She turned to face him.
"He probably took the trouble to find out as much as possible about you when he knew that you were a candidate for the job here.
It isn't such a large service after all."
 "But I came from outside it." 
"Even so, there would be contacts, gossip.
A failed marriage is one of those unconsidered trifles he might expect to sniff out.
And what of it?
After all, it's not unusual.
I thought forensic scientists were particularly at risk.
All those late hours at scenes of crime and the unpredictable court attendances.
They ought to be used to marital break-ups."
He said, knowing that he sounded as petulant as an obstinate child:
 "I don't want him in my Lab." 
"Your Lab?
It isn't quite as simple as that, is it?
I don't think the Stanley Spencer is right over the fireplace.
It looks incongruous.
It's strange that Father bought it.
Not at all his kind of picture I should have said.
Did you put it here to shock?"
Miraculously, his anger and misery were assuaged.
But then she had always been able to do that for him.
"Merely to disconcert and confuse.
It's intended to suggest that I may be a more complex character than they assume.
"Oh, but you are!
I've never needed "Assumption at Cookham" to prove it.
Why not the Greuze?
It would look good with that carved overmantel."
"Too pretty.
She laughed, and was gone.
He picked up Clifford Bradley's report and, in the space provided, wrote:
"Mr. Bradley's performance has been disappointing.
but not all the difficulties are of his making.
He lacks confidence and would benefit from more active encouragement and support than he has received.
I have corrected the final marking to what I consider a more just assessment and have spoken to the senior biologist about the personnel management in his department.
If he did finally decide, after all, this wasn't the job for him, that snide comment should go some way to ensure that Lorrimer stood no chance of succeeding him as Director of Hoggatt's.
At one-forty-eight precisely Paul Middlemass, the Document Examiner, opened his file on the clunch pit murder.
The Document Examination Room, which occupied the whole of the front of the building immediately under the roof, smelled like a stationer's shop, a pungent amalgam of paper and ink, sharpened by the tang of chemicals.
Middlemass breathed it as his native air.
He was a tall, rangy, large-featured man with a mobile, wide-mouthed face of agreeable ugliness and iron-grey hair which fell in heavy swathes over parchment-coloured skin.
Easy-going and seemingly indolent, he was in fact a prodigious worker with an obsession for his job.
Paper in all its manifestations was his passion.
Few men, in or outside the forensic science service, knew so much about it.
He handled it with joy and with a kind of reverence, gloated over it, knew its provenance almost by its smell.
Identification of the sizing and loading of a specimen by spectrographic or X-ray crystallography merely confirmed  what touch and sight had already pronounced.
The satisfaction of watching the emergence of an obscure water-mark under soft X-rays never palled, and the final pattern was as fascinating to his unsurprised eyes as the expected potter's mark to a collector of porcelain.
His father, long dead, had been a dentist, and his son had taken for his own use the old man's inordinately large store of self-designed surgical overalls.
They were old-fashioned in cut, waisted and full-skirted as the coat of a Regency buck, and with crested metal buttons fastening high to the side of the throat.
Although they were too short in the arm so that his lean wrists protruded like those of an overgrown schoolboy, he wore them with a certain panache, as if this unorthodox working garb, so different from the regulation white coats of the rest of the Laboratory staff, symbolised that unique blend of scientific skill, experience and flair which distinguishes the good Document Examiner.
He had just finished telephoning his wife, having remembered rather belatedly that he was due to help out that evening with the village concert.
He liked women, and before his marriage had enjoyed a succession of casual, satisfactory and uncommitted affairs.
He had married late, a buxom research scientist from Cambridge twenty years his junior, and drove back to their modern flat on the outskirts of the city each night in his Jaguar — his chief extravagance frequently late, but seldom too late to bear her off to their local pub.
Secure in his job, with a growing international reputation, and uxoriously contented with his comely Sophie, lie knew himself to be successful and suspected himself to be happy.
The Document Examination Laboratory with its cabinets and range of monorail cameras took up what some of his colleagues, notably Edwin Lorrimer, regarded as more than its share of room.
But the Lab  oratory, lit by rows of fluorescent lights and with its low ceiling, was stuffy and ill-ventilated, and this afternoon the central heating, unreliable at the best of times, had concentrated all its efforts on the top of the building.
Usually he was oblivious of his working conditions, but a sub-tropical temperature was difficult to ignore.
He opened the door to the passage.
Opposite and a little to the right were the male and female lavatories, and he could hear the occasional feet, light or heavy, hurried or dilatory, of passing members of staff, and hear the swing of the two doors.
The sounds didn't worry him.
He applied himself to his task.
But the specimen he was now poring over held little mystery.
If the crime had been other than murder he would have left it to his Scientific Officer assistant, not yet returned from a belated lunch.
But murder invariably meant a court appearance and cross-examination the defence seldom let the scientific evidence go unchallenged in this, the gravest of charges — and a court appearance put document examination in general, and Hoggatt's Laboratory in particular , on public trial.
He made it a matter of principle always to take the murder cases himself.
They were seldom the most interesting.
What he most enjoyed were the historical investigations, the satisfaction of demonstrating, as he had only last month, that a document dated 1872 was printed on paper containing chemical wood-pulp which was first used in 1874, a discovery which had initiated a fascinating unravelling of complicated documentary fraud.
There was nothing complicated and little of interest about the present job.
Yet, only a few years ago, a man's neck could have depended upon his opinion.
He seldom thought of the half-dozen men who had been hanged during the twenty years of his forensic experience, primarily because of his evidence, and when he did, it was not the strained but oddly anonymous faces in the dock which  he remembered, or their names; but paper and ink, the thickened downward stroke, the peculiar formation of a letter.
Now he spread out on his table the note taken from the dead girl's handbag, placing on each side the two specimens of the husband's handwriting which the police had been able to obtain.
One was a letter to the suspect's mother written on holiday at Southend — how, he wondered, had they managed to extract that from her?
The other was a brief telephoned message about a football match.
The note taken from the victim's purse was even briefer.
"You've got your own chap so lay off Barry Taylor or you'll be sorry.
It would be a pity to spoil a nice face like yours.
Acid isn't pretty.
Watch it.
A Well-wisher.
The style, he decided, was derived from a recent television thriller, the writing was obviously disguised.
It was possible that the police would be able to provide him with some more samples of the suspect's handwriting when they visited the lad's place of work, but he didn't really need them.
The similarities between the threatening note and the samples were unmistakable.
The writer had tried to alter the slant of his hand and had changed the shape of the small r.
But the lifts of the pen came regularly at every fourth letter — Middlemass had never found a forger who remembered to vary the interval at which he lifted pen from paper — and the dot above the i, high and slightly to the left, and the over-emphatic apostrophe were almost a trade-mark.
He would analyse the paper sample, photograph and enlarge each individual letter and then mount them on a comparison chart, and the jury would pass it solemnly from hand to hand and wonder wily it needed a highly-paid expert to come and explain what anyone could see with his own eyes.
The telephone rang.
Middlemass stretched out a long arm and held the instrument to his left ear.
Susan Bradley's voice, at first apologetic then  conspiratorial and finally close to tears, squeaked into his ear in a long monologue of complaint and desperation.
He listened, made soft encouraging noises, held the receiver an inch or two from his ear, and meanwhile noted that the writer, poor bastard, hadn't even thought of altering the distinctive cross-bar of his small letter t.
Not that it would have done any good.
And he couldn't have known, poor devil, that his effort would feature as an exhibit in his trial for murder.
 "All right," he said.
"Don't worry.
Leave it to me."
 "And you won't let him know that I phoned you?" 
"Of course not, Susan.
Relax.
I'll settle it."
The voice crackled on.
"Then tell him not to be a fool, for God's sake.
Hasn't he noticed that we've got one and a half million unemployed?
Lorrimer can't sack him.
Tell Clifford to hang on to his job and stop being a bloody fool.
I'll deal with Lorrimer."
He replaced the receiver.
He had liked Susan Moffat who, for two years, had worked for him as his S.O.
She had both more brains and more guts than her husband, and he had wondered, without greatly caring, why she had married Bradley.
Pity probably, and an over-developed maternal instinct.
There were some women who simply had to take the unfortunate literally to their breast.
Or perhaps it was just lack of choice, the need for a home of her own and a child.
Well.
it was too late to try and stop the marriage now, and it certainly hadn't occurred to him to try at the time.
And at least she had the home and the kid.
She had brought the baby to the Lab to see him only a fortnight ago.
The visit of the prune-faced yelling bundle had done nothing to change his own resolution not to produce a child, but certainly Susan herself had seemed happy enough.
And she would probably be happy again if something could be done about Lorrimer.
He thought that the time had perhaps come to do something about Lorrimer.
And he had, after all, his own private reason for taking on the job.
It was a small personal obligation, and to date it hadn't particularly fretted what he supposed other people called conscience.
But Susan Bradley's call had reminded him.
He listened.
The footsteps were familiar.
Well, it was a coincidence, but better now than later.
Moving to the door he called at the retreating back:
"Lorrimer.
I want a word with you."
Lorrimer came and stood inside the door, tall, unsmiling in his carefully buttoned white coat, and regarded Middlemass with his dark, wary eyes.
Middlemass made himself look into them, and then turned his glance away.
The irises had seemed to dilate into black pools of despair.
It was not an emotion he felt competent to deal with, and he felt discomforted.
What on earth was eating the poor devil?
He said, carefully casual:
"Look, Lorrimer, lay off Bradley will you?
I know he's not exactly God's gift to forensic science, but he's a conscientious plodder and you're not going to stimulate either his brain or his speed by bullying the poor little beast.
So cut it out."
 "Are you telling me how to manage my staff?" 
Lorrimer's voice was perfectly controlled, but the pulse at the side of his temple had begun to beat visibly.
Middlemass found it difficult not to fix his eyes on it.
"That's right, mate.
This member of your staff anyway.
I know damn well what you're up to and I don't like it.
So stow it."
 "Is this meant to be some kind of a threat?" 
"More a friendly warning, reasonably friendly anyway.
I don't pretend to like you, and I wouldn't have served under you if the Home Office had been daft enough to appoint you Director of this Lab.
But I admit that what you do in your own department isn't  normally my business, only this happens to be an exception.
I know what's going on, I don't like it, and I'm making it my business to see that it stops."
"I didn't realise that you had this tender regard for Bradley.
But of course, Susan Bradley must have phoned you.
He wouldn't have the guts to speak for himself.
Did she telephone you, Middlemass?"
Middlemass ignored the question.
He said:
"I haven't any particular regard for Bradley.
But I did have a certain regard for Peter Ennalls, if you can remember him."
"Ennalls drowned himself because his fiance threw him over and he'd had a mental breakdown.
He left a note explaining his action and it was read out at the inquest.
Both things happened months after he'd left the Southern Laboratory; neither had anything to do with me."
"What happened while he was at the Lab had a hell of a lot to do with you.
He was a pleasant, rather ordinary lad with two good A-levels and an unaccountable wish to become a forensic biologist when he had the bad luck to begin to work under you.
As it happens, he was my wife's cousin.
I was the one who recommended him to try for the job.
So I have a certain interest, you could say a certain responsibility."
Lorrimer said:
"He never said that he was related to your wife.
But I can't see what difference it makes.
He was totally unsuited for the job.
A forensic biologist who can't work accurately under pressure is no use to me or the Service and he'd better get out.
We've no room for passengers.
That's what I propose to tell Bradley."
 "Then you'd better have second thoughts." 
 "And how are you going to make me?" 
It was extraordinary that lips so tight could produce any sound, that Lorrimer's voice, high and distorted, could have forced itself through the vocal cords without splitting them.
"I shall make it plain to Howarth that you and I can't serve in the same Lab.
He won't exactly welcome that.
Trouble between senior staff is the last complication he wants just now.
So he'll suggest to Establishment Department that one of us gets a transfer before we have the added complication of moving into a new Lab.
I'm banking on Howarth — and Estabs come to that — concluding that it's easier to find a forensic biologist than a Document Examiner."
Middlemass surprised himself.
None of this rigmarole had occurred to him before he spoke.
Not that it was unreasonable.
There wasn't another Document Examiner of his calibre in the Service and Howarth knew it.
If he categorically refused to work in the same Laboratory as Lorrimer, one of them would have to go.
The quarrel wouldn't do either of them any good with the Establishment Department, but he thought he knew which one it would harm most.
Lorrimer said:
 "You helped stop me getting the directorship, now you want to drive me out of the Lab." 
"Personally I don't care a damn whether you're here or not.
But just lay off bullying Bradley."
 "If I were prepared to take advice about the way I run my Department from anyone, it wouldn't be a third-rate paper fetishist with a second-rate degree, who doesn't know the difference between scientific proof and intuition." 
The taunt was too absurd to puncture Middlemass's secure self-esteem.
But at least it warranted a retort.
He found that he was getting angry.
And suddenly he saw light.
He said:
"Look, mate, if you can't make it in bed, if she isn't finding you quite up to the mark, don't take your frustration out on the rest of us.
Remember Chesterfield's advice.
The expense is exorbitant, the position ridiculous, and the pleasure transitory.
The result astounded him.
Lorrimer gave a  strangled cry and lunged out.
Middlemass's reaction was both instinctive and deeply satisfying.
He shot out his right arm and landed a punch on Lorrimer's nose.
There was a second's astonished silence in which the two men regarded each other.
Then the blood spurted and Lorrimer tottered and fell forward.
Middlemass caught him by the shoulders and felt the weight of his head against his chest.
He thought: "My God, he's going to faint." 
He was aware of a tangle of emotion, surprise at himself, boyish gratification, pity and an impulse to laugh.
He said:
 "Are you all right?" 
Lorrimer tore himself from his grasp and stood upright.
He fumbled for his handkerchief and held it to his nose.
The red stain grew.
Looking down, Middlemass saw Lorrimer's blood spreading on his white overall, decorative as a rose.
He said:
 "Since we're engaging in histrionics, I believe your response ought now to be" By God, you swine, you'll pay for this "." 
He was astounded by the sudden blaze of hate in the black eyes.
Lorrimer's voice came to him muffled by the handkerchief.
 "You will pay for it." 
And then he was gone.
Middlemass was suddenly aware of Mrs. Bidwell, the Laboratory cleaner, standing by the door, eyes large and excited behind her ridiculous upswept diamante spectacles.
"Nice goings on, I don't think.
Senior staff fighting each other.
You ought to be ashamed of yourselves."
"Oh we are, Mrs. Bidwell.
We are."
Slowly Middlemass eased his long arms from his overall.
He handed it to her.
 "Drop this in the soiled linen, will you." 
"Now you knew very well, Mr. Middlemass, that I don't go into the gents' cloakroom, not in working hours.
You put it in the basket yourself.
And if you want a clean one now, you know where to find it.
I'm  putting out no more clean linen until tomorrow.
Fighting, indeed.
I might have known that Dr. Lorrimer would be mixed up in it.
But he's not a gentleman you'd expect to find using his fists.
Wouldn't have the guts, that would be my view.
But he's been odd in his manner these last few days, no doubt about that.
You heard about that spot of bother in the front hall yesterday, I suppose?
He practically pushed those kids of Dr. Kerrison's out of the door.
All they were doing was waiting for their Dad.
No harm in that, I suppose.
There's a very nasty atmosphere in this Lab recently, and if a certain gentlemen doesn't take a hold of himself there'll be a mischief done, you mark my words."
It was nearly five o'clock and dark before Detective-Inspector Doyle got back to his home in the village four miles to the north of Cambridge.
He had tried to telephone his wife once, but without success: the line was engaged.
Another of her interminable, secretive and expensive telephone calls to one of her old nursing friends, he thought, and, duly satisfied, made no further attempt.
The wrought iron gate, as usual, was open and he parked in front of the house.
It wasn't forth garaging the car for a couple of hours, which was all the time he could allow himself.
Scoope House hardly looked its best in the late afternoon of a dark November evening.
No wonder that the agents hadn't recently sent anyone to view.
It was a bad time of the year.
The house was, he thought, a monument to miscalculation.
He had bought it for less than seventeen thousand and had spent five thousand on it to date, expecting to sell it for at least forty.
But that was before the recession had upset the calculations of more expert speculators than he.
Now, with  the property market sluggish, there was nothing to do but wait.
He could afford to hang on to the house until the market quickened.
He wasn't sure that he would be given a chance to hold on to his wife.
He wasn't even sure that he wanted to.
The marriage, too, had been a miscalculation, but given the circumstances of the time, an understandable one.
He wasted no time on regrets.
The two tall oblongs of light from the first-floor drawing-room window should have been a welcoming promise of warmth and comfort.
Instead they were vaguely menacing; Maureen was at home.
But where else, she would have argued, was there for her to go in this dreary East Anglian village on a dull November evening?
She had finished tea, and the tray was still at her side.
The milk bottle, with its crushed top pressed back, a single mug, sliced bread spilling out of its wrapper, a slab of butter on a greasy dish, a bought fruit cake in its unopened carton.
He felt the customary surge of irritation, but said nothing.
Once when he had remonstrated at her sluttishness she had shrugged:
 "Who sees, who cares" 
He saw and he cared, but it had been many months since he had counted with her.
He said:
"I'm taking a couple of hours' kip.
Wake me at seven, will you?"
 "You mean we aren't going to the Chevisham concert?" 
"For God's sake, Maureen, you were yelling yesterday that you couldn't be bothered with it.
Kids' stuff.
Remember?"
"It's not exactly The Talk of the Town, but at least we were going out.
Out of this dump.
Together for a change.
It was something to dress up for.
And you said we'd have dinner afterwards at the Chinese restaurant at Ely."
"Sorry.
I couldn't know I'd be on a murder case."
"When will you be back?
If there's any point in asking?"
"God knows.
I'm picking up Sergeant Beale.
There are still one or two people we've got to see who were at the Muddington dance, notably a lad called Barry Taylor who has some explaining to do.
Depending on what we get out of him, I may want to drop in on the husband again."
"That'll please you, won't it, keeping him in a muck sweat.
Is that why you became a cop — because you like frightening people?"
"That's about as stupid as saying you became a nurse because you get a kick out of emptying bedpans.
He flung himself in a chair and closed his eyes, giving way to sleep.
He saw again the boy's terrified face, smelt again the sweat of fear.
But he'd stood up well to that first interview, hindered rather than helped by the presence of his solicitor, who had never seen his client before and had made it painfully apparent that he would prefer never to see him again.
He had stuck to his story, that they'd quarrelled at the dance and he had left early.
That she hadn't arrived home by one o'clock.
That he'd gone out to look for her on the road and across the clunch pit field, returning alone half an hour later.
That he'd seen no-one and hadn't been anywhere near the clunch pit or the derelict car.
It was a good story, simple, unelaborated, possibly even true except in that one essential.
But, with luck, the Lab report on her blood and the stain on his jacket cuff, the minute traces of sandy soil and dust from the car on his shoes, would be ready by Friday.
If Lorrimer worked late tonight — and he usually did — the blood analysis might even be available by tomorrow.
And then would come the elaborations, the inconsistencies, and finally the truth.
She said:
 "Who else was at the scenes" 
It was something, he thought, that she had bothered to ask.
He said sleepily:
"Lorrimer, of course.
He never misses a murder scene.
Doesn't trust any of us to know our jobs, I suppose.
We had the usual half-hour hanging about for Kerrison.
That maddened Lorrimer, of course.
He's done all the work at the scene — all anyone can do — and then he has to cool his heels with the rest of us, waiting for God's gift to forensic pathology to come screaming up with a police escort and break the news to us that what we all thought was a corpse is — surprise, surprise indeed a corpse, and that we can safely move the body."
 "The forensic pathologist does more than that." 
"Of course he does.
But not all that much more, not at the actual scene.
His-job comes later."
He added:
"Sorry I couldn't ring.
I did try but you were engaged."
"I expect that was Daddy.
His offer still stands, the job of"Security Officer in the Organisation.
But he can't wait much longer.
If you don't accept by the end of the month, then he'll advertise."
Oh God, he thought, not that again.
"I wish your dear Daddy wouldn't talk about the Organisation.
It makes the family business sound like the Mafia.
If it were, I might be tempted to join.
What Daddy's got are three cheap, shabby shops selling cheap, shabby suits to cheap shabby fools who wouldn't recognise a decent cloth if it were shoved down their throats.
I might've considered coming into the business if dear Daddy hadn't already got Big Brother as a co-director, ready to take over from him, and if he didn't make it so plain that he only tolerates me because I'm your husband.
But I'm damned if I'm going to fart around like a pansy floor-walker watching that no poor sod nicks the Y-fronts, even if I am dignified with the name security officer.
I'm staying here."
 "Where you've got such useful contacts." 
And what exactly, he wondered, did she mean by that?
He'd been careful not to tell her anything, but she wasn't altogether a fool.
She could have guessed.
He said:
"Where I've got a job.
You know what you were taking on when you married me."
But none ever does know that, he thought.
Not really.
 "Don't expect me to be here when you get back." 
That was an old threat.
He said easily:
"Suit yourself.
But if you're thinking of driving, forget it.
I'm taking the Cortina, the clutch is playing up on the Renault.
So if you're planning on running home to Mummy before tomorrow morning, you'll have to phone Daddy to call for you, or take a taxi."
She was speaking, but her voice, peevishly insistent, was coming from far away, no longer coherent words but waves of sound beating against his brain.
Two hours.
Whether or not she bothered to rouse him, he knew that he would wake almost to the minute.
He closed his eyes and slept.
DEATH IN A WHITE COAT
It was very peaceful in the front hall of Hoggatt's at eight-forty in the morning.
Brenda often thought that this was the part of the working day she liked best, the hour before the staff arrived and the work of the Lab got really under way, when she and Inspector Blakelock worked together in the quiet emptiness of the hall, still and solemn as a church, making up a supply of manila folders ready to register the day's new cases, repacking exhibits for collection by the police, making a final check of the Laboratory reports to courts to ensure that the examination was complete, that no relevant detail had been omitted.
Immediately on arrival she would put on her white coat, and at once she felt different, no longer young and uncertain, but a professional woman, almost like a scientist, a recognised member of the Lab staff.
Then she would go into the kitchen at the back of the house and make tea.
After the dignification of the white coat this domestic chore was something of a let-down, and she didn't really need a drink so soon after breakfast.
But Inspector Blakelock, who motored from Ely every day, was always ready for his tea, and she didn't mind making it.
 "That's the stuff to give the troops," he would invariably say, curving back moist lips to the mugs brim and gulping the hot liquid down as if his throat were asbestos.
 "You make a nice cup of tea, Brenda, I'll say that for you." 
And she would reply:
 "Mum says the secret is always to warm the pot and let the tea brew for just five minutes." 
This small ritual exchange, so invariable that she could silently mouth his words and had to resist an impulse to giggle, the familiar domestic aroma of the  tea, the gradual warmth as she curved her hands around the thick mug, constituted a reassuring and comforting beginning to the working day.
She liked Inspector Blakelock.
He spoke seldom, but he was never impatient with her, always kind, a companionable father figure.
Even her mother, when she visited the Lab before Brenda took up her post, had been happy about her working alone with him.
Brenda's cheeks still burned with shame when she remembered her mother's insistence that she should visit Hoggatt's to see where her daughter was going to work, although Chief Inspector Martin, the Senior Police Liaison Officer, had apparently thought it perfectly reasonable.
He had explained to her mother how it was an innovation for Hoggatt's having a clerical officer on the desk instead of a junior police officer.
If she made a success of the job it would mean a permanent saving in police manpower as well as a useful training for her.
As Chief Inspector Martin had told her mother:
 "The reception desk is the heart of the Laboratory." 
At present he was with a party of police officers visiting the United States and Inspector Blakelock was totally in charge doing the two jobs, not only receiving the exhibits, making out the register of court attendances and preparing the statistics, but discussing the cases with the detective in charge, explaining what the Laboratory could hope to do, rejecting those cases where the scientists couldn't help, and checking that the final statements for the court were complete.
Brenda guessed that it was a big responsibility for him and was determined not to let him down.
Already, when she had been making the tea, the first exhibit of the day had arrived, brought in no doubt by a detective constable working on the case.
It was another plastic bag of clothes from the clunch pit murder.
As Inspector Blakelock turned it over in his large hands, she glimpsed through the plastic a pair of  dark blue trousers with a greasy waistband, a wide-lapelled striped jacket, and a pair of black shoes with pointed toes and ornate buckles.
Inspector Blakelock was studying the police report.
He said:
"These belong to the boy-friend she was messing about with at the dance.
You'll need a new file for the report, but register it to Biology under the Muddington reference with a sub-group number.
Then attach one of the red Immediate slips.
Murder gets priority."
"But we might have two or three murders at the same time.
Who decides the priority then?"
"The head of the department concerned.
It's his job to allocate the work to his staff.
After murder and rape, it's usual to give priority to those cases where the accused hasn't been bailed."
Brenda said:
"I hope you don't mind my asking so many questions.
Only I do want to learn.
Dr. Lorrimer told me that I ought to find out all I can and not just look on this job as routine."
"You ask away, lass, I don't mind.
Only you don't want to listen too much to Dr. Lorrimer.
He isn't the director here, even if he thinks he is.
When you've registered that clobber, the bundle goes on the Biology shelf."
Brenda entered the exhibit number carefully in the day-book and moved the plastic-shrouded bundle to the shelf of exhibits waiting to go.
into the Biology Search Room.
It was good to be up to date with the entering.
She glanced up at the clock.
It was nearly eight-fifty.
Soon the day's post would be delivered and the desk would be heaped with padded envelopes containing yesterday's blood samples from the drink and driving cases.
Then the police cars would start arriving.
Uniformed or plain-clothes policemen would bring in large envelopes of documents for Mr. Middlemass, the Document Examiner; specially prepared kits issued by the Laboratory for the collection of  saliva, blood and semen stains; unwieldy bags of stained and dirty bed linen and blankets; the ubiquitous blunt instruments; blood-stained knives carefully taped into their boxes.
And at any moment now the first members of staff would be arriving.
Mrs. Bidwell, the cleaner, should have been with them twenty minutes ago.
Perhaps she had caught Scobie's influenza.
The first of the scientific staff to arrive would probably be Clifford Bradley, the Higher Scientific Officer in the Biology Department, scurrying through the hall as if he had no right to be there, with his anxious hunted eyes and that stupid, drooping moustache, so preoccupied that he hardly noticed their greeting.
Then Miss Foley, the Director's secretary, calm and self-possessed, wearing always that secret smile.
Miss Foley reminded Brenda of Mona Rigby at school, who was always chosen to play the Madonna in the Christmas nativity play.
She had never liked Mona Rigby — who wouldn't have been chosen twice for the coveted role if the staff had known as much about her as did Brenda — and she wasn't sure that she really liked Miss Foley.
Then someone she did like, Mr. Middlemass, the Document Examiner, with his jacket slung over his shoulders, leaping up the stairs three steps at a time and calling out a greeting to the desk.
After that they would come in almost any order.
The hall would become alive with people rather like a railway terminus, and at the heart of the seeming chaos, controlling and directing, helping and explaining, were the staff of the reception desk.
as if to signal that the working day was about to begin, the telephone rang.
Inspector Blakelock's hand enveloped the receiver.
He listened in silence for what seemed a longer period than normal, then she heard him speak.
"I don't think he's here, Mr. Lorrimer.
You say he never came home last night?"
Another silence.
Inspector Blakelock half turned away from her and bent his head conspiratorially over the mouthpiece as if listening to a confidence.
Then he rested the receiver on the counter and turned to Brenda:
"It's Dr. Lorrimer's old dad.
He's worried.
Apparently Dr. Lorrimer didn't take him his early tea this morning and it looks as if he didn't come home last night.
His bed hasn't been slept in."
"Well, he can't be here.
I mean, we found the front door locked when we arrived."
There could be no doubt about that.
As she had come round the corner of the house from putting her bicycle in the old stable block, Inspector Blakelock had been standing at the front door almost as if he were waiting for her.
Then, when she had joined him, he had shone his torch on the locks and inserted the three keys, first the Yale, and then the Ingersoll, and lastly the security lock which disconnected the electronic warning system from Guy's Marsh police station.
Then they had stepped together into the unlighted hall.
She had gone to the cloakroom at the back of the building to put on her white coat and he had gone to the box in Chief Inspector Martin's office to switch off the system which protected the inner doors of the main Laboratory rooms.
She giggled and said:
"Mrs. Bidwell hasn't turned up to start the cleaning and now Dr. Lorrimer's missing.
Perhaps they've run away together.
The great Hoggatt scandal."
It wasn't a very funny joke, and she wasn't surprised when Inspector Blakelock didn't laugh.
He said:
"The locked door doesn't necessarily signify.
Dr. Lorrimer has his own keys.
And if he did make his bed and then come in extra early this morning, like as not he'd have relocked the door and set the internal alarms."
 "But how would he have got into the Biology Lab, then?" 
"He'd have had to have opened the door and then left it open when he reset the alarms.
It doesn't seem likely.
When he's here alone he usually relies on the Yale".
He put the receiver again to his ear and said:
"Hold on a moment will you, Mr. Lorrimer.
I don't think he's here, but I'll just check."
 "I'll go," said Brenda, anxious to demonstrate helpfulness.
Without waiting to lift the flap she slipped under the counter.
As she turned she saw him with startling clarity, brightly instantaneous as a camera flash.
Inspector Blakelock, with his mouth half-open in remonstrance, his arm flung out towards her in a gesture, stiff and histrionic, of protection or restraint.
But now, uncomprehending, she laughed and ran up the wide stairs.
The Biology Laboratory was at the back.
of the first floor, running with its adjoining search room almost the whole length of the building.
The door was shut.
She turned the knob and pushed it open, feeling along the wall for the light switch.
Her fingers found it and she pressed it down.
The two long fluorescent tubes suspended from the ceiling blinked, then glimmered, then glowed into steady light.
She saw the body immediately.
He was lying in the space between the two large central examination tables, face downwards, his left hand seeming to claw at the floor, his right arm hunched beneath him His legs were straight.
She gave a curious little sound between a cry and a moan and knelt beside him.
The hair above his left ear was matted and spiked like her kitten's fur after he had washed, but she couldn't see the blood against the dark hair.
But she knew that it was blood.
Already it had blackened on the collar of his white coat and a small pool had separated and congealed on the Lab floor.
Only his left eye was visible, fixed and dull and retracted, like the eye of a dead calf.
Tentatively she felt his cheek.
It was cold.
But she had known as soon as she had seen the glazed eye that this was death.
She had no memory of closing the Lab door or coming down the stairs.
Inspector Blakelock was still behind the counter, rigid as a statue, the telephone receiver in his hand.
She wanted to laugh at the sight of his face, he looked so funny.
She tried to speak to him, but the words wouldn't come.
Her jaw jabbered uncontrollably and her teeth clattered together.
She made some kind of gesture.
He said something that she couldn't catch, dropped the receiver on the counter and raced upstairs.
She staggered to the heavy Victorian armchair against the wall outside Chief Inspector Martin's office, Colonel Hoggatt's chair.
The portrait looked down at her.
As she watched, the left eye seemed to grow larger, the lips twisted to a leer.
Her whole body was seized with a terrible cold.
Her heart seemed to have grown immense, thudding against the rib-cage.
She was breathing in great gulps, but still there wasn't enough air.
Then she became aware of the crackling from the telephone.
Rising slowly like an automaton, she made her way over to the counter and picked up the receiver.
Mr. Lorrimer's voice, frail and querulous, was bleating at the other end.
She tried to say the accustomed words
"Hoggatt's Laboratory here.
Reception speaking."
But the words wouldn't come.
She replaced the receiver in its cradle and walked back to her chair.
She had no memory of hearing the long peal of the doorbell, of moving stiffly across the hall to answer it.
Suddenly the door crashed open and the hall was full of people, loud with voices.
The light seemed to have brightened, which was odd, and she saw them all like actors on a stage, brightly lit, faces made grotesque and heightened by make-up, every.
word clear and  comprehensible as if she were in the front row of the stalls.
Mrs. Bidwell, the cleaner, in her mackintosh with the imitation fur collar, her eyes bright with indignation, her voice pitched high.
"What the hell's going on here Some bloody fool phoned my old man and told him that I needn't come in today, that Mrs. Schofield wanted me.
Who's playing silly buggers?"
Inspector Blakelock was coming down the stairs, slowly and deliberately, the protagonist making his entrance.
They stood in a small circle and looked up at him, Dr. Howarth, Clifford Bradley, Miss Foley, Mrs. Bidwell.
The Director stepped forward.
He looked as if he were going to faint.
He said:
 "Well, Blakelock?" 
"It's Dr. Lorrimer, sir.
He's dead.
Murdered."
Surely they couldn't all have repeated that word in unison, turning their faces towards each other, like a Greek chorus.
But it seemed to echo in the quiet of the hall, becoming meaningless, a sonorous groan of a word.
Murder.
Murder.
Murder.
She saw Dr. Howarth run towards the stairs.
Inspector Blakelock turned to accompany him, but the director said:
"No, you stay here.
See that no-one gets any further than the hall.
Phone the Chief Constable and Dr. Kerrison.
Then get me the Home Office."
Suddenly they seemed to notice Brenda for the first time.
Mrs. Bidwell came towards her.
She said:
"Did you find him then?
You poor little bugger"
And suddenly it wasn't a play any more.
The lights went out.
The faces became amorphous, ordinary.
Brenda gave a little gasp.
She felt Mrs. Bidwell's arms go round her shoulders.
The smell of the mackintosh was pressed into her face.
The fur was as soft as her kitten's paw.
And, blessedly Brenda began to cry.
In a London teaching hospital close by the river, from which he could in his more masochistic moments glimpse the window of his own office, Dr. Charles Freeborn, Controller of the Forensic Science Service, all six foot four of him, lay rigidly in his narrow bed, his nose peaked high above the methodical fold of the sheet, his white hair a haze against the whiter pillow.
The bed was too short for him, an inconvenience to which he had accommodated himself by neatly sticking out his toes over the foot board.
His bedside locker held the conglomerate of offerings, necessities and minor diversions considered indispensable to a brief spell in hospital.
They included a vase of official-looking roses, scentless but florid, through whose funereal and unnatural blooms Commander Adam Dalgliesh glimpsed a face so immobile, upturned eyes fixed on the ceiling, that he was momentarily startled by the illusion that he was visiting the dead.
Recalling that Freeborn was recovering from nothing more serious than a successful operation for varicose veins, he approached the bed and said tentatively:
 "Hello" 
Freeborn, galvanised from his torpor, sprang up like a jack-in-the box, scattering from his bedside locker a packet of tissues, two copies of the Journal of the Forensic Science Society and an open box of chocolates.
He shot out a lean speckled arm encircled by the hospital identity bracelet and crushed Dalgliesh's hand.
 "Adam, Don't creep up on me like that, damn you." 
God, am I glad to see you]The only good news I've had this morning is that you'll be in charge.
I thought  that you might have already left.
How long can you spare?
How are you getting there?"
Dalgliesh answered the questions in order.
"Ten minutes.
By chopper from the Battersea heliport.
I'm on my way now.
How are you, Charles?
Am I being a nuisance?"
"I'm the nuisance.
This couldn't have happened at a worse time.
And the maddening part of it is that it's my own fault.
The op could have waited.
Only the pain was getting rather tedious and Meg insisted that I had it done now before I retired, on the theory I suppose, that better in the Government's time than my own."
Recalling what he knew of the ardours and achievements of Freeborn's forty odd years in the Forensic Science Service, the difficult war years, the delayed retirement, the last five years when he had exchanged his directorship for the frustrations of bureaucracy, Dalgliesh said:
"Sensible of her.
And there's nothing you could have done at Chevisham."
"I know.
Its ridiculous, this feeling of responsibility because one isn't actually in post when disaster strikes.
They rang from the duty office to break the news to me just after nine.
Better that than learning it from my visitors or this evening's paper, I suppose they thought.
Decent of them.
The Chief Constable must have called in the Yard within a few minutes of getting the news.
How much do you know?"
"About as much as you, I imagine.
I've spoken to the C.C. and to Howarth.
They've given me the main facts.
The skull smashed, apparently by a heavy mallet which Lorrimer had been examining.
The Lab found properly locked when the Assistant Police Liaison Officer and the young C.O. arrived at eight-thirty this morning.
Lorrimer's keys in his pocket.
He often worked late and most of the Lab staff knew that he proposed to do so last night.
No sign of a break-in.
Four sets of keys.
Lorrimer had one set as the Senior P.S.O.
and Deputy Security Officer.
The Assistant Police Liaison Officer has the second.
Lorrimer or one of the Police Liaison Officers were the only people authorised to lock and open up the building.
The Director keeps the third set of keys in his security cupboard, and the fourth are in a safe at Guy's Marsh police station in case the alarm rings in the night."
Freeborn said:
 "So either Lorrimer let in his murderer or the murderer had a key." 
There were, thought Dalgliesh, other possibilities, but now was not the time to discuss them.
He asked:
 "Lorrimer would have let in anyone from the Lab, I suppose?" 
"Why not?
He'd probably have admitted any of the local police whom he personally knew, particularly if it were a detective concerned with a recent case.
Otherwise, I'm not so sure.
He may have admitted a friend or relative, although that's even more doubtful.
He was a punctilious blighter and I can't see him using the Lab as a convenient place for a rendezvous.
And, of course, he would have let in the forensic pathologist."
"That's a local man, Henry Kerrison, they tell me.
The C.C. said that they called him in to look at the body.
Well, they could hardly do anything else.
I didn't know you'd found a successor to Death-House Donald."
"Nor have we.
Kerrison is doing it on an item of service basis.
He's well thought of and we'll probably appoint him if we can get the Area Health Authority to agree.
There's the usual difficulty about his hospital responsibilities.
I wish to hell we could get the forensic pathology service sorted out before I go.
But that's one headache I'll have to leave to my successor.
Dalgliesh thought without affection of Death-House Donald with his ghoulish schoolboy humour "Not that cake-knife, my dear lady.
I used it this morning on one of Slash Harry's victims and the edge is rather blunted"— his mania for self-advertisement and his intolerable bucolic laugh, and was grateful that at least he wouldn't be interrogating that redoubtable old phoney.
He said:
"Tell me about Lorrimer.
What was he like?"
This was the question which lay at the heart of every murder investigation; and yet he knew its absurdity before he asked it.
It was the strangest part of a detective's job, this building up of a relationship with the dead, seen only as a crumpled corpse at the scene of crime or naked on the mortuary table.
The victim was central to the mystery of his own death.
He died because of what he was.
Before the case was finished Dalgliesh would have received a dozen pictures of Lorrimer's personality, transferred like prints from other men's minds.
From these amorphous and uncertain images he would create his own imaginings, superimposed and dominant, but essentially just as incomplete, just as distorted — as were the others by his own preconceptions, his own personality.
But the question had to be asked.
And at least he could rely on Freeborn to answer it without initiating a philosophical discussion about the basis of the self.
But their minds must for a moment have flowed together, for Freeborn said:
"It's odd how you always have to ask that question, that you'll only see him through other men's eyes.
Aged about forty.
Looks like John the Baptist without his beard and is about as uncompromising.
Single.
Lives with an elderly father in a cottage just outside the village.
He is — was — an extremely competent forensic biologist, but I doubt whether he would have gone any higher.
Obsessional, edgy, uncomfortable to be with.
He applied for the job at Hoggatt's, of course, and was runner-up to Howarth."
 "How did he and the Lab take the new appointment?" 
"Lorrimer took it pretty hard, I believe.
The Lab wouldn't have welcomed his appointment.
He was pretty unpopular with most of the senior staff.
But there are always one or two who would have preferred a colleague to a stranger even if they hated his guts.
And the Union made the expected noises about not appointing a forensic scientist.
"Why did you appoint Howarth?
I take it you were on the Board."
"Oh yes.
I accept a share of the responsibility.
That's not to say that I think we made a mistake.
Old Doc Mac was one of the really great forensic scientists — we started together — but there's no denying that he'd let the reins slip a bit in recent years.
Howarth has already increased the work turnover by ten per cent.
And then there's the commissioning of the new Lab.
It was a calculated risk to take a man without forensic experience, but we were looking for a manager primarily.
At least, most of the Board were and the rest of us were persuaded that it would be no bad thing, without, I confess, being precisely clear what we meant by that blessed word.
Management.
The new science.
We all make obeisance to it.
In the old days we got on with the job, jollied staff along if they needed it, kicked the sluggards in the backside, encouraged the unconfident and persuaded a reluctant and sceptical police force to use us.
Oh, and sent in an occasional statistical return to the Home Office just to remind them that we were there.
It seemed to work all right.
The service didn't collapse.
Have you ever considered what exactly is the difference between administration and management, Adam?"
"Keep it as a question to confound the candidate at your next Board.
Howarth was at the Bruche Research Institute wasn't he?
Why did he want to leave?
He must have taken a cut in pay."
"Not more than about six hundred a year, and that wouldn't worry him.
His father was rich, and it all came to him and his half-sister."
"But it's a bigger place surely?
And he can't be getting the research at Hoggatt's."
"He gets some, but essentially, of course, it's a service laboratory.
That worried us a bit on the Board.
But you can hardly set out to persuade your most promising applicant that he's downgrading himself.
Scientifically and academically — he's a pure physicist — he was well ahead of the rest of the field.
Actually we did press him a bit and he gave the usual reasons.
He was getting stale, wanted a new sphere of activity, was anxious to get away from London.
Gossip has it that his wife had recently left him and he wanted to make a clean break.
That was probably the reason.
Thank God he didn't use that blasted word "challenge" .
If I have to listen to one more candidate telling me he sees the job as a challenge I'll throw up over the boardroom table.
Adam, I'm getting old."
He nodded his head towards the window.
 "They're in a bit of a twitch over there, I need hardly say." 
"I know.
I've had an exceedingly brief but tactful interview.
They're brilliant at implying more than they actually say.
But obviously it's important to get it solved quickly.
Apart from confidence in the service, you'll all want to get the Lab back to work."
"What's happening now?
To the staff, I mean."
"The local C.I.D.
have locked all the interior doors and they're keeping the staff in the library and the reception area until I arrive.
They're occupying themselves writing out an account of their movements since Lorrimer was last seen alive and the local force are getting on with the preliminary checking of alibis.
That should save some time.
I'm taking one officer, John Massingham, with me.
The Met Lab will take  on any of the forensic work.
They're sending a chap down from Public Relations Branch to handle the publicity.
so I won't have that on my plate.
It's obliging of that pop group to break up so spectacularly.
That and the Governments troubles should keep us off the front page for a day or two.
Freeborn was looking down at his big toes with mild distaste as if they were errant members whose deficiencies had only now become apparent to him.
From time to time he wriggled them, whether in obedience to some medical instruction or for his own private satisfaction, it was impossible to say.
After a moment he spoke.
"I started my career at Hoggatt's, you know.
That was before the war.
All any of us had then was wet chemistry, test tubes, beakers, solutions.
And girls weren't employed because it wasn't decent for them to be concerned with sex cases.
Hoggatt's was old-fashioned even for the 1930 service.
Not scientifically, though.
We had a spectrograph when it was still the new wonder toy.
The fens threw up some odd crimes.
Do you remember the Mulligan case, old man who chopped up his brother and tied the remains to the Leamings sluice-gates?
There was some nice forensic evidence there."
"Some fifty bloodstains on the pig-sty wall, weren't there?
And Mulligan swore it was sow's blood."
Freeborn's voice grew reminiscent.
"I liked that old villain.
And they still drag out those photographs I took of the splashes and use them to illustrate lectures on bloodstains.
Odd, the attraction Hoggatt's had — still has for that matter.
An unsuitable Palladian mansion in an unexciting East Anglian village on the edge of the black fens.
Ten miles to Ely, and that's hardly a centre of riotous activity for.
the young.
Winters to freeze your marrow and a spring wind — the fen blow they call it — which whips  up the peat and chokes your lungs like smog.
And yet the staff, if they didn't leave after the first month, stayed for ever.
Did you know that Hoggatt's has got a small Wren chapel in the Lab grounds?
Architecturally it's much superior to the house because old Hoggatt never messed it about.
He was almost entirely without aesthetic taste, I believe.
He used it as a chemical store once it had been deconsecrated or whatever it is they do to unused churches.
Howarth has got a string quartet going at the Lab and they gave a concert there.
Apparently he's a noted amateur violinist.
At the moment he's probably wishing that he'd stuck to music.
This isn't a propitious start for him, poor devil.
And it was always such a happy Lab.
I suppose it was the isolation that gave us such a feeling of camaraderie."
Dalgliesh said grimly:
 "I doubt whether that will survive an hour of my arrival." 
"No.
You chaps usually bring as much trouble with you as you solve.
You can't help it.
Murder is like that, a contaminating crime.
Oh, you'll solve it, I know.
You always do.
But I'm wondering at what cost.
Dalgliesh did not answer.
He was both too honest and too fond of Freeborn to make comforting and platitudinous promises.
Of course, he would be tactful.
That didn't need saying.
But he would be at Hoggatt's to solve a murder, and all other considerations would go down before that overriding task.
Murder was always solved at a cost, sometimes to himself, more often to others.
And Freeborn was right.
It was a crime which contaminated everyone whom it touched, innocent and guilty alike.
He didn't grudge the ten minutes he had spent with Freeborn.
The old man believed, with simple patriotism, that the Service to which lie had given the whole of his working life was the best in the world.
He had helped to shape it, and he was probably right.
Dalgliesh had learned what he had come to learn.
But as he shook hands and said goodbye he knew that he left no comfort behind him.
The library at Hoggatt's was at the rear of the ground floor.
Its three tall windows gave a view of the stone terrace and the double flight of steps going down to what had once been a lawn and formal gardens, but which was now a half-acre of neglected grass, bounded to the west by the brick annexe of the Vehicle Examination Department, and to the east by the old stable block, now converted into garages.
The room was one of the few in the house spared by its former owner's transforming zeal.
The original bookcases of carved oak still lined the walls, although they now housed the Laboratory's not inconsiderable scientific library, while extra shelf-room for bound copies of national and international journals had been provided by two steel movable units which divided the room into three bays.
Under each of the three windows was a working table with four chairs; one table was almost completely covered by a model of the new Laboratory.
It was in this somewhat inadequate space that the staff were congregated.
A detective-sergeant from the local C.I.D.
sat impassively near the door, a reminder of why they were so inconveniently incarcerated.
They were allowed out to the ground-floor cloakroom under tactful escort, and had been told they could telephone home from the library.
But the rest of the Laboratory was at present out of bounds.
They had all, on arrival, been asked to write a brief account of where they had been, and with whom, the previous evening and night.
Patiently, they waited  their turn at one of the three tables.
The statements had been collected by the sergeant and handed out to his colleague on the reception desk, presumably so that the preliminary checking could begin.
Those of the junior staff who could provide a satisfactory alibi were allowed home as soon as it had been checked; one by one and with some reluctance at missing the excitements to come they went their way.
The less fortunate, together with those who had arrived first at the Laboratory that morning and all the senior scientists, had been told they must await the arrival of the team from Scotland Yard.
The Director had put in only one brief appearance in the library.
Earlier he had gone with Angela Foley to break the news of Lorrimer's death to his father.
Since his return he had stayed in his own office with Detective-Superintendent Mercer of the local C.I.D.
It was rumoured that Dr. Kerrison was with them.
The minutes dragged while they listened for the first hum of the approaching helicopter.
Inhibited by the presence of the police, by prudence, delicacy or embarrassment from talking about the subject foremost in their minds, they spoke to each other with the wary politeness of uncongenial strangers stranded in an airport lounge.
The women were, on the whole, better equipped for the tedium of the wait.
Mrs. Mallett, the typist from the general office, had brought her knitting to work and fortified by an unshakeable alibi — she had sat between the postmistress and Mr. Mason from the general store at the village concert — and with something to occupy her hands, sat clicking away with understandable if irritating complacency until given the order of release.
Mrs. Bidwell, the Laboratory cleaner, had insisted on visiting her broom cupboard, under escort, and had provided herself with a feather duster and a couple of rags with which she made a vigorous onslaught on the bookshelves.
She was unusually silent, but the group of scientists at the  tables could hear her muttering to herself as she punished the books at the end of one of the bays.
Brenda Pridmore had been allowed to collect the exhibits received book from the counter and, white-faced but outwardly composed, was checking the previous month's figures.
The book took more than its share of the available table space; but at least she had a legitimate job.
Claire Easterbrook, Senior Scientific Officer in the Biology Department and, with Lorrimer's death, the senior biologist, had taken from her briefcase a scientific paper she had prepared on recent advances in blood grouping and settled down to revise it with as little apparent concern as if murder at Hoggatt's were a routine inconvenience for which, prudently, she was always provided.
The rest of the staff passed the time each in his own way.
Those who preferred the pretence of business immersed themselves in a book and, from time to time, made an ostentatious note.
The two Vehicle Examiners, who were reputed to have no conversation except about cars, squatted side by side, their backs against the steel book racks, and talked cars together with desperate eagerness.
Middlemass had finished The Timescrossword by quarter to ten and had made the rest of the paper last as long as possible.
But now even the deaths column was exhausted.
He folded the paper and tossed it across the table to eagerly awaiting hands.
It was a relief when Stephen Copley, the Senior Chemist, arrived just before ten, bustling in as usual, his rubicund face with its tonsure and fringe of black curly hair glistening as if he had come in from the sun.
Nothing was known to disconcert him, certainly not the death of a man he had disliked.
But he was secure in his alibi, having spent the whole of the previous day in the Crown Court and the evening and night with friends at Norwich, only getting back to Chevisham in time for a late start that morning.
His  colleagues, relieved to find something to talk about, began questioning him about the case.
They spoke rather too loudly to be natural.
The rest of the company listened with simulated interest as if the conversation were a dramatic dialogue provided for their entertainment.
 "Who did they call for the defence?" asked Middlemass.
"Charlie Pollard.
He hung his great belly over the box and explained confidentially to the jury that they needn't be frightened of the so-called scientific expert witnesses because none of us, including himself of course, really know what we're talking about.
They were immensely reassured, I need hardly say."
 "Juries hate scientific evidence." 
"They think they won't be able to understand it so naturally they can't understand it.
As soon as you step into the box you see a curtain of obstinate incomprehension clanging down over their minds.
What they want is certainty.
Did this paint particle come from this car body?
Answer Yes or No.
None of those nasty mathematical probabilities we're so fond of."
"If they hate scientific evidence they certainly hate arithmetic more.
Give them a scientific opinion which depends on the ability to divide a factor by two-thirds and what do you get from counsel?
"I'm afraid you'll have to explain yourself more simply, Mr. Middlemass.
The jury and I haven't got a higher degree in mathematics, you know.
Inference: you're an arrogant bastard and the jury would be well advised not to believe a word you say."
It was the old argument.
Brenda had heard it all before when she ate her lunch-time sandwiches in the room, halfway between a kitchen and a sitting-room, which was still called the junior Mess.
But now it seemed terrible that they should be able to talk so naturally while Dr. Lorrimer lay there dead upstairs.
Suddenly she had a need to speak his name.
She looked up and made herself say:
"Dr Lorrimer thought that the service would end up with about three immense laboratories doing the work for the whole country with exhibits coming in by air.
He said that he thought all the scientific evidence ought to be agreed by both sides before the trial."
Middlemass said easily:
"That's an old argument.
The police want a local lab nice and handy, and who's to blame them?
Besides, three-quarters of forensic scientific work doesn't require all this sophisticated instrumentation.
There's more of a case for highly equipped regional laboratories with local out-stations.
But who'd want to work in the small labs if the more exciting stuff went elsewhere?"
Miss Easterbrook had apparently finished her revision.
She said:
"Lorrimer knew that this idea of the lab as a scientific arbiter wouldn't work, not with the British accusatorial system.
Anyway, scientific evidence ought to be tested like any other evidence."
 "But how?" asked Middlemass.
"By an ordinary jury?
Suppose you're an expert document examiner outside the service and they call you for the defence.
You and I disagree.
How can the jury judge between us?
They'll probably choose to believe you because you're better looking."
 "Or you, more likely, because you're a man." 
 "Or one of them — the crucial one — will reject me because I remind him of Uncle Ben and all the family know that Ben was the world's champion liar." 
"All right.
All right."
Copley spread plump hands in a benediction of appeasement.
"It's the same as democracy.
A fallible system but the best we've got.
Middlemass said:
"It's extraordinary, though, how well it works.
You  look at the jury sitting there politely attentive, like children on their best behaviour because they're visitors in an alien country and don't want to make fools of themselves or offend the natives.
Yet how often do they come up with a verdict that's manifestly perverse having regard to the evidence?"
Claire Easterbrook said dryly:
 "Whether it's manifestly perverse having regard to the truth is another matter." 
"A criminal trial isn't a tribunal for eliciting the truth.
At least we deal in facts.
What about the emotion?
Did you love your husband, Mrs. B.?
How can the poor woman explain that, probably like the majority of wives, she loved him most of the time, when he didn't snore in her ear all night or shout at the kids or keep her short of Bingo money."
Copley said:
"She can't.
If she's got any sense and if her counsel has briefed her properly, she'll get out her handkerchief and sob"Oh yes, sir.
A better husband never lived, as God's my witness."
It's a game, isn't it?
You win if you play by the rules."
Claire Easterbrook shrugged:
"If you know them.
Too often it's a game where the rules are known only to one side.
Natural enough when that's the side which makes them up."
Copley and Middlemass laughed.
Clifford Bradley had half hidden himself from the rest of the company behind the table holding the model of the new Laboratory.
He had taken a book from the shelves at random but, for the last ten minutes, hadn't even bothered to turn the page.
They were laughing!
They were actually laughing!
Getting up from the table he groped his way down the furthest bay and replaced his book in the rack, leaning his forehead against the cold steel.
Unobtrusively Middlemass strolled up beside him and, back  to the company, reached up to take a book from the shelf.
He said:
 "Are you all right?" 
 "I wish to God they'd come." 
"So do we all.
But the chopper should be here any minute now."
"How can they laugh like that?
Don't they care?"
"Of course they care.
Murder is beastly, embarrassing and inconvenient.
But I doubt whether anyone is feeling a purely personal grief.
And other people's tragedies, other people's danger, always provoke a certain euphoria as long as one is safe oneself."
He looked at Bradley and said softly:
"There's always manslaughter, you know.
Or even justified homicide.
Though, come to think of it, one could hardly plead that."
 "You think I killed him, don't you?" 
"I don't think anything.
Anyway, you've got an alibi.
Wasn't your mother-in-law with you yesterday evening?"
"Not all the evening.
She caught the seven-forty-five bus."
 "Well, with luck, there'll be evidence that he was dead by then." 
And why, thought Middlemass, should Bradley assume that he wasn't?
Bradley's dark and anxious eyes narrowed with suspicion.
 "How did you know that Sue's mother was with us last night?" 
"Susan told me.
Actually, she telephoned me at the Lab just before two.
It was about Lorrimer."
He thought and then said easily,"She was wondering whether there was a chance he might ask for a transfer now that Howarth has been in post a year.
She thought I might have heard something.
When you get home, tell her that I don't propose to tell the police about the call unless she does first.
Oh, and you'd better reassure her that I didn't bash in his head for  him.
I'd do a lot for Sue, but a man has to draw the line somewhere."
Bradley said with a note of resentment:
"Why should you worry?
There's nothing wrong with your alibi.
Weren't you at the village concert?"
"Not all the evening.
And there's a certain slight embarrassment about my alibi even when I was ostensibly there."
Bradley turned to him and said with sudden vehemence:
 "I didn't do it]Oh God, I can't stand this waiting" "You've got to stand it.
Pull yourself together, Cliff
You won't help yourself or Susan by going to pieces.
They're English policemen, remember.
We're not expecting the K.G.B."
It was then that they heard the long awaited sound, a distant grinding hum like that of an angry wasp.
The desultory voices at the tables fell silent, heads were raised and, together, the company moved towards the windows.
Mrs. Bidwell rushed for a place of vantage.
The red and white helicopter rattled into sight over the top of the trees and hovered, a noisy gadfly, above the terraces.
No one spoke.
Then Middlemass said:
"The Yard's wonder boy, appropriately, descends from the clouds.
Well, let's hope that he works quickly.
I want to get into my lab.
Someone should tell him that he's not the only one with a murder on his hands."
Detective-Inspector the Honourable John Massingham disliked helicopters, which he regarded as noisy, cramped and frighteningly unsafe.
Since his physical courage was beyond question either by himself or anyone else, he would normally have had no objection to  saying so.
But he knew his chief's dislike of unnecessary chat, and strapped as they were side by side in uncomfortably close proximity in the Enstrom F28, he decided that the Chevisham case would get off to the most propitious start by a policy of disciplined silence.
He noted with interest that the cockpit instrument panel was remarkably similar to a car dash-board; even the airspeed was shown in miles per hour instead of knots.
He was only sorry that there the resemblance ended.
He adjusted his earphones more comfortably and settled down to soothe his nerves by a concentrated study of his maps.
The red-brown tentacles of London's suburbs had at last been shaken off, and the chequered autumn landscape, multi-textured as a cloth collage, unrolled before them in a changing pattern of brown, green and gold, leading them on to Cambridge.
The fitful sunshine moved in broad swathes across the neat, segmented villages, the trim municipal parks and open fields.
Miniature tin cars, beetle-bright in the sun, pursued each other busily along the roads.
Dalgliesh glanced at his companion, at the strong, pale face.
the spatter of freckles over the craggy nose and wide forehead, and the thatch of red hair springing under the headphones, and thought how like the boy was to his father, that redoubtable, thrice-decorated peer, whole courage was equalled only by his obstinacy and naivete.
The marvel of the Massinghams was that a lineage going back five hundred years could have produced so many generations of amiable nonentities.
He remembered when he had last seen Lord Dungannon.
It had been a debate in the House of Lords on juvenile delinquency, a subject on which His Lordship considered himself an expert since he had, indubitably, once been a boy and had, briefly, helped organise a youth club on his grandfather's estate.
His thoughts, when they finally came, had been uttered in all their simplistic banality, in no particular order  of logic or relevance, and in a curiously gentle voice punctuated by long pauses in which he had gazed thoughtfully at the throne and appeared to commune happily with some inner presence.
Meanwhile, like lemmings who have smelt the sea, the noble lords streamed out of their chamber in a body to appear, as if summoned by telepathy, when Dungannon's speech drew to its close.
But if the family had contributed nothing to statesmanship and little to the arts, they bad died with spectacular gallantry for orthodox causes in every generation.
And now Dungannon s heir had chosen this far from orthodox job.
It would be interesting to see if, for the first time and in so unusual a field, the family achieved distinction.
What had led Massingham to choose the police service instead of his family's usual career of the Army as an outlet for his natural combativeness and unfashionable patriotism Dalgliesh had not enquired, partly because he was a respecter of other men's privacy, and partly because he wasn't sure that he wanted to hear the answer.
So far Massingham had done exceptionally well.
The police were a tolerant body and took the view that a man couldn't help who his father was.
They accepted that Massingham had gained his promotion on merit although they were not so naive as to suppose that being the elder son of a peer did any man harm.
They called Massingham the Honjohn behind his back and occasionally to his face, and bore no malice.
Although the family was now impoverished and the estate sold Lord Dungannon was bringing up his considerable family in a modest villa in Bayswater — the boy had still gone to his father's school.
No doubt, though the Dalgliesh, the old warrior was unaware that other schools existed; like every other class, the aristocracy, however poor, could always find the money for the things they really wanted.
But he was an odd product of that establishment, having none of the  slightly dégagé elegance and ironic detachment which characterised its alumni.
Dalgliesh, if he hadn't known his history, would have guessed that Massingham was the produce of a sound, upper-middle-class family — a doctor or a solicitor, perhaps — and of an old established grammar school.
It was only the second time they had worked together.
The first time, Dalgliesh had been impressed by Massingham's intelligence and enormous capacity for work, and by his admirable ability to keep his mouth shut and to sense when his chief wanted to be alone.
He had also been struck by a streak of ruthlessness in the boy which, he thought, ought not to have surprised him since he knew that, as with all good detectives, it must be present.
And now the Enstrom was rattling above the towers and spires of Cambridge, and they could see the shining curve of the river, the bright autumnal avenues leading down through green lawns to miniature hump-backed bridges, King's College Chapel upturned and slowly rotating beside its great striped square of green.
And, almost immediately, the city was behind them and they saw, like a crinkled ebony sea, the black earth of the fens.
Below them were straight roads ridged above the fields, with villages strung along them as if clinging to the security of high ground; isolated farms with their roofs so low that they looked half submerged in the peat; an occasional church tower standing majestically apart from its village with the gravestones planted round it like crooked teeth.
They must be getting close now; already Dalgliesh could see the soaring west tower and pinnacles of Ely Cathedral to the east.
Massingham looked up from his map-reading and peered down.
His voice cracked through Dalgliesh's earphones:
 "This is it, sir." 
Chevisham was spread beneath them.
It lay on a narrow plateau above the fens, the houses strung along  the northerly of two converging roads.
The tower of the impressive cruciform church was immediately identifiable, as was Chevisham Manor and, behind it, sprawling over the scarred field and linking the two roads, the brick and concrete of the new Laboratory building.
They rattled along the main street of what looked like a typical East Anglian village.
Dalgliesh glimpsed the ornate red-brick front of the local chapel, one or two prosperous-looking houses with Dutch gables, a small close of recently built, semi-detached boxes with the developer's board still in place, and what looked like the village general store and post office.
There were few people about, but the noise of the engines brought figures from shops and houses and pale faces, their eyes shielded, strained up at them.
And now they were turning towards Hoggatt's Laboratory, coming in low over what must be the Wren Chapel.
It stood about a quarter of a mile from the house in a triple circle of beech trees, an isolated building so small and perfect that it looked like an architect's model precisely set in a fabricated landscape, or an elegant ecclesiastical folly, justifying itself only by its classical purity, as distanced from religion as it was from life.
It was odd that it lay so far from the house.
Dalgliesh thought that it had probably been built later, perhaps because the original owner of the mansion had quarrelled with the local parson and, in defiance, had decided to make his own arrangements for spiritual ministrations.
Certainly the house hardly looked large enough to support a private chapel.
For a few seconds as they descended, he had an unimpeded view through a gap in the trees of the west front of the chapel.
He saw a single high arched window with two balancing niches, the four Corinthian pilasters separating the bays, the whole crowned with a large decorated pediment and topped with a hexagonal lantern.
The helicopter seemed almost to be brushing the trees.
The brittle autumn leaves, shaken by the rush  of air, flurried down like a shower of charred paper over the roof and the bright green of the grass.
And then, sickeningly, the helicopter soared, the chapel lurched out of sight and they were poised, engines rattling, ready to land on the wide terrace behind the house.
Over its roof he could see the forecourt patterned with parking lots, the police cars tidily aligned and what looked like a mortuary van.
A broad drive, bordered with straggling bushes and a few trees, led down to what the map showed as Stoney Piggott's Road.
There was no gate to the driveway.
Beyond it he could see the bright flag of a bus stop and the — bus shelter.
Then the helicopter began to descend and only the rear of the house was in view.
From a ground-floor window he could see the smudges of watching faces.
There was a reception committee of three, their figures oddly fore-shortened, the necks straining upwards.
The thrash of the rotor blades had tugged their hair into grotesque shapes, flurried the legs of their trousers and flattened their jackets against their chests.
Now, with the stilling of the engines, the sudden silence was so absolute that he saw the three motionless figures as if they were a tableau of dummies in a silent world.
He and Massingham unclasped their seat belts and clambered to earth.
For about five seconds the two groups stood regarding each other.
Then, with a single gesture, the three waiting figures smoothed back their hair and advanced warily to meet him.
Simultaneously his ears unblocked and the world again became audible.
He turned to thank and speak briefly to the pilot.
Then he and Massingham walked forward.
Dalgliesh already knew Superintendent Mercer of the local C.I.D.
they had met at a number of police conferences.
Even at sixty feet his ox-like shoulders, the round comedian's face with the wide upturned mouth, and the button bright eyes, had been instantly recognisable.
Dalgliesh felt his hand crushed, and then Mercer made the introductions.
Dr. Howarth; a tall  fair man, almost as tall as Dalgliesh himself, with widely spaced eyes of a remarkably deep blue and the lashes so long that they might have looked effeminate on any face less arrogantly male.
He could, Dalgliesh thought, have been judged an outstandingly handsome man were it not for a certain incongruity of feature, perhaps the contrast between the fineness of the skin stretched over the flat cheekbones and the strong jutting jaw and uncompromising mouth.
Dalgliesh would have known that he was rich.
The blue eyes regarded the world with the slightly cynical assurance of a man accustomed to getting what he wanted when he wanted it by the simplest of expedients, that of paying for it.
Beside him, Dr. Henry Kerrison, although as tall, looked diminished.
His creased, anxious face was bleached with weariness and there was a look in the dark, heavily-lidded eyes which was uncomfortably close to defeat.
He grasped Dalgliesh's hand with a firm grip but didn't speak.
Howarth said:
"There's no entrance now to the back of the house; we have to go round to the front.
This is the easiest way.
Carrying their scene-of-crime cases, Dalgliesh and Massingham followed him round the side of the house.
The faces at the ground-floor window had disappeared and it was extraordinarily quiet.
Trudging through the leaves which had drifted over the path, sniffing the keen autumnal air with its hint of smokiness, and feeling the sun on his face, Massingham felt a surge of animal well-being.
It was good to be out of London.
This promised to be the kind of job he most liked.
The little group turned the comer of the house and Dalgliesh and Massingham had their first clear view of the facade of Hoggatt's Laboratory.
The house was an excellent example of late seventeenth-century domestic architecture, a three-storey brick mansion with a hipped roof and four dormer windows, the centre three-bay projection surmounted by a pediment with a richly carved cornice and medallions.
A flight of four wide, curved stone steps led to the doorway, imposing on its pilasters but solidly, unostentatiously, right.
Dalgliesh paused momentarily to study the façade.
Howarth said:
"Agreeable, isn't it?
But wait till you see what the old man did to some of the interior."
The front door, with its elegant but restrained brass door handle and knocker, was fitted with two security locks, a Chubb and an Ingersoll, in addition to the Yale.
At a superficial glance there was no sign of forcing.
It was opened almost before Howarth had lifted his hand to ring.
The man who stood aside, unsmiling, for them to enter, although not in uniform, was immediately recognisable to Dalgliesh as a police officer.
Howarth introduced him briefly as Inspector Blakelock, Assistant Police Liaison Officer.
He added:
"All three locks were in order when Blakelock arrived this morning.
The Chubb connects the electronic warning system to Guy's Marsh police station; The internal protection system is controlled from a panel in the Police Liaison Officer's room.
Dalgliesh turned to Blakelock.
 "And that was in order?" 
 "Yes, sir." 
 "There is no other exit?" 
It was Howarth was answered.
"No.
My predecessor had the back door and one side door permanently barred.
It was too complicated coping  with a system of security locks for three doors.
Everyone comes in and goes out by the front."
 "Except possibly one person last night," thought Dalgliesh.
They passed through the entrance hall which ran almost the whole length of the house, their feet suddenly loud on the marble tessellated floor.
Dalgliesh was used to receiving impressions at a glance.
The party did not pause on their way to the stairs, but he had a clear impression of the room, the high moulded ceiling, the two elegant pedimented doors to right and left, an oil painting of the Laboratory founder on the right-hand wall, the gleaming wood of the reception counter at the rear.
A police officer with a sheaf of papers before him was using the desk telephone presumably still checking alibis.
He went on with his conversation without glancing up.
The staircase was remarkable.
The balustrades were carved oak panels decorated with scrolls of acanthus foliage, each newel surmounted by a heavy oak pineapple.
There was no carpet and the unpolished wood was heavily scarred.
Dr. Kerrison and Superintendent Mercer mounted behind Dalgliesh in silence.
Howarth, leading the way, seemed to feel the need to talk:
"The ground floor is occupied with Reception and the Exhibits Store, my office, my secretary's room, the general office and the Police Liaison Officer's room.
That's all, apart from the domestic quarters at the rear.
Chief Inspector Martin is the chief P.L.O.
but he's in the U.S.A. at the moment and we only have Blakelock on duty.
On this floor we have Biology at the back, Criminalistics at the front and the Instrument Section at the end of the corridor.
But I've put a plan of the Lab in my office for you.
I thought you might like to take that over if it's convenient.
But I haven't moved any of my things until you've examined the room.
This is the Biology Lab."
He glanced at Superintendent Mercer, who took the key from his pocket and unlocked the door.
It was a long room obviously converted from two smaller ones, possibly a sitting-room or small drawing.room.
The ceiling carvings had been removed, perhaps because Colonel Hoggatt had thought them inappropriate to a working laboratory, but the scars of the desecration remained.
The original windows had been replaced by two long windows occupying almost the whole of the end wall.
There was a range of benches and sinks under the windows, and two islands of work benches in the middle of the room, one fitted with sinks, the other with a number of microscopes.
To the left was a small glass-partitioned office, to the right a dark-room.
Beside the door was an immense refrigerator.
But the most bizarre objects in the room were a pair of unclothed window-dressers' dummies, one male and one female, standing between the windows.
They were unclothed and denuded of their wigs.
The pose of the bald egg-shaped heads, the jointed arms stiffly flexed in a parody of benediction, the staring eyes and curved arrow-like lips gave them the hieratic look of a couple of painted deities.
And at their feet, a white-clad sacrificial victim, was the body.
Howarth stared at the two dummies as if he had never seen them before.
He seemed to think that they required explanation.
For the first time he had lost some of his assurance.
He said:
"That's Liz and Burton.
The staff dress them in a suspect's clothes so that they can match up bloodstains or slashes."
He added: "Do you want me here?" 
 "For the moment, yes," answered Dalgliesh.
He knelt by the body.
Kerrison moved to stand beside him.
Howarth and Mercer stayed one each side of the door.
Alter two minutes Dalgliesh said:
"Cause of death obvious.
It looks as if he was struck  by a single blow and died where he fell.
There's surprisingly little bleeding."
Kerrison said:
"That's not unusual.
As you know, you can get serious intercranial injury from a simple fracture, particularly if there's extradural or subdural haemorrhage or actual laceration of the brain substance.
I agree that he was probably killed by a single blow and that wooden mallet on the table seems the likely weapon.
But Blain-Thomson will be able to tell you more then he gets him on the table.
He'll be doing the P.M. this afternoon."
"Rigor is almost complete.
What sort of estimate did you make of the time of death?"
"I saw him just before nine and I thought then that he'd been dead about twelve hours, perhaps a little longer.
Say between eight and nine p.m.
The window is closed and the temperature pretty steady at sixty-five Fahrenheit.
I usually estimate a fall in body temperature in these circumstances of about one-and-a-half degrees Fahrenheit an hour.
I took it when I examined the body and, taken with the rigor which was almost fully established then, I'd say it was unlikely that he was alive much after nine p.m.
But you know how unreliable these estimates can be.
Better say between eight-thirty and midnight."
Howarth said from the door:
"His father says that Lorrimer rang him at a quarter to nine.
I went to see the old man this morning with Angela Foley to break the news to him.
She's my secretary.
Lorrimer was her cousin.
But you'll be seeing the old man, of course.
He seemed pretty confident about the time."
Dalgliesh said to Kerrison:
"It looks as if the blood flowed fairly steadily, but without any preliminary splashing.
Would you expect the assailant to be bloodstained?"
"Not necessarily, particularly if I'm right about the  mallet being the weapon.
It was probably a single swinging blow delivered when Lorrimer had turned his back.
The fact that the murderer struck above the left ear doesn't seem particularly significant.
He could have been left-handed, but there's no reason to suppose he was.
"And it wouldn't have required particular force.
A child could probably have done it."
Kerrison hesitated, disconcerted.
 "Well, a woman, certainly." 
There was one question which Dalgliesh had formally to ask although, from the position of the body and the flow of the blood, the answer was in little doubt.
 "Did he die almost immediately, or is there any possibility that he could have walked about for a time, even locked the door and set the alarms?" 
"That's not altogether unknown, of course, but in this case I'd say it was highly unlikely, virtually impossible.
I did have a man only a month ago with an axe injury, a seven-inch depressed fracture of the parietal bone and extensive extradural haemorrhage.
He went off to a pub, spent half an hour with his mates, and then reported to the casualty department and was dead within a quarter of an hour.
Head injuries can be unpredictable, but not this one, I think?"
Dalgliesh turned to Howarth.
 "Who found him?" 
"Our clerical officer, Brenda Pridmore.
She starts work at eight-thirty with Blakelock.
Old Mr. Lorrimer phoned to say that his son hadn't slept in his bed, so she went tip to see if Lorrimer were here.
I arrived almost immediately with the cleaner, Mrs. Bidwell.
Some woman had telephoned her husband early this morning to ask her to come to my house to help my sister, instead of to the Lab.
It was a false call.
I thought that it was probably some stupid village prank, but that I'd better get in as soon as possible in case something odd was happening.
So I put her bicycle  in the boot of my car and got here just after nine.
My secretary, Angela Foley, and Clifford Bradley, the Higher Scientific Officer in the biology department, arrived at about the same time."
 "Who at any time has been alone with the body?" 
"Brenda Pridmore, of course, but very briefly, I imagine.
Then Inspector Blakelock came up on his own.
Then I was here alone for no more than a few seconds.
Then I locked the Laboratory door, kept all the staff in the main hall, and waited there until Dr. Kerrison arrived.
He was here within five minutes and examined the body.
I stood by the door.
Superintendent Mercer arrived shortly afterwards and I handed over the key of the Biology Lab to him."
Mercer said:
"Dr. Kerrison suggested that I call in Dr. Greene — he's the local police surgeon — to confirm his preliminary findings.
Dr. Greene wasn't alone with the body.
After he'd made a quick and fairly superficial examination I locked the door.
It wasn't opened again until the photographers and the finger-print officers arrived.
They've taken his dabs and examined the mallet, but we left it at that when we knew the Yard had been called in and you were on your way.
The print boys are still here, in the police liaison officer's room, but I let the photographers go."
Putting on his search gloves, Dalgliesh ran his hands over the body.
Under his white coat Lorrimer was wearing grey slacks and a tweed jacket.
In the inside pocket was a thin leather wallet containing six pound notes, his driving licence, a book of stamps, and two credit cards.
The right outer pocket held a pouch with his car keys and three others, two Yale and a smaller intricate key, probably to a desk-top drawer.
There were a couple of ballpoint pens clipped to the top left-hand pocket of his white coat.
In the bottom right.hand pocket was a handkerchief, his bunch of Laboratory keys and, not on the bunch, a  single heavy key which looked fairly new.
There was nothing else on the body.
He went over to study two exhibits lying on the central work bench, the mallet and a man's jacket.
The mallet was an unusual weapon, obviously hand-made.
The handle of crudely carved oak was about eighteen inches long and might, he thought, have once been part of a heavy walking stick.
The head, which he judged to weigh just over two pounds, was blackened on one side with congealed blood from which one or two coarse grey hairs sprouted like whiskers.
It was impossible to detect in the dried slough a darker hair which might have come from Lorrimer's head, or with the naked eye to distinguish his blood.
That would be a job for the Metropolitan Police Laboratory when the mallet, carefully packed and with two identifying exhibit tags instead of one, reached the Biology Department later in the day.
He said to the Superintendent:
 "No prints?" 
"None, except for old Pascoe's.
He's the owner of the mallet.
They weren't wiped away, so it looks as if this chap wore gloves.
That, thought Dalgliesh, would point to premeditation, or to the instinctive precaution of a knowledgeable expert.
But if he came prepared to kill it was odd that he had relied on seizing the first convenient weapon; unless, of course, he knew that the mallet would be ready to hand.
He bent low to study the packet.
It was the top half of a cheap mass-produced suit in a harsh shade of blue with a paler pinstripe, and with wide lapels.
The sleeve had been carefully spread out and the cuff bore a trace of what could have been blood.
It was apparent that Lorrimer had already begun the analysis.
On the bench was the electrophoresis apparatus plugged into its power pack and with two columns of six paired small circles punched in the sheet of agar gel.
Beside  it was a test-tube holder with a series of blood samples.
To the right lay a couple of buff-coloured laboratory files with biology registrations and, beside them, flat open on the bench, a quarto-sized loose-leaf notebook with a ring binding.
The left-hand page, dated the previous day, was closely covered in hieroglyphics and formulae in a thin, black, upright hand.
Although most of the scientific jottings meant little to him, Dalgliesh could see that the time at which Lorrimer had started and finished each analysis had been carefully noted.
The right-hand page was blank.
He said to Howarth:
 "Who is the Senior Biologist now that Lorrimer's dead?" 
"Claire Easterbrook.
Miss Easterbrook, but it's advisable to call her Ms."
 "Is she here?" 
"With the others in the library.
I believe she has a firm alibi for the whole of yesterday evening, but as she's a senior scientist she (bas asked to stay.
And, of course, she'll want to get back to work as soon as the staff are allowed into the laboratory.
There was a murder two nights ago in a clunch pit at Muddington — that Jacket is in exhibit and she'll want to get on with that Is well as coping with the usual heavy load."
"I'd like to see her first, please and here.
Then Mrs. Bidwell.
Is there a sheet we could use to cover him?"
Howarth said:
"I imagine there's a dust-sheet or something of the kind in the linen-cupboard.
That's on the next floor."
"I'd be grateful if you'd go with Inspector Massingham and show him.
Then if you'd wait in the library or your own office I'll be down to have a word when I've finished here.
For a second he thought that Howarth was about to demur.
He frowned, and the handsome face clouded momentarily, petulant as a child's.
But he left with Massingham without a word.
Kerrison was still standing  by the body, rigid as a guard of honour.
He gave a little start as if recalling himself to reality and said:
"If you don't want me any longer I ought to be on my way to the hospital.
You can contact me at St. Luke's at Ely or here at the Old Rectory.
I've given the sergeant an account of my movements last night.
I was at home all the evening.
At nine o'clock, by arrangement, I rang one of my colleagues at the hospital, Dr. J. D. Underwood, about a matter which is coming up at the next medical committee.
I think he's already confirmed that we did speak.
He hadn't got the information I was waiting for but he rang me back at about a quarter to ten.
There was as little reason to delay Kerrison as there was at present to suspect him.
Alter he had left, Mercer said:
"I thought of leaving two sergeants, Reynolds and Underhill, and a couple of constables, Cox and Warren, if that will suit you.
They're all sound, experienced officers.
The Chief said to ask for anyone and anything you need.
He's at a meeting in London this morning, but he'll be back tonight.
I'll send up the chaps from the mortuary van if you're ready for them to take him away."
"Yes, I've finished with him.
I'll have a word with your men as soon as I've seen Miss Easterbrook.
But ask one of the sergeants to come up in ten minutes to pack up the mallet for the Yard lab, will you?
The chopper pilot will want to get back."
They spoke a few more words about the liaison arrangements with the local force, then Mercer left to supervise the removal of the body.
He would wait to introduce Dalgliesh to his seconded officers; after that, his responsibility would end.
The case was in Dalgliesh's hands.
Two minutes later Claire Easterbrook was shown into the laboratory.
She entered with an assurance which a less experienced investigator than Dalgliesh might have mistaken for arrogance or insensitivity.
She was a thin, long-waisted girl of about thirty, with a bony, intelligent face and a cap of dark curling hair which had been layered by an obvious expert, and no doubt expensive, hand to lie in swathes across the forehead and to curl into the nape of her high-arched neck.
She was wearing a chestnut-brown sweater in fine wool belted into a black skirt which swung calf length above high-heeled boots.
Her hands, with the nails cut very short, were ringless and her only ornament was a necklace of large wooden beads strung on a silver chain.
Even without her white coat the impression she gave — and no doubt intended was of a slightly intimidating professional competence.
Before Dalgliesh had a chance to speak she said, with a trace of belligerence:
"I'm afraid you'll be wasting your time with me.
My lover and I dined last night in Cambridge at the Master's Lodge of his college.
I was with five other people from eight-thirty until nearly midnight.
I've already given their names to the constable in the library.
Dalgliesh said mildly:
"I'm sorry, Ms. Easterbrook, that I had to ask you to come up before we were able to remove Dr. Lorrimer's body.
And as it seems impertinent to invite you to sit down in your own laboratory, I won't.
But this isn't going to take long."
She flushed, as if he had caught her out in a social solecism.
Glancing with reluctant distaste at the  shrouded, lumpen shape on the floor, at the stiff protruding ankles, she said:
"He'd be more dignified if you'd left him uncovered.
Like this he could be a sack of rubbish.
It's a curious superstition, the universal instinct to cover up the recently dead.
After all, we're the ones at a disadvantage.
Massingham said lightly:
 "Not, surely, with the Master and his wife to vouch for your alibi?" 
Their eyes met, his coolly amused, hers dark with dislike.
Dalgliesh said:
"Dr. Howarth tells me you're the senior biologist now.
Could you explain to me, please, what Dr. Lorrimer was doing here last night?
Don't touch anything."
She went at once over to the table and regarded the two exhibits, the files and the scientific paraphernalia.
She said:
 "Would you open this file, please?" 
Dalgliesh's gloved hands slipped between the covers and flipped it open.
"He re-checked Clifford Bradley's result on the Pascoe case.
The mallet belongs to a sixty-four-year-old fen labourer called Pascoe whose wife has disappeared.
His story is that she's walked out on him, but there are one or two suspicious circumstances.
The police sent in the mallet to see if the stains on it are human blood.
They aren't.
Pascoe says that he used it to put an injured dog out of his misery.
Bradley found that the blood reacted to anti-dog serum and Dr. Lorrimer has duplicated his result.
So the dog it was that died."
Too mean to waste a bullet or send for a vet, thought Massingham savagely.
It struck him as odd that the death of this unknown mongrel should, for a moment, anger him more than the killing of Lorrimer.
Miss Easterbrook moved over to the open notebook.
The two men waited.
Then she frowned and said, obviously puzzled:
"That's odd.
Edwin always noted the time he began and finished an analysis and the procedure he adopted.
He's initialled Bradley's result on the Pascoe file, but there's nothing in the book.
And it's obvious that he's made a start with the clunch pit murder; but that isn't noted either.
The last reference is five-forty-five and the final note is unfinished.
Someone must have torn out the right hand page."
 "Why do you suppose anyone should do that?" 
She looked straight into Dalgliesh's eyes and said calmly:
"To destroy the evidence of what he'd been doing, or the result of his analysis, or the time he'd spent on it.
The first and second would be rather pointless.
It's obvious from the apparatus what he's been doing, and any competent biologist could duplicate the work.
So it's probably the last."
So the appearance of intelligence wasn't misleading.
Dalgliesh asked:
 "How long would he take checking the Pascoe result?" 
"Not long.
Actually, he'd started on that before six and I think he'd finished when I left at six-fifteen.
I was the last to leave.
The junior staff had gone.
It isn't usual for them to work after six.
I usually stay later, but I had to dress for the dinner party.
 "And the work he's done on the clunch pit case — how long would that have taken?" 
"Difficult to say.
I should have thought it would have kept him busy until nine or later.
He was grouping a sample of the victim's blood and the blood from the dried stain by the ABO blood group system, and using electrophoresis to identify the haptoglobins and PGM, the enzyme phosphoglucomutase.
Electrophoresis is a technique for identifying the protein and enzyme constituents of the blood by placing the  samples in a gel of starch or agar and applying an electric current.
As you can see, he'd actually started the run."
Dalgliesh was aware of the scientific principle of electrophoresis but didn't think it necessary to mention the fact.
He opened the clunch pit file, and said:
 "There's nothing on the file." 
"He would write up the result on the file later.
But he wouldn't have started the analysis without noting the details in his book."
There were two pedal-bins against the wall.
Massingham opened them.
One, plastic-lined, was obviously for laboratory waste and broken glass.
The other was for waste paper.
He stirred the contents: paper tissues, a few torn envelopes, a discarded newspaper.
There was nothing which resembled the missing page.
Dalgliesh said:
 "Tell me about Lorrimer." 
 "What do you want to know?" 
 "Anything which could throw light on why someone disliked him enough to smash in his skull." 
"I can't help you there, I'm afraid.
I've no idea."
 "You liked him?" 
"Not particularly.
It's not a question I've given much thought to.
I got on all right with him.
He was a perfectionist who didn't suffer fools gladly.
But he was all right to work with if you knew your job.
I do."
"So he wouldn't need to check your work.
What about those who don't know their jobs?"
 "You'd better ask them, Commander." 
 "Was he popular with his staff?" 
"What has popularity to do with it?
I don't suppose I'm popular, but I don't go in fear of my life."
She was silent for a moment, then said in a more conciliator"tone:
"I probably sound obstructive.
I don't mean to be.
It's just that I can't help.
I've no idea who could have killed him or why.
I only know that I didn't."
 "Had you noticed any change in him recently?" 
"Change?
You mean, in his mood or behaviour?
Not really.
He gave the impression of a man under strain; but then, he was that kind of man, solitary, obsessional, overworked.
One rather odd thing.
He's been interesting himself in the new C.O., Brenda Pridmore.
She's a pretty child, but hardly his intellectual level, I should have thought.
I don't think there was anything serious, but it caused a certain amount of amusement in the Lab.
I think he was probably trying to prove something to someone, or, perhaps, to himself."
 "You've heard about the telephone call to Mrs. Bidwell, of course?" 
"I imagined the whole lab knows.
It wasn't I who rang her, if that's what you're thinking.
In any case, I should have known that it wouldn't work."
 "How do you mean, it wouldn't work?" 
"It depended, surely, on old Lorrimer not being at home yesterday.
After all, the caller couldn't rely on his not noticing that Edwin hadn't come home last night until he didn't get his early tea brought to him.
As it happens, he went off to bed quite happily.
But the hoaxer couldn't have known that.
Normally, Edwin would have been missed much earlier."
 "Was there any reason to suppose that old Mr. Lorrimer wouldn't be at the cottage yesterday?" 
"He was supposed to be admitted to Addenbrooke's hospital in the afternoon for treatment of a skin complaint.
I think the whole Biology Lab knew.
He used to telephone often enough, fretting about the arrangements and whether Edwin would get time off to drive him there.
Yesterday, just after ten, he rang to say that the bed wouldn't be available for him after all.
 "Who took the call?" 
"I did.
It rang in his private office and I took it  there.
Edwin hadn't returned from the clunch pit autopsy.
I told him as soon as he arrived."
 "Who else did you tell?" 
"When I came out of the office I think I said something casually about old Mr. Lorrimer not having to go into hospital after all.
I'm not sure of the actual words.
I don't think anyone made a comment or took much apparent notice."
Suddenly she lost her composure.
She flushed and hesitated, as if realizing for the first time where all this was leading.
The two men waited.
Then, angry with herself, she burst out, clumsily defensive:
"I'm sorry, but I can't remember.
You'll have to ask them.
It didn't seem important at the time and I was busy.
We were all busy.
I think everyone was there, but I can't be certain."
 "Thank you." 
said Dalgliesh coolly.
 "You've been remarkably helpful." 
Mrs. Bidwell arrived at the door as the two attendants from the mortuary van were carrying out the body.
She seemed to regret its disappearance and looked at the chalk outline marked by Massingham on the floor as if this were a poor substitute for the real thing.
Gazing after the covered metal container, she said:
"Poor devil]I never thought to see him carried out of his lab feet first.
He were never popular, you know.
Still, I don't suppose that's worrying him where he is now.
Is that one of my dust-sheets you've had over him?"
She peered suspiciously at the sheet, now folded neatly at the end of one of the benches.
 "It came from the laboratory linen-cupboard, yes." 
"Well, as long as it's put back where you found it.
Come to that, it had better go straight into the soiled  linen.
But I don't want any of your chaps taking it away.
Laundry disappears fast enough as it is."
 "Why wasn't he popular, Mrs. Bidwell?" 
"Too particular by half.
Mind you, you've got to be these days if you want to get any work done.
But from what I hear he was too fussy for his own good.
And he'd been getting worse, no doubt about that.
And very odd he'd been lately, too.
Nervy.
You heard about the unpleasantness in the reception hall the day before yesterday, I suppose?
Oh well, you will.
Ask Inspector Blakelock. just before lunch it was.
Dr. Lorrimer had a real old tussle with that barmy daughter of Dr. Kerrison's.
Nearly pushed her out of the door.
Screeching like a banshee, she was.
I came into the hall just in time to see it.
Her dad isn't going to like that, I said to Inspector Blakelock.
He's crazy about those kids.
Mark my words, I said, if Dr. Lorrimer doesn't take a hold of himself there'll be murder done in this Lab.
I said the same to Mr. Middlemass."
"I want you to tell me about the telephone call this morning, Mrs. Bidwell.
What time was it?"
"It was near enough seven o'clock.
We was eating breakfast and I just filled the teapot for second cups.
Had the kettle in me hand when it rang."
 "And who answered it?" 
"Bidwell.
Phone's in the hall and he got up and went out to it.
Cursin "he was" cos he'd just settled down to his kipper.
He hates cold kipper, does Bidwell.
We always has kippers on Thursday on account of Marshall's fish van coming from Ely Wednesday afternoons.
 "Does your husband usually answer the phone?" 
"He always answers the phone.
And if he's not in I lets it ring.
I can't abide the dratted things.
Never could.
Wouldn't have it in the house if our Shirley hadn't paid to get it put in.
She's married now and lives Mildenhall way and she likes to think we can ring her if we want her.
Fat lot of use that is.
I can't  never hear what anyone says.
And the ring is enough to put the fear of God in a soul.
Telegrams and phone rings.
I hate 'em both."
 "Who at the Lab would know that your husband always answered the phone?" 
"Best part of them, more than likely.
They knows I won't touch the thing.
There's no secret about that.
We're all as the good Lord made us and some of us a sight worse.
Nothing to be ashamed of."
"Of course not.
Your husband's at work now, I expect?"
"That's right.
Yeoman's Farm, Captain Massey's place.
Tractor work mostly.
Been there twenty years, near enough."
Dalgliesh nodded almost imperceptibly to Massingham and the Inspector slipped out to have a quiet word with Sergeant Underhill.
It would be as well to check with Mr. Bidwell while his memory of the call was fresh.
Dalgliesh went on:
 "What happened then?" 
"Bidwell came back.
Said that I wasn't to go to the Lab this morning because Mrs. Schofield wanted me over at Leamings particular.
I was to bike there and she'd run me and the bike home afterwards.
Sticking out of the back of that red Jaguar she's got I suppose.
I thought it was a bit of a cheek seeing as I'm due here mornings but I've nothing against Mrs. Schofield and if she wanted me I wasn't above obliging.
The Lab would just have to wait, I said to Bidwell.
I can't be in two places at once, I said.
What don't get done today will get done tomorrow.
 "You work here every morning?" 
"Except weekends.
Gets here as near eight-thirty as makes no odds, and works till about ten.
Then back at twelve in case any of the gentlemen wants their lunch cooking.
The girls mostly manage for themselves.
Afterwards I washes up for them.
I reckons to get away by two-thirty most days.
Mind you, it's light  work.
Scobie — he's the Lab attendant — and I sees to the working labs but all the heavy cleaning is supposed to be done by the contractors.
They comes on Mondays and Fridays only, from seven until nine, a whole van full of them from Ely, and does the main hall, the stairs and all the heavy polishing.
Inspector Blakelock gets here early those mornings to let them in and Scobie keeps an eye on them.
Not that you'd know they'd been most days.
No personal interest, you see.
Not like the old days when me and two women from the village did the lot.
"So what would you normally have done as soon as you arrived if this had been an ordinary Thursday?
I want you to think carefully, Mrs. Bidwell.
This may be very important.
"No need to think.
I'd do the same as I does every"
 "Which is?" 
"Take off me hat and coat in the downstairs cloakroom.
Put on me overalls.
Get cleaning bucket and powder and disinfectant from the broom cupboard.
Clean the toilets, male and female.
Then check dirty laundry and get it bagged up.
Put out clean white coats where wanted.
Then dust and tidy Director's office and general office."
 "Right," said Dalgliesh.
 "Let's do the rounds then, shall we?" 
Three minutes later a curious little procession made its way up the stairs.
Mrs. Bidwell, clad now in a navy-blue working overall and carrying a plastic bucket in one hand and a mop in the other, led the way.
Dalgliesh and Massingham followed.
The two lavatories were on the second floor at the rear opposite the Document Examination Laboratory.
They had obviously been converted from what had once been an elegant bedroom.
But now a narrow passage leading to the single barred window had been constructed down the middle of the room.
A mean-looking door gave entry  to the women's cloakroom on the left, and, a few yards down, a similar door led to the men's washroom on the right.
Mrs. Bidwell led the way into the left-hand room.
It was larger than Dalgliesh had expected, but poorly lit from a single round window with pivoting opaque glass set about four feet from the floor.
The win ow was open.
There were three lavatory cubicles.
The outer room contained two wash-hand basins with a paper towel dispenser and, to the left of the door, a long Formica-covered counter with a glass above it which apparently served as a dressing-table.
To the right was a wall-mounted gas-fired incinerator, a row of clothes-hooks, a large wicker laundry-basket and two rather battered cane chairs.
Dalgliesh said to Mrs. Bidwell:
 "Is this how you would expect to find it?" 
Mrs. Bidwell's sharp little eyes peered round.
The doors to the three lavatories were open and she gave them a quick inspection.
"No better nor no worse.
They're pretty good about the toilets, I'll say that for them."
 "And that window is usually kept open?" 
"Winter and summer, except it's bitter cold.
That's the only ventilation you see.
"The incinerator is off.
Is that usual?"
"That's right.
Last girl to leave turns it off at night, then I puts it on next morning.
Dalgliesh looked inside.
The incinerator was empty except for a trace of carbon ash.
He went over to the window.
Rain had obviously driven in some time during the night and the dried splashes were clearly visible on the tiled floor.
But even the inside pane, where no rain could have splashed, was remarkably clean and there was no discernible dust around the sill.
He said:
 "Did you clean the window yesterday, Mrs. Bidwell?" 
"Of course I did.
It's like I told you.
I cleans the  lavatories every morning.
And when I cleans, I cleans.
Shall I get on with it now?"
"I'm afraid there'll be no cleaning done today.
We'll pretend you've finished in here.
Now what happens?
What about the laundry?"
The laundry-basket contained only one overall, marked with the initials C.M.E. Mrs. Bidwell said:
"I wouldn't expect many dirty coats, not on a Thursday.
They usually manages to make them last a week and drop them in here on Friday before they go home.
Monday's the busy day for laundry and putting out the new coats.
Looks as though Miss Easterbrook spilt her tea yesterday.
That's not like her.
But she's particular is Miss Easterbrook.
You wouldn't find her going round with a dirty coat, no matter what day of the week."
So there was at least one member of the Biology Department, thought Dalgliesh, who knew that Mrs. Bidwell would make an early visit to the lab to put out a clean white coat.
It would be interesting to learn who had been present when the fastidious Miss Easterbrook had had her accident with the tea.
The male washroom, apart from the urinal stalls, differed very little from the women's.
There was the same round open window, the same absence of any marks on the panes or sill.
Dalgliesh carried over one of the chairs and, carefully avoiding any contact with the window or the sill, looked out.
There was a drop of about six feet to the top of the window beneath, and an equal drop to that on the first floor.
Below them both a paved terrace ran right up to the wall.
The absence of soft earth, the rain in the night and Mrs. Bidwell's efficient cleaning meant that they would be lucky to find any evidence of a climb.
But a reasonably slim and sure-footed man or woman with enough nerve and a head for heights could certainly have got out this way.
But if the murderer were a member of the Lab staff, why should he risk his neck  when he must have known that the keys were on Lorrimer?
And if the murderer were an outsider, then how account for the locked front door, the intact alarm system, and the fact that Lorrimer must have let him in?
He turned his attention to the wash-basins.
None was particularly dirty, but near the rim of the one nearest the door there was a smear of porridge-like mucus.
He bent his head over the basin and sniffed.
His sense of smell was extremely acute and, from the plug-hole, he detected the faint but unmistakably disagreeable smell of human vomit.
Mrs. Bidwell, meanwhile, had thrown open the lid of the laundry-basket.
She gave an exclamation.
"That's funny.
It's empty."
Dalgliesh and Massingham turned.
Dalgliesh asked: "What were you expecting to find, Mrs. Bidwell?" 
 "Mr. Middlemass's white coat, that's what." 
She darted out of the room.
Dalgliesh and Massingham followed.
She flung open the door of the Document Examination room and glanced inside.
Then she closed the door again and stood with her back against it.
She said:
"It's gone It's not hanging on the peg.
So where is it?
Where's Mr. Middlemass's white coat?"
Dalgliesh asked:
 "Why did you expect to find it in the laundry-basket?" 
Mrs. Bidwell's black eyes grew immense.
She slewed her eyes furtively from side to side and then said with awed relish:
"Because it had blood on it, that's why.
Lorrimer's blood"
Lastly they went down the main staircase to the Director s office.
From the library there was a broken murmur of voices, subdued and spasmodic as a funeral gathering.
A detective-constable was standing at the front door with the detached watchfulness of a man paid to endure boredom but ready to leap into action should, unaccountably, the boredom end.
Howarth had left his office unlocked and the key in the door.
Dalgliesh was interested that the Director had chosen to wait with the rest of the staff in the library, and wondered whether this was intended to demonstrate solidarity with his colleagues, or was, tactful admission that his office was one of the rooms which had been due to receive Mrs. Bidwell's early morning attention, and must, therefore, be of special interest to Dalgliesh.
But that reasoning was surely too subtle.
It was difficult to believe that Howarth hadn't entered his room since the discovery of the body.
If there were anything to remove, he best of all must have had the chance to do it.
Dalgliesh had expected the room to be impressive, but it still surprised him.
The plasterwork of the coved ceiling was splendid, a joyous riot of wreaths, shells, ribbons and trailing vines, ornate and yet disciplined.
The fireplace was of white and mottled marble with a finely carved frieze of nymphs and piping shepherds and a classical overmantel with open pediment.
He guessed that the agreeably proportioned salon, too small to be partitioned and not large enough for a working laboratory, had escaped the fate of so much of the house more for administrative and scientific convenience than from any sensitivity on Colonel Hoggatt's part to its innate perfection.
It was  newly furnished in a style guaranteed not to offend, a nice compromise of bureaucratic orthodoxy and modern functionalism.
There was a large glass-fronted bookcase to the left of the fireplace, and a personal locker and a coat-stand to the right.
A rectangular conference table and four chairs, of a type provided for senior public servants, stood between the tall windows.
Next to it was a steel security cupboard fitted with a combination lock.
Howarth's desk, a plain contraption in the same wood as the conference-table, faced the door.
Apart from an inkstained blotter and a penstand it held a small wooden bookshelf containing the Shorter Oxford Dictionary, a dictionary of quotations, Roget's Thesaurus and Fowler's Modern English Usage.
The choice seemed curious for a scientist.
There were three metal trays marked "In,"  "Pending" and "Out" .
The "Out" tray held two manila files, the top labelled "Chapel — Proposals for transfer to Department of the Environment, and the second, a large, old and unwieldy file which had been much mended, was marked" New Laboratory — Commissioning".
Dalgliesh was struck by the emptiness and impersonality of the whole room.
It had obviously been recently decorated for Howarth's arrival, and the pale grey-green carpet, with its matching square under the desk, was as yet unmarked, the curtains hung in pristine folds of dark green.
There was only one picture, positioned in the overmantel, but this was an original, an early Stanley Spencer showing the Virgin's Assumption.
Plump, foreshortened varicosed thighs in red bloomers floated upwards from a circle of clutching work-worn hands to a reception committee of gaping cherubim.
It was, he thought, an eccentric choice for the room, discordant both in date and style.
It was the only object, apart from the books, which reflected a personal taste; Dalgliesh hardly supposed that it had been provided by a Government agency.
Otherwise the office had the underfurnished, expectant  atmosphere of a room refurbished to receive an unknown occupant, and still awaiting the imprint of his taste arid personality.
It was hard to believe that Howarth had worked here for almost a year.
Mrs. Bidwell, her tight little mouth pursed and eyes narrowed, regarded it with obvious disapproval.
Dalgliesh asked:
 "Is this how you would have expected to find it?" 
"That's right.
Every bloody morning.
Nothing for me to do here really is there?
Mind you, I dusts and polishes around and runs the Hoover over the carpet.
But he's neat and tidy there's no denying it.
Not like old Dr. Macintyre.
Oh, he was a lovely man!
But messy!
You should have seen his desk of a morning.
And smoke!
You couldn't hardly see across the room sometimes.
He had this lovely skull on his desk to keep his pipes in.
They dug it up when they was making the trench for the pipes to the new vehicle examination extension.
Been in the ground more than two hundred years, Dr. Mac said, and he showed me the crack — just like a cracked cup — where his skull had been bashed in.
That's one murder they never solved.
I miss that skull.
Real lovely that used to look.
And he had all these pictures of himself and his friends at university with oars crossed above them, and a coloured one of the Highlands with hairy cattle paddling in a lake, and one of his father with his dogs, and such a lovely picture of his wife — dead she was, poor soul — and another big picture of Venice with gondolas and a lot of foreigners in fancy dress, and a cartoon of Dr. Mac done by one of his friends, showing the friend lying dead, and Dr. Mac in his deerstalker hat looking for clues with his magnifying glass.
That was a real laugh that was.
Oh, I loved Dr. Mac's pictures"She looked at the Spencer with a marked lack of enthusiasm.
 "And there's nothing unusual about the room this morning?" 
"I told you, same as usual.
Well, look for yourself."
Clean as a new pin.
It looks different in the day, mind you, when he's working here.
But he always leaves it as if he isn't expecting to come back in the morning."
"There was nothing else to be learned from Mrs. Bidwell.
Dalgliesh thanked her and told her that she could go home as soon as she had checked with Detective-Sergeant Reynolds in the library that he had all the necessary information about where she had spent the previous evening.
He explained this with his usual tact, but tact was wasted on Mrs. Bidwell.
She said cheerfully and without rancour:
"No use trying to pin this on me, or Bidwell come to that.
We was together at the village concert.
Sat five rows back between Joe Machin he's the sexton and Willie Barnes he's the rector's warden, and we stayed there until the end of the show.
No sneaking out at half time like some I could mention."
 "Who sneaked out, Mrs. Bidwell?" 
"Ask him yourself.
Sat at the end of the row in front of us, a gentleman whose office we might or might not be standing in at this very moment.
Do you want to talk to him?
Shall I ask him to step in?"
She spoke hopefully and looked towards the door like an eager gun dog, ears pricked for the command to retrieve.
"We'll see to that, thank you, Mrs. Bidwell.
And if we want to talk to you again we'll get in touch.
You've been very helpful."
"I thought I might make coffee for them all before I go.
No harm in that, I suppose?"
There was no point in warning her not to talk to the Lab staff, or, come to that, the whole village.
Dalgliesh had no doubt that his search of the cloakrooms and the missing bloodstained coat would soon be common knowledge.
But no great harm would be done.
The murderer must know that the police would be immediately alive to the possible significance of that false early morning call to Mrs. Bidwell.
He was dealing with intelligent men and women, experienced, even if vicariously, in criminal investigation, knowledgeable about police procedure, aware of the rules which governed his every move.
He had no doubt that, mentally, most of the group now waiting in the library to be interviewed were following his actions almost to the minute.
And among them, or known to them, was a murderer.
Superintendent Mercer had selected his two sergeants with an eye to contrast or, perhaps, with a view to satisfying any prejudices which Dalgliesh might harbour about the age and experience of his subordinates.
Sergeant Reynolds was near the end of his service, a stolid, broad-shouldered, slow-speaking officer of the old school and a native of the fens.
Sergeant Underhill, recently promoted, looked young enough to be his son.
His boyish, open face with its look of disciplined idealism was vaguely familiar to Massingham, who suspected that he might have seen it in a police recruitment pamphlet, but decided in the interest of harmonious co-operation to give Underhill the benefit of the doubt.
The four police officers were sitting at the conference table in the Director's office.
Dalgliesh was briefing his team before he started on the preliminary interviews.
He was, as always, restlessly aware of time passing.
It was already after eleven and he was anxious to finish at the Laboratory and see old Mr. Lorrimer.
The physical clues to his son's murder might lie in the Laboratory; the clue to the man himself lay elsewhere.
But neither his words nor his tone betrayed impatience.
 "We start by assuming that the telephone call to Mrs. Bidwell and Lorrimer's death are connected." 
That means the call was made by the murderer or an accomplice.
We'll keep an open mind about the caller's sex until we get confirmation from Bidwell, but it was probably a woman, probably also someone who knew that old Mr. Lorrimer was expected to be in hospital yesterday, and who didn't know that the appointment had been cancelled.
If the old man had been home.
the ruse could hardly hope to succeed.
As Miss Easterbrook has pointed out, no-one could rely on his going early to bed last night and not realising until after the Lab opened this morning that his son hadn't come home.
Massingham said:
"The killer would have made it his business to get here early this morning, assuming that he didn't know that his plan had misfired.
And assuming, of course, the call wasn't a double bluff.
It would be a neat ploy, wasting our time, confusing the investigation and diverting suspicion from everyone except the early arrivals."
 "But for one of the suspects, it could have been an even neater ploy," thought Dalgliesh.
It had been Mrs. Bidwell's arrival at Howarth's house in obedience to the call which had given the Director himself the excuse for arriving so early.
He wondered what time Howarth usually put in an appearance.
That would be one of the questions to be asked.
He said:
"We'll start by assuming that it wasn't a bluff, that the murderer, or his accomplice, made the call to delay Mrs. Bidwell's arrival and the discovery of the body.
So what was he hoping to do?
Plant evidence or destroy it?
Tidy up something which he'd overlooked; wipe the mallet clean; clear up the evidence of whatever it was he was doing here last night; replace the keys on the body?
But Blakelock had the best opportunity to do that, and he wouldn't need to have taken them in the first place.
The call would have given someone the chance to replace the spare set  in the security cupboard here.
But that would be perfectly possible without delaying Mrs. Bidwell's arrival.
And, of course, it may have been done.
Underhill said:
"But is it really likely, sir, that the call was intended to delay the finding of the body and to give the killer time to replace the keys? admittedly Mrs. Bidwell could be expected to be first in the Biology Department this morning when she put out the clean coats.
But the murderer couldn't rely on that.
Inspector Blakelock or Brend Pridmore could easily have had occasion to go there.
Dalgliesh thought it a risk that the murderer might well have thought worth taking.
In his experience the early-morning routine in an institution seldom varied.
Unless Blakelock had the early-morning job of checking on Lab security — and this was yet another of the questions to be asked — he and Brenda Pridmore would probably have got on with their normal work at the reception desk.
In the ordinary course of event.
Mrs. Bidwell would have been the one to find the body.
Any member of stab who went into the Biology Lab before her would have needed a good excuse to explain his presence there, unless, of course, he was a member of the Biology Department.
Massingham said:
"It's odd about the missing white coat, sir.
It can hardly have been removed or destroyed to prevent us learning about the fight between Middlemass and Lorrimer.
That unedifying but intriguing little episode must have been round the Lab within minutes of its happening.
Mrs. Bidwell would see to that."
Both Dalgliesh and Massingham wondered how far Mrs. Bidwell's description of the quarrel given with the maximum dramatic effect, had been accurate.
It was obvious that she had come into the laboratory after the blow had been struck, and had in fact seen very little.
Dalgliesh had recognised, with foreboding, a familiar phenomenon: the desire of a witness, aware of the paucity of her evidence, to make the most of it lest the police be disappointed, while remaining as far as possible within the confines of truth.
Stripped of Mrs. Bidwell's embellishments, the core of hard fact had been disappointingly small.
"What they was quarrelling about I couldn't take it on myself to say, except that it was about a lady, and that Dr. Lorrimer was upset because she'd telephoned Mr. Middlemass.
The door was open and I did hear that much when I passed to go in to the ladies' toilet.
I daresay she rang him to arrange a date and Dr. Lorrimer didn't like it.
I never saw a man more white.
Like death he looked, with a handkerchief held up against his face all bloodied, and his black eyes glaring over the top of it.
And Mr. Middlemass was turkey red.
Embarrassed, I daresay.
Well, it's not what we're used to at Hoggatt's, senior staff knocking each other about.
When proper gentlemen start in with the fists there's usually a woman at the bottom of it.
Same with this murder if you ask me."
Dalgliesh said:
"We'll be getting Middlemass's version of the affair.
I'd like now to have a word with all the Lab staff in the library and then Inspector Massingham and I will start the preliminary interviews: Howarth, the two women, Angela Foley and Brenda Pridmore, Blakelock, Middlemass and any of the others without a firm alibi.
I'd like you, Sergeant, to get on with organising the usual routine.
I shall want one of the senior staff in each department while the search is going on.
They're the only ones who can tell whether anything in their lab has changed since yesterday.
You'll be looking — admittedly without much hope — for the missing page of Lorrimer's notebook, any evidence of what he was doing here last night apart from working on the clunch pit murder, any sign of what happened to the missing coat.
I want a thorough search of the  whole building, particularly possible means of access and exit.
The rain last night is a nuisance.
You'll probably find the walls washed clean, but there may be some evidence that he got out through one of the lavatory windows.
"You'll need a couple of men on the grounds.
The earth is fairly soft after the rain and if the murderer came by car or motorcycle there could be tyre-marks.
Any-we find can be checked against the tyre index here; we needn't waste time going to the Met Lab for that.
There's a bus-stop immediately opposite the laboratory entrance.
Find out what time the buses pass.
There's always the possibility that one of the passengers or crew noticed something.
I'd like the Laboratory building checked first, and as quickly as possible so that the staff can get back to work.
They've a new murder on their hands and we can't keep the place closed longer than is absolutely necessary.
I'd like to give them access by tomorrow morning.
"Then there's the smear of what looks like vomit on the first basin in the men's washroom.
The smell from the pipe is still fairly distinct.
I want a sample of that to go to the Met Lab urgently.
You'll probably have to unscrew the joint to get at the basin of the U-bend.
We shall need to find out who used the room last yesterday evening and whether he noticed the smear on the basin.
If no-one admits to having been sick during the day, or can't produce a witness that he was, we shall want to know what they all ate for the evening meal.
It could be Lorrimer's vomit, so we'll need some information on his stomach contents.
I'd also like a sample of his blood and hair to be left here at the Lab.
But Dr. Blain-Thomson will be seeing to that."
Reynolds said:
 "We take it that the crucial time is from six-fifteen when he was last seen alive in his lab, until midnight?" 
"For the present.
When I've seen his father and confirmed that he made that call at eight-forty-five we  may be able to narrow it down.
And we shall get a clearer idea of the time of death when Dr. Blain-Thomson has done the P.M. But judging from the state of rigor, Dr. Kerrison wasn't far out.
But Kerrison didn't need to be far out, if he were the murderer.
Rigor mortis was notoriously unreliable, and if he wanted an alibi for himself, Kerrison could shift the time of death by up to an hour without suspicion.
If the timing were tight he might not need even an hour.
It had been prudent of him to call in the police surgeon to confirm his estimate of the time of death.
But how likely was Dr. Greene, experienced as he might be in viewing bodies, to disagree with the opinion of a consultant forensic pathologist unless the latter's judgment was manifestly perverse?
If Kerrison were guilty, he had run little risk by calling in Greene.
Dalgliesh got to his feet.
 "Right," he said.
 "Let's get on with it, shall we?" 