

Power, Politics and the British Constitution
Everyone knows that the British constitution provides for a system of representative and responsible government.
A. H. Birch (1964) Representative and Responsible Government, London, George Allen and Unwin, p.13.
How is the country governed?
By the government is the first answer that you will be likely to give, and in a way the answer is right.
But who governs the government?
The answer is that Parliament does.
But last of all, who governs Parliament?
And the answer to that is that the People of this Country govern Parliament.
And so you will see that the real answer to the question "Who governs the country" is that"The Country Governs itself.
H. O. Arnold-Forster (1900) The Citizen Reader, London, Cassell, p. 35.
WHY STUDY THE CONSTITUTION?
What is the British Constitution; what is constitutional theory; and why should a book about the location and exercise of power in Britain spend time dealing with these matters?
There are three main reasons for our interest in the constitution.
1 The established constitution and the rules that are part of it are an aspect of the constraining context that operates on everyday politics.
The constitution helps to shape politics and also regulates public access to, and the behaviour of, the various institutions of the state (such as the Cabinet, the House of Commons, the civil service, the military, the judiciary, and the police) that in their different ways have the right to exercise public power, if necessary through the use of physical force, within the United Kingdom.
For example, a general election for the House of Commons must be held at least every 5 years but only certain people have access to the vote and not all votes for different parties are of equal power in the absence of proportional representation making for a close correspondence between votes cast and seats won; the House of Lords (once a very powerful state institution) can now only delay bills passed by the House of Commons; the Prime Minister "must" come from the Commons; and it is "expected" that a government will resign and call a  general election if it is defeated in a vote of confidence on the floor of the House of Commons.
2 The constitution is actually in politics.
No constitution is ever safe above the rough and tumble of political life.
It is often the focal point for fundamental conflicts.
It is, therefore, subject to change at moments of political crisis as particular interests scramble to shape the constitution and the rules of the political game to their own advantage.
In this chapter we shall identify two periods of decisive constitutional change since the eighteenth century, and in Chapter 4 we will deal with the substantial pressures for change with respect to the contemporary constitution.
3 Constitutional theory is about politics and aims to identify the location of state power.
Moreover, the established theory always sits in a position of political and intellectual prominence as the mainstream perspective supposedly making sense of British politics as a whole.
In setting down and discussing that theory we are, therefore, dealing with the "official" view of British politics — with the view that dominates public discussion and the accounts in the media.
Constitutional theory, in explaining how the various institutions of the state work together and in offering a particular theory of representation connecting state to society, seeks to provide us with answers to large and profound questions about who governs and how; about who should govern and how; and about the respective rights of people and the privileges of property in British politics.
So, let no one tell you that the study of the British constitution and constitutional theory is a boring irrelevance.
The issue is not whether we should study the constitution, but the problem is one of deciding just what is the constitution and determining how best to study it.
WHAT IS THE CONSTITUTION
The British constitution is not written down in a single legal document which enjoys a special political status above ordinary law.
This does not mean that the constitution does not exist.
Moreover, there are laws of constitutional significance, such as the various acts regulating the franchise and granting the vote, and the Parliament Act, 1949 which limits the capacity of the House of Lords to delay bills passed by the Commons to just 1 year.
But much is vague and outside of the law.
In this state of affairs, to answer the question, "What is the British constitution?" is to say a number of rather different things.
1 In the most basic sense, we can simply say that the British Constitution is the "set-up" as it is.
It embraces the various institutions that make up that the state — the House of Commons, the Cabinet, the civil service and so on— as well as the fundamental practices and rules that  identify which institutions have power and how they relate to each other and to the larger political community.
The trouble with this formulation is that it does not suggest how we can be sure as to just what is the constitutional set-up, and this is a particular problem once we recognise that the power of particular institutions is subject to change and that there are disputes as to what are (and should be) the fundamental practices and rules.
In some ways, however, these disputes have been contained because certain scholars have written books on the constitution that have endured to be widely regarded as so authoritative that they define the parameters of acceptable constitutional debate and almost the very constitution itself.
2 So, we can suggest that the British constitution is what the experts say it is.
In a country without a written constitution, the work of Bagehot, Dicey, and Jennings, has actually been the written codification of the customs, conventions, precedents, and traditions that have never been simply set down in single, legal document.
3 But it also makes sense to say that the British constitution is what the authorities say it should be because their views on these matters help to police everyday political practice, pulling it into line with the constitutional theory which they themselves advance as the proper way to conduct politics.
Britain does not have a supreme constitutional court to pass judgement on what is "unconstitutional" and it is left to the constitutional authorities to do their best to enforce particular patterns of constitutional political behaviour.
Now, the constitution as it "really" is, as it is said to be, and as it is said it should be, only really line up in times of political (and therefore constitutional) stability when there is agreement on clear and simple constitutional fundamentals.
In times of political crisis and upheaval, political and governmental practice (what "really" happens) and established constitutional theory (what the authorities say should happen) are likely to be out of step and there are severe limits as to what the constitutional theorists can do to shape behaviour.
With political change, the established constitutional authorities find themselves in a situation where they are forced to come to terms with new and emerging patterns of political power and practice that are outside (but pressing in on) the established constitution that is supposedly made sense of through their theories.
Politics is fluid.
It is ill-contained within established structures and processes.
Rude power is out of mesh with the prevailing patterns of legitimate constitutional authority.
Established constitutional theory is tired.
There will be disputes as to what should be the constitution.
There is even likely to be doubt as to just what is the constitution.
If the established set-up survives the pressures for change then the established constitutional theory will be of use as a rough guide to political and governmental practice, but if that set-up "breaks" then the established theories will be left beached.
New constitutional theories will  rapidly come to assume centre stage.
In these moments of fundamental change political practice makes all the constitutional running.
Established theory is swept aside: it is of little importance in shaping governmental behaviour, still less in enabling us to understand it.
The fact of change ( "flexibility" ), uncertainty, and complexity, means that there is no simple answer as to what is the British Constitution.
We have to attend to the dynamic tension between constitutional theory and political practice, and to change over time.
This has a direct bearing on how we should study the constitution.
HOW TO STUDY THE CONSTITUTION
We have highlighted the importance of recognising that the Constitution is subject to change in response to political conflicts, and so we have pointed to the need to study the Constitution (and constitutional theory) historically, politically and critically, with an eye to the tensions between things as they are and things as it is thought they are and should be.
We are, therefore, critical of the constitutional approach that has tended to dominate the field of constitutional study and the textbook accounts of British politics.
This approach places a heavy emphasis on the institutions of the state alone; it describes institutions and institutional relationships in suffocating detail; and because it focuses on constitutional "law" quite uncritically it tends to see the connections between state and society formally, simply, and legalistically in a way that ignores informal patterns of power in society and economy.
Institutions, such as the Cabinet, are sucked out of the larger political and societal context that gives them meaning, and they are regarded as having a life and importance all of their own.
Describing minute aspects of the state apparatus, such as Commons Committees, in some kind of vacuum becomes an end in itself.
There is little grip on the system as a whole.
Exploring, explaining, and analysing the actual working of the overall set-up in a self-conscious, critical, and systematic way tends to slip from concern.
Most of those who have studied the twentieth-century constitution have ceased to see it as a living, moving thing that has to be studied historically, that has to be studied in relation to interests and political forces, and that has to be understood within the context of larger developments within society and economy.
There has been a failure to see constitutional theory and political practice as in dynamic interaction each with the other; there has been a failure to recognise that interpretations of the constitution are always relative to time, place, and our position as observers; and so there has been the simple view that the constitutional set-up as it is, as it is said to be, and as it is said it should be, have all been as of one.
In effect, those who operated from within the comfy confines of the constitutional approach, froze the constitution when the set-up is never fixed.
In consequence, there has been the pretence  that a single perspective grounded in the nineteenth century can capture the essentials of things today, and so constitutional theory has itself been frozen in a way that has confined the parameters of constitutional debate.
There is no good intellectual reason why the study of the British constitution should have slipped into the static sterility of the constitutional approach.
In our discussion of the constitution we shall break out into a critical, historical, and political approach.
We shall begin where most constitutional accounts begin with the development of the nineteenth-century constitution, but we shall look at in the context of the balanced constitution that it replaced.
THE BALANCED CONSTITUTION
The orthodox theory of the eighteenth-century constitution was provided by the influential jurist and lawyer Sir William Blackstone in his lectures at Oxford in 1765.
In Blackstone's view:
"the true excellence of the English constitution [is]that all the parts of it form a mutual check upon each other.
In the legislature, the people are a check upon the nobility, and the nobility a check upon the people; by the mutual privilege of rejecting what the other has resolved: while the King is a check upon both, which preserves the executive power from any encroachments.
And this very executive power is again checked and kept within bounds by the two houses, through the privilege they have of enquiring into, impeaching, and punishing the conduct (not indeed of the King, which would destroy his constitutional independence; but, which is more beneficial to the public), of his evil and pernicious counsellors.
Thus every branch of our civil policy supports and is supported, regulates and is regulated, by the rest."
Now, although the mixed constitution of checks and balances between King, Lords, and Commons may have been the theory of the constitution, the precise practice of eighteenth-century politics was recognised as very much more basic.
Executive power — the power to set down the broad policies to be followed by the state and the ability to carry out or execute the laws was in the hands of the King, but the means for carrying it out had to be provided by parliament.
If it were left to itself the House of Commons could produce independent members in a way that would make the King's Government impossible since it could refuse to grant the money needed to carry out his will.
So, if clashes, deadlock, and instability were to be avoided, ways had to be found to ensure harmony between the three "checking" institutions of the state.
What this meant in practice was that the House of Commons had to be "managed" by the King and the Lords.
Through their power of patronage, the King and the Lords were able to exert "influence" over the composition of the lower chamber so oiling the relations between the King and the representatives of the people and  cementing the elements of the constitution into some kind of working whole.
Crudely expressed, corruption was of the political essence and was the practical counterpoint to the constitutional theory of balance.
The King exerted his influence, not just because forty or fifty Members of Parliament held government posts, but because others in the House of Commons looked to him for financial help in fighting elections, or they looked to him for contracts, pensions, and favours for friends.
For its part, the House of Lords was able to exert an influence in the context of a restricted franchise and a distribution of parliamentary seats that bore less and less relation to the actual distribution of the population at large.
In 1830, 70 English boroughs had 100 or less voters; Old Sarum and Dunwich were uninhabited constituencies; and in 1793 it was estimated that 400 Members of Parliament out of a total of around 530 were nominated or dependent on noblemen in such a way that they were likely to lack the chance to display any real independence of mind in their parliamentary behaviour.
Constitutional authorities defended this general state of affairs and the restricted franchise and the unreformed House of Commons.
No one in authority seriously considered that the labouring masses had any political rights.
Moreover, there was the fear that if they secured the vote then they would destroy the delicate balance of the Constitution and much else besides.
The conception of the political community which underlay this exclusive franchise, and the idea that corporate bodies (rather than individuals) should be represented, meant that the supporters of the theory and practice of the eighteenth-century constitution held the view that every major legitimate political interest was represented in Parliament — if not directly then at least "virtually" through the broad mix of members from different places and of varying backgrounds.
The ideology surrounding the constitution was one thing, but, in hard-power terms, the balanced constitution was essentially aristocratic.
At its worst it may have been a parasitic racket representing only itself to the detriment of all, but on the larger canvas of society it gave political power to a narrow group of substantial landowners in loose alliance with merchant princes and the small towns which returned members to Parliament.
In stable times the constitution "worked" .
The trouble was that by the end of the eighteenth century times were unstable.
New interests came into being which were outside of the established set-up.
The middle classes, based on manufacture in the emerging industrial towns, and a working class made out of these self-same developments, gained a consciousness of the fact that they were unrepresented and politically disadvantaged within the eighteenth-century constitution.
Manchester, Birmingham, and Leeds returned no members to Parliament.
Long before the century closed, pressures were building up for constitutional change and for more profound changes in the social and economic system itself.
The writing was on the wall for the old system: it was doubtful whether the established constitution could hold.
THE LIBEL CONSTITUTION
On the immediate constitutional front, corruption was attacked; virtual representation was no longer seen as enough; and whilst some attacked the rights of landed property in politics urging the principle that every man of means should be directly represented, some went further to attack the political privilege of all property arguing for the "rights of man" , complete equality, and a democratic republic based on the true sovereignty of all the people.
One thing is very clear, the limited eighteenth-century political contest between Court and Country — between the ins and outs to government within Parliament — was transcended by a more fundamental division within society between those who wished to change the political and social order and those who were determined to defend the status quo, the eighteenth-century Constitution, and the established basis of representation.
At the time there was the recognition that "society was on the brink of a great struggle between property and population" .
Not surprisingly, the nature of political argument shifted.
New issues and a new vocabulary bubbled to the surface of public debate, and different answers came to be given to enduring questions about who should govern and how.
More concretely, attention focused on Parliament.
The corruption and reform of the House of Commons became the central issue dividing the supporters from the opponents of the existing political system.
As the excluded social forces grew in political strength, so they pressed in on the established constitution in ways which eventually caused it to buckle so that it came to be more in line with their views as to how things should be.
In all of this, the Great Reform Act, 1832 stands as some kind of landmark development in the history of constitutional theory and political practice since it broke the essentials of the eighteenth-century constitution and also entrenched a new principle of governmental organisation.
The passing of the act was associated with massive political unrest, and a campaign of civil disobedience hovered over the proceedings in Parliament.
The act itself grew out of uneasy tensions and alliances between middle-class and working-class reformers and the entrenched aristocratic interest, in a situation in which the tie-up between class interests and politics was anything but neat, simple and easy to unravel.
The middle classes faced both ways and walked a tightrope.
On the one hand they resented the entrenched power of the landed aristocracy.
On the other hand they feared the working class who were also pushing for constitutional change against the aristocratic interest.
They wanted the House of Commons to represent the opinion of the middle orders of Britain for (as one reforming MP put in 1830) "there has arisen in the minds of the wealthy and enlightened middle classes of the country a conviction that there did not exist between them and the legislature a sufficient link" .
But they did not want change and the link to be forged if it  were to lead on to wild and radical measures for democracy, equality, and a social revolution that would threaten their larger position of power within the developing economy.
For the middle classes Britain meant business and they wanted constitutional change to prevent revolution not promote it.
This being the case it was seen as essential to set a financial qualification for the franchise that would give the vote to "decent" farmers and shopkeepers whilst excluding the lower social orders who might use their votes to plunder the public purse for their own advantage.
For their part, although the die-hard aristocratic opponents of change were desperately anxious about opening the floodgates, they nevertheless came to see that the price of resistance was becoming too high and might even bring disaster and revolution.
As they were forced to respond to the pressure for constitutional change the established interests saw a glint of light at the end of the political tunnel and came to entertain the hope that if the middle classes were allowed a subordinate share of power then they just might turn from being poachers to gamekeepers of the system and so side with the aristocracy in helping to keep the working classes in order.
In other words, if it were possible to remove the grievances of the middle classes against those above them, then it might also be possible to nip off the danger of an alliance between the middle classes and the working classes below them.
There was the hope that modest constitutional change might attach the middle classes to the established institutions of the country by making them consider the House of Commons as an ultimate tribunal where their grievances could be discussed and remedied.
Naturally enough, all of this placed the working-class organisations in a cruel dilemma.
They were forced to ponder on whether the Reform Bill would end the old system, or, in aiding the middle classes, merely add to the strength and number of working-class oppressors.
In fact, the act was a necessary, but not sufficient, condition for wider social upheaval, and it is impossible to pass a pat judgement on its political implications.
In the longer run, a measure which drew the line between voters and voteless was bound to increase the consciousness of the latter in ways that would encourage an upsurge of working-class political aspirations.
The act may have been intended as a "final measure" by those who wished to steady things, but the flow of politics is rarely so easily contained by the comma of a constitutional concession.
In the shorter run, however, the property qualifications for the franchise set down in the act did effectively exclude the working class from political participation through the ballot box, although the franchise itself was only increased by some 220000 in England and Wales.
At the time, what was of greater political significance was the redistribution of seats in the House of Commons.
Small boroughs lost 141 members, and the newly developed industrial areas of the North and Midlands secured representation through the creation of 65 new seats.
The British constitution was adjusting to the changed realities of economic power in the country at large.
The act affected the working of the political system in a number of significant ways so that it makes sense for us to see the constitution in very different terms from those which focused on the balance between King, Lords and Commons.
1 Although the politics of patronage lingered on, it was no longer possible for a small number of landowners to control the composition of the House of Commons, and the new independence this gave the Commons also reduced the controlling power of the King.
2 The personal will of the King was no longer decisive in government, and the effective choice of the Prime Minister and his leading Cabinet colleagues passed out of his hands and became a major role for a powerful House of Commons.
3 The act not only created a situation in which the House of Lords had to give way to the House of Commons, but in providing for the "representation of the people" it admitted a new principle of linkage between the state and society.
The House of Commons would no longer reflect the ancient idea and be representative of "whole" boroughs, county communities, or corporate interests but would be representative of unorganised masses of individual men since at this time no women had the vote.
The House of Commons was to become a representative assembly of independent members chosen by individual electors who had the right to vote and direct representation and, through this, the opportunity to enjoy government based on their consent and indirect choice.
Simply expressed, the 1832 act opened up a new political space.
Members of the House of Commons came to enjoy power.
They were at the centre of things.
They also enjoyed a distinct autonomy from the Lords, the King, and the Ministers of the Crown.
Moreover, although their constitutional and political position depended on their new relationship to "the people" they were not instructed delegates of their constituents any more than they were at the mercy of the party whips in the Commons.
So, the House of Commons as a body was independent of Lords and King, and Members within the Commons enjoyed an independence of action inside that chamber.
The cumulative effect of all these developments quite simply destroyed the balanced constitution.
The dynamic between politics and the constitution — between practice and theory — had resulted in constitutional change.
Social, economic and political developments crushed the eighteenth-century constitution and hence the credibility of the established constitutional theory.
This was noted by all manner of commentators in the middle years of the nineteenth century, but it was the banker, journalist, and cautious liberal, Walter Bagehot who provided the authoritative account of the new set-up in his study of The English Constitution published in 1867.
In observing the "contrast" between "the living reality" and "the paper description" of the British constitution (in observing the  gap between practice and theory) Bagehot did two things of significance.
1 He shot down once and for all the established accounts of British politics; they were "quite wrong" as descriptions and explanations of how things worked.
2 He provided us with a new theory as to the essential reality of governing, in the period of classical parliamentary government, in the period when members of the Commons enjoyed a golden age of independence between the fall of patronage and the rise of highly organised political parties.
How, then, did Bagehot describe and explain the essence of the British Constitution: who governed and how?
Bagehot distinguished the "dignified" from the "efficient" parts of the Constitution.
The dignified parts "impressed the many" and secured public support so that the system was legitimised, but they did not actually govern or wield any real power.
The efficient parts were not perceived as significant and powerful by the public but they nevertheless had power and "governed the many" .
Identify the efficient parts and you identify who governs; identify the dignified parts and you identify how they are enabled to do so.
Bagehot argued that the King and the House of Lords had ceased to exercise power and had become simply dignified parts of the constitution.
The House of Lords could only delay and revise legislation, and in our "disguised republic" the constitutional monarch always had to act on the advice of ministers responsible to the Commons.
It was the House of Commons, and the Cabinet and the Prime Minister that came from the Commons, that Bagehot saw as the efficient working parts of the Constitution as these got on with the job of actually running the show.
Bagehot argued that "the relation of Parliament, and especially of the House of Commons, to the executive government is the specific peculiarity of our Constitution" , and he made the point that "the efficient secret of the English constitution may be described as the close union, the nearly complete fusion, of the executive and legislative powers" .
In practice it is impossible to maintain any rigorous separation between executive power and legislative power — between the power to set down the broad direction of the state and to carry out the laws, and the power to make laws and general rules — and, in Britain, Bagehot saw the fusion as taking place in the Cabinet which he said was a committee of the legislative body chosen by the Commons to be the executive body and rule the nation.
The House of Commons had a number of functions, but the elective function of choosing the Cabinet was the "most important" .
It was precisely this opportunity to make and unmake Cabinets which led Bagehot to argue that "the ultimate authority in the English constitution is a newly elected House of Commons" : "we are ruled by the House of Commons" .
This was putting the matter very tartly, and Bagehot recognised that things were not quite this simple.
For sure Cabinets were  made and unmade on the floor of the House, but the Cabinet for its part could unmake the House of Commons because it enjoyed the right to ask for a dissolution and after the election it could look for support from amongst members in a new House of Commons.
It was precisely the subtlety of the checking relationship between Cabinet and Commons that led Bagehot to make the point that "the English system…is not an absorption of the executive power by the legislative power; it is a fusion of the two" .
So, around the middle years of the nineteenth century, Britain was seen to have acquired a new liberal constitution — that is a constitution of limited public participation where there was an executive which was responsible to a directly elected parliamentary assembly and which had taken few powers to intervene in economy and society.
In the accounts of British politics which were published at the time, ministerial responsibility was seen as the key and essential principle of the whole system.
Two kinds of responsibility were usually singled out.
1 In law and in theory, the individual minister was, in effect, the same as the Department: he was responsible for everything that went on in his office (whether he knew about it or not) and might be hauled over the coals and forced to resign if Parliament disapproved of his personal acts, the general conduct of his Department, or acts done (or left undone) in the name of his departmental officials.
2 There was the notion of the collective responsibility of the Cabinet or Government.
Two things were involved here.
On the one hand, an individual minister should resign if he could not publicly agree with the policy of the Cabinet as a whole.
On the other hand, if the Cabinet as a whole was defeated on a major issue in the House of Commons then it should either resign (as happened five times between 1852 and 1859), or else ask for a dissolution of Parliament in the hope of being able to secure the support of a new House of Commons.
Informed commentators, then, came to describe and explain the working of the British constitution in the following way.
A limited, but informed, middle-class electorate (composed of less than one in six adult males) enjoyed the right to elect persons of calibre and substance to represent their opinions and serve the national interest in the House of Commons.
Constitutionally, and in theory, Parliament as a whole was sovereign since the House of Commons was but a part of Parliament and for a bill to become law the assent of Lords, Crown, and Commons were all needed.
Politically, and in practice, however, the House of Commons was the working guts of Parliament, and, in addition, it alone had the job of selecting (and checking) the Cabinet as the executive to govern the country.
The Cabinet, for its part, had to put policy before Parliament, and had to supervise the implementation of legislation through the control and coordination of the civil servants working in the departments of state.
The civil service itself was obscured from view — it was simply  composed of servants with no independent power.
They were charged with administration and implementation (but no policy-making) and were controlled by, and responsible to, their elected political masters.
In effect, everything flowed to and from the House of Commons: the civil servants were held responsible to the Commons through their ministers; the Cabinet was collectively responsible to the Commons; the monarch only acted on the advice of ministers responsible to the Commons; and the Lords were always to defer to the legislative views of the Commons.
For its part, the Commons itself was representative of a limited electorate although there was no expectation that the electorate, should, or would, seek to impinge on the independence of members' judgements.
Britain was said to enjoy a system of responsible parliamentary government: power was in the Commons, and the Commons was responsible to the small electorate.
There was little that was truly democratic about this constitutional set-up since it was a system that was only representative of those with property.
Moreover, there was nothing egalitarian about the set-up and there was no expectation that the state would do much and interfere extensively in the "private" sphere of power and economic arrangements: these were seen as best left to the unseen hand of "impersonal" market forces.
(See Chapters 8 and 9 for a discussion of the growth of state intervention since the nineteenth century).
Most authoritative commentators on British politics in the period between the Reform Acts, 1832 and 1867 did not just describe and explain our politics.
They also applauded the constitution, and the pattern of political participation, class rule, and limited legislative activity that it embodied.
The 1832 act aimed to give the "middle orders" in society political influence and it also provided for a framework within which landed wealth and industrial wealth could adjust their conflicts of interest without resort to force.
Bagehot exaggerated when he described the middle classes as "the despotic power in England" but there is no doubt that the balance of power tilted away from the large landowners that dominated the House of Lords and towards the industrialists who were represented in the House of Commons.
Having said that, industrialists never "took over" the state.
They were partly absorbed into the ethos of the aristocracy.
They also worked towards and in alliance with the landed interest in the context of a low-profile, informal, state where there was a shared unease about the pressures for change that were coming from the lower social orders.
Would the balance of power tilt further; would the liberal constitution of limited participation and limited intervention be forced to expand outwards and assume a liberal-democratic form in which all adults had the vote?
A liberal constitution of limited government based on the self-reliant individualism of a middle-class electorate, an "independent" House of Commons, and government by consent, was one thing.
A liberal- democratic constitution, with the danger of "class legislation" (the phrase   used to voice the fear of a working-class takeover through the ballot box) and an intrusion into the rights of property through the more direct, participatory, and collective democracy of a mandated House of Commons of delegates close to working-class constituencies, seemed to be quite another.
Commentators were forced to ponder on the implications of allowing, or not allowing, the enfranchisement of the working class in a context in which either course of action seemed fraught with danger.
THE LIBERAL-DEMOCRATIC CONSTITUTION
Defending the 1832 settlement involved justifications which talked about the rights of those who had a propertied "stake" in society with the related gloss that education was a prerequisite for the "responsible" exercise of the franchise.
Intellectuals of the age believed in parliamentary government, not a democratic system; in liberty, not popular government; and the spectre of social and economic equality itself was seen as the dark side of the claim for adult suffrage.
All thoughtful Victorians were alive to the implications of industrialism.
They knew that their society was riding a tiger.
They were conscious of the ups and downs of working-class agitation for political rights, the vote — and more.
In theory (and in the long run) liberals, such as J. S. Mill, were prepared to recognise that representative government based on the whole people was the best form of government since political participation would promote the virtue, intelligence and "development" of the people.
In practice (and in the short run), however, they wanted to see government by the "fittest" .
Although they were keen to protect the governed from governmental oppression they were also anxious about the legislative implications of majority rule, fearing that popular participation would tumble into the chaos of working-class domination.
Some were keen to shunt popular participation into the civic training ground of local government.
However, the fear remained that excluding the working man from an involvement in the national political system could make for problems.
Maybe the "honest" working man would entrench himself in his own institutions and, in isolation, be a danger to the unity and strength of the whole nation; and maybe prolonged intransigence, accompanied by inevitable police control, would break down the divide between the labouring classes and the "dangerous classes" so causing the popular forces to unite and assume a truly menacing character that would be beyond concessionary control.
Perhaps it was even safe to yield.
Maybe the working class was loyal and could be trusted to display "goodwill" and deference to their "betters" ; and maybe there was even party advantage to be gained from seizing the initiative on reform.
Like it or not, democracy (which at the time meant votes for male workers) gradually came to be seen as inevitable.
It became a question of  making the best of a bad job.
In the end a strange combination of working-class agitation and pressure from outside of the state system together with an increasingly confident upper-class establishment inside the system anticipating the pressures for change and trying to contain them both served to encourage the Conservatives to pass the Reform Act, 167.
This act made working-class males a majority of the electorate in the country at large.
The act has been seen as one of the decisive events in modern English history because it transformed the country into something called, and approximating, a democracy.
By 1886, two in three adult males — almost 4.5 million people — had the vote in England and Wales, whereas some 50 years earlier the electorate stood at little more than 650 000.
So, after a protracted struggle the liberal state — the state of limited participation and limited state activity — was grudgingly democratised.
This is always noted.
What is usually glossed over is the fact that, in the process, democracy came to be "liberalised" in that its radical and egalitarian ideals were softened so that, in practice, democratic politics worked within the prevailing system of power in economy and society.
Democracy ceased to embody the cry from below for the overthrow of the limited liberal state and the competitive market society to which it was connected.
Instead democracy came to embody the more limited claim that the working class had the right to compete within the established state institutions and within the established society, with the clear expectation that they would not use the state to intervene in society to effect fundamental change.
No working-class party immediately burst on to the scene to dance on the floor of Parliament.
The politics of deference — the rich man in his castle the poor man at his gate — held change in check.
Politically, the democratic aspirations of the popular — radical tradition were effectively contained within a Liberal movement dominated nationally by middle class and aristocratic elites, and the Conservatives mobilised many working-class Tories into their camp.
In other words, democracy did not immediately deprive the upper classes, and the Liberal and Conservative Parties, of political leadership.
They still carried the ball, but the electors moved from being spectators to doubling as occasional umpires as well.
Contrary to the hopes and fears of those who had taken sides on the issue of democracy, political practice rather seemed to suggest that liberal (that is limited) democratic government and a class — divided society could fit nicely together without disaster and the overthrow of that society by democratic excesses.
Here was cause for surprise and celebration.
Here was cause for a new constitutional theory that would ease the liberal orthodoxy aside as at odds with the facts in order to describe, explain, and laud, the essentials of the new liberal-democratic constitution — a constitution in which there was an uneasy, and ultimately unstable, mix of the limited government of liberalism with the popular participation and equality of democracy.
Of course, there were important continuities between the liberal  constitution and the liberal-democratic constitution.
Notions of responsibility were still seen as of the  essence , and the permanent, civil service, side of the state machine was still kept from focus.
However, the injection of democracy into the prevailing set-up pulled "the people" and political parties into view and there was a change of emphasis as to what was the constitution.
If the accounts of British politics between 1832 and 1867 pointed to the sovereignty of Parliament, then the accounts that came to the fore after that period made the additional point that the sovereignty of the people was behind this and was now of the constitutional and political essence.
If the liberal accounts saw the House of Commons as at the centre of things, then the liberal-democratic accounts saw the Commons as a dignified part of the constitution that lacked real power.
If Bagehot's text can be regarded as authoritative for the golden age of parliamentary government, then Albert Venn Dicey's Law of the Constitution, published in 1885, came to be regarded as authoritative for the period of parliamentary democracy since then.
Dicey was concerned to deal with the "guiding principles" which he considered pervaded the modern constitution of England.
He centred his attention on the sovereignty of Parliament, the conventions of the constitution, and the rule of law.
The sovereignty of Parliament meant that Parliament could make and unmake any law whatsoever; there was no higher legislative authority; and no court was in a position to declare Acts of Parliament invalid.
However, Dicey went on to note that there were both "internal" and "external" limits to the actual exercise of this sovereignty.
The internal limits derived from the "nature" and "character" of the sovereign, but it was the external limits that were seen as of especial significance in the context of a democratic polity.
To this end Dicey distinguished legal sovereignty (which was with Parliament) from political sovereignty (which was with the electorate).
Put another way, Dicey welded the established theory of parliamentary sovereignty onto the new practice of liberal-democratic government so creating the new constitutional theory.
The conventions, or unwritten rules, of the constitution were seen as of crucial significance since they secured "in a roundabout way what is called abroad the" sovereignty of the people "" thus making for a governmental system in which "the will of the electors shall by regular and constitutional means always in the end assert itself as the predominant influence in the country" .
Simply expressed, the conventions of the constitution, in ensuring the supremacy of the House of Commons, have"one ultimate objective.
Their end is to secure that Parliament, or the cabinet which is indirectly appointed by Parliament, shall in the long run give effect to the will of that power which in England is the true political sovereign of the state — the majority of the electors."
Dicey felt able to boil the British constitution down to "one essential principle" : "obedience by all persons to the deliberately expressed will of the House of Commons in the first  instance and ultimately to the will of the nation as expressed through Parliament." 
In his book on Law and Public Opinion in England, Dicey made the point that "the English constitution had been transformed into something like democracy going on to argue that" in a democratic country the laws which will be passed, or at any rate will be put into effect, must be the laws which the people like".
Since Dicey, most constitutional authorities for most of this century have seen liberal-democratic constitutional theory and British political practice as of one.
Established constitutional theory has made sense of the British constitution and British politics in the following way.
This, then, is the "official" view of British politics.
All adults enjoy the right to vote in free general elections that must be held at least every 5 years.
The extension of the franchise to all adults created a situation in which political parties had to compete for the mass vote and so had to organise the electorate to support their candidates at the polls.
The electorate, for its part, no longer votes on the basis of the calibre of the candidates, but rather votes for a programme of policies and for the party which they wish to see form a government over the next 5 years.
The party which commands a majority of seats in the House of Commons wins a general election.
By convention, the monarch sends for the leader of the majority party in the Commons.
The leader becomes the Prime Minister and forms a government by choosing the Cabinet from amongst party colleagues in the Commons and in the Lords.
In theory, the Cabinet is still collectively responsible to the Commons, and so it is possible for a government to be defeated on a motion of no confidence in the Commons so that it would be forced resign, call for another general election, and face judgement at the polls.
In practice, however, this is not the case because the party organises the Commons as well as the electorate and the leadership of the majority party forms the government and Cabinet.
Rigorous party discipline ensures the party government of the day nearly always has the support of its parliamentary majority in the Commons.
In this state of affairs, the liberal-democratic account of the constitution completely reverses the liberal account of the relationship between Commons and Cabinet.
Instead of the Commons controlling and checking the cabinet, the cabinet and prime minister are seen as very much in control of the Commons.
In consequence, the convention of collective responsibility (so central to the liberal constitution) becomes drained of much of its significance and Parliament as a whole is reduced to a dignified rubber stamp of the "efficient" Cabinet and Prime Minister.
The liberal accounts saw the cabinet as chosen by the Commons, but the liberal-democratic accounts see the cabinet as chosen by, and directly responsible to, the electorate itself.
The Commons assume no mediating role of any significance in the process of cabinet formation: it is simply there to register the popular will in terms of the number of seats held by particular parties.
Within liberal-democratic constitutional theory, the people have the ultimate political power and exercise it through general  elections — elections that assume a place of quite massive constitutional significance.
Liberal theories centre their attention on the almost free-floating power of the Commons, whereas liberal-democratic accounts by-pass the significance of the Commons in order to place a twin emphasis on the government (the Cabinet and the Prime Minister) and the people in special relationship each to the other.
The constitutional authorities see a transmission of orders from the many to the controlling few in the government whereby votes inserted at one end of the system become popular public policies and laws at the other.
An electoral chain of command pushes orders up so that the people control things at the same time as those in authority are responsible down to the people or to the government of the people.
The people choose the government and the government carries out the policies on which it fought the election and controls the Commons and civil service.
In a downward direction, the government is responsible to the people through a general election, and the civil service is responsible to the Commons — the representatives of the people — because the convention of individual ministerial responsibility is still in force (as "proved" by the resignation of Foreign Office ministers in 1982 over the failure of the Foreign Office to anticipate the Argentinian invasion of the Falkland Islands).
From the liberal democratic perspective on British politics everything flows to and from the Cabinet and the Prime Minister.
It is they who govern, but in the last analysis it is the people who rule themselves.
The leading authority on the constitution in the twentieth century, Sir Ivor Jennings, had no doubt that Britain was an outstanding example of a democratic system at its best because the rulers governed according to the will of the people in the sense that there was a "close relation between the policies followed by the Government and the general ideas of the majority of the electorate" .
He saw the whole machinery of government as keenly attuned to public opinion because the character of the government depended on the results of the last general election; because there must be an election at least every 5 years; and because the electors had a genuinely free choice between candidates putting forward different policies.
So the people are free, they choose their rulers, and the rulers govern according to the wishes of the people.
Chapter 4 will make it clear that there is today a crisis of credibility with respect to this particular theory of the constitution, but, even so, it is still actively promulgated as an account of the reality of British politics.
In 1979, J. A. G. Griffith, Professor of Public Law at the London School of Economics, made the point that: "it is still quite common to hear the constitution described — even lovingly described — as a piece of machinery cleverly and subtly constructed to enable the will of the people to be transmitted through its elected representatives who make laws instructing its principal committee, the Cabinet, how to administer the affairs of the state, with the help of an impartial civil service and under the benevolent wisdom of a neutral judiciary.
Not only is this the explanation given to thousands   of schoolchildren but I have to tell you that it also finds its way — in a more sophisticated form — into the curricula of some institutions of further and higher education."
Now, this sketch of the established liberal-democratic constitutional theory has been painted with a broad brush.
It captures the fundamental agreement that has given a unity to the perspectives of leading constitutional authorities, but it does not reveal the disputes that have existed within liberal-democratic constitutional theory.
Two disputes are of central significance with respect to the location of power in the state.
First, there is the dispute as to the role of the civil service and the relationship between permanent civil servants and elected ministers.
We will attend to this dispute in Chapter S. Second, there is the dispute as to the respective powers of Cabinet and Prime Minister and we will deal with this now.
In the liberal constitution in the period of classical parliamentary government between 1832 and 1867, a variety of factors served to mean that there was a delicate balance between the Commons and the Cabinet (between the legislature and the executive) so that each could be said to enjoy a measure of power.
With the coming of the liberal-democratic constitution after 1867, the rise of a mass electorate and the force of party organisation and loyalty inside the Commons changed the relation between the Commons and the cabinet.
The cabinet moved into a position of greater power and control unchecked by the legislature, and the Commons was seen as having lost most of its powers because of the informal reality of party in government.
In this system of Cabinet government, the Prime Minister was regarded as primus inter pares, as first among equals, and as just the leading member of the Cabinet team.
In recent years, it has been argued that the position and powers of the Prime Minister have altered so considerably that it makes sense to talk about the rise of prime ministerial government and the transformation of the Cabinet into yet another "dignified" part of the constitution.
From this perspective, the Prime Minister is increasingly regarded as the keystone to the system enjoying unchecked and autocratic powers equivalent to an elected monarch and in excess of those enjoyed by presidents who have to contend with the legislature "checking and balancing" their powers.
What, then is the essence of the thesis about prime ministerial government and how adequate is that perspective on the location of executive power within the British constitution?
What powers does the Prime Minister enjoy?
Power over the parry.
The Prime Minister is leader of the majority party in the Commons.
The majority party want their leader to be successful and party loyalty is an important force within the British system.
Power over Parliament.
In a situation in which the Crown can only act on the advice of her ministers and where the Lords have been stripped of  powers, the Commons is the pre-eminent part of Parliament.
Moreover, in a situation in which party organises the Commons, power over the party is also power over Parliament.
Since a Prime Minister without a majority in the Commons is an impossibility, he or she is seen as in a position to make any law he or she sees as fit.
Power over the people.
The mass media, and the television in particular, places the Prime Minister in the public eye as the government, and general elections have increasingly become personalised contests between rival party leaders.
All this enhances the position of the Prime Minister and the Prime Minister is also in a unique position to control the flow of information about the work of government and can manage public information, publicity, and the media itself, to personal political advantage.
Power over the Civil Service.
As government has expanded so has there been an increasing need to coordinate the administrative side of the state machine.
The Prime Minister has the power to instruct the civil service on the conduct of its business and is aided in this task by a variety of formal and informal groupings at 10 Downing Street.
The key civil servants look to the Prime Minister, and the Prime Minister is able to decide which civil servants will hold the most important positions in the departments.
Power over the Cabinet.
The Prime Minister appoints ministers, reshuffles Cabinets, dismisses ministers, and promotes ministers.
The fact of around 100 or so ministerial appointments in the context of the demise of the independent members and the rise of the career politician gives the prime minister a "hold" over party colleagues because of his or her capacity to advance political careers.
A minister who wants to climb the hierarchy is dependent on the Prime Minister, and the easiest way to earn prime ministerial gratitude is through loyal and obedient service.
The Prime Minister has control over the machinery of the Cabinet, determining the agenda, setting up Cabinet committees, circulating (or not circulating!) papers written by Cabinet ministers for the Cabinet, and announcing the decision reached without taking a vote.
The large size of the Cabinet; the increased activity of the state; and the limited time for "efficient" Cabinet debate, all serve to encourage the Prime Minister to by-pass the Cabinet in favour of informal talks with individual ministers and a keen reliance upon an inner Cabinet of particularly trusted and sympathetic colleagues.
Power over ministerial conduct.
In addition to the power to appoint, dismiss and promote ministers, all new Prime Ministers issue a personal minute of procedure for ministers which lays down"a whole range of requirements for behaviour.
The Prime Minister has the capacity to determine the scope of the various offices, or to take-over a department  either in practice or by actually adding to his or her own responsibilities.
Other powers of patronage.
In addition to prime ministerial patronage with respect to ministers and civil servants, the Prime Minister has the right to advise the Crown on the creation of peers; expects to be consulted with respect to the appointment of chairmen of nationalised industries; and can appoint ambassadors, chiefs of staff, and the heads of the security services (MI5 and MI6).
Power to decide how and when the government shall be terminated.
Since the First World War, it has been recognised that the Prime Minister has the undisputed right to choose the date of a general election by asking the Crown for a dissolution of Parliament.
Some commentators suggest that the power deters supporters from rebellion since they would be reluctant to create a situation in which they could be faced with an arduous election campaign that could jeopardise their seats.
The threat of prime ministerial resignation may also serve to whip the Cabinet into line when less subtle forms of persuasion have failed.
The powers attaching to a Prime Minister are considerable, but what can we make of the thesis about prime ministerial government?
Critics, whilst accepting that the powers of Prime Ministers have increased, suggest that the thesis as a whole exaggerates.
It fails to consider the operation of informal, and often invisible, restraints on office and so lifts the Prime Minister out of the complex constraining context of action.
For example, the Prime Minister does have the constitutional right (or prerogative ") to choose the other ministers to form a government and administration, but no Prime Minister is ever politically" free"in the exercise of this choice.
It is a well-established convention that a minister should be an MP or a peer; the Ministers of the Crown Act, 1964 (in limiting the number of ministers and parliamentary secretaries that can sit in the Commons) forces the Prime Minister to select a nucleus of ministers from the Lords; leading figures in the majority party practically demand a Cabinet place — and a ministry of their choice; new young members need to be nurtured; and even leaders of factions within the party might have to be given office if only in the hope of softening their opposition to the broad drift of government policy.
In a similar way, the fact that the Prime Minister is leader of the party and the fact that the majority party in Parliament invariably supports the Prime Minister's lead and the legislation set before them, does not "prove" that the party itself is without influence over the Prime Minister.
Leaders are only leaders because they have followers; no leader can for long ignore the views of followers; and the absence of overt party constraints on leaders should not blind us to the fact that leaders need to anticipate the reactions of their followers if they are to retain a measure of needed support and loyalty.
Few things come for free, not even party support for a Prime Minister.
Of course it is difficult to generalise over time and between  parties with respect to the relations between party and Prime Minister, but in the recent past it has become clear that the Labour Party outside Parliament has been concerned to exert a greater measure of effective control over Labour Prime Ministers.
In fact, the whole prime ministerial government thesis presents us with a singularly "flat" view of power that is only attentive to action on the surface.
It fails to see the complex (and often hidden) relational aspects of power which effectively make a nonsense of simple statements about who has power.
We need to explore the tricky fields of constraints, the power significance of inaction and no conflicts, and the extent to which the structure of executive power may be different with respect to different issues at different times.
Simply expressed, it is next to impossible to generalise about the reality of prime ministerial government.
When a government is weak and under pressure and when policies are seen to be failing, little authority may attach to a Prime Minister and the advantages of office are rapidly turned to personal disadvantage.
Moreover, the secrecy that bedevils British government is of such a kind that it is hard to discover the truth on matters of state power.
Cabinet memoranda are not published and the Official Secrets Act effectively prohibits anything but titbits of information coming onto the public agenda for consideration.
As in so many debates on the nature and location of power in Britain it is not possible to come to a firm and lasting conclusion as to the nature of prime ministerial power relative to the position of the cabinet since Prime Ministers have always differed in their degree of command of the cabinet.
However, it is important to remind ourselves that the debate itself is a very narrow one once we are sensitive to the larger canvas of power in Britain.
The debate only attends to executive power within the state and on the democratic (or elected) side of the state machine at that.
In Chapters 5, 6 and 7, we will be attending to a world of power that is left unconsidered within the debate about prime ministerial government.
This debate easily tumbles into a narrow institutional and constitutional approach to power and politics.
The liberal-democratic constitution is seen as the only context and as the be-all-and-end-all of things so that the economic and societal context of power and the constraints which this imposes on Cabinet and Prime Minister alike are outside of the framework of serious consideration.
CONCLUSION
In this chapter we have pointed to the importance of coming to terms with the British constitution and constitutional theory since they are both in and about British politics.
Both need to be studied, and studied historically, politically, and critically, and that rules out any reliance upon the constitutional approach.
In substantive terms we have dealt with the  development of things since the eighteenth century.
The major theme has been to note the tension between constitutional theory and political practice, and the frequent limitations of established theory as an adequate explanation of the actual practice of British politics.
The chapter has come to rest with a description of the currently established, liberal-democratic, constitutional theory — a theory which argues that the constitution provides for a system of Cabinet or prime ministerial government within a larger parliamentary democracy in which Parliament is legally sovereign and the people are politically sovereign.
So far we have not dealt critically with liberal-democratic constitutional theory, but in the chapters that follow we will begin to explore the cogency of this perspective as an explanation for British politics.
We will start by attending to the part played by political parties and interest groups.
At one time both were seen as sustaining of democracy in Britain.
More recently, however, party and interest group practice has been seen as at odds with liberal-democratic theory.
This tension between political practice and the established constitutional theory suggests that the constitution may once again be in crisis and liable to change, but we will not be dealing with those questions until Chapter 4.
Power, Parties and Pressures
Part I Political Parties
Democratic government is now established on two columns, parties and interest groups.
J. Blondel (1974) Voters, Parties and Leaders, Harmondsworth, Penguin, p. 158
Many familiar assumptions about the British party system are under challenge.
D. Kavanagh, Party politics in question, in D. Kavanagh and R. Rose (eds), New Trends in British Politics London, Sage, 1977, p. 191.
In the period after the Second World War, British political science came into its own.
Political scientists who were in the intellectual vanguard chose to pay less attention to the constitution and to constitutional theory, and there was a growing consensus that the constitutional approach was a hindrance to understanding British politics.
There was the call for a "scientific" approach that would dig beneath the formalities of the constitution into the harder practice of informal politics, political behaviour, and the process of public policy-making itself.
Central to much of this new wave of work was the increased attention that was paid to political parties and interest groups.
In this and the next chapter we want to critically explore three broad perspectives on the significance of parties and pressures in British politics.
1 For much of the period since the Second World War, mainstream political science praised parties and interest groups as enhancing of democracy in Britain and talked in terms of responsible party government and pluralist democratic theory.
2 From the mid seventies, the New Right came into intellectual and political prominence.
Their perspective was anti state intervention and the practice of democratic politics, and pro the virtues of individualism and the freedoms associated with a free-market capitalist economy.
Instead of seeing parties and pressures as enhancing of things they talked in terms of adversary party politics and an overload of interest group demands having harmful effects both politically and economically.
3 Left, and Marxist, perspectives on British politics are sharply critical of the political and economic status quo.
They tend to focus attention on the state and the implications that flow from the capitalist economic base.
They are not particularly attentive to party politics (but they are critical of the Labour Party), although they are attentive to interests in British politics and are sharply critical of the pluralist perspective seeing the interest group world in terms of imperfect competition.
In this chapter we will deal with perspectives on political parties.
In the next chapter we will deal with perspectives on interest groups, where we will also offer a concluding assessment of the ideas and theories discussed in both Chapters 2 and 3.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY GOVERNMENT?
Political parties have often been attacked as bad things in the body politic.
In the 1950s, however, a particular kind of party system came to be regarded as utterly indispensable for the democratic control of government and that kind of party system was seen as well-established within British political practice.
What, then, were seen as the essential elements of the British party model, and how do these elements add up so as to make for responsible party government and the popular control of public policy?
1 A two-party system with free regular general elections.
2 One party forms the government.
The other party forms the opposition; criticises the government; keeps its ear to the ground of public opinion; and stands ready to form a government should it win the next election.
3 The parties are in close competition each with the other.
Neither party can expect to be in permanent government or permanent opposition: each party "swings" in and out of office.
The competitive situation keeps the governing party on its toes and sensitive to the public's view of policy.
The hope and prospect of office means that the opposition party will play by the established, conventional, rules of the game.
This serves to ensure moderation and contain political conflict to manageable proportions, and it also sustains the legitimacy of the system of rule so enabling law to be enforced with only limited policing.
4 Parties aim to win office and they compete for the support of the electorate at the polls on the basis of programmes of policies, or manifestos, that are set before the electorate for their judgement.
In effect, the parties organise and simplify the alternatives into policy packages that give the voters a meaningful and effective choice, so ensuring that the electorate is "consulted" at general elections with regard to fundamental legislative changes.
5 The fact of electoral competition, and the role of party programmes in that competition, means that parties try to draw up popular programmes of policies that will appeal to, and secure the electoral support of, the populace at large.
6 Individual voters are rational and informed; they have an appreciation of their own best interests; and so they give the parties programatic  support and vote according to the parties' past or prospective action in office in the light of their own knowledge and interests.
7 The party which wins a majority of seats in the House of Commons forms the government and has a mandate to put its programme of policies into legislative effect.
8 Each party is "disciplined" and possesses sufficient internal cohesion, so as to ensure that once in office it is able to carry its programme through the House of Commons and into law.
Members of parliament are not, therefore, individually responsible to the electorate since they are members of a party team that is collectively and directly responsible to the electorate as a whole.
In effect, parties are regarded as the midwives between the people and popular policies.
If there are two parties each putting forward programmes which they are pledged to carry out if elected to government, and which they are able to carry out because they possess sufficient internal cohesion, then the electorate in choosing a programme (and a programme at that which has been drawn up to appeal to their interests) mandates a party to carry out its programme and holds the party accountable for its adequate fulfillment at the next election.
If the electorate then considers that the governing party has broken its promises, or that the opposition party has since worked out more acceptable policies, it will vote out the established governing party and give the opposition party a chance.
If this cycle obtains, then it is argued that government is controlled, and public policy is congruent with the wishes of the majority of the electorate for most of the time.
How adequate is this perspective on party politics in Britain?
We have to attend to the evidence in four broad areas.
First, do we have a two-party system?
Second, do we have single-party government?
Third, do parties put forward programmes of policies that are "different" and offer a real choice, and is it the case that the winning party carries out its programme if elected to office?
Fourth, do the electorate vote for a party on the basis of the programmes that are put forward, or is there a better explanation to make sense of voting behaviour and the nature of public support for parties?
Is Britain a two-party system?
We need to be careful in answering this question.
First, we have to attend to the facts with respect to different periods of our politics.
Second, we should recognise that a two-party dominance in the House of Commons may not reflect the pattern of electoral support in the country at large since our first-past-the-post electoral system makes it difficult for third parties to break through into parliament in proportion to their support in the country.
For example, in the election of February 1974, the Liberals with over half of the votes of the Conservative and Labour Parties only  secured 14 seats instead of the 122 to which they were proportionately "entitled" , and in the 1983 election the Liberal-SDP Alliance secured 26 per cent of the vote but only 23 seats whereas the Labour Party with only 2.2 per cent more of the vote won 209 seats.
If the 1983 election had been fought under a system of proportional representation instead of a Conservative landslide in the Commons, the Conservatives would have had roughly 285 seats (and not 397), Labour 180 and the Alliance 160, resulting in a hung, three-party, parliament and a scramble to form a coalition.
Two-party dominance was at its greatest in the period between 1945 and 1970 when the Conservative and Labour Parties won all but 8 per cent of the vote and 2 per cent of the seats.
The model of responsible party government was born of this experience and it tended to elevate the politics of the moment into a law of nature that has distracted attention from the more fluid aspects of Britain's political experience.
The political turbulence of the 1970s and 1980s disturbed this cosy conceptualisation of things.
In the election of October 1974, 25 per cent of the vote went to third-party candidates and they secured thirty-nine seats in the Commons.
The election of 1979 seemed to mark something of a return to "normal" in that third parties had their vote cut back to less than 20 per cent and they were only able to secure twenty-seven seats.
In the election of 1983, however, third parties polled some 28 per cent of the vote and secured forty-four seats.
We now have a multi-party Britain, but we have yet to experience a fundamental departure from a two-party House of Commons.
In the period after the First World War Labour replaced the Liberals as one of the two major parties in the Commons without the aid of proportional representation, but we will have to wait and see whether the Liberal-SDP Alliance can fight back into Parliament under the established first-past-the-post electoral system.
What are the facts about single-party government in Britain?
We can be brief in dealing with this question.
Since 1900, Britain has been governed by outright, formal coalitions of two or more parties for 7 years between 1915 and 1922, for 1 year from 1931 to 1932, and for 5 years from 1940 to 1945.
Between 1910 and 1914, 1930 and 1931, and 1977 and 1979 (the period of the "Lib-Lab Pact" ), the party in office lacked a majority in the House of Commons but was maintained in office by a tacit agreement with one or more smaller parties.
From 1932 to 1940, Britain was governed by National Government which, although predominantly Conservative, was by no means wholly so.
For a total of 3 years-in 1924, from 1929 to 1930, and from 1976 until the Lib-Lab Pact of 1977-a minority government held office without even a tacit agreement with other parties.
In other words, Britain has been ruled by a government of what is generally regarded as the normal British kind — a single-party  government with a majority in the House of Commons, capable of getting its measures on to the statute book without open or tacit agreements with any other party — for only 54 of the 84 years of this century.
Party programmes
Three questions are before us when we attend to the evidence on party programmes.
(a) Do the parties put forward programmes of policies?(b) Do the programmes offer a meaningful choice?(c) Do the winning parties actually implement their programmes and deliver of their mandate once in office?
It is on these points in particular that the left perspective on party politics advances a critique against the "reality" of responsible party government in Britain.
Do the parties put forward programmes of policies?
In 1834, Peel was appointed prime minister.
He issued the famous Tamworth Manifesto, nominally addressed to his constituents, but actually communicated to the London daily press so as to operate as a programme submitted to the whole electorate.
Since that time, and first fully developed by the Radical wing of the Liberal Party, it has been normal for parties to fight elections on the basis of a manifesto of policy promises.
Moreover, over time, the manifestos have tended to become longer and more specific.
Of course, many policy statements are little more than vaguely embodied aspirations as to how parties would like to see Britain develop.
Blondel in his study Political Parties: A Genuine Case for Discontent? claims that "in the great majority of cases programmes are unclear, often limited in scope, and not closely connected to the goals which the party proclaims" and he goes so far as to assert that "on balance parties do not really have programmes" .
This certainly overstates the situation, but there is no doubt that party leaders in Parliament like to keep a free (and vague) policy hand, and in their speeches and campaigning around election time they are more likely to attack opponents and invoke positive symbols than to get down to the specifics of their own party programmes.
This tendency has been noted by left activists and left academics.
The Labour Party has been consistently criticised for failing to put forward a clear radical and socialist programme.
When it is pointed out that a number of Labour programmes have been markedly radical, as in 1945 and 1983, then it is claimed that the leaders have failed to be behind them and give them their solid backing and support.
Do the programmes offer a meaningful choice?
One problem in analysing party programmes derives from the fact that there is no unambiguous index by which one can assess the extent of "real" choice between them.
Whether one thinks that the differences between the programmes are big or small, or too big or too small, depends on value judgements and  political perspectives.
Left academics have consistently held the view that there is no "real" choice on offer to the electorate at the polls.
They argue that a socialist alternative is not offered because the Labour Party is not so much concerned to abolish capitalism as to manage it better than the other parties.
Having said that, however, most left academics and activists when it comes to the electoral crunch do vote Labour, excusing their commitment by saying that they do so "without illusions" but perhaps signalling by their actions that they do see some kind of meaningful choice at the polls.
In fact, most commentators (and many left academics) would feel able to divide the"post-war period into three distinct phases in terms of the kind of choice offered to the electorate by the parties in their programmes.
First, the 1945 election would be regarded as some kind of high point in terms of the programme choice offered to the electorate by the Labour and Conservative Parties: Labour was out to create a new socialist Britain whilst the Conservatives were still rooted in the Old Toryism of empire and unregulated capitalism.
Second, the 20 years from the mid-fifties provided a period of only marginal differences in programmes both from election to election and between the parties.
This was the period of "consensus politics" .
Both the major parties were agreed as to the need for a welfare state and a mixed, but managed, economy that would soften the rough edges of capitalism as they cut into the needy.
Under the leadership of Hugh Gaitskell, the Labour Party was dominated by a "revisionism" that edged away from socialism and dropped a commitment to the nationalisation of private industry.
For its part, the Conservative Party, under the intellectual leadership of R. A. Butler, came to terms with the changes wrought by Labour from 1945–51 and adjusted to the new mood in the country so that it grudged towards state intervention in support of some kind of equality.
This, then, was the age of "Butskellism" — the age of consensus and social stability.
Third, the political turbulence of the seventies born of economic failure and increasing unemployment, destroyed consensus and brought "conviction politics" and real choice back to the fore with a vengeance: the Conservatives rediscovered old roots in their opposition to state intervention and their commitment to the free market; the Labour Party rediscovered socialism and attacked the free market of capitalism at the same time as they were eager to fashion an interventionist state; the specifics of nationalist sentiment ebbed and flowed in unpredictable ways; and only the Liberal-SDP Alliance seemed eager to try and recreate the moderate consensus politics and policies of the fifties, and they did this despite growing signs that the social and economic conditions that made those policies viable had ceased to exist.
Do the winning parties actually implement their programmes and deliver of their mandate once in office?
Now, it is one thing for parties to produce programmes which offer a choice, but it is quite another matter as to whether the parties actually implement their programmes once in office.
In fact, a great many of the most important decisions by British Governments have been introduced without any prior leave by the electorate as has been the case with respect to the repeal of the Corn Laws, 1846, the passing of the Trades Disputes Act, 1927, the departure from the Gold Standard in 1931, the decision by the post-war Labour Government to opt for a nuclear-defence policy, the decision to apply for membership of the European Economic Community in 1961, the passage of the Commonwealth Immigration Act, 1968, as well as a host of foreign-policy matters over the years.
Moreover, the very stuff of electoral competition and the media coverage of our politics revolves around the issue of "U turns" and "broken promises" with politicians confessing (but excusing and explaining) the gap between promise and performance-programme and policy — with talk about being "blown off course" by circumstances, accidents, and the pressure of unanticipated world events beyond their effective grasp or control.
Naturally enough this kind of discourse is not unrelated to the facts of the situation.
The 1970 Conservative manifesto, A Better Tomorrow stated: "we will stop further nationalisation" but this did not stop a Conservative Government nationalising Rolls Royce just 8 months into office.
The manifesto also stated "we utterly reject the philosophy of a compulsory wage control" but in 1972 such a policy was implemented before collapsing into failure.
(For a fuller discussion of this see Chapter 8.)
For its part, the Labour Government of 1960 did a "U turn" on a number of pledges (most notably by restoring charges for the health service), and although the party entered office in 1974 with a series of clear policy commitments more radical in tone and in aspiration than any that the party had endorsed since 1945 the promise of industrial regeneration and social justice was in the end reneged.
The contrast between the aspirations of opposition and the actual development of policy in government could hardly have been starker.
Given these kind of records, it is perhaps not too surprising that Blondel can claim that the implementation of party programmes is "spasmodic and half-hearted" and that the influence of programmes on policy-making is "rather weak" .
In fact, the evidence is more complex than this simple assertion suggests.
Rose, in his book Do Parties Make a Difference?, argues that "the 1974 Heath Government fulfilled at least 80% of its manifesto pledges…[and]the 1979 Labour Government…acted unambiguously upon 54% of its manifesto commitments and gave some evidence of action upon another 19%" .
However, and rather more fundamentally, Rose goes on to make the point that "the gap between what governments can do and what the public (and for that matter, the government) wants to achieve is greatest in the management of the economy" .
 "In effect governments implement the" small scale "do-able" policies "and so" fulfill most of their pledges ", but the production of promised" economic benefits…appear to lie beyond the reach of either party".
So, "parties do  make a difference in the way Britain is governed…[but]the differences in office between one party and another are less likely to arise from contrasting intentions than from the exigencies of government" .
Rose goes on to make the point that "parties are only part of the political system and" much of the party's record in office will be stamped upon it by forces outside its control".
Interestingly, this is exactly the kind of argument developed and elaborated by left academics in their critique of "Labourism" and the "Parliamentary Socialism" of the British Labour Party.
They argue that to rely exclusively on the electoral or parliamentary road to the goal of socialism is to shut-off the possibility of attaining that goal precisely because it overestimates the power of party and the democratic state; underestimates rival centres of power; and minimises the moderating implications of parliamentary democracy and much else besides.
In other words, Labour, through control of the House of Commons, may form a government but it will not be fully in power because there is power in the secret state, in the private centres of economy and society, and in the international market itself, and all of these things lie beyond the easy grasp of a parliamentary majority.
We will be discussing these matters in later chapters.
For the moment, however, we should recognise that the concern to strengthen intra-party democracy through constitutional reforms designed to hold the Parliamentary Labour Party accountable to the rank and file may do little to ensure that any future Labour Government delivers of its manifesto (and possibly socialist) promises since these reforms do not come to terms with power, the state, and the market.
Simply expressed, good intentions and intra-party democracy can only carry socialism so far.
Does the electorate vote for parties on the basis of their programmes or policies?
Our final "test" of the responsible party model involves attending to the nature of public support for parties.
It is easy to berate parties and governments for their failures and shortcomings with respect to programmes and implementation, but the conception of government by responsible parties requires certain things of the general public.
How informed are the electorate about policies and programmes, and do they vote for parties on the basis of their programmes?
If we look back to the middle years of the nineteenth century and to the debates about the extension of the franchise to the working class then hopes were expressed as to how voters should behave at the same time as there was anxiety and fear as to how they would actually behave.
On the hopeful front, there was the view that voters should be either rational and informed, or deferential.
On the darker side, there was the fear that ignorance would rule and that deference would fail to hold things in check.
Bagehot was anxious that the established parties might bid for the  support of the working man, and he was even more anxious that a working-class party might arise that would then press for the interests of that class through the ballot box and through Parliament.
So, on the one hand, hope that reason and deference should prevail; on the other hand, fear that ignorance and the politics of class and class conflict would actually prevail.
In the years since those debates we have witnessed the rise of the Labour Party and the specific concern to secure independent working-class representation in the House of Commons.
Moreover, on the academic front, the detailed empirical study of electoral behaviour through sample surveys has come into its own so that we now have a great deal more information on which to explore the hopes and fears of those who took sides on the issue of democracy at the same time as we are provided with information to check out the reality of key elements of the responsible party model in Britain.
At the most general level, we can say that the electorate has not lived up to the hopes of those who looked to an active and informed public involvement in policies and elections.
More specifically, the model of responsible party government carried within itself the view that the electorate would not just be informed about politics but would vote for the party which has a programme of policies in accord with their own view as to how things should be.
Moreover, the "floating" voters — those who were not in total agreement with any party — would stand above the party battle and would carefully assess the rival policy packages on offer before casting an informed vote, affecting the swing, and determining which party would form the next government.
Early electoral studies have revealed just how far these pictures are removed from the realities of electoral choice.
Voters had limited information about the policy positions of the parties and often supported a party in spite of its policies instead of because of them.
Moreover, some studies suggested that the crucial floating voters were not characterised by a high degree of interest, involvement, and knowledge, but by ignorance and indifference, and they were less involved in following the election campaign than were those who were keenly attached to a party.
In 1963, Butler and Stokes began a series of surveys which set a new pattern, and a new standard, for the study of voting behaviour in Britain: their sample was large, nation-wide, and was interviewed several times between 1963 and 1970; and the authors were concerned to apply a rigour that had been absent from most of the earlier single constituency studies of electoral choice.
Quite simply, Political Change in Britain is the landmark text in the field of voting behaviour research.
What light does it throw on the extent of public information about parties and programmes, and on the nature of public support for parties?
Butler and Stokes "challenge any image of the elector as an informed spectator" , noting how "understanding of policy issues falls away very sharply indeed as we move outwards from those at the heart of political  decision-making to the public at large" , and how attitudes are formed towards even the best-known policy issues to only a "limited degree" .
Having said that and confirmed the conventional wisdom, however, Butler and Stokes went further.
They were concerned to push beyond the simple and trite observation that issues do not matter in electoral politics in order to ask a more detailed question as to the "terms" on which they are likely to matter.
They point out that three conditions must be met if an issue is to affect the relative standing of the parties at the polls.
First, the issue must be one on which attitudes are widely formed (and the vast majority of issues fail such a test); second, opinion on the issue must be skewed rather than evenly balanced; and third, the public must see the parties differently in relation to the issue.
During the early sixties Butler and Stokes argue that social services was an issue that satisfied the three conditions; its effect was "substantial" ; and it "worked strongly to Labour's advantage" — although their evidence for all of this was weak.
By and large, however, they argued that the behaviour of the electorate was shaped less by their stance to particular policy issues and more by generalised attitudes and beliefs about the party's "image" , and they specifically pointed out "how little the mass of voters could be said to respond to the policy alternatives at Westminster in judging the claims of the rival parties" .
So, there is little in this study to sustain the hopes of nineteenth-century liberal-democrats or to confirm the adequacy of the responsible party model as a realistic characterisation of the behaviour of voters in our politics.
Indeed, the conventional wisdom on these matters over the whole of the post-war period has held that a majority of people are either ignorant of, or disagree with, the specific policies of the party they support.
When we are dealing with the literature on voting behaviour, we are dealing with a literature that has come to display turbulence in the face of electoral behaviour that has become increasingly volatile and unpredictable.
Put another way much of the conventional wisdom looks rather tired in the face of emerging realities.
Alt and associates, in their study of the electorate at the time of the February 1974 election, argue that it is easy to exaggerate the extent to which voters are politically illiterate, unfamiliar with issues, and unable to identify the policy stands of the parties.
They suggest that the weakening of party identification may mean that voters' preference on issues will be determined less by established patterns of party identification and more by their own positions and their perceptions of party policy.
Simply expressed, in a situation in which voters detach themselves from a close identification with parties then issues come to assume a greater significance in voting behaviour and electoral choice.
It is difficult to come to a firm view on these matters, but the nature of support for third parties is clearly of particular significance and affords a crude test of the Alt view — especially in the case of new parties where there can be no established sense of partisan identification.
What sense can we make of support for these  parties at the polls?
Is it based on the positive pull of their policies, or is it more of a protest vote reflecting a generalised sense of disenchantment with the workings of the two-party politics?
Information on the nature of public support for the SDP throws a certain amount of light on these kind of questions because the party was not formed until 1981.
At the very outset, the party leadership took the view that manifestos and policy promises were part of the "old" politics that was responsible for Britain's troubles.
In taking this view they clearly struck a chord with their potential supporters since there was a developing sense of unease about the established parties failing to deliver the promised policy goods.
A poll carried out into the reasons why people voted for the SDP candidate in the Warrington by-election of 1981 revealed that only 9 per cent did so because they supported SDP policy; 8 per cent did so because they admired the well-known candidate; and nearly 70 per cent voted for negative"reasons — the most frequently cited being their opposition to the extremism of the two established parties.
In the general election of 1983, 63 per cent of the vote for the Liberal-SDP Alliance was motivated by dislike for the other parties rather than by a positive liking for their own party of choice — still less for their policies.
This kind of evidence does little to suggest that support for new parties is "rational" and based on an informed judgement as to party policy.
Indeed, we might even be inclined to suggest that third parties that are buoyant in the opinion polls, and have a diffuse appeal beyond specific regions, are only able to sustain their support on the basis of an attractive ambiguity about their main policy objectives that precludes the presentation of crisp programmes and, therefore, the possibility of programmatic support.
Breaking the mould of British politics may mean breaking the legitimacy of programmes, manifestos, and the ideology of responsible party government itself.
Of course, the electorate may not be fools, and they may pass rough judgements at the polls about which party may govern "better" in the future in the light of past performance and potential promise, but there is little point in our pretending that we can "explain" voting behaviour on the basis of the electoral appeal of party programmes even though this is the way politicians and the media often tend to present the essence of electoral politics and party choice.
In Chapter 6, we shall see that, in order to make sense of voting behaviour and party choice, it is vitally important to attend to the significance of sociological factors rather than to the more obvious political factors that bear on issues, parties, candidates, and leaders.
Taken together, the evidence assembled under the four points of assessment rather suggests that the conventional model of responsible party government is at odds with the facts and so does not provide an adequate explanation for party politics and the making of public policy.
It has been true in parts for a period of British politics but it is not the theoretical key to unlock the essence of things as was once thought to be the case.
We are not alone in taking this view.
ADVERSARY PARTY POLITICS?
For much of the period since the Second World War the responsible party model was at one with the informed consensus and "common-sense" as to the working of our system.
The conditions of the fifties meant that it was natural"for praise to be heaped on to democratic politics since it seemed to be doing the job very nicely.
Capricious economic forces were managed by democracy so that slump and unemployment were things of the past, and a welfare state had been created by democracy so ensuring that wealth and poverty (and hence any material basis for class conflict) were also cast into the dustbin of history.
In the sixties, the mood of buoyant self-satisfaction gave way to a mood of self-doubt and angry introspection.
On the welfare front poverty was rediscovered, and on the all-important economic front there was a growing awareness that we just could not get adequate growth out of our stagnant economy.
The concern to solve the problem of our economic decline in the context of a competitive world situation encouraged the search for explanations for that decline.
There was increasing discussion of the relationship between the poor performance of the British economy and certain features of the political system.
By the seventies, and part-and-parcel of the demise of consensus and the rise of conviction politics, the New Right had grown and was in a position of political and intellectual prominence.
From this perspective democratic politics, and the two-party system in particular, was the problem and the cause of our economic ills.
Nowadays, most political scientists no longer praise the responsibility of our party system but instead talk of, and condemn, our system of "adversary politics" , where an "electoral auction" is said to lead to an irresponsible "elective dictatorship" , which then manages the economy in such a way as to create an injurious "political-business cycle" that hinders our long-term economic growth.
So, at one and the same time, we have been provided with a new characterisation of the British party system that challenges the cogency of the responsible party government model, and we have also been provided with an explanation for economic policy-making and for the decline of Britain's economy.
What, then, is the precise nature of the adversary politics thesis?
How adequately does it make sense of party politics?
How adequately does it account for the development of economic policy and the poor performance of the British economy?
The adversary system, based on a party duopoly of seats in the House of Commons and party monopoly (or an elective dictatorship) of the government, has come to be seen as our national style of politics.
Within the Commons it is said to lead to constant petty squabbles; the mindless negation of government through excessive (and purely partisan and irresponsible) opposition; the oversimplification of complex issues into  two (and only two) contrasting alternatives; and the grand clash and confrontation of the cult of debate.
All of this is said to crush consensus and cooperation, and to destroy any basis for stable, moderate, and pragmatic policies that survive over the lifetime of one government.
Left of centre policies alternate with right of centre policies violently, rapidly, and on the basis of ideological considerations alone unrelated to the "real" needs of the situation.
A Committee sponsored by the Hansard Society for Parliamentary Government to "look at problems arising out of the apparent failure…of government and industry to work together effectively" argued that "industrialists have been justified in recent years in criticising the government for failing to provide a stable economic framework within which they can plan and invest in the long-term" .
The committee pointed out that "industry cannot grow steadily in a situation where industrial policy three years from now could be in the hands of politicians of utterly opposed political views" .
Evidence from leading industrial companies to the Trade and Industry Sub Committee of the Expenditure Committee of the House of Commons in 1973 made it clear that too frequent changes in government policy and in the nature of controls and incentives covering the location of industry had led firms gradually to discount government policy when considering new investment in a way that was injurious to growth and the creation of new employment.
Not too surprisingly, this kind of perspective on Britain's economic and political troubles has been best expressed by third parties outside of the established adversarial two-party system.
In Twelve Tasks for Social Democrats, issued on the day of its launch in 1981, the Social Democratic Party made the point that in order "to secure Britain s livelihood in the nineties we need a consistent economic strategy in the eighties, one that is not disrupted every few years by a political upheaval" and by "pointless conflict, the dogma, the violent lurches of policy and class antagonisms that the two old parties have fostered" .
In Towards a New Political Agenda, published in 1977, the Liberal Party had no doubt that:Britain's political structure obstructs economic and social reform.
The stylised confrontations of adversary politics produce heated debate and a flood of legislation but rarely encourage reassessment of the conventional wisdom or result in agreed and constructive change.
The cycle of government proposals and opposition promises of repeal, repeated with each change of government, has disrupted economic and industrial relations, disturbed the housing market and the education system and reshuffled the pattern of Whitehall, without achieving any new consensus or reversing Britain's decline.
Those who criticise adversary politics because of its alleged tendency to lead to frequent reversals in economic policy see the problem compounded by the fact that government within this system is unduly influenced by the extremists in the party ranks.
Moreover, and to add insult to injury, these off-centre policies are never supported by a clear majority of the electorate.
The electorate's views are seen as stable, centrist and moderate, but, in the context of an electoral system that bolsters the two-party system and blocks the easy rise of third parties of moderation, the House of Commons is "unrepresentative" and the party activists unchecked.
So (it is argued), a party comes to power claiming a mandate to implement its manifesto of seaside promises, and in the process established policies are mindlessly repealed in the struggle to deliver election commitments and please the party faithful.
However, as the reality of the economic situation presses in on the government so it is inevitable that more sensible and pragmatic policies are adopted 2 or 3 years into office.
Unfortunately, just as these newer policies begin to bear fruit, the country is hurled into the turmoil of another general election and the cycle of misguided mandate and policy change starts all over again.
These bouts of manifesto madness, U-turns, and broken promises, not only frustrate business confidence but also lead to public disillusion so that authority dribbles out of government and the legitimacy of the overall system is called into question.
In other words, the adversary system is said to have both economic costs and political costs.
Now, the economic costs attributable to the adversary system are not just seen as a function of the frequent reversals of ideologically motivated policies.
Critics of our two-party system also point to the injurious implications that flow from the "vote motive" and the practical effects of electoral competition within the political market place.
Simply expressed, the fact that party politicians are operating within an "unfair" electoral system in which the name of the game is to secure votes in order to win governmental power means that elections are turned into policy auctions in which the parties, through their manifestos, bid for popular support and the highest (and most irresponsible) bidder wins all.
On the "supply" side the parties will always be tempted to bribe the electorate and promise more than they can safely deliver after the votes are in the bag.
Moreover, this pattern will be reinforced on the "demand" side of the electoral equation.
First party competition will generate "excessive" expectations in the electorate.
Second, the electorate will have every incentive to vote for more government services because they do not pay for them directly and individual tax payments may bear little (if any) relationship to the benefits which they may derive from such services.
In other words, the system of competitive vote bidding acts like a ratchet encouraging ever more government services at the same time as it penalises a government prepared to take "tough" decisions that may hit particular interests in the short run even though these decisions may work to the advantage of all in the longer run.
Moreover, the higher taxes that are an inevitable counterpart of more government services not only act as a disincentive to saving and investment, but also "overload" the economy and crowd out opportunities for economic growth at the same time as the opening up of export markets and the defence of the home market is made ever more difficult by the inevitable inflation.
Although the government has to operate within the context of the  economic realities of the day and "should" have regard to the long-term interests of the economy as a whole, critics of adversary politics point out that a short-term concern for vote maximisation at the next general election is never far from the government's mind and this conditions the way in which it manages the economy and makes economic policy.
Finer, in his study of The Changing Party System, is not alone in taking the view that it is a "matter of proven fact that governments try to manipulate the economy to improve material conditions in time for the next election" .
Now, observations of this kind are not new.
They have been the commonplace stuff of the party political debate that is adversary politics.
What is new is that this phenomenon of the political management of the economy is being more systematically and seriously explored within the burgeoning New Right literature on the "political-business cycle" .
This literature, whilst being mindful of the ordinary business cycle of boom and slump, growth and recession, is especially mindful and critical of what is seen as the increasing coincidence between the five-yearly election cycle and the rhythm of the economy.
It is suggested that governments, in managing the economy, have to work out a trade-off between inflation and the level of employment.
They have to do this because it is seen as impossible to have both low inflation and a high level of employment since the former requires a low level of demand whereas the latter requires a high level of demand to keep people in jobs making things for sale.
The trouble is that governments are said to manage demand and work out the inflation-employment trade-off with party political electoral considerations uppermost in their minds.
As an election approaches, the government of the day will pump money into the economy and so engineer a boom, lower unemployment, and win popular support at the polls in the hope of securing another term in government.
Immediately after the election, however, the party in government will find it necessary and politically safe to raise unemployment in order to combat the inflation that was itself set in train by the politically engineered pre-election boom.
It is argued that this politically motivated business cycle is bad because it shifts the economy away from "natural" long-run optimal levels of steady growth.
Simply expressed, it is claimed that state intervention in the management of the economy, and a commitment to maintaining full employment, has actually caused a high level of inflation.
This has made it difficult for Britain to compete on the world market, and this in turn has eventually led to a worse slump and level of unemployment than would otherwise have been the case had there been no political intervention in the working of the naturally self-regulating free economy of the market.
The party political implications of all this in the context of the language of everyday politics are clear enough.
Those who are critical of governments creating political-business cycles are critical of state intervention in the economy at the same time as they are full of praise for the beneficial effects of free-market progress.
This is the language of the  New Right.
It is also the language of Thatcherism.
At its hard edge it is critical of the threat of socialism itself, but it is also critical of Keynesianism — that theory of economic management which dominated the political consensus from the Second World War to the mid-seventies and which sought to maintain full(ish) levels of employment on the basis of governments managing the economy by manipulating the level of demand by putting money into, or taking it out of, the economy.
We will be discussing Keynesianism more fully in Chapter 8, but for the moment we must attend to the adequacy of the adversary politics thesis.
Is party politics like that, and does the thesis explain policy-making and Britain's economic "failure" ?
At one level we can suggest that the adversary politics perspective is more at one with the reality of party politics than is the thesis about responsible party government in Britain, but we really need to attend to the facts with respect to two broad areas of concern.
First, there may be the rhetoric of party political conflict and policy change, but what is the reality with respect to the continuity and stability of economic policy?
Second, what is the evidence on the nature of political-business cycles in Britain?
Andrew Gamble, in an article on "Continuity and discontinuity in economic policy" , has explored the first question with great care over the period 1960–81.
He is sensitive to the problem of testing the thesis since it is difficult to separate out the influence of parties and politicians from that of other institutions, groups, interests, and the whole context of economic policy-making.
Moreover, he highlights the necessity of clarifying the meaning of continuity and of economic policy, pointing out that economic policy can be divided into three principal areas.
First, there is foreign economic policy-making involving the external relations of the national economy to the world economy; second, there is stabilisation policy and the whole field of macroeconomic policy and the management"of the economy; and finally, there is industrial policy covering all those aspects of governmental responsibility over the economy aimed at improving long-run efficiency, output and productivity.
So, how many policies were reversed by the incoming government, and which policies and areas of policy were left untouched?
Gamble argues that the adversary politics thesis over-generalises from a few instances to the whole of economic policy.
The thesis comes into its own with respect to industrial policy where significant discontinuities in policy can be attributed to the government changing hands.
But with respect to foreign economic policy (excluding the issues of our membership of the European Economic Community) and stabilisation policy the evidence for continuity is rather more plain than the evidence for discontinuity.
Many of the major issues have rarely entered the adversary debate; changes often turn out on examination not to be related to parties at all; and in the all-important field of foreign economic policy-making (which sets the limits which shape the rest of economic  policy) the continuity of policy and its generally non-controversial character is what is striking.
It is hardly surprising that Gamble concludes that "there is only limited evidence that there have been significant discontinuities in economic policy-making caused by the adversary positions adopted by the parties" .
What of the facts with respect to political business cycles in Britain?
Nordhaus has looked at the evidence in nine countries over the period 1947–72.
He found that although the coincidence of business and political cycles was "very marked" with respect to the United States, New Zealand and Germany, this was not the case with respect to Britain because pressing action on the balance of payments swamped the cycle of economic policy-making revolving around elections.
Alt's book on The Politics of Economic Decline has explored the nature of political business cycles in Britain alone and has dealt with the possibility that governments might run the economy to their own electoral advantage through manipulating the rate of inflation, disposable incomes, and unemployment in such a way as to rally short-run popular support at election time.
He finds no real evidence of any government attempting to hold down the rate of inflation in the short run in order to promote its own popularity at election time.
Before the elections of 1964, 1966, and 1970, real personal disposable income was rising at more than double its normal rate of growth — so supporting the political business cycle thesis, but Alt suggests that these "short pre-election spurts may not do the government of the day all that much good, and there is no evidence that they do (at least if short-term enough) the economy any particular harm" .
He suggests that there is little evidence that any British Government ever managed the unemployment rate simply with a view only to winning the next election.
Alt is wisely tentative in his conclusions given the nature of the available data but he is prepared to argue that there is "no evidence that any British Government in the period [since 1964]…believed it could" steal "an election by mortgaging the future in the interest of an economically better present" .
The problem with the political-business cycle literature lies in the fact that it attempts to deal with the popularity of governments and the nature of public policy-making solely on the basis of a consideration of economic variables alone and so isolates the economic dimension out of the larger political context and ignores the vital part played by non-economic factors in contributing to electoral success.
The argument that governments (foolishly and shortsightedly) attempt to win electoral support through the creation of mini-booms and full-employment at the cost of inflation just before an election approaches does accord with the common-sense of the fifties and sixties but the evidence is by no means entirely supportive of this perspective.
Moreover, the Conservatives won the election of 1979 with a specific commitment not to manage the economy on the basis of short-run considerations alone, and they won again in 1983 without creating a mini boom and with over 3 million unemployed which surely confounds a  thesis which suggests that economic good times are the major route to electoral success.
All things considered, then, we should be cautious in taking on board the view that economic policy-making and economic decline are explained by the adversarial nature of the two-party system.
We say this, not simply because of the weight of evidence we have just set down, but because of two additional factors of significance.
First, we should remember that the British economy has been in relative decline compared to the rest of the world for a hundred or more years — long before there was ever any concern expressed about adversary politics.
Second, we should not forget that political parties are only a part of the political system and they are not in sole control of Britain's economic destiny.
As this book unfolds we will be considering the impact and significance of other centres of power within polity, economy and society, but first we will be exploring the part played by interest groups within British politics.
Theories of party politics may not be able to unlock the essential reality of British politics and public policy-making, but what of interest groups?
Power, Parties and Pressures
Part II Interest Groups
in these years [1964–1970]…the pressures generated within the post-war system substantially and visibly escaped from control.
S. H. Beer (1980) British pressure groups revisited: pluralistic stagnation from the fifties to the seventies, P.A. Bulletin, 32, 8.
In the early years of the 1950s, the growing entrenchment of the theory of responsible party government, and a lingering attachment to the traditional liberal-Democratic theory of the constitution, blocked the easy rise of an emphasis upon interest groups affecting the overall thrust of public policy in Britain.
By the early 1960s, however, no political scientist who was worth his or her salt doubted the fact that interest groups provided the key to unlock the workings of British politics.
In effect, the intellectual centre of gravity slowly moved from parties to pressure groups and a new theory emerged that quickly gained wide acceptance.
Why, then, did interest groups come into focus; what was this new theory; how adequately does this theory make sense of British politics; are there alternative perspectives on the part played by interests and groups in British politics; and how adequate are those perspectives?
A number of factors pulled interest groups into view.
I At the most obvious level interest group activity increased in the post-war period in response to more state involvement in managing the economy and in welfare provision.
Interest groups not only prompted state intervention, but that intervention in disturbing the established equilibrium did much to draw-out still more activity as interests fought to defend their patch in the face of other interests jockeying for advantage.
2 Of itself, however, the reality of group activity was probably of less significance than was the fact that the established theories of British politics suddenly came to appear as "wrong" , so prompting the search for new ways to make sense of things.
By the mid-fifties, party programmes and party politics no longer seemed to matter because nothing major was at issue, and so the theory of responsible party government appeared to be increasingly irrelevant.
On the more formal, constitutional, front, survey research on voters revealed a reality utterly at odds with the conception of the active and informed citizen that was built into the  traditional liberal-democratic theory of the British constitution so confounding the credibility of that perspective on British politics as well.
So, established perspectives were tattered and there was "room" for a new theory of British politics that would be at one with the facts and celebrate the achievements of the post-war consensus.
3 As political science developed in the fifties, leading British political scientists came to display a keen sensitivity to intellectual developments in America at the same time as American political scientists were eager to come over to study British politics.
The 1950s was the golden age of interest-group theory in America and if it could "explain" American politics then there was the tempting presumption that it could do the job of making sense of British politics as well.
So, a tangled combination of factors led to a spate of work on interest groups in Britain.
What was the nature of this work, and what was the explanatory theory at its gut?
PLURALISM
Students of the "new group politics" often studied a single (usually successful!) group in great detail — such as the Confederation of British Industry, the National Farmers Union, or the British Medical Association, or else they studied group activity in a particular issue — such as capital punishment, commercial television, rent control, or race-relations legislation.
However, they invariably began their work by defining interest groups and distinguishing them from political parties.
Parties were regarded as governing coalitions that "aggregated" interests and policies before putting up candidates at elections with a view to winning and actually undertaking the direct government of the country.
For their part, interest groups assumed a rather more modest role in that they were content to "articulate" a single interest and policy.
Because of this narrowness of interest they could not (and did not seek to) form a government but exerted pressure on the government of the day in order, indirectly, to shape the particular direction of a facet of public policy to their own advantage.
Having defined interest groups in this way, it was customary for early students of the interest group world to sort it out into those groups that were promoting a "cause" or an issue, and those groups that were active in trying to advance the immediate material and "sectional" interests of their own members.
Moreover, research rather suggested that the former groups mounted one-off campaigns targeted at parliament or public opinion, whereas the latter groups (and especially the trade unions and employers associations) were of greater power and were likely to be in regular day-to-day contact with ministers, government, and the permanent administrative side of the state machine.
Theory to explain just why and how particular groups were influential  in shaping public policy to their advantage was not well developed, and easy talk about the exertion of "pressure" — as if that said anything — only sidestepped the explanatory problem.
Having said that, however, we can tease out from the textbooks of the sixties an implicit theoretical perspective that bore on groups and was designed to make sense of British politics as a whole.
 "Pluralism" was the new theory of British politics that burst through both the party and the constitutional perspectives on things.
Baldly expressed, those who subscribe to that theory see it as important to explain the process of public policy-making since that is regarded as the essential stuff of British politics itself; they see interest groups as of central and determining influence in that process; and they see the group process as enhancing of democracy in Britain.
These, then, are the three bare defining elements of pluralism, but in fuller form a pluralist perspective embraces the following elements.
1 The chief characteristic of society is that it is "open" and made up of many interests that freely and automatically form themselves into a whole variety of groups.
Moreover, because individuals are likely to be members of more than one interest ( "cross-cutting ties" ) and more than one group ( "overlapping membership" ) this will soften or moderate a commitment to any single interest.
This view quite clearly rejects a left perspective: the idea that society is made up of just two classes; that economic class is the only major, or "real" , line of cleavage; and that conflict is deep, bitter and unrelenting.
2 Individuals on their own are not particularly significant in politics.
They do not participate directly in the policy-making process and they are not well-informed.
Put another way, this perspective rejects the ideal of participatory democracy as a utopian dream, and regards the expectations for citizens integral to liberal-democratic constitutional theory as unrealistic.
3 Elections and party politics are rather less significant in securing democracy and representative and responsible government than was once thought to be the case.
After all, elections only occur once every 5 years, and the parties can only attend to the broad lines of policy and so do not represent particular interests in any meaningful way.
4 Interest groups, then, and not individuals, parties, or classes, are the crucial building blocks of the British polity.
Individuals (who know where their own best interests lie) participate in politics through groups and are effectively represented by groups.
5 No interests are left outside the group world.
Even those interests that are unorganised have the "potential" to organise should the need arise, and even inactive and apathetic citizens enjoy an indirect influence if only because elected politicians have to "anticipate" their wishes in order to win elections so that they can get back into office to bargain with the more active interests.
6 No one interest group is dominant in the policy process: there is  balance and equilibrium.
This view contradicts two rival perspectives on the world of interest-group politics.
First, and contrary to the Marxist perspective (to be discussed more fully in Chapter 7), business groups do not dominate the political process, in part because they are divided amongst themselves, in part because they face the "countervailing power" of organised labour, and in part because they face general competition from other groups as well.
Second, and contrary to the New Right perspective (to be discussed later in this chapter) organised labour is not the dominant interest in British politics.
7 Political power is "fragmented" because the resources that are the basis of power and influence are widely dispersed and "non-cumulative" .
For example, an interest group may be rich but it may be ill-organised, just as a poor group may enjoy power because it is active and well-organised.
Pluralists, in fact, attach much significance and power to action involvement, and skill in the political market place.
None of this means that they see perfect political competition in the interest group world, and influence as equally distributed among all groups and interests in society.
However, they do challenge the view of those left-inclined social scientists who see money and wealth — "economic power" — as the only solid basis for political power.
Pluralists tend to see politics as analogous to an idealised economic market place of free and fair competition.
8 There are many issues actually in politics and an infinite range of potential issues.
However, the political system is "open" and there is nothing to prevent any issue coming onto the governmental agenda for action and decision if an interest group seeks to put it there.
9 Although a group may be active and especially influential within a limited range of issues that are of pressing concern to it, such a group will take no part in a whole host of other issues where different groups will be active and influential.
10 Because there are many groups and interests in society; because groups can come and go as they wish; and because they all enjoy some measure of influence in particular issues, politics is fluid and everchanging and the policy process is best characterised as one involving bidding, bargaining, negotiation, accommodation, compromise, and checks and balances.
11 So, competition, and not polarised conflict, is the name of the political game, and that competition is kept moderate and restrained because of the implications that flow from cross-cutting ties between groups; from the existence of potential groups on the sidelines of activity; from the rules of the political game; from the role of the state; and from the whole context of pluralist politics.
We need to elaborate on some of these latter points.
12 All political activity within a democracy takes place within the context of "public opinion" .
In Britain, the political system is grounded in a fundamental consensus as to the desired ends of public policy and the means to attain them, and so the rules of the interest group game are set  by society to ensure "fair play" and free access for all legitimate interests that want the ear of government.
13 The state is open, neutral and fragmented.
Put another way, the state is seen as divorced from any one class and is not regarded as the cohesive instrument of the economically powerful (there is no ruling class); the state is not a biased "establishment" serving only itself; and the very fragmentation of the state provides for multiple access points for all interest groups.
Government provides the "arena" where all major group disputes are debated and resolved.
It also acts as a "referee" of the group struggle: it holds the ring and secures the public interest by restoring the balance and moving in when one group goes too far, and it also protects the interests of the inactive and inarticulate.
All of this is at odds with a left perspective on the "capitalist state" .
14 The outcome of interest-group activity is roughly equitable.
Every legitimate group secures its fair share and the equilibrium of interest-group interaction provides for public policy that is a reasonable approximation of society's preferences so securing the general interest at the same time as the overall system is rendered stable and legitimate.
Of course, Britain is not a democracy of the kind envisaged by those nineteenth-century theorists who focused on the active and informed citizen, and so it is not a democracy that is in accord with the "old-fashioned" liberal-democratic theory of the constitution, but interest-group competition provides for a good working democratic system.
So, from the pluralist point of view traditional liberal-democratic theory is wrong"because it is unrealistic.
They argue that democratic theory needs to be adjusted to the realities of governing Britain in the twentieth century.
Once this is done they argue that interest groups can be seen as good for democracy and the very essence of what democracy in Britain is all about.
The recognition of interests and groups in society, and a concern to see them in relation to government and the development of public policy represented an important breakthrough in the study of British politics.
There was a developing awareness that politics went beyond the institutions of government, and that the connections between state and society involved more than attending to the formal implications of regular general elections and the play of party politics.
Politics came to be seen as a social and collective activity which rose above the individual but which somehow fell short of the ideal of the nation or the whole community.
At first blush, the pluralist perspective on British politics seems to be at one with a common-sense appreciation of the facts.
There are many groups (4000 in Birmingham alone) and it is difficult to boil all interests down to something called "class" ; on a number of issues (and at certain levels of the state) we can discover a pattern of competitive interest-group politics in which no one group appears to be overwhelmingly dominant; and on occasions the state does simply referee the group struggle and is  content to ratify the outcome of the balance of competing forces.
Having said that, however, we need critically to explore the pluralist perspective.
How adequately does it make sense of British politics and the part played by interests and groups?
There are three bodies of writing that bear on this question and we will consider each in turn.
1 In recent years, as the New Right has come to prominence, a considerable number of political scientists have changed their assessment of the part played by interest groups in British politics.
Like pluralists, they continue to see groups as of fundamental importance.
However, unlike pluralists, they no longer praise their activity as enhancing of democracy and stable government, but instead condemn the whole interest-group system as being out of control.
Not only do they see organised labour as overwhelmingly dominant within the world of interests, but the absence of any checks on the system has led to what they call an "overload of demands" on government.
This, they say, has contributed to the "ungovernability" of Britain and to a whole host of economic problems as opportunities for investment and long-run growth are "crowded out" by the reality of evermore taxation raised to finance the public services demanded by interest groups.
2 The Left and Marxist perspective on British politics argues that pluralism is a theory at odds with the facts and ignores important phenomena in relation to interests and power.
Pluralism is regarded as an ideology which masks the reality of power and so helps to legitimise a system which is grounded in inequality and an absence of fair play.
Not surprisingly, left-inclined social scientists go on to take the view that good sense can only be made of British politics if the pluralist ideology is set aside and a start to understanding is made elsewhere than in the world of interest-group activity.
We will set down the bones of the left critique of pluralism in this chapter, but will attend to the more positive aspects of the left perspective on British politics in later chapters.
3 Social scientists in the mainstream of debate and those on the Left have become increasingly alive to the fact that competition is not always the reality of interest-group politics and that the relation of some groups to the state is different from that set-down in pluralist theory.
In the field of economic policy in particular, business and labour have come to work so closely with the interventionist state that they are seen as governing institutions in their own right.
In this situation it is argued that corporatism, or tripartism, better captures the reality of crucial state-interest-group relations.
OVERLOAD AND UNGOVERNABILITY
In February 1974, the Conservative Government called an early general  election: their incomes policy was in tatters and their attempt to legislate on industrial relations had been beaten back by action on the factory floor and the streets.
The country was on a 3-day working week and the mineworkers were solidly in favour of strike action in support of their pay claim.
The election was fought on the issue, "Who runs the country, the government or the trade unions?" , and the Conservative Government lost.
Labour scraped into office; the miners secured a 30 per cent pay rise; and the Industrial Relations Act was repealed.
The press was horrified and questioned whether Britain was still governable under a democratically elected administration.
It was clearly time for political scientists to reassess their pluralist perspective on interest groups: groups were real enough but were they still a "good" thing?
Most political scientists quickly came to argue that things had gone badly wrong: some groups were too powerful and the system as a whole was seen as out of control so that there was an overload of demands on government.
Four reasons were advanced for this state of affairs.
1 The public as a whole had fallen victim to the revolution of rising expectations and they displayed a lack of "realism" as to the constraints that bore on the capacity of governments to provide ever more.
These expectations were nurtured by the adversarial nature of electoral competition and they pressed hard onto government.
As the state had come to intervene more and more in the field of welfare provision it fed the ethic of equality and broke down the constraining check of deference (of poor people in their place), so itself contributing to a growing lobby for "more" and "better" public provision.
2 Within the system of government, the increased numbers of bureaucrats and officials involved in welfare and public-service provision were themselves a powerful lobby for more state activity.
They had a personal stake in improving their own incomes (and they were aided in this by the growth of white-collar and public-sector trade unions), and they had a professional commitment to improve the lot of the clients of their services.
Both factors meant that bureaucrats had every incentive to try to maximise the budgets of their own service without any regard to the larger implications of this for the scale of state activity and public expenditure.
3 Local authorities were faced with demands for improvements in service from local community groups.
They often found it difficult to resist these demands.
At the same time, however, their "own" capacity to supply new and improved services was restricted by their dependence on the limited income from rates.
Increasingly they looked to the central government for more grants and financial help.
In so far as they secured a satisfactory response then they succeeded in lifting their own fiscal crisis up to the central level of the state.
4 The trade unions in particular were too powerful.
They were pre-eminent within the interest-group world and were unchecked.
Two world  wars had drawn them into close and cooperative contact with government.
The post-war commitment to full-employment increased their bargaining power; the strike weapon in the context of a complex and interdependent economy meant that they could exert considerable pressure "through their capacity to disrupt and delay; and as inflation came to be seen as the problem (and as a problem caused by" excessive"wages demands backed by strikes) so trade unions found themselves in a new position of strategic importance and power.
To try to preserve industrial peace and control wage inflation governments were forced to adopt a carrot-and-stick approach to the trade unions.
However, the limitations of the stick forced governments to try and win voluntary cooperation through concessions and "social contracts" .
The experience of the sixties and seventies suggested that the trade unions were a political force to be reckoned with.
Taken together, these four factors were said to have made for an expansion of participants in pressure politics and for an expansion of demands on government.
In effect, the New Right wisdom was telling us that we have had too much of a good thing.
The moderate pluralism of bargains, balance, and compromise within rules of the game designed to ensure fair play and fair shares for all had somehow been transformed into the perverted and self-defeating hyperpluralism of strong groups and weak government operating on the basis of a free-for-all where might was right.
Too many groups all refusing to take "no" for an answer had made for problems precisely because a democratically based government needing popular support was reluctant to refuse demands and was weak in the face of them.
In consequence state intervention increased and public expenditure rocketed.
The problem of demand overload was seen as further compounded by two related factors.
First, the increased weight of demands came at a time when the actual problems thrust before government were not only more complex and intractable, but were also more interdependent — solve one (say, inflation) and you only caused another (rising unemployment).
Second, demand overload and intractable and complicated problems came at a time of decreased government capacity, effectiveness, and authority.
A series of conspicuous policy failures and U-turn retreats served to reduce public support for government, and willing consent to the law.
Moreover, the absence of economic growth limited the government's effectiveness to supply and fund the expanding demand for services.
Now, observers sensitive to the problem of overload (and quietly concerned with the survival of the free market and the profitability of private enterprise), detected a vicious downward spiral at work between economic and political factors.
A stagnant economy heaps increased demands on government as more people are in need.
This, however, occurs at a time when the government has limited financial slack to be  able to respond.
Inevitably, therefore, the government fails to deliver the goods as demanded, as expected, and sometimes even as promised.
This failure undermines governmental authority and weakens the legitimacy of the whole political system so that the governability of the nation is called into question.
There is no easy way back up out of the spiral because if a government attempts to buy back public support in order to alleviate the "political" problem of governability then this not only overtaxes the economy but stimulates inflation so further exacerbating the "economic" problem and making sustained and balanced growth all the more difficult.
What can we make of this perspective on British politics?
It cannot be simply dismissed, still less ignored, because it deals with phenomena of real significance that are in the public eye.
The trade unions are a problematic force both in and on the uneasy edges of the system of power; a variety of factors have conspired to produce an upsurge of competing participants and conflicting demands; elected governments have frequently shown themselves to be weak and vacillating in the face of pressures and problems; and certain democratic aspects of the British polity have heaped problems on to the capitalist economy in a way that has "crowded out" opportunities for growth.
Put another way, the overload, or hyperpluralist, perspective is more keenly attuned to the realities of aspects of politics in the seventies than is the pluralist perspective which was very much a product of the cosy consensus politics of the fifties and sixties.
However, this comparative assessment of the respective merits of two bodies of work does not mean that we can regard the hyperpluralist perspective as an adequate explanation of British politics.
The New Right emphasis on adversary politics and an overload of demands has been more of a critique of democracy in Britain than it has ever been a rigorous description of, and explanation for, British politics.
It has been self-consciously policy-oriented and has fed directly into the political debate with a series of prescriptions which involve cutting back the activities of the state and changing the nature of democracy in Britain.
At best it provides us with a partial and intensely partisan perspective because it is keenly committed to the view from the top — to the view of those who are more in control than controlled, and who are, therefore, centrally concerned to secure political stability and sustain a particular pattern of economic relations based on the economic order of capitalism and the free market.
The New Right in choosing to focus on, and criticise, pressure groups, parties, and elected governments as the very stuff of British politics, chooses to ignore other phenomena that are of political significance, such as the power of the secret state that we will be considering in Chapter S. Moreover, although it is a perspective which is critical of things, criticism is restricted to politics, and to democratic politics at that, and there is no attempt to direct critical attention to the functioning of the economic system and to the power which lurks hidden within it.
We will be exploring these matters in later chapters.
The  hyperpluralist perspective may have sought to distance itself from the pluralist perspective on British politics, but there is much in common between the two orientations.
The emphasis is still on interests overtly organised in political action, and this occurs to the detriment of a sustained consideration of the implications of inaction, the problem of interests forming themselves into groups, and the whole context of politics and power.
These points are discussed in the Left critique of pluralism.
PLURALISM AS IDEOLOGY
Left-inclined social scientists argue that the pluralist perspective on British politics is grossly inadequate because it adopts a restricted frame of reference; takes too much for granted; and fails to deal with the whole problem of political inaction.
In consequence, it actually masks the true reality of power in Britain and so serves as an ideology legitimising and stabilising the system as one worthy of public support.
Let us elaborate on these points.
The pluralist conception of politics is overly restricted.
Pluralists actually define British politics as public policy-making, and so they see politics as somehow "explained" once they tell us how those policies are made as a result of the activities of the various interested groups.
This means that the public-policy process is treated as an end-in-itself.
Left-inclined critics see two main things as wrong with this conception of politics.
First, the fact that pluralists are only interested in explaining what they choose to call public policy-making means that they confine their attention to those issues that involve government and the state in a very direct way.
They accept all too easily the public/private distinction and so rule out a consideration of those "privately" made decisions in the economic sphere that have profound implications for the life chances of millions of people.
Left-inclined critics of pluralism reject the utility of the public/private distinction as ideological; they reject the idea of a self-contained autonomous politics distinct from the economy and economic power; and they argue that decisions made by businessmen in "private" enterprise have a massive public aspect that needs to be explored because those decisions involve the exercise of very real power.
Second, the concern of pluralists to explain the making of public policies means that they emphasise inputs into the political system to the detriment of a serious consideration of public-policy outputs.
Pluralists are centrally interested in identifying who participates in public policy-making.
They tend not to explore what difference it makes who takes part in the public-policy process, or else they assume that the beneficiaries of public policy can simply be "read-off" from information about group participation because of uncomplicated assumptions about all groups  being able to participate in order to advance their own interest.
Left-inclined critics argue that pluralists ignore the more fundamental question of who actually benefits from public-policy outcomes and wrongly assume that participation is power.
Simply expressed, and taking these two points together, pluralists are charged with asking the wrong question (who participates instead of who benefits) about just the public aspect of policy-making so that they ignore the "private" aspect of power and policy-making altogether.
Pluralists ignore the problem of group formation.
They operate on the assumption that every individual is the best judge of his or her real interest and they define interest groups in terms of "shared attitudes" .
In consequence, they tend to see a simple one-to-one relation between attitudes, interests, and group organisation, and so they take the interest group world as a given that arises "naturally" in a way that calls for no complicated explanation.
Left-inclined critics of pluralism reject this as inadequate.
They recognise that not all interests in society are organised into groups and in order to explain this state of affairs they see it as important to consider two phenomena that tend to be ignored by pluralists.
First, there is the problem of information.
For example, all of us have a stake, or an objective interest, in a healthy environment but we may not be aware of the ways in which the environment is being polluted to the detriment of our health.
If we lack the information that is vital in enabling us to gain a subjective awareness of our real interest then we are hardly likely to be a position to get together to organise.
Second, the issue of group formation goes beyond the simple matter of information, because not all interests are "allowed" to develop a sense of their own collective identity.
For example, the poor and the unemployed are largely outside of the interest group world.
This is best explained, not by suggesting that they do not have interests in common or that they are satisfied with things as they are, but by attending to the crushing significance of those ideas in society which preach that to be poor is an individual's own fault and reflects his or her lack of preparedness to study and train, to work hard, to postpone having a family, or what have you.
In a similar way, for homosexuals to organise as a group involves their coming to terms with themselves in the context of a society which has certain views as to what is "normal" and proper with respect to sexual behaviour.
These views do not make it easy for individuals to come out, still less for the interest to come together in public political activity.
Before women could form into groups to press for change they too had to challenge ruling ideas — ideas which suggested that their proper place was at home with the family.
We will discuss the nature of interests more fully in Chapter 6, and will be discussing the nature of social control more fully in Chapter 10.
For the moment, however, it is sufficient to note that the formation of interest  groups is a problem of the highest order; the group world cannot be taken as a given but needs to be explained; and we have to attend to the determinants of individual consciousness and awareness, and the part they play in the development of groups and political conflict.
The pluralist perspective will not help us deal with these problems because it is more interested in political behaviour than in the role of ideas in society.
Pluralists provide only a partial perspective on the inactivity of certain interests and groups.
They assume that people know where their own best interests lie; they assume that people will automatically participate in politics if their interests are threatened; and they assume that all interests possess the "potential" to organise and be influential in politics.
Because of the assumption that people will always squeal politically if their toes are trodden on, pluralists tend to interpret political inactivity as a sign of a rough satisfaction with the prevailing state of things.
Left-inclined critics, whilst recognising that political inactivity can be construed as a measure of satisfaction and power for certain interests, nevertheless argue that this is not the case for all interests and in many cases they regard inactivity as symptomatic of a powerlessness and fatalism which renders any activity pointless.
So, from the left perspective, political inactivity can be a sign of satisfaction and strength, but it can also be a sign of disaffection and weakness.
In concrete terms, Miliband has argued that in a capitalist society, the interests of private capital will invariably and necessarily be taken into account in the development of public policy and so we should not expect to see business leaders standing on a soap box anymore than we should expect to see those who enjoy the ear of government organising on the streets.
However, there are groups outside of the mainstream who do not press their views on the state even though the individuals concerned may be keenly alive to the possibility of their lot being improved as a result of state action.
This inactivity is best interpreted as indicative of a powerlessness, but is perfectly "rational" once we recognise that the group is making certain calculations as to the likely response to their views and demands.
If a group anticipates no response at all, a blunt refusal, or even an attack upon its very integrity, then it makes good sense to keep its political head down below the level of activity.
Simply expressed, there is no point in talking politics to the powerful if you are powerless and cannot force them to listen and act on what you have to say.
For groups in this position the right to take part in politics represents little more than the right to whistle in the wind.
Pluralists exaggerate the extent to which all groups enjoy some influence.
Left-inclined critics of pluralism argue that the interest-group world is one where there is imperfect competition and business dominance.
Of course, there is the recognition that there are certain issues of no moment to business (such as abortion, or capital punishment), but within their particular sphere of concern the Left regards the business interest as  overwhelmingly influential, and trade unions (in particular ) are seen as in an inferior position.
Government cannot be indifferent to the long-term success of business.
If it does not facilitate economic growth and expansion then it limits its capacity to raise taxes and so cuts into the public revenue on which its own power depends.
Moreover, because depression, inflation, or other economic distress can bring down a government, and because jobs, prices, production, the standard of living, and the economic security of everyone, all tend to rest on the performance of business, politicians and administrators alike have to regard business as more than just another interest group.
The persistence of inequalities with respect to the distribution of income and wealth, and the survival of capitalism itself, are seen by the Left as attesting to the privileged position of business within economy, society, and polity.
Pluralists only study an aspect of power.
For pluralists, power is only really seen as existing in action, participation, and decision-making within the public arena of politics and government.
Left-inclined critics reject the idea that power is only embodied in action and decision, and is specific to particular issues and concrete policy situations.
They see power as "structured" beyond and behind public participation in particular issues, and they point to another "face" of political power caught up in the fact that certain issues do not even get onto the public policy-making agenda for action and decision at all.
In effect, they argue that the governmental agenda cannot be taken as a given.
We are challenged to recognise, first, that power is involved in non-decision-making, in inaction, and in non-participation, and, second, that interests are advantaged and disadvantaged by the fact that certain issues are not on the governmental agenda for complicated reasons that take us behind the scenes of the public face of policy-making and into the murky waters of the constraining role of ideas in society.
Pluralists fail to see the inherent "bias" of the state.
Although left critics do not agree among themselves as to how to explain this bias towards the interests of the propertied class, they are unanimous in rejecting the pluralist assumption that the British state is "neutral" as between different classes.
We will discuss Marxist perspectives on the state in Chapter 7.
The pluralist perspective on British politics was built up by political scientists who were predisposed to provide an account of interest-group politics which presented it in a good, democratic light.
The facts were not approached cold.
The research dice were loaded in favour of pluralist conclusions.
First, pluralists tended to study successful groups.
The early emphasis upon the powerful house-trained group going about things the proper way built up a picture of group influence and success within the context of the play of a moderate and restrained politics.
Second, when  pluralists studied issues in British politics then they tended to latch onto issues that generated controversy and a highly visible politics of action and interaction.
Issues such as the abolition of capital punishment or the legislation on abortion inevitably revealed a picture of an open, competitive pattern of politics where the state was often content to sit back and referee the group struggle.
These studies were not "wrong" , but it would be wrong to conclude that this pattern of interest-group politics holds for all issues.
Third, the emphasis on groups, issues, policy-making, and action sucked attention away from the more unchanging aspects of British politics, from non-issues and non-groups, and from the winners and losers of the outcomes of public policy, and all of this suggests a picture rather at odds with the fair and equal pluralist heaven.
Fourth, pluralists try to have it both ways when interpreting the power significance of inactive interests and groups: they minimise the influence of the rich when they are inactive, but choose to exaggerate the influence of the poor unless they are inactive.
So, pluralists argue that if those of economic wealth are not directly involved in public policy-making then this is some kind of proof that they lack political power, but if poorer people are not directly involved then it is suggested that they are satisfied and enjoy power because politicians will "anticipate" their concerns and they themselves possess the "potential" to organise for their own advantage.
All things considered, then, the left claims that pluralism tends to provide a top-down view of British politics.
In dealing with the surface politics of the moment and with the politics of participation and satisfaction it tends to reproduce the bias of the system under scrutiny because it provides a description couched in terms set by the system itself.
The pluralist perspective makes no attempt to criticise British politics, and it chooses to bend democratic theory in a conservative direction so that it justifies and defends the established order.
Pluralism is insensitive, and inattentive, to the view from the bottom; to the politics of the powerless; to the ill-organised and unincorporated politics of movement, protest and riot; and to the power of government and the state to rebuff demands for change and to destroy certain groups.
Now, those of a pluralist persuasion may be tempted to suggest that the left-inclined critique of their perspective is itself ideological and simply the product of bigoted minds disaffected from the established order and inattentive to the facts.
Such a view would be wrong because many of the points of critique that we have just set down have been backed up by solid research into the concrete world of interests and groups.
Research on interests in local politics, and research on the "third world" of groups at the national level with only limited and sporadic access to government, has revealed a picture of the interest-group world starkly at odds with the rosy optimism of the pluralist perspective.
In the 1960s, in response to changes in social structure and expectations, and in the context of a party and interest-group world that would not embrace new interests and demands, large numbers of inner-city residents formed themselves into loose groups to press for changes in public policy and in the balance of the public-private provision of the basics for a decent life.
Research has revealed that these community action groups were invariably regarded with hostility by Conservative and Labour councils.
Moreover, these groups found themselves to be in a catch 22 — no win — situation so far as their own political action was concerned.
If they were relatively inactive and presented their demands through what the councillors defined as the "proper" (private) channels then their demands rarely secured a favourable response.
However, as soon as they moved on to a more public and active presentation of their demands then councillors condemned this activity, the demands themselves were ignored, and the groups were held up to public ridicule as a threat to democracy and the general interest.
We have ourselves observed and documented many such cases in our studies of local politics in Kensington and Chelsea, and Croydon, where relatively powerless groups of underprivileged people were frequently ignored by councillors when they played by the rules of the game, and were vilified when they did not.
For many groups, public-pressure group activity was no sign of their power, but it was a testament to the frustrated powerlessness of those who could not get the ear of government, still less their positive action — no matter what they did or did not do.
The rules of the game, then, far from being set by society so as to ensure fair play for all, seemed to be set by the local authorities.
Moreover, these rules served to protect established policies and the easy access of those groups and interests advantaged by them, at the same time as groups urging change were ruled out of court by a whole series of exclusion devices.
On the one hand, interests in line with the prevailing policy and ideology of a local authority tend to secure effective access and substantive policies that advance their interest without any need for activity and organisation.
In Croydon, big-business interests were influential in local politics but their involvement was personal and informal and their influence was rarely in evidence in action on policy-making as the local authority was keenly sensitive to their concerns without any need for pressure-group prompting from outside.
On the other hand, poorer residents, in spite of their organisation and activity, could often do very little to press their demands through to a successful policy outcome.
They were frequently left out in the cold and were fobbed off with symbolic concessions — such as a tatty play space instead of a decent nursery.
If these groups persisted in their protest then they were drawn into sham "participation" exercises with the local authority that experience shows did more to neuter their dissent than to advance their real interests.
In either case, the basic fundamentals of substantive council policy were left quite untouched.
Research rather suggested that there often seemed to be a dual political system of interests, action, and demands at the local level.
One was inactive, close to the council, and powerful.
The other was active and noisy, far-removed from the council, and powerless.
Neither of these patterns of politics was really pulled into view by pluralism, because that perspective could not cope with too much raucous political activity — still less with too little or none at all.
CORPORATISM
During the 1970s, some political observers, recognising the unequal participation and influence of certain interests in public policy making, began to argue that British politics could better be described as "corporatist" rather than pluralist.
The very phrase corporatism is a problem since it continues to evoke the spectre of Italian fascism and authoritarian rule.
Moreover, there is a profound lack of agreement on what the concept actually refers to.
Some see corporatism grandly as a total economic system distinct from capitalism and socialism; some see corporatism as a particular kind of "state form" distinct from, say, parliamentarianism, where citizens participate in the determination of policies through the exercise of voting rights in relation to a parliament; and still others see corporatism rather more modestly and fruitfully as connoting a particular system of interest-group politics and representation distinct from the pluralist system that we have just discussed.
Different authors may define corporatism differently, but we should not worry too much about this since corporatism is a highly complex phenomenon and different dimensions, or aspects, of it are covered by these diverse conceptualisations.
Put another way, certain elements are common to the corporatist perspective on politics in the West, and so, although there are different schools of theory, it is possible to fuse some of these together in order to recognise that we are looking at a perspective that bears on interests and the state within the contemporary period of economic development.
Much of this work will be discussed in Chapter 8 when we will be dealing with the way in which the British state has handled the economy.
In the context of this chapter, however, it is particularly important to deal with the corporatist perspective on the politics of organised interests since it provides some kind of challenge to the pluralist perspective (even though pluralism and corporatism share a number of basic assumptions), and it fleshes out elements of the left critique of pluralism (even though much corporatist theory is hostile to a Marxist theory of the capitalist state).
Corporatists share with pluralists a belief that the basic building blocks of the polity and the political process are groups formed around interests and that these have somehow taken over from the significance of representation through elections, parties and parliaments.
However, corporatists are sharply critical of the pluralist perspective in so far as that perspective sees the interest-groups system as competitive, "democratic" , equal, and open to all, so that it leads to policy outcomes that give fair shares to everyone.
In this sense, then, corporatists see pluralism as basically "wrong" — as a theory at odds with the facts.
But, like left critics, they recognise that the pluralist perspective serves as a powerful ideology legitimising (by mystifying) the established political order.
In one of the classic articles on corporatism Schmitter (1979) clarifies the distinction between pluralism and corporatism in the following way.
Pluralism can be defined as a system of interest representation in which the constituent units are organised into an unspecified number of multiple, voluntary, competitive, nonhierarchically ordered and self-determined (as to type or scope of interest) categories which are not specially licensed, recognised, subsidised, created or otherwise controlled in leadership selection or interest articulation by the state and which do not exercise a monopoly of representational activity within their respective categories.
whereas:
Corporatism can be defined as a system of interest representation in which the constituent units are organised into a limited number of singular, compulsory, noncompetitive, hierarchically ordered and functionally differentiated categories, recognised or licensed (if not created) by the state and granted a deliberate representational monopoly within their respective categories in exchange for observing certain controls on their selection of leaders and articulation of demands and supports.
Now, we should not quibble about Schmitter's definition of pluralism (which is somewhat different and rather more wordy than is our own perspective on this theory) since Schmitter is intent on making the point that the system of interest politics as it currently exists is at odds with the pluralist viewpoint in crucial ways that bear on the nature of interest groups and the access of particular interests to the state.
In fact, other writers within the corporatist tradition seek to go beyond this emphasis upon the structure of interests in order to suggest that this new pattern of interest-group politics has itself served to contribute to more extensive state intervention in economy and society.
In Cawson's words, "corporatism" in its broadest meaning is a pattern of articulation between the state and functional interests in civil society which fuses representation and intervention in an interdependent relationship".
Powerful interest groups prompt state intervention; state intervention has implications for the nature of the interest-group world; and each reinforces the other leading to an increasingly closed and tight pattern of interest group/state relations.
More than this, there are those within the corporatist tradition who go even further.
They recognise that the development of both state intervention and a corporatist system of interest representation go together, but they go on to suggest that this is tied into a particular period of capitalist development.
They note that in the early days of capitalism, the role of the state was limited to the enforcement of a legal structure necessary for the market to function.
This was the era of competitive capitalism and the laisser-faire state which simply sought to guarantee freedom of contract and trade at the same time as it dismantled the restrictive apparatus of the feudal economy and secured public order at home and defence from abroad.
This era was not to last for long.
War, international competition, industrial concentration (and the demise of competitive capitalism), technological developments, declining profitability, and the political implications of the great depression of the 1930s (and the related decline in any faith in the self-regulating virtues of unfettered capitalism) all heightened tensions, increased the need for order and stability, and prompted the search for a "better" way of handling economic and political affairs.
Large and powerful interest groups came together coordinating the activities of whole economic sectors and enforcing membership on those they saw as "their" people.
State intervention increased, in managing the economy ( "Keynesianism" ), and in areas of social policy (the "welfare state" ).
In the course of these developments, corporatists argue that the competitive and open pattern of pluralist politics passed into comparative insignificance.
Certain interests were able to secure exclusive access and an inside track to the ear of government as well as a permanent relationship to the administrative side of the state machine.
The peak associations of business and labour were important in the economic sphere as they controlled resources that were needed by government if public policy was to be effective and capable of implementation and enforcement.
In this state of affairs, these major interests were no longer in a position of having to simply press in on government from the outside.
The fact that they were needed by the state, because there was a "public" dimension to their activity, meant that they were actually co-opted into governmental decision-making: they were asked to give advice, and, more than this, they came to act as agents through which state policy was actually implemented.
So, certain interests, but only certain interests, came to enjoy a quasi-legal status so that they almost became a part of the state and governing institutions in their own right.
Other lesser interests and associations continued to exist but they were excluded from influence in crucial areas of public policy and were left out in the political cold.
Simply expressed, there is the suggestion within the literature on corporatism that it is possible to link the growth of corporate, closed, forms of interest representation to developments with respect to the interventionist state in the context of needs of the capitalist economy at a particular, advanced (or late), stage of development.
It is these three points about interests, state, and economy, that serve as the cutting edge, and the defining elements of corporatist theory.
The insights into politics derived from a corporatist perspective have been applied to Britain by Keith Middlemas in an important book on Politics in Industrial Society which carefully explores the experience of  the British system since 1911.
Middlemas recognises that "the accepted version of the constitution…has become inadequate" ; he asks "is it possible to discover a hidden code which explains more fully the behaviour of political parties, other institutions and government?" ; and he argues that it is possible to "establish a theory…of British governance" in the first half of the twentieth century".
In bald form, Middlemas argues that around the time of the First World War the nineteenth-century British political system had broken down under the weight of the antagonism and conflicts in industrial society.
A deep change took place in the nature of government.
Parliament and party became increasingly irrelevant, and trade unions and employers' associations came into positions of political prominence.
Indeed, "the main theme" of the book is the argument that the triangular pattern of cooperation between government and the two sides of industry built up a new form of harmony which lasted until the mid-sixties and led to the trade unions and employers' associations being elevated to a new sort of status so that they became "governing institutions" sharing some of the political power and attributes of the state itself.
In this "process of corporate bias" , what had once been merely interest groups crossed the political threshold and became part of the extended state.
The control which state and interests together could exert over society and economy contributed to a uniquely low level of class conflict for much of the twentieth century so ensuring a political stability that reached a head over the period 19455.
Middlemas concludes by arguing that "the nineteenth century concept of the state is wholly outdated, even when the modifications of early pluralist theory are taken into account" .
What can we make of the corporatist perspective on British politics, and just how stable is the pattern of politics which is suggested by those who point to close collaborative arrangements between particular interests and the state in pursuit of ever more state intervention?
There is no doubt that the corporatist literature is important: it is ambitious; it is sensitive to the tie-up between politics and economics (in a way which pluralism never was); it deals not just with the process of public policy-making but with the substantive outcomes of that process as well; and it is keenly alive both to the clashes of interests and to the forces which have tended to hold those clashes in some kind of check.
Having said that, however, we should not exaggerate the stability of corporatist arrangements since this particular method of representing and accommodating interests is threatened by a number of factors.
1 There is the threat of rank-and-file revolts from within those groups that are tied in closely to the state.
Trade union leaders may well enter into "social contracts" with governments and pledge themselves and their members to wage restraint and productivity improvements in return for social benefits and an extension of trade union powers, but their control  over their own members is limited and unofficial strikes can, and have, destroyed deals worked out at the top.
2 Marxists, convinced as to the eventual overthrow of capitalism, argue that corporatism is at best a short-run institutional solution to the deep-seated conflicts between capitalists and workers.
It may paper over things and succeed in buying time, but it cannot overcome the class-based conflicts that will eventually bubble up to the surface.
Indeed, as workers come to recognise that the corporatist game is rigged against them — wage restraint in return for the "benefits" of a social contract, whilst everything is done to foster profits for the capitalists — they will rebel against it.
In fact, this perspective on the demise of corporatism exaggerates the likelihood of a renewed revolutionary impulse and ignores the implication of the new mood of "realism" born of recession.
Indeed, it is the fact of recession which rather suggests that the greatest threat to the persistence of corporatist arrangements may come, not from the Left and labour, but from the Right and from the industrial capitalists themselves — those interests, that is, that the Left have seen as having benefited most from corporatism.
Recession, in making people unemployed, weakens worker organisations and limits the utility of the strike weapon (the only real weapon of labour) because labour is reluctant to come out in a situation in which the hold on a job is precarious.
In this state of affairs, there is no need to buy-off union potential for disruption and dissent through collaborative arrangements with the state and with promises of state benefits born of more intervention.
Corporatism, then, may be a fair-weather flower.
It may have bloomed with the post-war boom, but it may wither with recession as it is no longer needed to secure stability.
Moreover, the increased state intervention that was part of the trend to corporatism imposed costs and taxes that capitalists are showing themselves eager and able to shrug off given the support of the politics of Thatcherism.
3 A corporate tie-up between privileged interests and state may be threatened by the emergence onto the political agenda of new groups and new "citizen" concerns that fall outside of the incorporation that bears on groups caught up in economic issues and the division of labour.
Those at the receiving end of policies made as a result of corporate arrangements — the policy-takers rather than the policy-makers — have often been forced to bear the costs of those arrangements.
Moreover, as some kind of consciousness of this has filtered through, so we have witnessed the rise of an unincorporated politics of protest as a challenge to the incorporated politics of order and control.
Inner-city riots, the politics of nationalism, peace protests, community action, and the emergence of single-issue movements around the felt concerns of blacks, women, the youthful, and the disenchanted, may not prove to be permanent features on the  political scene but whilst they are around they are likely to defy easy incorporation into the snugness of the state.
A corporatist perspective on the politics of interests in Britain contains powerful insights that draw our attention to major developments with respect to interest politics, state intervention, and the development of the economy.
Having said that, you would miss a lot in British politics if you were to put all your interpretative eggs into the basket of corporatist theory.
We have already suggested that corporatist arrangements may lack stability and staying power, especially in the context of recession, and that the other side of the coin to those arrangements is the unincorporated politics of protest.
The reach of corporatist theory is over ambitious: it makes sense of things but only with respect to some groups; some issues; some periods; and at some levels of the state.
Corporatism tends to "fit" the facts best with respect to the major functional economic groupings of capital and labour; with respect to issues of economic policy (especially in so far as they concern incomes) in periods of boom when labour cannot be easily disciplined by market forces; and at the level of the central state.
Take any one of these four ingredients away and you will be much less likely to find a close corporatist tie up between particular interests and the state in pursuit of increased state intervention.
Many groups, and even more interests, are outside the corporatist system (clients and consumers in particular); many issues continue to reveal a pattern of competitive politics (especially moral issues like abortion) or protest politics (especially on environmental issues); and at the level of the local state the absence of any real concern with economic policies and the central concern with consumption issues suggest that the soil may not be so warm for the development of corporatist arrangements.
CONCLUSION TO CHAPTERS 2 AND 3
In the last two chapters we have looked at the part played by parties and interest groups in British politics.
More particularly, we have looked at different perspectives, or theories, on these phenomena.
We have set down, and assessed, the theories of responsible party government, pluralism, adversary politics, overload and ungovernability, and corporatism.
We have also explored the left-inclined critique of responsible party government and pluralism, so highlighting the extent to which theory is up against theory as much as any theory is assessed up against facts.
Where, then, have we got in our understanding of British politics as a result of focusing on perspectives on parties and pressures?
It is not possible to come to a clean and simple judgement.
No one of the theories we have set down is all wrong, any more than any one perspective is all right so providing us with a single key to "explain" British politics.
Like the parson's egg, each theory is good in parts: they provide  insights into aspects of British politics at particular periods of our history.
Having said that, some theories are better than others.
In the concluding part of this chapter we want to pass rough, but clear, judgement on these matters so that you know where we stand.
The theory of responsible party government and pluralist democratic theory together provided the mainstream interpretation of British politics for most of the period since the Second World War.
They eased their way into becoming the established constitutional theory and they praised British politics during the good times of economic boom.
By the mid- seventies, however, these theories were subjected to challenge.
Most political scientists became keenly alive to their limited explanatory worth, and the New Right condemned British democracy pointing to the adversarial nature of party politics and to the dangerous overload of interest-group demands.
Responsible party government and pluralism fitted some of the facts of British politics for some of the time, but they were always overoptimistic and crucially flawed in ways we have pointed to in the body of this chapter.
On the party front, programmes are often vague, do not always offer much choice, and in crucial policy areas are not adequately implemented.
Moreover, the electorate often seems to vote for a candidate and a party in ignorance of, and in spite of(rather than because of), the party programme that is on offer.
For its part, pluralism adopts a restricted frame of reference and takes too much for granted so that it skates on the surface of political life and only deals with the politics of participation and the politics of satisfaction to the detriment of any consideration of other less "obvious" things: there is little that is deep and illuminating about the pluralist perspective and crucial concerns are ignored as irrelevant to politics: pluralism is less wrong than limited.
We regard the left critique of pluralism as cogent, but it goes over the top in seeing everything about pluralism as completely wrong since it is the case that an open competitive model of interest-group politics does fit the facts on certain issues.
Moreover, the left perspective on interests is not without its own problems.
It hangs too much on the concept of class and fails to explore the changes and complexities that bear on this; it tends to be gross in its handling of the power of business; and it is unsure in its handling of the power of organised labour, seeing it both as lacking in any real power, but as somehow having the potential to become a ferocious force capable of transforming the capitalist system totally.
In this chapter we have only really attended to the negative, critical, edge of left theory in so far as it challenges rival perspectives on parties and pressures.
We will however, be critically assessing the more positive aspects of left theory in later chapters.
The theses about adversary politics and overload came to the fore as the fact of economic recession bit into public consciousness: these were  the pessimistic theories for the bad times.
In fact, the adversary politics thesis overgeneralises about the extent of policy instability; the evidence affords only limited support for the existence of political business cycles; and given the long-term trend of Britain's economic decline it is absurd to blame this on the nature of party politics in the sixties and seventies.
For its part, the thesis about overload struck a chord since it fed off the common-sense of the media.
It was, however, always hotter as a critique of British democracy and working-class participation, than it was in providing a careful analysis of interests and power in British politics.
Proponents of adversary politics and overload present themselves as providing new hard-edged perspectives at one with the facts and at odds with the model of responsible party government and pluralism.
In fact, they share assumptions and limitations in common with the theories they reject, and differ only in the way in which they assess the worth of British democracy in the context of changed economic circumstances.
In all four theories attention rests on the "public" and accessible features of democratic political life to the detriment of any substantive and critical concern with the economy and with the non-democratic secret state that we will be exploring in Chapter 5.
The strength of the, corporatist perspective lies precisely in the extent to which it does deal with the substance of state intervention and with the implications of the particular stage of capitalist development.
However, we see the thesis as overambitious since it only holds for certain groups and issues and for a particular period of British politics — and that period, may have passed at least for the moment.
Parties and pressure groups are important parts of the British political system, and they do assume a position of power and some prominence in linking economy and society to the polity and the state.
But for all that, they are only parts of the political system, and in the chapters that follow we will be attending to the significance of other things.
First, however, we will attend to the crisis of the contemporary constitution — a crisis that is partly revealed in the literature about adversary politics and overload since these perspectives challenge accepted constitutional theory, condemn British politics, and point to the need for constitutional reconstruction.
The Constitution in Crisis
I have reached the conclusion that our constitution is wearing out.
Lord Hailsham, The Listener, 21 October 1976
The introduction of proportional representation is the linchpin of our entire programme of radical reform.
SDP/Liberal Alliance, Working Together for Britain (1983)
Labour will take action to…abolish the undemocratic House of Lords as quickly us possible.
Labour Party, The New Hope for Britain (1983)
For much of this century things have seemed pretty clear on the constitutional front.
There was a flurry of constitutional activity between 1906 and 1914, and the House of Lords had its powers cut back by the Parliament Act, 1911, so formally putting the "balanced" constitution to rest.
Since then, however, in spite of a hiccup of concern during the depression of the 1930s, the British constitution has been seen as settled and so constitutional debate could itself settle down.
By and large, constitutional authorities, parties and public alike were pleased with the set up.
In the period since the Second World War, political stability, economic growth, and a broad societal consensus, meant that the constitution as it was, as it was said to be, and as it was said it should be, were all seen as of one, pulling together in mutual support in a way that called for "no change" .
In the 1960s, there were minor (and seemingly unconnected) grumbles about many of the parts of the constitution.
Local government was inefficient and lacked leaders of calibre; the civil service was too amateurish; the House of Commons needed a strong committee system; policy coordination and planning were poor; and many felt that there was scope for reform with respect to the redress of individual grievances against the state.
However, these grumbles, and the piecemeal reforms and constitutional pseudo-changes which they inspired, did not spill over into a generalised sense of unease about the essence of the liberal-democratic constitution itself.
There was almost a concern to avoid the problem of the British state.
There was the hope that entry into the  European Community would offer the solution of a magic external escape route, and the drive for institutional efficiency embraced the pretence that the old system could be made to work "better" whilst it was still left pretty much intact.
It was all desperate, delaying stuff.
Developments since the late 1960s changed things.
Constitutional fundamentals have been opened up with a vengeance.
Entry into the EC challenged parliamentary sovereignty; the growth of direct action and extra-parliamentary politics in Northern Ireland and on the mainland challenged the rule of law and the stability of the liberal-democratic state; the ups-and-downs of nationalism in Wales and Scotland challenged the unitary state and threatened the break-up of Britain; the use of referenda [popular and direct votes on issues]revealed the crumbling legitimacy attaching to the indirect democracy of voting for people to parliament; the conventions underpinning cabinet government were buffeted by a trend to "open government" that weakened collective responsibility and Cabinet solidarity; and developments within the Labour Party have had constitutional implications at the self-same time as the Liberals and SDP have sought to imprint themselves directly onto the British constitution with proposals for radical constitutional change including proportional representation.
All these developments have made for confusion.
Experts were increasingly unclear as to what was the British constitution.
However, they were very clear that a "gap" had somehow opened up between the favourable tone of established constitutional theory and the horrors of day-to-day political practice.
Instead of limited liberal-democracy they saw unrestrained mass democracy pushing the state into ever more intervention; instead of responsible party government they saw adversary politics; and instead of the harmony of pluralist group competition they saw only overload and hyperpluralism with the trade unions as the new lads on the top.
There was agreement that British politics had slipped beyond the explanatory grasp, and the control, of the established constitutional theory.
More than this, the Royal Commission on the Constitution detected "discontent" , "mistrust" and "disenchantment" with the prevailing set-up, pointing out that "the people of Great Britain have less attachment to their system of government than in the past" .
In this kind of political situation, and in the context of an economic decline that was "blamed" on the excesses of democratic politics, instead of praising the British constitution as the best in the world, the constitutional authorities agreed that things were very badly wrong.
Fundamental constitutional reconstruction was called for as a matter of urgency.
In little over a decade, constitutional clarity was replaced by confusion; praise was replaced by piercing critique; and support for the system was replaced by the demand for a new constitutional settlement to reshape politics.
Simply expressed, the set-up as it was, as it was said to be, and as it was said it should be, had all pulled apart in a way that called for change.
By the mid-seventies, then, the constitution was clearly in crisis.
Instead of just being part of the context within which politics occurred and was constrained, it has become an issue in politics on which interests and parties were keenly divided.
On the surface, the Conservative victory of 1979 seemed to blunt the case for change and in a 1981 Commons debate on the British constitution the minister of state at the Home Office boldly put the case for no change, arguing that"this is a time when we should stand up for our great tradition of parliamentary democracy…
I think that it is a great and positive system, a marvellous system…
There is nothing more important than that we should stick up for the system that we have inherited down the ages, and that still has so much to offer the people of our country."
In fact, even as he spoke, the forces for change were there and rallying: the critique of the established constitutional authorities was eating into things below the froth of party politics; the Liberal-SDP Alliance considered that the "key to…change lies in electoral and constitutional reform" ; and Tony Benn, generally recognised as leader of the radical left in the Labour Party, was telling large and enthusiastic audiences up and down the country that "constitutional questions are the key to power in a parliamentary democracy" and that "socialists need to give at least as much attention to the institutions of the state as to the power structure of the economy" .
Of course, the Conservatives won again in 1983, but the fact that they secured two-thirds of the seats in the Commons with less than half of the popular vote encouraged the centre parties to cry still louder for electoral reform at the same time as the Left were forced to ponder on the fact that had there been proportional representation then the Conservatives would not have been able to form a government without the moderating support of another party in the coalition.
So, the play of party politics at the ballot box may give us interludes of constitutional peace, but we cannot escape the fact that the British constitution is still up for grabs, in politics, and on the agenda for change.
We are in a period of decisive constitutional significance.
The writing may be on the wall for the established system.
It has presided over our economic decline for decades and even now is failing to reverse it.
Moreover, public support for the system has become problematic in a way that poses some kind of challenge to the legitimacy and authority of the state itself.
Economic decline is tangled up with political turmoil in a way that has made for a crisis of the constitution.
Politicians of all persuasions entertain the hope that their brand of constitutional reconstruction can set things aright so enabling the state to recover, square the circle, and create the conditions for both economic growth and social cohesion.
Although it is doubtful whether the established set-up will hold, the future form of any new constitution is uncertain.
There is now no consensus on the British constitution.
The rest of this chapter will set down three broad and differing perspectives on what should be the form of a new constitution for Britain.
First, we will set down the  Establishment perspective of the constitutional authorities — the perspective, that is, of those who do so much to say what is the constitution in the absence of a written legal document.
The Conservative Party itself has tended to lend its weight to the prevailing set-up (perhaps because it can win within it), but the constitutional authorities are, by definition, Establishment figures and they are often identified with Toryism.
Moreover, if the forces for constitutional change do grow, then the Conservative Party itself could well be forced to contemplate constitutional change in order to hold things.
Were this to be the case then the party would almost certainly adopt the essentials of the Establishment perspective — the more so since this perspective is keenly attentive to many of the contemporary concerns of the New Right.
Second, we will set-down the perspective of the Liberals and SDP — the parties that have been most active in pressing the case for a new constitution precisely because they do not think they can win within the rules of the old one.
Third, we will set down the perspective of the Left within the Labour Party — the party that has very belatedly come to an awareness of the significance of constitutional politics and of the need for change.
THE ESTABLISHED CONSTITUTIONAL AUTHORITIES
In 1976, Lord Hailsham, an elder statesman of the Conservative Party who had been (and was to become again) the Lord Chancellor —the most powerful position in the British legal system — was invited by the BBC to give the Richard Dimbleby lecture: he called it "Elective Dictatorship" .
Lord Hailsham carefully unpicked the shreds of legitimacy attaching to the established constitution and called for "nothing less than a written constitution for the United Kingdom, and by that I mean one which limits the powers of Parliament and-provides a means of enforcing those limitations both by political and by legal means" .
In 1980, Lord Denning, the then Master of the Rolls perhaps the second most powerful judicial position — delivered the Richard Dimbleby lecture.
His lecture, entitled "Misuse of Power" , ran through eight instances of possible misuse of power by sovereigns, politicians, ministers, and the media.
Lord Denning recognised that "in our constitutional theory Parliament is supreme but he saw the judges as the real" guardians of our constitution "and he felt that they ought to be able to pronounce on the validity of the conventions and" ought to have a power of judicial review of legislation similar to that in the United States: whereby the judges can set aside statutes which are contrary to our unwritten constitution — in that they are repugnant to reason or to fundamentals".
Lord Denning raised the obvious question as to whether the judges might misuse their power — power which he wished to see dramatically increased — but he argued that we"need  have no fear…
Someone must be trusted.
Let it be the judges".
Lord Hailsham and Lord Denning have not been alone in their views as to what is wrong with the established constitution and what kind of new constitutional settlement is needed.
What is wrong with the established constitution?
The sovereignty of Parliament has been the linchpin of our unwritten and flexible constitution; it can be traced back in our political practice and constitutional theory for almost three centuries; and yet the constitutional authorities have come to see it as the fundamental constitutional problem needing challenge and change.
These authorities, be they judges, constitutional lawyers or senior political scientists, have come to this view as they have been forced to ponder on two things.
1 They have become crushingly alive to the presence of external political checks on the power of Parliament.
Elections are said to limit Parliament because they give power to electors who ignorantly demand ever more state intervention.
The need to secure obedience to the laws passed by Parliament is said to limit what Parliament can do in a situation in which there are those who are prepared to openly defy the law on the streets, with strikes, and with the gun.
2 As they have pondered on the growth of state intervention (which they largely regard as undesirable) so they have come to bemoan the absence of legal limitations on parliamentary sovereignty and competence which could hold that intervention in check.
This concern about the sovereignty of Parliament has to be seen in the context of political realities as seen by the constitutional authorities.
In theory, Parliament consists of Crown, Lords, and Commons, and the assent of all three parts is needed for a bill to become law.
In practice, however, the sovereignty of Parliament has increasingly become the sovereignty of the Commons, and the sovereignty of the Commons has increasingly become the sovereignty of the government and the majority party.
More than this, many constitutional authorities have become uneasy about the behaviour of governments in the light of the doctrines of mandate and the manifesto which are said to give effective power to party activists and extremists outside of parliament.
In hard reality, therefore, many authorities consider that the sovereignty of parliament really means the sovereignty of an unrepresentative party boss who is then given a free constitutional rein to wreak unlimited havoc.
Constitutional authorities are critical of the established constitution precisely because it has somehow allowed, and not limited, the emergence of the pattern of party politics and state intervention which they regard as so disastrous for Britain and her economy.
Now, there is something new and strange about all this.
Since the coming of manhood suffrage in the last century, constitutional authorities  have tended to applaud the demise of parliamentary government, the decline of parliament, and the rise of the strong one-party executive.
They painted a picture of responsible party government and saw the electorate as an adequate check upon cabinet (or prime ministerial) government within our praiseworthy system of parliamentary democracy.
Nowadays, however, the constitutional authorities are unhappy about the electoral check; they are very unhappy about the demise of the undemocratic checks of Crown and Lords; they are profoundly uneasy about the power of party in government; and so they are critical of the reality of what Parliamentary sovereignty has become.
In bald terms, many of today's most prominent constitutional authorities have grown anxious about the working of unfettered representative democracy and majority rule.
What do they think should be done?
What kind of constitution would they like to see established?
Proposals for a new constitution
First, the constitutional authorities want to limit the sovereignty of Parliament by law; second, they want to reinvigorate the various checks on the power of a democratically elected government through changes designed to bolster a more "balanced" constitution; and third, they look to the checks implicit in a genuine revival of Parliament and parliamentary government.
Proposals to limit the sovereignty of parliament tend to centre on the introduction of a written constitution with judicial review and the entrenchment of a Bill of Rights as some kind of "higher" law beyond easy parliamentary repeal.
The function of a written constitution would be to set down the laws and conventions relating to the main institutions of the state, the relations among them, and between them and private citizens.
There would be a concern to clarify the confusion which exists as to the "right" and "proper" principles for the British constitution today and then there would be an attempt to secure them against repeal or amendment except by some specially prescribed procedure that would involve more than a simple majority in the House of Commons.
For its part, a Bill of Rights insists that certain rights, privileges, and liberties are basic and must be afforded to all individuals notwithstanding what transient governments might wish to do.
Expressed in these general terms it is easy to see how such a code of rights could be regarded as a "good thing" .
The problems start, however, once we move on to consider just what rights should be included in any Bill; once we consider the difficulties of implementation; and once we assess the implications of any such legally enforced code and written constitution for the functioning of our system especially as these things involve the position of the elected government and the judges.
Let us deal with each of these problems in turn.
Most of the constitutional authorities who have lent their weight to a  Bill of Rights for Britain, envisage our incorporating the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms into our domestic law.
We ratified the treaty in 1951 but under our constitution this gives no right of action in our domestic courts.
Now there would be a certain logic in this incorporation, for, if we were to have a Bill of Rights enforced in Britain, then in a situation in which we have ratified the European Convention it would be difficult for us to bypass these rights and draw up a completely new set.
Moreover, if we were to attempt this, then getting an agreed set of principles approved by Parliament would open up conflicts as to the rights to be included, and if a new code was eventually passed then their existence alongside the European Convention would create confusion and cause additional difficulties for the courts.
The problem is that the European convention only really gives expression to traditional liberal and democratic freedoms bearing on such things as freedom of association, speech, belief, the press, and so on.
These freedoms are clearly of importance in the face of the public power of the state, but they give small comfort to those who would like to see the position of individuals strengthened in relation to the exercise of private power in the economy.
In fact, those who support the introduction of a Bill of Rights tend to see the state in essentially "negative" terms: it is regarded as the only real threat to individual freedom and liberty (apart from that posed by the collective activity of trade unions) because freedom itself is defined negatively as simply involving an absence of public and legal restraint on individual action.
There is a lack of any sympathy for a more "positive" view of the state as a collective and democratic instrument.
From this point of view the state is not seen as a threat to freedom, but is rather regarded as a vehicle for securing broad community and individual rights against the power.
of vested "private" interests within economy and society.
Such a view inevitably embraces a rather more positive perspective on freedom itself, requiring the provision of real opportunities for all individuals to do worthwhile, life-enhancing, things.
From this point of view there is room for the state to assume an interventionist role for the many in a way that may well eat into the freedoms of the few who exercise private, economic power — power that many constitutional authorities are actually concerned to protect and defend through their stress on the importance of liberty, and constitutional limitations on taxation, state intervention, parliamentary sovereignty, and the play of democratic politics itself.
Many constitutional authorities, like the New Right, seem to be keener on securing economic freedoms for particular individuals than they are to secure broad social freedoms for the mass of the population against the freedoms of the few.
In fact, behind the bland constitutional concern to protect human rights through a Bill of Rights, there often lurks a partisan and intensely political concern to restrict the role of the state because of an attachment  to a theory of limited government, born of a desire to use the law to defend the private sphere and capitalism, so hitting at the possibility of socialism and the democratic road to its attainment.
Be this as it may, the constitutional authorities who support the introduction of a Bill of Rights to limit Parliament, government, and the state, nevertheless recognise that it calls for a fundamental constitutional change if it is to be more than just a pious declaration of good intent.
Simply expressed, they see a need to mount a successful two-pronged attack on the established doctrine of parliamentary sovereignty.
1 If a Bill of Rights is to limit the exercise of political power through the state then it really has to be "entrenched" beyond the repeal of future parliaments.
This hits at the doctrine that Parliament cannot bind, or curtail, the powers of future parliaments.
2 If a Bill of Rights is somehow entrenched as a higher law, then all ordinary legislation will need to be checked against that law.
This will involve judicial review through some kind of supreme court of the United Kingdom.
Judges would be charged with the duty of interpreting and protecting the constitution so keeping the legislative sovereignty of Parliament within written, legal, limits.
This hits at the established doctrine that the courts recognise no legal limits to Parliament's legislative power.
The constitutional difficulty of this attack is clear enough.
The proposals to limit parliamentary sovereignty stumble against the sovereignty of parliament itself.
The problem to be solved seems to block the solution!
Not surprisingly, therefore, constitutional authorities eager for change have pondered long and hard, not so much on how to introduce a Bill of Rights or a restraining written constitution (that, after all, could be effected by a simple Commons majority backed by the usual formality of assent by Crown and Lords) but on how to ensure that such a new settlement sticks and lies safe beyond the repealing vote of yet another simple Commons majority.
There are a number of tortured perspectives on how to get round this problem, but they are themselves fraught with problems.
The idea of using a Constitutional Commission and a referendum to endow any new constitution with a special prestige does not alter the fact that within our constitution referenda are of an advisory character only and have not served to limit Parliament's ultimate discretion.
Moreover, constitutional lawyers may write about "old" Parliaments being able to bind and limit a "new" Parliament, and may suggest that a "new judicial attitude" (whereby judges no longer accept that they are subordinate to Parliament) would make for a fresh start so that "the doctrine that no Parliament can bind its successors becomes ancient history" , but these tricky legal formulations do not alter the fact that constitution-making occurs in the context of a political reality which limits what is feasible, acceptable, and enforceable.
Interestingly, however, the fact that the British constitution is in part what the constitutional authorities say it is means that an insidious kind of constitutional change is already occurring simply as a result of authoritative attacks on the sovereignty of Parliament as a "dogma" and a "myth" that needs to be challenged.
Although any "alternative doctrine must be highly speculative" , the influential Halsbury's Laws of England goes on to recognise that: "for many constitutional theorists the question of whether parliamentary sovereignty presupposes that Parliament must always remain sovereign and cannot be bound by the legislation of its predecessors, or whether Parliament's sovereignty entitles it to restrict its power to legislate, or deprive itself of the power to legislate, remains open." 
One thing is very clear: the road to constitutional change via a Bill of Rights, a written constitution, and an attack on parliamentary sovereignty is likely to be a long and bitter haul.
A number of things are part of the concern to secure a more "balanced" constitution — the second essential of the new constitution envisaged by the established constitutional authorities.
1 There is a concern to strengthen the position and power of the House of Lords.
There is the grudging recognition that, as it stands today, the House of Lords is an indefensible anachronism and that only limited legitimacy (and therefore power) can attach to a second chamber whose membership is largely based on heredity and which has an overwhelming and permanent majority for the Conservative Party.
In order to give the House of Lords a more effective role in the governmental process (and in order to buttress its position against the threat of abolition) there is the recognition that it needs to secure increased public support, and in order to secure that there has been the dawning realisation that changes are needed in the composition of the second chamber.
There is no consensus on this, but in broad terms there is a concern to water down, or phase out, the hereditary element in favour of elected members representing "interests" or regions and possibly chosen by proportional representation.
2 There is now a much greater preparedness to see the Crown shift from a limp constitutional role into a much more active and independent role in matters of decisive constitutional significance.
For example, Lord Crowther-Hunt considers that the Queen would be perfectly "justified" in withholding her consent from a bill which sought to abolish the House of Lords even if the government proposing this had secured a mandate through the manifesto set before the people at a general election.
Moreover, if the centre parties succeed in breaking through into parliament in large numbers then the prospect of coalition government would be increased and this would give the Crown a role in the making of governments since it would no longer be a simple and automatic matter of sending for the leader of the majority party in the Commons.
3 A written constitution with judicial review clearly involves staking out a position of greater political power for the judges.
In fact, independently of current concern about the constitution, there has been a trend to "judicial activism" that has resulted in a situation in which the courts have shown a much greater willingness to become involved in challenging the use of ministerial discretion and prerogative powers.
As the constitutional authorities gradually detach themselves from wholehearted support for our system of democracy so they envisage the judges assuming a role of extended significance in defending liberty and in checking what they regard as the misuse of political power.
Politically, the judicial conception of the public interest tends to embrace the promotion of certain views normally associated with the Conservative Party and there is a greater likelihood that Labour Governments will encounter challenges through the courts if only because they tend to be more interventionist and to challenge the status quo.
The final major aspect of the new constitutional settlement seen as desirable by the constitutional authorities embodies a concern to revive parliamentary government and the power of an independent House of Commons unchecked by outside interest and direct democratic pressures.
The current situation in which the government, through party discipline, is able to control the House of Commons and absorb its powers unto itself is regarded as undesirable.
There is a concern to increase the independence of members and to devise institutional relationships to facilitate a balance of powers that would give the Commons a more effective checking, choosing, and legislating role of the kind it enjoyed prior to the extension of the franchise and the organising implications of political parties in the nineteenth century.
The weakening of party and the creation of a strong committee system are seen as of especial importance in this regard.
There is the hope that their ability to delve deeply and acquire information would enable them to hold ministers and government to proper account.
This catalogue of proposals for constitutional change does not exhaust the perspective of the constitutional authorities, but the emphasis is on limiting Parliament, asserting the power of the judiciary, balancing the constitution, and reviving parliamentary government.
Caught up in the concern to balance the power of the Commons is an attempt to recapture elements of the eighteenth-century constitution in a way that waters down the democratic side of the state machine; caught up in the concern to secure a more independent House of Commons is an attempt to revive the pre-democratic nineteenth-century liberal constitution; and caught up in the concern to limit parliamentary sovereignty is an attempt to limit democracy itself.
At the present point in time there are those who are of the opinion that no sacrifice is too great for our democracy, least of all the sacrifice of democracy itself to the power of the judges and enslaving legal  limitations.
Central to all of this is a concern to limit state intervention and the play of politics itself because of a preference for the freedoms and liberties available to some in the context of the "naturally" self-regulating and ordered free market of capitalism.
Lord Hailsham may be critical of the British constitution, but he is clear that "whatever else has been the cause of our failure, it is not capitalism, or free enterprise in any form" .
THE SDP-LIBERAL ALLIANCE
In 1979, Roy Jenkins, ex-Labour minister, President of the European Commission, and soon to be a born-again British politician, was invited by the BBC to give the Richard Dimbleby lecture.
In his "Home Thoughts from Abroad" he chose to talk about the state of British politics and how the "system" had gone wrong and ought to be changed and improved.
He considered that the established two-party system had become a rigid tyranny that lacked public support and was injurious to our economic performance — the adversary politics thesis.
He argued that the established system made "the moderates too much the prisoners of the extremists" ; he made an "unashamed plea for the strengthening of the political centre" ; and he considered that "the case of proportional representation is overwhelming" .
Liberal interest in electoral reform goes back over 100 years.
The emergence of the Labour Party in 1922 as the second largest political party and the fact of alternating Labour and Conservative Governments in the period since the Second World War heightened Liberal interest in proportional representation — the more so from the 1960s onwards when their increasing vote in the country was not matched by seats in the House of Commons.
The election of February 1974 was some kind of turning point in the case for electoral reform and constitutional change.
It did not simply result in a situation in which the Liberals won 2.2 per cent of the Commons seats in return for 19.3 per cent of the national vote since Labour also sneaked into office with only 37.1 per cent of the votes cast — less than the Conservative total.
An election that had been fought by the Conservatives on the issue of, "Who runs the country — government or trade unions?" , was won by a party that was seen by many as in the pay of the unions and there was the spectre of socialism via the ballot box.
There was now the more general view that the established electoral system was too generous to the two major parties.
Moreover, it was seen as too generous at a time when those parties had become more extreme.
In effect, it was claimed that the unpopular and disastrous system of adversary politics and the threat of democratic socialism was in existence because of the working of the established electoral system.
Criticism of that system and interest in proportional representation surged.
In 1974, Anthony Wigram founded Conservative Action for Electoral  Reform and urged the adoption of proportional representation because "the present electoral system could easily give power to a Socialist Party controlled by an extreme left wing group." .
In March 1981 the SDP was launched and immediately announced that "the present" winner takes all"system of electing MPs is unfair to the voters and opens the door to extremism, whether left or right.
We need a sensible system of proportional representation in which every vote really counts."
As sure as night follows day the Social Democrats moved into uneasy alliance with the Liberals.
In the First Report of the Joint Liberal/SDP Commission for Constitutional Reform they announced that "electoral reform is an absolute priority for Britain, since we believe it to be a precondition both of national unity and of social and political progress" and (they failed to add) for their own sure breakthrough into Parliament itself.
The Liberals and the SDP as outsiders to the established system have emerged as the champions of constitutional change with a whole package of proposals for a new constitutional settlement.
To a great extent their analysis of the problematic nature of the established set — up tends to parallel that advanced by the constitutional authorities in that they are attentive to the political and economic problems of adversary party politics, elective dictatorship, and the overload of conflicting demands.
Not surprisingly, then, their package of proposals for constitutional change has much in common with the perspective set down in the last section.
They see a place for a Bill of Rights, a written constitution and constitutional court; they want to increase the checks on government through a more balanced constitution consequent upon the establishment of a reformed, elected, second chamber with increased powers of delay; and they look to a revival of the position of Parliament and parliamentary government.
They depart from the perspective of the constitutional authorities, however, in their advocacy of proposals for devolved and decentralised government, and for more open government.
Moreover, the constitutional authorities tend to adopt a "legalistic" approach to constitutional change and are pessimistic as to the prospects for democratic politics.
In consequence, they seek to prevent democratic damage and state intervention by choosing to emphasise the desirability of setting legal limits to the powers of a democratically elected parliament.
By way of contrast, the Liberals and Social Democrats adopt a more "political" approach to constitutional change and they are rather more optimistic as to the prospects for democratic politics in Britain.
In consequence, they are less concerned to fashion a constitution that would limit democratic politics than they are to introduce a constitution that would facilitate a new type of democratic politics that would then make more likely coalition government and the kind of moderate, stable, policies which they regard as at one with the broad mass of public opinion and in the national interest itself.
It is in this connection that, notwithstanding their commitment to a whole new constitutional  settlement, they are primarily concerned to effect electoral reform.
They see this as the "linchpin" of their "entire programme of radical reform" and as the key to a "new" politics and a "precondition" for further constitutional change.
Let us, then, explore the arguments surrounding the issue of electoral reform.
What is the case for the established system; what is the case against this system and for proportional representation; what are the prospects for implementing change; and what are the implications of proportional representation for representative and responsible government in Britain?
The case for the established electoral system
Under the established system for electing members to the House of Commons, each elector has only one vote in a general election; each constituency returns only one Member of Parliament; and Members of the House of Commons are elected on a first-past-the-post (winner takes all) system whereby the candidate with the most votes wins the seat whether or not he or she has an overall majority of all the votes cast in the constituency.
The established system has been defended on a number of grounds.
1 It is simple, well-established and well-understood, and requires only a short ballot paper on which the voter needs to put a single "X" against the name of the preferred candidate.
Compact, single-member, constituencies (as opposed to large, multi-member, constituencies) provide for one representative in a way that is said to facilitate constituent-member contact and the redress of individual grievances.
2 More fundamentally, however, defence of the established electoral system is caught up with a belief in the virtues of the Responsible Party Government model that we discussed in the Chapter 2.
From this perspective a two-party system and one-party government is of the essence.
It is recognised that the established electoral system does discriminate against third parties securing seats in proportion to votes, but this is defended because of the virtues that are seen as flowing from the fact that the system helps to ensure that just one party has a secure majority in the Commons and is therefore able to form a government without the need for coalition.
In this state of affairs, the electorate is presented with a clear choice between alternative programmes and parties for government in a way that enables the electorate to choose the government and the broad drift of public policy for the next 5 years.
In effect, under the present system a voter is doing more than simply choosing a parliamentary representative.
The electorate is able to choose a candidate, a party, a programme, and a government; the electorate knows roughly what the government will do once in office; and so the electorate knows who to blame and which party to vote out of office at the next election.
3 In addition to providing for strong and responsible government it has been claimed that the system provides for moderate government because the two parties in a two-party system must strive to occupy the middle ground where the votes lie thickest and this obliges them to control their extremists who might dissuade the middling voters from giving their support.
The case against the established electoral system and the case for proportional representation
Liberal and Social Democratic critics of the established electoral system reject this defence as a caricature of the real situation.
1 They claim that the stability of government is more apparent than real.
They argue that the post-war period is best characterised as one involving policy change and instability, and that, since the crack-up of the consensus in the 1960s, one doctrinaire and mandated government has been replaced by another with scant regard to appeals to the middle ground of public opinion.
They point out that under the first-past-the-post system a small swing in votes tends to produce a major change in parliamentary strength so "exaggerating" a party's lead in parliament in a way that leads to sharp swings in policy when there are only small shifts in voting and still more limited changes in public opinion.
2 They recognise that the system has tended to provide for "strong" government in that most post-war governments have been able to count on an absolute majority of seats in the House of Commons, but they regard this strength as a bad thing.
They take this view because they are alive to the fact that since 1935 no government has been elected by a majority of the electorate and secured 50 per cent of the popular vote.
In reality therefore, strong government has simply enabled a series of "minority" governments to push their policies through the Commons.
Moreover, this has taken place against the policies of the previous party government so entrenching the instability of adversary politics as the price to be paid for a strength that really works against the moderate majority in the population at large.
3 They question the extent to which the system provides for representative governments noting not just the underrepresentation of third parties, but the fact that, in the elections of 1929, 1951, and February 1974, the party which returned the largest number of MPs actually had a smaller share of the vote than the runner-up party in the Commons so that the electoral "winner" was, in fact, the governmental "loser" .
Now, all of this is seen as bad enough, but in our developing multi-party system they see less prospect of single parties having absolute majorities in the House of Commons.
Put another way, even without a  change in the electoral system there is the prospect of more "pacts" of the kind which existed between Liberals and Labour between 1977 and 1978.
Of course, on occasions, single parties may still be able to gain absolute parliamentary majorities but they will be likely to do so on the basis of much smaller percentages of the popular vote.
For example, in October 1974 the Labour Government secured the support of 39.2 per cent of those who voted and just over a quarter of the electorate; in 1979 the Conservatives gained 43.9 per cent of the vote and the support of around a third of the electorate; and in 1983, the Conservative landslide of seats (their parliamentary majority trebled) was based on just 42.4 per cent of the vote — less than they got when they lost in 1964, less than they got in 1979, the fifth-lowest Conservative vote since the war, and the lowest vote-count by a government with a secure majority since 1922.
Although Liberals and Social Democrats claim that the established electoral system does not work as its defenders say it should, they are at their most forceful when they point out that the established system is "unfair" and unrepresentative.
There are two broad aspects to this and both bear on the relation of seats in the Commons to votes in the country.
First, it is pointed out that the Labour and Conservative Parties secure seats in the Commons in numbers far larger than warranted by their voting strength in the country.
In 1983, for example, the Conservatives won almost two-thirds of the seats in the House of Commons with less than half the nation's backing and a modest 30.8 per cent of the total electorate, while the Labour Party won almost a third of the seats with only 27.6 per cent of the votes.
Second, and obviously related, there is the position of "third" parties.
A third party whose candidates may obtain many thousands of votes in each of the constituencies that it contests without ever coming top of the poll in any, can amass a national vote in the millions without winning a seat.
This problem does not affect all third parties to the same extent since the problem of "wasted votes" bears heavily on those parties whose support is spread across the country as opposed to those whose support is regionally concentrated.
In February 1974, for example, the Liberals, with 19.3 per cent of the vote, secured only fourteen seats, while the Ulster Unionists with only 1.3 per cent of the total UK vote won eleven seats.
In October 1974 the Liberals with 18.3 per cent of the vote won thirteen seats, while the Scottish National Party with only 2.9 per cent of the total UK vote secured eleven seats.
In 1982, the Joint Liberal/SDP Commission for Constitutional Reform calculated that if in England there was, as compared to the 1979 general election, an even switch of votes from the Labour and Conservative Parties to the Alliance such that each of the three groupings secured 33 per cent of the vote, then the Alliance would still only gain 56 seats as compared to 207 for the Conservatives and 253 for Labour.
Not until the Alliance secured about 37 per cent of the vote would it become the largest single grouping in the Commons.
We can see in these figures how crucial  is the issue of electoral reform to the success of the Liberals and Social Democrats.
Both points about unfairness are revealed once we note that in the election of 1983 the Conservatives secured one Commons seat for every 33 000 votes; Labour one for every 40 000; and the Liberals and Social Democrats one for every 340 000.
The ratio of seats won was 17:9:1, yet the spread of votes was much closer producing a rough ratio of 3:2: 2.
We may have a system of "one person one vote" , but Liberals and Social Democrats point out that we do not yet have a system of "one person one vote one value" since some votes are more equal than others.
Not surprisingly, they argue that if we persist with the established electoral system then we will continue with the problems of government which they identify.
Moreover, as the public themselves come to recognise that many more votes are being "wasted" and that their votes bear little relation to the final result in the constituency or the country, so declining turnout and public disaffection will increase in a way which will really threaten the legitimacy of the whole system.
The problem of implementing proportional representation
The remedy for pretty much all of the above, and for much else besides, is seen to lie in the introduction of proportional representation for all national and local elections.
The immediate problem, however, lies in implementing such a system.
The Labour and Conservative Parties who benefit from the present system have set their teeth against a change which would undermine their prospect of regularly forming a government on their own.
The likelihood of change lies in one of a number of possibilities — all in the long term, and all problematic.
1 If the centre parties gain a clear majority in a future Parliament then they claim that they would immediately introduce a bill to effect proportional representation.
The problem is that the prospect is unlikely given the way that the established system works.
Moreover, if they were to break through within the established system then they just might be a little less enthusiastic about introducing proportional representation as "a first priority" since it could let one of the parties they would have displaced back into the game.
2 If a future Parliament is "hung" with the centre parties holding the balance of power between Conservative and Labour then the Liberals and Social Democrats have made it clear that the price of their giving support to any minority government would be a binding agreement to introduce proportional representation.
However, it is by no means certain that either of the established parties would agree to change since they would be bidding away long-term electoral advantage in return for a  short-term in office in a coalition government in which they might have only limited power.
Moreover, it is not clear that either party could agree to a change and still hold itself intact.
What kind of deal could the SDP possibly do with the Labour Party when they split with Labour because of the developing strength of the Left in the party?
Equally, what kind of bargain could be struck with the Conservatives if the dominant tendency in the party remained Thatcherite Right wing?
In the event of a hung parliament there is the probability of constitutional deadlock, and the possibility of political breakdown and a realignment of parliamentary support for particular parties.
In either case an early general election is likely to be called to resolve things.
If the centre parties were seen to be self-interested in blocking the formation of a government through their insistence on a deal to introduce electoral reform then this could reflect badly on them in the election so cutting back their seats — and the prospect for proportional representation.
3 There is the particular position of the Conservative Party.
In 1978, over one-third of Conservative MPs voted for a form of proportional representation for the proposed Welsh Assembly.
Moreover, the party as a whole is clearly opposed to the election of a Labour Government.
The established system may let the Conservatives into office with less than half the popular vote, but it also invites the prospect of a future Labour Government elected to office on perhaps 32 per cent of the vote and with the support of less than a quarter of the electorate as a whole.
While the Conservatives are secure in Parliament and on the offensive then they can see no need for electoral reform as they struggle to recover a Tory England.
However, they are put into a more defensive position if they suffer a crushing defeat in any future election and if the two-party system continues to weaken.
In this kind of situation they might be concerned to hold on to what they have by accepting a change in the electoral system that would block the prospect of a Socialist Government committed to extensive state intervention and a more "extreme" kind of constitutional reconstruction.
The moderate Conservative, Sir Ian Gilmour, favours electoral reform precisely because he is alive to the fact that: "after electoral reform, no Labour party led by Mr Wedgwood Benn, say, would ever win a majority in the country.
If the Labour Party wished to participate in government it would have to shed its Marxist-Trotskyist wing or make it impotent."
Put another way, thoughtful Conservatives recognise that electoral reform would probably secure the right of middle ground in the face of socialist challenge but at the cost of blocking the returning prospect of the chance to implement the hard-right vision.
It is an issue that could split the Conservative Party.
4 Finally, there is the position of the Labour Party.
Earlier this century they broke through the Liberal-Conservative two-party system without the help of proportional representation, and under the established electoral system they have been able to form governments on their own with less than 40 per cent of the popular vote.
Their crushing electoral  defeat of 1983 in conjunction with the realisation that their share of the popular vote has been in steady decline since 1951 has, however, forced a reassessment.
First, had proportional representation been in force in 1983, then the Conservatives would not have been able to form a government on their own and coalition would have forced a moderation of policies.
Second, if the Liberals and Social Democrats had been able to squeeze a few more votes from Labour supporters, then it could well have been the Labour Party that finished up with just a few seats in parliament out of all proportion to votes cast.
Third, there is the growing recognition that Labour could not carry through a radical programme of change without mass support.
In other words, they may win within the established system but it does not get them very far if they are not carrying the people with them in a popular crusade for change.
Simply expressed, from both a defensive and offensive point of view there are good reasons why Labour needs to think hard about electoral reform.
The implications of proportional representation for representative and responsible government
Leaving aside the prospects for proportional representation, what would be the implications of such a system for the functioning of the British political system?
Are there problems caught up in the case for change?
We need to pay particular attention to two things.
First, there is the issue of "fairness" .
Second, we need to consider the role of the electorate and the accountability, or responsibility, of government to the people.
1 On the surface a system of proportional representation is self-evidently fair to parties and people, since parties favoured by the people at the polls would secure seats in the Commons in direct proportion to their votes in the country.
The argument cannot be stopped at this simple point, however.
Elections are not just about electing representatives to Parliament.
Elections are also about government and governmental power.
It may be fair to give third parties seats in Parliament in proportion to their votes in the country, but it is quite a different matter when the implications of this situation are considered in terms of the follow through to governmental power.
It is far harder to argue that it is fair to create an electoral system that will put the centre parties into a governmental position where they will be likely to hold an almost permanent balance of power between Labour and Conservative.
Simply expressed, a relatively poorly supported centre party with well under 20 per cent of the vote, but with some eighty or so seats, would invariably be in government; would be in a position to determine whether Conservative or Labour were drawn into government with it; and would, therefore, be able to exert an influence over the direction of public policy out of all proportion to their votes and support in the country at large.
Proportional representation in Parliament might translate into disproportionate power  in government in a way that would make the established first-past-the-post inequalities look rather more fair than is often seen to be the case.
Of course, there may be those who would argue that the entrenchment of the middle ground in power would be a good thing that would lead to moderate government and stable policies, but let them not argue that it would also be fair or would give the majority of people what they wanted of government.
2 What are the implications of proportional representation for responsible government?
Since the Second World War, with the exception of the quasi-minority Labour Government of 1974–9, Britain has experienced single-party government backed by an overall majority in the Commons.
Proportional representation would not make majority government of this kind impossible (we would have it if more than 50 per cent of the electorate wanted it) but it would make it very much less likely.
Put another way, proportional representation would make minority or coalition government very much more likely.
For example, after the election of 1983 the Conservatives had an overall majority in the House of Commons of 144 seats and the Liberals and Social Democrats had only 23 seats.
However, if that election had been fought under some system of proportional representation then the Conservatives would have had a majority over Labour but would have been in a very substantial overall minority since the Liberals and Social Democrats would have held 160 or so seats.
The Conservatives may have tried to go it alone and form a minority government, but some kind of party-splitting coalition government could well have been more likely.
Coalitions are not alien to British political experience but it is as well to consider the implications of this form of government.
In a situation in which no one party is likely to be in an overall majority in the Commons then the electorate is just not in a position where it can realistically choose between alternative programmes and alternative teams of leaders sure in the knowledge that the winning team will be available to form a government and eager to try and implement its electoral programme.
The electorate cannot do this because proportional representation makes it less likely that there will be a single winning governmental team.
Of course, two parties may announce before an election that they are prepared to go into coalition with each other but they cannot guarantee the election result that would make that coalition possible.
So, the electorate can choose representatives for Parliament but it is less able to choose a government and a programme that will be implemented.
There may be deadlock and paralysis, but the government that will eventually take office will emerge after protracted bargaining between the parties in Parliament after a general election and without any reference to the electors and their wishes.
The result will be a governing coalition for which no one voted, and with policies (born of the necessity for compromise to effect the coalition) which were never set before the electorate for their approval and support.
Moreover, the coalition  government so formed will not have to (or even be able to) face the electorate at the next election since the parties to the coalition will be free to fight again as independent entities.
Each will probably claim credit for the popular policies, and each will probably blame the other coalition partner for the unpopular policies.
Simply expressed, the accountability, or responsibility, of single-party government to the people a responsibility that has been of the very essence of our system of parliamentary democracy-would be rendered less likely with proportional representation.
Having said that, governments would be more responsible to Parliament; Parliament would be stronger relative to the executive; and party leaders could be "weaker" , but we should remember that there is nothing essentially democratic about reviving the parliamentary government of the nineteenth-century liberal constitution.
Indeed, increasing the power of an independent and autonomous parliament could further weaken the connection between government and the people and could institutionalise our passivity as spectators to a game over which we have no real control and only limited influence.
If the Liberal-SDP Alliance were ever in a position to implement electoral reform, a reformed and strengthened second chamber, and legal limits on the sovereignty of Parliament, then we could find ourselves with a constitution which entrenched the middle ground and which offered a democracy of dazzling choice but no decision, and a less-accountable government than that which we currently enjoy within the established constitution.
THE LABOUR PARTY
Models for Transformation
In the past, the Left in British politics has not displayed a keen interest in the subtleties of the British constitution because two strategic models for socialist transformation, the parliamentary and the insurrectionary, have dominated thinking, debate, and action.
More recently, however, a variety of factors have rather changed this state of affairs and encouraged the search for a third road to socialism.
What, then, are these models, and how have they shaped the Left perspective on the British constitution, and on the need for change in the rules and the institutions of the political game in Britain?
The parliamentary road.
The parliamentary road to socialism has been the major tradition within Britain where the Labour Party has long been the dominant organisational force on the Left and amongst the working class.
Revolutionary violence (and even extra-parliamentary politics) is  rejected as undemocratic, undesirable, and unnecessary.
There is the view that socialism will come gradually (but inevitably) through a democratic Parliament as a result of the cumulative effect of piecemeal reforms pushed through Parliament consequent upon regular electoral victories enabling the Labour Party to form a government, organise Parliament, and determine law-making.
Parliament is seen as at the controlling centre of the state.
The state machine as a whole is regarded as neutral and autonomous from economic power, and so is available to be driven to the left if Labour is in the majority in the Commons.
From this point of view, the liberal-democratic British constitution is applauded as pretty much the best in the world and so no case is made for constitutional reconstruction.
The insurrectionary road.
The insurrectionary road to socialism is associated with Lenin and the experience of the October Revolution in Russia.
It is not a strategy that is organisationally entrenched with British political experience, but it is intellectually entrenched as a challenge to the viability of the parliamentary road to socialism.
Parliamentary socialism is regarded as elevating the parliamentary means above the socialist end, so precluding socialism and sacrificing it to the struggle for office and government.
Elections are not seen as providing a pathway to power.
They simply "incorporate" the working class into the established system and so legitimise that system in a way that stops any real change.
Parliament controls nothing.
It merely conceals the true reality of power that resides untouched by democracy in the rest of the state apparatus and above all in the market economy itself.
Meaningful change cannot come through the existing political system.
A liberal-democratic polity and a capitalist economy fit so snugly together in mutual support that democracy is regarded as the best possible political shell for capitalism.
Reform and reformism are out.
The gradualism of concession merely shores up the essentials of the established system by creating an illusion as to the possibilities of change.
Moreover, by curbing the worst excesses of capitalism, concessions cut into the grievances of the working class so turning them away from action for fundamental transformation.
The Labour Party has much to answer for from this perspective.
In "managing" the system at crucial moments; in neutering the discontent of the working class; and in holding out the prospect of socialism via Parliament, the Labour Party is seen as part of the problem blocking transformation and so has no part to play in securing socialism.
Revolution is necessary.
The system as a whole has to be "smashed" and set aside by a vanguard party of intellectuals which leads the working class in extra-and anti-parliamentary action towards socialism (see also Chapter 7).
From this point of view, the liberal-democratic British constitution is not taken seriously.
It is dismissed as an irrelevant facade that conceals the reality of class rule behind the smokescreen of a democracy that exists only in form but not in substance.
The British constitution is simply an  unimportant part of the "superstructure" of society and economy that is explained by, and cemented to, the all-important and all-determining economic "base" .
From this kind of perspective on the road to socialism, to even consider reconstructing or reforming the British constitution is regarded as a trifling nonsense that borders on the evil of a naive reformism itself.
So, from the dominant parliamentary perspective the Left takes the British constitution for granted as a good thing, and from the insurrectionary perspective the Left sees the British constitution (if it sees it at all) as beyond the pale of reasoned consideration and change.
From both points of view there has been no tradition of serious, sustained, and critical debate on the limits and potentialities of the British constitution and liberal-democracy.
Third road to socialism.
Over the past few years, part of the Left in Britain has moved into a more considered view as to the limits of elements of the British constitution, at the same time as it has become increasingly alive to the merits of elements of that same constitution — especially in so far as they bear on the issues of democracy, the sovereignty of Parliament and the people, and civil liberties.
Moreover, the Left has tended to turn away from applause for insurrection — at least in so far as prospects for change in Britain are concerned.
These two developments have prompted a concern to transform the constitution of the Labour Party and the British constitution in the struggle to fashion a third road to socialism.
Let us elaborate on these developments.
1 The fact that those on the right and in the Establishment have become increasingly critical of the British constitution (critical that is of party politics, pressure-group politics, parliamentary sovereignty and unlimited democracy itself) at the same time as they defend the integrity of capitalism and attack socialism, has rather disturbed the orthodoxy as to the close fit and supporting connection between liberal-democracy and capitalism.
The Right has prompted the Left to ponder that perhaps capitalism and democracy have come to the parting of ways; perhaps there is more life in the democratic road to socialism than many have chosen to suppose; and so perhaps there are things that need to be defended and advanced from within the British constitution itself.
2 Most socialists have become increasingly critical of the monopolistic and authoritarian role of Communist parties in one-party systems in a way that has made them cast doubt on the desirability of insurrection.
History rather suggests that the discipline needed for insurrection lingers on as an authoritative force after the revolution in a way that blocks the larger end of a socialism that advances opportunities for freedom and self-development through a true democracy of equals.
Moreover, in the British context, the fact that Leninist and Trotskyist groupings are hopelessly divided and have never been able to move beyond a fringe role  and secure any kind of solid base in the working class has, as a matter of practical politics, forced them to reconsider their own position and that of the Labour Party.
3 It is one thing to recognise the limited possibilities of insurrection in Britain, but it is another thing to move from this into support for the Labour Party.
The Labour Party has remained a problem for socialists, as the experience of Labour in government after 1966 and over the period 1979 rather confirmed.
(This will be more fully discussed in Chapter 7).
At a time when many socialists were moving away from a naive faith in the prospects for revolutionary change and towards uneasy respect for democracy, Labour in office was doing little to justify belief in the viability of their vision of the road to socialism.
The Left seemed to be caught on the horns of a dilemma: insurrection was regarded with increased scepticism and democracy with increased respect, but parliamentary socialism continued to reveal its all too familiar limitations.
The realisation that it was important to defend democracy, and that it was difficult to dodge the Labour Party, forced many to consider transforming the constitution of the party so that the leadership in Parliament was more accountable to the party outside.
These constitutional concerns within the Labour Party have profound implications for the British constitution itself.
First, senior members of the Labour Party broke with the party over the issue of these constitutional changes in order to form the SDP, and we have already seen that the SDP wishes to fashion a new constitution for the country.
Second, part and parcel of the internal debates about the constitution of the Labour Party are larger debates about the limits and problems of the British constitution and these spill over into a case for reconstructing the British constitution itself in order to fashion a different kind of democracy and a third road to socialism.
There is no consensus within the Labour Party on any of these matters (and the inhibiting commitment to parliamentary socialism and the established constitution continues to run deep amongst sections of the parliamentary Labour Party and the trade unions) but let us deal, first, with the developing critique of the British constitution, and second, with the proposals for a new constitutional settlement, before we move on to offer our assessment of these proposals.
What is wrong with the established constitution?
A dominant tradition of thought within the Labour Party "sees" the British constitution in terms rather different from those which we have so far set down.
Simply expressed, more cautious judgements are made as to the democracy on offer within the system.
The constitution is not seen in the rosy terms set down in Chapter 1, but neither is democracy seen in the new gloomy terms set down in Chapters 2 and 3.
Because the Left has not been sensitive to the established debates on the British constitution it has not been attentive to the potentialities for change which have flowed from the absence of legal and constitutional limits on Parliament.
Instead, the Left has chosen to attend to the presence of other limits and constraints that are seen as blocking the prospects for socialism via parliament.
The constitutional authorities were mindful of the constraints imposed by elections and trade unions, but the Left sees democracy in Britain as constrained, not by these things, but by the presence of unaccountable economic power and by the independent power of those closed and secret parts of the state machine that are not popularly elected and that are not even truly accountable to, or effectively controlled by, that part of Parliament that is subject to regular election by the people.
The civil service, the House of Lords, the Monarch, the judges, the police, the military, the security services, the Bank of England, a host of Quangos, and even the cabinet and the absolute premiership, are all seen as enjoying varying degrees of political power without any balancing responsibility to hold them in check — as we ourselves will suggest in Chapter 5.
In addition to stressing these "internal" limits on parliamentary democracy in Britain, stress is also placed on "external" factors that have contributed to a loss of powers and to a significant reduction in the scope of our capacity to govern ourselves.
Attention centres on the position of multi-national companies and the role of the USA and the implications of our NATO membership, but special attention centres on the implications of our entry into the European Community and the position of the International Monetary Fund.
We will be discussing these matters more fully in Chapter 11, but let us elaborate a little now on the Left perspective on the European Community and the International Monetary Fund.
The United Kingdom became a member of the European Community in January 1973.
Parliamentary sovereignty is still intact in so far as Parliament can still repeal the act committing us to entry.
However, so long as we remain in the Community, Parliament has effectively handed over a number of functions that it has traditionally fulfilled.
On entry, the British Parliament had to take over lock, stock and barrel forty-two volumes of legislation passed by Community institutions.
It also entered into an open-ended commitment to incorporate into British law all future community legislation in those areas where the Community has competence, and to make such a law virtually unamendable by our domestic Parliament.
Britain is seen as having surrendered power to the Common Market in a way that has limited our freedom of manoeuvre and turned us into a colony of an embryonic West European federal state.
As we shall show in Chapter 8, the Labour Party entered office in 1974 with a radical programme but in severe economic conditions that restricted the freedom of manoeuvre enjoyed by the Chancellor of the Exchequer and his cabinet colleagues.
The severity of the world recession  and the weakness of the pound combined to lead the government to borrow foreign currency from the International Monetary Fund in December 1975.
When the government went back again in 1976, the second loan brought with it a Fund investigation into Britain's economic policy and the requirement of more cuts in public expenditure as a condition of the loan.
The fact that the Fund was only too willing to lend in return for a written undertaking that domestic economic policy would follow the lines agreed in negotiations between Treasury officials and the Fund investigators in the autumn of 1976, involved what many Labour activists saw as a loss of governing powers to an external force that was anti-socialist.
Proposals for a new constitution
What are the implications of the above assessments for the issue of constitutional reconstruction in Britain?
We can pull out of the Common Market and out of NATO, but there are practical limits as to what can be done from within British politics to overcome the external constraints on the development of public policy in Britain since we are part of the world economy.
The "internal" limits on democracy in Britain are a rather different matter, however, and part and parcel of the Left description and critique of the established British constitution is the call for a new constitution for Britain that would somehow lift those limits.
Two broad concerns give a certain coherence to their package of proposals for change.
First, there is the concern to strengthen the democratic element of the state machine and a related concern to weaken the independent power of the other, more secret, parts of the state.
Second, and part of the power battle over the constitution of the Labour Party, there is a concern to secure a democracy in Britain different from that entrenched within the established liberal-democratic constitution and different from that envisaged by the Liberals and Social Democrats.
Strengthening democracy.
The concern to strengthen the democratic element within the British constitution poses a direct challenge to the authorities who seek to reinvigorate the "balanced" constitution of Crown, Lords, and Commons, and finds its most obvious expression in the commitment to abolish the House of Lords.
1 The present House of Lords is seen as a wrecking chamber with a built-in Conservative majority and a crippling power of delay that only exists to put a brake on a reforming Socialist government.
The case for abolition was made more urgent as a result of the experience of Labour in government after 1974.
In the 1975 session the government was defeated in 100 Lords divisions, and in the 1975 session it was defeated in 120 divisions.
A membership based on the hereditary principle and the  patronage that is needed to create life peers is seen as deeply offensive in the context of a democracy.
Moreover, reform is ruled out because either the new second chamber would be less democratic than the Commons in which case it should not be able to delay legislation, or if it was just as democratic then there is no point in having two chambers, the more so since there is the potential problem of constitutional deadlock between them.
2 Republicanism is not strongly expressed within the Labour Party.
There is little sentiment in the population at large for attacks upon the position of the monarchy, and the "fact" that we have a constitutional monarchy contains within itself the idea that the Crown has no personal political power but exercises prerogatives solely on the advice of ministers responsible to Parliament.
For the most part this is true, but the Crown does have the direct and personal power to refuse to dissolve Parliament before the expiry of its full term and does have the power to invite a person to form a government.
Although the Labour Party as a whole has not taken a stand on the political position of the monarchy, Tony Benn has expressed the view that these two powers of the Crown should be transferred to the Speaker of the House of Commons because he stands apart from the political parties and is directly answerable to the Commons for the conduct of the chair in a way that does not apply to the position of the Crown.
In the event that no single party enjoys an overall majority in the Commons then the issue of sending for the Prime Minister and refusing a dissolution become matters so charged with political manoeuvring that the Crown would be drawn into politics in a public way that would be bound to invite a keener scrutiny as to what should be her proper role within the British constitution.
Tony Benn is clearly not able to resolve the position of the monarchy within our system but he highlights a problem that may need to be confronted at some point in the future.
Other aspects of the concern to strengthen the democratic side of the state machine bear especially on the position of the civil service, the Prime Minister, and the House of Commons.
3 A number of changes are advocated to secure a civil service that is more accountable to Parliament and more amenable to the control of ministers.
A Freedom of Information Act (also supported by the Liberals and the Social Democrats) is advocated to open up to public scrutiny the workings of government departments.
In addition, it is argued that ministers should have a larger say in the appointment and transfer of senior departmental officials with whom they would be working; that ministers should have their own private political office of specialist and political advisers; that junior ministers should be involved in the work of departmental and interdepartmental committees which are at the moment the preserve of departmental officials; and that backbenchers should be more closely involved in the decision-making process through bringing them into government departments.
4 In Chapter 1 we discussed the thesis about prime ministerial  government.
Sections of the Left agree with that thesis and are of the opinion that the powers of the Prime Minister are too great.
In order to secure a "constitutional premiership" that is less powerful and more accountable to the party and parliament, there are those within the Labour Party who would wish to change the British constitution so as to restrict the powers of a Prime Minister.
Two proposals stand out.
First, there is a concern to limit prime ministerial patronage in a number of areas (and the concern to abolish the House of Lords is in part born of a desire to deny the Prime Minister the constitutional right to create peers).
Second, instead of continuing with the constitutional convention whereby the Prime Minister has the right to choose a government and a Cabinet, there is a concern to transfer this to Members of Parliament when Labour is in office, giving them the right to elect Cabinet ministers.
5 The proposed abolition of the House of Lords, and the concern to limit the powers of the Prime Minister, the government, and the civil service, would place a greater burden on the House of Commons.
In order to enable that chamber to adequately fulfil its main function of scrutinising legislation, over-seeing the executive, and representing the electorate in the national forum of debate, a number of changes in the procedure of the House of Commons are part of the Labour Party package for constitutional reconstruction.
They propose an improved procedure for the handling of bills; making legislation easier to follow; and, of course, the cry for improvements in the present Select Committee system.
All of this is familiar uncontroversial stuff, and the Labour Party proposals for increasing the power of the House of Commons are not at odds with the perspective of the constitutional authorities or the Liberals and Social Democrats.
However, although the Labour Party may want to see a stronger House of Commons, there is no wish to revive parliamentary government.
The Labour Party is in favour of that element of the "Westminster Model" that has to do with single-party government grounded in secure majorities in the House of Commons and it is, in consequence, opposed to proportional representation.
However, the concern to increase intra-party democracy and change the balance of power within the Labour Party bespeaks of a profound commitment to create a kind of democracy in Britain very different from that entrenched in the established constitutional set-up and different from that desired by the constitutional authorities and the Alliance who both wish to see legal limits on Parliament as well as a revival of the autonomy of parliamentary government itself.
Let us, then, deal with this second aspect of the Labour Party's proposals for constitutional change.
Changing democracy
Any consideration of the Labour Party concern to change the kind of democracy on offer to the people within a new British constitution has to begin by attending to the battles within the Labour Party and to the  resulting changes that have occurred in the constitution of the party.
The Left in the party at large, anxious about the failure of the party in Parliament to press for socialism when in government, have been concerned to change the relationship between the parliamentary party and the party outside Parliament through the implementation of three changes in the party constitution.
First, there is the issue of the mandatory reselection of MPs the idea that all sitting Labour Members should submit themselves for reselection by the local party at least once during the lifetime of each Parliament.
Second, there is the issue of the method for appointing the leader of the Labour Party and the idea that this should no longer be in the gift of the parliamentary party alone.
Third, there is the issue of the party manifesto for a general election and the idea that this should no longer be drawn up just by the leader on the basis of informal consultations.
Mandatory reselection was won in 1979 and a new method for electing the leader of the party was adopted in 1981 which gave trade unions and constituency parties a major say, but there has still to be a change in the way in which the party manifesto is drawn up.
The intent behind these changes within the Labour Party constitution spills over to pose a challenge to the kind of democracy that has been seen as the essential hallmark of the liberal-democratic British constitution.
If we look back to Chapter 1, we can see that the constitutional authorities regarded the British constitution as properly providing for representative government of a liberal-democratic kind.
Within our system of parliamentary democracy, only inter-party competition was seen as crucial and desirable.
In keeping with the emphasis on liberalism, there was the idea that party competition should be restrained and moderate so that it would involve gradual change and only limited state intervention.
In keeping with the emphasis on parliamentarianism there was the idea that party power should reside within the parliamentary leadership alone.
Party leaders should be free to devise programmes designed to appeal to the electorate as a whole, and they should only have to hold themselves vaguely accountable to the people through the direct mechanism of regular general elections.
It was always an elitist kind of limited democracy that was applauded a democracy of powerful, autonomous, but cautious, leaders, in limp relation to passive and uncommitted followers who had nothing to give but their votes and unquestioning support.
Political practice was condemned when it went beyond this constitutional state of affairs.
There was little room for popular participation except through the ballot box, and the public was given no real right to press demands onto governments or parties.
As soon as political parties rediscovered their roots, dropped their concern to maintain a consensus, and regained a conviction, they were condemned because they were adversarial and offered a real choice.
The bursts of intra-party democracy within the Labour Party, reflected in the cry that "Conference should decide" , were  invariably condemned as at odds with the essentials of the British constitution and as offensive to the magic, unmediated link between parliamentary leaders and "their" supporters (not controllers) in the electorate at large.
Interest-group activity could just about be tolerated as long as it was moderate and operated within the suffocating rules of the political game.
( "Ask nicely and quietly, and if we say" No "don't press us, just give up and drop your demands." )
But if that activity became more strident and refused to take no for an answer; if it became more popular, participatory, and direct, taking to the streets and becoming something called "extra-parliamentary politics" ; and if it threatened to overload the capacity of the state, then it was condemned — and condemned as at odds with the liberal-democracy of the British constitution.
Now, the changes of power in the Labour Party, and the changes in the constitution of the party, challenge the legitimacy and limitations of exactly this kind of limited, liberal, democracy.
Intra-party democracy is seen as vital to supplement the reality of interparty competition at the polls.
There is the view that the party leadership in parliament should lack autonomy and should be held accountable to the party rank and file outside of parliament.
Popular participation is applauded.
The direct democracy of extra-parliamentary politics, be it in the form of trade union strikes or campaigns of civil disobedience by peace protesters, is defended.
Simply expressed, parliamentary democracy and the representation of individual electors by unfettered parliamentary leaders is challenged in favour of party democracy and the representation of collective (class) interests where the majority wishes of the party activists outside Parliament in the constituencies are interposed between the parliamentary leaders and the electorate to limit the former and to provide the party programme for choice by the latter.
Manifesto is the cement, and a mandated democracy (whereby MPs are delegates to be instructed by activist supporters outside Parliament) is the building.
Established elements of parliamentary democracy in Britain are challenged.
Prime ministerial power, and therefore prime ministerial government is challenged; Cabinet government and collective responsibility are challenged because of the claim that the first allegiance of a Labour minister is not to the Cabinet but to the mandate given by the party conference; parliamentary government and the autonomy of MPs to deliberate as representatives is challenged through the notion of mandate reducing them to delegates; and liberal-democracy itself is challenged because of a refusal to accept limits to participation and to the role of the state in the struggle to attain socialism through democracy.
These plans for a fundamental reshaping of democracy in Britain find little support outside the party, but there are those who consider that the interaction between parliamentary and extra-parliamentary action constitutes a dual strategy that provides a viable third road to socialism.