

THE ENDING.
16 January 1979, Mehrabad Airport, Teheran.
A bitter wind form the Elburz Mountains sweeps around two 707s parked in front of the low, white, thickly carpeted Imperial Pavilion where, in happier days, the Shah of Iran welcomed or bade farewell to the monarchs and statesmen who came to pay him court, nurture his ambitions and ask for alliances, money or other tokens of his kingship.
The planes have been tested and are now being loaded and prepared for flight.
The Shah himself is about to leave.
There is not much other activity at the airport.
Rows and rows of planes of Iran Air — "the caviar airline" — are grounded by strikes.
In recent months, as the Islamic revolution has gathered force, almost all the country had been stopped by strikes.
They have all been directed at just one target: the Shah.
In Teheran, there have been power cuts, and even basic food stuffs have been short.
Oil, the fount of the country's wealth and of the crash modernization and militarization on which the Shah encouraged by his allies, had embarked in the 1970s, has at times stopped flowing altogether.
Iran has even had to import heating oil from the United States in recent months.
Now the armed forces are working the oil fields.
In Teheran poor peoples wait in long lines in the snow for paraffin.
Drivers are lining up for hours in front of petrol stations guarded by sullen, sometimes angry soldiers who keep control by firing their automatic weapons into the air.
Soldiers, drivers and attendants a like are cursing the snow and the cold — and the Shah.
Grey-black smoke rises from bonfires of tyres and rubbish set alight by gangs of youths who roam the streets, stop expensive cars like BMW or Mercedes, and siphon out the petrol.
Drivers are unwise to protest, especially if they are foreign.
The Americans, in particular, are afraid of being beaten up.
The best insurance is to have on a window a sticker of the Shahs great enemy, the  turbulent, intransigent priest, Ayatollah Khomeini or, even better, to play one of the tapes on which, from his exile near paris, he exhorts the Shahs overthrow.
The city this morning is relatively calm, far quieter than it has been on many days in recent months.
But it is an uneasy calm, expectant of imminent, enormous change.
The Shah has already announced that he will leave the country for a holiday and for medical treatment.
Only the actual day of his departure is, to the people, unknown.
As in all revolutionary crises, there is no real news.
No one knows what is being plotted, what pressures are being applied, who will turn where.
Almost the entire population listens to the Persian service of the BBC, and the BBC reports the latest broadside from the Ayatollah in Paris and such information from Teheran as correspondents have been able to sift from rumour.
Together the rumours and the snippets of information, the suspicions and the lies, make a pretty fearful brew.
According to one story, the Shahs announcement that he will leave is only a bluff, and soon the Army will strike.
All the generals, the admirals and the air force commanders, quite apart from the secret policemen from SAVAK — which is now a byword both at home and abroad for torture and repression -have everything to lose if he goes.
So the logic is that they will prevent him.
It is all being organized.
That is one story.
Some think that he will go abroad for a few days and the CIA will then engineer his return in a countercoup, just as it did in 1953.
Others say no — for this time it is the British and the Americans who are throwing him out.
This is a view that is widely held by those around the court itself.
If the British were not behind Khomeini, why would the BBC broadcast his strictures sermons?
Everyone knows the old saying, "If you life a mullah's beard you'll find" Made in Britain"stamped on his chin.
The Shah himself has tried to have the British government curb the BBC.
He sees its refusal as a clear British betrayal of him.
The Americans position is said to be more complicated.
If they wanted the Shah to stay they would already have told him to order the Army to destroy the revolution, not just peck at it, Instead, president Carter has sent over a senior US general, Robert E. Huyserl, to keep the army quiet.
That is what is being said by many.
Palaces and rich houses all over town are echoing emptily now.
For weeks, for months even, members of the royal family and the royal court have been getting out, The exodus has been a little undignified.
Sometimes it seemed that those who had profited most successfully form the bonanza that he Shah had unleashed were the first to go -with members of the Pahlavi dynasty leading the rush tot he exit.
The Shah had actually asked his twin sister, Princess Ashraf, to leave the country — she was too much the symbol of the royal family excesses.
The walls and the floors of her newly redecorated palace -rather garish many thought — are bare, The carpets and the pictures have been created and flown to one of her other homes — perhaps to Juan-les-Pins, perhaps top one of her two places in Paris, perhaps to the house of her fabulously rich businessman son on London, or perhaps to his island in the Seychelles, Her other son, a naval officer who will later pass, briefly and tragically, through this story, dined in his mothers palace one night in October 1978 and, pointing to the one picture remaining on the wall, said,"There's one they forgot to take.
From the Shahs Niavaran Palace on the slope of North Teheran, where all the rich villas are clustered, the Queen, Farah Diba, has sent a plane load of clothes and what others might call household effects to the United States.
It has been a strange time for customs officers thought Western Europe and North America.
How could they possibly assess the value of the trinkets being imported — suitcases and crates crammed with carpets, pictures, furniture, diamonds, strings of pearls, ruby rings, emerald earring, tiaras, silver money transfers -all most every rich person in the country suddenly want this of her money telexed to accounts in Switzerland, Paris London, New York, the Cayman Islands.
Employees of the Central Bank have gone on strike, refused to send any more telexes, and circulated documents using tow of the Shahs nephews and an army general, a month other of transferring $2.4 billion to banks outside Iran.
It is a time for journals and diaries.
In London the Shahs ambassador, Parviz Radji, who had been inter alia, the lover of Princes Ashraf, has been agonizing daily over the turn that is country had taken, the corruption of the court of which he was apart, and the inglorious way in which it has now all collapsed.
He recounts rumour -false, it later seems, that the Shah in his despair now goes to a friends house to smokes opium three times a week.
He wonders whether anyone now has sympathy for the Shah or whether his vanity, his vainglory, his hectoring, his insensitivity  his military obsessions, have not lost him all goodwill, at home and abroad.
Radji thinks he ought to go back to Teheran so as not to be lumped with the more infamous of the Shahs associates"in peoples minds.
A friend warns him not to do so.
"The current joke in Teheran is about the fox who was hurrying out of town.
Someone asked the reason for such haste.
The fox said"In the town they kill all foxes that have three balls.
 "But have you got three balls?" 
He was asked.
 "No replied the fox, but they kill you first and count your balls afterwards" .
In the town of frightened foxes, a British diplomat phoned one of the richest businessmen in the country.
 "Is he in?" no, he's in prison,"came the answer.
The diplomat knew that was untrue but asked why the man was imprisoned.
 "Because he sent a hundred and fifty million dollars out of the country," came the reply.
"Who are you? asked the diplomat.
 "One of his servants," the voice stated.
A few senior officials, including a former prime minister and the former head of the secret police, SAVAK, have been arrested on the Shahs orders, But these were little more than futile, almost feckless, gestures of appeasement (and personal betrayal) by the Shah.
In these least months of 1978 almost all the golden people of Iran and international wheeler-dealers who had fed off them and with them have vanished — westward.
One of the most fabulously rich of the Shahs ministers, Hushand Ansary, has obtained permission to leave on the grounds that he had an urgent appointment with Henry Kissinger.
From the airport he called the Us ambassador to say he would be back within three days.
 "This may not be savior-faire, but it looks like sang-froid" commented the ambassador in a cable to Washington.
Ansary never returned.
In the old days it was hard to get an audience with the Shah.
The palace bustled with courtiers, officials, cronies and those whom the French call affairistes.
(Sadly, there is not exactly equivalent expression in English; the French have in mind businessman whose fingers seem to stick everywhere.)
Everyone was then seeking the monarchs presence.
His appointments were rigidly controlled, It was his imprimatur rather than is ear that people wanted.
The Shah was not known as a great listener — not as least to Iranians.
He suffered foreigners more gladly.
In any case, in the old days, no Iranian ever came to give him advice.
Everyone knew that the only source of political acumen was the Shah himself, But by the end of 1978, all that had changed.
The old crowds had largely fled, the King was seeking counsel, and almost anyone could drop by.
All at once in the ante-rooms of the palace were sources of people who had not been seen or allowed anywhere near the place in recent years.
Members of the National Front, the opposition the Shah had crushed in the fifties and ignored ever since, leftists, rightists, monarchists, republicans, dentists, doctors, lawyers — almost anyone it seems could finally get into see His Imperial Majesty.
Each of them had his pet theories on what had caused the massive, popular Islamic uprising, and on how the situation should now develop.
Even "intellectuals" were allowed in.
The Shah had sometimes shown disdain for many such people.
He and his courtiers used the French work "intellectual" to refer to them.
The first syllable, pronounced an, means "shit" in Persian.
The Shah used to dress that syllable, ANtellectuel", when referring to anyone with education who was thought not to embrace everything the Pahlavis embodied.
There came one day to the palace a certain Dr Shakar.
He was a lawyer who had not seen the Shah for the last twenty years.
He asked the master of the horse, whom he knew, to arrange an audience.
The master of the horse, Kambiz Atabai, obliged, and Dr Shakhar was shown into his Majesty's presence.
When he emerged, Dr Shakhar seemed to think that the talk had gone well and then asked for another audience.
This too he was granted; he spent another two hours with the Shah.
Triumphantly he told the master of the horse that he had the solution to everything "in my back pocket." 
Kambiz Atabai, a slim, good-looking and asked him if he would share his secret and Dr Shakhar said by all means.
He had, he said, advised the Shah to erect a hundred scaffold in Teheran and to hang on them a hundred people, starting with his former prime minister.
Then all would be well.
The master of the horse said later that he had not been overly impressed by this proposal.
Everyone's solution was subjective, he thought, based on the resentments and jealousies festered in the long, bitter years of internal exile that the Shah had imposed on all those who would not recognize his sole and divinely inspired leadership of Iran.
Now the Shah was getting each of those personal, often vindictive, views one by one.
Never before had he been subjected to such a plethora of opinions — often form people with whom he had no real relationship, many of whom, bore him and his family substantial grudges.
"We all wanted to save the country.
We all had a  solution and we all wanted to present it to one man alone"said Kambiz Atabai
A few weeks before he left Iran, the Shah had asked one of the most respected members of the opposition that he had crushed in the fifties to try to form a government.
This man.
Gholam Hussein Saddiqi, tried and failed.
When the told the Shah he could not find anyone to serve under him, the Shah was astonished and asked "Why" ?
Saddiqi, a learned and formidable intellectual, was embarrassed if not frightened, because his answer could never before have been given by a subject to the Shahanshah, King of Kings, Light of the Aryans, Muhammad Reza Pahlavi, Hesitantly, he said it was because no one wanted to be associate with the Shah.
At this time the Shah snapped forward, flung out his arms, and shouted,"Why?
Why?
I do not understand."
Until only months before, the Shah had genuinely believed that he was beloved by the Iranian people.
Perhaps this meant no more than that he believed the propaganda, the lies and the flatter of those who surrounded him; still, his belief had been complete.
But in the last twelve months the fury of the entire national had been aroused against him by an aged, exiled cleric for whom he had only contempt.
Suddenly the people, his people, were expressing only loathing for all that he had achieved in his thirty-seven years on the throne.
It was impossible for him to comprehend.
Only a year ago the Shah had seemed to himself and to his allies to be utterly secure.
President Jimmy Carter had spent New Years Eve 1977–78 with him and praised him extravagantly.
And then the Shah had allowed the publication of a scurrilous attack on his clerical enemy, Ayatollah Khomeini.
To everyone's astonishment, this had opened a whole well spring of bitterness against his regiment and precipitated a cycle of protests, killings, mournings, more protests, more killings, throughout the spring and summer.
Two terrible climaxes occurred.
One, in August 1978, was a fire in a cinema in Abadan.
The doors were locked form the outside.
Four hundred people perished.
The government blamed the inferno on Muslim fundamentalists.
The opposition said it was the work of SAVAK, the secret police.
That was what most people believed.
Then at the beginning of September, troops opened fire on demonstrators in Jhaleh Square in South Teheran.
Hundreds were killed or wounded.
This last event had a catastrophic effect on the Shah.
When President Carter called him soon after it, the Shah spoke as if shell-shocked by the diabolical conspiracy against him.
Those who  saw him then say he seemed to shrink into himself and lose what ever vestige he had till then retained.
A few days after the massacre, the Shah had an opportunity to show himself as a compassionate leader after an earthquake destroyed the town of Tabas and killed about twenty thousand people.
But instead of going into the street where mullahs, students and soldiers were desperately digging people out.
He merely flew into the airport, where the military rescue operation was being organized.
He stood around, stiff, resplendent and uncomfortable in the brilliant plumage of a field marshals uniform.
Then he flew out again.
In terms of identifying himself with the peoples suffering it was a disaster.
At around the same time, Michael Blumenthal, the Us treasury secretary, visited him while on a swing through the middle East in search of petrodollars for investment in the states.
He had met the Shah year before and the Shah had lectured him imperiously on the need for law and order in affairs of state.
 "You in the United States don't understand how a country should be run," the Shah had declared.
Blumenthal went to the palace for lunch.
He barely recognized the Shah.
The athletic arrogant and handsome monarch of 1977 had been replaced by a sick, befuddled man who had no idea what was happening.
 "I don't know what to do"  "he told Blumenthal" .
 "I don't know what they want me to do." 
He repeated this over and over, as if he believed that it is only "they" whoever they were, told him how to act, then everything would be all right.
In between such anguished pleas, there were long and embarrassing silences while he simply stared at the floor.
To Blumenthal he seemed like a ghost.
Back in Washington Blumenthal went straight to see Zbigniew Brzezinski, Jimmy Carter's national security adviser.
 "You've got a zombie out there," he said.
"What are we doing in Iran?
Have we got some fall back position?
You've got to understand that we can't count on the Shah any more.
But there was no one else.
For at least twenty-five years, Western policy had been to help the Shah destroy all alternatives to his own rule.
Soon after Blumenthals visit, the Shahs naval commander Admiral Kamiladin Habinb Olahi, one of the more thoughtful senior officers, came to his King.
He brought with him a thirty page document proposing a military take-over of the country.
After he was shown into the Kings presence, the admiral kept his  eyes, lowered, as normal in audiences with the Shah, stood to attention and read from his memorandum.
The Shah paced up and down the room.
The admiral suggested that the revolution was coming to a head and the Shah must order the military to take control.
they would have to arrest everyone responsible for the present crises.
This included perhaps five thousand of the most corrupt courtiers and businessmen — to calm the millions of people who wanted the government overthrown — and five thousand mullahs and revolutionaries.
Sitting much later in the genteel coffee shop of a Holiday Inn in Suburban Virginia, Habib Olahi recalled that as the Shah walked to and fro, he said, "This is against the constitution." 
"But it is the only way to save the country.
The revolution is already in an advance state.
Nothing can save Iran except an equal force in the opposite direction."
 "You think I should act against the constitution" 
"Yes, you Majesty.
It is the only way to save the country."
There was silence.
It lasted for about five minutes, The Shah kept on walking back and forth.
Habib Olahi, a stocky man, still stood at attention, his eyes fixed on the rich carpet.
Neither man spoke.
Finally the naval commander realized that the Shah was not going to approve his plan.
He stated to talk about something quite different.
Habib Olahi left the palace very pessimistic.
"Every book on revolutions shows that they succeeded when the head of state loses is nerve.
The Shah was so indecisive.
"Habib Olahi thought part of the blame lay with Iran's allies — particulary the Americans and the British, who were giving him differing advice.
Others around the Shah agreed with that.
All through his life, the Shah had depended on the counsel of foreigners.
Now he was not getting it.
The Shah had at court a tall, slim, well-dressed man, a former ambassador to Washington, Vienna and Bonn.
He was now the grand master of ceremonies.
His name was Amir Aslan Afshar.
Mr Afshar was not an intellectual and his position did not afford him great administrative power.
But it did give him unique access to the Shah.
There were those who might used that access to greater affect than Afshar, some who might have been more ruthless, perhaps, for he was not really an aggressive man.
He was a courtier.
But he was with the Shah constantly throughout those final months of 1978 and early 1979.
For weeks now Afshr's office had been chaotic, besieged every day by rich men and rich women reminding him of past favours, promising him future ones.
Some wanted to see the Shah; others were more interested in fleeing the whirlwind than reaping it.
Many of them were, with reason, frightened of the Shahs desperate attempt to find scapegoats to appease the mobs.
In the last months of 1978 several of his former servants were arrested in this vain hope.
On 5 November 1978, four generals called Afshar saying they must see him at once.
5 November was a particularly bad day, the day, in the words of the British ambassador, then the "balloon went up" .
An ayatollah had been released from three years"detention and mobs took to the streets to celebrate.
Thousands of young men attacked government buildings, banks, offices of state enterprises, liquor shops — anything associated with the regime.
Windows were smashed,.
Furniture was dragged into the streets and burned along with cars and buses.
Young men danced around the flames and slapped onto those cars that did dare pass stickers proclaiming "Death to the Shah" .
The chancery of the British embassy was attacked and part of it was burned down.
Since the massacre in Hjaleh Square, the soldiers had been under orders — from the Shah himself — to avoid bloodshed.
The Shah constantly said to those around him that while a dictator could survive by massacring the people, a king could never do so.
This is not to say that force was thereafter eschewed It was used in Isfahan, in the north, and in the west — but less in Teheran.
Within the government and the court there was a constant debate as to how many deaths the United States and other allies of the Shah would tolerate.
"Would you accept five thousand deaths?
Ten thousand?
Twenty thousand? was a question frequently asked of American officials by Iranian ambassadors and other emissaries.
In the last three months of 1978, the Army in Teheran was patrolling under restraint.
Stick out on the streets day after day, taunted and mocked, the troops became demoralized.
No one would take a decision.
The master of the horse, Kambiz Atabai, later told the story of how one day a lieutenant and his men were caught in a hostile crowd at the university.
The lieutenant was screaming into his walkie-talkie for advice.
No one would give it.
His plight went all the way up to his general, who was in the palace.
Even he would not give an order.
The lieutenant was shouting.
"What must I do?
I have to defend my soldier."
The generals replied,"Tell him to use his initiative.
There must be no bloodshed.
I will report to His Majesty and come back to him."
Now, on 5 November, one of the generals urged Agshar, "The whole city is burning; you must tell His Imperial Majesty to do something." 
 "You are generals, you should talk to him," Afshar replied.
But, by his own account, he agreed he would speak to the Shah if they too would do so.
So when he Shah left his office to drive back to the residence in the palace ground, Afgshar rushed towards him.
He fell on his knees and grasped his monarch around his legs.
 "What is going on?" asked to Shah.
Afshar replied,"Your Majesty, you have to do something.
The people are very unhappy.
They are burning shops and are in the streets.
Something has to be done."
Behind the figure of Ashar hugging the Shah legs, the four generals also fell on their knees.
 "I really wanted to stop the Shah, to get him to do something," said Agshar long afterwards.
The Shah replied "But the troops are in the city." 
To which one general, later killed, stood up, saluted the Shah, and, with tears in his eyes, said,"Majesty, the soldiers do nothing.
They are not allowed to shoot.
People make fun of them and spit on them and laugh at them…"
Then, recalled Afshar, "The generals and I said," Majesty, it is time to put a strong man in charge of government."
Afshar and the other wanted General Gholam Ali Oveissi, the governor of Teheran, to be made prime minister.
He was known as "The Butcher of Teheran" because of the massacre of Jaleh Square.
He was reckoned to be one of the officers prepared to use force to put down the revolution.
The Shah said,"OK, OK.
It's all right.
Get up and will see what I can do."
But that night, he summoned the British and American ambassadors and after talking to them he appointed as prime minister his chief of staff, General Gholamreza Azhari, a mild-mannered man who was absolutely opposed to use force.
When the Shah informed Agshar of this, his grand master of ceremonies said nothing.
"he was the Shah.
I could not question his judgements or decisions.
"But a few months later, in exile, he did ask the Shah why he had not chosen Ovesissi.
The Shah, according to Afshar, replied that the British and American ambassadors had been against it; they thought it was better to have a quiet man like Azhari who could discuss problems with mullahs leading the revolutionary ferment.
Afshar drew his own conclusions from this.
 "I think," he said much later in his apartment overlooking the Mediterranean in  France,"that this was another of the West's attempt to undermine the Shah.
With Oveissi we could have ended the whole thing.
We had a list of three to four hundred people who were the key organizers.
We could have arrested the.
Having Azhari was another way of trying to destabilize Iran, to bring the Shah rule to an end."
In Ashar's attitude one senses one of the many paradoxes of the Iranian revolution.
Millions of Iranians perhaps the majority, it is hard to tell — saw the Shah as did Ayatollah Khomeini; he was an agent of the Great Satan, as Khomeini called the United States.
The idea that the US and Britain were actually conspiring against the Shah was less pervasive.
But it was strongly felt by many in the court, and indeed by the Shah himself.
All through his life the Shah had been obsessed by the what other nations controlled or manipulated Iran, particularly the British, the Russians and the Americans.
This was understandable enough.
After all, it was the British and the Russians who had dominated Iran through the nineteenth and much of the twentieth centuries.
The British had encouraged his father to seize power in the 1920s.
Then they and the Russian had deposed him and installed the Shah himself on the throne in 1941.
For many years the British had tried to run him, or so it seemed to many.
Since the 1950s they had lost a good deal of their influence over him to the Americans.
Many Iranians around the Shah believed that the British resented this and blamed the Shah for it.
None the less, faced with the greatest crises of his reign, and unable to sift through the unfathomable views, and motives of his countrymen, the Shah had turned increasingly to foreign advisers.
One of these who visited him was the Comte Alexandre de Marenches, the conservative head of the French secret service, who had known and admired the Shah for years.
At the end of 1978, when he realized the danger that Khomeini was inflicting on the Shah from France, Marenches say he tried to have him expelled from the country.
He flew to Teheran to consult the Shah.
After driving through streets filled with angry demonstrators, he found the Shah in a darkened room of the Palace, wearing large sunglasses that his half his face.
The Shah said he wanted the French to keep Khomeini; if he went to Syria or Lybia he would be even more dangerous.
For Marenches the most dramatic moment of the interview was when the Shah returned to him and said, "You do understand, my dear count, that I can never fire on my own people." 
Thinking of the crowds "spreading terror in Teheran" , Marenches says he replied, "sire, in that case you are lost." 
When the audience was over, the Shah led Marenches with great courtesy to the door.
He took off his glasses to shake hands, and the light fell upon his face.
Marenches thought he looked ravaged.
Next day in Paris, Marenches called on President Giscard d'Estaing.
The president rose to greet him and asked, "Alors?" 
C "est Lois XV," said Marenches.
 "Alors, c'est la fin," said Giscard.
More frequent visitors to the palace in the last months were the American and British ambassador, William Sullivan and Anthony Parsons.
Both of them have published their accounts of the Shahs final day and their frequent meetings with him.
What emerge is the Shahs complete inability to understand what had gone wrong, what mistakes he had made.
But they too managed only to confuse him.
Did they want further liberalization?
Did they want him to crack down on the rioters?
Would they put up with thousands of imprisonments and deaths?
He could not tell.
The message form Washington and London were discordant.
Some Americans officials wanted force.
Others did not.
The British seemed to be against it, but the British could never be trusted.
The British Ambassador, Anthony Parsons, a man whose heavy spectacles gave him an amiable academic appearance, was an Arabist who had been in Iran since 1974.
Parsons was equivocal about the regime.
He liked the Shah personally, but, as he later acknowledged, he had been so intent on promoting British exports to Iran that he had given too little weight to many of the country's problems.
His wife had been much more critical of Pahlavi excesses than he.
In the crucial summer months of 1978, as the Shah disintegrated, Parson had gone on home leave, as had the US ambassador.
Since his return, parson had become heavily involved with the Shah, attempting to advise him and to answer his questions as to why the people had turned against him.
Parsons had said that among the causes was the fact that the massive influx into the cities following the mid-seventies oil-boom had created a rootless, unhappy proletariat.
In Teheran thousands of workers spent their days building villas or even palaces for the rich and their nights in hovels or holes in the ground.
The materialism was crass, everyone's expectations had  been aroused, and few people had been satisfied.
There was no confidence between the government and people.
Little wonder people turned to their traditional leaders, the mullahs, said Parsons.
The Shah did not disagree.
Parsons was due to leave Iran for London in early 1979.
He found his last meeting with the Shah a profoundly emotional experience and told the Shah he was so moved by the tragedy of it all that he would rather not speak.
The Shah smiled and put his hand on Parson's arm as the ambassador faltered, tears in his eyes.
"Never mind, I know how you feel.
But we must have one last talk,"said the Shah.
He said he was getting three different sets of advice; to stay and "tough it out" to retire to a naval base and let the Army put down the people in his absence, or to leave.
What did Parsons think?
Parsons said he was loath to answer, because anything he said would be see as a British plot*
The Shah insisted.
Reluctantly, and stressing this was only his "personal" opinion, nothing to do with the British government, the British ambassador replied that a crackdown couldn't work, that is the Shah was now forced to withdraw to a naval base, he would soon have to leave altogether anyway, but that if he did now leave Iran, the chances of his coming back were slight.
The Shah then made a strange gesture.
He looked at his watch and said, "If it was up to me I would leave in ten minutes." 
But he had to stay, he said — because the parliament had not yet confirmed his new prime minister, Shapour Bakhtiar.
(The previous premier, General Azhari, had suffered a heart attack on a few weeks in office).
Parson thought this was ridiculous, but he realized that even days before he would flee, the Shah was unable to acknowledge that power had slid from him like snow from the mountains in spring.
Till not Iran had, on paper, a constitutional monarchy, but in reality all power was exercised by the Shah.
He had controlled the government and the parliament.
Now, he had just appointed a new Cabinet and he insisted that the would not leave until it had been formally approved by the Majles, or parliament, as the constitution demanded.
Only then could the new prime minister formally take up the vast burden of his office.
Parsons considered this absurd.
as if anyone any longer cared for such constitutional niceties.
This was a revolution.
It was no a picnic.
But it was the Shah's way.
The US ambassador, William Sullivan, was very different from Parsons.
With a bushy crop of grey-white hair, barley, ramrod straight, he was veteran of Laos and the Philippines, and by his own accounts neither very knowledgeable about nor very sympathetic to Iran.
Like Parson, he had been out of Teheran as the Shah's power crumbled in the summer of 1978.
After his return, he went dozens of times to the palace.
Often the Shah summoned him and Parsons together.
On some of these visits the atmosphere in the palace had been macabre.
On one occasion in the early autumn, the Shah had turned on Sullivan, recited almost every incident of unrest and declared that it was all so sophisticated that it must be the result of foreign intrigue against him.
The KGB were not capable of coordinating such protests he said, so it must be the work of British intelligence and the CIA.
Well, he said, to Sullivan, he knew that the British had never like him, But why had the CIA turned on him?
Had he done something wrong?
Or had Washington and Moscow reached some grand design in which Iran divided between them as part of a plan for world condominium.
The Shahs tone was plaintive, hurt, inquiring, rather than angry.
Sullivan found it almost pathetic — as well as astounding.
The ambassador tried to explain what he knew of the sources of unrest and said he thought the mullahs were getting their money from the merchants in the bazaars, not from the CIA.
The Shah seemed surprised.
Sullivan realized that he had almost no one to talk to, except, of course, Sullivan himself and Parsons.
He did talk to his wife, Empress Farah, but otherwise he had never been at ease with Iranians.
On another of occasion, Sullivan arrived in his armour-plated Chrysler (which an enraged mob had once found too heavy to overturn) to find the palace surrounded by tanks (sold to the Shah by the British) and by units of the Imperial Guard heavily armed with machine guns and anti-aircraft weapons.
But the usual doorman was not on duty.
Sullivan opened the door himself and went in alone.
There was no soft-footed, tailcoated aides-de-camp in the hall.
He wandered along the thick carpets through to the main drawing room.
Still there was no one.
The whole palace seemed deserted, as if the Royal family and all the staff had already taken the road to Varennes.
Eventually the lost ambassador was found by Empress Farah.
She was as surprised as he was, and went off to look for some servants.
Finally he was taken upstairs to the Shahs study.
In some of their talk the Shah had seemed drained by events.
Sometime he was nervous; at other times, strangely calm.
At all times he was uncomprehending and desperate for advice.
Just what did Washington want?
This was a tough question for Sullivan.
Washington was divided, with the national security adviser, Zbigniew Brezinski arguing for a crackdown, and the secretary of state, Cyrus Vancel, urging restraint.
So the ambassador could not take a single firm line.
At the end of December Sullivan went to the palace on a mission that, he says was rather unusual for an ambassador.
It was to tell the head of state to whom he was accredited that he ought to leave the country.
But their relationship had become so close over the last few months that even this advice did not see, all the 'surrealistic"to Sullivan.
/
The Shah listened quietly and then turned to Sullivan "almost beseechingly, throwing out his hands and saying," yes, but where will I go "" 
Sullivan later claimed that he had been given no instructions on this point.
But he remembered that the Shah had a house in Switzerland.
Every winter for years the popular illustrated paper of Europe had devoted great colour spreads to the Shah and his wife and four children on the ski slopes.
For apres-ski, half the finance ministers or even heads of European governments used to come to pay court, to seek this or that contract, some loan or other — anything to divert some of the Shah's new oil wealth back to Europe.
And for apres-apres-ski there were always the lovely blonde women flown in from Madam Claudes famous establishment in Paris.
But Switzerland the Shah now dismissed, saying the security was no good.
; We also have a home in England, "he said," but the weather is so bad."
He might also have said, as he had on countless occasions, that although he had constantly looked to the British for advice, he distrusted them acutely.
Instead, he just kept looking at the American ambassador with what Sullivan describes as 'soulful eyes".
So Sullivan asked, "Your Majesty, would you like me to seek an invitation for you to go to the United States.?" 
At that the Shah leaned forward, almost like a little boy in his eagerness, and said, would you, would you really?"
The Shah's version of this meeting was somewhat different.
After Sullivan left, he talk to Iranians who had come to the palace to see him, He said to the in wonderment,"Do you know what Sullivan has just said to me?
That I must leave."
Amir Aslan Afshr, the grand master of ceremonies, said later, He didn't want to leave, I know.
I was the closet to him, I was within twenty-four hours a day and he called me all the time.
At the beginning of January he decided to go to the US for two months and then come back.
He said to me, "Perhaps yourself for two months." 
I sent my suitcase to the palace.
From the Protocol Department pack some small gifts, carpets and things like that.
We sent a small plane load of things ahead of us to the States.
"The Shah wanted to go to America because he didn't know what Sullivan was reporting and didn't know what was happening in the US.
He wanted to talk to Carter and the Senate and the CIA.
I'm going to explain to them all the importance of Iran to the US and the danger of it falling to extremists, he said."
Within twenty-four hours Washington told Sullivan that the Shah would be welcome to come to the United States.
He could stay at the Palm Springs home of Walter Annenberg, newspaper publisher, millionaire, friend of the Shah's friend Richard Nixon, former ambassador tot he court of St James, Sullivan was told to convey the invitation in the name of the president and to ask how many people would be travelling with the Shah.
At this time Ayatollah Khomeini was declaring that any country which took the Shah out of Iran would be doing the revolution a favour.
So Sullivan actually thought that by taking the Shah, the US might gain points with the opposition, whose triumph he now regarded as inevitable.
On 12 January Sullivan went to see the Shah again.
According to the Shahs subsequent account,"The atmosphere was grim.
My departure was no longer a matter of days.
Sullivan said, bit of house."
The Shah recalled that Sullivan looked meaningfully at his watch."
Sullivan remembers the meeting rather differently.
Indeed, throughout the story of the Shah's last year, recollections differ enormously, There is no one version on which everyone agrees, no single destination, no unity of perception or goal.
Nor could there be.
This was a revolution in which allegiances constantly shifted, perceptions changed, unexpected futures suddenly beckoned, and equally unforeseen punishments became dreadful threats.
Accounts are bound to differ.
As far as Sullivan recalled, the Shah seemed relieved to be invited to the US and suggested he should fly to Andrews Air Force base outside Washington.
This is where state visitor usually land, and official welcome by President Carter or to her senior US officials.
There were ample precedents for such a notion.
The Shah had repeatedly been to American during the last thirty years.; he had been welcomed with full honours as not only an important chief of state by also a vital ally by every single president since Harry Truman.
But Sullivan did not think that such a grand welcome would now be appropriate.
It was one thing to ease the Shah passing out of Iran, quite another to accord him fill honours on arrival in the United States.
Washington would require a good relationship with the new Iranian authorities, Iran being the strategically vital country it was.
The president was supposed to be dissociating himself from the Shah not encouraging him.
So Sullivan recommended rather that the Shah enter the States through an obscure air force base in either Maine or South Caroline, and best of all at night,.
He could fly on to Travis Air Force base in California and then take a helicopter to the Annenberg estate.
In other words, he was supposed to slip through the back door into the country, unseen, unheard and unsung.
The Shah seemed to Sullivan to accept the proposal.
But the Shah was not happy.
In his memoirs, he later quoted one of his generals saying, as he face his trial and firing squad, that the Americans "threw the Shah out of the country like a dead mouse." 
The Shah's office was in the grounds of Niavaran Palace.
Part of the palace was a rather plain, square, white building put up in the early 1960's for stat visitors.
The subsequent growth of Teheran had made the previous royal quarters in town too cramped and after an attempt on the Shah life in 19965, on of several that he survived, the family had moved to Niavaran.
From the iron gates that gave on to the road the palace was visible through tall plane tress, but it was not easily accessible.
Banks of guards, telephones TV monitors and electronic friskers kept out unwelcome visitors and made the grounds secure for the Shah, and his wife, their children, their dogs and their courtiers.
The Shahs main office was altogether prettier.
It was on the slope of the gardens in a tiny old place built by the previous  (Qajar) dynasty.
It had since been rebuilt; its arched windows and roofs made it look like a Russian provincial home.
There the Shah worked in a large salon that looked out through tall windows on to the city below.
It was furnished with gilt, bevelled mirrors, chandeliers, gold-plated telephones, gold cigarette boxes studded with jewels, gold pens and inkwells.
This as in keeping with the style of the palace itself.
But in the office, such traditional"Versailles-kitsch furniture was offset by charts, radio, tape recorders and other modern gadgetry including an illuminated wall map.
Outside this office was a smaller room, little more than an antechamber.
It contained a large white marble bust of the Shah's father, Reza Shah, who had dominated his son as much as he had his country.
Now, just before he left the country for what would be the last time.
The Shah went in there and paused in front of the graben image of the ruthless and brilliant army officer who had seized power in 1921, and ended the Qajar dynasty, proclaimed himself the new Shah, the first of the Pahlavi dynasty, and begin to recreate Ira.
A vast and awesome leader, Reza Shah had ruled despotically, trying to force the factions, oligarchies and tribes of Iran to accept centralized authority and the appurtenances of the twentieth century.
In the old days, the courtiers, who clicked around his son, Muhammad Reza, that his achievements ere even greater than those of his father.
No praise could be higher.
But during the trauma of 1978, the Shah's courtiers no longer mentioned his father name.
They were concerned least the Shah should think that they were rebuking him for comparing him unfavourably with them of steel.
They did not want him to make the comparison himself.
Privately people made another, even more invidious comparison among themselves.
They said that Reza Aah was a man to whom mo one dared to lie.
With his sons, no one dare to tell the truth.
Now, as the son came to see the marble bust for the last time, court photographers crowded around to capture the poignancy of the son saying goodbye, presumably with a sense of terrible failure, to the father for whom he had never been good enough.
There stood the Shah, impeccable as ever in a well-cut grey suit and rather loud time ramrod straight, his face, always, expressionless before the cold white stare of his father.
Then he turned on his heel and walked down the stairs.
On 16 January the Shah and the Empress, Farah Dida left the Niavaran Palace for the last time.
Instead of flying straight to the United States, the Shah had decided at the last minute to accept an invitation from Anwar Sadat of Egypt to pause briefly in Aswan.
For the queen the last few months had been perhaps harder then for the Shah himself.
 "There wasn't really five minutes of breathing calmly," she said later.
 "If we had ten to twenty minutes, we were happy." 
While the court crumbled around them and advisers fled, she had become more and more vital to the Shah, lending him continual strength.
In 1978 he came to depend on her almost completely.
Like him, she had been against destroying the revolution with massive bloodshed.
And like him, she was uncertain whether they should leave.
At one stage she says she suggested that he go and she stay, for the sake of those who believed in them.
He refused and said they must leave together.
Officers of the Imperial Guard and the servants lined up on the palace steps, weeping, to say goodbye.
Some of them held the Koran over the Shah head, to give him its customary protection on his journey, and wailed as the royal party left by helicopter for the airport.
It had been literally years once the Shah had drive men in the streets of Teheran.
Occasionally he went by car to the nearby homes of members of his family.
Otherwise it was everywhere by air.
His view of Iran had almost always been from the sky.
The landed close to the Imperial Pavilion.
The Shah said later that he noticed the terrible wind and the gloomy sight of the planes grounded by strikes.
In the pavilion he made a little speech to a few reporters.
"As I said when the (new) government was formed, I am feeling tired and need a rest.
I also stated that when I felt that things were going well and the government was settled I would take a trip and that trip starts now.
Asked how long he would be away he said softly, "I don't know." 
He then waited for his new prime minister, Sharpour Bakhtiar, who had been imprisoned several times during his reign, and in whose hands he now was leaving the country.
The Shah did no like Bakhtir - "I had always considered him an Anglophile and an agent of British Petroleum." 
(Perhaps therefore he thought his appointment would please the British).
But he still would not leave until Bakhtiar had been confirmed by the Majles.
He asked his staff to telephone back to the city, but all the lines form his pavilion at the airport were cut.
They had to use the guards"radio, which was patched through to army headquarters and thence to the Majles.
Finally the news cracked through that Bakhtiar had indeed been confirmed.
A helicopter was sent for him and shortly afterwards it clattered down on the tarmac, Bakhtiar, a thin, nervous but very elegant man who looked like a French aristocrat, with a trim moustache and superbly cut clothes, entered the pavilion and bowed before the king.
 "Now you have everything in your hands," said the Shah,"I hope you will succeed.
I entrust Iran to you and to God.
"Within days Bakthiar would be swept away in the whirlwind of the Ayatollahs return.
He was the Kerensky of Iranian revolution.
The Shah and his party, dressed against the wind, began to walk towards the plane.
In front of the blue-and-white 707, he stopped for final farewells.
As neatly dressed as ever, his striped tie showing through the lapels of his overcoat, he stood stiffly, his left foot slightly forward, as if ready to walk quickly away.
One fell on the ground to kiss his feet and the Shah bent awkwardly to fetch him up.
In his left hand, the Shah gripped his spectacles.
He had barely slept for days and his white face was dominated by his broad, dark eyebrows, which were locked together in an expression suggesting both grief and incomprehension.
Beside him the Empress's face was stretched taut with misery.
Almost everyone was weeping, even Bakhtiar, who, perhaps alone of those on the tarmac, had wanted the Shah to leave.
Almost all the military men had begged him to stay.
The Shah's own eyes's were wet, This was not the first time that his officers had seen him show such emotion.
he said to the commander of the Imperial Guards,"Do whatever you consider necessary.
I hope people are not killed."
Later he wrote,"I was completely overwhelmed by the expressions of loyalty given to me when I left.
There was a poignant silence broken by sobs."
It was just two in the afternoon when the Shah and the Empress and their small entourage finally took off.
When the news was broadcast on Teheran radio a few moments later, the city erupted in joy.
Car horns were blared for minutes on end, headlights were flashed, people danced and sang and shouted,"The Shah is gone.
He's not coming back."
Boys gave V signs; girls and young women in chadors laughed, danced and shouted, "Everyone is free now." 
People waved gladioli, carnations, portraits of Ayatollah  Khomeini, crying, "By the force of Khomeini, the Shah has fled." 
Statues of the Shah and his father were torn to the ground; newspapers with huge headlines "THE SHAH HAS GONE" were at once printed and distributed by the armload, to be enthusiastically seized and read.
Meanwhile, the Shah's 707, with the Shah himself at the controls, climbed and turned away towards the West, the source of many of his dreams and illusions, and now the object of hatred of many of his people.
In October 1971, Muhammad Reza Pahlavi gave a party to excel all parties.
He invited the leaders of the world.
Not all of them came, and many of those who did attend represented the panoply of power rather than its reality.
The party was held in the ruins of Persepolis, which was built by Darius and burned by Alexander the Great.
It was supposed to mark the 2,500th anniversary of the original Persian empire founded by Cyrus the Great in the sixth century BC.
In retrospect it can be seen to mark the beginning of the end of the Pahlavi dynasty, which the Shah's father had founded just fifty years before.
In 1971 the Shah was also celebrating his own thirtieth anniversary on the throne, and the tenth anniversary of his reform programme, which he called the White Revolution, and which was supposed to introduce land reform, increase literacy, enfranchise women, modernize industry and the infrastructure, redistribute at least some wealth and lessen the power of the Muslim clergy, the mullahs.
Inevitably, therefore, this revolution had infuriated the clergy.
Nineteen seventy-one also marked the emergence of Iran as a regional force.
On St Valentines Day that year, the oil cartel, OPEC, had just had its first major success in forcing up in oil prices.
The Shah had taken a leading role in this process.
Perhaps even more importantly, the British government as now completing its announced intention to withdrew its troops from "east of Suez" and, together with the Americans, had quietly been encouragingly the Shah to take over the British role as the "Policeman of the Gulf." 
In 1971 there was a sense of self-confidence about both the Shah and his government, But, as Persepolis itself showed, it was a mood that was beginning to degenerate into unreal arrogance.
The Shah had imagined it as a modern version of the Congress of Vienna of 1815, where the rulers of the world could meet and discuss matters  of great import.
One government hand-out predicted of the party that "this suggest, universal assembly will make Persepolis, during the unforgettable day of 15 October 1971, the centre of gravity of the world." 
Perspeholis was a pageant in which the Shah's dreams and ambitions were unfolded.
Many of those who wrote about it at the time recalled Christopher Marlowes line, "Is it not fine to be a King and ride in triumph in Persepolis?" 
Triumph it was, in a sense for the Shah; but it was also some what bathetic.
As with so much of what he envisaged, the reality did not quite match the vision.
The Shah decided to follow nineteenth-century rules of protocol which meant that the senior guest was his friend and ally Haile Selasse, emperor of Ethiopia, Lion of Judah.
President Georges Pompidou of France refused to come unless he could be seated above Haile Selassie and Francophone heads of state; the Shah refused, so, in a huff, Pompidou sent his prime minister instead.
The Shah never forgave Pompidou sent his prime minister instead.
The Shah never forgave Pompidou for this insult.
The King and queen of Denmark were there.
So were the kings of Jordan, Belgium, and the former King of Greece.
The queen of England did no come, but she met instead her husband, Prince Philip, and her daughter, Princess Anne.
Prince Anne.
Prince Bernard of the Netherlands represented his wife, queen Juliana.
Perhaps most disappointing to the Shah was that President Nixon did not attend.
Mrs Nixon had been honourary chairman of the US committee for the 2,500th anniversary).
Vice President Spiro Agnew represented the United States — wan was outranked by nearly everyone save the ambassador from Peking.
The guests aside, almost everything at the party had been brought form Paris.
An encampment of tents was constructed on the dry, high plateau of Paris by the French decorator Jansen.
The house of Jansen had, over decades, decorated the royal palace in Belgrade in 1920, the private apartments on Fifth Avenue.
Jansens classic Parisian 'style-palais-style-Ritz, sub-louis Quartorse"was very much the Shah's taste.
At the centre of Jansen sumptuous tent city was a sort of Big Top, where receptions and dinners were to take place.
It was draped  with ruby velvet and furnished with gilded chairs.
The Shah and the Empress had their apartments there.
Around the main tent were scores of smaller tents for the famous and not-so-famous guests, many of whom were the important or merely rich foreign friends, in France, and contained two bedroom, two marble bathrooms, and a small chic sitting room.
There where hot plates for breakfasts, refrigerators for drinks, and ironing boards civil engineering.
Only the highest or the most favoured guests were to live in the tent city, and so, inevitably, the fighting between socialites to ensure places there was fierce.
Imelda Marcos gave Christina Ford space in her tent.
The les fortunate guests had to come daily from the new hotel on Persepolis or even form Shiraz, forty miles away.
That town had been given a face-lift.
The prison, where some of the dissidents who opposed the Shahs rule were held by SAVAK, was painted up, the street were cleaned, pots of flowers were placed all along the main roads, birds in cages were hung from lamp posts, shopkeepers were given blue coats to wear.
As soon as the party, was taken away.
Only the painted prison remained.
Top hair dressers flew in Paris salons of Carita and Alexandre; Elizabeth Arden created a new make-up named Farah, to be given in kits to the guests; Baccarat designed the crystal goblets; Ceralene fashioned the place setting after a fifth century BC Persian ceramic; Robert Hailland produced a cup-and-saucer service to be used just once by arriving guests; and Porthault, one of the great French linen makers, made the private and state linens.
Lanvin created new uniforms for the gentlemen of the court.
The coats were ornately if not fabulously stitched with over a mile of gold thread.
Each took about five hundred hours of work.
The food at Persepolis was prepared by other leading French and Swiss chefs and caterers.
The year before, Maxims services had been tried out when the Ministry of the Court commissioned them to provide a banquet in the desert for a hundred people.
M. Louis Vaudable of Maxims personally supervised that affair and created an exquisite new dish of caviar and poached quails eggs.
Unfortunately the Shah never ate caviar and would not touch his food.
So no one-else could do so either.
Eventually Maxim's improvised and placed some leeks, which had been used for consomme", in front of the King.
He began to eat and everyone else could then do so.
This time the dish was repeated for  the guests and the Shah had an artichoke.
The only food on the menu that was Iranian was the caviar; almost everything else came from France.
The menu for the main banquet was printed in black, with intricate gold filigrees, on vellum pages and bound in a little book whose covers were in blue silk and gold.
The wines were appropriate.
Vin Nature di la Champagne Chatearu de Sarab; Chateau Hart-Brio blanc 1964; Chateau Lafite Rothschild 1945; Musigny Comte de Vogue 1945; Dom Perignon Rose 1959 Cuve Ravissime; and, with the coffee, Cognac Prince Eugene, Reserves Des Caves Maxims.
After the banquet, other French experts had Created a son et Lumiere spectacle and a fireworks display.
Still other French artists helped devise the "authentic" uniforms in which the Iranian Army could parade dressed as Persians of centuries gone by.
The guests sat with rugs and hot water bottles watching the parade of the Shahs own incomplete vision of Iranian history.
Like any other country's, the history and the passion of Iran has been the product of its location.
The Shah like to all it "the crossroads of civilization" , situated as it is between Russia and the Persian Gulf, midway between Europe and the Far East.
Iran is much larger than any country of Western Europe; its territory today covers about 636,000 square miles, about the same area as Soviet Union, Turkey, Iraq, Pakistan and Afghanistan.
To the north is the Caspian Sea, to the South and west, the Persian Gulf, through which most of the worlds oil had passed in the twentieth century.
Iran has always been inhabited by many different people or tribes.
If its history is taken as stretching back 2,500 years.
Iran has had periods of imperial greatness, but Iranians have also experienced successive waves of invasion, intervention and occupation, which have left them understandably fearful of suspicious of foreigners.
It was the greatness of the ancient empire to which the Shah was attracted and with which he constantly compared his own achievements and ambitions.
That empire was founded by Cyrus the Great, the first of the Achaemenids, a ma of great character.
He conquered Lydia, now Turkey, in 546 BC and his domain covered almost all the eastern Mediterranean — including Babylonia, Syria and Phoenicia.
His son Cambyses drove into Egypt, and the empire was then extended by his successor Darius as far as the valley of the Indus.
Darius proved to be a superb administrator.
He built a canal between the Nile and the Red Sea, established a system of taxation, and constructed a fifteen-hundred-mile royal road form Sardis to susa.
It was a mammoth and indeed crippling undertaking and by the end of the Darius reign the vast empire was in decline.
In 330BC Persia was conquered by Alexander the Great.
Alexander as much struck by the quality of the leaning and the administration of the country; he treated the royal family he had over thrown with esteem.
He ordered the tomb of Cyrus at Pasargadear to be well preserved, and he was infuriated when he later discovered that it had been vandalized.
But in Iran he is remembered more for the fact that he destroyed Persepolis by fire.
Alexander's death was followed by years of savate internecine fighting between his own commanders.
Finally the nomadic Parthians were followed, two, centuries after Christ, by the Sassaniansm who Shahanshah, or King, still ruled over a vast area, including parts of what are now Georgia, Armenia, Afghanistan, Bahrain and Iraq.
The Sassanian empire survived until Iran's conquest by the Muslim Arabs in the seventh century AD.
It was this fantastic history that the Shah celebrated at Persepolis in 1971.
He had persuaded himself that he was the spiritual heir to Cyrus and he too, would extend and advance the Persian empire.
For the celebration, soldiers of his Army had been forbidden to shave for the last month so that their faced would more nearly represent those of warriors of old.
Lesley Blanch, an official biographer of the Queen, later described the scene.
The tight crimped beards of the Medes and the Persian; the small pointed beards of the Safavids, or the fierce moustaches of Qajar troops.
Shields, lances, pennons, broadswords and sun, but shielded by parasols for those in need, the guests who were seated on a rostrum below the pillared ruins of Cyrus"might, watched this impressive defile.
Achaemeniann foot guards, Parthian warriors, the cavalry of Xerxes, litters, chariots, tanks, Bactrian camels.
Fath Ali Shah artillery, warriors from the Caspian or the Persian Gulf, the Air Force, the new Women's contingents of the armed forces…all were there at Persepolis; all attested to Iran's glories, past and present.
Many Iranians were less impressed.
Later one of the Shahs ambassadors who eventually denounced him gave a different description.
 "It was as if some Technicolour epic of Cecil B. De Milles was being projected on to the screen of the vast plain." 
Perhaps more significantly many felt that by celebrating the Iran of Cyrus and Dariuss, the Shah completely and deliberately ignored a per of Iran's history that was far more relevant to the twentieth century AD — the teachings of the prophet Muhammad.
Unlike Jesus Christ, who is for Christians the Son of God, Muhammad, who was born in AD 570 is seen by his followers as Gods messenger.
Gods messages, imparted to him in visions, are embodied in the Loran are gathered political or legal revelations as well as spiritual ones.
By the end of Muhammad's life, his followers had become the dominant power on all Arabia.
Within a hundred years Islam was "a mighty empire stretched form the Punjab to the Pyrenees and from Samarkand to the Sahara," In the authority of the Shahs.
The Mullahs remained a dominant influence until the twentieth century when the Pahlavis attempted to curb them.
Apart from the Shah's particular version of Iranian history, there was another aspect of Persia that was indeed celebrated at Persepolis.
That was the lure of Persia — the fantastic attractions it was held for Westerner ever since the seventeenth century, when traders, ambassadors and princes began to bring back exotic spices, silks and tales.
Gradually, the Europeans came to see Persia as an ally against the Ottomans.
The Safavid Shahs encouraged commerce and built roads, caranvaserais and workshops to produce silk and pottery to be sent to the countries to the west.
During the eighteenth century, Persia economy began to decline, partly because the Europeans had begun to use the sea route rather than the land route to the East.
The country was conquered by the Afghans but by the middle of the century the Persians had not only thrown out the Afghans but also marched through the Khyber Pass and captured India.
Delhi was sacked and many of the Moghul treasures were carried back to Iran, including a Peacock Throne, which was lost en route and then copied by Iranian craftsmen.
Almost all the Moghul jewels were also taken to Iran; they became the crown of Iran's kings.
The British became a dominant influence in Persian life during the nineteenth century; but to this day many Persians believe that Britain merely exploited Persia for the sake of India throughout the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
In Britain itself intellectual fascination with Persia grew again in the middle of the nineteenth century after the publication of Edward Fitzgerald's translation of the Rubayat of Omar Khayyam.
This work was enthusiastically adopted by Richard Burton, Dants Gabriel Rossetti, William and John Ruskin.
Ruskin reviewed it in 1869, saying that "it is the work of a poet inspired by the work of a poet; not a copy, but a reproduction; not a translation but the redelivery of a poetic inspiration." 
Among Fitzgerald friends was Alfred Tennyson.
He also became interested in Persian literature and began to study the language, intending to translate the poetry of Hafez.
But his wife thought the characters of the Persian alphabet were "peculiar" and harmful; to his eyes.
When she discovered also that Persian was written from right to left, she became convinced that his eyesight would suffer irreparable damage.
So she hid all his Persian textbooks and persuaded him to take up badminton instead.
Khayyam was not one of the greatest Persian poets, nor the best loved in Persia, but Fitzgerald translation made large Western audience aware for the first time of Persian poetry.
Fitzgerald understood Khayyam's nihilism and his rage.
At Persepolis, Muhammad Reza Shah remoulded Persian history to his own hearts desire.
He was delighted with his party.
It had, he said, helped immeasurably to establish Iran anew in Western perceptions.
For him the high point of the ceremony was when he stood before the empty but impressive tomb of Cyrus the Great and addressed it grandiloquently in his flat, featureless voice.
To you Cyrus, Great King of Kings, from Myself, Shahanshah of Iran, and from my people, Hail!…
We are here at the moment when Iran news it pledge to History to bear witness to the immense gratitude of an entire people to you, immortal Hero of History, founder of the worlds oldest empire, great liberator of all time, worthy son of mankind.
Cyrus we stand before your eternal dwelling to place to speak these solemn words; sleep on in peace for ever, for we are awake and we remain to watch over your glorious heritage.
The Shah, a shy, almost taciturn man, showed unaccustomed emotion as he spoke, pausing before he could complete his address to the dead monarch.
After he finished, it is said, a wind suddenly arose from the floor of the desert and blew sand across the spectators.
This was widely thought to be a good omen.
It was not.
Seven years later, many of the men and women who emerged in 1978 to express such vocal opposition to the Shah cited Persepolis as one intolerable example of Pahlavi excess.
Some Iranians disliked the event because of its expenses.
Others, including the Queen herself, by her own later account, were happy that it was so French and had so little Iranian personality to it.
The whole affair cost anything up to $300million (estimates differ) and that in a country where per capita income, through rising, was till only about $500 a year.
Moreover, the event seemed to me much more a paean to the Pahlavi family than to Iran.
At the time no one denounced it more fiercely than Ayatollah Khomeini, whom the Shah had exiled in 1964 for his fierce opposition tot he Pahlavi regime.
Khomeini seemed then only a very small voice in the wilderness, Bit in retrospect, the party at Persepolis can be seen to symbolize the end of the most successful years of the Shahs reign.
From now on the Shah would be far more interested in military than in social matters.
Oil price rises were about to bring Iran colossal, unimagined wealth.
But rather than helping the development of the country, these petrodollars would spread chaos and disappointment among millions of people, while offering fabulous opportunities of corruption to the court, the Shah's family and may foreign companies and merchants.
For the Shah himself it would bring a complete divorce from reality.
He became more and more obsessed with his own kingship and the importance of his direct succession from Cyrus.
In an interview in 1975 he declared that during his Persepolis party,"the whole world, from the United Nations to every capital, paid tribute to Cyrus and his kingdom…
The seeds of international cooperation were well sown at Persepolis…"
In the next few years no one would try to temper this vision or even to relate it to reality.
None of the Shah's own officials or courtiers dated to contradict him.
And foreign statesmen were far more eager to have him spread Iran's wealth in their direction than to advise restraint.
French leaders would humbly seek absolution for Pompidou's awful error in failing to attend Persepolis, and seek contracts for nuclear power stations.
The Americans would  give him the key to the US armoury.
The British, the West Germans, the Italian, the Dutch, the Japanese, all the countries of the socialist worlds save Albania — these and many more jointed in the line.
Everyone competed to flatter him, to encourage him and to take Iran's money.
A folly would be an inspiration, dream would be visions, propaganda would be perfect sense.
Until 16 January 1979.
The fight into Egypt took less than three hours.
The Shah, who had always loved flying, remained in the cockpit until his 707 was out or Iranian airspace.
A few miles behind him followed his back-up plane.
As usual on his visits abroad, it carried the luggage — for reasons of security.
When the place passed out or Iranian airspace, the Shah turned over the controls to his pilot Captain Behzad Moezzi, and went back to his suite for lunch with the Queen.
The food had been prepared in the palace and was now served by the Shahs own cook, Ali Kabiri.
The Shah's plane had a sumptuous section at the front for the royal family and seats at the back for the entourage.
In the old days it had carried a full complement of aides, courtiers, ministers, secretaries and bodyguards.
On this flight, the plane was almost empty.
The senior functionary on boards was Amir Aslan Afshar, the grand master of ceremonies.
He had not wanted the Shah to depart.
But he was reassured by the fact that the Dhah had promised that they were leaving only for a few weeks vacation.
Sitting close by him was Colonel Kiumars Jahanbini, the Shahs chief bodyguard.
Jahanbini did not look like the sort of gorilla who often protects important men.
He was rather short, he wore glasses, and he had receding hair.
He had been trained in England, at Sandhurst, and for the past fifteen years he had been an officer in the Imperial Guard.
His formal title was commander of the Special Security Unit, and he was the shadow of the Shah, travelling with him almost everywhere he went.
Jahanbini had been one of the few people to have known for almost a month that they were going to leave Iran.
"I had a lot of time to prepare myself.
But I simply could not believe that we were not coming back.
I left almost everything I had".
There were several others guards aboard, including the Queens bodyguard, Colonel Yazdan Nevissi; there was a Sergeant Ali Shahbazi, and there were two of the Shahs valets, Amir Poirshoha and Mahmoud Eliassi.
Finally there was Dr Lucy Pirnia.
Dr Pirnia had been the paediatrician of the four children.
(they had all left Iran for the United States a few weeks before their parents).
She was a small, attractive woman with red hair.
She had not had any idea of leaving her family in Iran.
But she was loyal to the Queen and in January 1979 she had realized that the Queen had a serious problem.
There were almost no women left in the palace).
Most of the Queens friends and ladies-in-waiting had already left the country.
Her mother was gone from Teheran.
One of her maids was married and did not wish to leave; another had become very religious.
'she went form wearing a miniskirt to the veil,"said the Queen later.
'she begged me to take her with me in the end.
She said "I have nobody, you are my mother, please take me," But I felt I could not handle another nervous wreck.
I needed someone quieter."
Dr Pirnia came to the palace a few days before the departure to say goodbye to the Queen.
Instead she agreed to fly out with her.
From among this small group of people were to be founded the only Iranians who remained with the Shah and Queen in the months to come.
They would no doubt have been astonished, of not appalled, if they had been able to glimpse the bitterness and pain of the long voyage that lay ahead, In some ways the exile on which the Shah was now embarked echoed not only his first exile in 1953, but even that of his father, Reza Shah, before him.
Reza Shah was a colossal figure, in every sense.
he attempted to stride Persia as a Bismarck, changing its face, uniting it and freeing it form foreign domination.
But in the end he was toppled by these very same foreigners who had for so long manipulate Iranian life.
He was born in 1878, the child of a poor Persian officer.
Persia was then one of the most backward countries of the middle east, divided into tribal fiefdoms over which the Shahs now Qajar dynasty, had less and less influence.
The country was still almost untouched by the political and industrial revolution that and gradually spread form its core in Europe.
Persian bureaucracy was still tiny and the Cadgers had embarked on almost no public works.
They did not even create a national arm, and such institutions  as schools and the courts remained, as in most Islamic states, in the hands of religious leaders.
The most powerful forces in the land were the British and the Russians.
The overriding concern of the British was to protect the route to India and to secure their hold on Afghanistan, the buffer between Persian and India.
It was also vital to them that Persia should be able to prevent any Russian drive to the south.
And so for the Cadgers, British involvement was a mixed blessing.
They disliked British interference, but at the same time they appreciated that the British they appreciated that the British presence on Persian countered what would otherwise have been over whelming Russian influence.
To differentiate, one might say that Persians held the British more responsible for Iran's misfortunes, but the Russians were more feared.
For much of the later part of the nineteenth century, the British dominated the court.
They were granted the right to build telegraph lines across the country so that London could be closer touch with India.
In 1872 Baron Julius de Reuter, a British subject, was given an exclusive concession to build railways and to mine almost all of Persian minerals.
Lord Curzon later called this the most complete surrender of a country's resources to foreign interest that could ever be imagined, Protest within Persian was such that the Shah was compelled to avoid the concession.
The British then used Reuters unsettled clans to block Russian railway concessions.
Intense competition between the two great powers continues and by the end of the century both were deeply involved in different aspects of Persian life.
This became increasingly unpopular, and when the British were granted a monopoly over the sale of Iranian tobacco, massive protests followed and the government was forced to cancel the agreement.
For a time Russian influence increased.
One of Russians means of exerting its power was the Iranian cossack Brigade, which the Shah had founded after a visit to Russia and which had Russian officers.
Some time before the turn of the century, Reza Khjan joined the Cossacks, as a tall teenager of fifteen or sixteen.
This was shortly before another concession had been granted — one more to the British at the expense of the Russians.
In 1901, an Englishmen, William Knox D "Arch, was given the right" to search for, obtain, exploit…carry away and sell"all Iranian oil save that of the five northern provinces.
Those provinces were excepted out of deference to Russian sensibilities.
Russian opposition to the concession even as it stood was defused by presenting the Persian  text to the Russian delegation when the Russian's translator was known to be out of town.
In 1970 the British sent troops to protect the oil-drilling operation without regard to Iran's sovereignty.
Oil was discovered in the south-west in 1908 and the Anglo-Persian Oil Company was founded the following year.
The British Navy converted from coal to oil-fired boilers, and with the outbreak of the First World War, the British had an even more pressing need for Persian new and invaluable resource.
The British government bought a controlling interest in Anglo-Persian, which from then on operated in Iran on terms much more favourable to the British than to the Iranians.
Iran declared its neutrality in the First World war, but most Iranian sympathy lay with German because she was fighting Great Britain and Russia.
Iran became a battle ground.
Germany allies presented as a supporter of Islam.
German agents were allowed to act freely in what the British had hitherto considered their own area of influence.
The British sent troops to defend the Abadan refinery and made a secret deal with the Russians whereby at the end of the war the Russians would have control of Istanbul and the Dardanelles, and Iran would be divided between them, the Russians in the North, the British in the South, and the British influential in the "neutral" zone, where the oil was to be founded.
By 1917 the British and the Russians between them occupied most of Iran.
Then came the Russian revolution; late in 1917, the new Soviet leaders renounced what they considered the czar's unequal treaties and subsequently the Cossack officers were withdrawn from Iran.
The British were determined to consolidate their own control over the country and in 1919 they imposed an Anglo-Persian treaty that virtually made Iran a British protectorate.
It aroused fury among the educated classes in Teheran, and it was never ratified ny the Majles, It was at this time that the same Iranian nationalists began to look to the United States for support against British exploitation.
The British officer in charge of the British troops in Iran at the end of 1920 was Major-General |Sir Edmund Ironside, a substantial figure.
He had fought in the Boer War and he was John Buchan's model for Richard Hannay in the Thirty-Nine Steps.
Ironside was greatly struck by the personality (and physique) of Reza Khan, who was now a colonel in his early forties.
In his diary he noted,"He is a man and the straightest I have met yet…
"
Before he left Persia in February 1921, Ironside told Reza Khan  that the British would not oppose his seizing power so long as the reigning Qajar Shah was not actually deposed.
The British were then looking for a 'strongman solution"to the problem of keeping their influence in Iran.
Reza Khan joined forces with a civilian, Sayyed Zia as-Din, to mount a coup and ti impose a new government on the weak Qajar leadership.
Reza Khan was thought to be pro-British and the British Minister in Teheran simply told the Qajar Shah that the must co-operate; so he did, Ironside, who had by now left the country, noted in his diary,"I fancy that all the people think I engineered the coup d'etate.
I suppose I did strictly speaking."
In fact the new government did not develop as a British creature and, in the words of one historian, Nikki Keddie, it marked a "turning point in Iranian history" .
It showed na unprecedented, independence, a modern industrialized economy and other social reforms.
Relations with the Soviet Union were normalized.
Soon after the coup, Reza Khan became minister of war and de facto commander in chief of the armed forces.
He began to modernize the Army; in 1923 he became prime minister and started to strengthen the central government against the tribes.
Reza Khan had promised Ironside that he would not depose Ahmad Shah and for a time he did not.
But in 1925 he did overthrow the Cadgers. he had considered creating a republic, but he was persuaded many of the leading clergy that the monarchy should be preserved.
The mullahs were concerned that in a republic the Muslin clergy might be disestablished, as had recently happened in Turkey.
So on 25 April 1926, he crowned himself Reza Shah Pahlavi, Shahanshah of Iran.
The Qajar dynasty had ended; the Pahlavi dynasty had begun.
Accepting kingship was almost the only time that Reza Shah listened to the advice of the Muslim clergy.
Throughout his rule he sought to invite Persia under a strong national Army and forced it to modernize and accept many of the attributes and conventions of the twentieth century.
The protests of the religious establishment were largely ignored.
His model and hero was his neighbour Mustafa Kenal Ataturk; he strove to implement the same reforms in Iran as were being achieved in Turkey.
He enjoyed considerable success; in the first ten years of his rule Iran probably progressed more than in the entire Qajar period of the last hundred and twenty years.
He built roads, schools, hospitals, and sent students abroad  for further education, most to France and some to Germany, which many Iranians still saw as their friend simply because it was the traditional enemy of both Britain and Russia.
He built up the textile, sugar and cement industries, he introduced electrification, and he embarked on a vastly ambitious railway across the country, linking the Persian Gulf to the Caspian.
He curbed the tribal chiefs and imposed a secular legal code.
He insisted that foreigners call the country Iran rather than Persia.
*
But he was less successful than Ataturk in forging a strong national ideology.
Ataturk was able to control the mullahs and to find a place for them as well as for merchants and intellectuals in the new Turkey.
He governed as an autocrat but also as a twentieth-century politician.
By contrast, Reza Shah ruled as a monarch, proving adept at centralization but not at delegation.
He saw the clergy, rightly as a hindrance to his plans for modernization.
He banned many of their rites and their passion plays and he forbade women to wear in public the cahdor, the long, black seamless garment in which they were covered from scalp to toe.
Reza Shah exiled one ayatollah who dared to criticize the Shah's female relations for entering a shrine unveiled, Indeed, one of his military aides was said to have violated the sanctuary of the shrine by marching in and dragging the ayatollah out by his beard, so that the Shah could whip him for his lese-majeste.
Reza Shah also seized land form the clergy and other great landowners.
Much of it kept for himself and his family.
Indeed, by the thirties his family was almost certainly the largest landowner in Iran, owning perhaps one-sixth of the usable land, Apart from the, Rexa Shah undertook very little effective agricultural reform.
As a result, agricultural productivity and peasant living standards remained stagnant.
No national market for consumer or industrial goods was created and thus industrialization was hindered.
Reza Shah acknowledged eleven children thought he may have had many more.
His heir, Muhammad Reza, was born to his second wife, queen Taj ol Molok, on 20 October 1919.
A few hours later he was followed by a twin sister, who was named Ashraf, and whose  relationship with her brother remained passionate and painful all of their lives.
Other children by Taj ol Molok were an elder daughter Shams and a son Alii Rezal, who died in a plane crash in 1954.
When Reza Shah crowned himself in 1926, Muhammad Reza was appointed Crown Prince, or Valiahd, and everyone was thenceforth required to address him as "Your Highness" .
It was not easy to grow up under the shadow is over whelming father as he lashed Iran into a nation, Like almost everyone else in Iran, the Crown Prince was very much afraid of him.
His mother, Queen Taj ol Molok, appeared different — tiny and delicate, But she was equally fierce and unbending; in later years she was frequently described as a harridan She was not easily appeased when, after the birth of the twins, Reza Shah took more wives, with whom he had six more children.
Muhammad Reza was timid, even gentle and self-questioning, quite unlike his twin sister, Ashraf.
When he was seven the boy almost died of typhoid.
There were virtually no drugs to be had in Teheran in those days; the doctors dithered and the family prayed around the bed.
Then, when the fever reached it crises, Muhammad Reza apparently had a dream in which he saw Ali, the son-in-law of the prophet Muhammad and, to Shiites, the second most holy of men, hand him a bowl of liquid.
He drank.
Next day the fever had abated and he began to recover.
This was a story he told all his life; it was just the first of many miracles with which he believed he was blessed.
He considered himself divinely protected.
(But he never considered the mullahs to have diving guidance).
Reza Shah was literate but scarcely educated.
He was determined that his children be well schooled.
He sent the crown Prince to school at Le Rosey, the famous swiss establishment for the young international rich.
It was often said later that it was in Switzerland that Muhammad Reza required a sympathy for aspect of democracy, and that his subsequent attempts to reconcile such notions with the governance of Iran proved to be difficult.
He later declared that his years in Switzerland were"the most important of my whole life…
I heard what democracy is…
I still believe in democracy but not without discipline.
(With discipline) it is anarchy."
When the seventeen-year-old but returned to Iran after five years in Switzerland, much had changed under the impact of his fathers modernization, Teheran now had boulevards and electric lights in Iran was beginning to have some appurtenances of the work to the West.
The entire country was strictly controlled by his father.
Even village officials were appointed by Teheran.
Tribal  independence was being crushed by the new might of Army.
Reza Shah did not give his son much of substance to do.
But Muhammad Reza enroled in Teheran's Officers Academy, learned to fly, and began to acquire the reputation of a playboy.
When he was nineteen, Reza Shah decided that the Crown Princes marriage was due and so he began trawling the Middle East for the most suitable wife — from a dynastic point of view.
 "With his characteristic forthrightness — perhaps better adapted to engineering projects than affairs of the heart — he started his investigations" wrote his son later.
The most describable candidate was Fawzia, only seventeen, the loveliest and favourite candidate of King Farouk of Egypt.
The two young people were informed of the arrangement and they were married in spring 1939.
At first all went well; the princess was fun as well as beautiful.
Cecil Beaton once declared of her:
If ever Botticelli were reincarnated and wished to paint an Asiatic Venus or Primavera here is his subject.
He would delight in the Queens features contained in a perfect heart-shaped face: strangely pale but piercing blue eyes; crimson-coloured lips curling like wrought-iron volutes; and the way in which the dark hair grows beautifully from the forehead.
Their only child, Princes Shahnaz, was born in 1940., but from then on the marriage appears to have disintegrated.
The royal court in Egypt was then one of the most cosmopolitan in the work; Fawzia was sophisticated and had been accustomed to great luxury and pampering, no least from her doting brother.
Teheran, by contrast was a poor and primitive society in those days.
It was like being exiled from Paris to a mall provincial town.
When the Second World War broke out, Iran closely linked to Germany.
The Nazis had assiduously courted Reza Shah, exploiting his desire to see Iran become more independent of both the British and the Russians.
In his early years Reza Shah had reached a series of agreements with Moscow and ended the system of extraterritoriality, by which Westerners in Iran were outside the jurisdiction of the Iranian courts.
This the British cancelled the oil concession to the Anglo-Persian Oil Company.
A new sixty-year agreement was signed with the company in 1933, but the British never trusted Reza Shah again.
They began to see him as an increasingly unreliable tyrant — which to some extent was  true.
By the mid 1930s, he had begun to rule as a royal dictator without the benefit of independent counsel.
The British diplomat John Coleville, appointed to the Easter Department of the Foreign Officer in September 1937, wrote later"My parish…was Turkey and Persia.
Persia was just a little tiresome, as the Shah, Reza Pahlavi, was a temperamental despot.
We had to be particularly polite to him because of the enormous interests of the Anglo-Persian Oil Company (now BP) in the country…
Turkey was more exciting."
Throughout the thirties the Germans had been eager to displace the British.
Apart from declaring that the Persians were true Aryans, they had become Iran's most in important trading partner.
Much of the heavy equipment with which Reza Shah was industrializing the country, building ports and roads, came from Germany.
The Germans helped construct his railway, With the rolling stock and engineers came German agents, bribes and propaganda.
By the end of the decade, the Russians saw German economic links as threatening alarmed at the numbers of German "advisers" and their political activities in Iran.
When was came, Reza Shah declared that Iran would remain neutral, but the German invasion of the USSR rendered that impossible.
The large German presence in Iran at once became a hostile force to the Russians as well as to the British.
The Allied Arctic convoys were under such heavy German pressure that an alternative route into the USSR was needed.
What better path could there be than through Iran and indeed, along Reza Shahs new railway?
In July 1941 the British and the Russians demanded the expulsion of all German agents and influence.
Unusually for him, Reza Shah hesitated — and was lost.
In August 1941 the British and the Russians invaded Iran.
Reza Shah abdicated, saying to his son Muhammad Reza, "I cannot be the nominal head of an occupied land, to be dictated to by a minor English or Russian officer." 
The old man was bundled off, with little ceremony and les dignity, into exile with his favourite wife — not Queen Taj — and most of his children.
He had wanted to go dispatched him first to Mauritius and then to South Africa where, on 26 July 1944, he died.
Once again the ruler of Iran was determined in London.
Although his son Muhammad Reza was Reza Shahs designated heir and had been groomed to succeed his father -albeit in happier circumstances — the British paused.
Members of the British Cabinet  actually considered restoring a member of the old Qajar dynasty to the throne; unfortunately it emerged that the man in question did not speak a work of Persian.
Even in London this was thought to be a drawback.
Some British officials Muhammad Reza a weak Playboy "hand in glove with the German Legation" .
But in the end they and the Russians decided to install him on his fathers throne; They reasoned that the could always be replaced if he did not do as was required.
After all, he would have no real power.
Iran would be ruled by the British in the south and the Russians in the north.
Convenient nineteenth-century rules would be restored, so long as the war lasted.
Thus the new Shah began his reign in the shadow of his fathers humiliation, and as an Anglo-Soviet puppet.
He was not quite twenty-two.
His position was not helped by the fact that the Queen Mother and his twin sister, Princess Ashraf, had not accompanied Reza Shah into exile.
They were both powerful personalities.
Ashraf claimed later that she had wanted to leave with her father but he insisted that she remain because "your brother needs you more" .
Princess Fawzia found life in a court controlled by her scheming mother-on-law and jealous sister-in-law intolerable.
Muhammad Reza deeply resented the way in which his country was once again being governed by its old enemies.
After American troops joined the Allied occupation of Iran, he observed that American policies were independent of both Britain and Russia and so he appealed to President Roosevelt for help.
As a result, the United States encouraged the British and the Russians to join with it in signing a treaty with Iran promising that all three countries would withdraw their troops within six months how useful the United States could be against Iran's old exploiters.
In 1944 the state Department advised Roosevelt that Iran should be strengthened after the war so that she could resist the encroachments of Britain and Russian.
The notion appealed to Roosevelt.
He wrote what became a celebrated memorandum to Cordell Hull, the secretary of state, in which he declared that he was"thrilled by the idea of using iran as an example of what we could do by an unselfish American policy.
We could not take on a more difficult nation that Iran.
I should like, however, to have a try at it."
Roosevelt sent Winston Churchill a report on Iran by Major General Patrick Hurley, who had been President Hoovers secretary of war, and had visited Iran in May 1943.
He attacked both the British and the Russians for their "imperialist" policies in Iran and called for a free, independent Iran with a constitutional monarchy.
He thought Iran had been too long governed by a "powerful and greedy minority" and the"the people have been subjected to foreign exploitation and monopoly.
Churchill was not pleased and replied to FDR that there need be no conflict between imperialism and democracy.
"British imperialism had spread and is spreading democracy more widely than any other system of government since the beginning of time.
In 1947 Princes Fawzia returned to Egypt.
The following year she and the Shah were divorced.
Alone in Teheran, the Shah was once again free to indulge his habit of night-clubbing.
Two years later, he married Soraya Esfandiari, the beautiful eighteen-year-old daughter of a Baktiari father and a German mother.
In 1949 he narrowly escaped the first of three attempts on his life.
The attacker was a young man who appeared to be aligned with both the Communist-controlled Tudeh (Peoples) party and with what the Shah called "archconservative religious fanatics" .
Martial law was declared and Communists were arrested.
In the early 1950s the Shah endured his greatest test, one that committed him much more strongly to the United States.
The encroachment.
It also fundamentally and Western fear of Communist encroachment.
It also fundamentally changed the nature of the Shah's relations with his government and people.
Till 1953 he was far from all powerful.
After 1953 he became determined to allow no rivals in the Iranian firmament.
The drama stemmed from the Iranian fury at then Anglo-Iranian Oil Company, which held a monopoly of all Iranian oil production and which many Iranians thought, with good reason, profited Britain rather more than Iran.
Royalties paid to Iran were lower than the taxes Anglo-Iranian paid to the British government, and  the company kept most skilled jobs for British expatriates.
After nearly fifty years, there were still almost no Iranian technicians in the industry.
All in all, Anglo-Iranian was seen as a major tool in British control over Iran.
During the late forties Anglo-Iranian had some concessions to growing Iranian anger but they were far from meeting the popular demands.
A prime minister who sought to push an unpopular agreement through was assassinated but a religious nationalist in March 1951.
The same month the Majles approved nationalization of the oil industry.
Then the National Front Leader, Dr Mosadeq, who had long been one of the most fiery and articulate proponents of nationalization, was appointed prime minister over the objections of the Shah, and became an extraordinary actor on the stage of the world.
Muhammad Mossadeq came from a wealthy family of landowners who had served a minister to the Cadgers.
By comparison the Pahlavis were nothing.
Born in the 1880s he had been educated in Switzerland long before Reza Shah's establishment of a dynasty in his own name, and had been exiled to the north-east of Iran.
In 1944 he had resisted Soviet efforts to gain an oil concession in norther Iran.
But this principal dislike was for the British.
He apparently once told the Shah that the Russians did not count.
 "It is the British who decide everything in this country" .
By the 1950s he saw his country's salvation in keeping a proper distance, a real neutrality, between East and West.
But in the midst of the Cold War, with most of Eastern Europe now under fearful stalinist rule, such views were heresy in both London and Washington.
It was for his style as much as for his opinions that mossadeq became notorious in the West.
Like Khomeini a quarter of a century later, he was almost totally incomprehensible to many western Europeans and Americans.
By the time he came to power in 1951 he was already seventy.
He exploited his age, like all his other attributes, to great dramatic effect.
He owls weep, he would faint, he would rant, he would laugh moan or shriek-as thought the situation demanded.
He walked with a stick, but sometimes he would throw it away and skip.
For Iranians he was charismatic, but for most foreigners he seemed rather strange.
It was not hard for the British, whose influence remained powerful in Teheran, and who had a spy in Mossadeq's own Council of Ministers, to portray him as a madman to lead Iran into the Soviet camp.
His nationalisation and fury at British exploitation made it impossible for him to compromise even if it was clear that this policies were self-destructive.
At first many American officials in the Truman administration were sympathetic to his cause and exasperated by British greed.
Dean Acheson described Mossades as a "most conservative, rich, reactionary feudal-minded Persian, who also just happened to hate the British." 
But gradually Washington became concerned that he was becoming dependent upon the Tudeh Party.
(This was a soviet instrument, but in some ways it was the only real policy party in Iran, the others were the factions of certain politicians.)
The Labour government in Britain, with Herbert Morrison as its combative foreign secretary, was able to lead the Americans out of Neutrality into a worldwide boycott of Iranian oil.
The Iranian economy began to collapse.
The United States refused Mossadeq loans until the dispute was settled.
Mossadeq declare that Iran did not need a settlement anyway; much better that the country proceed as if it had no oil — at least that way it would not be exploited.
He proclaimed an age of austerity.
By mid-1952 the middle class began to drift away form him, but his fierce nationalism remained popular with poorer people and the clergy.
The Shah detested the way in which mossadeq rather than he was coming to symbolize Iran, and he tried in the summer of 1952 to remove him from office.
But massive public protests enabled Mossadeq to return and to assume greater powers and authority than ever.
He broke diplomatic relations with Britain and banished the Shah's mother and Princess Ashraf.
His thought, undoubtedly, was that while he could not hope to control those two strong women, the Shah himself was more pliable.
The Shah now showed himself incapable of decisive action, Dispatches form Both the British and the American embassies at the time commented on him with patronizing contempt.
Thus a British embassy official reported on a three-hour lunch with a distressed Shah…
One reason for the length of the audience was, It think, that he found some comfort in being offered a number of more or less obvious platitudes, regarding the transitory nature of the present political muddle.
 "In a joint Anglo-American paper on the crises, the Shah was described as" well-meaning, naturally well disposed towards Britain and the US, aware of the Communist danger, but vacillating and weak.
Recently he has shown himself to be too easily swayed by Mossadesq "a threats…" 
Washington tried to first to mediate between Britain and Iran.
In July 1951, Averell Hariman travelled to Teheran.
Mossadeq  received him in bed; he fluttered his hands as Harriman came into the room and launched into a fluting tirade against the British.
You don't know how crafty they are.
You don't know how evil they are.
They usually everything they touch."
Harriman remarked that the had fought with the British in two world wars, and he thought there were some good things about them too.
Harriman and his interpreter, Bernod Walters, found Mossadeq engaging but almost impossible as an interlocutor, On one occasion he remarked, "Irans's problems have always been caused by foreigners, The whole think began with that Greek, Alexander." 
In his place, the Shah had very little idea of what was happening, Shorn of more and more of his powers but Mossadeq, who tended to ignore him, the Shah retreated into alternating bouts of gloom and high spirits which involved playing practical jokes on guests.
Queen Soraya later recalled that sometime he would try to amuse everyone by barking like a dog during the screening of a film (film shows remained a favourite form of palace relaxation till the end.)
On other occasions he would try to frighten ladies of the court by planting plastic frogs and spiders on their laps as they played bridge.
There was not much else for him to do.
At the end of 1952 the British government (now Conservative) decided that Mossadeq had to be removed.
The British already had substantial intelligence "assets" in Teheran.
Now they tired to enlist the CIA Kermit (Kinm) Roosevelt, grandson of Theodore, veteran of the OSS and the head of the Agencies Middle Eastern operations, was invited to London to discuss the British plan.
The British were concerned primarily about the Anglo-Iranian Oil company, The Americans were much more interested in a possible Soviet threat to Iran.
The British plan to over throw Mossadeq was put on hold until after General Eisenhowers inauguration in January 1953.
A group of British officials flew to Washington to explore the matter further with Allen Dulles, the new director of the CIS, and his brother John Foster, the new secretary of state.
The British recommended that Kim Roosevelt be in charge of any operation and be sent to Iran to explore the possibilities.
It was so agreed.
In Iran Roosevelt noted, that the economic blockade was losing Mossadeq his support, both among the mullahs and among the merchants in the bazaar, Indeed, his erratic and increasingly dogmatic responses to the crisis meant that even some of his own National Front supporters were defecting form him.
Roosevelt reckoned that the Army was still loyal to the Shah and that a strong coalition could be mounted against Mossadeq.
He recruited  two Iranian brothers who were already British agents and brought them secretly tot eh Unties States for further training.
One problem for any coup plotters was what to do with the Shah if Mossadeq were removed.
At this stage, the Shah himself had little idea what was being planned, Indeed, he even suspected the British of conspiring with Mossadeq against him.
*
His uncertainty is visible in the diplomatic cable traffic.
After diplomatic relations with Britain were broken, he remained in touch with london through the offices of the American ambassador, Loy Henderson.
In May 1953 the state Department told the British that the Shah wanted to know what the British expected of him.
He was Harping on the theme that the British had thrown out the Qajar dynasty, had brought in his father and had thrown his father out.
No they could keep in power or remove him in turn as the say fit.
If they desired that the should stay and that the crown should retain the powers given to it by the constitution he should be informed.
If on the other hand they wished him to go, he should be told immediately so that the could leave quietly.
The Foreign Office drafted and sent a personal reply form Churchill that may have given the Shah way amusement as well as comfort"…while we do not interfere in Persian politics we should be very sorry to see the Shah driven out.
Perhaps Mr Henderson, the United States ambassador at Teheran will convey this assurance to the Shah and say that it comes personally from me."
When Henderson went next to see the Shah, they walked around the palace garden to avoid being overheard by Mosadeq"a spies or microphones.
The Shah seemed very pleased attitude was changing previously they had urged him to be a purely constitutional monarch; now perhaps they wanted him to involve himself more in Iranian politics, He thought he must do that — otherwise there would be confusion and chaos.
By midsummer 1953, all attempts to negotiate a settlement of the oil crisis had foundered on Mossadeqs stubbornness.
Churchill was determined that he must be overthrown.
Anthony Edne, the foreign secretary, was more cautious.
On 22 June the Americans who were also exasperated by Mossadew, and were increasingly concerned about Soviet influence, decided to unleash Kim Roosevelt and the other CIA and M16 operatives.
In London, Eden fell sick and Churchill took over the Foreign Officer, He gave final permission for what the British called Operation Boot to proceed,(To the CIA it was Operation Ajax) Churchill sent an even stronger message encouraging the Shah to act against Mossadeq.
It was a masterpiece of instruction, indirect but utterly clear, and deserves to be recalled in full.
I should be glad if Mr Henderson, USA, would transmit to the Shah the following observation of a general character which I believe is correct and in accordance with democratic principles.
Begins.
It is the duty of a constitutional monarch or President when faced with violent tyrannical action by individuals or a minority party to take the necessary steps to secure the wellbeing of the toiling masses and the continuity of an ordered state.
End.
In the event the message was not delivered until after Mossadeq had been overthrown.
Kin Roosevelt was sent back to Teheran.
He arrived soon after Princess Ashraf — who had been in touch with the CIA and M16 in Europe — slipped secretly into the country, in order to, in Queen Soraya's words, "encourage us to act" .
Furious, Mossadeq had ordered her to leave.
The Shah was still nervous and undecided.
Kim Roosevelt went to see him, driven through the palace gates lying under a blanket in the back of a car.
The Shah was thrilled.
Till now he have not fully believed that the Americans wished to get rid of Mossadeq.
British support alone would have been at least a mixed blessing.
*
The plan involved the Shah issue two firmans, or decrees, dismissing Mossadeq and appointing one of his own supporters, General Fazloalah Zahedi, as prime minister.
He was then to fly to a town on the Caspian and wait.
Meanwhile, Roosevelt would give two agents several hundred thousand dollars out of a substantial slush fund the CIA had established in Teheran.
This money was to be handed out to things from athletic clubs and the poor of the South Teheran slums to encourage them to demonstrate in favour of the Shah.
General Zahedi, a tall and good-looking man, was not always a British favourite.
Indeed during the Second World War a British officer of some distinction, Fitzroy Maclean, had actually arrested Zahedi on grounds he had been intriguing with German agents.
In his famous book Eastern Approaches, Maclean includes an account of his capture of the general, in whose home he said he found many photographs of his women friend.
(Women were an interest Zahedi pursued all his life.
Queen Soraya later described him as "half swashbuckler and half Don Juan" .)
By 1953 his war record was forgotten; though the British had misgivings, Zahedi was deemed preferable to the dangerous Mossadeq.
In the last few days before the coup, Mossadeq assumed more and more dictatorial powers.
To Roosevelt irritation, the Shah still dithered.
A referendum to dissolve parliament was held and was said to be accepted by 99.9 per cent of the people.
Parliament was duly dissolved.
On 12 August the Shah issued his firmans.
At first the plan did not go well.
Mossadeq simply arrested the Shahs messenger, Colonel Nematollah nassirim, an officer of the Imperial Palace Guard.
Mossadeq declared that he had forestalled a coup and issued orders for Zahedis arrest.
But the general was already in hiding on a friends estate.
He appealed to the army, still largely loyal to the Shah.
At first, the streets of Teheran were held by Mossadeq supporters and members of the Tudeh Party.
Mobs with red flags tore down the graven images of the Shahs father, Reza Smith and cried "Yankees go home." 
Thinking the attempt had failed, the Shah himself panicked and fled with Soraya in a small place to Iraq.
When they arrived in Baghdad, dishevellved, tired, their clothes and a couple of bags and a jewel box flung hastily across the seats of the plane, the Iraqi authorities arranged a secret meeting for the Shah with the US ambassador.
The Shah was desperate for advice from the Americans and the British.
Should be publicly denounce Mossadeq?
What was to be done?
Should he stay here or go to Europe?
He  insisted he had not abdicated, but what should he do know? *q Before any advice could given, at least by the British the Shah and Soraya flew on to Rome — perhaps because King Faisal was embarrassed by his presence in Baghdad and perhaps because the Shah thought they would be sager and more comfortable in the Italian capital.
In Rome, the Iranian chargé d'affaires rushed off to the seaside rather than commit himself to the Shah's uncertain cause.
He even refused to let the Shah have the keys to the personal car he kept in Rome.
(A junior embassy employee was more loyal and handed them over.
The Shah later dismissed the charge.)
The Italian press made much of the fact that the royal couple had almost no clothes, no staff and appeared to have no money.
They were hard-pressed even to get a hotel room.
A British embassy official wrote to the Foreign office, "It seems that they only got a fourth-floor berth at the Excelsior…because some Persian industrialist vacated his suite." 
(All those Iranians who helped the Shah in these day were subsequently rewarded a thousandfold).
On instructions from State, the US ambassador in Rome advised him to give a press conference in which he stressed his constitutional rights and the illegality of Mossadeq actions.
He should explain that the left the country only because his authority was no longer respected and because he desired to avoid bloodshed.
But at the same time State thought the US might make some "minor concessions" to Mossadeq, in case the Shah did not return.
The British were becoming more wary of the Shah.
He had not behaved with courage so far, and some British officials considered that he was a weak card that should be played no longer.
Notes in Winston Churchill's files suggested that Britain's options were either to send a "correct" reply to the South, commiserating with  him in declining to advise him, or to encourage him along the American line, or to urge him to undertake an all-out campaign against Mossadeq.
One possibility was "to write off the Shah and proceed on the unpalatable consumption that Mosadeq is the indisputable ruler of Persia and the only bulwark against Communism" In the end, however, the prime minister advisers decided that it was almost prudent for Britain to follow the American line.
"By doing so, we shall strengthen our hand with the American in arguing that it would be a mistake to cultivate Mossadeq.
For the next couple of days the Shah and Soraya had all their meals in the hotels public rooms.
While Soraya wandered apparently penniless around the shops the Shah gave innumerable Americans informal press conferences in which he repeated the message the Americans had suggested.
The AP correspondent would then read out the latest dispatch form Teheran and according to the British embassy,"The Shah would then put on his spectacles and, in a charming manner which endeared him to present, would comment in his quiet English on the news.
Later, as the Shah began to get news of his own, repaid their kindness by giving them the stop press himself.
The number of journalists who claim to have sat on the same sofa and had private speech with His Majesty is legion.
While he may not have said in so any words that these encounters with the press had been an "eye-opener, he did remember that he had been sincerely treated by the Journalists courtesy and by the beneficent power of journalism in the modern world." 
At first the mobs in Teheran had all been anti-Shah, Gradually, however, the tide began to turn.
Soldiers appeared in the streets and showed that the Army was still loyal to the Shah and to Zahedi.
Then the CIAs paid demonstrators, organized by Roosevelt's two intelligence brothers, marched up from South Teheran and shouts of "Long Live America" began to prevail over "Yankees go home" .
* The Shah's picture was plastered on walls and windows.
Pro-Shah and anti-Shah groups fought in the streets, Mossadeq was toppled; Zahedi was embraced by the crowds and assumed the premiership.
It was lunchtime on 19 August 1953 went he news arrived in Rome.
The AP man rushed up tot the Shah with a wire that announced: "Teheran: Mossadeq overthrown.
Imperial troops control Teheran.
Zahedi Premier."
Soraya burst into tears; the Shah  went white and then declared, "I knew that they loved me." 
Then, drinking champagne with journalists, he flew home to a Teheran in which his supporters had tried to re-erect the toppled statues of his father.
He told Kin Roosevelt of the CIA, "I owe my throne to God, my people — and you." 
Many of his opponents considered that the whole of the CIA was more crucial than that of the Almighty.
It is certainly true that the actions of the CIA and M16 were important.
But alone they could not have removed Mossadeq.
The demonstrations were indeed provoked and begun with M16 and CIA money — no one knows how much was spent — but money alone could not adequately explain the way in which the protests rushed so fast through the city.
The costs of Mossadeq's policies had come to seem to high to too many people and there was already widespread dissatisfaction with his rule, The CIA and M16 provided a spark, but the dry tinder was Iranian.
Nonetheless, to many Iranians the events proved the Shah was an American if not a British puppet.
Immediately after the coup, Prime Minister Zahedi and his son Ardeshir who had helped round up the demonstrators, met their American advisers.
Zahedi said he intended to settle the oil dispute with Britain as fast as he could, and the United States at once promised the loans that it had refused Mossadeq.
The first money was the remainder of the CIAs coup fund in Roosevelts safe.
Then, to meet the deficit in Irans operating budget, the United States extended aid of $60 million in fiscal 1954, $53 million in 1955, and $35 million in 1956.
Many of Mossadeq's support were jailed and his foreign minister was executed.
But there was no bloodbath.
Mossadeq was put on trial and blamed a British plot for his own downfall.
He called upon Iranians to throw off foreign influence.
He was sentenced to three years house arrest, was released in August 1956, and lived till his death in 1967, under guard in his estate.
This drama and first brush with exile seems to have taught the Shah several things.
First, that while British influence in Iran remained enormous, the Americans were becoming ever more influential in the world.
He subsequently began to abandon Iran's long tradition of playing off East against West and turned increasingly towards the United States for the support of his regime.
Throughout the second half of the fifties, the Shah did little to reform the essentially feudal structures of his country.
He was more interested in increasing his military power, as his father had done, and he incessantly demanded more military aid form the United States and his other allies.
At the same time, he determined never to allow anyone develop power independent of the throne as Mossadeq had done.
From now on he would strive to develop a government of courtiers.
In order to destroy all domestic opposition, he began, with the help of the CIA and the Israeli secret service Mossad, to build a formidable secret police, which became known by the acronym SAVAK (from its Iranian name, Sazeman-e-Ettle"to va Amniyat-e Keshvar, which means National Intelligence and Security Organization).
SAVAK was to develop a fearsome reputation both at home and abroad — indeed, it eventually came to symbolize the excess of all secret-police societies.
His experience with Mossadeq also convinced the Shah that he needed his own money, and outside the country.
He began to allow members of his family to amass fortunes.
Finally, and perhaps most dangerously, became to believe that his restoration was evidence of some sort of divinely inspired relationship between him and the Iranian people.
 "I knew that they loved me," he had declared with emotion in Rome.
His good fortune in surviving subsequent assassination attempts increased his belief in his divine protection.
In his last memoirs, written in his second exile, he wrote that before 1953,"I had been no more than a hereditary sovereign, but now I had truly been elected by the people.
Even after he had left the country once more, in January 1979, this remained his conviction — and the root of hid tragedy.
On the afternoon of 16 January, as his blue-and-white 707 neared Aswan airport, the Shah walked back into the cockpit to rejoin Captain Moezzi.
He landed the plane himself and taxied it over to where President and Mrs Sadat were waiting with a guard of honour, a twenty-one-gun salute, a military band to play the national anthems of Iran and Egypt, and a red carpet.
Nowhere else in the world he ever again be accorded such honours.
The Host
It was an exquisitely warm afternoon in Aswan-just the sort of day for which the swallows fly so far, When the Shah walked slowly down from the plane, looking drawn and exhausted, Sadat stepped forward to kiss him on both cheeks — despite advice from his officials that he should be more circumspect with the fallen King.
 "Rest assured, Muhammad, you are in your country and with your people and brothers," he aid to the Shah, whose eyes filled with tears.
Egypt had not always been so welcoming.
After the Shah's former brother-in-law, King Farouk, was overthrown in a military coup in 1952, Egypt became the Shahs leading opponent in the region.
Farouk successor, Gamal Abdel Nasser, a socialist and a revolutionary, attempted to unite the Arab world.
He was and fiercely opposed not only to the Shah's monarchism but also to his foreign policy.
After Anwar Sadat succeeded Nasser as president of Egypt in 1970, he began to transform the direction of Egyptian policy.
Rapprochement with Iran was one result.
Sadat and the Shah had become friends the previous year, after first quarrelling at an Islamic summit in Rabat, about the measures needed to protect an Islamic shrines under Israeli occupation.
This was after the el-Aqse mosque had been burned by a deranged tourist.
Sadat found the Shah's response too weak and said so.
But after the Shah responded angrily, Sadat told him in Persian, "There can be no love except after enmity." 
He also liked to remind him that the first time he had seen him was during the military parade in Cairo to celebrate Kuhammad Rea's marriage to Princes Fawzia in 1939."
You were on a raised platform and I passed before you in the parade."
Sadat laughed.
"The distance between us was very small, yet in reality it was great.
You were heir to a throne and I was a minor officer from a village you had never heard of."
Sadat visited the Shah in Teheran in October 1971, and each  man impressed the other with his friendships and strategic views.
The Shah told one of his ministers.
"We have a lot to learn from Sadat.
He's a man with wide horizons who knows what he wants."
Subsequently, wrote Mrs Sadat, they felt a special kinship for they led the two most ancient civilisations in the middle east —"the Iranian Empire dating back 2500 years and Egypt's civilization going back seven thousand.
Since the mid-seventies the Shah had extended substantial financial aid to Egypt.
Mrs Sadat and the Queen had become friends after an official visit the Sadat had made to Iran in 1976.
During that trip, Jehan Sadat had been impressed by the progress made by Iran under the Shah, but she said later that she was also appalled at the extravagant opulence that the rich displayed.
A government official gave a party for the Shah, the Queen and the Sadats, The steps of his house seemed to Mrs Sadat to be made of crystal, kilos of caviar were laid out on tables in the garden, fruits were woven into the trees, chocolate mousse was presented in swans made of spun sugar, orchestras played, fountains splashed, and the plates were made of gold.
She had never in all the world seen much overindulgence.
 "There will be a revolution, I feel it," she said to her husband when they left.
She said she wanted to warn the Shah, but her husband forbade her to do any such thing.
Like the Shah, Sadat identified himself with the state.
(The critics of each of them would say "confused" rather than "identified" .)
Each man had grandiose visions, Neither was able to turn them into reality but, for better or for worse, they had a lasting impact on the Middle East.
Sadat, perhaps more than any other Middle Eastern leader in the seventies and eighties, attempted to come to terms with one of the most extraordinary acts of modern times — the creation and development of the state of Israel.
His visit to Jerusalem in 1977 did not, as he hoped, bring peace, but it was an astonishing, moving tribute to the ideal of reconciliation.
In the fall of 1978, while the Shah's power was draining away from him in Teheran and riots against his rule dominated the US television news, Sadat was closeted with Menahcem Begin and Jimmy Carter in the Maryland hills working out the interstices of what became known as the Camp David Agreement.
This was hailed as historic at the time — as a giant contribution towards a peaceful settlement of the Middle East.
In fact it served to isolate Anwar Sadat and Egypt from most other Arab leaders and governments.
While Sadat was praised in the West as a saintly figure prepared to make great sacrifices in order to end the strife between  Muslin and Jew, in the Middle East he was widely denounced as a traitor and a knave.
During those last months of the Shah's regime, Jehan Sadat was constantly on the telephone to the Shah wife, Farah.
In January 1979, when the revolution was well under way, Mrs Sadat invited the Queen and the Shah to visit Cairo.
At first they refused; the Shah thought that the Americans were using Sadat to get him out of the country.
But after he had agreed to leave Iran, he accepted the invitation to pause in Aswan on the way to the United States.
Amir Aslan Afsharm the grand master of ceremonies, felt there was a conspiracy behind this decision.
 "I think it was an Americans plot not to have the Shah come to the US," he said later."
"Just before we left Iran, the Shah asked me to call Sadat, but the telephone was on strike, the telex also.
Even the Egyptian ambassador could not get in touch with Cairo.
The Shah said "Find a solution" .
About ten or eleven at night I got a call from the US embassy…
"
We have got in touch with(Vice President Hosni) Murbarak by radio and Mr Sadat is expecting the Shah the day after tomorrow at two P.M. in Aswan".
So you see, the Americans prepared everyone.
From the White House, the view was different.
Gary Sick, the aide to Zbigniew Brzezinski on Iranian affairs, has written that the Shah's last minute decision to visit Egypt completely disrupted the complex arrangements made for his arrival in the US "and gave rise to concern about the Shah's real intentions." 
Reports reached Washington that the Shah was hoping for a restoration similar to that which occurred in 1953.
From the airport the Sadats and the Pahlavis drove to the Oberoi Hotel, which is secluded in a man-made island in the Nile.
Sadat had ordered photographs of the Shah, left over from an earlier state visit, to be mounted along the route.
The Shah sat in the car and wept.
He told Sadat that his officers had cried at Teheran airport and begged him to leave.
 "I feel like a leader who has deserted the battlefield" .
According to Mrs Sadat, her husband then offered to provide sanctuary for the Iranian Air Force and Navy.
 "Egypt will host then until the conditions stabilize in Iran," he said.
But the Shah replied,"The Americans will not allow it.
They forced me to leave."
He went on to tell Sadat that the US ambassador kept looking at his watch at the airport, 'saying that every minute I delayed was not in, my interest nor in the interest of Iran."
(In fact the ambassador William Sullivan, had been nowhere near the airport).
Sadat was shocked; later he told his wife that he could not believe that the Shah would have allowed any foreign power such  influence over his country's affairs.
The Shah and his party spent five days in Aswan.
There were not many visitors.
One person who called by telephone was ex-king Constaine of Greece, a great favourite of Queen Farah.
He found both her and the Shah in a state of shock, quite confused and uncertain what to do.
One man who came to Aswan at the Queens request, was a youthful-looking Frenchman with a shock of curly hair and a slightly puzzled expression behind his glasses.
He and an Iranian doctor flew from Paris as directly as they could.
The Frenchman had made any such trips to Teheran before the fall and he understood the need for absolute secrecy.
His name was Dr Georges Flandrin and for five years he had been treating the Shah for cancer.
But not even the Shah really understood the extent of his illness.
When they arrived in Aswan, they found problems in getting to the Oberoi; the river was patrolled and few people were allowed across.
From a cafe"behind the Nile, Frenchman called the Oberoi and asked for the Queen.
Somewhat to his surprise, he was put through to her at once.
 "Majeste, c'est moi," he said simply.
She recognized his voice and sent a boat for him.
Dr Flandrin had seen the Shah only two weeks before ill at ease and nervous in the palace.
Now he seemed rather calmer and appeared pleased to see his doctor.
Flandrin examined the Shah, took a blood test, and went away.
No one else in the Shah's entourage knew who he was or why he had come.
There was another visitor, who was as discreet — and just as vital to the Shah as Dr Flandrin.
Muhammad Behbehanian was seventy-eight years old.
He came now from his haut-bourgeois voilla in Basel, the banking capital of Switzerland and he was frightened by the forces that the uprising in Iran had unleashed.
Behbehanian looks like a pleasant well-to-do Swiss grandfather — a retired dentist perhaps, round with a small grey moustache and a fine smile.
He had been the administrator of the Royal Estates and head of finance at the court.
He was the man who held the drawstrings to the Shah's own private fortune, amassed at home and abroad since the Shah had found himself penniless in his first exile in 1953.
Behbehanian had not fled the turmoil early in 1978, like so many of the Shah's nearest and dearest.
On the contrary.
through much of the year, he was, he said later, an intermediary between the Shah and once of the principal mullahs in Iran, Ayatollah Shariatmadari, who was les radical than Ayatollah Khomeini and who maintained contact with he Shah through 1978.,
Eventually Behbehanian left Teheran for hiss home in Basel just before Christmas 1978.
"On 16 January 1979, I heard on the radio the Shah had left for Egypt.
I called him in Aswan that afternoon, I said, "Majesty, do you want me to cone?" he said, "Come at once." 
When Behbehanian arrived at the hotel in Aswan, he was shown into the Shah's suite.
The Shah told him, I want to control everything now."
Behbehanian was to write to all foreign banks that held the Shahs funds to inform then that form no on His Imperial Majesty would be dealing with them direct and the He Muhammad Behbehanian, would no longer be acting on the Shah's behalf.
Behbehanian was not just a money man.
He also had very firm ideas on what had gone wrong in Iran and how things should be righted.
Like many Iranians, particularly of the older generation, he was convinced that the British were behind much of the upheaval in the country.
He thought the British were angered by the extent to which the Shah had criticized British sloth in recent years.
(The Shah had indeed been strident in his denunciations of Western decadence and corruption.)
The Shah had give a press conference in which he insulted British workers, saying they were not as good as Iranian,"said Behbehanian later.
As a result the British had deposed him.
He now believed that id only the Shah apologized, then the British would restore him.
So he put forward a plan of action to the Shah.
 "I said," Let's get up and go to Mecca.
You can worship there and the nation will understand that you are a Muslim.
We will get a loan from King Khalid (Of Saudi Arabia) and then we will go to Britain and settle affairs with the British government, We can apologize for insulting British workers and then, with British support, we can go back to Teheran. "" 
Behbehanian sincerely and deeply believed this would do the trick.
Six years later, when he talked about it in his house in Basel, he still believed it, and with absolute conviction.
Everyone knew how influential the British had always been in Iran.
More often, there was the queen of England's interest.
"I am a banker not a politician.
But I had noticed the sincerity of the British queen towards the Shah.
I had lunched at Buckingham Palace and them met with her at Ascot.
She was so interested in the Shah and his family."
(The queen had been due to visit Iran in the royal yacht Britannia in January 1979; at the last minute the trip was cancelled because of the turmoil in Iran and the queen  sent the Shah a gracious and sympathetic handwritten note of regret).
The Shah shared much of Behbehanians suspicion of the British, But now in Aswan, he did not seem to be greatly in favour of Behbehanians suggestion that he throw himself in their mercy.
Wearily, he waved his financial adviser away.
Queen Farah seemed to like the idea even less.
After Behbehanian left the room, he paused outside with Amir Aslan Afshar, Colonel Jahanbini and others.
According to Behbehanian. the Queen rushed out and declared that the Shah would go along with such a plan "over my dead body" .
She was very angry, and Behbehanian felt humiliated.
Like some others of his generation around the Shah, he did not much like the Queen.
In Behbehanian proposal one can detect elements of the fantastic, almost surrealist path the Shah had been destined to try to follow throughout his life.
Constantly, he had been torn by contradictory forces.
There was the towering image of his father — to whom almost no son could be equal.
There was the justified belief in external manipulation — and yet there was dependence on those same manipulators.
There was the impetus, coming mostly form the West, but also from within himself and his own Western education, towards the modernization and reform, of his country.
There were similar demands for reform from the people -, and there were corresponding conservatism.
Conspiring against almost everything (one can say in retrospect) were his exaggerated notions of his own divinely inspired relationship with the Iranian people.
The combination of Cyrus the Great, the Great Satan, and the Schisms in the Middle East that followed the creation of the state of Israel was almost intolerable — as events after his restoration by CIA and M16 in 1953 were to show.
Almost alone among Middle Eastern states, Iran pursued, from the start, a policy of discreet co-operation with Israel.
Indeed, its relations with Israel provide one key to its relations with all its neighbours.
Persian tolerance of Hews is a long and honourable tradition.
The Book of Ezra records that when Cyrus captured Babylon in 539BC, to Jerusalem, whence they had been exiled by their Babylonian conquerors.
After this the Jewish community began to spread into Persian, and by the mid-twentieth century there were probably about 100,00 Jews in Iran, Until Rexa Kahn seized power they were required to
live in ghettos, but as part of his policy of diminishing the power of the traditional landowning classes, he decreed in 1927 that they could own land, vote and live outside the ghettos.
In 1948, when Israel was created, Iran allowed Iraqi Jews who unlike Iranian Jews, were being persecuted, to flee to Israel through Iran.
At this time one of the principal tasks of Mossad, the Israeli secret service, was to facilitate Jewish emigration to Israel; the Iranian government allowed Mossad agents to operate in Teheran.
Right from the start of the Israeli state, in other words, Iran gave rhetorical support to the Arabs and covert assistance to the Israelis.
It was an enduring pattern.
In July 1949 the various armistice agreements between Israel and the Arab states formally ended the 1948 war and established Israel's territorial position.
Israel's principal foreign-policy objective now became to break the walls of its political isolation in the region.Its first success was full diplomatic recognition ny Turkey in 1949; the second was de facto recognition from Iran in 1950.
From documents in Israeli archives, it has become clear that it was not the Shahs personal decision to grant de facto recognition to Israel.
(The Shah at this time did not have much authority).
Israel in fact obtained de facto recognition from Iran by paying a substantial bribe to the then Iranian prime minister, Muhammad Saed.
The negotiations were conducted on Israel's behalf by an American sill known only as "Adam" who was close to Mossad and also knew an Iranian merchant who was the friend and 'silent business partner"of the prime minister.
Through him Prime Minister Saed asked for $4000,000 to stack the Cabinet had to persuade the Shah that de facto recognition of Israel was in Iran's national interest.
This request led to agonized debate within the Israeli Foreign Ministry.
Not only was it a vast amount of money for the fledgling state to raise, by many Israeli officials felt passionately that Israel should not begin its life be seeking to extend its reach ad influence through such obvious corruption.
But then Adam, on his own initiative, paid a first instalment of some £12,400 to the merchant for the prime minister.
There were immediate results.
The prime minister began to talk to the ayatollahs about the need to distinguish between global politics and religion,.
he made some changes in his cabinet to assure a favourable vote, and he talked to the Shah.
The Shah was reported to the Israelis as having said,"If the prime minister and the foreign minister were in favour of recognizing Israel, I have no objections.
'so the $400,000 was paid.
These initial contacts and bribes led to all most thirty years of close political, military an developmental co-operation between Israel and Iran.
Their common interest were obvious.
First of all, Iran could provide Israel with oil and in return Israel could, eventually, provide Iran with manufactured products, including arms, and all sort of experts.
Mossad, together with the CIA, played an important part in the creation of SAVAK in the mid-fifties.
After the overthrow of Mossadeq in 1953, the United States began to replace Britain as the dominant external power in Iran — through many older Iranians (like Muhammad Behbehanian) continued to believes for decades that it was the British who really still called the shots and that the Americans were only British stooges.
The Shah realized that his Western friends wanted above all a stable, friendly Iran.
As the fifties proceeded, a succession of coups, countercoups, wars, revolutions and civil disorders made the Middle East one of the most volatile areas on earth, a place that in the words of one historian, "reverberated with the sound of crashing throne." 
First Farouk had been deposed, Then Egypt tried to overthrow King Husein of Jordan, In Iraq, Irans neighbour, the Hashemiter royal family was murdered in a coup in 1958 and was replaced by a pro-soviet dictatorship.
The Shah saw himself surrounded by enemies.
Quite apart form the new radical Arab regimes, the Soviet Union remained a bellicoes, threatening neighbour — as Russia almost always had been to Persia.
This was the context in which the Shah determined to do as his father had done — to destroy all possible Iranian opposition, and to build up the armed forces as the basis of his power.
That might have been thought to be intune with the Cold War music of the era.
However, US government papers, released under the Freedom of Information Act, show that President Eisenhower, his secretary of state, John Foster Dulles and, later, Presidents Kennedy and Johnson, all had misgivings about the Shah's abilities.
They doubted his capacity to rule Iran effectively, and they constantly tried to limit his apparently insatiable appetite for military hardware.
For example, when the Shah met Dulles in March 1956, he told Dulles that the thought Iran was "the most critical spot in the world today" .
Dulles replied that a good many countries in the world saw themselves the same way.
If the US responded to each accordingly, the total amount of aid it would have to disburse would be "astronomical" .
The Shah asked for £75 million a year in, military aid for the next three years, but Dulles thought this was excessive.
The Shah said that he thought the US was"perhaps spending too much in other countries such as Vietnam although he recognized that was important.
He said that was because he had come in too late.
He did not ant to see us make the same mistake in Iran as it might cost us much more if we did not move now".
The Shah continued, every year, to ask for increased aid, and constantly threatened that unless the US provided it, he would turn neutralist or even move towards the Russians.
+ In January 1958, Dulles talked with him again, in Teheran, and immediately cabled Eisenhower in exasperation, saying that the Shah "considers himself a military genius" , and his ministers were unable to cope with Iran's pressing economic problems "in the face of the Shah military obsessions" .
He suggested that Eisenhower "flattered the Shah with the prospect of an exchange of views with you on modern military problems" .
Eisenhower subsequently did so at a meeting with the Shah in Washington.
He reminded the Shah that "maintenance of too much force for limited war could be self defeating economically" .
Not withstanding Eisenhower's record as a military man and a statesman, the Shah was still unsatisfied, and in 1959 he flirted with the idea of signing a non-aggression pact with the USSR unless he  was given more US military aid.
* Dulles said the thought the Shahs behaviour "in some instances seems to border on blackmail tactics" .
Eisenhower and Dulles both believed that since no Iranian Army could ever resist an actual Soviet invasion, the Shah should not build up a vast Army but should depend on US guarantees.
Were such an invasion ever to happen, it would inevitably lead to a world war involving the US anyway.
By the end of the fifties, Washington had agree to help improve the Iranian armed forces more rapidly, but American military aid was still far less than the Shah wanted.
In his memoirs he complained that in the fifties the US gave twice as much aid to Yugoslavia, three times to Turkey and four times to Taiwan.
In March 1958, after seven years of marriage, the Shah and Queen Soraya were divorced, largely because of their inability to have a child together.
They had sought professional advice.
On one occasion, Soraya saw a gynaecologist who was said to have been sent by Kim Roosevelt.
 "Four times a night and twice every afternoon, she said, 'still I don't have baby." 
The doctor explained to her how hard it sometimes was for the sperm to coincide with the eggs; she just had to continue to keep the Shah interested.
 "Doctor," she replied, "All I'm asking you to do is find something to break my eggs." 
I'll see the Shah goes on making the omelettes"
The question of succession had been made more urgent because in 1954 the Shah's only full brother, Ali Reza, who was next in line to the throne, was killed in an air crash.
Their mother, who believed that Ali Reza would have been a stronger Shah and should succeed (if not replace) Muhammad Reza.
Indeed, one CIA report claimed that she had contempt for her elder son, for she felt he was unworthy of his father, and that she had actually plotted to put Ali Reza on the throne.
After Ali Reza's death she insisted that the Shah must produce a son and Heir.
The Shah announced the divorce on the radio in many ways it was reminiscent of King Edward VII's speech to the British people when he announced he had decided to marry Mrs Simpson.
Edward declared he could not continue to be king without the women he loved.
The Shah said that he loved Soraya but the  demands of monarchy meant that he must have an heir and so he had to sacrifice his love.
After the divorce, Soraya was despatched with her pension to Europe where, in Lesley Balcnh's memorable phrase, she became "the closure of all eyes about the empty halls of international pleasure" .
The Shah was said to have remained very fond of her.
He played around again.
His tastes, the CIA later noted in one of its profiles of him, were"ecumenical; liked all races.
Soraya wrote in her memoirs that "the European type appealed to him most" , but that he had too much common sense to marry one of them.
The European he was said to be the most fond of as Princess Maria Gabriella de Savoia, but her father, the former King Umberto of Italy, would have insisted on a Catholic wedding.
That would have been impossible for the Shah.
(Gabriella's family would retain close links with Iran; her brother Vittrio Emanuele represented Bell helicopters and other companies in the says of the great boom).
In 1959 the Shah married for the third time, to Farah Diba, a twenty-one-year-old Iranian student of architecture.
John Kennedy was even more ambivalent about the Shah than Eisenhower had been.
When Kennedy became president in January 1961, the state of Iran was not encouraging.
The Shah had built up his armed forces and had begun to create a nationwide secret police, but he had done almost nothing to meet the disparate but urgent demands of his people.
He was behaving more and more as an autocrat, The State of emergency inherited form Mossadeq had been lifted only on 1956.
The National Front, where most leading opponents had grouped, could not operate at home, but it re-formed abroad.
The Communist Tudeh party also began to organize abroad, chiefly in Eastern Europe.
The 1960s opened with student demonstrations and teachers"strikes against the Shah.
There was religious dissension in the holy city of Qom and disaffection in many of the tribal areas.
The peasantry still had virtually no rights whatsoever.
After the Shah publicly endorsed Irans links with Israel, Nasser cur off diplomatic relations with Iran and increased Egyptian propaganda attacks against the Shah.
Syria and Iraq and other Arab states supported "liberation movement" in Iran's oil-production province of Khuzistan, and Iran began to menace Kuwait.
The Arabs began to describe the Persian Gulf as the Arabian Gulf and Khuzistan as Arabistan — it sold name under the Qajar Shahs.
When President Kennedy met Nikita Khrushchev in Vienna in 1961, the soviet leader scoffed at the Shah.
The Shah, he said,
claimed that his power was given to him by god, but everyone knew that the throne had been seized by his father.
And his father was not God but a sergeant.
Khrushchev warned that Iran would undergo political upheaval.
It would fall like a rotten fruit into Soviet Hands.
No doubt Moscow would be blamed, but it would not be responsible.
Kennedy was alarmed.
Back form Vienna, he ordered a report on Iran from the state Department it concurred with Khrushchev's assessment.
A 1961 National Intelligence Estimate on Iran concluded the "profound political and social change in one form or another is virtually inevitable" .
It reckoned that such change was likely to be revolutionary.
From then on, Kennedys attitude to Iran was unashamedly interventionist.
The Shah resented this and subsequently noted that during Kennedys presidency there was "increased US intrigue against our country." 
Kennedy encouraged the Shah to undertake reforms and was pleased when the Shah appointed Ali Amini, the former Iranian ambassador to Washington, prime minister of Iran.
Amini came from one of the great landowning families of Iran and he had the distinction of serving in the Cabinets of both Mosadeq (with whom he broke) and general Zahedi.
But as minister of finance under Zahedi he had become too well known for negotiating the new agreement with the oil companies, and so the Shah had exiled him to the Washington embassy.
Amini had concluded that the Shah's choice was to divide his lands or face revolution — and perhaps death.
This view impressed Kennedy.
Although the Shah appointed Amini prime minster, he disliked US interference.
He also feared the growth of Aminis influence and began to think that the reforms his prime ministers proposed were too extensive.
The Kennedy administration was not pleased.
One state Department cable to the US ambassador in Teheran asked him to remind the Shah the reforms were necessary "because it is generally agreed that without some reforms Iran as likely as Khrushchev predicted to fall to Soviets like ripe plum" 
Washington was not confident about how to deal with the Shah.
The 1961 Presidential task Force on Iran noted that"the Shah is a highly complex personality; intelligent and forceful on occasion, but often moody, erratic and indecisive.
He is constantly haunted by the fear that the US might abandon him for one reason or another and has been particularly uneasy over the new US administration's attitude towards him."
In April 1962 the Shah came to Washington.
He told Kennedy that many of his officers were worried that other countries received  more military aid than Iran did.
Kennedy replied that the United States felt that the main problems in Iran and, thanks to the new reforms, things were improving.
He rhapsodized about Franklin Roosevelt who, he said, was still regarded "almost as a god in place like West Virginia" , because, although rich, he had worked for the common people.
The Shah agreed and said that this was his great goal.
But he repeated that what Iran needed was"an honest first-class Army with a decent standard of living.
With such an Army Iran can resist Communist pressures and build the country into a showcase to so that other peoples can see that it is possible to work with the West and get more effective support than countries such as Egypt receive."
Egypt, under Nasser was then being armed and underwritten by the USSR).
Kennedy was alarmed at the 'showcase"notion, which he thought unrealistic.
The Shah then said,"(I am) not by nature a dictator.
But if Iran is to succeed, its government (will) have to act firmly for a time."
He said he knew that "the United States would not insist that Iran do everything in an absolutely legal way." 
This was not then a popular view in Washington.
The Justice Department, under Robert Kennedy, as resisting Iranian request that the US extradite Iranian students to Iran on the grounds they were "Communists" .
* John Kennedy replied, There (are) always special factors that have to be taken into account in different countries.
We are aware that the Shah is the keystone to the arch in Iran."
But Kennedy also praised Amini, the reformer.
And so, like so many other politicians of merit, Amini was excluded form any positions of responsibility in Iran from the early sixties onwards.
The Shah appropriated the idea of reform to himself an launched what he called his "White Revolution" — white because it was meant to be bloodless.
In fact the measures were rather less "revolutionary" than those that Amini had sought to implement.
There were six principal areas to the White Revolution.
It provided for nationalization of forests, the sale of some state-owned industries to provide money for agricultural development, some worker participation in prophet sharing, revision of electoral laws (including significant rights for women), the formation of a Literacy Corps in an attempt to take education to the countryside and.
above all, land reform.
The Shah had already given away some of the land that had been seized by his father after 1925.
But in the early sixties Iran's agriculture was still dominated by vast states owned by rich private landlords and by muslim clerics.
Both resisted the Shahs decrees, and the clerics encouraged protests riots in the holy city of Qom at the end of 1962 and more serious riots in Teheran in June 1963.
These were suppressed with force.
For the next few years, the White Revolution achieved marked successes.
Some lands were redistributed to landless peasants, literacy was raised, industrialization preceded, women became freer than ever before, health care improved in many parts of the country.
The achievements were considerable; the economy grew.
But as all opposition and criticism were suppressed, it was hard to make real judgements as to how popular these measures made the Shah regime outside the new, growing middle class which benefited most.
As a result of his reforms, the Shah enjoyed an excellent public image in the West by the second half of the sixties.
He was seen as an enlightened despot pursuing liberal policies in the face of dogmatic reaction from priests and landlords.
The new York Times declared that in his White Revolution he had "aligned himself directly with the workers and peasant against conservatives and traditionalists" .
Policy makers in Washington and London were sometimes privately more sceptical about the Shah's intentions, the viability of his economic policies, the growing corruption of his court, his apparently insatiable appetite for arms and even his personality.
* But such doubts rarely appeared in print.
More  important was the fact that the Shah was an important ally of the West (and of Israel) in an increasingly vital and turbulent part of the world — particularly after Israel's momentous victory over its Arab neighbours in the Six-Day War of 1967.
There was no more humiliating defeat for Egypt for Nassers policies.
The Shah subsequently told the Israeli foreign minister, Abba Eban, that he had jumped for joy at Nassers gemmulation victory.
When Nasser dies, three years later, Anwar Sadat told his wife, Jehan,"He did not die on 28 September 1970.
He died the morning of 5 June 1967.
Now in January 1979, as he fled Teheran for the second time in his life, the Shah had intended to fly on to America after just a few day in Egypt.
During his visit, he and Sadat prayed together in the Nasr (Victory) mosque and they went on a cruise around the islands of the Nile.
A picture of the Shah at the ruined temple on Philae shows him in a blazer and tie, wearing tinted glasses and looking very gaunt as a guide earnestly explains it all to him.
Just before he was due to leave for the states, there arrived in Aswan herald form another king.
It was the Moroccan ambassador to Egypt, who had flown form Cairo to extend an invitation to the Shah from His majesty King Hassan, an old ally.
Like Sadat, Hassan had received considerable funds form the Shah.
Now, Mrs Sadat recalled, the Moroccan king felt that he too should make a gesture to his fallen brother king.
Would his Imperial Majesty the Shah be so good as to pause in Marrakesh on his way to the US?
He would.
In Washington, President Carter was delighted that the Shah's arrival in the states would be further delayed.
He reckoned that it was better for the new Iranian prime minister, Shapour Bakhtiar, that the Shah stayed in Muslim country and he thought that Hasans influence would help "keep Khomeini under control" 
It would not be long before Jimmy Carter and much of the world realized that there very little, perhaps nothing, that could "keep Khomeini under control" -not, that is, from a liberal Western point of view.
In his diary, on 20 January, Carter added, oddly for a man who had rather recently praised the Shah, "And I believe the taint  of the Shah being in our country is not good for either us or him" .
The Shah's enemies saw the move differently, The fact that they was now lingering in the area, first in Egypt an now Morocco, rather than proceeding straight to the United States as announced, inevitably aroused the suspicion that he was hoping for some sort of repeat of 1953.
No one knew.
On 22 January, just six days after they had left Teheran, the Shah, Queen of Farah and the entourage, including now Mr Behbehanian, left for Morocco in the style that Anwatr Sadat wished to accord them.
A red carpet was laid out on the runway by soldiers — they only just had it straight when the official parties arrived.
There was a guard of honour for the Shah to inspect — more than one hundred troops.
As when he arrived, cannon fired a salute.
They all said their emotional farewells, Sadat begged the Shah to return whenever he wished, the Shah and the Queen boarded the doors were closed and the Shah walked forward to sit beside Captain Moezzi in the cockpit.
The formality of the occasion slightly spoiled as Sadat and about thirty Egyptian officials waved goodbye; the Shah turned the 707 too soon and his hosts were exposed to the full blast of it taxiing engines.
The Sadat crouched low, clasping their heads as the red carpet and the wooden poles holding red and blue ropes flew into the air around them.
THE QUEEN AND A KING.
The most formidable personality on the flight out of Egypt was not the Shah.
It was his third wife and Queen, Farah Diba.
One CIA report in the mid-seventies noted:
The Shah's own household had provided him with one of the major problems of his reign.
The court was at one time a centre of licentiousness and depravity, of corruption and influence peddling.
The image may have softened somewhat"or is less the subject of common gossip, but the old picture remains in the public mind and some of the derelictions continue but with more discretion.
Some courtiers were intelligent, some had the desire to educate themselves, but in the whole these people had little interest in politics, beyond a vapid enthusiasm for the status quo which treated them so well, and an unthinking conservatism, which led them to dismiss anyone with views to the left of their own as "Communists" .
The same CIA report labelled many of them "drones, sycophants and timesaver's" .
Another US embassy study remarked, several members of the Royal Family are thought to be, in varying degrees, corrupt, immoral and largely uninterested in Iran and the Iranian people."
The only section of the court that had a reputation for some seriousness and probity was that around the Queen.
Indeed, she accumulated considerable power in a society dominated more than most by men.
Many of her associates were intellectuals and artists; some were thought to be liberals, even leftists.
Inevitably, many of the men around the Shah blame the Queen and her circle for the debacle that befell the monarchy in 1978.
This was a view ascribed to Princess Ashraf, who was not enamoured of the Queen and the  way in which her political star rose as Ashrafs waned.
The Queen had very mixed feelings about their leaving the country.
She agreed with the Shah that they could not and should not use massive bloodshed to keep the throne.
At one stage she had suggested that he leave for a vacation and she stayed being, heading a Regency Council.
This seemed like a grab for power to some, but she saw it differently.
 "I said to my husband," If we all leave there's no hope for those who believed in us".
I wanted to stay just to be resent physically and symbolically without any involvement in politics.
"The Shah dismissed the notion.
So did Bakhtiar.
 "Nobody can tell what would have happened if he had stayed if he's reacted more strongly," she said later.
 "Hindsight is always easy, but I don't think it would have worked, There would have been more bloodshed, more killing, but of the people in the streets, not of the people responsible, My husband didn't want bloodshed." 
By the time of their exile, Farah had been married to the Shah for nineteen years.
She had been studying architecture in Paris when he first met her in 1958.
They met in Iran in 1959, the year they were married.
Farah's mother, Faridah Ghotbi, came from a family of provincial gentry on the Caspian.
Her fathers family, the Dibas, had served the Shahs for generations.
They had a reputation for honourable conduct.
Her father himself had been an army officer trained first in St Petersburg and then in France,.
He became one of those Persians for whom Paris was a second home, and Farah later shared that enthusiasm.
He died when she was ten.
For a long time his death was concealed from her; her mother and others told her had gone to Europe to be cured.
"But presently I began to wonder, to notice that everything was changed…they would stop talking when I came into the room, or there were hush-hush whispers…and my mother crying so dreadfully…
Of course, I began to suspect — it was terrible and at last I asked why my father didn't write to me.
In my heart I knew he was dead, but I wanted to hear what she would say…
From that time on, I never spoke to my mother of my father-never again, till I was eighteen leaving for France, to study there…
It was all locked up inside me, all my sadness."
Marriage to the Shah was, said Farah later, something of an unexpected challenge,"To marry a king — my king — the man for whom I and my friends felt such unbounded admiration, and  whom we had so often watched, passing in some procession, while we cheered and waved flags…
He was a sort of god to us…
And then, suddenly, I had to see him as a MAN — my husband!
Yes, it was a great challenge."
She was sent back to Paris to be plucked, groomed, coiffed, gowned, a "la" mode, hair by carita, dressed by Dior, shoes, jewellery, gloves and lingerie form all the best houses.
"I was like a little doll then, 'she said later.
I did what I was told, wore things others choose for me…
I really was a little doll being dressed up and arranged and ornamented, 'she had become, like the Shah's friends the Frimaldis of Monaco, a Paris Match person presented to massed readers as a fairy tale, a pretty commoner raised to royalty and yet retaining her human touch.
Back in Teheran they were married legally, on 2 December 1959.
The Honeymoon, was spent in the bosom of the pahlavi family, on the windswept shores of the Caspian.
Farah was to learn that her husbands siblings and mother were an ineluctable part of almost every day.
Dinner almost every night was at one or another of the relations palaces.
With equal grace and dispatch she produced the son and heir the Shah craved.
Crown Prince Reza was bon on 31 October 1960.
Then came a daughter, Farahnaz; another son, Ali Reza; and finally another daughter, Leils.
No Queen could have performed her dynastic duty with more aplomb.
But then Farah did everything with style and wit courtesy.
Born outside the pompous circumstance of the court, she was relaxed and convivial and far less snobbish than most of the Shahs family., Through the sixties she began to emerge as a warmhearted, rather cultured figure who was much easier with her role than the Shah with his.
She was visibly interested in social programmes, in women's affairs, in medicine, in leper colonies, and she managed to develop a reputation for compassion.
In many ways she became a symbol of the White Revolution during the sixties.
After a second attempt on the Shahs life, in 1965, he decided (and the US embassy concurred) that the Queen should have the power to become regent in the event of his death while their son was still minor.
In 1967, the Shah arranged his own coronation and, having crowned Farah too.
Her crown, destined by Arpels of Paris, had at its centre an emerald the size of a tangerine.
She retained something that the Shah had never had — an ability to appear spontaneous and in touch.
Sometimes on progresses through the country she would depart from her official schedule  and visit some village that had not been sanitized in advance.
She would be enraged if her security guards tried to force people away from her; surrounded by crowds of ordinary people she glowed.
She attracted real affection, while the Shah himself aroused fear or, at best, respect.
Inevitably there was a lot of sycophantic non sense around her too.Thus when she made a blood donation, the director of the clinic declared that the room would remain a shrine for her and everyone who now had a transfusion would insist that it was her divine blood that flowed and miraculously and potently into his veins.
She had tried to alter the manner in which the Persepolis celebrations were conducted.
She said she had disapproved of their reliance on French rather than Iranian products and people.
She knew the press would seize on the food from Maxims, the tents by Jansen, and so on.
Before the party, she had suggested that it be delayed.
 "We have waited twenty-five hundred years." 
she said,"Why not wait another three years to do things more Iranian?
It will be more interesting for everybody; it will please the Iranians."
She was not heeded and later she argued that the party provided an extraordinary, unparalleled forum for kings and communists, dictators and democrats and that the attention given around the world to Iranian history and culture was invaluable.
Nonetheless, she agreed that the"details — the French connections — ruined the whole thing.
People in Iran were unhappy, and there were enough people to incite them, and then there was so much fuss in the press outside…"
During the 1970s her relationship with the Shah became complicated.
As the Queen had matured, and perhaps become more politically aware, so on the Teheran rumour mill it was reliably asserted that there was a rift between her and the Shah.
There were rumours that the Shahs womanizing had now become intolerable.
Call girls from Madam Claudes establishment in Paris, and other services, were one thing.
Hundreds passed through Teheran for the Shah and for other members of the court.
All this was taken for granted; it was part of the Pahlavi style.
But then something more serious happened.
In the early seventies the court (and the bazaar) buzzed with stories that the Shah had fallen in love, not with a European but with a nineteen-year-old Iranian girl with dyed blond hair.
Her name was said to be Gilda.
Not only was he being fearfully indiscreet, but it was said that he had been foolish enough  actually to marry her and to install her in a cottage in the palace grounds.
The Queen apparently lost her patience.
At the end of 10972 she left Iran abruptly for Europe.
As the CIA alter noted,"This sparked rumours of a rift between the Shah and Farah.
Although there were suggestions that Ashraf may have had a hand in the affair it seems more likely that the Shah dalliance with another women was the real cause."
The Queen returned, but it was said that she insisted that the Shah get rid of Gilda.
The Shah was rescued by his brother-in-law, General Khatami, the rich "affairist" husband of Princess Fatimeh; Khatami, took Gilda as his own mistress.
The Shah was very grateful at the time, according to the minister of the court Assadollah Alam.
"A stupid, vile, disgusting libel, he replied.
"But, Your Majesty, you're a Muslim.
Your religion allow you to take another wife without repudiating Empress Farah Diba."
"Yes, certainly.
According to my religion, I could, so long as my wife grants her consent.
And, to be honest, one must admit there are cases here…when a wife is ill, for instance., or when she refuses to perform her duties, thereby causing her husband unhappiness…
Lets face it!
One has to be a hypocrite or an innocent to believe that a husband will tolerate that kind of thing.
In your society, when something like that occurs, doesn't a man take a mistress, or even more than one?
Well in our society instead, a man can take another wife…?
But there was another side to Farah, one that was perhaps more problematic for the Shah.
As well as being an ideal wife and mother, and a symbol of social reform, she also represented a strong Western influence which was anathema to the Shiite clergy and to many ordinary, conservative Iranians.
This particulary true in her patronage of the arts.
Much of her work was beyond reproach.
She rescued old houses form the juggernaut of industrialization, restored them, and, opened them to the public.
She had the state collect painting, carpets, silver, jewellery and ceramics, and display them in museums created especially by her.
Some of the objets d'art were bought on her orders, at home and abroad; others she prised out of rich Iranians who often found her acquisitiveness on behalf of the country irksome but impossible to resist.
It was a good deal more attractive than the usual Pahlavi type of greed.
Although she started out a creature of Parisian tastes in the sixties, by the seventies she had turned towards Iranian fabrics and designs; where she went her court and may others followed.
She encouraged the rich to take holidays within Iran, so tried to foster a sense of Iranian culture and a national pride among a people notoriously liable to succumb to self-pity and paranoia.
Nonetheless, sometimes her enthusiasm seemed to jar.
Although she was determined to preserve Iran"past, her contemporary tastes were often too avant-garde, too cosmopolitan, for most of her countrymen.
Andy Warhol, Stockhausen, Peter Brook, appealed to her, but they were lost on most Iranians.
 "We were only just beginning to listen to Bach" , said one Iranian businessman.
 "stockhausen was impossible." 
And those few Iranians who liked Stockhausen certainly did not like the Shah.
The Queen was a patron also of the Shiraz international arts festival.
By the mid-seventies this had become one of the most controversial cultural events on the country.
Among its most notorious performances was one by a Brazilian troupe whose members bit the heads off live chickens in the course of the action.
It reached a climax in 1977 when another troupe of actors took over a shop in the main street of Shiraz, hard by the mosque, and performed in the shop and on the pavement a play that involved a full frontal rape and laws acts between naked, consenting actors.
Such a performance would have led to scandal (and the arret of the actors) in any English or American street.
Performed in Shiraz it aroused enormous anger and offence.
Such excess were no doubt the responsibility of her courtiers or producers rather than of the Queen herself, but they became associated with her.
Later, in exile, she defended the festival saying that it brought to Iran purist, traditional art form all over the world.
She had been unaware of every detail of performances, and one or two offensive productions had crept in.
 "In any art festival it is difficult to have fee expression by the artists and expect it to appeal to all the different social groups." 
During the seventies her court became known, at least to both the friends of the Shah and to his conservative critics, as a den of avant-garde liberalism.
She was one of the few people in Iran who dared speak her mind to him (perhaps the sole person), but what was on her mind was not to everyone's liking.
She was always perhaps a bit too trusting.
Now in exile, her faith on other people was becoming somewhat tried.
In Cairo, exhausted by the traumas of recent weeks, she had been concerned not only about the Shah and his morale, but also about their four children who had gone ahead of them to the states.
Where, for example, would they now go to school?
Even that would make me burst into tears, because all the simple things in life had become a problem for me."
I used to have so much illusion,"she said later.
'so much relief in everything.
But so many things happened, and you lose those illusion, ideas.
Thank God, I've not lost them altogether.
It's true we saw a lot of the negative side of human behaviour, but there was also a lot of the positive side.
So putting them in balance, I still want to hope that the light will overcome the darkness."
It was in Morrocco that the twilight began to fall.
King Hassan II was at the airport to welcome the Shah and Queen when their boeing touched down at Marrakesh on 22 January 1979.
But he gave them none of the honours accorded by Anwar Sadat.
Tourists and journalists, including, to their chagrin, the three American network, were detained in a hotel on the airport road and were not even allowed to watch the cars pass by.
Publicity in the local press was discouraged by the regime; officials insisted that this was "a strictly private visit" to take place "in absolute discretion" , and that the Shah himself had "expressed no desire to see the press" .
He was taken to the Jinan el Kabir palace, set in an oasis outside Marrakesh, with a splendid view over the Atlas Mountains.
Palace sources told foreign journalists that Hassan had invited the Shah as a gesture of friendship".
Monarchs share understandable interests.
Theirs is, after all, a smallish society in international terms.
Whether they be Asian African or European, they have a great deal more in common than most of their respective citizens would have with one another.
Since the community appears to be forever shrinking some of those in power tend to be understanding of those who have lost it -if, that is, they still sufficiently powerful in their own states  to be able to override the diplomatic problems involved.
Thus the Shah himself had supported several fallen royal's, including the former kings of Afghanistan and Albania, as well as Constantine of Greece.
Umberto, the former king of Italy, and his family had lucrative contracts with Iranian agencies.
Simeon was on Hassans list as well.
He was often invited to Hassans birthday party, and since he was usually the only other monarch there, he took precedence in the receiving line over almost everyone else in the room.
It was in this spirit that Hassan had now asked the Shah to Morocco.
But he meant this to come for only a few days, not for an indefinite stay.
Hassan wanted to demonstrate royal loyalty.
But he did not wish to jeopardize Morocco's relations with the new authorities in Teheran, or with those radical Arab states that rejoiced in the fall of the Shah.
Still less did he wish to disrupt his carefully crafted relationship without the mullahs in Morocco.
Moreover, King Hassan was reported to be ambivalent about the Shah.
It was widely said that he had long resented the Shah's great oil wealth and the independence that it gave him.
Morocco had no oil and Hassan by contrast was dependent on support from the Saudi and, until rather recently, from the Shah himself.
There must therefore have been a certain piquancy for him in now extending hospitality to the fallen monarch.
From Hassan there was to be none of the commitment already expressed — and to be expressed ever more passionately as the Shahs's journey continued — by Anwar Sadat.
In his last memoirs, completed just before he died in exile, the Shah described King Hassan II as"a sovereign with a rate intellectual elegance…a perfect incarnation of two cultures, the Koramic and the European.
"There is a poignancy in this remark.
It was true that Hassan had managed to balance the often conflicting pressures more successfully than had the Shah.
Indeed, the Shahs failure to so do had caused his downfall.
Like Iran, Morocco was (and still is) governed by an educated but often corrupt elite gathered around the person of the King.
But Hassan was more cunning then the Shah.
His family has ruled Morocco since the seventeenth century.
The French imposed a protectorate at the beginning of this century; in the 1940s and fifties Hassans father, King Muhammad V, which was won in 1956.
Hassan became king on his fathers death in 1961.
Since then, unlike the  Shah, he has managed to remain the spiritual leader of his people.
Whereas the Shah came to be seen in Iran as doorman to the Great Satan, pushing Western goods and notions, Hassan had cleverly portrayed himself as resisting both Moroccos former colonizers the French, and, more recently, the American intrusion.
Indeed, he frequently managed both to play the French and the Americans off against each other and then to blame them when anything went wrong.
And while the Shah despised and fought against the mullahs, Hassan had his own representatives in almost all the brotherhoods and mosques.
The church was not an enemy for Hassan, it was an accomplice.
Like the Shah, Hassan used financial favours to keep the loyalty of his courtiers.
Like the Shah, Hassan had survived several assassination attempts.
In 1971 rebels attacked his birthday party; the king had in a lavatory.
The story goes that a young king held out his hand, declaring, "I am the commander of the faithfully." 
The boy dutifully fell to his knees, kissed the hand, and the king lived.
In 1972 his own principle aide, General Oufkir, who ruled the country in the king's name attempted a coup.
Till now Oufkir had controlled the secret police and pursued the kings enemies ruthlessly.
By 1972, however, he had apparently tired of the courts corruption and his own subordination to the king.
He ordered fighters to shoot down Hassans Boeing.
But even he had underestimated the king's nerve.
When his plane was under attack.
Hassan grabbed the radio operators microphone and shouted words to this effect;"This is the navigator.
The King is dead."
The fighters paused and the King escaped again.
It was later announced that General Oufkir had committed suicide by shooting himself in the head — three times.
Marrakesh has long been a winter watering hole for the rich, the chic and the famous and the Shah had arrived at the height of the tourist season.
There was not much room for all the Iranian courtiers who flew into see him.
Some of them offered help, but more usually they were there to ask for favours — which nearly always meant money.
They almost all wanted to stay at the fabulous old Hotel Mamounia, a place of wonderful gardens and lakes that had achieved fame when Winston Churchill came to paint there in the fifties.
Other patrons in those days had included Narbra Hutton and some of the relatives of J Paul Getty.
More  recently Marrakesh had been taken over by some of the biggest names in haute couture.
Pierre Balmin, Yves St Laurent, and Pierre Cardin had bought old palaces in the town and renovated them elegantly.
Among the guests the Mamounia while the Shah was settling in were Henry, Count of Paris, the pretender to the French crown, who was finishing his memoirs there; the Reverend Ndabaningi Sithole, then a member of the coalition government of Rhodesia, but soon, like the Shah, to be swept away by revolution and Hassans friend, former King Simeon of Bulgaria, who was reported to be there on some business.
Also in residence was General Vernon Walters, who, since his trip with Hariman to see Mossadeq, had been one of the more redoubtable and mysterious figures in the American, military-intelligence complex.
He was a discreet consultant to King Hassan, whom he had first met when Hassan was a young prince.
The details of his work were not well known within the US embassy in Rabat.
Now he was reported to be at the Mamounia in order to work on a book entitled The Mighty and the Meek.
The American ambassador sent his CIA station chief to ask Walters what he was really doing in Morocco at this of all time Walters insisted that his visit had nothing to do with the Shah.
When the Shah arrived, Morocco officials evidently did not know how long he planned to stay.
But they made it clear they hoped he would soon be on his way to the United States.
The Shah, however, now wished to wait had nothing to do with the Shah.
On January his seclusion was broken for what is called a "photo opportunity" at king Hassans winter palace outside Marrakesh.
The place was surround by troops as the journalists were ushered in.
The Shah was, as often, wearing a dark jacket, lighter trousers and a striped tie; the Empress a smart patterned suit.
They both looked tense and uncomfortable, and seemed to be searching the journalists for faces they knew.
Pierre Salinger of ABC News managed to get past the Moroccan security officials.
The Shah said that he was staying on for a while, not flying immediately either to the States back to Egypt.
A few says later the Shah sought assurances from the US Embassy that he was still welcome in the United States cabled Rabat to say, "we assured the Shah publicly as well as in private messages that he would be welcome in the US should he choose to go there, and that there should be bo doubt whatsoever as to our willingness  to receive (him) and provide him with appropriate protection" .
When he conveyed this message to the Shah's entourage, the US ambassador, Richard Parker, warned that as the situation in Iran changes so might the attitudes in Washington.
The Shah should therefore proceed with dispatch.
He did not.
One of the people who advised him to remain in Morocco was the legendary Ardeshir Zahedi, son of the Shah's prime minister in 1953, and till recently the Iranian ambassador in Washington.
Perle Mesta. "hostess with the mostest" .
once declared that if you hang a lamb chop in the window the whole town will come running.
Ardeshir Zahedi had done far better than that.
The windows of the Iranian embassy in Washington were forever hung with pots of caviar and magnums of Don Perignon and the whole town was at this feet — until they were swept by the revolution from under him.
Then the influence that he exercised rather than his generosity, became the talk of the town.
In Washington in the seventies Ardeshir Zahedi played the part of a fun-loving playboy, shovelling edible and liquid gold down the throats of the powerful, of the rich, and of the merely famous.
He had a personality as big as the Ritz.
He as a fabulous showman, the Cecil B De Mille of the dinner party trail, equally happy embracing Henry Kissinger or Liza Minnelli or Andy Warhol or Elizabeth Taylor — who was one of the more celebrated of his many lovers.
Le Tout Washington adored him; no other place was so lavish as the Iranian embassy on Massachusetts Avenue, with its mirror-domed ceilings, its drapes and its silks, all dominated by two full-length portraits of His and Her Imperial Majesties and brought alive by the bounding, capacious personality of Zahedi, the ultimate host.
Gold watches, caviar, champagne and beautiful women — all these became associated with Zahedis munificence.
He was tall, aquiline and dashing.
But behind his large smiles and large cigars, his eyes often seemed to brim with regret.
While Iran was undergoing fundamental changes in the seventies he was on the outside, instead of authority at home.
In a court in which obsequious obedience to the monarch was the rule.
Ardeshir Zahedi had always been different.
Most of the men around the Shah were tied to him by fear, by devotion or by the tentacles of corruption.
Zahedi was one of the few men in the court with his own standing.
During the 1953 crisis he had operated literally as the strong arm of his father, General Zahedi.
He  he had been one of the principal Iranian liaisons with Kim Roosevelt and he had helped to organize the demonstrations in support of the Shah.
As a result, he was later dogged by the claim that he had continuing CIA links, a claim he always denied.
In 1957 Zahedi married the Shah's daughter by Fawzia, princess Shahnaz.
It was they who introduced the Shah to Farah Diba…
Soon afterwards the Shah appointed him, for the firs time, ambassador to Washington.
He liked America, he had studied agriculture at the top University of Utah after the Second World War.
As ambassador he tried, without overwhelming success, to convince radical Iranian students the at they should support rather than demonstrate against the Shah.
(One story, which entered his official state Department biography, has it that he told several students that his own rise to the position of ambassador showed what great opportunities there were for the young in Iran.
To which one of the students replied, "Yes, but the Shah has only one daughter." )
In 1962 he became ambassador of Britain.
London was then supposed to be swinging.
Zahedi enhanced this reputation and London society had a taste of the party giving that was to hit Washington ten years later.
His princess enjoyed herself less; they were divorced in 1964.
In 1967 Zahedi returned to Teheran to become minister.
He was energetic and in many ways successful.
A US Embassy profile commented,"partly in order to counteract his playboy image, Zahedi drove himself and his staff extremely hard and achieved a reputation as a leader with impressive knowledge.
Zahedi clearly had the Shah's ear and often made policy suggestions outside the foreign-policy area, a tactic which resulted in rather strained relations with Prime Minister Hoveyda.
In fact, by the end of the sixties Zahedis relationship with Amir Abbas Hoveyda had degenerated into bitter dislike, which Zahedi, impetuous and frank, took less trouble to conceal.
In 1971 he was also angered by a visit made by the Shah's sister Princess Ashraf, to China, which he felt was an intrusion on his turf.
On her return, Ashraf reported directly to her brother and did not even send the foreign minister a copy of her conclusions.
After further disagreements with Hoveyda, Zahedi left the Foreign Ministry and took himself off to his fathers house in Switzerland.
This was not the way in which people usually behaved towards the Shah.
No one was allowed to resign; people served until the Shah dismissed or moved them.
By the early seventies, Teheran was littered with forgotten men who had worked in the government or the court and had once-once was too often-dared to question a  decision or a policy and had thenceforth been frozen out of all official life.
Zahedi was different, first because of his and his father's roles in 1953, and secondly because of his absolute and unflinching loyalty to the Shah.
Eventually the Shah asked Zahedi to leave Switzerland and become ambassador to Washington again.
Aside from the society pages, Zahedi was a successful envoy in the Nixon-Ford era.
Nixon liked him.
He was closer to William Rogers, Nixon's first secretary of state, then to Henry Kissinger, though the press showed him more frequently embracing the latter.
He spent much time visiting most states of the Union and acting as a super salesman for Iran.
He invited scores of congressmen and journalists, civic officials and academics to visit Iran and made sure they were lavishly received and entertained.
All such activities paid dividends in the sense that, until the second half of the seventies, there was almost no questioning of the Shah's priorities or stability in the American press or congress.
When Jimmy Carter took office in January 1977, Zahedi found it harder to be close to senior officials.
Under Carters human rights programme, the state Department began to pressure the Shah to restrain his secret police, and Zahedis opulent flamboyance was ill suited for Carters desire for a less pretentious style of government.
Nonetheless, Zahedi had easy access to Zbigniew Brzezinski, Carters national security adviser.
As the Shah crumbled towards collapse, Zahedi shed the mantle of bon vivant and became, in partnership with Brezinski, a controversial player in the drama of the final days.
He returned twice to Teheran.
Before his second visit, in November 1978, Brezinski asked him to come to the White House to meet Carter, Secretary of state Cyrus Vance, and Stansfield Turner, the director of the CIA.
Carter made a rather remarkable commitment to him., saying,"Don't worry about Washington.
I will be ambassador for Iran here."
In Teheran, Zahedi was one of the protagonists of a military solution to the crisis.
His view was echoed by Brezinski but not by the Shah.
Zahedi was also opposed to the Shah leaving Iran.
Here again he failed to convince his liege.
He returned to Washington and then went to Switzerland.
Soon after the Shah left Teheran, the Iranian embassy in Washington was taken over by militants and by members of Zahedis staff who had hitherto seemed loyal to him and the Shah.
Zahedis chateau Lafite and other vintage were pouted into the embassy fountain, and he was publicly denounced as  having bribed congressmen and journalists with drugs and call girls.
(Such charges were investigated by Congress and the Justice Department and were dismissed.)
By the time Zahedi rejoined his king in Morrocco at the end of January 1979, he had decided that by refusing to give the Shah unequivocal support, the United States had betrayed him.
He now thought that the Shah should keep his distance from Washington.
Moreover, once the King went to the States there was no way he could ever return to Iran except as a parcel from the CIA.
Zahedi advised the Shah to stay in Morocco.
At the same time he and some of the Shahs entourage, including Colonel Jahanbini, hatched a simple and dramatic plot.
The Israeli commando unit at Entebbe was the model to which they aspired.
The idea was that a group of them should take back the second of the Shahs planes to Teheran, contact those military commanders known to be most loyal to the Shah and convince them to hijack Khomeinis plane when, as the assumed he would, he flew back to Teheran from Paris.
What then?
One possibility was to force it to land at an army base remote to Teheran.
What would then be done to contain the rage of the millions of people waiting to greet the Imam in the streets of Teheran?
Their proposal was that Teheran radio should announce that the plane had technical problems and that Khomeini was safe at another airport.
There they would force Khomeini to negotiate a deal and to broadcast it to the people.
If he did not?
They would kill him.
The other alternatives were to shoot the plane down before it landed or blow it up on the ground at Teheran airport when all the Imam's followers had come forward to welcome him.
Of these schemes, the conspirators preferred the first — the diversion of the plane.
The other two were messier; for one thing, each would have involved killing anyone else who was flying back with Khomeini (In the event, the plane was filled with journalists whose tickets financed the cost of the charter form Air France.)
But in Morocco even that was not seen as totally out of the question.
Years later, when they told this story, those who had conceived the plan insisted that they would have carried out the attack in their own names, as rebels, and not under the Shah's authority.
The Shah could then have denounced them and ordered their arrest and execution.
They did substantial planning and then they took the idea to the Shah.
His reaction, they say, was disappointing.
He said,"You must be mad.
If you carry on like this I will ask Hassan to put you behind bars."
But even while the Shah shrugged of such schemes, saying that this was not 1953 he also seemed to feel that the allies who had saved him then had somehow betrayed him now.
Where was Kim Roosevelt or his successors, come to tell him how to fight?
Not in Marrakesh.
Not even, it seemed in Teheran.
With or without the help of the CIA and the participation of the Shah, some of his commanders left behind in Iran were still attempting to organize a coup.
Before Christmas the Shah had constantly refused to approve such efforts, saying that the King could not secure his throne by massive bloodshed.
Just before the Shah had left Iran, Admiral Habib Olahi and other commanders had gone to him one last time and asked his permission to undertake a coup.
This time the Shah had seemed ambiguous.
 "But it seemed he didn't want any responsibility for any military action, even while out of the country," said Habib Olahi later.
"He did not want blood on his hands but on ours.
If it worked, he could return.
If no, we would be tried and executed,"Habib Olahi recalled.
Obliquely the Shah had agreed to let them start some planning; it began just as he left for Egypt.
By January, the navy had already taken over the oil fields from striking oil workers and was producing just under a third of normal output,.
The Navy also controlled the ports.
Under the coup plan, Habib Olahi would be responsible for running the country's whole electric grid, taking over key factories if necessary.
It took nearly two weeks of detailed discussion by planning officers of all three services to work out the denials.
They had virtually no contact with the Shah.
His absence made their planning almost impossible.
This was because the Shah, always nervous of a military coup against him, had structured the armed forces in such a way that lateral collaboration between the services was very hard to arrange.
Until now the commanders had all reported upward to the Shah, who himself made all decisions.
Now that the apex of the pyramid was gone, there was no obvious way for decisions to be reached,.
Eventually, however, those commanders  still loyal tot he Shah (or still hoping to resist the imposition of Islamic government) produced a series of plans for a military take-over.
But they had not had time to implement then when, on 1 February 1979, the ayatollah returned to Teheran in triumph like Lenin to the Finland Station.
The Priest
Since early 1979, Ayatollah Sayyed Ruhollah Mousavi Khomeini had preoccupied the Western world he so despises.
He had been its implacable scourge, its unbending critic, preaching and practising austerity and revenge.
To many in the West he had seemed an utterly ruthless and even deranged enemy, a terrifying symbol of an anger and hatred that we had not expected could not understand and had no hope of controlling.
At the very least he had made the subject of Islam one of widespread fascination in the West.
As the revolution in Iran there was comparatively little Western interest in the spiritual aspects of the Islamic world.
The Arabs were seen in terms of oil, the Palestinian problem and terrorism,.
The Iranians were symbolized by the Shah.
Only with the rise of Khoneini did the politics and spirituality of Islam become a burning issue among strategists, conversationalists, politicians and writers.
Yet the faith that Khoneini represented, Shiism, is radically different from the Sunnis faith practised my most Muslims.
The Koran is common to the two, but the Shiites and the Sunnis have distinct interpretations of the legacy of the prophet Muhammad.
All of Muhammads sons died and only his daughter lived, Fatima, who was married to his chosen successor, Ali, had children.
So all his descendants are through Fatima.
After Muhammads death a schism developed between those (who became known as Sunnis) and the followers of Ali (the Shiites, from Shi'a Ali, or party of Ali).
The followers of Ali were defeated after his won death and the deaths of his sons.
Shiism became a sect distinct from the mainstream of Muslim thought.
It came in a sense to represent opposition rather than power, which was assumed by the mainstream Sunnis.
Shiism was imposed on Iran under the Safavid dynasty in the sixteenth century.
For Iranians it was always a  political as well as religious creed, and way of differentiating themselves from the Arabs.
The importance of the Imams as spiritual leaders is at the hearts of Shiite doctrine.
The Imams do not have the authority to change anything in the divine revelation of the Koran, but they are able to interpret it, through the divine guidance with which they are endowed.
Shiites believe that there were eleven Imams after Ali and that the twelfth Imam disappeared from human view around then ninth century but still exists in spirit.
This hidden Imam will one day reappear, and when it does so, all the wrongs of the world will be righted.
When the Afghans overthrew the Safavid dynasty and tried to reimpose Sunnism on Iran in the eighteenth century, the principle Shiite mullahs and teachers (ulama) fled to Iraq.
There they were able to be independent of the Iranian state authorities — a tradition that has continued since.
During the nineteenth century the ulama became increasingly critical of the Wahar dynasty and found themselves acting in effect as guardians of the people against the governments; but they did not seek to govern themselves.
They allied themselves with Western influenced opponents of the Qajar and were influential in the revolution of 1906 which further weaken the authority of the Shah by creating a constitutional monarchs, similar to that of Belgium-and which remained nominally in force until 1979.
As far as the Shiite ulama were concerned any Shah ruling before the return of the hidden Imam does so unlawfully, unless he has ben licensed by the chief priests, the ayatollahs.
Thus the mullahs can legitimately incite revolution, and since the seventh century they have done so.
Over the centuries, Iranians have become used to having their religious leaders denounce the Shahs policies on the grounds they were contrary to Islam.
Indeed, as Barry Rubin has pointed out in his seminal history Paved with Good Intentions,"Tens of millions of Iranians, particularly those living in the rural villages and even the many peasants who had recently migrated to the cities, accepted these clerical proclamations as guides top proper behaviour towards their King.
"At first, Reza Shah had the mullahs support where he crowned himself King in 1926.
At that time, the mullahs were the country's principal teachers and in many rural areas they had become considerable men of property, taxing the people and buying land for themselves.
But Reza Shah's introduction of new civil, commercial and penal codes, which diminished the power of the ulama, his expansion of the secular school system, and many more is his attempts to create a modern, centralized state, weakened and therefore infuriated them.
By 1941, when Reza Shah abdicated, the Mullahs had lost much of their former influence.
They began to regain lost ground in the first years of muhammad Reza's reign, were probably involved in his attempt assassination in 1949, succeeded in killing the prime minister in 1951, and initially allied themselves with Dr Mossadeq's campaign to nationalize the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company.
The Mullahs nest great battle with the Shah came over his White Revolution in the early 1960's.
It was then that Khomeini first came to prominence.
Khomeini was born at the turn of the century, to a family of mullahs who like to trace their ancestry back to the prophet Muhammad.
His father was killed while Khomeini was a baby, apparently on the orders of a powerful landlord.
He was brought up by his mother and an aunt and then, after their deaths, by his elder brother.
Both brothers followed the family tradition and became mullahs.
Until the early sixties Khomeini spent his life in the holy city of Qom, where he taught law, philosophy and ethics, insisting that Islam had a commitment to social and political causes and that Iran had to be independent of both Eastern and Western colonialism.
He was a splendid teacher and his lectures drew large crowds form the 1940's on wards.
His views were always stern, He believed that there was either good or evil, with no grey area in between.
Thus corruption cannot be reformed but must be destroyed.
He used to recount a parable of a clean spring and a stagnant pond.
The spring can pour into the pond, but the pond will remain stagnant unless it is drained.
It was inevitable that Khomeini would loathe the attacks that Reza Shah made on the power of the mullahs.
After Reza Shah's abdication, Khomeini wrote a book in which he described the king as a usurper who had ignored Islamic precepts and had run a corrupt, cruel and illegitimate state.
His later declarations were filled with similar anger at the way in which Muhammad Reza was substituting Western values for the Islamic tradition in Iran.
In the 1940's Khomeini published his view that the clergy must ensure that secular rule is limited by the laws of Islam.
Later, he declared, From the beginning Islam represented a political power, not limiting itself to problems of religious practice.
In fact, of one refers to the practices of Muhammad, which are the main Muslim Texts, one sees that they deal as much with politics, government, the struggle against tyrants, as with prayers."
In the fifties Khomeini attempted, vainly to obtain clemency for members of the Islamic fedayeen (the precursor of Islamic jihad and Hezbollah which came to prominence in Lebanon in the 1980's) who had been sentenced to death for assassinating prominent members of the Shah regime.
He abhorred the Shahs relationship with Israel.
In the sixties he saw the clergy and the place of religion in Iranian society.
That was accurate enough.
Khomeini described the Shahs attempt to enfranchise women as an effort "to corrupt our chaste women" .
The Shah's Literacy Corps, under which young army conscripts spent their national service as teachers in poor village, threatened their monopoly of the mullahs as teachers.
Land reform endangered their financial independence.
Khomeini asserted that many of the reforms were"perhaps drawn up by the spies of the Jews and the Zionists…
The Koran and Islam are in danger."
On some issues he managed to force changes in government policy.
It gave him a sense of his power.
When the land reform began to take effect in 1963, the Shah himself denounced the religious opposition as "black reaction" and dismissed the clerics as "lice-ridden mullahs" .
Land reform was popular and the National Front politicians, what remained of them, could hardly impose it.
But Khomeini again insisted that it was all being done for foreign enemies of the Jews, America and Israel, we must be nailed and killed; we must be sacrificed to the evil intentions of foreigners"
In June 1963, Khomeini denounced the Shah particularly harshly as a Zionist agent, and was arrested.
This caused widespread riots that the government suppressed with brutality.
Estimates of the number of people who were killed by the military varied form several hundred to several thousand.
Significantly, the key decisions in containing these disturbances were afterwards said to have been made not so much by the Shah as by his prime minister, Assadollah Alam, vital figure in the development of Iran in the sixties and seventies.
Alam came from a great landowning family in Birjand, on northeastern Iran.
He remained by the Shahs side first as prime minster and them as minister of court until his death from cancer in 1977.
He was said to become of the very few senior officials who ever dared to question, if not contradict the Shah.
Muhammad Behbehanian, the Shah personal financier, was with Alam at the time of the 1963 riots.
He later recalled that the Shah had told Alam not to kill anyone.
Alam had replied.,
"You are the Shah.
I am the prime minister.
I am responsible for security.
I will quiet the people any way I can.
If I succeed, you will still be Shah, If I fail, you can hang me and you will still be Shah."
It was rumoured that Alam wanted Khomeini executed in 1963 but other religious leaders prevailed upon the Shah not even to put him on trial.
In spring 1964 Khomeini was released, Various emissaries of the Shah tried to persuade the ayatollah to leave politics to the politicians."
All of Islam is politics."
he replied.
The final breaking point between Khomeini and the Shah came over relations with the United States, In July 1964 the government introduced a bill that allowed American military advisers and their families to be subject to American, no Iranian, courts.
Such agreements on extraterritoriality are common where American forces or advisers are stationed abroad, but in Iran it aroused memories of the humiliating capitulations demanded by the British and the Russians in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
*
The act was only narrowly passed by the parliament and Khomeini denounced it as a "document for the enslavement of Iran." 
The parliament, he said, had"acknowledged that Iran as a colony; it has given America the next.
He demanded that the Army rise up against the government.
Khomeinis denunciation was widely reproduced and popular.
The Shah rejected more advice to kill him, but Khomeini was arrested and banished to Turkey.
In 1965 he moved to the Shia shrine in Najaf, in Iran where he stayed until 1978.
His bitterness against the Shah grew; he constantly denounced the crimes and the tyrannies of the Iranian government and decided the Shah as "a servant of the dollar" .
He upheld the rights of students imprisoned by SAVAK, of intellectuals and the poor.
He saw the Shah's  reform movement as designed to sell out the country to foreign powers, especially Israel and the Untied States, and he exhorted the mullahs to resist.
From Najaf Khomeini denounced the Persepolis celebrations absolutely…
"
Anyone who organizes or participates in these festivals is a traitor to Islam and the Iranian nation,"he declared.
Despite the fact that the mullahs had originally urged Reza Shah to accept Kingship, he stated that the title King of Kings is the most hated of all titles in the sight of God…
Islam is fundamentally opposed to the whole notion of monarchy…
Monarchy is one of the most shameful and disgraceful reactionary manifestations."
For a long time, it seemed as if these were merely the ranting of a bitter exile.
Certainly few people in the West, even the intelligence agencies whose job it is to monitor such dissidence, had much idea of the latent forces that this choice in the wilderness represented in Iran itself.
It was a scurrilous attack on Khomeini that the Shah allowed to be published in an Iranian paper early in 1978 the led to the beginning of the apparently endless cycle of protest and suppression that undermined and destroyed the Shah.
In October 1978, the Iraqis expelled Khomeini form Najaf at Irans request.
He was refused entry to Kuwait and asked for asylum in France.President Giscard d'Estaing asked the Shah his views and the Shah made one of the worst mistakes in his reign by agreeing the Khomeini should go to France, He assumed that the obstreperous priest would be les of a threat to him in distant, Christian France than in neighbouring, radical, Islamic country.
The Shah had reckoned without power of modern communications.
From France, Khomeinis aides would dial Teheran direct and the ayatollah could read his sermons straight into Iranian tape recorder for instant distribution throughout the country.
And for the first time all the worlds press had unfettered access to him, His pronouncements were published and broad cast almost daily, and his BBC, in particulary, gave full coverage to his views.
By the end of 1978, the ayatollah had come to be seen, by many of these Western intellectuals interested in Iran, as a saintly old man who was determined to establish a far more just, democratic and 'spiritual"regime than that run by the cruel, corrupt and despotic Shah.
About three million people thronged the airport and the street of Teheran to greet Khomeini when he flew home on 1 February 1979.
The Crowds were delirious and impassable.
The ayatollah had to be flown by helicopter to his chosen head quarters-symbolically, a school in the poor part of South Teheran, far from the villas and the palaces of the northern sector, which had till now dominated the lives of the masses.
There were still those among the Shah's military who believed that a coup against Khomeini was possible.
They tried to persuade Shapour Bakhtiar, who was still prime minister, to agree to it.
He was reluctant, because he believed that he personally had ejected the Shah and that his standing was now so great that he could face down Khomeini alone.
"For fifty years, never had the Army been so obedient him, urged all government officials to resign and set up his won alternative government under Meddi Bazargan, a long-time member of the National Front, a lawyer, and a campaigner for human rights under the Shah.
He had spent five years in prison in the early sixties for his opposition to the Shah.
By the eleventh of February, followers of Khomeini had taken control of the administrative, police and judicial functions in several cities.
Millions of people demonstrated on favour of the ayatollah and an islamic government,.
Bakhtir denounced Khomeini's plans as "arachic and medieval" .
As the Shah sat in the palace at Marrakesh, listening to Radio Teheran, the Army he had so fatefully nurtured began to fall apart.
Soldiers deserted in droves.
SAVAK agents were either fleeing for their lives, being murdered or, the lucky ones, being allowed to rally to Khomeini.
A pro-Khomeini mutiny began among Air Force technicians (known as homagars) and then spread to other ranks; by 10 February the Air Force was fighting against the Imperial Guard.
"I never thought the Army would collapse so quickly, 'said Habib Olahi later.
Thousands of civilians swarmed over several military garrisons, seizing the weapons and "liberating" the bases.
Bakhtiar gave a broadcast in which he declared these actions would have "no effect on me" .
The coup de grace for this unrealistic man of reason attempting to rationalize came on 11 February.
Armed civilians, Islamic militiamen and pro-Khomeini troops took to the streets to take control of other military installations.
Those army commanders who had still been hoping for a coup realized that all such hope was now lost.
The armed forces would not even support Bakhtiar, let alone the Shah.
The Armies supreme council  ordered troops back to barracks and assured Bazargan, Khomeini's prime minister, that the military was now prepared to support his provisional government.
Bakhtiar finally understood that this own cause was lost.
While machine-gun fire raked the streets around his office, he walked down a back staircase and managed to slip away into hiding.
He eventually contrived to smuggle himself, heavily disguised, on to a commercial flight out of Iran and to exile in Paris.
Admiral Habib Olahi and some others finally escaped on foot across the mountains into Turkey.
Some of them had crucial help from the Israeli secret service, Mossad) Those army commanders who did not immediately his were not so lucky.
Some were dragged out of their cars and butchered by angry crowds in the street.
Others were executed after swift show trials.
The Queen remembers that day, 11 February 1979, well.
"I was passing through a corridor (Of the palace in Marrakesh).
We had the radio on all the time to Radio Teheran, and I heard: "The revolution has won, the bastion or something has fallen" .
For a few second I wasn't sure which side had won.
For me, we were the good guys and they were the bad guys.
Unfortunately it was the other side".
When news of some of the executions reached Morocco, the Shah was on a new gold course built for King Hassan by Robert Trent Jones, a celebrated designer of gold courses.
Jones said later that the reports from Teheran had left the Shah rather distracted.
In Washington not everyone understood at once how complete Khomeini's revolution was.
As the Army collapsed in turmoil on 11 February, the White House Situation Room put through several calls to the US ambassador in Teheran, William Sullivan saying that Zbigniew Brezinski wanted to know what were the chances of a coup d'etat.
Since he had already told Washington that the Army had disintegrated and as he was trying to rescue American officers from a mob, Sullivan dealt with these falls impatiently.
He suggested that Brzezinski should "get stuffed" and then asked of he could translate this into Polish.
In the end of American officers were rescued by the intervention of one of Khomeini closest associates, Ibrahim Yazdi, who had been with him in exile and who became foreign minister.
The next day the Iranian military unit that had been guarding the American embassy was ordered to return to its barracks.
With tears pouring down his face, the young captain in charge drew up his men, kissed the US Army attache"goodbye on both cheeks, and drove away.
Khomeini's new prime minister Baargan, assured Sullivan that the embassy would be helped in case of attack, and gave him his direct telephone number in case of trouble.
But Sullivan immediately made his own plans for repulsing as assault on the embassy.
It came on St Valentines Day, 14 February 1979.
That morning, just after Sullivan had received a cable form Washington telling him to inform the new government that the United States would continue diplomatic relations with Iran, machine guns mounted on the surrounding buildings all opened up in a pre-arranged barrage.
Windows shattered and lead flew around the offices.
Ambassador Sullivan dived for the floor.
Sullivan ordered his staff to try to reach prime Minister Bazargan on the "hot lines" he had been given.
Eventually the new authorities dispatched a rescue mission.
But before it arrived, the residence had been captured and the chancery was under assault by more than a hundred militants.
Many of them wore the chequered scarves of the Palestinian fedayeen, the leader of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine.
Sullivan crawled to the relative security of the chancery's central corridor and on his walkie-talkie ordered the US marines guarding the compound not to resist, still less to shoot anyone.
He reckoned that if a US soldier killed an Iranian, such rage would be unleashed that all the Americans would be torn limb from limb.
He sent most of his staff into the embassy vault where they set about burning and shredding the classified papers that remained (he had most shipped out of the country already), destroying the cryptographic equipment and dismantling the controlling element in the satellite communications station.
Sullivan then surrendered the embassy and opened the steel doors to the second floor of the chancery, which the attackers had been trying to batter down.
Armed and unarmed Iranians streamed in-along with gusts of tear gas that the US marines had laid down around the door.
It gradually became clear that some of the intruders were attackers and some were rescuers dispatched by Bazargan and Yazdi.
Then Yazdi arrived, apologized profusely to the Americans, and, with the help of a senior mullah, exhorted all the attackers and onlookers to leave.
He agreed to station Iranian guards both inside and outside the walls of the compound in the future.
In the next few days nearly all Sullivans diplomatic  colleagues came to offer their condolences and to marvel at the fact that no one had been killed.
Despite the assault, the US government announced that it would maintain normal diplomatic relations with the new Iranian regime.
One reason, which Secretary of State Cyrus Vance has mentioned, was the protection of American lives, and another was to prevent 'sensitive military and intelligence equipment form falling into unfriendly hands".
On 21 February Sullivan called on Prime Minister Bazargan to assure him, and through him Khomeini, that the US accepted the revolution and would not interfere in Irans internal affairs.
He even offered to continue to supply arms — thought at this time the new regime was trying to get the United States to buy back some of the more expensive equipment that the Shah had purchased.
Sullivan also persuaded Bazargan to help obtain the release of a number of Americans who had been taken hostage in the listening posts that the US had manned along the soviet border.
The men being held not by militants but by Iranian Air Force personnel who feared that they would no longer be paid.
He told Bazargan that the posts were useful for Iranian security, since they provided information on Soviet troop movements.
The prime minister agreed and the embassy air attache"and the prime ministers assistant flew up to northern Iran carrying the payroll.
Given Khoneinis constant Anti-American rhetoric, this was quite a success for the United States and it led Ambassador with the new regime.
But he and his staff now convinced of one thing- that it would be impossible if the Shah proceeded to the States.
Moreover, after the attack on the embassy, they were also persuaded that their own lives would be seriously threatened if the Shah arrived in America.
They began to cable Washington to this effect.
If the Shah went to the United States, they said, American diplomats would be coming him in pine boxes.
The Royal Farewell
With the spectacular success of Khomeinis revolution in Iran, opposition within Morocco to the Shahs stay increased.
The sudden apparition of the avenging, victorious ayatollah not only astounded the West, it also gave an immense, immediate surge of pride in their culture and in the political power of the religion to other Muslims.
Moroccans opposed to the monarch, or to Hassans tilts away from either fundamentalism or the PLO, began to protest.
In Marrakesh there were work stoppages by post office and junior government clerks, many of them members of the islamic Youth Movement, Wall posters denounced Hassan with a clever play on words: "LE CHIEN RECOIT LE CHAT" (The dog welcomes the cat-chat sounding very like Shah).
Another slogan read,"The King is the Shah's dog.
@
It was embarrassing for the King.
Morocco had recognized the new Bazargan government and Hassan had no interest in continuing to display hospitality to his fallen brother.
He was too clever not to realize that harbouring the Shah increased the danger of Muslim fundamentalism gaining round in the kingdom.
In recent years he had made a point of appeasing the fundamentalists at the same time as co-opting left-wing opposition.
He was not about to see the Shah's prolonged stay upset that.
There was also danger of assassination squads being sent to Morocco; Iranian officials had begun to stay such things as that the Shah and his family would be "hunted down like Eichmann" .
There were other stories that a group of terrorists were planning to kidnap Hassan's family and hold them hostage against the Shah's return to stand trial in Iran.
By the middle of February, when the Shah had been in Morocco more than a month, it had become common gossip in the diplomatic corps that Hassan was giving him the cold shoulder.
His officials  were talking about "the man who came to dinner" and making it clear that he would just have to go before the Islamic summit that was scheduled to meet in Morocco in April.
The Shah himself could not believe that Hassan would throw him out.
He would never himself have done such a thing to a brother king trouble.
When Muhammad Behbehanian, who was still in Morocco writing to all the Shah's bankers, told him that he had heard Hassan wanted him out as quickly as possible to understand what had happened and why.
Twice during February, the White House dispatched a CIA official to see him, This man was selected not because of his knowledge of Iran but because he exuded a certain gravidas.
Farhad Sepabhodi was told by the Americans that the official's visit to the Shah must be kept absolutely secret.
So the ambassador recorded in his log merely the man's most physical characteristic- "Moustachio" .
The Shah told "Moustachio" that he had avoided a bloodbath and he hoped that this would mean that one day the monarchy could again play a part in Iranian life.
He said he was not now in touch with the military leaders in Iran; in fact most of them were either dead, arrested or in hiding.
 "Moustacio" was shocked by the Shah's appearance and demeanour.
Vanished was the cold, proud and arrogant leader; in his place was "virtually a broken man" The Shah seemed traumatized and to have no plans.
He did not mention that he was not thinking of taking up his invitation to the United States.
The Shah's confusion was evident in an interview he gave to one of the journalists whom he had known the longest, Clare Hollingworth of the Daily Telegraph of London.
(This was a paper that had consistently supported him).
He talked to her on condition she quote only"court sources, not him directly.
*  He blamed the Communist Tudeh Party for his overthrow; the Communists were far more powerful than the Mullahs, he said.
He believed that hundreds of the "veiled women" demonstrating in the streets of Teheran in favour of an Islam Republic were actually militant Communists dressed up.
The Shah acknowledged to Hollingworth that he had perhaps become too remote from his people and that is courtiers had not always reported adverse criticisms to him, And he said that although he had earlier hoped that his stay abroad would be brief, he knew now that he would die in exile.
But he was horrified by what was happening to his country.
He thought that members of the new regime were "Marxists, terrorists, lunatics and criminals." 
He could not understand how the West could have allowed it all to take place.
A vital barrier against Russian expansionism was now lost.
It was "far worse than the giveaway at Yalta," he said.
The United States was above all to blame.
He left her with the impression that he would be proceeding to the States.
He also talked in Morocco to Barbara Walters of ABC news, Walters was among those Western journalists with whom the Shah was on good terms and who could expect exclusive interviews when they came to Teheran, as well as personal attention from the Iranian ambassador in their won countries.
The Shah had always place more importance on prominent American and European journalists than on contact with Iranian journalists.
This was a characteristic he shared with Anwar Sadat.
At the time, he was often outraged by critical press coverage in the West.
His ambassador in London, Parviz Radji, constantly curb the satirical British magazine Private Eye, which referred to the Shah as "The Shot of Persia" .
Radji of was disinclined to protest as the Shah wished.
*  The Shah told Walters that he had no intention of abdicating.
"Why should I abdicate?
I left my country to help straighten things out.
It obviously has had the opposite effect…
If only I'd had three more years.
All my programmes would have been working and people would have seen what I was trying to do."
Since he believed that he personified Iran, it was not surprising that he saw almost everything in terms of personal betrayal.
Thus, as ambassadors who had till recently expressed total loyalty to him "rallied" across the world to Khomeini, he expressed bewilderment.
"Why had this man turned on me? he would ask.
 "I was nice to him." 
One ambassador who did not turn was Farhad Sepabhodi in Morocco.
Because he was serving the Shah, he received a telegram form the Foreign Ministry in Teheran ordering him to pack his bags and come home at once.
He replied that he could not come right away, to which the foreign minister, Ibrahim Yazdi, replied,; Mr Farhad Sepabhodi, I cannot listen to our statements.If you do not come back immediately, very serious action will be taken against you."
In those days that was a substantial threat, but Sepabhodi took the risk.
(Later Princess Ashraf gave him work in New York).
There were others among the Shah's immediate entourage who had to decide what would be the best of several uncertain future for them.,
First, the back-up plane flew back to Iran.
The grand master of ceremonies, Amir Aslan Afshar, was all for the Shah's keeping or selling his personal plane.
 "It must be worth twenty million dollars," he said he told the Shah.
According to Afshar, the Shah refused.
 "Are you mad? he asked," It belongs to the air force, We have to send it back."
In the middle of February, the pilot of this plane.
Captain Moezzi, and the crew came to the palace to talk to the Shah and the Queen.
* The Shah had said,"We don't know when we will return and you need to be with your families.
We can get a  plane from our friends if necessary."
There was weeping.
The Shah had Amir Aslan Afshar find among the Iranians in Morocco some Iranian currency for those who were returning home-they went back with more than $50,000.
At Teheran airport they came down from the plane with Koreans in their hands.
Captain Moezzi declared how glad they all were to be back in Teheran and how much he had hated flying for the Shah.
Others of the Shah's courtiers fell away, not for Iran, but for the West.
Each had his or her own reason — a dying father, an urgent operation, sick children, financial problems — whatever seemed more plausible or appropriate.
Behbehanian, the money man, fled into hiding, terrified.
The new government in Iran had announced that he was the key to the millions or billions of dollars that the Shah had plundered from Iran and was therefore one of their most wanted men.
To elude Khomeinis avenging angels, Behbehanian went underground and for the next few years lived incognito at the homes of various friend, particularly in Switzerland.
He avoided travelling, and if he had to fly, he went only on charter flights, for fear that on a scheduled airline his name would show up on computers that could be tapped by Iran Air officials.
He was pursued also by an unsubstantiated rumour (put about by others in the Shah's entourage) that he had stolen millions of dollars from the Shah.
This he denied categorically.
Kambiz Atabai, the master of the horse, left but later returned to the journey.
Amir Aslan Afshar, the grand master of ceremonies, retired to Europe.
Ardeshir Zahedi also went, but only temporarily, to Switzerland.
Zahedi was almost the only former senior official who stayed closely in touch with the Shah throughout his exile.
Within a few weeks after his arrival in Morocco, only a handful of servants, bodyguards and Dr Prima, the paediatrician, remained with the Shah and the Queen.
It has to be said that the Shah was not totally displeased by this exodus.
For, like many rich men, he was worried about money.
He had never before had any control over his own finances and he was finding many demands on his purse upsetting and worrying.
We are in exile now and we have no money,"he would tell people who came to Morocco and asked to be paid for past services to the crown, It was not quite true, but certainly no longer disposed of the sort of funds as he had done when he was in power.
On 22 February the Shah sent a message to the American ambassador in Morocco, Richard Parker, saying that he would now like  to proceeded to the state.
He had finally realized that there was now absolutely no chance of returning home.
This news caused a flurry of concern in Washington.
It was only a week since the attack on the embassy, and there were still thousands of Americans in Iran.
They were in obvious danger from the revolutionary "khomieths" that had sprung up throughout the country to enforce radical change.
On 23 February a committee of the National Security Council, chaired by Zbigniew Brzezinski, met at the White House and decided that the Shah should be told that while the invitation remained open, the delicate situation in Iran meant that it would be very awkward for the United States if he arrived right now.
Among senior American officials, Zbigniew Brzezinksi was least happy with this decision.
Indeed, in the account of his aide, Captain Gary Sick, he found it "repugnant" .
He accepted that some delay in the Shah's arrival might now be needed, but he felt that the United States owed him refuge.
On 26 February Ardeshir Zahedi called Brzezinski from his home in Switzerland.
Zahedi asked whether the Shah could come to the States in the next few days.
Brzezinski said the invitation remained open but it was difficult at the moment; someone would go and explain things to the Shah very soon.
Next day Brzezinski suggested to Carter that the decision to keep the Shah to be reconsidered.
Carter angrily said no; he did not want the Shah playing tennis in the States while Americans in Iran were kidnapped or killed.
Jimmy carters relationship with and feelings towards the Shah were, it must be said ambiguous.
The Shah had always preferred Republicans to Democrats and he had felt that Carters human rights programme was in some senses directed against him.
He was in part correct., But on the two occasions they had met, the president had given the Shah reason to believe he valued him, Those meetings are cameos of the perplexities of international relations, and they help explain the Shahs won confusion.
The Shah had visited Washington in November 1977, towards the end of Carters election, and the new administration had impressed upon him that although the United States still regarded him as an important ally, the days of unrestricted arms sales, while arrest and torture by SAVAK were ignored by the US, were over, In fact, the Shah had already moderated SAVAK, released some political prisoners and allowed a little more criticism of his government to be expressed, even before Carter's inauguration.
Nonetheless, when he arrived in Washington, the Shah learned that hundreds of Iranian students had gathered to demonstrate against him.
Many of them were masked to prevent identification by SAVAK.
There were pro-shah demonstrators out on the streets as well, as may of whom had been produced by the Iranian embassy.
As the Shah arrived at the White House to be officially welcomed by President Carter, the two groups shouted abuse at each other just beyond police railings.
Then they started beating each other with clubs and sticks.
The Washington police fired tear gas at them and the gas was blown at once across the White House garden.
There stood the King of Kings and the president, choking and weeping as they tried to praise each other, their wives by their sides.
Inside the White House, the Shah behave impeccably.
He made no mention of the demonstrations and the tear gas, although many Iranians, including some of his own supporters, would be convinced that he episode had been planed by the US government as a deliberate insult to him.
Instead, he gave Carter and his advisers a long talk on how he saw the international situation.
He spoke without notes, and his ability to relate economic changes on one part of the world to political rivalries in another left Carter and his staff greatly impressed.
Here was a leader of both stature and vision who understood the power politics of the contemporary world and who eschewed the vague rhetorical generalizations favoured by many Third World leaders.
That evening Carter gave a warm toast to the Shah in which he spoke of the great importance of Iran's relationship to the United States.
As the Shah listened, his eyes glistened with tears.
The next day at lunch he referred to the previous day as bringing "tears in the morning and tears at night." 
As Gary Carter gave a warm toast to the Shah personality emerged that night.
The Carters had laid on a jazz evening, featuring Sarah Vaughan and Dizzy Gillespie.
At the end of the performance, Jimmy and Rosalynn Carter leaped on to the stage to congratulate them.
The Shah remained stiffly seated.
His wife whispered to him to go on stage.
He did not.
Eventually she literally dragged him up to shake hands.
He was visibly uncomfortable.
Carter and the Shah met again for the second and final time only a few weeks later, It was New Years Eve in Teheran, Carter was on a hectic world swing and Teheran was a convenient resting place between Warsaw and New Delhi.
The Shah suggested, and the White House agreed, that the visit would provide a good chance for Carter to talk to King Hussein, whom both men wanted to encourage into the Israeli-Egyptian peace process.
But the King could not be asked to the dinner because protocol would demand that he be seated above Carter.
He was invited to come to Teheran to talk to Carter after dinner.
The dinner was a typically lush, typically Pahlavi affair After the Carters, the most important guests were Pahlavi relations — half brothers, sisters, cousins.
Cyrus Vance, the US secretary of state, the Iranian foreign minister, and other senior officials were well below the salt.
This caused some comment among the Americans.
The meal was of course splendid.
Don Perignon, caviar, kebabs, a pilau of diced partridge, fruit salad, fabulous wines and, the piece de resistance, flaming ice cream in honour of which the lights were lowered.
The Shah made a gracious speech, but the high point of the evening was Carters toast.
The President with eloquence evoked, his concern for human rights in Iran by quoting form Saudi, one of Irans best-loved poets;
This reference was encouraging to many of the Shah's Iranian opponents who interpreted it as the presidents support for their struggle against the Shah.
But Carter went out of his way to underwrite the Shah himself as well.
He declared that he had asked Rosalyn with whom she would like to spend New Years Eve, "And she said," Above all others, I think, with the Shah and Empress Farah."
So we arranged the trip accordingly and came to be with you.
"He talked of a picture book on Iran that the Empress had given him, Bridge of Turquoise.
This was one of the dozens of expensive Pahlavi public-relations productions commissioned by propaganda, and some, like this one — beautiful but marked above all by a pseudomysticism.
These tended to suggest that Iran was a magical, fairy-tale and where only justice prevailed and where progress was assured by an omniscient king.
 "One night," said Carter, "I started to thumb through its pages and I called my wife, Rosalyn, and I called my daughter, Amy, who climbed into my lap, and we spent several hours studying the beautiful history that this book portrays of Persian, of Iran, of its people…" 
Then Carter went on to add phrase that was to haunt him as, only a few weeks later riots and disaffection began to unfold across the country and within twelve months led to the fall of the Shah.
 "Iran," he declared, because of the great leadership of the Shah, is an island of stability in one of the more troubled areas of your world.
This is a great tribute to you, Your Majesty, and to your leadership and to the respect and the admiration and the love which your people give to you…
There is no leader with whom I have a deeper sense of personal friendship and gratitude. *
Some American officials at the banquet were dumbfounded by this testament.
Princess Ashraf later wrote that as Carter spoke,"I looked at his pale face.
I thought his smile was artificial, his eyes icy — and I hoped I could trust him."
(Over the course of the next year she decided she could not).
The Shah was naturally delighted, and led the dinners in clapping enthusiastically and smiling brilliantly at Jimmy Carter.
Never before had any American president, not even his greatest friend and admirer Richard Nixon, paid tribute to him in terms quite as fulsome as that.
After dinner, the Shah and Carter retired to a study to talk about the Middle east with King Hussein, whom Crown Prince Reza and Ardeshir Zahedi had just welcomed at the door.
Then the Shah persuaded the Carters to see in the New Year at the palace and the Queen sent the Crown Prince into the Library to organize a smaller party.
Once more the liveried waiters appeared with the Don Perignon, while the teenage Crown Prince acted as disc jockey on the balcony.
The Shah asked Mrs Carter and King Hussein, each of them only about five feet high, shuffled around like two little mechanical dolls, staring distractedly over each others tiny shoulders.
Lesser mortals stepped out as best they could.
At times the Crown Prince swapped the staid dance music for rather, more lively rock and roll.
The Shah would gesticulate to him to stop it, but finally the Prince and his younger sister were allowed to perform a spirited disco dance while everyone below watched and the applauded.
Next morning Carter flew off to India, leaving behind an elated Shah.
A group of American businessman and their families had been invited to the airport for the president to pump their hands.
After air Force one left, Ambassador Sullivan asked the Shah if he would like to meet them too.
Nervous at first, by the time the Shah reached the end of the line, he was obviously enjoying himself.
He turned to Sullivan with a glow on his face and a slight mist in his eyes and said.
 "You Americans are really very nice people." 
Emboldened by Carters support, the Shah ordered the publications of the scurrilous attack on Khomeini which precipitated the first of the riots against him and, within a year, had led to his fall, by early 1979, after what he saw as US failure to support him, and as he now looked for a refuge form Morocco he was less certain.
By the end of the first week in March 1979, King Hassan was even more anxious for the Shah to move on.
But views in Washington were hardening.
On 6 March David Aaron of the Nsc warned President Carter that American hostages might be captured in Iran if the Shah was allowed into the states.
Carter authorized the State Department to try to find another asylum.
Ardeshir Zahedi was searching also.
Among the possible destinations there was Switzerland, where the Shah had spent a lot of time (and a lot of money) on his ski holidays.
He had his famous chalet, the Villa Suvretta at St Moritz, where during the oil crisis of 1973–74 treasury ministers from around the world had come to kiss his hand and pay homage and he had a house on Lake Geneva.
But the Swiss, like all other mercantile nations, were now frightened of their relationship with such a vital Middle East country as Iran.
They were not out to destroy their commercial prospects in that huge market, still less to jeopardize their oil supplies, for a misplaced sense of loyalty to a fallen friend.
When Ardeshir Zahedi inquired, it was made clear to him, indirectly, that it might be wiser to postpone a formal request.
The security problems would be immense, murmured Swiss officials with apologetic sighs.
There was Britain — the country with which Iran had the longest association and with which many Iranians had an almost neurotic relationship.
Mr Behbehanian, his banker, who believed that the British controlled every event in Iran, was still pressing  him to repair there and to apologize to the British for insulting them in recent years.
The Shah was not very keen, even though he had a house in southern England.
Nor was the British Labour came to Morocco that Mrs Margaret Thatcher, the leader of the Conservative Party, had promised informally that is she won the general election, which was expected soon in Britain, she would welcome Britain's old ally and friend.
But that was in the future.
For now, France might be a possibility.
He did not have a house there, but Princess Ashraf did an so did many other members of the family.
Emotional, cultural ties between Iran and France have always been strong.
Many Iranians have seen France as neutral and with fewer designs upon them than Britain.
And France owed the Shah a good deal.
Years before, when Valery Giscard d'Estaing was minister if finance, he had been among those to call on the Shah at the Villa Suvretta in St Moritz.
It appeared that the he was anxious to make amends for President Pompidou's lese-mjaests"in refusing to attend the Persepolis party, and also to request special help for France.
 "He stood there meekly smiling, with his hands clasped across his balls," said Ardeshir Zahedi later, "ingratiating himself." 
There were stories that the Shah had kept Giscard waiting in an ante-room while he finished a game of cards with his cronies, but Zahedi said later, "The Shah was always too polite to do that." 
In following years France had indeed benefited from the financial bonanza unleashed in Iran by the oil price rise.
But by the end of 1978 the French had decided that the sooner the Shah left Iran the better.
In the first week of January 1979, President Giscard d'Estaing expounded his view when he met for a summit conference with Jimmy Carter, Hemut Schmidt, the West German chancellor, and James Callaghan, the British prime minister, on the French West Indian island of Guadeloupe.
*
By the time they had reached Morocco, the Shah and the Queen both believed that Giscard had betrayed them personally at Guadeloupe.
It was something they talked about frequently.
Once Giscard called the Shah in Morocco.
the Shah was in the garden.
Amir Aslan Afshar asked the French president to call back.
At lunch the Shah said,"I have nothing to say to him.
We were so nice to France and we did so much for them.
Now they have changed their minds.
What can I say?
Afshar suggested, "Your Majesty, time will tell, but you could say to him" If you try to sit on two stills, you will fall between. "" 
By now early March 1979, the French where concerned that the Shahs prolonged stay in Morocco was endangering their ally, King Hassan.
The head of the French secret service, the Comte de Marenches, who had visited the Shah just before he left Teheran, flew from Paris to express his won concerns to both kings.
According to Marenches, he and the Shah had long had an excellent relationship.
 "He asked me to met him several times a year, I tried to advise him, to tell him how I saw things in the world." 
More than, Marenches said later that the Shah had told him,"I count on you always to tell me the disagreeable things that other people won't say.
As far as Marenches was concerned, the most important thing for a Western intelligence agency was to stop the spread of Communism.
In his Paris office he had maps showing Communist encroachment in red.
He handed them out.
He considered the Shah an autocrat, not a dictator; a dictator would have crushed the clerical unrest as soon as it began to appear, and the Shah had not.
He suppressed political perhaps, but Marenches argued that by the standards of the Orient, SAVAK was not that brutal.
Marenches had strong views on the reasons for the Shah's fall.
He blamed President Carter.
Later Marenches said that he had told the Shah to beware of the mullahs and the merchants in the bazaar, but above all to beware  of Jimmy Carter, "I told him that this national and international disaster, President Carter, had decided to replace him." 
Marenches thought that Carter knew absolutely nothing about the Middle East.
 "In the narrow mind of this Boy Scout person, with his doll's face (popin), who only just knew where I ran was, the Shah was a dictator who put people in prison and so had to be replaced as soon as possible with a democracy like the USA" .
Now, in Morocco in March 1979, Marenches first saw Hassan, whom he had known since the king was a twenty five year old prince.
He would later describe the king as "one of the most brilliant statesman I have ever been privileged to meet, with a fantastic memory and a third eye which gives him great sensitivity and extraordinary perception." 
Marenches considered it most unfortunate that Morocco did not have oil, for Hassan was "one of the rare statesmen of our time." 
Now Marenches informed the king that the continued presence of the Shah would cause him grave problems.
Marenches claimed later that the king replied that the Shah was his guest and that was that, Then, Marenches, says, he had to convince the king that his other duties, including the straits of Gibraltar, which was 'so vital for the camp of liberty", must take precedence over hospitality.
When he realized that Hassan himself would not tell the Shah to go, Marenches offered to do it himself.
The king agreed.
(Other accounts suggest that Marenches probably had much less difficulty in obtaining the monarchs agreement than he maintains.)
When the Shah and Empress received Marenches, he told them that the ayatollah had sent kidnappers to seize Hassans family and bargain them for the Shah.
The danger was terrifying, he said.
When the Shah realized that his hosts family was at such risk, said Marenches, he agreed to leave within three weeks.
For all his admiration of the Shah and his disdain for President Carter, Marenches did not suggest France as a possible destination.
Nor did President Giscard d'Estaing offer it.
By now there was almost on one in the US government, save Brezinski, who wanted the Shah in the states.
Previously Cyrus Vance had been in favour of his admission; indeed in January he had asked Henry Kissinger to help find the King a home.
Now the State Department argued that north Americans interest in a good relation with Iran and the safety of Americans there demanded his exclusion.
In the middle of March, Vance made what he later called "one of the most distasteful recommendations I ever had to make to the  president." 
It was that the Shah should be told formally that it was no longer appropriate for him to come to the USA.
President Carter thought the same.
In this memoirs he said that on 15 March he learned that Hassan was pressing Washington to admit the Shah.
But because of the growth of Anti-Americanism in Iran, "I decided that it would be better for the Shah to live elsewhere." 
And so, wrote Jimmy Carter, rather casually, "I asked Cy to scout around to help him find a place to stay." 
In fact, by this stage, the state Department knew that there was almost no country prepared to accept the Shah.
An immediate and embarrassing problem:Who should tell the Shah?
Cyrus Vance turned to two of the Shahs American associates, David Rockefeller, the chairman of Chase Manhattan, and again to Henry Kissinger.
(David Rockefellers older brother Nelson, who had recently died, had been almost a friend of the Shah) Would either of them fly to Morocco and tell the Shah that the US government preferred that he did not come to America right now?
Neither accepted this chalice.
Indeed, each man refused it with some indignation; Kissinger in particular thought it outrageous that such an old friend and ally as the Shah should not be allowed into the States.
In the end, several people, apart form Alexandre de Marenches, told the Shah to leave.
 "Moustachio," the US intelligence agent who had already visited him in February, returned.He met the Shah in the palace in Rabat and told him of all the dangers that the US systems would pose for him-lawsuits to find his money, congressional subpoenas and demonstrations.
The Shah took the news with his usual appearance of calm.
To make sure that the Shah understood, Cyrus Vance sent Ambassador Richard Parker to see him as well.
Parker was a career State Department official, tall, balding, with a cautious, academic mien.
He believed the Shah should be allowed into the US.
He did not enjoy this mission.
He was received by the Shah in Library of the Dar Salaam Palace.
The Shah was wearing a sport"jacket and looked well.
He motioned Parker to sit down.
The ambassador began by saying,"Your Majesty, you are always welcome in the United States, but it would be very inconvenient right now.
There could be legal problems for you, and problems of security."
The Shah, said Parker later, took the news"like a man.
He was very dignified.
He did not complain about a friendship betrayed.
He simply nodded his head and made some neutral comment.
Parker went to say, "I am authorized to tell Your Majesty that both Paraguay and South Africa will be glad to receive you." 
These were the only two countries in the world that, at this stage, the State Department had found prepared to take the Shah.
The Shah replied that he had sad associations with South Africa, because his father had died there.
And he did not wish to go to Paraguay.
 "I would prefer to of to Mexico," he said.
That would be close to his mother, who was living in the Beverly Hills house of his sister Princes Shams and who was very ill.
Perhaps she could visit him in Mexico.
Parker told him that the State Department had asked Mexico, but there had been no reply as yet.
There was nothing more to say on that and so that the Shah started talking quietly about Iran.
He did not know how "these people" thought they were going to run the country.
They could not control the Army, let alone the various tribes.
No one understood the Army as he did.
Iran would now fall apart.
When Parker took his leave, he was, he said, later, ashamed.
His country, he thought, was treating the Shah abysmally.
Another emissary was an American lobbyist retained by King Hassan.
This was Don Agger, a cheerful, puckish man with a narrow beard, a former assistant secretary of transportation under Lyndo Johnson.
Since 1977 Agger and his associate, former New York Senator Charles Goodell, had represented Morocco in Washington.
Early in March 1979 they were summoned to Rabat.
"We saw the king at once, 'said Agger later.
It was clear he had a problem.
The Shah was the man who came to dinner…
There was an Arab summit coming up.
How could he tell his Muslim brother to fiche le camp?
He couldn't.
He just had to get the Shah's butt outta there."
Agger realized that the Carter administration would not now accept the Shah.
 "We didn't have the balls." 
He and Goodell met several times with the Shah to discuss other possible destinations.
Agger was struck by the Pahlavi dogs, particularly the Great Dane, Beno, a vast animal that had a habit of nuzzling peoples laps.
There go the family jewels, thought Agger to himself more than once.
The worst meeting they had with the Shah was the last.
There was no country in sight, at least none that he liked the sound of.
Nowhere in Europe would take him.
Nor would King Hussein of Jordan, a man whom the Shah had constantly supported.
King Kahlid of Saudi Arabia had also said no.
Yet Hassan was at the very end of his patience.
He told Agger that he must inform the  Shah that the visit was over, that the King's plane was at his disposal, and that he must use it — very soon.
So, on Saturday, 24 March, Don Ager and Charlie Goodell went back to the palace library to offer the Shah Hassans own plane.
Former Senator Goodell tried to cheer up the Shah.
He said that he too had lost an election; he had felt very bad when the people of new York rejected him, and he could empathize with what the Shah now felt.
The Shah nodded.
Agger thought these kind remarks helpful, but he knew also that they could hardly sweeten.
"Your Majesty, the aircraft has been arranged for Friday.
So please tell us where you want to go.
We are at your disposal."
 "I'm sure if I ask Muslim brother for another ten days it will be all right," the Shah replied stiffly.
 "Your Majesty" replied Agger quietly and formally.
 "I'm only authorized to say that the aircraft has been prepared for friday." 
The Shah stood up and left the room without a word.
Early in the morning of 30 March, the Shah and the Queen and their entourage drove to Rabat airport to board Hassans own 747, which had been loaded with their baggage — 368 pieces in all.
Until a few hours before, they had no idea where they would be going.
South Africa seemed the most likely place; Hassan had dismissed the Shah's opposition.
If that was the only place that would take him, that was where he would go, said the King.
The State Department had still failed to find anywhere else.
But by now Princess Ashraf has asked David Rockefeller to take a much closer interest in the Shah's predicament and he was discussing it constantly with Henry Kissinger.
Literally hours before the Shah was about to be bundled off to South Africa, the Rockefeller-Kissinger connection had finally found him at least a temporary haven — the Bahamas.
It was not entirely satisfactory; the arrangements were complicated.
 "Even at one or two a.m. the night before, we were not sure we could go there," said the Queen later.
But at the last moment, the Bahamian government agreed (there were rumours that a good deal of money changed hands), and a new flight plan was drawn up for Hassan's 747.
The plane crossed the wine-dark ocean with very few passengers aboard.
Apart from the Shah and the Queen, there were Colonel Jahanbini, the Shah's principal bodyguard; a few other guards; his valet, Pourshoja; the faithful Dr Lucy Pirnia, the family doctor; and the dogs.
Expelled by a cunning King, they flew again towards the west on the next leg of their ride through a world that all the time was changing and shifting against them.
 "When you think of the relations we had with the most countries," said the Queen later,"and suddenly they don't care to talk to you, or write to you, ask you to come and stay in their country…
That was very said.
It's a sad human experience to go through."