

What's that?
That's all right it's what 
Bit scary isn't it?
Okay so has anybody had a chance to look at some of the things er
Okay so if you want to talk about  what you've got.
Was it you two who were gonna go Scott and Rebecca who were gonna do the talk.
Hang on you can 
 
You can
I can get  
chip in 
Chip in.


You  all the responses and things like that.
Say  I agree with that.
And I'll keep quiet and  all to myself.
Okay  go for it.
Are we still doing anything about  I've got to  I've got some inf information about .
Yeah.
First.
 
I've got this  Yeah yeah look  
 
Ah no we haven't discussed it yet.
Oh superb.
We'll discuss that after you've took a look at  
When's your interview?
Next week?
Er It's it's supposed to be due in Friday week three


But  I think sometime during week four.
Oh that's good, thank you.
Yeah.
Right so the thing is if we talk about what you've read and then  The idea is that if there's anything out of you've read that's given you an idea for an essay then you can do that.
thank you 
And if not we can think of something more specific afterwards.
But we'll go through what you've read first and then try to work something.
a definition sort of  
 
Says it  ready to make stereotype judgements about personality, E G you can tell he's anxious by his voice is in inverted commas or she sounds very strong minded.
And this type of stereotypical link has led to various experiments.
At the first experiment of er I think of this kind it was er  in nineteen sixty.
Who had done it already despite the English, French Canadians and how they felt about each other.
And er they felt had little prestige and that the French peop The French Canadian speakers had little prestige in their own language.
But er e English er guises were favoured more than the French ones even by the French themselves.
And er o despite that sort of  just said something about the 
 
procedure but we'd already done that.
So  
 
there wasn't really There wasn't really a great deal of er sort of stuff here but it was more about sort of language  and shifts so I had to like  shift through it and find the bits 
Right.
that were more er.
Well these sort of languages often considered to be the central pillar to group attachment and er official agencies like government an and things like historically support group language purity.
And er a although we usually associate language identity with minority groups, linked with minority groups er it's quite important that we don't erm dismiss the prominence it has in majority groups as well.
And it quotes  Quote from  nineteen eighty four.
Who says that the best predictor of future social behaviour is  is past social behaviour all things being equal and er as any assessment of linguistic of a linguistic scene will profit  from an historical awareness.
Anyway er.
Oh yeah, that's right.
It says he believed that the historical awareness will help any linguistic scene to profit.
An analysis of what people have done is likely to be useful not only in ascertaining what they're likely to do but also what their linguistic needs are.
he's just saying that  in a group if we look at the historical background of the language, it helps to see you know how What the strong points are of the linguistic and what we need  to be bolstered on.
Er if we're to understand the dynamics of language in our density and how it exists in the minds of ordinary speakers we must consider the real life record.
So he looks at Island and America.
He looks at Island er and the Irish language and in America he looks at immigrant e adaptation and the value of the historical record in each.
Erm he also states that the erosion of language does not mean the erosion of an identity.
And essentially identity revolves around the idea of political boundaries and groups.
And language and identity is not indis er indissoluble link.
So if you know language and identity need not be together cos identity is er essentially political as opposed to linguistic.
But is common that they both are together in that way.
Er Right he says on the subject of attachment of identity and language and why and why not language is maintained, he cites Harris and  and the Yiddish and  Na-dene speakers.
Vis-a-vis Hebrew.
Yiddish yiddish served as a lingua franca for   Jews.
And Na-dene did for the  Jews.
When the sates of Hebrew heightened thus becoming the language of Israel, Yiddish and Na-dene became somewhat redundant  and er in his survey of America 
 

In his study of Amer In his study of m the U S he found that seventy five percent of the s people who spoke Na-dene, couldn't give a reason er a proper reason for passing their language on to the er children.
Because i i they though it was in competition with other varieties around and it something t It wasn't necessarily to do with the fact that erm they though it was less it held less prestige in the  community.
It was just that erm the other varieties around were competing too heavily against it so they thought what's the point of passing it on to the children.
And er  let's think  That's it on that.
I think.
Cos there wasn't really much
Okay.
on it.
 
I did the Maastricht one well as which is  a bit more to do.
The Maastricht you know
Yeah tell us a bit about it cos  
Okay  this was a bit better this.
Right the situation in Maastricht up till the nineteenth century was that It was described as a di- or tri-glossic erm linguistic community.
With French and standard Dutch as competing high varieties and the dialect of Maastricht as a common variety.
Which is like the third of the tri-glossic 
What was it German and French?
No French and standard Dutch.
And Maastricht was the common variety.
And er the dialect today whenever this experiments was   which year it was but it said today.
The dialect is still very unlike Dutch itself  on levels of phonology, morphology and lexis itself.
You know it doesn't It doesn't like look too much like  the standard Dutch.
And and a funny thing is, it's not limited to social class  within Holland itself.
I it seems to be functional, so you know you get like lawyers and farmers and all sorts of people using it.
So it's a the tests it was a match-guising experiment and the tests er tested sixty four people  who were aged the ages were fifty five plus, thirty to forty five and fifteen to twenty.
They were sort of equally distributed in those ages.
And er process was er match-guising so it was You know they were list They listened to three different people  well th th they thought it was three people it was one person doing three ac the three accents  er dialects sorry.
And er it was the process was analyzed on a list of personal tracks.
And er  Oh there was one other thing .
The match-guising results were interesting because instead of the typical prestige of the standard language, and the attractiveness of a dia You know a If you did R P and say er Cockney, you'd probably get people saying that their R P was prestigious but the cockney was sort of more you know y more friendly and more attractive accent.
Er it was found that the status items were about the same for both.
So there wasn't a great difference bet The status items of things like honesty and er leadership and stuff like that.
The items weren't greatly different on scores between they had a little graph .
But st standard Dutch won on leadership but the other status items shows sort of scores that were very close to each other and they're not significantly different.
That was it .
Okay that's .
Okay what have you
Got a bit from  Erm the match-guise erm  it helps to show the stage in attitudes.
How they were  towards peoples of other languages or language varieties.
Erm you know it just says about how they carry it out about subjects assumes that er the samples.
And and judgements are made on intelligence, personality and suitability and particular occupations and although they're only limited speech samples erm many subjects  judge them.
Erm
Sorry what were the erm things that related to personality?
Intelligence and suitability and particular occupations.
And then it was saying about quantitative and qualitative measures.
Quantitative measures may allow a discovery of pattern in the situations which might otherwise merely be seen as random variation.
Not really talking about the issues, just
Yeah I mean if you're looking at quantitative things it's really you know how much actual How much variation happens whereas qualitative is  you know what the actual variations
entails
entails.
you know what the actual quality of the variations are.
Okay.
Erm.
Judging occupational suitability presumes a hierarchy and what this is must be determined erm differently for every culture being investigated.
And second one is a book by
 Beardsmoor and he  sheep says about  the Canadian soc social  psychologist 
 
W E Lambert who was the one that  match-guise technique erm and basically he's just kind of saying about the technique that it shows corre correlations between the degree of bilingual ability and attitudinal dispositions.
Erm  and it's sort of erm features that are expressed er like  intelligent and then  intelligent er  it reveals to what extent subjects perceive speakers in a particular language as having desirable or undesirable traits  with which they may or may not wish to identify.
Erm and this technique can trigger comunic communally shared stereotyped images of a linguistic community and reveal the degree of tolerance  erm for the different erm languages.
And then the other one is the one that I got from the library by Luhmann.
Erm that's a b bit too But it's it's about  Appalachian English?
Appalachian.
Okay.
 
Appalachian then.
Erm
Who's this book by?
Luhmann L U H M A double N.
Appalachian English is one of the surviving non-standard regional dialects of English in the United States and it's associated with the residents of the Appalachian mountain range.
Erm it's a community isolation because is like mountains around which makes barriers against physical mobility that can't really be moved round that easily.
Erm so they just kind of stay put and so the dialects thrive because it's just such a physical It's in physical and social isolation.
Erm and then it's talking about standard variety that it's usually the standard variety that's accepted as the proper one when compared to other like smaller varieties erm dialects and stuff.
The low status dialects are associated with neg negative prestige.
Erm  Appalachian English differs from standard American English in grammar, phonology, lexicon and intonation.
Erm and then just generally language is far more than just a means of communication.
It symbolizes our social experience and locates us with social groups from which we draw our identities.
Erm and none standard language varieties are associated with those social status groups erm they acquire status evaluation, their speakers.
Erm the speakers on the samples are either bilingual or bi-dialectal and  erm  the dialects listed are in between standard American English and the eastern Kentucky sub-dialect of Appalachian English.


There's four bi-dialectal speakers two males and two females, erm who are also actors and native speakers natives of Kentucky erm  And then it g And then it goes into the the different  factors of Appalachian English.
but we don't really need to go into that do we?
No .
Erm  Oh and here's a quote.
In almost any country standards speakers and non-standard speakers view the former as more successful, intelligent, ambitious, wealthy and educated.
The status of items that were looked at er educated and uneducated, intelligent unintelligent, wealthy poor, successful unsuccessful, and ambitious and carefree.
And solidarity items were trustworthy untrustworthy, good bad, sympathetic unsympathetic, friendly unfriendly, honest dis dishonest and dependable and unreliable.
Erm they were eight speech samples


without taking a breath.


Erm and they were also asked where the where they though the speaker was from.
So the results that were got, is that the Kentucky accented speech was high in solidarity and low in status.
And the standard English was high status and low solidarity.
So the stereotype of Appalachian English speakers is that they're not very intelligent, they've got a lack of ambition and success and a poor education.
Erm and the two the two females in the solidarity evaluations they it was constant the d There wasn't any change erm across the two guises but with the males there was a significantly higher score in solidarity  when they were in the Kentucky accented guises.
Erm so the er Kentucky people were  erm not am ambitious and not educated  wasn't it?
Low intelligence, lack of ambition and success, and poor education.
That's about it.
Oh the stereotypes serve to strengthen ethnic identification and group boundaries.
In such social social settings linguistic differences become important boundary markers that require careful cultivation.
Good.
You said that some of their actual differences in speech ?
Yeah.
Erm  it's talking about glide reduction.
What does it say?
What what reduction?
Glide.
Glide?
Yeah.
Is it an eliminator?
Yeah elimination of the off glide on a word such as my which becomes ma.
Okay so 
The sound at the end of my er it would seem to have like a glide 
What's the difference between a glide and a diphthong ?
Er  I not really sure it depends on what you mean in that particular context.
I mean in som In some ways in the word my it might have part of that symbol you write with a J in it.
You know might be part of a actually a continuant rather than a vowel.
And it could be the fact that maybe that's getting reduced.
And as I say they would .
Erm
They just That was the only example they gave and said that as the word  
Well it  well it could b 
Right I mean it could be that that the th the glide from first vowel in the diphthong to the second one and that that's gone off so you're left wi with a  
No yeah  
I guess it's probably just that he glide up to the second part of the diphthong,has been displaced so you've just got the first part of it left ,
Mm.
so it's a single vowel.
Then another thing was Unstressed ing.
That erm instead of saying ng they pronounced it as just N.
In words such as building graduating and nothing it would just be an N on the end like  buildin  graduatin .
Erm  They dropped the final consonant in a co If there was like a consonant cluster at the end of the wor word.
So instead of saying kept they'd just say  kep .
Erm     of a unstressed syllable erm like X in except, so they'd just say except.
Erm and of initial like instead of saying them they'd say just say em.


Erm  Oh yeah substitution of A for What's that with an A and a U ?
Er ow?
Ow.
Which makes Yeah which makes for  of Our and Are.
Substitution of  I for  E so instead of forget you know  I for  E So instead of saying forget you'd say  forgit .
And


rising pitch in declarative sentences.
That's all.
Right, okay.
Have you got anything  
Yeah  
go back to Alcuin bar 
Do do you still do this  title an all?
Erm I think so.
What are we going to do?
What's the 
Right.
subtitle gonna be?
Well there's three, there's three different ways of going about it I guess you could do.


A whirlwind just come through the


Oh god!
When you left the door open the wind just blew 
Said it in  
it in.
Right.
Erm  
three ways to do an insect.
We should return to that book  
Oh right.
Sorry?
Na don't worry.
I did the one from the book list that was erm Giles and Howard.
Aha
No I didn't.
I did Which one did I do Yes I did.
You did.
Giles.
Well  Erm he's talking erm language convergence like erm shifting your sides  match.
as people are like.
Erm convergence erm they describe as  Individuals shift their speech styles to become more alike that of those with whom they are interacting.
And the adaptations they make are made on several different levels erm they might become more alike in their language, in their pronunciation, their rate of speech, their pause or  utterance length and their vocal intensities .?
Mm.
Nothing.
And erm also in what they're saying the intimacy of their self-dissuasions.
What they actually say themselves I suppose.
Erm and it's talking about this er accommodation theory Giles' accommodation theory which has one main assumption erm that all the things I've just mentioned about pronunciation and speech rates and things, erm they all occur in in order to encourage more interaction between the two speakers.
Erm so in assuming that that in these sort of situations, the speaker and the listener erm quote  Share a set of interpreted procedures which allow speakers intention to be encoded by the speaker and correctly interpreted by the listener .
Erm then it talks about similarity attraction processes erm and there's theory Similarity attraction process theory proposes that quote,The more similar our attitudes and beliefs are  with others the more likely it is we'll be attracted to them .
Erm and speech convergence is one of the many methods of becoming more similar to another person, so that you erm get rid of your linguistic differences.
Erm
So was that the convergence theory ?
That was Convergence was when you shift your speech style to become more like somebody else.
And erm similarity attraction
Oh
theory
sorry.
is that more similar your attitudes and beliefs are to somebody, the more likely it is that you'll  mutual attraction.
And so we can show that by speech convergence.
Erm convergence reflects a speakers desire for erm to get the listeners social approval.
Erm because once you've got their approval that increase the attraction and the intelligibility of what you're saying and predictability but I don't know quite what they mean by that.
Erm in general people desire approval more often than they don't, so the general tendency in conversations is for people to converge to each other in many situations.
Erm Are you keeping up?


Just about, yeah.


Erm many factors effect what type and extent of convergence happens erm and these can include the range of the speakers repertoire, the probability that there will be future interactions with the same listener,erm the status relationship between the two  participants and whether there's any recollections of previous shifts made by the listener in the same conversation.
Erm  and then it says that somebody called Natalie  erm wrote in nineteen seventy five, that the greater somebody's need for approval, the greater their tendency will be to converge with a style.
Erm and the way this is most often shown like the the th type of convergency they do is that they erm  change their vocal intensity to match that of the other person and their pause length is made the same.
Erm  then it goes on about quite a bit of this Erm perception and decoding of the speech style er talking about er  Martin and Giles.
Subject presumes perceived er speaker as pr prestigious and authoritative and they perceived that there might be future interaction with him perceived his speech is more similar to their own than subjects who were told nothing about the speaker.
Erm and the difference in appraisal between the groups of people that knew about the speaker before and those that didn't know anything, they say it is important to the similarity attraction .
Erm social exchange processes this talks about the rewards and costs of convergence up against each other.
Erm the similarity attraction model tends only to emph to emphasize the rewards of convergent .
Erm I E an increase in attraction or approval  the other person.
But there are costs involved as well and these include the increased effort you have to make in conversation erm and loss of perceived integrity and personal group identity  sacrificing yourself to match up to them.
Erm  Yeah, and they say that er before we actually erm  do a  speech convergence for want of a better phrase , erm that we kind of weigh up in our heads, quickly, the rewards and cost of you know alternative courses of action.
And so from a choice of between X and Y we're going to choose the opt option that we think maximizes the chances of a positive outcome, I E approval.
Erm so convergent speech acts should therefore incur more potential rewards for the speaker than costs.
Erm the rewards they're talking about depend on which hat level your convergence occurs at.
Erm and they give the example of erm a job interview Accent in a job interview.
Where it's two males, male applicant and a male interviewer, and the prospective employee has a less prestigious accent than the interviewer, so it's quite likely that the prospective employee would shift his accent towards a more that of the employer, due to his relative need of approval so much more than  vice versa.
And the rewards then would be that erm from the interviewers point of view he be you know viewed as more intelligent, self-confident, industrious all this sort of thing, make him say determined, erm more understandable to the interviewer obviously, and also the there He's more likely to be well liked by the interviewer, and that's Because of that not only his voice but the content of what he's actually saying is gonna be more favourably looked upon.
Erm  then it talks about the opposite.
Oh sorry that Before that er erm shows about how this erm convergence from dialectal to sort of pr prestigious or R P accent is known as a upward convergent.
And then it talks about the opposite accent  and it gives the example of There'll be an industrial dispute in a small family business erm and there is possibly a greater need by the employer to win the workers' approval.
Erm within the limits of his repertoire he'll shift his accent down towards that that of the workers erm shows them  cooperation and that's known as a downward convergence.
Erm downward convergence are generally done to reduce embarrassment between people of different statuses.
Erm so it makes a common basis of communication.
Mutual c convergence can also occur with upwards convergent by person and that's completed by downward towards the other.
That's generally if they both desire integration so it's not just done on the part of one person.
Erm so they're saying that erm speech convergence is generally erm quite favourably perceived.
That's about it really.
Right okay.
You haven't got anything else to add before we talk about ?
Okay as I said before, I think there's sort of three ways of doing the essay.
You can either think about doing one that is very literature based which I supposed might end up being  sort of a rewrite of a lot of the stuff you can read.
Or you can do a vaguely experimental sort of thing.
Now there's two different things you can do, there's one which you were originally gonna do  when it was a project.
Mm.
Which was to like actually do an experiment which might be a bit time consuming now and you might have to do 
Yeah.
If you want to do it you haven't really got you probably haven't got the time .
Haven't got the time.
The other thing might be do just do a questionnaire asking people about their attitudes to accents and dialects and 
Yes mm.
languages.
And that's something which you haven't like got to do a lot of recording for You haven't got test conditions you've got to think of some questions and photocopy it.
Mm.
Mm.
And then if you want to read some literature and talk about some of the things which Once you've said what questions you want to ask you'll want to read some stuff You've either read a lot of it already, the stuff you've done today is useful, and do a bit of your essay saying, This is what the literature says, so we did an experiment to test this aspect and here's the results we found, let's discuss this.
Erm 
So based on match-guise 
 
that's what it's gonna be about.
Well I mean you can't really you can't do much you can't do much about  
You can't really do that though  
The best thing would be to s sort of say I don't know but the sort of thing which came into my mind were questions like you know, Which accents  do you think
Yeah or I mean which accents do you think people sound more intelligent when they've got I mean, it's not that's heavily match- guised cos in match guised people are doing it without knowing what they're doing.
In this 
Mm.
we're asking people to make an informed choice
Mm.
and people have got to be aware of their prejudices 
But 
when they're answering.
yeah everybody's got some sort of accent that grates on their nerves though haven't they?
Yeah.
That they can't stand and there's another one they think it's nice.
Yeah I mean people don't always agree on those things 
Mm.
but you actually find some trends
Mm.
across the board.
Mm.
Er which also really doesn't look as if actually asks you  cross section.
Yeah you've gotta almost ask say you keep getting an accent erm Oh I don't know say Brummie accent or something that people don't really think sounds very nice.
Mhm.
Then you've got to go and try and find somebody from Birmingham saying  and erm  
Yeah I mean 
Mm 
if you can actually try and find one.
I mean it's probably a good idea to make a If you do a questionnaire to make a note of what accent 
 
the people you're asking have got.
Yeah.
And that way when you analyze the results you can sort of say, Well  we found that say Birmingham was very disliked erm but you can say that wasn't  I mean if everybody in the whole sample 
 
had been  I dunno a very  then you can say, Oh so it doesn't really show very much.
But if you have a reasonable cross section of the country and your result was still that Birmingham was looked down upon as a low status accent, then at least you can  your results so..
Would you have to say why?
Why you
Well I think if you can come up with some suggestions you don't have to say why.
Y you can say why you think it might be.
Some of it's the erm Actually could we put something like that in the questionnaire, What don't you like about it.
Yeah definitely.
Erm
Mm.
but the thing is  
See if you can actually quantify it or if it's irrational.
Yeah but I I mean sort of patronize them 
They might of  Oh sorry 
but because they're not linguists
Yeah.
they might not know how to say it.
Well
They might might 
in some ways the way that people describe things
The words they use .
I mean they're not a linguist but the words they use will say a lot about what they think about  .
A lot about what they think.
I mean if somebody says I used to People finding  grating people might say, Oh I find it grating but it doesn't really mean anything does it?
Mm.
And s I mean that's a a sort of non-linguistic of the people use but you sort of 
I suppose you have to into something linguistic then?
And you have to work out what they mean by that.
Er I mean it could just be that they don't like it, so anything which they don't like is grating or
Mm.
Whatever.
I mean
does that sound like the decent thing to do?
Yeah.
Should we all do the same questions ?
I I  get together 
Yeah.
on the same ?
Yeah.
I think you should all do the same questionnaire and the same survey but then if you can write it up separately.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So d do you want us to do like tables, results, you know 
I don't  
or just write  ?
Er it's up to you I mean if your results I mean you're not going to have loads and loads of results.
So 
No 
I mean doing a couple of tables probably won't be that hard work cos it just be a case of a list of averages or something .
Yeah.
Or a list of scores.
But I mean it's up to you if results are very simple you can sort of say, Oh well sixty percent went this way and forty 
Mm.
went the other way.
I mean it's up to you to display the data in the way that you think's best.
Okay.
Erm  is everyone okay with that?
Yeah.
Mm.
Right the best thing to do 
should we do it now?
The questions?
think of some now.
Because if you should think some now in the next five or ten minutes, and then if during the next week you meet in the week sometime
Mm.
to organize this.
do we do we want 
And if you get 
to Sorry to interrupt.
I was gonna say 
Sorry.
do we want to erm go I mean obviously we want to go away and I'll do it with my friend and you'll do it your 
Mm.
friend and you'll do it with your friend.
Erm but do you want us to keep our own results or do you want us to pool all  together 
I think you should pool together 
 
Say we could do ten each or something like that.
Yeah that would only be 
Yeah 
thirty people's plenty really  
Yeah okay 
something.
Right.
Er I might say if keep a little check list of whether each person you ask is male or female or how old they are
Mm.
what accent they've got I mean th that's plenty to do.
Yeah so yeah they've got to add some conditions on top of this things so it's like should we do an age range thing?
Or is that gonna be too wide  
Well  
I think  one person who is in their thirty or forties or two people so, you know you can't really quantify that very easily.
Yeah.
Mm.
Er so you might be best just sticking to people who are the s around the same age you know eighteen to twenty two or something.
Is it best to do sort of a say if a question, Which accent do you not like?
Is it best to do a series of accents and get 'em to tick or get 'em to  
Yeah like multiple choice ones.
Cos if you get em If you put a bo A multiple choice and if They're not actually think they just like look at one and, Oh I don't really like that all I don't really like  think about it .
Yeah they put an idea into their heads don't you? yeah.
Yes.
Yeah.
Yeah.
It it  
 
has this property of I you do put a list of accents it's a good idea to put other at the bottom in case there is 
Mm mm.
one you haven't mentioned .
Mm.
Because 
There's there's so many though aren't there I mean there's that Scottish accents which I love but other ones are a bit kind of difficult to understand you know.
Yeah I mean if you sort of put Scottish accent then you're probably going to  
But 
lots of Scottish people.


what's what's a Scottish accent 
Well there just think of it as being very different don't they?
Well yeah.
I mean  
Course they  
yeah.
Er so  you might be better of leaving it open.
Or leave it open for some questions if you want to test a ps specific thing in another question then try and test that.
Mm.
Erm.
A thing that's really  about accents that if you say to somebody, What accent don't you like?
They might really dislike sort of a standard English accent sort of
But they don't  yeah 
standard sort of middle class thing but the pre thin they might not think of that because people sort of quite often think of that as not being an accent.
Yeah.
Which is quite difficult.
Yeah well it's on all the radio and T V and stuff isn't it ?
Yeah.
And they don't think about it or
Mm.
or you could think it also  true that I think wh what you think you're supposed to like as well.
Yes I mean  
you're keep being told that's the way you're supposed to  
Sorry.
If you did have a list it  one of the list  B B C English or Queen's English or something that makes people know what they w what you're trying to tell them .
B B C accent yeah 
Er whereas if you ask somebody to name an accent they'd probably think of regional varieties, urban varieties,
But they don't think it is one 
rural ones .
do they?
Well you could you could do you could
putting a Say if you put
I won't join in this


Say you put, What accent do you not like?
And put a line.
And put in brackets E G you know how you like give an example for them to fill in and say E G B B C 
Yes 
English something like that 
Well what what you could do is  put in brackets somewhere a list of  accents you can think of so that if people really don't know what to do .
Yeah so you've got a list  
It's not your list of choices it's not going to have to take box form.
But they can just look through so they can say I can't think of an accent let's have a quick look through this list.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Er
and that way you can include  you can even include sort of very upper class varieties which are sort of 
We we could ask them actually where you could put where are you from
Yeah.
and then say, Do you perceive yourself as having an accent?
Yeah.
As well and so that that get's over whether they  you know that get's over this thing about erm  views of other people j the way you  
Yeah.
somebody else up you've got a massive accent, but then  turns round and says, Well so have you.
So there again perhaps try and find somebody who's from where they've said they're from and they might be ticking this box you know .
Yeah.
Another thing that might be worth doing as well I mean don't make it too complicated we ought to  about which things to put in.
if you want to say put the name of an accent down You wanted to put say Birmingham and then say, How would you rate people who have a strong accent from this place on a scale of one to five for  friendless, honesty the things which you could  
Yeah 
Yeah 
Yeah 
scale of one to five for each one with one being er
But yeah I mean it's not going to be quite so true because they're gonna think Well when you write it down you think Well actually it's got nothing to do with this be really clever.
But and that takes away that initial reaction.
Yeah.
have to put something they're gonna have prejudices and  
Yeah that's right 
Er but we like say don't want to put everything in cos it would take you a while to analyze that but that's another thing you might want to put on.
How many questions do you think?
I don't know I mean  I think if you had a double side of a sheet of A four that was well spaced out and stuff that would be  
 
er you wouldn't want to make them You wouldn't particularly have more than a dozen or so would you?
No.
No.
But I mean  more or less so You'll probably get a feel for when you've got  things.
yeah.
I reckon your sort of timetable for doing this wants to be, early next week to meet to work out exactly what questions you are gonna do and mak make a questionnaire and perhaps later on in the week Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, start to ask some people Now on the Friday this time this we this time next week you c 
 
you can talk about some of your results in here and we'll discuss about anything that's gonna be problems we'll discuss how you're can write it up and how you want to display the statistics if 
Yeah.
you've got some complicated ones.
Er and then you can write it up sometime during week four and hand it in sort of Wednesday, Thursday week four would be quite good.
Okay what Do we have to do a methodology project as well?
I don't think you do  
.
or do you?
To be in when?
By end of week four.
Yeah.
Three sides.
Three sides.
It's not bad it's 
Mm.
just a
We're gonna have to be doing that at the same time.
Well I mean I a asked Christine yesterday and she was saying that because this isn't a project any more it's actually supposed to in the end of week three.
But you know I think if I say to her  hand it in week four then
Mm.
she won't mind so  push past week four she might 
Yeah.
we could do the first bits and  about an hour really, this weekend not  at work or anything.


No cos we've we've got the first two bits, we've got the rational for the experiment and the method
What do we have to do?
We just have to write one side on the rational and one side on the method and the third side's on the results.
But I mean we don't know h how long  
We haven't got eight
So we can do the first two.
No he's gonna give us the other results.
Erm.
We can do the first two and then  
two 
It's on that Were you there the other day when we got that sheet?
Yeah is on there?
Yeah it's all 
Okay.
on there.
Oh good okay.
But why do we do the experiment then?


Oh I dunno .
 
Okay so we  You're really gonna have to sort of do
Meet on Monday 
Monday .
So.
So if next week c you can at least of started 
three hours a week 
to  the questionnaire er but we definitely have done finish finished making the questionnaire I mean gonna have to
Well yeah cos we want to get out and distribute it and get it back.
Yeah.
can do it on Monday and we can People will have until Friday then to ask .
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah we'll do it on Monday.
What have we got?
Well I've got three hours from straight from nine fifteen in the morning so I'd like  a bit of a break actually after that .
No sorry.
  
afternoon.
Oh.
I've got one free in the afternoon so
I've got a three 
Yeah I have 
fifteen as well.
I've got .
Oh
Only take an hour or so won't it anyway ?
Yeah.
Okay if you want any help or anything I should be around for 
Okay.
 
next week so catch me if you want anything.
Got anything together?
 
We've got Principles of Linguistics .
Principles at nine fifteen though I've got to one 
Oh yeah.
Mm I've got English and then I've got  the afternoon 
I can do at two fifteen if you like.
Yeah I think I can do two fifteen.
I think I might be able to  
is two fifteen okay?
two fifteen 
She said two fifteen
Let's do lunch.
here.
 
 
Right a a t Here?
Okay two fifteen yeah.
I'll probably forget you'll probably come and get me.


Okay let's hold it there.
Yeah
Right, cheers.
See you next week or before then.
Yeah.