

What can I do for you this morning?
Ah it's the acne it's  I ran out two weeks ago, so we've been on holiday I had to get those prescription .
Oh.
I made an appointment to se you sort of this week but that's
Now it was working well.
Yeah.
Is it still working well?
Yeah, it's about the same really.
Right okay.
But you had a bit of flare up A You flared up in last time you had came off it, didn't you?
Temporarily.
That's right, yeah, so I thought I'd best get it  
Yes.
rather than run out  
Yes, no you don't want to er  flare up, right, so


Are you growing?
No, I've stopped growing now  
You've stopped growing.
Y 
I've had this all week.
Oh I 
It's alright.
Do you play basketball?
Is there a family history of being very tall?
No not really my dads about six foot three  
That's quite tall, yes.
Well he's six foot, six foot one or six foot t 
Well you're you're tal taller than him, I should think, aren't you?
Yeah .
Yeah, oh yeah, yeah.
Are you well in yourself?
Yeah, fine yeah.
But there's no there's no family history of other medical problems at all?
No not really  
Just there are one or two I mean when we see tall, thin, young people we think of all sorts of interesting medical things, but most of them are completely  at all, you see so
Yeah.
We always ask.
No, fine.
Right, okay .
I've had a bit of problem with me knee left knee
Have you ?
Don't know if it's cartilage or not?
I just 
 
play football on Sundays and I fence as well, Thursday night .
Fence?
Yes I  good fencer, long 
Yeah.
reach.
That's right, yeah.
Football, er I thought you might be big for football.
Basketball definitely.
It's there 
Let's have a
It's just there it after like when I'm resting it aches 
Yeah.
a bit.
Right.
What about stairs and steps ,
 
when you go up and down stairs and  
I noticed a bit more lately, yeah
Yeah.
but not so much  
Twisting?
If you've got a  
No not really 
No you're okay, twisting, okay just t just turn 
It's just sort of there.
slightly.
Er No no no no your whole body 
Right.
get y get your knee in, okay.
Now I'll just wobble it backward and let it go.
There's full range of movement.
And a stable joint.
It doesn't particularly wobble around, does it?
No.
Okay.
It's just that it's aching, I was wondering if the  
Just er Lift up, let it go completely l loose and limp, that's fine.
If I move the kneecap around it from side to side .
No  
If I push the kneecap up?
No.
Okay.
Down.
No that's alright.
You're okay there?
Okay.
Just let it flop again.
Does it er hurt under there?
No, not really, no.
And at the sides of the joint there?
No.
It was just the front moving  that was
Okay.
I think if you have mainly pain in there it's much more likely to be a little bit of inflammation under the this tendon which goes from the muscle here over the top of the kneecap and attaches in there.
Right.
And it's this muscle that makes the whole leg go  like that.
And it's a huge great big muscle but it can get a little bit er inflamed, as it passes over the front edge of the kneecap there.
And that's what gives you the pain right at the front.
It's not 
Ah 
rela It's not actually the knee joint itself, it's got nothing to do with the cartilages and it's particularly common in people who are growing.
Or tall .
Or  Or have grown.
Well no, not particularly tall but certainly growing and it's probably been It's probably just er related to that.
Right.
And you don't need to do anything.
Keep yourself generally fit,.
So we'd better make a note of that.
Ache left knee, perhaps  nothing to see.
Ah and then  and you're not getting any side effects from  Erithramita 
No.
No side effects, fine as far as I can tell.
Okay.
Now you're now er nineteen aren't you?
I'm going to a university
I was going to ask what you're doing.
in September.
Erm 
what three times a day aren't you?
Yeah.
Yeah.
It's Dundee and they've asked me to transfer my medical records up to the local G P up there.
Actually what we'll do is we'll give you Er you're probably a bit bigger than you were when we were giving you three er on three times a day.
We'll give you twice a day but a slightly bigger dose so that's actually five hundred milligrammes twice a day.
Give you a hundred and eighty which is three months worth of those.
Yes when you go up there you'll have to register but if you I mean I presume the university term's what ten weeks?
Yes, ten or twelve weeks cos I starting 
Yeah.
in It starts September the twentieth 
Yeah.
so it is a bit earlier.
But 
So you're going to be there more than you're going to be here,
Yeah.
and er you obviously will need to register there.
Now there's two important things, first thing is your notes will take a long time to get up there maybe up to three months.
Right.
I think some one has to walk from Nottingham to Dundee.


No it's just that they take ages and ages and ages cos Dundee will ask Nottingham, Nottingham will ask us to bring the notes back, then we'll send them to Nottingham, Nottingham will send them to Dundee, Dundee will send them to your G P.
Right, okay .
Convoluted isn't it?
Convoluted, but that's the way it goes and we can't actually release the notes to anyone but the local people in Nottingham.
So we can't send them up to your doctor.
There's absolutely nothing to tell your doctor fortunately, so we don't have to do a summary for you or anything like that.
But 
Right.
the important is that he knows what you're on and why you're on it, and you can tell him that.
But I've got enough You'll write Will 
Erm 
you write a prescription  
one twice a day I I I would keep going with three month prescriptions anyway, so that'll keep you going till the end of November No not quite the end of November, but you can then see him and say look, I've got this this is why I'm on these for.
Yeah, right.
And er he can introduce that.
You'll probably find when you register you're invited to go along for a new patient medical anyway, and all sorts of things like that.
Right.
All fun and game Just one twice a day.
Best taken on an empty stomach so half an hour before food.
Don't interfere with paracetamol, they don't interfere with aspirin, they don't interfere with alcohol.
That's alright then.
Okay.
Just to exaggerate those three points, I know, I can remember being a student myself.
Er the other thing of course, when you're down here we can carry on treating you with what's called a temporary resident .
Yes it's like the holidays, vacation 
Yeah no problems seeing you while you're down here as a temporary resident, delighted to do so.
Okay?
Thanks very much.
Very good, what are you doing up there?
It's retail and distribution management.
Aha.
a degree so,
Aha.
but it's a year out as well.
So it's four years .
Four years,Okay.
 
Have a nice holiday.
See you  bye now.
Bye.