

Derek Howse
,Jonathan (1690? –1747), mathematical instrument-maker, born perhaps in 1690, went to London from Lincolnshire and was established in a workshop on the corner of Beaufort Buildings in the Strand by 1722, probably having worked for George Graham [q.v.], with whom he remained on very close terms.
In 1725 he was employed by Graham to construct the framework of the eight-feet mural quadrant for Edmond Halley [q.v.]
at Greenwich Observatory.
He was appointed mathematical instrument-maker to Frederick, prince of Wales [q.v.]
in April 1729, by which time he had a high reputation, particularly as a maker of surveying instruments, being known especially for his accurate division of scales.
Edward Saul, in An Historical and Philosophical Account of the Barometer or Weather-glass (1735) says: ‘it may perhaps be an Inducement to some of the Gentlemen of Lincolnshire, to deal with Mr Jonathan Sisson…; that he is their Country Man, and eminent for his great Skill, Accuracy and Fidelity, both in the Construction of his Barometers, and in whatever Work, he undertakes, or delivers out of his Hands.’
In 1736 he received two commissions from Graham: the construction of a nine-feet zenith sector (the arc of which Graham divided himself) for the French Académie des Sciences expedition to Lapland under Pierre de Maupertuis to measure the length of a degree of the meridian; and preparing brass rods and scales for the Royal Society and the Académie for new standards to show the relation between the English yard and the French half-toise.
After each rod had been engraved with both yard and half-toise and comparisons made in London and Paris, Sisson divided each measure into three equal parts, in 1742.
The same year, a paper was read at a meeting of the Royal Society, giving an account of a new spirit-level invented and made by him.
By this time Sisson's reputation was such that he had begun to receive orders for large astronomical instruments, such as mural quadrants, zenith sectors, and transit instruments for observatories all over Europe: for Utrecht, Bologna, Leiden, Paris, and Pisa, as well as for the private observatory of George Parker, second Earl of Macclesfield [q.v.]
at Shirburn.
Jonathan's son Jeremiah Sisson [q.v.]
was working for his father at this time and about 1740 John Bird [q.v.]
also worked in the Sisson workshop before setting up on his own almost next door in 1745.
Jonathan Sisson was one of the most celebrated instrument-makers of his time, fostering the pre-eminence of the London instrument-making trade in Europe during the eighteenth century, ably followed by John Bird, Jeremiah Sisson, John and Peter Dollond, Jesse Ramsden, and Edward Troughton [qq.v.].
Sisson died 13 June 1747.
[Abraham Rees, ‘Graduation’,Cyclopaedia , vol. xvi, 1819; E. G. R. Taylor,The Mathematical Practitioners of Hanoverian England , 1966; Maurice Daumas,Scientific Instruments of the Seventeenth and Eighteenth centuries and their Makers , 1972; Derek Howse, ‘Greenwich List of Observatories’,Journal for the History of Astronomy , vol. xvii, part 4, 1986.]
Brian Pearce
,Iris (1910–1953), novelist and writer on ballet, was born 10 May 1910 in Carshalton, Surrey, the elder daughter (there were no sons) of Colonel Lyddon Charteris Morley, CBE, of the Hampshire Regiment, and his wife Gladys Nassau Braddell.
Being an army officer's daughter, she attended a succession of schools, including the Royal School at Bath and Mannamead (Plymouth).
She studied, briefly, at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art.
Her ancestors included George Morley [q.v.],
the bishop of Winchester under Charles II, and William Henry Zuylestein, first Earl of Rochford [q.v.].
Her three novels set in late seventeenth-century England, with James Scott, Duke of Monmouth [q.v.],
and William III as central characters —Cry Treason (1940),We Stood For Freedom (1941), and The Mighty Years (1943)— were widely acclaimed as being among the best historical novels of their time.
Her posthumously published study of their factual background,A Thousand Lives: the English Revolutionary Movement 1660–1685 (1954), showed her to be an able popularizer of history.
She also produced, with Paul Hogarth, RA, a guide to Hampton Court Palace, near which she lived, in 1951.
Of her other novels,Nothing But Propaganda (1946) and Not Without Fantasy (1947), set in wartime Britain and Russia, were perhaps the most interesting.
She also wrote The Proud Paladin (1936) and Rack (1952).
She had gone to Moscow in 1943 as correspondent for the Observer and the Yorkshire Post , and from this experience wrote Soviet Ballet (1945), which helped to introduce contemporary Russian dancing to the British public.
It was followed in 1949 by The Rose and the Star (with Phyllis Manchester), a comparison between Russian and British ballet.
Thanks to her political views, the Communist Daily Worker enjoyed for several years the services of a perceptive ballet critic.
Iris Morley was a woman of delicate beauty and also (despite lifelong migraine) of gracious charm.
In 1929, at the age of eighteen, she married Captain Gordon Coates, of the Devonshire Regiment.
She was divorced in 1934 and in the same year she married the journalist Alaric Jacob, in whose Scenes from a Bourgeois Life (1949) she appears as ‘Miranda Ireton’.
He was the son of Lieutenant-Colonel Harold Fenton Jacob, of the Indian Army.
There was one daughter of the marriage.
Iris Morley died from cancer in Farnham, Surrey, 27 July 1953.
[The Times , 28 July and 7 August 1953; private information; personal knowledge.]
Walton of Detchant
,Henry George (1913–1976), neurologist, was born 13 December 1913 in Chesterfield, Derbyshire, the only son of John Miller, engineer (who died when Henry was aged four) and his wife Mabel Isobel Bainbridge.
The family later moved to Stockton-on-Tees, where Henry attended the secondary school.
He enrolled at the Newcastle College of Medicine (University of Durham) in 1931.
After graduation he held house appointments at the Royal Victoria Infirmary (RVI), Newcastle upon Tyne, and then worked for a year in pathology at the Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore before becoming house physician at the Hospital for Sick Children, Great Ormond Street, London (1939).
He then returned to Newcastle as medical registrar to work with Professor F. J. Nattrass and became interested in neurology, acquiring the MD (Durham) and MRCP (1940).
From 1942 to 1945 he served in the Royal Air Force, first as a general-duties medical officer in Bomber Command, then as a neuropsychiatry specialist, when he was much influenced by (Sir) Charles Symonds [q.v.].
He obtained a diploma in psychological medicine in 1943.
After demobilization he worked at the National Hospital, Queen Square, and at Hammersmith Hospital, and in 1947 was appointed assistant physician to Dr A. G. Ogilvie at the RVI, where he further developed his neurological interests and established a flourishing private practice.
In 1956 he became the first consultant neurologist to the RVI, establishing a department which achieved an international reputation.
In 1953 he was elected FRCP, in 1961 became a personal reader in neurology, and in 1964 a personal professor.
In 1962 he was appointed clinical subdean and played a major part in revising the medical curriculum.
When the University of Newcastle became independent he was its first public orator from 1963 to 1966, and in 1966 became dean of medicine.
Two years later he was appointed vice-chancellor, in which capacity he served until his death.
While he wrote on many aspects of neurology and psychiatry (which he regarded as ‘neurology without physical signs’) his major research interest was in multiple sclerosis and he was chairman of the medical panel of the UK Multiple Sclerosis Society and honorary clinical adviser to the MRC Demyelinating Diseases Unit.
He was also president of the Association of Physicians of Great Britain and Ireland in 1973–4.
He received the John Rowan Wilson award for his book Medicine in Society in 1974.
In 1967–71 he was director of the BMA Planning Unit.
Known in his registrar days as Henry ‘Gorgeous’ Miller, even in 1947 his elegant attire was notable.
His energy, drive, intuitive clinical ability, abounding flow of language with (at times) slightly wounding wit, and, above all, his generosity to friends and colleagues were extraordinary.
In his presence no meeting was dull and, as vice-chancellor of the university, he had great skill with students; whether with senior academics, students, porters, clerks, or visitors, he was unpredictable and irreverently cheerful.
In 1942 he married Eileen Cathcart, MRCOG, daughter of George Gibson Baird, engineer, of Tynemouth, and they had two sons and two daughters.
He died at home in Jesmond, Newcastle upon Tyne, 25 August 1976 from the heart disease which had dogged his latter years.
[Stephen Lock and Heather Windle (eds.),
Remembering Henry , 1977;Munk's Roll , vol. vii, 1984; personal knowledge.]
Frank Greenaway
,John Rex (1901–1966), inventor of terylene, was born 16 February 1901 in Sutton, Surrey, the son of John Henry Richard Whinfield, mechanical engineer, of Sutton, and his wife Edith Matthews.
He was educated at Merchant Taylors' School and Caius College, Cambridge, where he received a third class in part i of the natural sciences tripos (1921) and a second in part ii in 1922 (chemistry).
He was introduced very early in his career to the chemistry of fibres and textiles by working without pay for a year in the London laboratory of C. F. Cross and E. J. Bevan [qq.v.], who had first made rayon in 1892.
In 1924 he joined the Calico Printers' Association as a research chemist, at a time when the search was on in many laboratories for new synthetic fibres.
With Wallace H. Carothers's nylon (1935) already promising well if it could be commercialized, Whinfield looked to other classes of polymer, which could be made to yield a textile fibre.
Assisted by James Dickson, he discovered how to condense terephthalic acid and ethylene glycol to yield a substance which could be drawn into a fibre.
(Carothers had thought of investigating this route but had eventually concentrated on his polyamides.)
The Whinfield–Dickson patent was filed in July 1941, but was suppressed for wartime reasons until 1946.
It was then examined for commercial potential by both ICI (who eventually marketed it under the name Terylene) and DuPont (who called it Dacron).
World manufacturing rights eventually fell to ICI.
Whinfield served as an assistant director of chemical research in the Ministry of Supply during World War II and then joined ICI in 1947, first in its plastics division and then in the fibres division, which brought him worldwide travel, including a visit to the USSR in 1961 as a guest of the USSR government.
Despite the importance of terylene and its universal use as a textile fibre, Whinfield received little public honour for his discovery, a CBE (1954) seeming hardly adequate for his achievement.
Possibly he might have published more, and not been content with the record of work provided by patents.
His colleagues honoured him, however, by the honorary fellowship of the Textile Institute (1955), and the Perkin medal of the Society of Dyers and Colourists (1956).
The University of York gave his name to its chemical library and created some Whinfield travelling fellowships.
In 1922 Whinfield married Mayo, daughter of the Revd Frederick William Walker.
She died in 1946 and in 1947 he married Nora, daughter of E. Hodder of Worthing.
Whinfield died in Dorking, Surrey, 6 July 1966.
[The Times , 7 July 1966.]
Michael A Sutton
,John Alexander Reina (1837–1898), chemist, was born 26 November 1837 in London, the second son of the Revd William Newlands, a Presbyterian minister, and his wife Mary Sarah Reina.
His early education came chiefly from his father, but in 1856 he enrolled at the Royal College of Chemistry and studied for a year under A. W. von Hoffmann, before becoming assistant chemist to J. T. Way at the Royal Agricultural Society.
He energetically supported various social reforms in England, and in 1860 he spent several months with British volunteers fighting for Garibaldi in the Risorgimento (his mother was of Italian descent).
From 1864 he was a consulting analytical chemist in London; he also taught at St Saviour's Grammar School, the School of Medicine for Women, and the City of London College.
In 1868 he became chief chemist in a sugar refinery at the Victoria docks, owned by James Duncan, with whom he devised and patented several technical improvements.
The business eventually declined, and in 1886 he returned to private practice, in partnership with his brother B. E. R. Newlands.
He remained interested in sugar: the brothers, with C. G. W. Lock, published Sugar: a Handbook for Planters and Refiners (1888), based on an earlier work by Lock and others.
Despite his marginal position in the academic world, Newlands earned a place in chemical history by his partial anticipation of D. I Mendeleyev's periodic law, developed in several papers in the Chemical News between 1863 and 1866 (republished in his On the Discovery of the Periodic Law , 1884).
Though unaware of A. de Chancourtois' general classification of the elements, Newlands knew that J. B. Dumas had identified ‘families’ of similar elements and noted numerical relationships among their atomic weights.
On listing the known elements in order of ascending atomic weight, Newlands found several groups with similar properties located at intervals of eight steps from each other, and accordingly proposed his ‘law of octaves’ in 1865.
His ideas met with opposition and even ridicule — G. C. Foster suggested ironically that he should arrange the elements in alphabetical order — and the Chemical Society refused to publish them in its Journal .
Newlands's tables did contain errors and anomalies, but after 1869, when more accurate and comprehensive studies by Mendeleyev and J. Lothar Meyer began to appear, he argued for recognition of his priority.
When the Royal Society awarded Mendeleyev and Lothar Meyer its Davy medal for the discovery of the periodic law, Newlands renewed his campaign; he eventually received the Davy medal in 1887, but was never elected FRS.
Newlands died 29 July 1898 at his home in Lower Clapton, London.
He left a widow, a daughter, and a son.
[Obituary in Nature , vol. lviii, 1898, pp. 395–6; W. A. Smeaton, ‘Centenary of the Law of Octaves’,Journal of the Royal Institute of Chemistry , vol. lxxxviii, 1964, pp. 271–4; J. V. Van Spronsen,The Periodic System of the Elements , 1969, pp. 102–16; C. C. Gillispie (ed.),
Dictionary of Scientific Biography , vol. x, 1974.]
George Hammersley
,Daniel (1525–1581), mining and smelting expert and merchant, was born in 1525 in Augsburg, the second son of the twenty-year-old Joachim Hoechstetter and his wife Anna, daughter of Eitelhans Langenmantel, patrician and Anabaptist.
Joachim died, probably in Denmark, in 1535; some time before 1541 his relatives placed Daniel with a branch of his grandmother's Wieland family, who trained him at their lead, copper, and silver mines and smelting works in the Rauris and Gastein valleys in the Tyrol, part of the archbishopric of Salzburg.
He was apparently fully trained by 1549 and began to operate independently.
Between December 1555 and January 1557 Daniel returned to live in Augsburg with his growing family.
Nothing is known about his activities until he was authorized, by Elizabeth I's signet of 8 July 1563, to prospect for minerals in England, which he did during that summer.
For reasons which can only be guessed at he decided to establish himself near Keswick in Cumberland and returned in the following year with Hans Loner, a relative by marriage, and twelve German workers, to set up works and to prospect more fully.
In 1564 he also concluded an agreement with the Augsburg firm of Haug, Langnauer & Co. to finance the enterprise with himself as manager, and to invite English participation.
By 1568 they were incorporated as one of the first two English joint-stock companies, the Society of the Mines Royal, with some important royal servants and London merchants as members.
The English partners became increasingly reluctant to supplement their original investment of £1,200 per share and finally refused in 1580, and agreed to lease the works and mines to Daniel and ‘customer’ Thomas Smith [q.v.],
one of the wealthiest London merchants.
Daniel had meanwhile built up the works, from a large smelter in three storeys to coal-sheds, workshops, a stamp mill, and housing in Brigham, almost a mile east of Keswick on the river Greta.
They produced fair quantities of copper and a little silver but, with a declining market for copper, could not cover the costs of installations and the travelling expenses of almost 150 Austrian and German craftsmen, a total which amounted to about £50,000.
The lease from 1580 worked well enough to provide some regular rent for the society, even after Daniel's death just before 14 May 1581, when he was buried in Crosthwaite church.
On fragmentary evidence, Daniel impresses as a reasonable and well-educated man, with a typical prospector's irrepressible enthusiasms.
At first two of his sons, Emanuel, who died 22 August 1614, with Daniel Hechstetter (as the English descendants called themselves), and then Daniel with Emanuel's son Joseph continued, more modestly and successfully, to operate the works and mines until about 1634, when they went bankrupt.
On 16 July 1553 Daniel senior married, in Augsburg, the twenty-year-old Radagunda, daughter of the prominent Augsburg merchant Leonhard Stammler.
They had five sons and five daughters, of whom three sons and four daughters survived infancy.
Radagunda herself was buried next to her husband in Crosthwaite church in 1610.
[G. Hammersley,Daniel Hechstetter the Younger, Memorabilia and Letters, 1600–1639 , 1988; F. Blendinger, ‘Hoechstetter’,Neue Deutsche Biographie , 1972, vol. xi, pp. 302–5; W. Hoechstetter,Stammtafel der Hoechstetter , 1976.]
Michael De-la-Noy
,(Maurice) Denton (1915–1948), writer and painter, was born in Shanghai 29 March 1915, the youngest of the four sons (there were no daughters) of Arthur Joseph Welch, a wealthy English rubber merchant, and his American wife, Rosalind Bassett.
After spending an itinerant early childhood he was educated first at an eccentric preparatory school intended for the sons of Christian Scientists, St Michael's in Uckfield, Sussex, and later at Repton, from where, at the age of sixteen, he ran away.
When he was seventeen he returned to China for several months.
His original ambition was to be a painter, and in 1933 he enrolled at Goldsmith's College School of Art.
Welch's spell as an art student came to an abrupt end, however, in 1935, at the age of twenty, when he was knocked off his bicycle by a motorist.
He sustained appalling injuries, including a fracture of the spine.
Long periods of enforced solitude as a semi-invalid threw him back on the resources of his own imagination, and after reading Hindoo Holiday , by J. R. Ackerley [q.v.],
he resolved to write a semi-autobiographical novel, based on Repton and China.
The result,Maiden Voyage (1943), was acclaimed by (Dame) Edith Sitwell [q.v.],
who contributed a foreword in which she wrote: ‘This is a very moving and remarkable first book and the author appears to be that rare being, a born writer.’
Welch's second novel,In Youth is Pleasure , recalling a summer holiday at the age of fifteen, was published two years later, and was dedicated to the memory of his mother, who had died when he was eleven.
A number of Welch's short stories, all in effect autobiographical, were published during his lifetime, by Cyril Connolly [q.v.]
in Horizon , John Lehmann in Penguin New Writing , and Peter Quennell in the Cornhill Magazine .
Within the space of only eight years, although desperately ill and while painting and illustrating as well, he completed some sixty short stories, all later published posthumously, three novels, and a quarter of a million words of journals.
Because he was so isolated physically, and knew only a handful of fellow artists — his friends did include John Minton [q.v.],
with whom he collaborated over the line drawings for Vogue's Contemporary Cooking , by Doris Lytton Toye, Keith Vaughan [q.v.],
and Graham Sutherland [q.v.],
a near neighbour in Kent — Welch never attached himself formally to any school of painting, yet he became an almost unconscious and very prolific exponent of the neo-Romantic movement.
He provided quixotic endpapers for his own first editions, which later became collectors' items, and his paintings, in oils, water-colours, and pencil, crayon, and gouache, were exhibited in the 1940s at the Leicester Galleries.
After his death many were given away or sold for a few pounds, and he was largely ignored as a painter until in 1987 six examples of his work were loaned to an exhibition entitled ‘A Paradise Lost’ at the Barbican Art Gallery, devoted to the neo-Romantic movement.
There are self-portraits in the National Portrait Gallery in London and at the University of Texas in Austin.
As a writer, the quality, quantity, and character of Welch's output was inevitably circumscribed by his relative immobility and the restrictions this placed on the acquisition of new material and experience.
But he was in any event fascinated by his childhood and adolescence, and by the time he died this juvenile field had been fruitfully tilled and probably exhausted.
It is his interest in the minutiae of life and his shrewd and perceptive descriptions of people, places, and events that have left the most indelible impression on his admirers.
His journals in particular constitute a moving memorial to a young man of integrity and moral courage, whose determination not to succumb to pain and humiliation was at times heroic.
It took him four years to write his third, and posthumously published, novel,A Voice Through a Cloud (1950), an account of the accident itself and his struggle to convalesce.
The manuscript was found beside his bed, complete except for about half a dozen pages, when he died, 30 December 1948, at Middle Orchard, Crouch, Kent.
He was unmarried.
[Michael De-la-Noy,Denton Welch: the Making of a Writer , 1984.]
Richard Ingrams
,Gerard (1925–1959), cartoonist and musical humorist, was born Gerhardt Hoffnung in Grünewald, Berlin, 22 March 1925, the only child of German-Jewish parents, Ludwig Hoffnung, a wealthy grain merchant, and his wife Hilde, a widow, whose first husband, Schnabel, was killed in World War I. His mother was a keen amateur musician and artist who encouraged his artistic talents.
From his earliest years he was interested in the macabre — fairy tales, practical jokes, and the comic drawings of the famous German illustrators and caricaturists.
In the wake of the Nazi persecutions the Hoffnungs left Germany in 1938.
Ludwig Hoffnung settled permanently in Israel.
Gerard and his mother went to London, renting a house in Hampstead Garden Suburb which was to be Hoffnung's home for the rest of his life.
In 1939 Hoffnung became a pupil at Highgate School, where he was remembered for his anarchic spirit.
He studied at Hornsey College of Art but was expelled and became art master at Stamford School in 1945 and later at Harrow.
He was already working as a freelance cartoonist and his work appeared in a number of magazines.
He developed a distinctive style which owed something to the German illustrator Wilhelm Busch.
His illustrations in colour for Colette's libretto for Ravel's opera,L'Enfant et les sortilèges , were outstanding.
Much of Hoffnung's humour centred on the world of music, particularly the various instruments of the orchestra with which he was fascinated.
He taught himself to play the tuba.
In 1953 he published The Maestro , the first of a series of six little books of cartoons on musical themes which had a worldwide success.
He broke new ground in musical humour when in 1956 he organized the first of a series of concerts of symphonic caricature at which new music, some of it by respected composers like Malcolm Arnold, was played on ludicrous instruments or to the accompaniment of vacuum cleaners or road rammers.
These concerts, which became more and more elaborate, proved highly popular with the public.
In 1950 Hoffnung began a career as a broadcaster, during the course of which he made many appearances on the radio as both raconteur and panel member.
He was a brilliant improviser with a dry wit and a masterly sense of timing.
An Oxford Union speech in 1958 in which he told ‘The Story of the Bricklayer’ became a classic recording.
The story, involving a bricklayer's misfortunes as he attempted to lower some bricks from the top of a building in a barrel, was not especially funny, but Hoffnung's manner and delivery reduced his audience to hysterics.
In appearance Hoffnung was stocky, bald, and benign.
Nicolas Bentley [q.v.]
described him as looking like a ‘Teutonic Pickwick’.
His manner, voice, and looks were those of a much older man and his wife was sometimes mistaken for his daughter.
In 1952 he married Annetta, daughter of Percy Alfred Bennett, electrical contractor, of Folkestone.
They had one son and one daughter.
Hoffnung was only thirty-four when he died of a cerebral haemorrhage in Hampstead 28 September 1959.
[The Times , 29 September 1959; Annetta Hoffnung,Gerard Hoffnung , 1988.]
J C Sainty
,John (c. 1608–1691), clerk of the parliaments, was born c .1608, the only child of Thomas Browne, citizen and grocer of London, and his wife Joan, whose surname may have been Wilson.
He belonged to a family which originated at Bury St Edmunds.
On his father's death in 1621 he was adopted by his uncle John Browne, a merchant tailor, from whom he eventually inherited a substantial fortune.
He was admitted a student by the Middle Temple on 28 October 1628 but was not called to the bar.
On 13 March 1638 he was appointed clerk of the parliaments.
Parliament was then dissolved and he did not enter fully upon his duties as clerk of the House of Lords until the assembly of the Short Parliament in April 1640.
He was a firm adherent of the parliamentary cause and, following the final break between the king and Parliament in 1642, he remained at Westminster to serve the House of Lords there.
The abolition of the House in March 1649 deprived him of his employment until the Restoration.
On 25 June 1650 the House of Commons ordered the records of the House of Lords in Browne's custody to be delivered to Henry Scobell [q.v.],
whom they had appointed their clerk and designated clerk of the parliaments.
However, at the first meeting of the convention on 25 April 1660 the House of Lords ordered Scobell to return the records to Browne, who was reinstated as clerk of the parliaments, making a declaration of loyalty to Charles II on 30 May.
He served the House for a further thirty years until his death.
Although not a profound scholar like some of his immediate predecessors as clerk of the parliaments, Browne consolidated their work during his long term of office by bringing order and regularity to the procedure of the House of Lords.
His reputation as a record-keeper has, however, suffered due to the loss through his agency of the Braye and Nalson manuscripts from the archives of the House.
Browne was much interested in music and accumulated a large collection of musical manuscripts.
He also acquired a considerable amount of property, mainly in Northamptonshire.
He possessed a house in Twickenham in addition to his official residence in the palace of Westminster, but his principal seat was in Eydon, Northamptonshire, where he was buried 8 June 1691.
He was twice married.
His first wife was Temperance, third daughter of Sir Thomas Crew or Crewe [q.v.]
of Steane, Northamptonshire, Speaker of the House of Commons in 1623 and 1625.
She died 22 September 1634, aged twenty-five, leaving no issue.
His second wife, whom he married 28 January 1636, was Elizabeth, daughter of John Packer [q.v.]
of Shillingford, Berkshire, clerk of the Privy Seal and secretary to George Villiers, first Duke of Buckingham [q.v.].
She bore him two daughters and was buried 13 June 1691, five days after her husband.
[M. F. Bond, ‘The Formation of the Archives of Parliament, 1497–1691’,Journal of the Society of Archivists , vol. i, 1957, pp. 151–8;House of Lords Record Office Memorandum , no. 61, 1979, pp. 13–14; typescript notes on John Browne compiled by M. Edmond, House of Lords Record Office; G. Baker,History and Antiquities of the County of Northampton , 1822–30;House of Lords Manuscripts , new series, vol. xi, 1962, pp. xxvi–xxviii.]
Donard de Cogan
,Harry Robert (1852–1935), electrician, proprietor of the Electrical Review , and co-founder of Kempe's Engineers’ Year-book , was born in London 1 March 1852.
He was the youngest in the family of four sons and one daughter of the Revd John Edward Kempe, later rector of St James, Piccadilly (1853–95), prebendary of St Paul's, and chaplain-in-ordinary to Queen Victoria (1864–1901), and his wife Harriet, daughter of the Revd R. Wood of Osmington House, Dorset.
One of his older brothers was Alfred Bray Kempe [q.v.],
an ecclesiastical lawyer.
He was educated at Westminster School (1865–7) and at King's College, London (1867–70), where he studied applied science but took no degree.
His autobiographical reminiscences mention two years spent in the laboratory of Sir Charles Wheatstone [q.v.].
He worked for three years with Sir Samuel Canning [q.v.],
engineer-in-chief of the Telegraph Construction and Maintenance Co., and was involved with the laying of the Malta–Gibraltar cable.
He also had a working association with the civil engineer Robert Sabine, one of the pioneers of transatlantic telegraphy.
He moved to Southampton to work with (Sir) William H. Preece [q.v.],
divisional engineer in the Postal Telegraph Department (1 April 1872).
Preece was appointed electrician to the postmaster-general in 1877 and Kempe was subsequently transferred to London on 2 March 1878 to act as his assistant.
During the 1890s they carried out work on inductive telegraphy, which was particularly important for communication with lighthouses and lightships, and Preece was one of the members of the royal commission on electrical communication with lighthouses and light vessels.
Kempe was responsible for many telegraph and telephone services used by the Post Office (including sending keys, postal pneumatic extensions) and his design of the Dover–Calais cable for the London–Paris telephone was an acknowledged success.
He succeeded Preece, becoming principal technical officer on 15 March 1900 and electrician on 1 August 1907, a position from which he retired in 1913.
During World War I he was examiner to the inventions committee of the Air Ministry.
While still living with his family in London in 1871 he was amongst the first associate members of the newly formed Society of Telegraph Engineers (later the Institution of Electrical Engineers).
From 1872 onwards he contributed student articles to the Telegraphic Journal , which later became the Electrical Review .
He became the editor and one of the proprietors, retaining full control of the journal until 1931.
His major written works include A Handbook of Electrical Testing (1876),Alternating Currents (1916),The Electrical Engineers' Pocket-Book (1890), and a contribution on telephony and telegraphy for the eleventh edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica .
His Engineer's Year-book , first produced with W. Hannaford-Smith, was a major achievement and one which he steered for thirty-six years.
In 1880 he married Helen Catherine (died 1932), daughter of Major-General Byng of the Madras Light Infantry.
They had one daughter.
He lived for many years at Brockham, Betchworth, Surrey, and died there 10 April 1935.
[Post Office Electrical Engineers' Journal , 1912, pp. 1–36, 498–503; obituaries in Electrician , vol. cxi, 19 April 1935,Electrical Review , vol. cxvi, 19 April 1935, and Journal of the Institution of Electrical Engineers , vol. lxxvii, 1935, p. 893; correspondence with Westminster School, King's College, London, and Brockham Green Village Society.]
H F Oxbury
,Samuel Moses James (1867–1931), sportsman, was born 14 April 1867 in Ashfield, near Sydney, Australia, the fourth in the family of five sons and seven daughters of John Woods, of Manly Beach, Sydney.
After a year at Royston College, Sydney, he went to school at Brighton College in England.
There he made his name as a cricketer, and in particular, as a fast bowler.
In a letter to The Times , published on 9 May 1931, a correspondent signing himself ‘Old Brightonian’ recalled an occasion when Woods was bowling in a school match and the wicket-keeper, standing some ten yards back from the wicket, was unable to stop a ball which flashed by him to the boundary but was able to field the stump which the ball had knocked out of the ground.
From Brighton College Woods went on to Jesus College, Cambridge, and became a cricket blue in 1886 and captain of the university XI in 1890.
A. G. Street [q.v.],
discussing the prospects of university cricket at that time wrote: ‘The young Australian S. M. J. Woods, the present captain, is far and away the best fast bowler Cambridge has had for many years.
Very fast, straight, with a good control of the ball both as regards pitch and change of pace, he is the beau idéal of the fine amateur bowler.
He is a dangerous batsman too.’
Woods was one of only five men who played in test matches for both Australia and England.
In 1888 he played in three tests for the Australians touring in England and he was capped three times for England, playing in South Africa in 1895–6 and in the West Indies in 1896–7.
His long career for Somerset lasted from 1891 to 1910.
He was captain from 1894 to 1906 and secretary from 1899 to 1923.
Other famous cricketers, including W. G. Grace, C. B. Fry, and Sir Pelham Warner [qq.v.], all spoke highly of Woods as a fine cricketer and a skilful captain.
Gilbert Jessop [q.v.]
wrote that Woods's sportsmanship was never questioned and that drawn games were anathema to him; he was always out to win.
One example of this was an occasion described by Tony Lewis in Double Century (1987).
‘The Gentlemen v. Players match of 1900 was an extraordinary game, the Players being set 502 to win and getting them.
At half past six, the time for drawing stumps, the scores were tied, but S. M. J. Woods, the Gentlemen's (and Somerset's) captain, decided to have another shot.
He bowled it himself, and Wilfred Rhodes made the winning hit.
The M.C.C.
did not approve because playing conditions had been flouted.’
Pelham Warner said Woods had the strength of a Samson and the courage of a lion.
Woods was not only a successful cricketer; he excelled at rugby football.
He was a Cambridge blue during the years 1888–90 and won the first of his thirteen caps for England playing in the match against Wales in 1890 while he was still at university.
He captained the England XV in five matches in 1892, 1893, and 1895, and as an indefatigable forward was largely responsible for success against Ireland, Scotland, and Wales in 1891–2, when England won the triple crown.
In 1914, at the age of forty-seven, Woods enlisted in the 9th Somerset Light Infantry.
He then served as a captain in the 2nd Devonshire Regiment.
In 1925 he published My Reminiscences , a short autobiographical account of his sporting career, which gives little information about his personal life.
He never married.
He died in Taunton 30 April 1931.
[The Times , 2 May 1931; Benny Green (ed.),
The Wisden Papers 1886–1946 , 1989; John Griffiths (ed.),
Book of International Rugby 1871–1982 , 1982; William H. Frindall,England Test Cricketers , 1989.]
D Ellis Evans
, Sir Thomas Herbert (1887–1975), Welsh scholar, poet, and essayist, was born in Rhyd-ddu, Caernarfonshire, 21 September 1887, the second child and eldest son in the family of four sons and two daughters of Henry Parry-Williams, schoolmaster at Rhyd-ddu, and his wife Ann Morris.
He was educated at Porthmadog Intermediate School, the University College of Wales at Aberystwyth, Jesus College in Oxford, Freiburg University, and the École des Hautes Études at the Sorbonne in Paris.
He graduated with the degrees of MA (Wales), B.Litt.
(Oxford), and Ph.D.
(Freiburg).
During his period of study at Freiburg and Paris he held a fellowship of the University of Wales.
While still a student he won in 1912 both the chair and the crown at the National Eisteddfod of Wales in Wrexham, a feat repeated by him in 1915 at the National Eisteddfod held in Bangor.
From 1914 to 1919 he was lecturer in the department of Welsh at the University College of Wales, Aberystwyth.
Following dissension over the appointment to a professorship at Aberystwyth in 1919 (connected in part with his having been a conscientious objector during the war of 1914–18) he withdrew from his academic post in order to study in the faculty of science at the University College.
In 1920 he was elected to the chair of Welsh at Aberystwyth, a post held until his retirement in 1952.
He was a distinguished philologist, editor, and critic.
His Freiburg Ph.D.
dissertation on ‘Some Points of Similarity in the Phonology of Welsh and Breton’ was published in 1913 and his pioneering The English Element in Welsh in 1923.
He took a special interest in early free-metre poetry in Welsh, editing Carolau Richard White (1931),Canu Rhydd Cynnar (1932), and Hen Benillion (1940).
He was joint editor of Llawysgrif Hendregadredd (1933), an important source for the study of Middle Welsh court poetry, and wrote a treatise on the nature of poetry,Elfennau Barddoniaeth (1935).
He reacted to the excesses of traditionalist neo-grammarian work and derived greater satisfaction from creative writing in Welsh, both prose and verse.
He was one of the most sensitive and influential writers of the twentieth-century renaissance in Welsh literature and came to be regarded as a remarkable innovator in both style and theme.
His essays, poems in rhyming couplets, and sonnets are a powerful contribution to meditative writing in Welsh, marked both by a searching and courageous intelligence and by a superb mastery of his native language.
His creative works include Ysgrifau (1928),Cerddi (1931),Olion (1935),Synfyfyrion (1937),Lloffion (1942),Myfyrdodau (1957), and Pensynnu (1966).
He was a modest and inspiring person, greatly consumed by the mystery of life.
His flashes of light-hearted humour were commonly tinged with an awesome critical irony.
A gifted public speaker, he was at his best reading aloud his own work and delivering stylish penetrating eisteddfodic adjudications in his memorably sonorous voice.
He was admitted to the degree of D.Litt. on two occasions (Wales 1934, Oxford 1937) and to the degree of honorary LLD by the University of Wales.
He was warden of the Guild of Graduates of the University of Wales, chairman of the BBC's Welsh consultative council, president of the Honourable Society of Cymmrodorion (the society honoured him with its medal), president of the court and a fellow of the National Eisteddfod of Wales, president of the National Library of Wales, and an honorary fellow of Jesus College, Oxford.
He was knighted in 1958.
In 1942 he married Amy, of Pontyberem, Carmarthenshire, the daughter of Lewis Thomas, civil servant with the Inland Revenue.
He died 3 March 1975 at his home in Aberystwyth.
[Idris Foster (ed.),
Cyfrol Deyrnged Syr Thomas Parry-Williams , 1967; special numbers of Poetry Wales , summer 1974 and of Y Traethodydd , October 1975; Robert Gerallt Jones,T. H. Parry-Williams , 1978; Ifor Rees,Syr Thomas Parry-Williams 1887–1975 , 1981; obituary by J. E. Caerwyn Williams in Studia Celtica , vol. xii/xiii, 1977–8; personal knowledge.]
Anne Baker
,Joseph Carey (1862–1890), the ‘Elephant Man’, was born 5 August 1862 in Leicester, the eldest child in the family of two sons and one daughter of Joseph Rockley Merrick, a warehouseman in a cotton factory, and his wife Mary Jane, daughter of William Potterton, a farm labourer.
She was a Baptist Sunday-school teacher, and gave her son the name ‘Carey’ after a leading Baptist preacher in Leicester.
Merrick was educated at the local board school in Syston Street, Leicester.
His mother died of pneumonia in 1873, and his father remarried in 1874.
A perfect baby, Merrick showed the first signs of deformity at the age of twenty-one months.
It was later generally accepted that he was suffering from multiple neurofibromatosis (von Recklinghausen's disease), a very rare and incurable disease characterized by the tendency to form neurofibromas (tumours of the nerve and fibrous tissue).
Merrick was cited in twentieth-century medical textbooks as a supreme example of a case of this disease, one of the worst cases ever recorded.
However, he is now thought to have suffered from Proteus syndrome.
Whatever his disease, it developed rapidly, and by the time (Sir) Frederick Treves [q.v.]
exhibited him to the members of the Pathological Society of London in 1884 he had an enormous head, with a huge mass of bone protruding from his forehead and mouth, and folds of spongy flesh covered with skin resembling a cauliflower hanging from his head, chest, and back.
A fall as a child had led to hip disease and permanent lameness.
Although an operation on his upper jaw at Leicester Infirmary in about 1882 had removed most of the bony ‘trunk’ protruding from his mouth, his appearance was so repulsive that he could only go outside heavily disguised in a long black cloak, a peaked cap, and a mask.
The popular explanation of his condition was that his mother, in late pregnancy, had been knocked over by a runaway circus elephant, and the shock had imprinted itself on the unborn child.
Leaving school at the age of twelve, Merrick found it increasingly difficult to find employment because of his deformities, and after jobs in a cigar factory and as a haberdashery pedlar he entered the Leicester Union Workhouse in 1879.
He decided that the only way to avoid spending the rest of his life in the workhouse was to exhibit himself as a freak, and so he offered himself to Sam Torr, who ran a music-hall, the Gaiety Palace of Varieties.
A syndicate was formed to exhibit Merrick, ‘The Elephant Man, Half-a-Man and Half-an-Elephant’, and in 1884 he left the workhouse.
For two years he was exhibited in fairgrounds, and it was while he was on display in an empty shop in Whitechapel Road, London, opposite the London Hospital, that Treves first saw him.
But the attitude of the civic authorities towards the public display of freaks was becoming increasingly severe, and Merrick was passed on to an Austrian or Italian manager, who took him on tour in Europe.
By June 1886 the manager decided the venture was no longer profitable, stole Merrick's savings, and abandoned him in Brussels.
Summoned to Liverpool Street station, which Merrick had managed to reach from Brussels before collapsing, Treves arranged to have Merrick admitted to the London Hospital, and an appeal launched by the chairman of the hospital, F. C. Carr Gomm, in The Times in December 1886 provided sufficient funds to keep him there.
He had his own rooms and spent the last few years of his life reading and receiving a stream of aristocratic visitors, including the princess of Wales, venturing forth occasionally for trips to the theatre organized through the actress Madge Kendal [q.v.].
Treves visited him daily, and remarked on the sweetness of his nature and his intelligence.
Treves wrote: ‘As a specimen of humanity, Merrick was ignoble and repulsive; but the spirit of Merrick, if it could be seen in the form of the living, would assume the figure of an upstanding and heroic man, smooth browed and clean of limb, and with eyes that flashed undaunted courage.’
Merrick died suddenly in the London Hospital 11 April 1890.
It is thought that he tried to lie down to sleep — he normally slept sitting up, propped against pillows — and suffocated.
His skeleton was preserved in the museum of the medical college at the London Hospital.
[Sir Frederick Treves,The Elephant Man and other Reminiscences , 1923; Michael Howell and Peter Ford,The True History of the Elephant Man , revised edn., 1983; Peter W. Graham and Fritz H. Oehlschlaeger,Articulating the Elephant Man , 1992; Bernard Pomerance,The Elephant Man , 1980 (a play, first produced 1977).]
Trevor I Williams
,George (1631–1711), chemist, lacked, by his own account, ‘the great blessings of academical education’, save what he had ‘fetched out of the fire’ in his laboratory, and virtually nothing is known of his origins.
His date of birth has to be inferred from the preface to the third (1709) edition of his Compleat Course of Chymistry , in which he says that he was then seventy-eight.
This work contains an engraved portrait, showing aquiline features, evidently drawn in middle life.
He first emerges shortly before 1665, when he was established in London at the sign of Hermes Trismegistus, in Watling Street, as a maker of chemicals, largely medicinal.
Later, from about 1690, he operated at the sign of Hermes Head in Well Yard, west Smithfield.
He catered for ‘Doctors of Physick, Apothecaries, Chirurgions, and others Studious of Physick or Curious in Chymical Operations’.
During the plague of 1665 Wilson was kept busy supplying the potions — many containing arsenic, antimony, and sulphur — with which physicians sought to control the disease.
Some of his colleagues succumbed, among them George Starkey [q.v.],
from whom he had acquired the recipe for his famous ‘compound soap pills’, which found their way into the London Pharmacopoeia in 1746.
The ‘soap’ was a mixture of salt of tartar and turpentine, blended with opium.
In the 1670s he developed a very popular ‘anti-rheumatick tincture’, initially to relieve his own affliction.
Through these two remedies Wilson attracted distinguished custom.
That of James II, exercised through Wilson's patron William Paston, second Earl of Yarmouth [q.v.],
proved a mixed blessing.
In December 1688 the mob destroyed his laboratory, believing, as he said, that he ‘was preparing the Devil's Fireworks, purposely to burn the City and Whitehall’.
From about 1690 he also supported himself by giving courses of lectures on chemistry.
As a complement to these he published in 1691 A Compleat Course of Chymistry , rather similar to N. Lémery's Cours de Chymie (1675).
Illustrated with engravings of chemical apparatus, it went through many editions and is a landmark in the transformation of alchemy, with its strong mystical element, into chemistry as an exact science.
It was highly thought of by Stephen Hales [q.v.],
and as late as 1746 it was revised by the pharmaceutical chemist, William Lewis [q.v.],
then a fellow of the Royal Society, who recorded that he ‘frequently had recourse’ to the earlier editions.
We know that Wilson married, for his wife Mary helped him and continued the business for a time after his death, but nothing is known of her origins or ultimate fate.
He was buried in the parish church of St Bartholomew the Less 17 August 1711, but following an eighteenth-century reconstruction there is now no trace of his grave.
[F. W. Gibbs, ‘George Wilson (1631–1711)’,Endeavour , vol. xii, 1953, pp. 182–5 (with portrait); J. R. Partington,A History of Chemistry , vol. ii, 1961, pp. 760–1.]
Paul Brand
(ante 1248– c. 1313), administrator, first appears in surviving records, but already in a responsible position, in 1269.
He is therefore likely to have been born some years before 1248.
He was the son of William de Bray of Hinton in Woodford Halse in Northamptonshire.
His use of the title magister indicates that he had received a university education, presumably at Oxford.
In the late 1260s and early 1270s he is to be found acting as the business agent of the west midland baron John de Verdun.
In 1273 he became a king's clerk.
His first royal commission was levying arrears of a clerical tenth granted to the king.
Later the same year he was appointed to the custody of various Welsh castles and honours which had come into the king's hands on the death of George de Cantilupe [q.v.].
In 1275 he surrendered custody of Kilgerran but retained Abergavenny till 1281 and was embroiled during this period in a number of disputes with the tenants of the honour.
In 1281 he was commissioned by the king to search the chirograph chests for all deeds relating to Jewish debts, which had come into the king's hands through the forfeiture of the creditors concerned, and then to levy those debts for the king.
Shortly thereafter he was also given the status of a justice of the Jews.
He was paid as such down to 1287 and in 1290 was still in possession of a key to the Jewish treasury, but it is doubtful whether he actually acted as a justice for most of this period, since in February 1283 he was appointed to the full-time position of escheator of England south of Trent.
He held this position until May 1290, when he was arrested and sent to the Tower and his lands seized, probably as the result of an allegation made against him in the course of the ‘State Trials’.
One contemporary chronicler (Bartholomew Cotton, q.v.) tells us that he attempted to drown himself en route to the Tower and that he also attempted to dash his brains out while in custody, but he came to no harm and by October had been released and begun paying a fine.
By Easter term 1292 he was back in the Tower and his lands once more in the king's hands, apparently after a second conviction.
Although the amount of his fine was fixed at 2,000 marks as early as October 1292, he remained in prison in the Tower and later in Winchester Castle till 1294, when his release was obtained in return for a promise by Henry and his sureties to pay the fine off at the rate of 300 marks a year.
In 1299 he reached an agreement with the king, granting him some of the Northamptonshire lands he had acquired in return for a remission of all the king's financial claims against him.
He was never again employed directly by the king.
There is no evidence that Henry de Bray was ever married and by 1284 he had taken orders in the church which were incompatible with married status.
He is, however, known to have had a son, also named Henry.
He was still alive at the end of 1311 but was dead by September 1313.
[Public Record Office, Memoranda Rolls (E 159) and Common Pleas Plea Rolls (CP 40);Calendars of Patent and Close Rolls of the reign of Edward I.]
Margaret Ward
,Maud Edith (1866–1953), Irish nationalist, was born 21 December 1866 in Tongham, Surrey, the elder daughter (there were no sons) of Captain Thomas Gonne of the 17th Lancers and his wife Edith, daughter of William Cooke, London merchant.
Thomas Gonne was a professional soldier who was posted to Ireland in 1868.
Edith died in 1871 and Maud and her sister Kathleen were cared for by a nurse and governess.
They stayed briefly and unhappily with English relatives, an experience which contributed towards Maud's dislike of England.
Illness led them to France but in 1883 the family returned to Ireland.
Maud's conversion to Irish nationalism was fuelled by a meeting with Lucien Millevoye (died 1918), a French politician.
They were unable to marry (Millevoye, a Roman Catholic, was separated from his wife) but their ‘passionate alliance’ against the British empire lasted fifteen years.
Their son George was born 11 January 1890 (died 1891) and their daughter Iseult was born 6 August 1894 (died 1954).
Colonel Gonne died in 1886 and on her twenty-first birthday Maud inherited a substantial income.
She undertook an assignment to enlist Tsarist support for the Boulangists and then travelled to Ireland.
The Irish National League asked her to witness evictions taking place in Donegal and she soon acquired a reputation as a charismatic force.
The poet W. B. Yeats [q.v.]
fell in love with her, immortalizing her in verse; in 1902 she appeared in his play Cathleen ni Houlihan .
She co-founded Daughters of Erin (1900–14), contributing to their journal Bean na hEireann (1908–11).
She campaigned against Britain's role in the Boer war.
In 1903 she married in Paris Major John MacBride [q.v.],
the son of Patrick MacBride, shopkeeper.
Their son Sean was born 26 January 1904 (died 1988).
The MacBrides separated after two years.
MacBride was executed 5 May 1916 for his role in the 1916 rising and Maud Gonne returned to Ireland as Madame Gonne MacBride.
She was interned in the ‘German plot’ arrests of 1918 and imprisoned twice in 1923.
She opposed the treaty between Britain and Ireland, although involved in attempts to negotiate a truce at the start of civil war.
She campaigned for prisoners' rights as secretary of the Women's Prisoners' Defence League from 1922; edited Prison Bars in 1937–8; and was the Republican party of Ireland candidate in the local government elections of 1936.
She published A Servant of the Queen in 1938.
Sean MacBride was a government minister between 1948 and 1951 and later United Nations commissioner for Namibia.
Maud Gonne hated being ‘a prisoner of old age’.
She died at Roebuck House, her Dublin home, 27 April 1953, surrounded by her family.
At her funeral The O'Rahilly paid tribute to her love of justice and devotion to the Irish people.
Sarah Purser's portrait of the young Maud is in the National Gallery of Ireland and a bust of her by Lawrence Campbell stands in the Hugh Lane Gallery.
Neither does justice to her extraordinary beauty.
[Irish Press , 30 April 1953;Irish Times , 28 April 1953; Maud Gonne MacBride,A Servant of the Queen (autobiography), 1938; Nancy Cardozo,Maud Gonne: Lucky Eyes and a High Heart , 1979; Margaret Ward,Maud Gonne: Ireland's Joan of Arc , 1990; private information.]
Paul Slack
,Richard (1633–1685), farmer, patentee, and pamphleteer, was baptized 4 or 14 May 1633, the eldest son of Gregory Haines, yeoman farmer of Shere in Surrey and Sullington in Sussex, and his wife Elizabeth Pollard.
He farmed at Sullington, near Horsham, and was the most prominent member of the Horsham Baptist congregation, of which Matthew Caffyn [q.v.]
was minister.
He styled himself ‘gentleman’ and his publications show him to have been something of a virtuoso, interested in the state of agriculture, industry, and the national economy.
He corresponded with members of the Royal Society, had lodgings in Christ Church parish, Newgate Street, London, and sought support for his projects at court and in Parliament and the City.
In 1672 Haines obtained a patent for a new method of cleaning trefoil so as to improve the seed, and this led to public controversy with Caffyn, who was himself a local farmer, jealous of Haines's influence with local notables, and convinced that patents were unchristian and patentees covetous.
Haines published New Lords, New Laws (1674) in his own defence, but his excommunication by Caffyn was not finally overturned by the General Baptist Assembly until 1680.
Also in 1674 Haines published The Prevention of Poverty, or a Discourse of the Causes of the Decay of Trade, Fall of Lands, and Want of Money throughout the Nation , stressing the importance of the balance of trade and advocating a 25 per cent devaluation of shilling coins in order to stimulate domestic manufactures and discourage imports.
In the following years, however, Haines turned his attention to workhouses as a panacea for national ills, after a visit to Holland, where he admired Dutch methods of employing the poor.
In 1677 he published Proposals for building, in every County, a Working-Alms-House or Hospital, as the best Expedient to perfect the Trade and Manufactory of Linen Cloth .
In 1678 he took out a patent for a simple ‘engine’ turning wheels for spinners of flax, and recommended county workhouses to Parliament in Provision for the Poor .
Further publications followed, all aimed at a parliamentary audience:A Breviat of Some Proposals for the promoting of Industry (1679), including wool as well as linen manufacture in the workhouse scheme;A Method of Government for Such Publick Working Alms-Houses (1679), proposing the union of small parishes for workhouse purposes and the election of ‘delegates or overseers’ by contributing parishes to oversee the new institutions; and finally England's Weal and Prosperity Proposed (1681), a summary statement.
The Exclusion Parliaments found no time to discuss Haines's scheme, but, along with the proposals of Thomas Firmin [q.v.],
whom Haines knew, it influenced later projects for reform of the poor laws.
Haines's last publication was Aphorisms upon the New Way of Improving Cyder or making Cyder-Royal (1684), publicizing his third patent for a method of doubling the strength of cider and so competing with imported wines and spirits, and including general advice on the management of orchards.
His own farming seems not to have been profitable, however, perhaps because of his other activities; he and his heirs sold off over 500 acres in the later seventeenth century.
He married Mary Green in 1654, and had seven children, three of whom (two sons and one daughter) survived infancy.
He died in London 29 May 1685 and was buried at Christ Church, Newgate Street.
[Haines's publications; C. R. Haines,A Complete Memoir of Richard Haines , 1899; J. Thirsk (ed.),
Agrarian History of England and Wales , vol. v, 1984; E. D. Bebb,Nonconformity and Social and Economic Life 1660–1800 , 1935.]
H F Oxbury
, Sir Francis Arthur (1869–1932), inspector-general of the Chinese maritime customs, was born in Scarborough 17 October 1869, the son of Archdeacon Anthony Stocker Aglen, later rector of St Ninian's, Alyth, Perthshire, and his wife Margaret Elizabeth, eldest daughter of Stephen Mackenzie [q.v.],
surgeon.
He was educated at Marlborough College, and in 1888, on the advice of Sir Robert Hart [q.v.],
he joined the Chinese Maritime Customs Service of which Hart was the head.
That service played an important part in the economy of China, providing the government with its most reliable source of revenue and underwriting the large foreign loans upon which it was dependent.
Between 1888 and 1900 Aglen served in a number of posts in Peking, Amoy, Canton, and Tientsin; in 1897 he was appointed to the rank of commissioner; and shortly after the Boxer rising broke out in 1900 he was posted to Shanghai as officiating inspector-general while Hart was a refugee in the British legation under siege in Peking.
During the years between 1901 and 1910 he served as commissioner in Nanking and Hangkow and as chief secretary at the inspectorate-general, Peking.
After a dispute with the Chinese authorities Hart left China on leave in 1908 and never returned, although he remained titular head of the Customs Service until his death in 1911.
In 1910 Aglen became officiating inspector-general, and on Hart's death was appointed head of the service by the Chinese government.
During Hart's time the responsibilities of the customs had been concerned only with the collection of duties and the prevention of smuggling; Chinese officials were responsible for banking the revenue and for its use in the service of loans and other financial obligations to foreign governments for which it was security.
However, Aglen's appointment as inspector-general coincided with the anti-Manchu revolution of 1911–12 which resulted in the breakdown of the administrative arrangements of the Chinese, and faced by these unprecedented difficulties, Aglen made arrangements for the safety and integrity of customs revenue by placing it in foreign banks in his own name.
This was intended to be a temporary measure, but it was so successful that the Chinese authorities gave it formal recognition for the whole of Aglen's term as inspector-general (1911–27).
In fact, in 1914 he was entrusted with the task of servicing loans guaranteed by customs revenue earmarked for that purpose.
As political conditions in China became increasingly chaotic in the decade after World War I Aglen found his responsibilities becoming not only more onerous, but also more difficult to carry out without coming into conflict with one or other of the Chinese factions making demands upon him as custodian of revenues of which he was in sole charge.
He was appointed KBE in 1918.
His problems came to a head in 1927 when he was instructed by the Chinese government to collect surtaxes on foreign trade to which the treaty powers had not agreed, although the charges had been approved in principal during the Peking tariff conference of 1925–6.
Aglen refused to allow his officers to collect these duties until they had been formally approved.
In consequence, despite protests from the Diplomatic Corps, the Chinese government dismissed him from his office on 31 January 1927.
In that year he became GCMG.
Aglen also received many honours both from China and from other foreign countries, including Japan, France, Italy, Denmark, Belgium, and Norway.
In 1906 he married Senga Marion, daughter of Professor (Sir) Isaac Bayley Balfour [q.v.],
regius keeper of the Royal Botanic Garden, Edinburgh.
They had three sons and two daughters; she died at sea in 1925.
In 1927 he married Anna Moore, daughter of Murray Pringle Ritchie of Santiago, Chile.
Aglen died in Alyth 26 May 1932.
[The Times , 27 May 1932; private information.]
G C Ainsworth
, Sir Edwin John (1874–1943), plant pathologist and mycologist, was born 13 August 1874 in Kilkee, county Clare, the youngest of three sons of Thomas Butler, of Suirville, county Tipperary, resident magistrate, and his wife Annie Barry.
He was educated first in Gainsborough, Lincolnshire, and then, owing to illness, at home where he had the run of a large library.
In 1890 he attended the Christian Brothers School in Cork, and then studied medicine at Queen's College, Cork.
In 1898 Butler took the degrees of MB, B.Ch., and BAO of the Royal University of Ireland, but he never practised.
His main interest lay in botanical research and, stimulated by Marcus Hartog, professor of natural history at Cork, he specialized in aquatic phycomycetes.
Awarded an 1851 exhibition two-year travelling scholarship, from 1899 he worked in Paris (under P. van Tieghem and M. Cornu), Antibes (where G. Poirault introduced him to chytrids), Freiburg (under F. Oltmanns), and finally the Jodrell laboratory of the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew.
At the end of 1900, on the recommendation of Kew, Butler was appointed to the new post of cryptogamic botanist to the government of India.
Butler's first posting in India was to Calcutta.
In 1902 he was transferred to Dehra Dun, and in 1905 became the first imperial mycologist at the new agricultural research station at Pusa.
While in India he published some forty scientific papers on diseases of tropical crops, investigations which provided an authoritative background for his textbook,Fungi and Disease in Plants (1918), a landmark for tropical plant pathologists.
He also published his classic account of the genus Pythium (1907).
At the same time, he and his Indian staff, in collaboration with European taxonomic mycologists, began the census which culminated in Butler and G. R. Bisby's The Fungi of India (1931).
In 1913 the Imperial Bureau of Entomology was established to survey the field of plant pests and the success of this venture led, in 1919, to the founding of a complementary bureau to cover diseases of plants.
In 1920 the Imperial Bureau of Mycology was established at Kew under the directorship of Butler, who, after assembling a small staff and laying plans for the abstracting journal, the Review of Applied Mycology , visited plant pathologists in the United States, and subsequently Commonwealth countries, to obtain support for the Bureau, which flourished.
In 1927 it became a unit of the Imperial Agricultural Bureaux as the Imperial Mycological Institute and in 1930 moved into purpose-built accommodation on land leased from Kew Gardens.
There was widespread regret when Butler resigned, in 1935, to join the Agricultural Research Council, of which he became the first paid secretary.
After leaving the Institute, where he retained a small laboratory which he visited at weekends, Butler's administrative duties were so heavy that he had little time for mycological research.
He did, however, find time to complete the general part of the posthumous textbook,Plant Pathology , published in 1949 in collaboration with S. G. Jones.
Butler had an easy manner but his searching cross-questioning gave him a reputation as a somewhat intimidating examiner or assessor for appointments, duties that made frequent calls on his time.
He was also a practised diplomat, often getting his own way by inducing others to propose the course of action he desired.
He received many honours.
He was appointed CIE (1921) and CMG (1932), was knighted (1939), and was elected FRS (1926).
He was president of the British Mycological Society (1927) and the Association of Economic Biologists (1928–9), and in 1938, the University of Aberdeen awarded him an honorary LLD.
In 1901 he married Nina, daughter of Alfred John Le Mesurier, head of an old Guernsey family.
They had one son and two daughters.
Butler died in London 4 April 1943.
[E. W. Mason in Obituary Notices of Fellows of the Royal Society , vol. iv, 1943, pp. 455–74; personal knowledge.]
Bernard Capp
,Robert (c. 1591–1652), naval officer, was born c .1591 in Landulph, Cornwall, and probably belonged to a junior seafaring branch of a landed family settled in Devon.
His career was bound up with the ‘colonial-interloping’ nexus of Puritan merchants, shipowners, and masters which challenged the established trading companies before the civil war and came into prominence during it.
As a skilled shipwright he was invited by the Massachusetts Bay Company in 1629 to settle in New England, and became a freeman there in 1631.
On his return to England he joined Robert Rich, second Earl of Warwick [q.v.],
in a number of privateering ventures, and was a part-owner of the celebrated privateer, the Constant Warwick .
In 1636 he sailed to the East as second in command of the fleet led by John Weddell [q.v.],
which Sir William Courten [q.v.]
had sent out in defiance of the East India Company's monopoly, and commanded the Planter home from Goa in 1637–8.
On the outbreak of the civil war the navy rallied to Parliament, which made Warwick its lord high admiral.
Moulton, a firm parliamentarian, became one of its most important commanders.
He was captain of the Swiftsure , a second-rate, in 1643, and admiral of the forces in the Irish Sea in the summer guards of 1644–6.
In this capacity he played a prominent part in strengthening Parliament's position in Wales, and maintaining its foothold in Ireland.
He retired from active service at the end of the war but was recalled in the early summer of 1648 when Parliament found itself facing a serious mutiny in the fleet.
Rebellion in Kent had spread to the ships stationed in the Downs, and in late May the sailors drove out their admiral and demanded an accommodation with the king.
Moulton was directed to try to stem unrest in the remainder of the fleet, and also did his best to rally support for Parliament among shipowners and seafarers in London.
The mutineers eventually carried their ships to Holland.
In September Parliament sent an expeditionary force against them, under Warwick as admiral; Moulton served as his flag-captain and showed considerably more resolution than his commander.
After the fleet's return home in November Warwick played no further part in naval affairs.
Moulton was appointed to command the forces in the Downs, and was the most senior serving officer in the critical weeks that followed, which saw the execution of the king and the establishment of the Commonwealth.
His experience and loyalty made him an important figure in the remodelled navy.
He served as vice-admiral under the new generals-at-sea in 1649, and sailed with General Robert Blake [q.v.]
in March 1650 in the same position in the expedition dispatched to Portugal against Prince Rupert [q.v.].
As John IV of Portugal had offered protection to Rupert's squadron, no military resolution was possible, and a lengthy stalemate ensued.
While the English fleet lay off Lisbon Moulton was sent ashore to try to negotiate a diplomatic settlement with the king.
In October Rupert at last slipped out and made for the Straits of Gibraltar.
Blake and Moulton at once gave chase, and were soon able to report that the Royalist squadron had been almost totally destroyed.
Moulton returned home with Blake in February 1651.
A few weeks later, in April, he was nominated navy commissioner and master attendant at Portsmouth, with charge of a dockyard that was rapidly growing in importance.
He proved himself an effective administrator, but died 22 September 1652 after little more than a year in office.
His wife Katharine survived him.
Their son Robert (d .
1668), who was married to the daughter of Commissioner Peter Pett [q.v.],
held several commands in the parliamentary navy in the period 1646–52 and again during the second Dutch war.
Another son, James, also served in the parliamentary navy.
[J. R. Powell,The Navy in the English Civil War , 1962; B. S. Capp,Cromwell's Navy , 1989.]
Susan Agnes Stussy
,Michael (c. 1588–1653), stationer and author, was born in Eynsham, Oxfordshire,c .1588, the son of Richard Sparke, a husbandman according to the records of the Stationers' Company, to which Michael was apprenticed in 1603.
He obtained his freedom in 1610, and thereafter built a successful business as printer and publisher, despite being frequently at the centre of political and religious controversy and at odds with the more established members of his company.
He published 171 titles in all, writing or compiling ten of them and contributing introductions to ten more.
William Prynne [q.v.]
was the most notable of his authors.
Sparke published forty-two of Prynne's works, including Histrio-mastix (1633), which earned him the antagonism of William Laud [q.v.]
and repeated appearances before the court of high commission.
To his non-political contemporaries, however, Sparke was probably best known as the compiler of Crums of Comfort , a collection of prayers for such crises as death, poverty, and war, which went through forty-four editions from its first publication in 1628 to the last in 1755.
Two later works reflected Sparke's professional concerns as a stationer.
In Scintilla (1641) he attacked printing monopolies, named monopolists, and urged that the Stationers' Company should be run more democratically.
In A Second Beacon Fired by Scintilla (1652) he described his own apprenticeship and career, lamented the hardship caused to stationers by the civil war, and now argued that the availability of popish and heretical works showed that the press was too free.
Sparke enjoyed considerable financial success (his will indicates that he bought a gentleman's estate and his first wife was connected to the Warwickshire gentry) and political influence, which came from publishing works no other printer would touch.
Sparke's works show that he had an intense curiosity about the economic, political, religious, social, and scientific concerns of the day.
Two considered the treatment of poverty and idleness:Grevos Grones for the Poor (1622) and The Poore Orphans Court (1636).
Other writings reflecting the breadth of his interests were Thankful Remembrance of Gods Wonderful Deliverances of This Land (1628),A Catalogue of Printed Books Written by William Prynne (1643),Artificial Fire, or coale for rich and poore (1644) which promoted a new coal substitute, and two historical works,The Narrative History of King James (1651) and The Plots of Jesuites (1653).
Sparke was twice married: his first wife was named Elizabeth and his widow was Isabel.
He had two sons, Michael, a stationer, and Philip, who murdered his brother in December 1645.
Three daughters (Elizabeth Baskerville, Sarah Hutton, and Mary Sutton) survived Sparke who died in London 26 December 1653.
[Susan A. Stussy, ‘Michael Sparke, Puritan and Printer’, Ph.D.
thesis (1983) for the University of Tennessee, Knoxville; Sparke's will (Public Record Office: PROB 11/199 407A).]
R G Davies
(c. 1335–1395), royal servant and bishop, was from the West Riding of Yorkshire, probably from a family of modest account.
His spinster sister, Alice, lived with him and was his principal legatee.
Other kinsfolk included at least one other sister, the brothers John and Thomas Sneynton, Cecily Sneynton, John Thomas, and Eleanor and Joanne, daughters of Agnes.
He also had ‘poor relations’ in Aton-in-Pickering in 1395.
He became a royal clerk, probably by July 1359, certainly by 1361.
Exhibiting nothing more than competence, he became keeper of the great wardrobe on 27 June 1369, at the time when Edward III, and hence his court and government, were lapsing into passivity.
In such circumstances Wakefield, like others well-placed, could direct royal patronage in the Church towards himself without doing much in return: the treasurership of St Paul's Cathedral (1369–75), the archdeaconry of Northampton (1371–2), the prestigious archdeaconry of Canterbury (1374–5), and much else.
Wakefield even secured election to the small but immensely rich see of Ely in June 1373, but such was the disarray round the old king that Edward III also nominated his confessor, John Woodruff.
Pope Gregory XI plumped for Thomas Arundel [q.v.],
the twenty-year-old son of Richard Fitzalan, Earl of Arundel [q.v.],
and a future archbishop of Canterbury.
Undoubtedly this proved the right choice, if for the wrong reasons.
On 12 September 1375 the pope awarded Wakefield the lesser see of Worcester, his share of the spoils carved out between royal and papal envoys at the concordat of Bruges; this superseded an election by the chapter of their prior, supposedly confirmed by the king.
Wakefield was consecrated in Hatfield on 28 October 1375.
According to scandal, his promotion also dashed the hopes of John Wycliffe [q.v.],
who thereupon took the road to heterodoxy in his disappointment: this cannot be more than a fragment of the story.
Wakefield was a court creature, and only a draught animal at that.
Still, after the court had been rocked by the impeachments and accusations of corruption made in the ‘Good Parliament’ of 1376, John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster [q.v.],
led a vicious counter-attack against the critics, and on 11 January 1377 put in Wakefield as treasurer of the realm, an uncompromising and unconvincing choice.
As soon as Edward III died (Wakefield being an executor of his will) and a general reconciliation was mooted to look after the young Richard II, Wakefield was replaced (19 July 1377).
He retired from public life (or, just as likely, was not invited to continue in it).
Although he came to Parliaments regularly enough, he spent his last twenty years running his diocese with the same competent mediocrity by which he had come by it.
None the less, his deathbed will is a surprisingly sensitive and austere statement, with an unusual concentration of his goods upon the sick and poor, especially those amongst his own tenants, ‘particularly those who have been hurt by me’.
Though his kin, servants, and three former benefices were remembered dutifully enough, there is nothing of the wider, political world where he had made his fortune, scarcely more of his own diocese or even of the cathedral itself, before whose pulpit he sought burial.
He died the next day, 11 March 1395.
[W. P. Marett (ed.),
A Calendar of the Register of Henry Wakefield, Bishop of Worcester, 1375–95 , Worcestershire History Society, new series, vol. vii, 1972 (includes will); R. G. Davies, ‘The Episcopal Appointments in England and Wales of 1375’,Mediaeval Studies , vol. xliv, 1982; R. G. Davies, ‘The Episcopate in England and Wales, 1375–1443’, Ph.D.
thesis (1974) for the University of Manchester.]
G H L Le May
,George William Erskine (1853–1919), politician, churchman, and writer, was born in London 3 February 1853, the youngest of six children (two sons and four daughters) of Lord Charles James Fox Russell (son of John Russell, sixth Duke of Bedford, q.v.), and his wife Isabella Clarissa, daughter of William Davies of Penylan, Carmarthenshire.
Lord Charles was an MP from 1832 until 1848, and was then appointed serjeant-at-arms attending the House of Commons, and George Russell's childhood was spent in the official lodgings in Speaker's Court.
It was there, he said, that he acquired the three enthusiasms of his life — politics, religion, and books.
He was a lame and sickly child; at Harrow, where he was sent as a home-boarder, he could play no games.
He went as a scholar to University College, Oxford, in 1872; there he combined studiousness with acquiring a reputation as a ‘riding man’, and was elected to Vincent's Club.
In 1874, his physical ailments were compounded by myelitis; he described himself as ‘maimed for life, with all hope of academic distinction at an end’.
He took a pass degree at Oxford.
He was elected to Parliament as member for Aylesbury in 1880.
Although born in the very purple of Whiggery, he displayed independence of judgement, and, in spite of his personal admiration for W. E. Gladstone (tempered by a certain irreverence), he attached himself to the radical section of the Liberal Party.
He wrote articles for the Fortnightly Review , favoured the disestablishment of the Church of England, and was sympathetic to the ‘unauthorized programme’ of Joseph Chamberlain [q.v.].
In June 1883 he was appointed as parliamentary secretary to the Local Government Board; his investigations of the London slums were partly responsible for the appointment of a royal commission on the housing of the poor in 1884.
He lost his seat in 1885.
In 1889 he was chosen as an alderman of the newly established London county council, in the Progressive interest.
He served until 1895, being particularly active in the movement to raise the tone of the London music-halls by prohibiting sales of alcohol on the premises.
He was re-elected to Parliament in 1892, as member for North Bedfordshire, and was appointed under-secretary for India and then, in 1894, under-secretary in the home department.
He retired from politics in 1895, and devoted himself to his other two enthusiasms, religion and books.
From early life he had been deeply interested in evangelical Christianity (he published, anonymously, a religious tract at the age of fourteen), and he had an abiding belief in personal social service.
While at Oxford he taught at a Sunday school in Cowley and a night school at St Frideswide's church.
After Oxford he was influenced by the Christian socialists, especially Charles Kingsley and F. D. Maurice [qq.v.].
He was a regular workhouse and hospital visitor, conducted Bible classes, and was active in Christian missions.
After he retired from Parliament, he was invited by Edward Talbot, bishop of Rochester [q.v.],
to do practical work in south London.
In 1898 he became a diocesan lay reader.
He maintained excellent relations with the Dissenting movements, and spoke frequently at PSA (Pleasant Sunday Afternoon) meetings.
He was strongly in favour of Church of England services for men only, as a means of introducing working men to church.
He wrote throughout his adult life (he first appeared in print at the age of thirteen, with some verses on a Volunteer encampment).
He was a regular contributor to many of the leading newspapers and periodicals; his weekly articles for the Manchester Guardian were republished in two series of Collections and Recollections (1898).
His religious opinions were set out in A Short History of the Evangelical Movement (1915), and his personal interpretation of Whig philosophy in Politics and Personalities (1917).
He edited the letters of Matthew Arnold, and wrote a number of biographies and memoirs, including those of Gladstone, Sydney Smith, E. B. Pusey, Bishop King of Lincoln, and H. P. Liddon.
He was one of the founders of the National Liberal Club, and of the White Cross Society.
He was awarded an LLD by the University of St Andrews in 1899, and became a privy councillor in 1907.
He died 17 March 1919 at his house in Wilton Street, London.
He was unmarried.
[G. W. E. Russell,One Look Back , 1911;The Times , 18 March 1919.]
Jose Harris
,Emmeline , Lady Pethick-Lawrence (1867–1954), suffragette, was born 21 October 1867 in Clifton, Bristol, the second and oldest surviving child in the family of thirteen children (five of whom died in infancy) of Henry Pethick, a Nonconformist businessman of Cornish origin, and his wife, whose maiden name was Collen.
She had an unhappy childhood in Weston-super-Mare, and was briefly sent to boarding-school in Devizes at the age of eight.
As a young woman she fell under the influence of the evangelical Christian Socialist Mark Guy Pearse.
Early in the 1890s she went to work under Mrs Hugh Price Hughes at the West London Mission.
In 1895 she left the mission to found the Esperance Working Girls' Club with Mary Neal, and in 1897 she founded the Maison Esperance, a co-operative dressmaking business.
In 1900 she helped to found a hostel at Littlehampton for working girls' holidays.
She was also active at Percy Alden's Mansfield House settlement in Canning Town, where she met Frederick Lawrence (later Baron Pethick-Lawrence, q.v.), prospective Liberal Unionist MP, who was living at the settlement.
They married in 1901.
He was the son of Alfred Lawrence, carpenter and later owner of a building firm.
They had no children.
It proved to be the start of a remarkable partnership.
Their early married life was taken up with a series of reformist issues, including Chinese labour and working-class representation in Parliament.
In 1906 Emmeline was introduced to the Pankhursts (Emmeline Pankhurst and her daughter Christabel, qq.v.) and Annie Kenney by James Keir Hardie [qq.v.].
She became treasurer to the Women's Social and Political Union, and with her husband's support soon became a key figure in the suffragette movement.
Together the Pethick-Lawrences transformed the WSPU into a highly effective and financially buoyant political organization.
They poured more than £6,000 of their own money into the campaign, provided it with offices and staff, and co-edited its mass-circulation newspaper,Votes for Women .
For several years they upheld the Pankhurst strategy of concentration on one single issue, though for Emmeline Pethick-Lawrence the suffragette campaign increasingly meant more than acquisition of the vote: ‘It meant to women the discovery of their own identity, the sources within of purpose, power, and will.’
She defended militancy, arguing that the violence of the suffragettes was vastly outweighed by the force used against them, and on several occasions she was imprisoned and subjected to force-feeding in Holloway gaol.
Violence escalated in 1912 and the Pethick-Lawrences and Mrs Pankhurst were tried for conspiracy.
After their conviction the contents of the Pethick-Lawrences' country home were sequestered by the courts.
They were becoming increasingly uneasy about the dictatorial stance of the Pankhursts and their attempts to expand suffragism into a more general sex war.
As a result Mrs Pankhurst asked them to withdraw from the WSPU, and the militant suffragette movement split off into the ‘Peths’ and the ‘Panks’, with Emmeline Pethick-Lawrence helping to found the non-violent Votes for Women Fellowship and the Women's Freedom League.
Her commitment to women's causes continued for the rest of her life, and when female suffrage was granted in 1918 she was one of the first women to contest a parliamentary seat, standing unsuccessfully as Labour candidate for Rusholme in 1918.
From 1914 onwards, however, her interests gradually shifted to other issues.
In 1915 she helped to organize an international women's peace conference at The Hague, and until 1922 she acted as treasurer to the Women's International League.
In the early 1920s she campaigned for widows' pensions.
Her oratory and organizational skills played an important role in her husband's election as Labour MP for West Leicestershire in 1923.
Three years later she accompanied him on a tour of India.
Thereafter she largely faded from public life, though she continued to befriend and correspond with many younger feminists.
Throughout her life she retained a passionate belief in the possibility of universal human improvement, and in the eventual dissolution of barriers of class, race, creed, and sex.
This belief was supported by an equally passionate belief in the triumph of spiritual over material forces, and by a rather ill-defined theology of divinely generated social progress.
Because her talents lay in organization, personal inspiration, and a somewhat Wagnerian style of oratory, rather than in writing and analytical thought, it is difficult to pinpoint precisely the nature of her impact upon contemporaries, but she clearly inspired great personal devotion in both women and men.
In old age she was troubled by deafness and played little active part in her husband's later political career.
She died at home in Gomshall, Surrey, 11 March 1954.
[Emmeline Pethick-Lawrence,My Part in a Changing World , 1938; Vera Brittain,Pethick-Lawrence: a Portrait , 1963; Roger Fulford,Votes for Women , 1957; Sylvia Pankhurst,The Suffragette Movement , 1931; Brian Harrison,Prudent Revolutionaries , 1987.]
Barbara M D Smith
,Joseph Henry (1827–1881), screw manufacturer, was born in London 19 September 1827, the son of John Sutton Nettlefold (1792–1866) and his wife Martha Chamberlain (1794–1866), both Unitarians.
What was to become the future firm of Guest, Keen & Nettlefold (GKN) began when John Nettlefold opened an ironmonger's shop at 54 High Holborn, London, in 1823, and in 1826 a water-mill at Sunbury-on-Thames to make iron wood-screws; this was followed in 1834 by a steam-powered factory in Baskerville Place off Broad Street in Birmingham, the centre of the screw trade.
The crucial breakthrough came in 1854, with the purchase of the United Kingdom rights of an American patent for the manufacture, by steam machinery, of a revolutionary wood-screw with a pointed end which acted as its own gimlet.
John Nettlefold needed £30,000 to buy the patent and to begin manufacture; his wife's brother, Joseph Chamberlain, invested £10,000, becoming an equal partner in Nettlefold & Chamberlain, and sending his own son, also named Joseph [q.v.],
to look after the investment.
The older generation of both families remained in London; the new partnership was managed by Joseph Nettlefold, his elder brother Edward, and the younger Joseph Chamberlain.
A factory was built in Heath Street, Smethwick, on the canal and railway on the outskirts of Birmingham; it comprised 20,000 square feet in two single-storey sheds.
By 1864 it had 600 employees.
When the Chamberlains left the firm in 1874, Joseph Nettlefold moved into the void thus created.
In 1878, on his brother's death, he became chairman, and prime mover in the creation of a limited liability company in 1880.
By then, the Smethwick factory had trebled in size, and new offices had been built in Broad Street.
It was Joseph, too, who organized the building up of the firm's virtual monopoly of the wood-screw trade in Britain.
These two operations went together, for additional capital was needed to buy up competitors, and iron and wire suppliers.
The neighbouring firm, Birmingham Screw, was acquired; this permitted further extension at Smethwick.
Not much is known of Joseph Nettlefold's personality.
He was educated in a Nonconformist academy; his abilities lay in mathematics, engineering, and business administration.
An obituary said that his tastes were simple, and that he was ‘wholly free from a sense of personal importance’.
He became a member of the Institute of Mechanical Engineers in 1860.
He left a gross estate of £287,887, plus twenty-five pictures by David Cox [q.v.],
which he left to the Birmingham Art Gallery (on condition that it opened on Sundays).
He also left £1,000 to the King's Heath and Moseley Institute.
He was a man of great business capacity, and his leadership established the prosperity of the company for a decade after his death; thereafter it declined, until it was acquired by Arthur Keen, of Guest, Keen & Co., in 1902.
In 1867 Nettlefold married a Catholic, Mary Maria Seaborne (1835– c .1886/7), who had worked in the Broad Street warehouse, the daughter of Joseph Chamberlain, shoe manufacturer at 36 Milk Street, London.
They had three daughters, none of whom was connected with the family business.
Nettlefold died of an  apoplectic seizure, 22 November 1881, at his Scottish home, Allean House, near Pitlochry, Perthshire.
[Proceedings of the Institute of Mechanical Engineers , 1882; Edgar Jones,A History of GKN, Volume One: Innovation and Enterprise 1759–1918 , 1987; D. J. Jeremy (ed.),
Dictionary of Business Biography , vol. iv, 1985; private information.]
Ronald M Birse
,John (1817–1872), textile machinery manufacturer, was born in Dobcross, Saddleworth, Yorkshire, 15 September 1817, the second of at least three sons of Henry Platt and his wife Sarah Whitehead.
After being educated at Dunham Massey, Cheshire, he was apprenticed as an iron moulder, and in 1837 entered the family business established in Oldham as Hibbert & Platt, makers of cotton machinery.
In 1846 he became the senior partner, following the deaths of his father in 1842, his elder brother in 1845, and Elijah Hibbert in 1846.
With the support of his younger brother James he bought out the Hibbert interest in 1854 and renamed the firm Platt Brothers and Co.
Since about 1840 they had been expanding the scope of their products to include the whole range of cotton-processing machinery.
At the same time he was responsible for many improvements, taking out seven patents up to 1851 for cotton spinning and several thereafter for power-loom weaving.
The firm expanded its activities still further under his direction and became the largest employer of labour in Oldham, the workforce rising from 400 in 1837 to 6,000 in 1870.
After the restrictions on the export of machinery were abolished in 1843 the firm achieved a dominant position in the world market, helped by the outstanding success of its imaginative displays at the Great Exhibition of 1851.
Platt was equally active and successful in politics.
He became chairman of the Oldham Liberal Party in 1847 and was mayor of Oldham three times between 1854 and 1862.
He was MP for Oldham from 1865 until his death, a radical and a staunch advocate of free trade.
He was instrumental in bringing the London and North Western Railway to Oldham, and served as a director of the company from 1862 to 1867.
He believed that the activities of trade unions should be restricted to the sphere of welfare, but he strongly supported the provision of education for working men and women, establishing a works library in 1848, a new School of Science and Art in Oldham in 1865, and a works school in 1866.
He was elected a member of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers in 1859 and his paper ‘On Machinery for the Preparing and Spinning of Cotton’ was published in their Proceedings in 1866.
Platt bought a country estate at Llanfairfechan in 1857 and was appointed first a JP and later a high sheriff of Caernarvon, as well as being a JP and DL of Lancashire.
In 1842 he married Alice, daughter of Samuel Radcliffe, then the leading local cotton manufacturer; they had seven sons and six daughters.
He died suddenly from typhoid at the Hotel Maurice, Paris, 18 May 1872.
[D. J. Jeremy (ed.),
Dictionary of Business Biography , 1986;Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers , 1873, pp. 19–20; D. A. Farnie, ‘The Metropolis of Cotton Spinning, Machine Making and Mill Building’, in The Cotton Mills of Oldham , Oldham Libraries, 2nd edn. 1985.]
Richard J Howarth
, Sir Aubrey (1852–1928), geologist, was born 20 April 1852 in London, the younger son of William Strahan (formerly Snow, who changed his name in 1831), a banker (until convicted of fraud in 1855), of Blackmore Hall, Sidmouth, and his wife Elizabeth Anne Dorothea, only daughter of General (Sir) George Bulteel Fisher.
Educated at Eton College (1865–70) and St John's College, Cambridge (1870–5), Strahan obtained a third class in the natural sciences tripos (1874) and took his BA (1875), MA (1878), and Sc.D. (1907).
St John's was an active centre of geological work and this decided Strahan to join the Geological Survey of England and Wales.
He was appointed temporary assistant geologist in 1875.
Between 1875 and 1890 he revised earlier geological mapping of many parts of Britain.
Structural geology was his favourite area of investigation throughout his career and his field mapping was excellent.
In 1891 the director,(Sir) Archibald Geikie [q.v.],
appointed him to undertake a complete revision of the geology of the south Wales coalfield and by 1893 Strahan had five geologists working under him.
When (Sir) Jethro Teall [q.v.]
became director in 1901, Strahan was appointed district geologist in charge of the south Wales region.
In 1903 he joined the royal commission on the coal supplies of Great Britain (1901–5).
His work did much to promote recognition of the importance of concealed coal deposits.
In 1909 he was appointed assistant to the director of the Geological Survey and, when Teall retired in 1914, Strahan succeeded him.
At the outbreak of war in 1914, Strahan supervised the preparation of a set of vital military geological maps of Belgium and other war zones; and with the cessation of foreign sources of supply an exhaustive inventory of native sources of supply of strategic minerals (ranging from barytes to sand) was needed.
This led to the publication of the special reports on the mineral resources of Great Britain which, together with the memoirs on the geology of the south Wales coalfield (finally completed with the publication of the thirteenth memoir in 1921, all edited by Strahan), established Strahan as one of the foremost British economic geologists.
He retired in July 1920.
Strahan was a very successful administrator and organizer.
He was shrewd, diligent, methodical, and impartial.
Although his manner appeared reserved on first meeting, he could be a genial, friendly, and charming companion.
His interests included archaeology and photography.
He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1903 and served on its council (1921–3).
He also served as president of the Geological Society (1912–14); president, section C (geology) of the British Association (1904); and vice-president, International Geological Congress (1913).
He was appointed KBE in 1919, partly in recognition of his services during the war years, and was also awarded the Wollaston medal of the Geological Society (1919) and an honorary LLD (Toronto).
In 1886 he married Fanny Evelyn Margaret (died 1926), daughter of Edward Henry Roscoe, gentleman, of Chester.
They had one son.
Strahan died 4 March 1928 at Fairfield, near Reading, Berkshire.
[John S. Flett,The First Hundred Years of the Geological Survey of Great Britain , 1937;idem in Proceedings of the Royal Society , series B, vol. ciii, 1928;Geological Magazine , vol. lxv, 1928, p. 238.]
Richard Ollard
, Sir Richard (c. 1615–1690), Royalist soldier and conspirator, was the second son of Richard Willys, of Fen Ditton, Cambridgeshire, a manor granted to his grandfather Thomas Willys by James I in 1605.
Educated at St John's School in Hertford, and Christ's College at Cambridge, matriculating in 1631, Willys was admitted to Gray's Inn in the same year.
He had, however, already embarked on a military career in the Dutch service.
He distinguished himself at the siege of Breda in 1637 and in 1639 was back in England, serving in the Scots expedition of that and the following year.
He was made a member of the King's Guard at Whitehall in 1641–2.
Knighted at Shrewsbury, the headquarters of Prince Rupert [q.v.],
in October 1642 for his conduct in a cavalry skirmish, he was appointed colonel of horse under Viscount Grandison, surrendering with him at Winchester in December and, like him, breaking his parole.
By the autumn of 1643 he was major-general to Arthur Capel (first Baron Capel of Hadham, q.v.) in Cheshire.
Captured in a raid on the Royalist camp at Ellesmere in January 1644, he spent nine months in the Tower of London before being exchanged.
He returned to Oxford in October and the portrait of him by William Dobson [q.v.],
now in the possession of Newark Corporation, was probably painted then.
By January 1645 he had joined Prince Rupert near Bath.
In May he was appointed governor of Newark and colonel-general of Nottinghamshire, Lincolnshire, and Rutland.
But his enjoyment of this licence to plunder one of the richest parts of England was short-lived.
In October the king arrived, pursued by Rupert, whom he had dismissed his service and forbidden his presence.
Willys, in defiance of the royal wishes, marched out to welcome his old commanding officer.
After scenes of tension memorably recounted by Edward Hyde, first Earl of Clarendon [q.v.],
Willys was replaced as governor by John, Baron Belasyse [q.v.],
whom he at once challenged to a duel.
He finally withdrew with Rupert and, like him, was at length formally reconciled to the king, being pardoned on 3 April 1646 and created baronet on 11 June.
He then went abroad, mostly to Italy, returning to Fen Ditton in the summer of 1652.
Willys's claim to fame, or infamy, rests on his membership of the Sealed Knot, the inner ring of six Royalist conspirators, all of them, except Willys, aristocrats.
Two indeed were peers, one the Lord Belasyse with whom Willys again quarrelled fiercely, perhaps even sending him a second challenge.
The Knot came into existence about November 1653 and throughout its six years of intermittent activity achieved less than nothing.
Younger, more daring conspirators, such as John (later Viscount) Mordaunt [q.v.],
regarded it with contempt if not positive suspicion.
Willys, who had been imprisoned in 1654 and 1655 had in fact reached an understanding with John Thurloe [q.v.],
Cromwell's chief of intelligence, almost certainly by the autumn of 1656 and on his own admission by March or April 1657.
In exchange for information Thurloe undertook that no Royalist life should be taken as a result of it.
The operation of the system is strikingly instanced in the secret visit to London of James Butler, Marquess (later Duke) of Ormonde [q.v.],
one of the king's chief advisers, in January 1658.
He conferred with Willys, who duly informed Thurloe of his whereabouts, having first warned Ormonde to change his lodgings, so enabling him to keep one jump ahead of the pursuit.
On 3 July 1659 Willys was placarded on the Exchange as a traitor to the king.
A few weeks later (Sir) Samuel Morland [q.v.],
one of Thurloe's assistants, betrayed Willys to the king and Hyde, sending over letters whose hand they recognized.
Willys was instantly denounced but many ardent Royalists, including three of his colleagues in the Knot, refused to accept his guilt.
Morland, a notoriously untrustworthy man, openly boasted of his skill as a forger.
But the weight of evidence, including Willys's own defence, is overwhelming.
His motives, on the other hand, are anything but clear.
On 15 May 1660 Willys was condemned but pardoned, on condition of never again coming into the king's presence or entering the verges of the court.
He lived on quietly at Fen Ditton, where he was buried 9 December 1690.
His will, proved in December of that year, shows him to have been in easy circumstances.
[David E. Underdown,Royalist Conspiracy in England 1649–1660 , 1960, and ‘Sir Richard Willys and Secretary Thurloe’,English Historical Review , vol. lxix, 1954; D. and S. Lysons,Magna Britannia , vol. ii, 1810;Notes and Queries , 12th series, vol. x, 1922, pp. 101–2, 123–4, 145–6.]
Helen Wallis
,Jean (c. 1505–post 1560), known in France as Jehan Roz, hydrographer to Henry VIII, was born in Dieppe c .1505.
His father David Ross was one of a number of Scotsmen who went to Dieppe to seek a living.
His mother was French, probably Dieppoise.
In his early years he sailed in the ships of the Dieppe armateur , Jean Ango.
He may have been on the expedition from Dieppe to Sumatra under the command of Jean Parmentier, 1529–30.
He was in Guinea and Brazil in 1539.
From 1540 to 1542 he appears to have resided in Paris, studying the maritime sciences.
He moved to London with his wife Coleta and his children in 1542 to seek service under Henry VIII.
In September he was appointed royal hydrographer and he and his wife and children were made denizens of England under royal warrant.
His first gifts to Henry were a navigating instrument of his own invention, the ‘differential quadrant’(a combined magnetic compass and universal dial), and a navigational treatise for its use, ‘Traicte des differences du compas aymante’(British Library, Royal MS 20.
B.vii).
Rotz then presented to Henry the ‘Boke of Idrography’, 1542 (British Library, Royal MS 20.
E.ix), comprising a magnificent illuminated atlas of the world.
Vignettes drawn ad vivum depict the lives of the inhabitants of the distant regions, such as a raja's procession in Sumatra, and a Tupinambá village in Brazil.
A remarkable geographical feature is the ‘Londe of Java’, a land mass which may represent the Portuguese discovery of Australia in 1528.
A further example of Rotz's work has been identified in an anonymous chart of the English Channel,c .1543 (British Library, Cotton I.ii.65.66).
In January 1547, when Henry was dying, Rotz sought the help of the French ambassador Odet de Selve to secure his return to France.
In order to win the favour of the French king, he became a secret agent, providing political and military intelligence and maps of England and Scotland.
He effected his escape to France in June 1547, and became the leading merchant captain of Dieppe.
In 1551 he was rewarded with a grant of ennoblement.
In 1559 he was in charge of the naval operations for the abortive invasion of Scotland under the command of Réné of Lorraine, the Marquis d'Elboeuf.
He makes a final appearance with two ships at Middleburg, the port of Zealand, on 8 June 1560.
Rotz was acclaimed in 1568 by Nicolas de Nicolay, ‘premier Cosmographe du Roy’, as one of the greatest French navigators, and although his role as a hydrographer is not recorded in the early chronicles of Dieppe, his ‘Boke’ ranks as one of the greatest maritime atlases of the Renaissance.
[Helen Wallis (ed.),
The Maps and Text of the Boke of Idrography Presented by Jean Rotz to King Henry VIII , 1981; Germain Lefèvre-Pontalis (ed.),
Correspondance politique de Odet de Selve …, 1888.]
W F Bynum
,Thomas Wharton (1808–1891), physiologist and ophthalmic surgeon, was born in St Andrews 9 January 1808, the second of three sons (there were also three daughters) of Richard Jones (died 1821), sometime secretary of HM Customs for Scotland, and his wife Margaret Cockburn of Ayton Mains, county Berwick.
Through his maternal grandmother, Jones fancied he could trace a distinguished ancestry back to the Norman conquest, but he grew up in straitened circumstances, and money remained a problem throughout his life.
After early education in Stirling, Dalmeny, and Musselburgh, he enrolled in arts classes at Edinburgh University in 1822.
Switching to medicine, he distinguished himself, qualifying LRCS in 1827.
His appointment as demonstrator in the extramural anatomy school of Robert Knox [q.v.]
coincided with the scandal of William Burke and William Hare [qq.v.], and Jones left Edinburgh for Glasgow in 1829.
There his interests in ophthalmology and embryology were cultivated.
Around 1835 he moved to a practice in Cork; after an extended tour of continental universities, he settled in London in 1838.
Never a particularly successful medical practitioner, Jones brought a sound scientific reputation with him.
In May 1841 he was appointed lecturer in physiology at Charing Cross Hospital Medical School.
He had been elected FRS in 1840 and became FRCS in 1844.
From 1851 to 1881 he was professor of ophthalmic medicine and surgery at University College London, and although he influenced the earliest microscopical investigations of Joseph (later first Baron) Lister [q.v.],
he never took much part in college life and eventually became an object of derision among medical students, who called him ‘Mummy Jones’.
For many years he lived with his mother.
His scientific work was mostly microscopical, and included important observations on the blood circulation through capillaries, the mammalian ovum, the pathophysiology of inflammation, and the nature of the white blood corpuscles.
Much of this was summarized in his ‘State of the Blood and Blood-vessels in Inflammation, as Ascertained by Experiments, Injections, and Observations under the Microscope’, his Astley Cooper prize essay (Guy's Hospital Reports , 1850).
His Failure of Sight from Railway and Other Injuries of the Spine and Head (1869) was a speculative attempt to apply his theories of inflammation to clinical problems.
Jones was a competent eye surgeon, and his A Manual of the Principles and Practice of Ophthalmic Medicine and Surgery (1847) reached its third edition in 1865.
He published in addition shorter primers aimed at medical students and general practitioners.
His views on the nature of astigmatism were important and he improved the treatment of acute glaucoma.
After Hermann von Helmholtz introduced his ophthalmoscope, Jones became adept at using it, though he had earlier failed to recognize the significance of an ophthalmoscope devised by Charles Babbage [q.v.].
Jones was a religious man who published a treatise on natural theology and was hostile to the evolutionary work of Charles Darwin [q.v.].
He was saved in old age from extreme poverty by a private subscription and, on the recommendation of T. H. Huxley [q.v.],
a civil list pension.
This permitted him to retire to Ventnor, Isle of Wight, where he died, unmarried, 7 November 1891.
[Sir Rickman J. Godlee, ‘Thomas Wharton Jones, F.R.S.’,
British Journal of Ophthalmology , March and April 1921 (also separately printed, London, George Pulman, 1921);Plarr's Lives of the Fellows of the Royal College of Surgeons of England , vol. i, 1930, pp. 628–31;Lancet , vol. ii, 1891, pp. 1256–8.]
Alan Cameron
, Sir John (ante 1486–1559), soldier and MP, was the eldest son of John Markham of Cotham, Nottinghamshire, whose ancestors had been established in Great Markham since the twelfth century, and his wife Alice, daughter of Sir William Skipwith.
He inherited lands in Nottinghamshire and Lincolnshire worth about £450 a year, on the death of his father on 28 February 1508.
His apprenticeship as a soldier and courtier had been served in the household of Margaret Beaufort, Countess of Richmond and Derby [q.v.].
Markham joined Henry VIII's French expedition of 1513 and was knighted at the surrender of Tournai, 25 September 1513.
As a prominent local man he served on many commissions in Nottinghamshire, including those for the subsidy (1512, 1523–4) and musters (1513, 1524); and he was sheriff in 1518–19 and 1526–7, and JP from 1521 until his death.
In 1520 he was named in a papal indulgence obtained by his cousin, Sir John Willoughby, in Rome.
Markham probably entered Parliament in 1529, serving throughout the 1530s.
He attended Henry VIII in Calais in 1532, and was server at the coronation of Anne Boleyn [q.v.].
Actively involved in the dissolution of the monasteries, he was present at the execution of the prior of Lenton and two monks in 1538.
Along with George Talbot, fourth Earl of Shrewsbury [q.v.],
he held Newark against the Lincolnshire rebels in 1536, and was a royal commissioner at the subsequent trials.
Despite his enthusiastic support for the religious changes, rewards in pensions added little to his inheritance.
His friendship with Thomas Manners, first Earl of Rutland [q.v.],
dates from the 1530s, when they were involved in a long-running battle to break the hold of the bishop of Lincoln, and secure a charter of incorporation for Newark.
In 1542, when Rutland was nominated lord warden of the marches, Markham was appointed to his inner council.
He served in Scotland in the 1545 expedition of Edward Seymour, first Earl of Hertford [q.v.].
The latter, now Protector Somerset, secured Markham's return to the Parliament of 1547.
The high point of Sir John Markham's career came in 1549 when he was appointed lieutenant of the Tower.
By 1551 his prisoners included Somerset, and his brother-in-law Sir Michael Stanhope [q.v.],
casualties of the coup d'état of John Dudley, Duke of Northumberland [q.v.].
Markham was dismissed on 31 October 1551 for over-generous treatment of his prisoners.
He was present at the funeral of Edward VI, but lived in quiet retirement during Mary I's reign.
In 1557 he led a Nottinghamshire levy of 300 men to Berwick, and was returned to Parliament again in 1558, Elizabeth's first Parliament.
He died probably during the summer of 1559, for his will was made on 1 April and proved 28 October 1559.
Sir John Markham was married three times; first to Anne, daughter of Sir George Neville, by whom he had three sons; secondly to Margery, daughter of Ralph Longford; and thirdly around 1521 to Anne, widow of Richard Stanhope of Rampton, by whom he had two further sons and three daughters.
His grandson Robert succeeded him in a bare inheritance, due to provisions made in lands and goods for the children of the third marriage.
[S. D. Bindoff,The House of Commons 1509–1558 , 1982; C. R. Markham,Markham Memorials , 1913;Calendars of State Papers Domestic, Patent Rolls, Close Rolls ; Public Record Office, PCC 50 Chaynay.]
Alan Powers
,Oliver Percy (1881–1939), architect and designer, was born 8 April 1881 in Camberwell, London, the younger son (there were no daughters) of Charles Bernard (originally Charles West), theatrical manager of Scottish descent, and his wife Annie Allen, actress of Glasgow.
There was also another son from a previous marriage.
Bernard grew up at 8 Waterloo Road, London, a household kept by his father, containing, in his words, ‘vague and violent people together, to whom parents had consigned a son who would have encumbered their travels’.
On the death of his father in 1894, Bernard went to Manchester and found work as a ‘property boy and paint-room drudge’, educating himself by reading,inter alia , John Locke and John Ruskin [qq.v.], and practising drawing.
He escaped from Manchester as cabin-boy in a tramp steamer, the Manchester Commerce , and, tiring of this, became a seaman in the Norwegian barque Naja , a terrifying experience recounted in his autobiography.
He resumed scene painting in London, in the studio of Walter Hann, participating in the sporting scene as a boxer and billiards player.
He travelled to New York in the autumn of 1905 and became principal scenic artist for Klaw & Erlanger, and later technical director for the Boston Opera Company.
Here, and again in London as resident scenic artist for the Grand Opera Syndicate at Covent Garden, he became frustrated by the conservatism of management with regard to production and scenery, and returned to America after the outbreak of war in 1914, having been rejected for military service because of deafness.
Determined to try again, he crossed back in the Lusitania , and survived its sinking on 7 May 1915.
Early in 1916 he was commissioned as a camouflage officer in the Royal Engineers and served in France, Italy, and Belgium, reaching the rank of captain.
He was awarded the MC and appointed OBE.
In 1919 he returned to the London theatre, designing the Ring cycle for Sir Thomas Beecham [q.v.]
in the 1921 Covent Garden season.
Acting as consultant to the Board of Overseas Trade, he worked on the British empire exhibition, Wembley, in 1924, as a designer of friezes, decorations, and displays.
He designed a new system of lighting and stage planning for the Admiralty Theatre and staged the ‘Raid on Zeebrugge’ and ‘Air Attack on London’.
For the Paris 1925 exhibition, Bernard was technical director for the British government, but he achieved his greatest fame as consultant artistic director to the caterers J. Lyons & Co.
For the Strand Palace Hotel, 1929, he designed a spectacular entrance of reflective metal and concealed lighting, and other interiors for the Oxford Street, Coventry Street, and Strand Corner Houses, and the Cumberland Hotel, 1932, with many separate restaurants in each building, cleverly exploiting new materials and techniques in a popular decorative manner.
His knowledge of continental modern design was considerable.
He displayed it in journalism, arguing that the future of architecture lay with engineers.
In 1931 he was appointed consultant designer to Practical Equipment Ltd., manufacturers of tubular steel furniture.
His architectural works date from the late 1930s and were mostly industrial buildings, notably the Supermarine aviation works, Southampton, 1937.
Bernard was short in stature with a large head.
His former secretary described him as ‘amusing, utterly impossible, kind, and a bully’.
Bernard was married first in 1911 to Muriel Theresa Lightfoot, singer, daughter of Jabez Lightfoot, manager of the India Star Railway.
This marriage, of which there were no children, was dissolved in 1924 and in the same year he married Edith Dora Hodges, singer, daughter of Joseph Hodges, butcher of Tooting; they had three sons and one daughter.
Bernard died unexpectedly 15 April 1939 in London.
[Oliver Bernard,Cock Sparrow , 1936; private information.]
N G Coley
,John (1817–1902), chemical manufacturer, inventor of the Glover tower, was born in Newcastle upon Tyne 2 February 1817, the son of Robert Glover, cooper.
He was brought up in humble circumstances.
Glover was apprenticed to a plumber at thirteen and followed that trade for fourteen years, during which he acquired a taste for study and an interest in science.
He studied chemistry at Newcastle Mechanics' Institute in the 1830s.
In 1841 he joined the Felling Chemical Works, where he maintained the lead chambers of the sulphuric-acid plant.
The idea for his invention of a tower in which the oxides of nitrogen, the catalyst in the lead-chamber process, would be retained and returned to the process for reuse, dates from this period.
In 1852 he was employed by H. L. Pattinson [q.v.]
at the Washington chemical works, where large-scale trials of his tower were made in about 1859.
It was found to improve the efficiency of the process by extracting the oxides of nitrogen, and facilitating the reaction before the hot gases reached the lead chambers.
After eighteen months' successful operation at the Washington works, Glover set up his own chemical works at Carville, Wallsend, in 1861, with W. F. Clark and J. W. Mawson as partners.
In 1868 the works became the Carville Chemical Co.
He continued to develop his invention but took out no patent and freely explained the operation of the tower to visitors.
Other chemical manufacturers were thus able to install the tower.
Glover and his partners manufactured sulphuric acid, alkali by the Leblanc process, and bleaching powder, but competition from the Solvay process, introduced by Brunner, Mond at Gateshead in 1873, led to the decline of the Leblanc process on Tyneside and the Carville works closed in 1882.
Glover was genial, modest, and always eager to improve himself.
He read extensively in science, social economy, and religion, became involved in local charitable activities, and was especially interested in the Wellesley training ship for boys on the Tyne.
He was a member of many local societies, including the Newcastle Literary and Philosophical Society and the Newcastle Historical Society.
He was president of the Newcastle Chemical Society (1871–2) and a vice-president until 1882, when it became the Newcastle section of the Society of Chemical Industry, in which he continued to take an active interest.
He received the first gold medal awarded by the Society of Chemical Industry for ‘conspicuous service to applied science’ at the fifteenth annual meeting of the Society in 1896.
On 19 September 1837 Glover married Elizabeth, daughter of William Kelly, a gardener.
They had three sons and one daughter.
Two of the sons, William and Henry, assisted their father at the Carville works, designing towers for acid plants.
Glover died 1 May 1902 in Newcastle upon Tyne.
[D. W. F Hardie, ‘John Glover’,Chemical Age , vol. lxxviii, 1957, p. 816,Journal of the Society of Chemical Industry , vol. xxi, 1902, pp. 595–6; F. Hurter, ‘Presidential Address’, ibid., vol. xv, 1896, pp. 510–11; anon., ‘John Glover’, ibid., vol. l, 1931, p. 95;Newcastle Weekly Chronicle , 3 May 1902.]
M A Bloomfield
, Sir John (1860–1933), librarian, was born in Pontnewynydd, Monmouthshire, 12 May 1860, the younger son and second of four children of Henry Ballinger of Whitchurch, Herefordshire, metallurgical engineer, and his wife Jane Williams of Llanrumney.
His father died in 1866.
He was educated at Canton School, Cardiff, and privately until 1875, when he was apprenticed at Cardiff Free Library.
In 1880 he was appointed librarian at Doncaster.
Before returning to Cardiff as chief librarian in 1884 he developed journalistic skills, contributing a series ‘About Books’ to the Doncaster Chronicle , 1880–4.
Cardiff's policy of providing school libraries, inaugurated in 1899, and children's reading-halls in branch libraries, evidenced the practice of principles advocated by Ballinger in a stream of papers and pamphlets urging their educational function.
Children's literature became an abiding interest.
Books for Village Libraries (with Frank Burgoyne, 1895), and articles on library planning and administration, foreshadowing The Rate Limit and the Future of Public Libraries (1902) and Library Politics: a Sequel…(1905) reinforced Ballinger's many dynamic contributions to the public libraries movement.
Although Ballinger knew little Welsh, he made a name as a bibliographer by publishing the monumental Catalogue of Printed Literature in the Welsh Department of Cardiff Free Library (1898), articles on Vicar Prichard of Llandovery (1899), and on the Trevecca printing press (1905), and The Bible in Wales (1906), all with the assistance of James Ifano Jones.
Bibliography and acquisitions of valuable collections of Welsh books and manuscripts for Cardiff led to Ballinger's appointment in 1908 as first librarian of the National Library of Wales at Aberystwyth, which was opened in 1909.
There his reputation as an administrator and expository bibliographer increased with the publication of reports and papers on the library and its educational role, and with his contributions to the south Wales press, the Journal of the Welsh Bibliographical Society, which he served as treasurer (1910–24), and Y Cymmrodor .
He pioneered the historiographic use of ephemera in Gleanings from a Printer's File , 1928.
Assisted by (Sir) William Llewellyn Davies [q.v.]
and other Welsh scholars, he prepared new editions of The History of the Gwydir Family (1927), and Basilikon Doron (1604), and four seventeenth-century Welsh religious books for the University of Wales press board, on which he served from 1922 until 1930.
He co-directed, then directed, the Library Association's summer schools at Aberystwyth from 1917 until 1929.
He was awarded an honorary MA by the University of Wales in 1909 and he was appointed CBE in 1920.
He served as president of the Library Association (1922–3), was elected an honorary FLA in 1929, and, just before he retired, was knighted in 1930.
In 1932 the Honorary Society of Cymmrodorion awarded him its medal for services to Wales in the field of Celtic bibliography.
In private an autocrat, Ballinger was popular with the public and its political representatives, whom he impressed with his authority, journalism, and the exhibitions he organized; but, sadly, his lack of humour and austere sense of mission alienated many of his associates and he intimidated his subordinates.
In 1888 he married Amy, daughter of Captain David Boughton, master mariner, of Cardiff.
They had two sons and a daughter.
Until he died at Hawarden, Flintshire, 8 January 1933 he helped organize the St Deiniol's Library of Henry, Baron Gladstone of Hawarden.
[Library Association Record , 3rd series, vol. iii, 1933;The Dictionary of Welsh Biography , 1959;Library History , vol. iii, no. 1, 1973; M. A. Bloomfield, ‘Sir John Ballinger: an Annotated Bibliography’(thesis), National Library of Wales MSS XEX 1149 and ex 1150;The Times , 10 January 1933; private information.]
John Harvey
,John (fl. 1364–1398), principal master mason to Durham Cathedral and the Palatinate, may have been identical with John ‘Loewyne’ who was a working mason on repairs to Westminster Palace in June 1351.
As an architect he was sent from Durham in 1364 to Coldingham priory, a Scottish dependency, and in 1367–74 had charge of building the great kitchen of Durham priory, with its remarkable vault of Spanish inspiration.
At this period Lewyn was paid £13 6s. 8d. a year and a robe worth 13s. 4d.
By 1368 he was also described as ‘the Bishop's Mason’ and was granted lands by Bishop Thomas Hatfield [q.v.].
Notwithstanding his position with the bishop of Durham, Lewyn was appointed in 1368 by the Crown to repair Bamburgh Castle.
Some work had been done there by 1372, but in 1375 inquiry was made into allegations that Lewyn had received money for the work but had failed to carry out the repairs.
In the 1370s Lewyn received various grants from Bishop Hatfield, and by 1378 his son Walter Lewyn was already of age.
It is likely that John was responsible for rebuilding the keep of Durham Castle, and the Crown in 1378 appointed him to carry out works at the castles of Carlisle and Roxburgh, the latter in Scotland but held by the English from 1346 until 1460.
By this time Lewyn must have been regarded as the principal military architect in the north, for he was also commissioned by Sir Richard le Scrope (first Baron Scrope of Bolton, q.v.) to build Bolton Castle, Yorkshire.
On stylistic grounds other northern castles built or rebuilt at this time may be attributed to him, notably Raby and Sheriff Hutton (1382), and perhaps also Lumley in county Durham and Wressle, Yorkshire.
Their plans and details resemble his known output.
Lewyn's works at Carlisle and Roxburgh were completed by 1387, but in 1380 he had contracted with John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster [q.v.],
to build a new mantelet of freestone at Dunstanburgh.
Bishop John Fordham in 1384 appointed Lewyn a commissioner of array for the city of Durham, and with several partners he was granted the borough of Durham to farm, and he was also engaged in the export of wool overseas.
In 1385–6 Lewyn was superintending building works for the Crown at Berwick-on-Tweed, and about the same time may have been concerned with the great new donjon at Warkworth for the Earl of Northumberland.
For Ralph, sixth Baron Neville of Raby [q.v.],
Lewyn and his son Walter undertook in 1392 to renew all defective roads at Brancepeth, probably the result of heavy wear during building operations at the castle there.
Between 1390 and 1398 Lewyn was carrying out work at Finchale priory, subordinate to Durham Cathedral.
Lewyn was a distinguished master in a noble and functional style, but in the geometrical vault of the Durham prior's kitchen he showed an outstanding aesthetic awareness.
His career is the most remarkable of any provincial architect of the whole middle ages.
[J. Harvey,English Mediaeval Architects , 1984.]
Richard J Howarth
,Frederick Henry (1864–1932), geologist, was born 7 March 1864 in London, the eldest in the family of two sons and one daughter of Henry Hatch, merchant, and his wife Elizabeth Ann.
His brother, Herbert Lincoln, became an ophthalmic surgeon.
Educated at University College London (1879–83) in general science, Hatch qualified for the gold medal and Tuffnell scholarship in analytical chemistry in the intermediate science examination in 1881.
He subsequently studied mineralogy, chemistry, geology, and mining at the University of Bonn (1883–6) under A. von Lasaulx, to whom he became university assistant, and was awarded his Ph.D.
with a thesis on the volcanic rocks of Arequipa (Peru).
Acknowledged as ‘one of the best trained younger petrologists in Britain', he joined the Geological Survey of Great Britain in 1886 as a temporary assistant geologist (petrologist for England and Wales), undertaking studies of the chemistry and petrology of rocks from Scotland and Ireland.
He translated C. H. F. Rosenbusch's Petrographical Tables (1880) and published his own Introductory Text-Book of Petrology (1891) and Mineralogy (1892), which greatly assisted the growth of petrology as a subject in Britain.
He was also instructor in geology at the Royal Geographical Society and lectured aspiring explorers in the subject.
Hatch resigned his appointment in 1892 and went to work as a mining engineer in Johannesburg.
He became assistant to the American J. H. Hammond and they undertook exploration for gold on the Witwatersrand and were associated with the mining ventures of Cecil Rhodes [q.v.]
in Rhodesia.
However, tension between the Transvaal government and the mine owners was rising and Hammond was imprisoned in 1896 as a result of the raid into the Transvaal by (Sir) Leander Jameson [q.v.].
As the political situation steadily worsened, Hatch left in 1898 to study gold and other deposits in Canada, Spain, India, and Eritrea.
He returned to Johannesburg at the close of the Boer war in 1902 and during the next four years proved that ore deposits similar to those of the central Rand goldfield were also present in the east Rand.
Returning to England in 1906, he subsequently advised on mines in Russia, South Africa, Canada, and elsewhere.
Between 1910 and 1913 he lectured on economic geology at Cambridge.
During World War I he worked with the Ministry of Munitions, being concerned with iron-ore supplies.
In 1919–20 he served on a number of national committees concerned with the mining industry and ore supplies.
His later publications included The Gold Mines of the Rand (with J. A. Chalmers, 1895);The Geology of South Africa (with G. S. Corstorphine, 1909);An Introduction to the Study of Ore Deposits (1929); and The Petrology of the Igneous Rocks (with A. K. Wells, 8th edn., 1926).
He was an ex-president of both the Institution of Mining and Metallurgy (1914) and the Geological Society of South Africa (1905); and James Forrest lecturer to the Institution of Civil Engineers (1911).
The rare sulphide mineral hatchite is named after him.
He was appointed OBE in 1920.
In 1891 he married Mary Elizabeth (‘Pearl’), eldest daughter of William Henry Randall, merchant, of Madeira.
They had four sons (the two eldest were killed in the war of 1914–18) and one daughter.
Hatch died 22 September 1932 in London.
[Nature , vol. v, 1932, p. 130; G. H. Safford (ed.),
Who's Who in Mining and Metallurgy , 1908;Mineralogical Magazine , vol. v, 1933, p. 32.]
J Sutton
,Benjamin Neeve (1842–1926), geologist and palaeontologist, was born 6 September 1842 in Gorran Haven, Cornwall, the youngest of the eight children (five sons and three daughters) of Charles William Peach, coastguard, and his wife Jemima Mabson.
He was at school at Peterhead and Wick academies.
He learned about fossils and marine life from his father, a noted naturalist whose work was recognized by Charles Darwin, Sir Roderick Murchison, and F. T. Buckland [qq.v.].
The boy's career was determined by a shipwreck.
His father was sent to guard a wreck at Durness, Sutherland; the young Peach discovered fossils nearby, whose importance brought Murchison to the scene.
Murchison recognized the boy's ability, arranged for his entry to the Royal School of Mines, where he studied under Thomas Huxley and (Sir) Andrew Ramsay [qq.v.], and in 1862 recruited him to the Geological Survey of Scotland.
Peach was best known for his geological fieldwork in Scotland with John Horne [q.v.],
a partnership that lasted for sixty years.
Peach had an intuitive genius for discerning geological structures: what he saw on a mountainside led him to visualize the arrangement of the rocks below.
Horne's judicious temperament was an excellent foil for Peach's intuition.
Together they would analyse the evidence, so that a firmly based interpretation of the geology emerged from the initial conjecture.
Their geological mapping was rarely found to be faulty by subsequent investigators.
When Peach joined the Geological Survey, the geology of the Southern Uplands and the Scottish Highlands was little understood.
It was uncertain whether the methods developed to survey fossiliferous sediments could be applied to the deformed crystalline rocks which underlie so much of Scotland.
Sixty years later, there was an understanding of every formation in Scotland; much of the Highlands had been surveyed in detail unmatched in any other comparable area of crystalline rock, and a host of new geological phenomena discovered.
Peach and Horne, and the surveyors they trained, were the architects of this transformation.
Their two greatest achievements were the surveying of the Southern Uplands, begun in 1862 and continued with interruptions for thirty years, and the North West Highlands (1883–97).
Both led to memoirs which became classics.
Peach was also a distinguished palaeontologist.
He determined the fossils that were the key to the rock succession in the Southern Uplands, was for many years palaeontologist to the Scottish branch of the Geological Survey, and late in life wrote an important memoir on Carboniferous crustacea, a group that had fascinated him since he had searched rock pools for crabs with his father.
Peach was elected FRS in 1892.
He was an honorary LLD (Edinburgh) and with Horne received the Wollaston medal, the Geological Society's highest award, in 1921.
Their final work, a book on the geology of Scotland, though never completed in their lifetimes, was published in 1930 as it stood at the time of their deaths.
In 1871 Peach married Jeannie Bannantyne, the daughter of a farming family; they had one son and two daughters.
After her death, he married Margaret Ann, daughter of Angus McEwan, schoolmaster of Assynt; they had two sons.
She predeceased him.
Peach was a man of great energy, who retained a youthful boisterousness until old age; he tended to be the centre of any scientific or social gathering.
He was adept with his hands, a talented artist, and a skilled fisherman who made his own flies and rods.
Some of his best work, on glaciation and on Old Red Sandstone, was done in his spare time.
He retired in 1910, but continued to work until his death in Edinburgh, 29 January 1926.
[Scotsman , 30 January 1926;Proceedings of the Royal Society , series B, vol. c, 1926; private information.]
N J Travis
,Ferdinand (1844–1898), industrial chemist, was born 15 March 1844 in Schaffhausen, Switzerland, the only son of the two children of Tobias Hurter, bookbinder, and his wife Anna Oechslein.
He went to the gymnasium at Schaffhausen, and then, after apprenticeship with a dyer in Winterthur, he moved to Zurich to work with a silk firm.
He attended the Zurich Polytechnic under G. Staedler, and then studied at Heidelberg University under R. W. Bunsen.
He graduated Ph.D.
(summa cum laude ) at the age of twenty-one.
He refused a professorship in Switzerland and went instead to Manchester, armed only with a few letters of introduction.
In 1867 he joined Deacon & Gaskill, alkali manufacturers at Widnes.
He became chief chemist, and with Henry Deacon [q.v.]
developed the process by which the by-product, hydrochloric acid, was converted to marketable chlorine and bleaching powder — an important contribution to the survival of the Leblanc soda process.
Hurter was a pioneer in applying the disciplines of physical chemistry and thermodynamics to industrial processes.
By 1880 he was recognized as an international authority on alkali manufacture.
Competition from the more cost-effective ammonia-soda process forced the many Leblanc soda manufacturers to combine, and in 1891 the United Alkali Company was formed, with Hurter in charge of its research centre at Widnes.
Soon afterwards he was asked to assess a new process, the production of caustic soda and chlorine by the electrolysis of brine.
Following his advice, the company then made a disastrous decision to decline the investment opportunity.
At a time when his health was failing, Hurter's judgement was affected by emotional loyalty to the Leblanc process, to which he had made such valuable contributions in the past.
He collaborated with Vero Driffield, an engineer, in research into photography; they published many papers and were awarded the progress medal of the Royal Photographic Society in 1895.
Hurter was a sociable man, who loved music and played the clarinet and piano.
He campaigned for free education, and for the introduction into Britain of the metric system.
He was active in founding the Society of Chemical Industry, and read an important paper at the first meeting of the Liverpool section in 1881; he was its chairman, 1889–91.
On 3 August 1871 he married Hannah, daughter of R. Garnett of Farnworth; they had six children.
He remained a Swiss citizen.
He died 12 March 1898 and was buried at Farnworth churchyard.
The Hurter laboratory of the United Alkali Company (later ICI Ltd.) of Widnes was named in his memory.
The Society of Chemical Industry endowed the triennial Hurter memorial lecture.
[D. W. F. Hardie,A History of the Chemical Industry in Widnes , 1950; ‘Life and Work of Ferdinand Hurter’,Journal of the Society of Chemical Industry , 31 May 1898, p. 406; ibid., special jubilee issue, 1931; D. W. Broad,Centennial History of the Liverpool Section, Society of Chemical Industry , 1981.]
G H L Le May
,Jeanette (‘Jennie’), Lady Randolph Churchill (1854–1921), society hostess and writer, was born in New York 9 January 1854, the second of four daughters (there were no sons) of Leonard Jerome, American sportsman and speculator, of New York, and his wife Clarissa, daughter of Ambrose Hall, landowner and sometime assemblyman of the New York legislature.
Their second daughter was christened Jeanette but known as Jennie after the singer, Jennie Lind.
In 1874 she married Lord Randolph Henry Spencer Churchill [q.v.],
politician, third son of John Winston Spencer Churchill, seventh Duke of Marlborough [q.v.].
They had two sons,(Sir) Winston Leonard (1874–1965, q.v.) and John Strange (1880–1947).
During the early 1880s Lady Randolph supported her husband's political career, electioneering on his behalf, being active in the Primrose League, and entertaining imaginatively (she claimed to have invented ‘the dinner party of deadly enemies’).
Privately, the marriage was faltering.
Lady Randolph acquired a number of romantic attachments; the most serious of these was with Count Kinsky, a diplomat in the Austro-Hungarian embassy in London.
After Lord Randolph's death from syphilis in 1895, his widow began a career in her own right.
She was not squeamish about using her considerable social influence in support of her son Winston; she pressed his writing on publishers, sought for favourable reviewers, and appealed directly to the third Marquess of Salisbury, then prime minister, to permit him to join the expedition to the Sudan under Sir H. Herbert Kitchener (later first Earl Kitchener of Khartoum, q.v.).
She did not allow a chronic shortage of money to hamper her style of life: she kept from the door a wolf of considerable size and voracity.
In 1899 she founded and edited the Anglo-Saxon Review ; in spite of its contributors, this monthly magazine was overpriced at a guinea, had no theme, and failed after ten issues.
At the outbreak of the Boer War in 1899, she was chairman of a committee of American women which managed to obtain and equip a hospital ship, the Maine ; she sailed to South Africa on its maiden voyage.
On her return, in 1900, she married George Frederick Myddelton Cornwallis-West (died 1951), an officer of the Scots Guards, who was a fortnight older than her elder son.
He was the son of William Cornwallis Cornwallis-West, of Ruthin Castle, Denbighshire.
The marriage was not universally welcomed; however, the couple acquired Salisbury Hall, near St Albans, where they entertained with panache: the guests at one weekend included Edward VII and his entourage.
In 1908 she published The Reminiscences of Lady Randolph Churchill by Mrs Cornwallis-West , which was modestly successful in both Britain and America.
She wrote a play,His Borrowed Plumes , which was performed in 1909 with Mrs Patrick Campbell [q.v.
under Beatrice Campbell]as director and leading lady.
Cornwallis-West became enamoured of Mrs Campbell; this was the effective end of his marriage to Jennie, although she did not divorce him until 1913, when she reverted to the name of Lady Randolph Churchill.
During the war of 1914–18 she was chairman of the American Women's War Hospital in Paignton, and served personally in a hospital at Lancaster Gate.
She wrote articles for Pearson's Weekly which were later published as Small Talks on Big Subjects (1916).
In June 1918 she married Montagu Phippen Porch, the son of Reginald Porch, of The Abbey, Glastonbury, Somerset.
He was a colonial official serving in Nigeria; he was then forty-one and she was sixty-four.
‘He has a future’, she remarked, ‘and I have a past, so we should be all right.’
She did not take his name, nor did she return with him to Nigeria, but the marriage was placidly successful.
‘My second marriage was romantic but not successful; my third marriage was successful but not romantic.’
At the end of the war Porch resigned from the Colonial Service; in 1921 he returned to Africa, in search of a fortune.
During his absence, Jennie fell downstairs while visiting friends in Somerset, breaking her ankle.
Gangrene set in, and her leg was amputated.
She died suddenly in London, after a haemorrhage of an artery in the thigh, 29 June 1921.
She was buried in Bladon, next to her first husband.
Her second and third husbands survived her, dying respectively in 1951 and 1964.
[Ralph G. Martin,Lady Randolph Churchill, 1854–1875 , 1969, and Lady Randolph Churchill , vol. ii:The Dramatic Years, 1875–1921 , 1971; Peregrine Churchill and Julian Mitchell,Jennie: a Portrait with Letters , 1974.]
Frank Greenaway
,Arthur (1811–1900), chemist and phosphorus manufacturer, was born 3 March 1811 in Charlbury, Oxfordshire, into a Quaker family, the second son and sixth of ten children of William Albright, grocer and mercer of Charlbury, and his wife Rachel Tanner of Woodborough, Somerset.
He was educated at schools in Rochester and privately at home, and then at the age of sixteen became apprenticed to his uncle, a chemist and druggist in Bristol.
He did not settle to this life and had a number of activities, including travel to France and Belgium.
In 1842 Albright joined the firm of John and Edward Sturge, manufacturing chemists in Birmingham, a city congenial to enterprising dissenters.
They expanded their scope in 1844 to make white phosphorus (from bone-ash), the main outlet for which was the making of matches.
The white phosphorus matches were dangerous and their manufacture a serious danger to health.
In the course of travels to find sources of bone-ash Albright met Anton Schrötter, who had published in 1850 a method of making the red, or amorphous, form of phosphorus, which was much less reactive than the white form.
Albright purchased the patents, and then took out his own patents on improvements to Schrötter's method.
He was thus able to make, economically, this form of phosphorus which was a main factor in bringing about the widespread use of safety matches.
The partnership had opened a new phosphorus plant in Oldbury in Worcestershire in 1851, which Albright took over when it was dissolved at the end of 1854.
In 1856 he went into partnership with J. W. Wilson, who married Albright's wife's sister, Catherine, in 1857.
The firm Albright & Wilson survived until the middle of the twentieth century.
Albright travelled all through his working life, in eastern Europe in the early 1850s and in western Europe thereafter, promoting the use of red phosphorus, for example, by showing specimens at exhibitions.
He had a good command, developed in childhood, of the main European languages.
Albright was a dedicated and effective philanthropist, his early interest in phosphorus having grown out of a concern for the health of match-workers.
He concerned himself with alleviating the slave-like conditions of negroes in the West Indies, and when war broke out in the United States in 1861 he worked at getting financial and material support for emancipated negroes.
He was also active in alleviating distress in France following the devastation of the Franco-Prussian war.
In later life he expanded this social interest, even attempting to enter Parliament, standing as a candidate for East Worcestershire in 1874, but his platform, based on proposals to deal with the health problems of prostitution near garrisons and naval establishments, attracted little support.
His political ideals included the concept of arbitration as a substitute for war in the settlement of national disputes, and involved him in the jingoistic disputes of 1877.
In 1848 Albright married Rachel, daughter of George Stacey of Tottenham.
They had four sons and four daughters.
They lived mainly in fine houses not far from his factories.
He died in Chelsea, London, while on a visit to his daughter Dora (Lady Scott-Moncrieff), 3 July 1900.
He was buried at Witton, Birmingham.
[R. E. Threlfall,The Story of 100 Years of Phosphorus Making 1851–1951 , 1951; P. Morris and C. A. Russell,Archives of the British Chemical Industry , 1988.]
A W F Edwards
,Thomas (1701? –1761), mathematician and Presbyterian minister, was probably born in Hertfordshire in 1701, the eldest in the family of four sons and three daughters of the Revd Joshua Bayes [q.v.]
and his wife Ann Carpenter.
He entered Edinburgh University in 1719 and studied for three years, though without taking a degree.
Licensed to preach whilst in Edinburgh, he was ordained by 1727, and began his ministry as an assistant to his father, at the time minister of the Presbyterian meeting-house at Leather Lane, Hatton Garden, London.
In 1731 he was appointed to minister in Tunbridge Wells at the meeting house in Little Mount Sion, and in that year a tract attributed to him —Divine Benevolence: Or, An Attempt to prove that the Principal End Of the Divine Providence and Government is the Happiness of his Creatures — was published by John Noon.
In 1736 Noon published another anonymous tract which has always been attributed to Bayes —An Introduction to the Doctrine of Fluxions, and a Defence of the Mathematicians against the Objections of the Author of the Analyst .
In 1742 Bayes was elected a fellow of the Royal Society.
Bayes's fame rests on his posthumous paper, ‘An Essay towards solving a Problem in the Doctrine of Chances’, which was published in 1764 in the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society for the year 1763, having been ‘found among [his]papers’ by his friend the Revd Richard Price [q.v.],
who wrote an introduction for it.
It contains a solution to the problem (in Bayes's words): ‘Given the number of times in which an unknown event has happened and failed:Required the chance that the probability of its happening in a single trial lies somewhere between any two degrees of probability that can be named.’
The problem is fundamental to statistical inference.
It owes its origin to the Ars conjectandi of James Bernoulli (1713), and was extensively treated by Abraham de Moivre [q.v.].
Possibly de Moivre was one of Bayes's teachers, so that Bayes may have learned of the problem directly from him, although he may equally have encountered it first in his writings or in the Observations on Man, His Frame, His Duty, And His Expectations (1749) by David Hartley [q.v.].
Bayes's tentative solution to the problem involves assuming that the lack of knowledge of the probability about which an inference is to be made may be represented by a uniform probability distribution, for which he gives an ingenious argument.
The resulting type of statistical methodology is known as Bayesian, and is still controversial.
Although the mathematical content of Bayes's paper is not especially noteworthy, it includes a result which is a special case of a more general theorem in conditional probability which, anachronistically, has therefore become known as Bayes's Theorem.
Bayes's only other known published work is a short letter to John Canton [q.v.]
on Stirling's approximation which was also printed in the Philosophical Transactions for 1763.
In 1752 Bayes retired from his ministry, but continued to live in Tunbridge Wells until his death, 7 April 1761.
A bachelor, he was buried in the Bayes and Cotton family vault in Bunhill Fields, the Nonconformist burial ground at Moorgate, London.
His will, executed on 12 December 1760, shows him to have been a man of substance.
Richard Price described Bayes as the most ingenious man he ever knew, and William Whiston [q.v.]
wrote that he was a very good mathematician.
He is also said to have been a good Greek scholar and a poor preacher, and it is clear that he was retiring and modest.
[G. A. Barnard, biographical note in ‘Thomas Bayes's Essay towards solving a Problem in the Doctrine of Chances’,Biometrika , vol. xlv, 1958; J. D. Holland, ‘The Reverend Thomas Bayes, F.R.S.’,
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society , series A, vol. cxxv, 1962; S. M. Stigler,The History of Statistics , 1986; information from A. I. Dale and D. R. Bellhouse.]
Kenneth Garlick
,Harold John Wilde (1876–1919), painter, was born 11 February 1876 in Road, Somerset, the second son of the Revd John Gilman, rector of Snargate with Snave, Romney Marsh, Kent, and his wife Emily Purcell Gulliver, daughter of a naval captain.
He was educated at Abingdon, Rochester, and Tonbridge schools.
In 1894 he went to Oxford University as a non-collegiate student but ill health caused him to leave and he spent the year 1895 acting as tutor to an English family in Odessa.
On his return in 1896 he attended Hastings Art School, progressing in 1897 to the Slade School of Art, London, in the great days of Frederick Brown, Henry Tonks, and P. Wilson Steer [qq.v.].
In 1901 he went to Spain, for the most part to study and copy Velázquez in the Prado.
In 1904, having returned to London, he exhibited for the first time at the New English Art Club.
The turning-point in his career came when he met Walter Sickert [q.v.]
and through him became a founder member of the Fitzroy Street Group, a small society of artists centred on the Soho area who were aware of post-Impressionist developments in France.
Robert Bevan, one of their number, had worked at Pont-Aven and had known Paul Gauguin, and Sickert, whose sympathy with France went deep, owned a house in Neuville, on the outskirts of Dieppe, which he lent for a time to the Gilmans.
Gilman was attuned to France and to the new mood in French painting and at this time, at first through the example of Sickert, patterned coverage of the canvas in the manner of Édouard Vuillard, and intimiste tonal areas in the manner of Bonnard, began to be apparent in his work.
His palette was lighter than that of Sickert.
The years before and immediately after the outbreak of World War I in 1914 were unsettling for experimental painters.
The New English Art Club had been founded in 1886 somewhat in defiance of the Royal Academy, and the Fitzroy Street Group was a dissatisfied breakaway from it.
In the winter of 1910 Roger Fry [q.v.]
had staged the epochal exhibition ‘Manet and the Post-Impressionists’ at the Grafton Gallery, when the work of Paul Cézanne, Gauguin, and Vincent Van Gogh was seen in England virtually for the first time.
The members of the Fitzroy Street Group, notably Gilman, I. Charles Ginner [q.v.],
and Spencer Gore, were the chief beneficiaries of it.
Gilman and Gore progressed almost startlingly in the use of flat areas of brilliant colour.
In 1911 the Fitzroy became more or less transformed into the Camden Town Group, with Gore as president, and this in turn gave way to a more broadly based society, the London Group, with Gilman as president, in 1913.
Gilman and Gore held a joint exhibition as ‘neo-Realists’ at the Carfax Gallery in the summer of 1913.
In 1914 Gilman exhibited with Ginner at the Goupil Gallery and for this Ginner wrote a catalogue introduction on Neo-Realism , which was in the nature of a manifesto.
In these and the immediate subsequent years Gilman painted the well-known portraits of his landlady, Mrs Mounter, with her teapot.
The death of Gore in 1914 was a great loss to Gilman, but he continued to experiment.
He had been to Sweden in 1911 and Norway in 1913, experiences which encouraged him in the use of a looser technique and a thicker impasto.
In 1918 he was commissioned by the Canadian government to record the naval base at Halifax, Nova Scotia.
In 1902 or 1903 he married in Toledo Grace Cornelia, an artist, the daughter of William Eaton Canedy of Chicago, an inventor and manufacturer of heavy mining machinery.
They were divorced in 1917 and in the same year Gilman married Sylvia Hardy, a former student at the Westminster School of Art.
There were two sons and two daughters from his first marriage, and one son from his second.
After Gilman's death in London 12 February 1919, in the influenza epidemic, his wife married one of his brothers.
[Wyndham Lewis and Louis F. Fergusson,Harold Gilman, painter: an Appreciation , 1919; catalogue,Harold Gilman , Arts Council exhibition, 1983; catalogue,The Painters of Camden Town , Christie's exhibition, 1988; family information.]
Eric J Evans
,James , Baron Ashton (1842–1930), linoleum manufacturer, was born 31 December 1842 in Lancaster, the third of five sons (three of whom died in infancy) and the fourth of six children of James Williamson, originally of Keswick, painter, decorator, and later oilcloth manufacturer of Lancaster, and his wife Eleanor, daughter of Leonard Miller, innkeeper of the Blue Anchor, Lancaster.
He was educated at the Royal Grammar School, Lancaster.
Williamson worked in the family business, assuming personal control in 1875.
He quickly expanded the business, which was based on linoleum, a product whose mass-production potential as a cheap, effective floor covering he saw more rapidly than any.
Cork linoleum was produced in Lancaster from 1887 and the firm rapidly became the largest of its type in Britain, with important overseas interests including a factory in Antwerp and major colonial markets.
The Lune Mills factory in Lancaster grew to employ more than 4,000 hands.
Williamson's relations with his workforce were ambivalent.
He behaved as a benevolent autocrat, but was reluctant to delegate, suspicious, and secretive.
He kept hands in work after their most productive years and was reluctant to dismiss them when trade was slack.
But his concern for profit margins kept wage levels low and he was intensely suspicious of trade unionism.
He fought many battles with the early Labour party in Lancaster and discrimination against socialist employees was alleged.
Williamson used some of his vast wealth to provide permanent evidence of his beneficence.
He developed the park donated by his father and provided an imposing neo-Georgian town hall in 1909.
His best-remembered gift was the impressive domed Ashton memorial built on a site dominating Lancaster.
Williamson donated more than £500,000 to Lancaster and about £100,000 to Lytham St Annes, where he spent an increasing amount of time after 1913.
His political career was not extensive.
He served on Lancaster town council from 1871 to 1880 and was MP for the Lancaster division of North Lancashire from 1886 to 1895, when he retired to accept a peerage, allegedly in return for a contribution of £10,000 to Liberal party funds.
He became high sheriff of the County Palatine in 1885 and constable of Lancaster Castle in 1921.
While in the Commons he was a staunch, if silent, Gladstonian Liberal.
He later became a Conservative.
From about 1913 onwards he became a reclusive eccentric, shunning both London and local society.
He was married three times: to Margaret, daughter of Joseph Gatey of Keswick, Cumberland, in 1869, who died in 1877 and by whom he had two daughters; to Jessy Henrietta, daughter of James Stewart of Clapham, Yorkshire, in 1880, who died in 1904; and to Florence Maude, daughter of the Revd Robert Daniel of Osbaldwick, Yorkshire and widow of Colonel J. Lawson Whalley, in 1909.
He died intestate 27 May 1930 in Ryelands, Leicester, leaving a fortune of ten and a half million pounds, the largest intestate legacy in British history to that point.
[D. J. Jeremy (ed.),
Dictionary of Business Biography , vol. v, 1986; N. Todd, ‘Lord Linoleum’,New Society , vol. xxxi, 6 March 1975;Lancashire Daily Post , 27 May 1930;Morecambe Visitor , 15 March 1930; P. Gooderson, ‘The Social and Economic History of Lancaster, 1780–1914’, Ph.D.
thesis (1975) for the University of Lancaster; files of cuttings and correspondence on Lord Ashton in Lancaster Public Library.]
Peter Binkley
(d. 1262/3), Latin poet, was a Norman by birth; his father's name may have been ‘Troteman’.
The title of master was accorded him, but nothing is known of his education.
His works show a knowledgeable interest in grammar, logic, Aristotelian philosophy, medicine, and canon law, and a marked penchant for the translation of prose texts into verse.
Henry's poetic career began as early as 1215.
He was in England by 1219, when he wrote an epitaph for William Marshal, first Earl of Pembroke [q.v.].
In the 1220s he began the series of verse lives of English saints which constitute the greater part of his work: Saints Birinus, Guthlac, Hugh of Lincoln, Oswald, Edmund [qq.v.],
Fremund, and an account of the translation of the relics of St Thomas of Canterbury (Thomas à Becket, q.v.).
At this time Henry contributed a poem to the fund-raising campaign for the construction of Salisbury Cathedral, and also wrote for patrons in Cologne.
In about 1228 Henry moved to the papal court, where he wrote occasional verse for patrons from all over western Europe.
He composed his magnum opus, the Life of St Francis , for Pope Gregory IX.
He also wrote at the court of the patriarch of Aquileia, and approached the Emperor Frederick II with a series of poems in about 1236.
Henry left Italy in the late 1230s.
He seems to have travelled in the Rhineland, and was in Paris in 1241, when he commemorated the arrival of the relics of the crucifixion, and then in Angers, where he taught and disputed with local poets.
By 1243 Henry had entered the service of Henry III of England, composing lives of St Edward (Edward the Confessor, q.v.) and St George (both now lost) for the king.
He left the king's service for a few years after March 1245; it was probably during this period that he compiled a metrical grammar for the children of Hamo de Pecche, a Cambridgeshire baron.
In 1251 Henry returned to the royal service.
He seems to have been intimate with the king and perhaps prominent at court: writing in 1258, the poet John Garland [q.v.]
praised Henry in a list of the great figures of the English court; but there is no reason to believe that Henry held a position corresponding to the modern poet laureate, as has sometimes been alleged.
Henry is best known today for the series of public contests of poetic invective in which he engaged with his student Michael the Cornishman [q.v.]
in the mid-1250s; unfortunately, only Michael's verses survive.
These contests were notable events, judged by such prominent patrons as the king's half-brother Aymer de Valence [q.v.],
bishop elect of Winchester.
Henry died, presumably in England, between 26 January 1262 and 2 April 1263.
[Josiah Cox Russell and John Paul Heironimus,The Shorter Latin Poems of Master Henry of Avranches , 1935; Peter Binkley, ‘Thirteenth Century Latin Poetry Contests Associated with Henry of Avranches’, Ph.D.
thesis (1990) for the University of Toronto.]
Nigel Ramsay
,Alfred Brotherston (1888–1979), medievalist, was born 22 October 1888 in West Ealing, Middlesex, the elder son of Alfred Charles Emden, barrister and later county court judge, and his wife Lizzie Whitfield.
He was a scholar at both the King's School, Canterbury (1903–7), and Lincoln College, Oxford (1907–11), although he only obtained a second class in modern history (1911).
His future career then seemed uncertain: he qualified for the bar at the Inner Temple, ran a hostel for disadvantaged boys, Edghill House, Sydenham (1913–15), and then began schoolmastering at Strand School, Brixton.
The war intervened, and from 1915 he was an able seaman (Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve) in a destroyer leader, HMS Parker .
In January 1919, while still an able seaman, he accepted an almost chance offer of a tutorship in modern history at St Edmund Hall, Oxford.
He was appointed bursar in the same year and vice-principal in 1920.
He now immersed himself in university life and history, and remained at St Edmund Hall for the next thirty years.
In 1920 he published his first article, on the Hall's history, in the first issue of its magazine, which he had launched, and in 1927 he produced a pioneering, scholarly study,An Oxford Hall in Medieval Times .
Two years later he was appointed principal of the Hall.
It was then a small society, unendowed but relatively inexpensive for undergraduates; its principal had virtually complete control over it, choosing both undergraduates and tutors.
Emden entered his role with infectious enthusiasm, increasing the number of students and greatly enhancing the Hall's prestige in the university.
He successfully ran it as what he wished it to remain, the last of the medieval halls; he never wanted it to have full collegiate status.
After his proposed reorganization of the Hall's constitution was rejected by Convocation in 1937, he conceded a formal liberalization of the Hall's constitution, by another statute, giving more power to the tutors, and freed the Hall from control by Queen's College.
However, an uneasy relationship with the tutors (now called fellows) subsequently developed.
An enlightened paternalist, he was happier in his relations with the students and shaped the careers of many of them.
Until 1939 he continued to teach medieval history, giving tutorials that often lasted for a couple of hours.
He was also responsible for the restoration of the Hall's old buildings, the completion of the south side of its quadrangle in 1934, and the beginnings of an endowment.
During World War II Emden remained in charge of St Edmund Hall, while also being lieutenant-commander in charge of the Oxford University Naval Division (1942–4): he had persuaded a reluctant Admiralty to raise such divisions in several universities.
He was, besides, still very active in public school and Church of England affairs, being much consulted over appointments.
The strain of all this told, especially when he did such things as going on a submarine foray to the Bay of Biscay while the French coast was still in German hands.
His health broke down, and in 1951 he resigned the principalship, going to live with his mother in Oxford.
He was now sixty-two.
He had already written one book, and revised another — H. Rashdall's Universities of Europe in the Middle Ages , edited with (Sir) F. M. Powicke [q.v.],
in 1936 — but it is on the prosopographical works of his years of retirement that his scholarly reputation depends.
Combing the collegiate and university records of Oxford, and going through all the medieval episcopal registers, as well as a vast range of other English sources, he compiled three substantial volumes of A Biographical Register of the University of Oxford to A.D. 1500 (1957–9).
He made such thorough notes that it was then no great labour to produce a similar Biographical Register for Cambridge (1963)— in 1958 he estimated that such a work could be completed within eighteen months — and a more summary Survey of Dominicans in England, based on the Ordination Lists in Episcopal Registers (1268–1538)(Rome, 1967).
He forestalled any criticism of the supplementary Biographical Register of the University of Oxford, A.D. 1501 to 1540 (1974) by the comment that ‘octogenarians, like young men, are apt to be in a hurry.’
Emden was unconcerned that his chosen areas of research were not then fashionable.
He had a gift for friendship, and a wide range of acquaintances, but his close friends were few and in his later years were drawn from a small circle who shared his interest in the lives and books of medieval scholars.
His lifestyle was comfortable but simple; he had strong Christian convictions.
His manner was normally gracious and unperturbed, although he was a man of powerful emotions and could on occasion explode violently.
He delighted in the careful observation of birds, wild flowers and grasses, and medieval floor tiles.
He was elected an honorary fellow of Lincoln College (1939) and of St Edmund Hall (1951), FBA (1959), FSA (1969), and corresponding fellow of the Mediaeval Academy of America (1968); he received honorary doctorates from both Oxford (1959) and Cambridge (1964).
He was a trustee of the Oxford Preservation Trust (1932–67), and he served on the governing bodies of the King's School, Canterbury (1933–62), St Edward's School, Oxford (1933–57), and two other schools, while he was a member of Oxford University's hebdomadal council from 1935 to 1947.
He died in Oxford 8 January 1979, a bachelor.
The bulk of his estate, over £400,000, was left to St Edmund Hall.
[R. B. Pugh in Proceedings of the British Academy , vol. lxv, 1979, pp. 641–52; J. N. D. Kelly in St Edmund Hall Magazine , vol. xi, no. 6, 1979;idem ,St Edmund Hall: Almost Seven Hundred Years , 1989; Emden papers at Bodleian Library and St Edmund Hall; private information; personal knowledge.]
John Saville
,Robert (1834–1924), trade-union leader, was born in Kingston upon Hull, in the East Riding of Yorkshire, 26 January 1834, the son of Robert Applegarth, who was engaged in the whaling trade.
Robert had no formal education and began work at the age of ten.
After a number of juvenile jobs he began work in a local joiner's shop and acquired the skills of a carpenter although he was never officially apprenticed.
In 1852 he moved with his mother to Sheffield, where she died after a few months.
Three years later Robert married Mary, the daughter of Stephen Longmoore, a farmer, but within a few months he left for America in order to improve his position.
His wife, for health reasons, stayed in England.
America had a powerful impact upon Applegarth.
He appreciated the openness of American society compared with that of Britain and he also became a strong abolitionist.
He might have stayed there (he was in Galesburg, Knox County, Illinois) but for his wife's health.
When he returned he joined the local carpenters' union, and in 1861 he persuaded his Sheffield union to become part of the newly established Amalgamated Society of Carpenters and Joiners (ASCJ).
A year later he became the general secretary, a position he was to hold until 1871.
These were years of growth in power and status for the skilled unions of mid-Victorian Britain, and Applegarth established himself among the leading union personalities of his day.
His own union grew from 1,000 when he first took office to 10,000 within a decade.
Applegarth, who was a radically minded Liberal, was at the centre of all the political and industrial issues of the 1860s: the vigorous support for the north in the American civil war; the agitation for the repeal of the Master and Servant Acts; the political aims of the Reform League; and after union affairs his main concerns were the co-operative movement and a national system of education for working people.
Applegarth had joined the International Working Men's Association (the First International) in January 1865, a few months after its foundation, and at the third congress in Brussels in June 1868 he was elected chairman of the general council.
Thus we have some interesting comments on Applegarth in letters from Karl Marx to Friedrich Engels.
Applegarth's main activity at the end of the 1860s, however, was concerned with the legal status of trade unions.
The royal commission which was established to review the whole situation included two sympathetic members — Frederic Harrison and Thomas Hughes [qq.v.]— and Applegarth worked closely with them as a counter to the evidence of individual employers and their association.
He himself was the first, and most important, trade unionist to present evidence to the commission, and he made a powerful impression upon its members.
The final report was as satisfactory as could be expected.
In 1870 Applegarth was war correspondent in the Franco-Prussian war for the Sheffield Independent ,Scotsman , and New York World .
In the early 1870s his career as a trade-union leader came to an end.
He had accepted membership of the royal commission on contagious diseases — the first working man ever to be appointed in this capacity — but this led to fierce opposition from within the union's executive, and Applegarth resigned in April 1871.
The opposition against him was straight prejudice, and a commentary upon the social conservatism of mid-Victorian trade unionists.
The interesting thing is that while Applegarth did not return to his trade, or to the union movement, he retained his political radicalism to the end of his days: for another fifty years.
He became a successful businessman, on a small scale, with a continuing faith in the co-operative movement, and above all a consistent advocate of compulsory, free, and unsectarian education.
He was small in stature, only five feet two inches tall.
His first wife died in 1870.
Two sons aged fifteen and four, and a daughter of one year old, were mentioned in the 1871 census, but A. W. Humphrey (see below) says he had five children to support.
At some stage he married again and his second wife predeceased him.
Applegarth died in south London 13 July 1924.
Trade-union leaders, among them Ben Tillett [q.v.],
gave the funeral addresses at a secular service.
In 1917 he had rejected the invitation to become a Companion of Honour, preferring, as he wrote to Lloyd George, to remain ‘plain Robert Applegarth’.
A newspaper obituary mentioned four children living at the time of his death.
[A. W. Humphrey,Robert Applegarth , 1913; Royden Harrison,Before the Socialists , 1965; J. M. Bellamy and J. Saville (eds.),
Dictionary of Labour Biography , vol. ii, 1974.]
J R Smith
,Robert (c. 1708–1788), surgeon, apothecary, and smallpox inoculator, was born c .1708 and baptized in Kenton, Suffolk, 12 February 1708.
His father was Robert Sutton, gentleman.
He was apprenticed in September 1726 to John Turner of Debenham, Suffolk, apothecary.
In October 1731, shortly after completing his apprenticeship, he married Sarah Barker of Debenham.
The first of their eight sons, Robert, was born in 1732 and in the same year Sutton returned to Kenton to start his own practice as surgeon and apothecary.
There were also three daughters of the marriage.
He then worked for many years as a country doctor, during which time his son Robert nearly died from smallpox inoculation performed by a ‘surgeon of his acquaintance’.
This experience determined Sutton ‘to dedicate his thoughts solely to the Small-pox; to…investigate a means whereby…that distemper might be lessened and danger, if possible, prevented by inoculation’.
Following a lengthy period of study he evolved a plan for inoculation.
This he tested on a single patient in 1755.
The results were favourable and there began a series of trials which ‘convinced him that he had made some valuable discoveries’.
In the spring of 1757 Sutton opened an inoculation house staffed by nurses where patients stayed for one month.
So successful was this venture that two further houses were opened in September.
A fourth house was opened in the summer of 1758.
By the autumn of 1760 he had agents in sixteen towns and villages in Suffolk, south Norfolk, and north-east Essex.
In 1761, probably as the result of competition from a rival inoculator, Sutton reduced his top fee from seven to five guineas, with easier terms ‘for the…lower Class of People’.
By December 1761 the observations and modifications of several years' practical experience led Sutton to believe he had perfected his method.
Earlier English inoculators had made deep cuts with the lancet and inserted large amounts of material from mature smallpox pustules, believing that protection was not obtainable unless the patient suffered a pronounced smallpox attack.
As a later inoculator pointed out, ‘little difference was perceived between the natural Smallpox, and that conveyed by inoculation.’
This was rejected by Sutton, who reverted to the original Graeco-Turkish technique of superficial scarification using small amounts of lymph.
Even more important was his use of lymph taken from a smallpox pustule in its early stage of development, rather than from a mature pustule which was likely to be contaminated with a variety of organisms.
The severity of symptoms in inoculees was thereby much reduced and the risk of a healthy patient dying almost eliminated.
In brief, the Suttonian method comprised treatment which was almost painless and relatively mild in its effects, while the greatly decreased number of pustules lessened disfigurement.
In the nine months from December 1761 to September 1762 Sutton performed a further 365 inoculations, all successfully.
In the autumn of 1762 two inoculation houses were opened in Barrow, near Bury St Edmunds, under the control of his son Robert.
About the same time his second son Daniel [q.v.],
who had been working as an assistant to an Essex doctor, joined the practice, which was then at its zenith.
A disagreement over patients' preparation and post-operational recovery regime resulted in Daniel leaving his father in 1763 to set up on his own at Ingatestone, Essex.
Thereafter Sutton was overshadowed by his ambitious, avaricious, and energetic second son, who was to amass a fortune by publicizing and exploiting the Suttonian method of inoculation.
Sutton was buried 13 April 1788 in Thetford, Norfolk.
[J. R. Smith,The Speckled Monster , 1987.]
Richard Landon
,William (1723–1808), bookbinder and bookseller, of Halifax, was probably born in the West Riding of Yorkshire.
He evidently established a bindery and bookshop about 1750, and its fame was widespread enough to be noted in his premature obituary in the Gentleman's Magazine of March 1784 (corrected in the April issue).
Four of his five sons, James [q.v.],
John, Thomas, and Richard, all carried on branches of the business and the designation ‘Edwards of Halifax’ is applied to them all.
The Edwards firm ‘invented’ three binding styles much in vogue with collectors then and now: transparent vellum with paintings executed on the underside of the skin; Etruscan calf; and hidden fore-edge paintings of landscape scenes.
The patent for the vellum process was granted to James Edwards on 28 January 1785, in London, and specifies that the parts of the skin to be decorated must be soaked in a solution of pearl ash and pressed.
A letter dated Halifax 24 July 1784, from James Edwards to Richard Bull, suggests that the artist of at least some of the vellum bindings was Thomas Edwards (1762–1834).
The Etruscan calf bindings utilized a marbled centre panel surrounded by a border stained terracotta and decorated with black Greek palmettes, copied from Etruscan and Greek vases.
Fore-edge paintings had been put on books for centuries, but William Edwards was the first binder to paint landscape scenes on fore-edges which were hidden by gilt and could only be viewed by fanning the leaves of the book.
This art was continued by his son Thomas until 1826, the scenes often relating to a description or incident in the book chosen for decoration.
The fore-edge painting could, of course, be combined with a vellum or Etruscan calf binding.
William Edwards, who died in Halifax in January 1808, was characterized by his final obituarist in the Gentleman's Magazine as ‘of no common estimation for the energies of his mind’ and his creative approach to bookbinding has ensured that his name will remain esteemed by collectors and historians of the book.
[Gentleman's Magazine , 1784, pp. 238, 315, and 1808, p. 92; G. D. Hobson,English Bindings 1490–1940 in the Library of J. R. Abbey , 1940; T. W. Hanson, ‘Edwards of Halifax’,Book Handbook , vol. vi, 1948; Howard M. Nixon,Five Centuries of English Bookbinding , 1978; Carl J. Weber,Fore-edge Painting , 1966.]
John M C Wheeler
, Sir David Lionel , second baronet (1851–1925), electrical engineer and pioneer of the motor car, was born 28 June 1851 in Hove, Sussex, the eldest child in the family of two sons and two daughters of Philip Salomons, sheriff of Sussex, and his wife Emma, daughter of Jacob Montefiore of Sydney, New South Wales.
In his own words ‘a born mechanic’, from childhood he was chiefly interested in applied science.
Educated privately, in 1868 he went briefly to University College London, and then to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, where he received a second in the natural sciences tripos in 1873.
He also studied law and was called to the bar by the Middle Temple in 1874.
On the death of his father in 1867 he and his sisters had been virtually adopted by their uncle, Sir David Salomons [q.v.],
whose baronetcy he inherited by special remainder in 1873, together with his estate at Broomhill near Tunbridge Wells.
A pioneer of motoring, he built his first electrically propelled tricycle in 1874, and subsequently owned sixty-two cars of nineteen different makes.
He organized the horseless carriage exhibition — the first motor show in England — in Tunbridge Wells in 1895, and was said to have written 56,000 letters in the campaign to abolish the legal anomaly which required a man with a red flag to walk in front of what was classified as a ‘locomotive’ at no more than four miles per hour.
He was consulted on the drafting of the bill which changed this law in 1896.
At Broomhill he constantly enlarged the house and developed the estate, acting as his own architect.
In 1876 he built a high water tower, topped for a time with a telescope.
By 1880 he had completed a large wing of workshops.
Work began in 1894 on a science theatre, with fully equipped stage and an auditorium with 150 seats, and the largest Welte orchestrion in the world.
Salomons used the theatre to mount dramatic displays in which he would produce startling effects with the aid of electricity, music from the orchestrion, and scenes with magic lanterns.
The more serious uses of the theatre and adjoining laboratories were acknowledged by some of the leading scientists of the day — William Thomson (first Baron Kelvin),(Sir) J. Ambrose Fleming,(Sir) James Dewar, and (Sir) Joseph Swan [qq.v.]— most of whom were his personal friends.
He installed a photographic studio, a chemical laboratory, a large electric power installation, apparatus for measuring the speed of light, and a powerful magnet.
Broomhill is believed to be the first house in Britain to have had some items of domestic equipment powered by electricity — for example, the butter churn and electric chafing-dish.
The inventions which Salomons patented from 1874 included an automatic railway-signalling system.
His publications included Electric Light Installations (1886), which became the standard work on the subject.
As well as being one of the founders of the Automobile Club de France and the Aero Club de France, Salomons was the first director of the City of London Electric Lighting Company and for many years treasurer and vice-president of the Institution of Electrical Engineers.
Active in local affairs, he was mayor of Tunbridge Wells in 1895 and a member of Kent county council for fifteen years.
In 1882 he married Laura Julia, daughter of Baron Hermann de Stern and his wife Julia Goldsmid, and sister of the first Baron Michelham.
In 1889 he assumed the additional surnames and arms of Goldsmid and Stern.
Salomons had one son, who was drowned on active service in the Dardanelles in 1915, and four daughters.
He died at 4 Dorset Square, St Marylebone, London, 19 April 1925, and the baronetcy became extinct.
[Albert M. Hyamson,David Salomons , 1939; M. D. Brown,Catalogue of Mementos, David Salomons House , privately printed, 1968; T. R. Nicholson,The Birth of the British Motor Car, 1769–1897 , vols. ii and iii, 1982.]
Mary R S Creese
,Marion Isabel (1869–1934), biologist, geographer, and editor, was born in Alnwick, one of five daughters and three sons in the family of James Lesslie Newbigin, pharmacist.
She studied at the Edinburgh Association for the University Education of Women, and then at University College, Aberystwyth, and at the extramural School of Medicine for Women, Edinburgh.
In 1893 she took a University of London B.Sc.; she was awarded a D.Sc.
(London) in 1898.
Her sister Maude Newbigin, who graduated from Edinburgh University in 1893, later served as lecturer in history and deputy principal of the Day Training College, Portsmouth.
A third sister, Alice Newbigin, held a post at the Edinburgh College of Agriculture.
All five of the daughters of James Newbigin were strong supporters of the feminist cause.
While a student at Edinburgh, Marion Newbigin had come under the influence of J. Arthur Thompson, whom she later succeeded as lecturer in biology and zoology at the School of Medicine for Women.
She was a distinguished teacher and an outstanding lecturer.
Her original research at this period, carried out in the laboratories of the Royal College of Physicians, concerned studies on coloration in plants, crustaceans, and fish.
Several papers resulted from this work, some being joint publications with N. D. Paton and other collaborators.
Her monograph,Colour in Nature , appeared in 1898.
Her second book,Life by the Sea Shore (1901), which resulted from work at the Marine Biological Station, Millport, remained a classic for many years.
In 1902 she became editor of the Scottish Geographical Magazine , the position she held till her death.
Her career in geography began at a time when, in Britain, this field was still among the less fully organized of the sciences.
Indeed, she has been described as one of the founders of modern British geography.
Coming to the subject by way of the biological sciences, she stressed the value of biological principles applied to human geography.
She was one of the first of the British geographers whose interests covered the whole range of the field, and this breadth is reflected in her many writings.
Her Animal Geography (1913) and Ordnance Survey Maps (1913) were pioneering works.
Aftermath (1920), dealing with the territorial questions raised by the Versailles settlement, was a remarkable essay in political geography.
Her most valuable contributions, however, were probably those relating to the Mediterranean region; they included Geographical Aspects of Balkan Problems (1915) and Southern Europe (1932), her last major publication.
She travelled widely, and in Frequented Ways (1922) expressed the hope that ‘something of the intense joy of travel shines through the pages’.
Much of Marion Newbigin's work was directly educational, and her An Introduction to Physical Geography (1912) remained a student stand-by for many years.
She long acted as examiner in geography for various institutions, and her influence on the training of the next generation of students of geography was substantial.
She served as president of the geographical section of the British Association in 1922.
An able and accomplished editor, she guided the evolution of the Scottish Geographical Magazine for over three decades.
Under her leadership it became one of the most respected periodicals in the field.
Her home in Edinburgh was shared with her sisters Hilda and Alice, and later, on her retirement, Maude.
Marion Newbigin died in Edinburgh 20 July 1934.
[Obituaries in Scottish Geographical Magazine , vol. l, 1934, pp. 331–3, and Geographical Review , vol. xxiv, 1934, p. 676; William N. Boog Watson, ‘The First Eight Ladies’,University of Edinburgh Journal , vol. xxiii, 1967–8, pp. 227–34; Edinburgh University archives.]
Kenneth Parker
, Sir Harold Richard (1887–1969), civil servant and commissioner of police, was born in Banbury 24 December 1887, the youngest of three sons of Richard Scott, a skilled craftsman, and his wife Hannah Hopecroft.
The family moved to Taunton, and Scott won a scholarship to Sexey's school, Bruton.
From there he went on to Jesus College, Cambridge, the first from his school to get a Cambridge scholarship.
There he took three triposes in different subjects, securing a first in natural sciences (1907), a second in history (1908), and, after taking his BA, a first (with distinction) in modern languages (French) in 1909.
In 1910 he took the first division examination for the Civil Service and secured a place in the Home Office, which he joined in 1911.
Scott found that he and a contemporary were the only non-public-school boys in the administrative class in the department.
He was soon caught up in the wartime expansion of government activity, being concerned mainly with the regulation of foreign trade.
After a brief spell in the newly created Ministry of Labour he returned to the Home Office in 1919.
There followed a period of ten years of overwork and stagnant promotion, but his career took off with his promotion first to assistant secretary and then to be the chairman of the Prison Commission (1932–9).
Scott threw himself with enthusiasm into this exacting assignment.
He had already established a good personal relationship with (Sir) Alexander Paterson [q.v.],
whose influence on penal reform in the postwar period was outstanding, and he stood firm in the face of some ministerial pressure in the difficult period of unrest following the recent Dartmoor mutiny.
Scott extended the scope of prisoners' employment, established the first open prison camp, and set up the Imperial Training School for prison officers at Wakefield, a pioneer effort in public-service training.
When Sir John Anderson (later first Viscount Waverley, q.v.), the former head of the Home Office, was put in charge of a hastily improvised London civil-defence organization during the Munich crisis, he appointed Scott as his chief staff officer; and when Anderson became minister for civil defence, he made Scott responsible for the urgent task of accelerating London's civil-defence arrangements, with the title of chief administrative officer for the London civil-defence region, as from February 1939.
Although London was bound to be the main target for attack, its preparations were seriously inadequate.
The next two years were probably the most fruitful of Scott's public life.
With a small administrative and professional staff, he quickly imposed his personality and capacity for decision on the chaotic scene of London's local government.
With the support of Herbert Morrison (later Baron Morrison of Lambeth, q.v.), the leader of the London county council, he brought together the most influential councillors and officers.
For operational purposes, the ninety-five local authority control centres were co-ordinated through nine group centres, working through an efficient communications system to the London regional headquarters established in the Geological Museum in South Kensington.
By the time war broke out the civil-defence machine was ready to operate, although there was still much ground to make up, and good use was made of the unexpected respite before bombing started a year later.
When the raids died down after May 1941 Scott was moved to the Ministry of Home Security, first as deputy (1941–2) and then as permanent secretary (1942–3).
He then served for nearly two years as permanent secretary of the Ministry of Aircraft Production (1943–5).
At the end of 1944, most unexpectedly, Scott was asked by the Home Secretary, Herbert Morrison, to become commissioner of police of the metropolis.
Scott's years as commissioner (1945–53) were generally regarded as successful.
There were no startling innovations, as Scott found that his main task had to be the adaptation of the wartime organization of the Metropolitan Police to meet peacetime conditions, and he was hampered throughout by a manpower shortage for which it seemed that no solution could be found.
Scott had the disadvantage, as commissioner, of looking like a civil servant in uniform, although in fact, with his powers of quick decision, he had no use for bureaucracy.
He was respected as a fair-minded chief and a humane disciplinarian.
He dealt firmly with the attempts of the union movement to stir up trouble and efficiently with the problems created by Marshal Tito of Yugoslavia's state visit, as well as with the great occasion of the coronation.
He retired to the west country in 1953 after eight years.
He wrote a highly successful book,Scotland Yard (1954), and a memoir,Your Obedient Servant (1959).
Scott was an honorary fellow of Jesus College, Cambridge.
He was appointed CB in 1933, KBE in 1942, KCB in 1944, and GCVO in 1953.
There is a portrait by Peter Greenham at Scotland Yard.
Scott was good-humoured, approachable, and unflappable.
Confronted with a problem he would reduce it to its essentials, get on with producing a solution, and see that it was put into effect.
In 1916 he married Ethel Mary, daughter of James Golledge of Bruton, gentleman.
They had a son and two daughters.
Scott died 19 October 1969 in Minehead, Somerset.
[The Times , 20 October 1969; Sir Harold Scott,Scotland Yard , 1954, and Your Obedient Servant , 1959; private information; personal knowledge.]
John R Lloyd
,Eugenius (1818–1884), civil engineer, was born at Gloucester Terrace (later Pitfield Street), Shoreditch (then in Middlesex), 20 June 1818, the son of John Birch, corn dealer, and his wife Susanna.
Eugenius had an elder brother, John Brannis Birch, who was born in 1813.
Birch showed considerable mechanical and artistic talent at an early age.
Educated in Brighton, and then at Euston Square, London, he was enthralled when he watched the cutting of the Regent's canal.
While still a boy he submitted a model of a railway carriage to the Greenwich Railway Company, which adopted his method of putting the wheels under the carriages.
At sixteen he was employed at Bligh's engineering works in Limehouse, and he then joined the Mechanics' Institute.
In 1837 he received a silver Isis medal from the Society of Arts for his drawing of a marine steam engine, and in 1838 a silver Telford medal for his drawings and description of Huddert's rope machinery.
In 1839 Birch was elected a graduate of the Institution of Civil Engineers, and in 1863 a member.
From 1845 Birch entered into partnership with his elder brother and was engaged in the building of railways, viaducts, and bridges during the expansion of railways.
He designed the Kelham and Stockwith bridges in Nottinghamshire.
Later he became involved in the building of the Calcutta–Delhi line in India.
The Birch brothers had an office at 3 Cannon Row, Westminster, from 1845 to 1856, and at 43 Parliament Street from 1858 to 1864.
From 1864, after the death of his brother, Eugenius Birch occupied offices at 7 Westminster Chambers, Victoria Street, London SW1.
Eugenius Birch's fame rested mainly, however, on the fourteen seaside piers he built around the coasts of England and Wales.
Seven of his piers have survived: Aberystwyth (shortened), Birnbeck (Weston-super-Mare), Blackpool North, Bournemouth, Eastbourne, Hastings, and the West Pier, Brighton.
Experts consider his finest achievement to be the West Pier, with its elegant cast-iron kiosks, railings, and windscreens.
Birch's piers were noteworthy for their screw-pile method of construction, which he pioneered at Margate.
This method involves screwing the cast-iron columns into the seabed, sometimes by means of a winch mounted on a barge.
Birch was also a great believer in the corrosion-resistant qualities of cast-iron columns, and this confidence was fully vindicated by time.
Apart from building fourteen piers, he carried out the Devon and Somerset railway, Exmouth docks, Ilfracombe harbour, and the West Surrey waterworks.
Birch was also a talented artist.
Apart from his early technical drawings, he painted over a hundred water-colours during a visit to Italy, Egypt, and Nubia in the winter of 1874–5.
In 1842 Birch married Margaret, daughter of Charles Gent, of Moss Side, Manchester, a manufacturer.
There were no children.
He died in Hampstead 8 January 1884.
[Obituary notice in Minutes of the Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers , vol. lxxviii, 1884, pp. 414–16; Simon Adamson,Seaside Piers , 1977; private information.]
Alan Hollinghurst
,(Arthur Annesley) Ronald (1886–1926), novelist, was born 17 January 1886 in London, the second of the three sons and the four children of (Sir) Joseph Thomas Firbank of London, railway contractor and later Unionist MP for East Hull, and his wife Jane Harriette, daughter of James Perkins Garrett, rector of Kellistown, county Carlow, Ireland.
Firbank spent the first ten years of his life at his family's new home, The Coopers, Chislehurst — a village whose connections with the exiled Empress Eugénie may have influenced his enduring fascination with both royalty and Catholicism.
He was sent in May 1900 to Uppingham, where, suffering from ill health, he stayed only two terms.
Subsequent private tuition was taken in England, France, and Spain in 1901–6.
His first book, containing two stories, ‘Odette D'Antrevernes’ and ‘A Study in Temperament’, was published in 1905; and in the following summer he was at work on his first novel The Artificial Princess (published posthumously in 1934): in it he devised the techniques of elliptical narrative and baroque construction, and the manner, at once satirical and lyric, concentrated and fragmentary, that were to characterize his mature work.
In October 1906 he went to Trinity Hall, Cambridge, and left in March 1909, having taken no examinations; on 6 December 1907 he had been received into the Catholic Church by R. Hugh Benson [q.v.].
In October 1909 Firbank went to Rome, where he hoped, but failed, to join the Guardia Nobile, and remained in Italy until October 1910, when his father died and he assumed control of the family's finances.
Over the following four years he cultivated the nomadic way of life which, with the exception of the war years, was to be his until he died: he drifted restlessly in southern Europe and North Africa — and when in London was seen at the theatre, the Ballets Russes, the Café Royal, and at the bohemian restaurant, La Tour Eiffel.
He was known for the refined dandyism of his appearance, the flutterings and oscillations of his bearing, his heavy drinking, and his intense shyness.
With the appearance of his novel Vainglory in 1915 he styled himself Ronald Firbank for the first time, signalling the emergence of the mature writer.
Like all his books until Prancing Nigger (1924), it was published at his own expense and to negligible acclaim.
It was the most experimental modernist novel yet published in England, and its abstruseness was found additionally baffling in the context of the war.
Being unfit for service, and to escape the danger of bombing, Firbank moved to rooms in the High Street, Oxford, in October 1915, and remained there until September 1919.
This was a period of intense isolation, in which he sank into nervous apprehensiveness and paranoia.
But it was also a period of remarkable creativity, in which he wrote his novels Inclinations (1916),Caprice (1917), and Valmouth (1919).
He showed an exceptional and sustaining dedication to his art in the face of personal loneliness and critical indifference; it was only after his death that he emerged as a vital influence on writers of the generation of Evelyn Waugh, W. H. Auden [qq.v.], and Anthony Powell.
Firbank had no close emotional attachments, save with his mother; but in 1919 he seems to have become infatuated with the Hon. Evan Morgan, who rebuffed him by refusing the dedication of his only play,The Princess Zoubaroff , days before its publication in 1920.
After this Firbank resumed his nomadism, and the settings of his books, too, were henceforth to be fantastic versions of foreign places: Vienna, Havana, Seville.
His North African tale Santal appeared in 1921, and The Flower Beneath the Foot , the first of the three major novels of his last years, in 1923.
This book shows a new satirical vigour and contempt for British society, at a time when the American writer, Carl Van Vechten, had begun to promote Firbank's work in the United States.
His next novel Prancing Nigger (1924) was published first with considerable success in New York, and then under the author's preferred title of Sorrow in Sunlight in London.
American editions of The Flower Beneath the Foot and Vainglory followed, but Brentano declined Concerning the Eccentricities of Cardinal Pirelli (1926) on religious and moral grounds: Firbank's work after the death of his mother in March 1924 showed a new candour in its treatment of homosexuality.
He was working on a novel set in New York,The New Rythum (fragments published in 1962), when he died in Rome 21 May 1926.
[Ifan Kyrle Fletcher,Ronald Firbank: a Memoir , 1930; Miriam J. Benkovitz,A Bibliography of Ronald Firbank , 1963, new edn., 1982;idem ,Ronald Firbank: a Biography , 1969; Brigid Brophy,Prancing Novelist , 1973.]
Michael Laffan
,John (1868–1916), Irish revolutionary, was born in Westport, county Mayo, 7 May 1868, the youngest of four sons (there were no daughters) of Patrick MacBride, a prosperous shopkeeper, and his wife Honoria Gill.
As a young man he was employed in a draper's shop and as a chemist's assistant; he then emigrated to South Africa, where he worked as an assayer in Johannesburg.
Before leaving Ireland he became a member of the revolutionary Irish Republican Brotherhood (IRB).
When war broke out in South Africa MacBride was one of the first and most prominent members of the Irish Brigade which fought for the Boer republics, and at Ladysmith, Colenso, and elsewhere he proved himself to be a brave and resourceful soldier.
Henceforth he was known in Irish nationalist circles as ‘Major John MacBride’.
While still in South Africa he contested the South Mayo by-election in February 1900 as an anti-war candidate, but lost the seat to the Irish Parliamentary party by 2,401 votes to 427.
His brother Joseph was elected Sinn Fein MP for West Mayo in 1918.
MacBride toured the United States denouncing British policy in Ireland and Africa, and then lived in Paris until an amnesty allowed him to return to Dublin.
In 1903 he married Maud Gonne [q.v.],
famous for her beauty and for her flamboyant commitment to Irish republicanism.
She was the daughter of Captain Thomas Gonne of the 17th Lancers.
She was loved in vain by W. B. Yeats [q.v.].
She and MacBride soon proved incompatible, and they separated after two years.
Their only child, Sean, was to lead a varied career in which he served as chief of staff of the Irish Republican Army, minister for external affairs of the Irish Republic, and United Nations commissioner for Namibia.
After his return to Ireland MacBride secured a minor post as water bailiff for Dublin corporation.
His undiluted radicalism was illustrated by his admission that ‘my command of the English Language is not sufficiently wide to allow me to put into words the intense hatred and detestation I have for England.’
Although he was a member of the supreme council of the IRB, and is supposed to have been present at a meeting in September 1914 at which it was decided to stage a rebellion against British rule in Ireland, he played no role in planning the Easter rising of 1916.
His alcoholism would have made him an unsuitable colleague for revolutionaries obsessed with the need for secrecy and the dangers of indiscretion.
But when the rising began on 24 April 1916 he promptly joined the rebel garrison in Jacobs' factory.
As one of the few insurgents with military experience he was a valuable recruit.
MacBride was court-martialled after the rebels' surrender and was sentenced to death.
As a well-known republican who had twice taken arms against Britain he could not expect clemency, and he was shot by a firing squad in Kilmainham gaol 5 May 1916.
[Owen Hughes, ‘Major John MacBride’,Cathair na Mart: Journal of the Westport Historical Society , vol. i, 1981, and vol. vi, 1986; Samuel Levenson,Maud Gonne , 1977; Leon Ó Broin,Revolutionary Underground , 1976.]
Peter Leach
,John (1787–1852), architect and civil engineer, was born 20 June 1787 at Newton Fell House, Nafferton, Northumberland, the son of John Green, builder, carpenter, and agricultural implement-maker, and his wife Ann.
His practical education was evidently gained working in his father's business and soon after he came of age he was taken into partnership, the firm then moving to the larger settlement of Corbridge.
Here they expanded their activities into general building work, John Green turning his attention to the architectural side of the business; but c .1820 he moved to Newcastle upon Tyne, from where he established his extensive professional practice in the area of Northumberland and county Durham.
Green's early works as an architect included the Newcastle Literary and Philosophical Society's building (1822–5) and the beginnings of a lengthy sequence of somewhat undistinguished Gothic-style churches; while he also developed a reputation as a designer of farmhouses, being employed in this capacity on the Beaufront estate near Hexham (1824) and by Hugh Percy, second Duke of Northumberland [q.v.].
But his principal contribution was in the field of civil engineering, as a builder of road and railway bridges.
In 1829–31 he erected two wrought-iron suspension bridges, at Scotswood across the Tyne (demolished 1967) and at Whorlton across the Tees, the latter of which survives as the oldest bridge of its type in the country still supported unaided by its original chains.
He also built several handsome examples in masonry; and, most important, at the Ouseburn and Willington Dene bridges (1836–9, demolished) on the Newcastle and North Shields Railway and in a number of subsequent examples he successfully employed a system of laminated timber arches, which, for a short time, was widely imitated in railway-bridge construction.
In 1840 he was elected to the Institution of Civil Engineers and the following year was awarded the Institution's Telford medal for his work on laminated arch design.
Green was said to have been a ‘plain practical shrewd man of business’ whose style was ‘plain, severe and economical’.
In 1805 he married Jane Stobart: they had two sons, John and Benjamin [q.v.],
both of whom became architects.
The latter in the mid-1830s became a partner of his father.
Thereafter they practised together, and it is not always possible to distinguish the work of the father from that of the son.
The monument to John Lambton, first Earl of Durham [q.v.],
at Penshaw Hill, county Durham (1844), in the form of a Greek Doric temple, for example, is simply ascribed to ‘John and Benjamin Green’.
In general, however, the father appears to have concentrated on the civil engineering works and the son on the more purely architectural.
John Green died in Newcastle 30 September 1852.
[H. M. Colvin,A Biographical Dictionary of British Architects 1600–1840 , 1978; H. Hagger, ‘The Bridges of John Green’,Northern Architect , vol. viii, 1976; R. Welford,Men of Mark ‘twixt Tyne and Tweed , vol. ii, 1895.]
Ronald M Birse
,John Benjamin (1812–1887), ‘optical, mathematical & philosophical instrument maker’(from his own trade plate), was born in London 8 October 1812, the son and grandson of optical instrument-makers.
His father Josiah Dancer (1779–1835), was principal assistant to Edward Troughton [q.v.],
and in 1817 on the death of the grandfather Michael Dancer, Josiah returned to take charge of the family business, moving with it to Liverpool the following year.
It is known that he was proficient in the sciences of the time, as well as being a considerable linguist.
At the time of the move to Liverpool he had a family of four daughters and one son, John Benjamin, two other sons having died in infancy.
J. B. Dancer received some basic education at a dame school and was then tutored by his father in mathematics, French, Latin, and Greek.
More importantly, from a very early age he assisted his father in his optical workshop, and also in the courses of lecture-demonstrations he gave in the recently established Liverpool Mechanics' Institution.
He helped to assemble geological specimens on microscope slides, and in addition attended classes in chemistry and other subjects at the Institution.
After his father died in 1835, leaving the business to him, he remained in Liverpool until 1841, when he moved to Manchester and at the same time entered into partnership with another Liverpool optician under the name Abraham & Dancer.
This lasted only four years, and from 1845 he worked and experimented on his own.
He was far from being a recluse, however, for in 1842 he joined the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society, which at the time had many eminent members.
In 1885 he became a founder-member of council of the Manchester Photographic Society, where he met some of the most notable pioneers of early photographic techniques, and in the same year he was elected a fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society.
He was probably one of the first to discover the principle of electrotyping by depositing copper electrolytically on to an engraved copper plate, but, as with many of his other inventions and discoveries, he failed to take out a patent and most of the benefits were reaped by others.
All the time he was in business he was improving the design of his optical instruments, and he was one of the first to make inexpensive achromatic microscopes.
In 1853 he developed a binocular stereoscopic camera, following an idea put forward in 1847 by Sir David Brewster [q.v.].
Probably his greatest claim to fame is as the inventor of microphotography, his earliest successful results, based on the newly introduced wet collodion process, dating from February 1852.
By 1856 his results were impressive enough to be shown by Brewster to the Académie des Sciences in Paris, and later in Florence and Rome, where it was reported that the pope showed considerable interest in them.
In 1870 he contracted diabetes and his sight began to fail.
Three operations did not succeed in curing his glaucoma, and he had to give up his business in 1878, although it was carried on for some years by his daughters, Eleanor, Elizabeth, and Catherine, as E. E. Dancer & Company.
He died in Manchester 24 November 1887.
He had five sons and three daughters.
[H. Garnett, ‘J. B. Dancer’,Memoirs and Proceedings of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society , vol. lxxiii, 1928–9; ‘John Benjamin Dancer, FRAS, an Autobiographical Sketch’, ibid., vol. cvii, 1964–5; H. B. Marton,J. B. Dancer , North Western Museum of Science and Industry, 1979; M. Hallett, ‘John Benjamin Dancer 1812–1887: a Perspective’,British Journal of Photography , 3 December 1987, pp. 1474–7.]
Derek Howse
,Charles (1734–1771), astronomer, was baptized in Wentworth 26 December 1734, the youngest son of Joshua Green, farmer of Swinton, near Rotherham in Yorkshire.
Most of his education was derived from his eldest brother, Dr John Green, who was master of a school at Denmark Street, Soho, London, where Charles later became an assistant teacher.
In 1760 he became assistant to the astronomer royal, James Bradley [q.v.],
at the Royal Observatory at Greenwich, succeeding Charles Mason [q.v.],
who went to the Cape of Good Hope to observe the transit of Venus, which Green himself observed with Bradley at Greenwich on 6 June 1761.
When Bradley died in July 1762, Green remained at Greenwich as assistant to Nathaniel Bliss [q.v.],
who was in precarious health and spent much of his time in Oxford, with the result that most of the observational work at Greenwich fell upon Green.
In August 1763 the board of longitude asked Green to go to Barbados with Nevil Maskelyne [q.v.]
to make observations in connection with the trial of the fourth timekeeper of John Harrison [q.v.].
Bliss agreed that a temporary assistant should be provided at Greenwich until his return.
Green and Maskelyne embarked in the Princess Louisa at Spithead on 9 September 1763 and reached Barbados on 7 November, when they set up an observatory ashore and began observations to settle the longitude of the island.
William Harrison (John Harrison's son) and the timekeeper arrived on 13 May 1764, the necessary observations were made, and Green sailed for home on 4 June, reaching Greenwich in July.
Bliss died in September 1764 and Green took charge of the observatory until the arrival of the new astronomer royal, Maskelyne, in March 1765.
Despite past disagreements, Maskelyne recommended that Green should go with James Cook [q.v.]
to observe the 1769 transit of Venus in the Pacific, which Green, then serving as purser in the Aurora frigate, agreed to do for 200 guineas.
The Endeavour sailed from Plymouth on 26 August 1768 and Green and Cook successfully observed the transit together in Tahiti on 3 June 1769.
During the subsequent exploration of New Zealand and Australia, Green was, in Cook's words, ‘indefatigable in making and calculating these observations [for latitude and longitude]which otherwise must have taken up a great deal of my time…
Not only this, but by his instructions several of the petty officers can make and calculate these observations almost as well as himself.’
Before the Endeavour arrived in Batavia in October 1770 (whence the records of his Venus observations were dispatched to England), Green had been sick with scurvy and dysentery.
He died at sea of fever 29 January 1771.
‘He had long been in a bad state of health, which he took no care to repair but on the contrary lived in such a manner as greatly promoted the disorders he had had long upon him, this brought on the Flux which put a period to his life’(Cook).
He was unmarried.
[A. Kippis,The Life of Captain James Cook , 1788, pp. 176–8, note by William Wales who was married to Green's sister; J. C. Beaglehole (ed.),
The Journals of Captain James Cook on his Voyages of Discovery: the Voyage of the Endeavour 1768–1771 , vol. i, 1955.]
Malcolm Lester
,Anthony (1756–1835), diplomat, was born 6 August 1756 at 17 Lawrence Pountney Lane, London, the only son and younger child of Anthony Merry, a City wine merchant and shipowner, and his wife Susanna.
After a counting-house education and employment in Malaga, he became British consul in Majorca in 1783.
Appointed consul-general in Madrid in 1787, he served as chargé d'affaires before leaving Spain in 1796.
In 1799 he went as consul-general to Denmark, Prussia, and Sweden and was chargé d'affaires in Copenhagen.
Secretary to the embassy that negotiated the treaty of Amiens with France, he served in 1802 as minister ad interim in Paris.
Named minister to the United States in 1803, Merry was the first British minister to reside in the new American capital in Washington.
Ever a stickler for protocol, he and his wife took umbrage at the democratic etiquette of President Thomas Jefferson's administration.
The Napoleonic war severely strained Anglo-American affairs, owing to the problems arising from a belligerent–neutral relationship, and Merry clashed with the Americans in defending the British impressment of seamen, and restrictions on neutral trade to colonial and blockaded ports.
Approached by American conspirators, such as Aaron Burr, who sought British aid in their plots of disunion, Merry listened to the plotters but never abetted them.
Despite his long and honourable career, he is mainly remembered for his American ministry, the unfavourable accounts of which reflected Jefferson's animosity towards Britain and Merry.
Recalled from America in 1806 by the Grenville–Fox government, Merry, a Pittite, did not expect reassignment.
But a new administration in 1807 sent him on a futile mission to conciliate Denmark, following the British bombardment of Copenhagen.
In 1808 he received his last assignment when he went to Sweden as minister.
He retired in 1809 after twenty-six years in the diplomatic service.
According to an associate, he performed his duties ‘strictly en règle …like clockwork’ and without imagination.
Esteemed, nevertheless, by foreign secretaries, such as Robert Banks Jenkinson (later second Earl of Liverpool) and George Canning [qq.v.], he was used by them to train budding diplomats such as(Sir) Augustus John Foster and Stratford Canning (later first Viscount Stratford de Redcliffe)[qq.v.].
Dour and meticulous, Merry was respected, however, especially by younger colleagues, who nicknamed him ‘Toujours Gai’.
In retirement he lived first at Herringfleet Hall in Suffolk, where he was a justice of the peace, and then at Dedham House in Essex.
His marriage in 1803 to Elizabeth Death (died 1824), the widow of John Leathes, of Herringfleet Hall, Suffolk, was childless.
He died 14 June 1835 and was buried in Dedham parish church, where there is a mural tablet to his memory.
His portrait, painted in Washington by Gilbert Stuart, has disappeared, though a photograph of the portrait survives.
[Malcolm Lester,Anthony Merry Redivivus: a Reappraisal of the British Minister to the United States, 1803–6 , 1978.]