

George W Carpenter
,William (1825–1904), engineer and inventor, was born in Limehouse, London, 15 October 1823, the second son and third in the family of three sons and two daughters of John Samuel Adams, clerk of works to the East India Dock Company, and his wife Jean Walker.
He was educated privately at academies in Margate.
In 1841 he was apprenticed as a machinery fitter with Miller & Ravenhill, shipbuilders at Orchard Wharf, Blackwall.
In 1846 he joined Vignoles as a draughtsman and, two years later, Philip Taylor, shipbuilder, in Marseilles and Genoa, working as a marine engineer there and in ships of the Royal Sardinian Navy.
He returned to England in 1852 and planned the North London Railway's Bow locomotive and carriage works, becoming locomotive and carriage superintendent in 1854.
To deal with its rapidly increasing commuter traffic, in 1855 Adams introduced new high-capacity suburban trains with continuous brakes, probably the first in Britain.
He was also first in his use of coal gas for train lighting in 1862.
New passenger locomotives of greater power, of 4–4–0 tank type, from 1865 embodied his patent two-axle guiding bogie with lateral movement controlled by springs.
This greatly improved their negotiation of curves and enabled speeds to be increased without risk of derailment.
It was one of the major developments in locomotive design and was adopted worldwide.
In 1873 he took up a similar appointment with the Great Eastern Railway.
He modernized their Stratford works, using largely American labour-saving machines and equipment which in many cases enabled process costs to be reduced five- to tenfold.
In 1878 he pioneered the introduction of 2–6–0 type freight locomotives in Britain and, as consultant to the London, Tilbury and Southend Railway, 4–4–2 passenger tank locomotives, which were highly successful and were built in enlarged form over the next fifty years.
On becoming locomotive superintendent of the London and South Western Railway in 1878 Adams rapidly introduced urgently needed, more powerful, and reliable locomotives for passenger, suburban, and freight traffic, which were robust in construction and elegant in outline, especially the outside-cylindered 4–4–0 express type.
A major development, patented by Adams and his nephew Henry in 1885, was the Vortex steam exhaust system which increased combustion efficiency and locomotive power.
It was applied to over 500 locomotives in Britain, France, and Austria.
Adams retired because of ill health in 1895.
Adams was a kindly man who took a keen interest in his staff and his fellow men.
He was musically talented, with a fine bass voice like his father.
Whilst with the North London Railway he persuaded its directors to provide suitable accommodation for concerts and evening classes at the Bow and Bromley Institute.
He was a member of the Institutions of Civil and Mechanical Engineers and a founder member of the Association of Railway Locomotive Engineers.
He married Isabella, daughter of Charles Park, mechanical engineer, at Genoa in 1852.
They had seven sons and three daughters.
Adams died 7 August 1904 in Putney, London.
[E. H. Wilson, ‘William Adams 1823–1904’,Transactions of the Newcomen Society , vol. lvii, 1985–6.]
Dick White
, Sir Vernon George Waldegrave (1873–1942), intelligence officer, was born in Great Yarmouth 21 November 1873, the only son of Major Waldegrave Charles Vernon Kell of the South Staffordshire Regiment, who served in a number of Imperial outposts and with distinction in the Zulu wars, and his wife, the daughter of a Polish count named Konarpki, with exiled relatives in other parts of Europe by whom her son was helped to become an accomplished linguist.
Before entering Sandhurst, he was privately educated and in 1894 joined his father's old regiment, in which his languages immediately proved useful.
He became an interpreter in French and German and in 1899 was posted to Moscow for further language studies and in 1900 to Shanghai, where he served in the Boxer campaign and was mentioned in dispatches.
Later he became chairman of the Japan Society.
In time for her to accompany him to China, he married Constance Rawdon, daughter of James W. Scott of Westlands, Queenstown, county Cork.
They had two sons and one daughter.
On returning to England he served as a staff captain in the War Office and then as an assistant secretary to the Committee of Imperial Defence, an appointment which was to alter completely the course of his career.
During the span of his appointment, the CID was considering how best to fill a serious gap in the country's defence arrangements.
There existed no organization to cope with the rising dangers of German espionage nor one to obtain secret intelligence on German military expansion.
The Committee finally proposed and the cabinet approved the creation of a Secret Service Bureau to cover both these functions.
At thirty-six years of age Kell was chosen as one of its first two directors and shortly afterwards took over full responsibility for the defensive side.
He was to hold this position for the next thirty-one years and must therefore be regarded as a founding father of the organization which later became known as MI5.
Kell started work in October 1909 and was characteristically slow and methodical in his approach to his utterly new functions.
By 1914 he still employed only three officers, one barrister, and seven clerks.
Nevertheless, on the first night of the war he was able to round up a ring of twenty-one German spies in an effectively timed and executed coup which probably deprived the Germans of any information on Britain's initial military dispositions.
By the end of the war he accounted for thirty-five more spies to complete a wartime record which impressed the general staff and ensured the continuance of his organization into the peace, though on a much reduced basis from his final wartime strength of 800.
The period between the wars coincided with the remainder of his working life and was highly formative for Britain's later intelligence system.
In 1919 a Secret Service committee of senior ministers was established to monitor its development and decide the delicate issues involved in fitting it into its democratic framework.
This took time, and it was not until 1931 that Kell was chosen as the director around whom something like a national security service could be built.
This meant adding a civil commitment to his existing military one and augmenting his staff from selected members of the civilian staff at Scotland Yard.
It was a considerable tribute to his growing reputation in high official circles, and the fact that he was proposed for it by Sir John Anderson (later Viscount Waverley, q.v.), then permanent under-secretary at the Home Office, indicates that he already enjoyed the trust of the home departments he would henceforth be serving.
Kell was appointed CB in 1917 and KBE in 1919.
He was an officer of the Legion of Honour and had many other foreign decorations.
He reached the rank of major-general and received the Jubilee medal in 1935.
He was a calm, modest, and patient man, which made it seem obvious that fly-fishing was his chosen hobby.
From first to last he kept himself out of the public limelight.
He selected his staff by personal recommendation and from men nearing the end of their careers in other public services, the army and navy, the home and overseas police.
It was a safe and economical procedure which also initially guaranteed the loyalty and discretion needed for the maintenance of security.
He ruled his staff with a light touch and a delightful sense of humour, thereby setting standards of unity and comradeship which were gratefully inherited by his successors.
But the end of the 1930s was a time of trial for him.
His health began to fail as a result of severe attacks of asthma.
He worried over the pace of his build-up, which he knew should be quickened though resources for this were severely limited.
In the early summer of 1940 he was quietly retired and he died at Emberton, Olney, Buckinghamshire, 27 March 1942.
[F. H. Hinsley and C. A. G. Simkins,British Intelligence in the Second World War , vol. iv, 1990; Constance Kell (wife), ‘A Secret Well Kept’, unpublished MS in Imperial War Museum, London; personal knowledge.]
Marcus M G Wood
,George (1804–1867), colour printer, was born at 37 High Street, Lewes, Sussex, 31 July 1804, the second son and second child in the family of three sons and three daughters of John Baxter [q.v.], printer and bookseller, and his wife Charlotte Warner.
He spent his childhood in Lewes, attending the Cliffe House Academy and then the high school, St Ann's.
After school he was apprenticed to a wood engraver.
In 1825 he moved to London and in 1827 settled in Islington.
Over the next eight years he applied himself to the development and perfection of the colour printing process which brought him international fame.
In 1829 he produced his first coloured print, ‘Butterflies’, and achieved popular acclaim in 1834 with the coloured plates for Feathered Tribes of the British Islands by Robert Mudie [q.v.].
In 1836 Baxter received a royal patent for his printing process.
His technique was innovatory, combining an engraved metal plate with as many as twenty engraved wooden blocks, each printed in a separate colour.
The prints combined quality and cheapness and were produced in vast numbers.
For the next twenty-five years Baxter dominated colour printing, branching out into a variety of publishing areas, including decorated music sheets, note paper, pocket-books, and his famous needle cases.
He claimed to have produced twenty million prints by the end of his career.
Baxter's subjects were remarkably varied and included sentimental treatments of religious and romantic themes, prints of typical London figures, and newsworthy events.
His piety led him to produce some of his most powerful work for the immensely influential and prosperous missionary societies, his most celebrated print in this context being ‘The Massacre of the Lamented Missionary, the Rev. J. Williams and Mr. Harris at Erromanga’(1841).
Had he restricted his output to such enterprises Baxter would undoubtedly have become very wealthy; yet he suffered commercially throughout his career because of his perfectionism and over-ambition.
It is ironic that his greatest financial disasters were projects which resulted from the interest which both Queen Victoria and Prince Albert showed in his work.
The large prints which he brought out by royal command to commemorate the coronation and opening of the House of Commons in 1838, and the prints he produced, subsequent to an interview with Albert, to commemorate the Great Exhibition, were hopelessly delayed and proved very expensive failures.
Baxter's work and his royal connections made him famous during the years directly following the Great Exhibition and he gained public recognition for his achievements: he was awarded the great gold medal of Austria (1852), and medals for his exhibits at the Great Exhibitions in New York (1853) and Paris (1855), was elected a member of the Royal Society of Arts (1855), and received the grand gold medal of Sweden (1857).
By 1856, however, Baxter was in financial difficulties as a result of competition from rival companies and because of the growing appeal of photography.
His markets were poached, and his temperament appeared to decline with his financial fortunes.
He became increasingly embittered, alienating both his family and personal friends.
In 1859 he produced his last print ‘Dogs of St. Bernard’, and in 1865 he was declared bankrupt.
After unsuccessful attempts to sell his enormous stock of prints through public auctions he retired to his wife's house, suitably named ‘The Retreat’.
In 1827 he married his cousin Mary, daughter of Robert Harrild, manufacturer of printing machinery.
They had one son and two daughters.
In 1866 Baxter suffered a blow to the head in an omnibus accident; he never properly recovered, and he died 11 January 1867 at home in Sydenham.
[C. T. Gourteney Lewis,George Baxter, his Life and Work , 1908; H. G. Clarke,Baxter Colour Prints , 1920–1; Max E. Mitzman,George Baxter and the Baxter Prints , 1978.]
Barry Took
,(Charles) Kenneth (1907–1969), comedian, was born 27 February 1907 at Ampthill Square, London, the youngest in the family of three sons and four daughters of the Revd (Charles) Silvester Horne [q.v.],
Congregational minister of Newport, Shropshire, and his wife Katharine Maria, daughter of Herbert Hardy Cozens-Hardy (later first Baron Cozens-Hardy, q.v.), later master of the rolls.
Horne was educated at St George's School, Harpenden, Hertfordshire, the London School of Economics, and Magdalene College, Cambridge.
Though popular with his contemporaries, and a fine sportsman, gaining a tennis half-blue at Cambridge, Horne did not have a spectacular academic career and was sent down in December 1927.
Through the influence of his uncle, Austin Pilkington, a director of the Pilkington Glass Company, Horne secured a job with the Triplex Safety Glass Company in 1928.
In 1938 he enlisted in the RAF Volunteer Reserve.
He was commissioned as acting pilot officer and posted to 911 Squadron (barrage balloons).
He served in the RAF throughout the war, reaching the rank of wing commander, and on demobilization in 1945 he rejoined Triplex Glass as sales director.
He became managing director of the British Industries Fair (1954–6), and chairman and managing director of the Chad Valley Toy Company (1956–8).
He gave up his business interests in 1958, when he was partially incapacitated by coronary thrombosis.
From 1940, when he made his first broadcast as a quiz-master in the BBC radio series Ack, Ack, Beer, Beer , he was a constant broadcaster and in 1943, by then stationed at the Air Ministry in London, he created and wrote with Squadron Leader Richard Murdoch the long-running radio series Much Binding in the Marsh , a take-off of a fictitious RAF station.
He was subsequently the eponymous Ken of the radio series Beyond Our Ken (1958–64).
Round the Horne succeeded Beyond Our Ken in 1965 and ran until 1968.
Kenneth Horne's rich, fruity voice and warm patrician manner made him the ideal link man and that, coupled with a mischievous sense of humour, ensured that any programme in which he was involved was the better for his presence.
His skill in handling staff and co-directors when in industry was equally evident in his broadcasting career.
Horne married three times.
His first wife was Mary, daughter of Henry Francis Hope Pelham-Clinton-Hope, eighth Duke of Newcastle.
They were married in 1930 and the marriage was annulled in 1933.
There were no children.
In 1936 he married Joan, daughter of Ernest Burgess, chairman and managing director of Harrisons (Birmingham) Ltd., brass founders.
They had one son, who was stillborn.
Following their divorce in 1945, he married in the same year Marjorie, widow of Lieutenant George Ambler Thomas and daughter of Harry George Sadler, clerical officer in the Ministry of Pensions; she had one daughter from her previous marriage.
Horne died 14 February 1969 of a heart attack during the awards presentations of the Guild of British Film and Television Producers at the Dorchester Hotel, London.
[The Times , 15 February 1969; Norman Hackforth,Solo for Horne , 1976; personal knowledge.]
Peter Leach
,Charles (1792–1867), architect, was born 17 May 1792 in Cullompton, Devon, the son of John Fowler of Cullompton and his wife Jane.
At the age of fifteen he was apprenticed to John Powning, architect and builder, of Exeter.
On the completion of his articles in 1814 he moved to London to work as an assistant in the office of David Laing [q.v.], architect to the customs and excise, before setting up in independent practice there in 1818.
In 1822 he won the competition for rebuilding London Bridge but the result was set aside in favour of the design by John Rennie [q.v.]; and the principal feature of his career, for which he gained notice on the Continent as well as in England, was to be his speciality as a designer of large covered market buildings.
One of his first commissions was the New Market in Gravesend, Kent (1818–22, demolished), and three major examples followed: the Covent Garden Market (1828–30) and Hungerford Market (1831–3, demolished) in London, and the Lower Market in Exeter (1835–7, demolished).
In these works, together with the great conservatory at Syon House (1827–30), Fowler spanned the rapidly widening gap between architecture and civil engineering.
A sophisticated functionalist economy of structure, embracing on occasion a highly innovative use of cast iron, was combined with an appropriately simplified neo-classical elevational style derived from French rationalist architects such as J. N. L. Durand.
This rationalist approach is overtly expressed in Fowler's statement that ‘The proper excellence of architecture is that which results from its suitableness to the occasion…and this principle rightly pursued leads to originality without the affection of novelty; but…the present enlightened epoch in architecture is woefully distinguished as having no character of its own nor any pretensions beyond that of adopting the various styles that have prevailed in all ages and nations without regard to the difference of circumstances upon which they were founded’; while the critic J. C. Loudon [q.v.]described him as ‘one of the few modern architects who belong to the School of Reason and who design buildings on fundamental principles instead of antiquated rules and precedents’.
Alongside this and particularly following the Exeter commission, Fowler also maintained his connection with his native county where he had a long-standing patron in William Courtenay, tenth Earl of Devon, his works including the Totnes bridge (1826–8), a small group of churches, and alterations to the Earl of Devon's Powderham Castle (1837–48).
The churches are mainly in a conventional Gothic style but the most ambitious, that in Honiton (1837–8) is in the neo-Norman manner.
In 1835 he was one of the founder-members of the Institute (later Royal Institute) of British Architects, from 1836 to 1843 he was one of the joint honorary secretaries, and in 1850–1 he was elected a vice-president.
He also contributed a number of papers to the Institute's Transactions and to Loudon's Architectural Magazine .
He retired from practice in 1852 because of ill health, and moved first to Kent and then to Buckinghamshire, where he died at his home, Western House, Great Marlow, 26 September 1867.
[H. M. Colvin,A Biographical Dictionary of British Architects 1600–1840 , 1978; obituaries in Builder , vol. xxv, 1867, and R.I.B.A. Transactions , vol. xviii, 1867–8; J. Taylor, ‘Charles Fowler, Master of Markets’,Architectural Review , March 1964, and ‘Charles Fowler: a Centenary Memoir’,Architectural History , vol. xi, 1968.]
J E Spence
,Ngwenyama (‘the lion’)(1899–1982), king of Swaziland, was born in Zombodze, Swaziland, 22 July 1899, one of a large family born to his predecessor, King Ngwane V (‘Bhuna’) and Lomawa Ndwandwe, the monarch's chief wife.
His father died a few months after his birth and his grandmother then ruled as regent.
He was educated at Zombodze primary school and at the Lovedale Institute in South Africa before assuming the Swazi throne as paramount chief at the age of twenty-two in 1921.
Like his predecessor, Sobhuza took many wives and the precise number of his offspring, estimated at some 500, is unknown.
Throughout his long reign, Sobhuza presided over the transformation of his country from British protectorate to independent statehood within the Commonwealth.
His survival as a traditional monarch was exceptional in a period when, elsewhere in Africa, tribal authority was denigrated and often pushed aside as an antique obstacle to the path of modernization and national self-determination.
Sobhuza, however, possessed political skills in abundance and he cunningly blended appeal to tribal custom with a capacity to manage economic and social change for his kingdom without weakening his autocratic power base.
His role during the years of British rule was essentially ceremonial; for his people — a largely agricultural community — the king was a source of ritual ensuring rain and a fertile crop.
Yet as early as 1922 Sobhuza demonstrated his political leadership of the Swazi nation by petitioning the British government to nullify a proclamation increasing the land available to the white-settler community.
In the early 1960s the king became a major actor in the events that led to independence for his country in 1968.
He strongly opposed the orthodox post-colonial constitution proposed by the British government, in which he was assigned the role of constitutional monarch presiding over a Westminster-style parliament.
As he emphasized, ‘Western democracy is not suitable for my people…my rule through the tribal council is best for them.’
Sobhuza founded his own party — the Imbokodvo (‘grinding stone’)— and in the pre-independence elections of 1967 won all twenty-four seats in the legislative council and 80 per cent of the popular vote.
The nationalist opposition had split into competing factions in the years before the election, and it never effectively challenged Sobhuza's rule thereafter.
In the 1972 election the Ngwane National Liberation Congress (NNLC) won three seats, and this modest revival in nationalist fortunes so disturbed Sobhuza that he promptly abrogated the constitution and for the next six years ruled by decree through the national council, a traditional body of tribal advisers.
Sobhuza was appointed KBE.
In 1978 a new constitution was promulgated which provided for an elaborate reversion to a tribal mode of rule involving an electoral college of eighty members chosen by forty local councils (‘tinkhundla’), dominated by tribal elements.
The parliament (which opened in 1979) was in effect a gathering of the ‘king's men’ issuing instructions to the cabinet and civil service —‘the administrative agents of traditional authority’.
Thus, by the time of his diamond jubilee in September 1981, Sobhuza had successfully restored and indeed strengthened the monarch's role as the chief arbiter of decision-making in his kingdom.
The Swazi economy prospered under Sobhuza's leadership.
Swaziland is rich in natural resources, and much of the land and mineral wealth originally owned by non-Swazi interests was brought under indigenous control during Sobhuza's reign.
His foreign policy displayed a mixture of caution and commitment to the details of the Organization of African Unity.
Neighbouring South Africa was the dominant state in the region, and — at Pretoria's insistence — Sobhuza kept a tight grip on the activities of the exiled African National Congress.
A secret accord was signed with South Africa in 1982 which in effect deprived the ANC of sanctuary within Swaziland.
Yet, at the same time, Sobhuza maintained cordial relations with his Marxist neighbour, President Samora Machel of Mozambique.
Old and infirm, Sobhuza died 21 August 1982 in Mbabane, Swaziland.
The choice of his successor according to Swazi custom threatened to be prolonged and difficult.
He left a stable polity and an economy that, by African standards, was a model of successful, if unbalanced, growth.
His achievement was considerable; his intuitive understanding of his people's preference for traditional ways enabled Swaziland to avoid the upheavals characteristic of much of postwar Africa.
He was shrewd enough to realize that western-style government could not easily be grafted on to a chiefly structure profoundly resistant to rapid and uneven modernization.
He kept in check the political and economic expectations of his people, but in so doing he may well have placed a burden on his young and untried successor, the fourteen-year-old Makhostive, his son by Ntombi Latfwala, who was queen regent of Swaziland from 1983 until the prince was crowned in April 1986.
[The Times , 24 and 28 August 1982;Africa — South of the Sahara , 1982–3 and 1984–5;Current Biography , 1982; Hilda Kuper,Sobhuza II, Ngwenyama and King of Swaziland , 1978.
John Harvey
,John (fl. 1485– c. 1515), master mason, was junior partner of Simon Clerk (fl .
1434–1489) in a contract of 1485 at Saffron Walden church, Essex, and may have worked under Clerk at the abbey of Bury St Edmunds and at King's College, Cambridge.
Wastell bought a house in Bury before 1490 and was living there for much of the remainder of his life.
In Bury he probably designed the church of St James (now the cathedral), begun in 1503.
By 1494 Wastell had been engaged by Cardinal John Morton [q.v.]to design the central Bell Harry tower of Canterbury Cathedral, for which he provided drawings, and which was finished about 1505 with a fan vault precisely agreeing with Wastell's known work elsewhere.
The pierced stone screens of the crossing also belong to his work.
He was master mason to the prior and chapter of Canterbury by 1496, but was also active in Cambridge, where he worked at King's Hall and on Great St Mary's church.
He must also have designed the fan vault for the upper part of the Red Mount chapel in Lynn, Norfolk, built in 1505–6 (information from Michael Begley).
Between 1496 and 1509 Wastell was also, on stylistic grounds, designer of the eastern chapels of Peterborough Abbey (later Cathedral) for the abbot, Robert Kirton, who spent £2,000 on the work.
The vaulting is once again recognizably his.
Wastell's greatest work was the completion of King's College chapel in Cambridge, begun early in 1508 for Henry VII and completed in 1515.
Although William Vertue [q.v.]was a consultant several times called to Cambridge, the design of the vaults differs widely from his style but agrees perfectly with Wastell's details at Canterbury.
He may have worked at King's in 1476–85 and was certainly at the college by 1486.
His visits continued in subsequent years while he was in Cambridge building a new range of King's Hall in 1490–5, now part of the east range of Trinity College with the lower stage of the Great Gate.
At this period he seems to have directed works on the university church of Great St Mary's, from the tower begun in 1491 until 1514.
In April 1506 Henry VII visited Cambridge to initiate the final stage of the King's chapel; work began in earnest two years later and the fabric was complete by 1515.
Wastell, as master in charge, received a salary of £13 6s. 8d.
His work included the completion of the choir and almost the whole of the antechapel, with all the high vaults, which he built by contract from 1512.
Wastell also designed and built the pinnacles and corner towers, and the vaults of the porches from 1513, as well as the vaults of nine of the choir chapels.
On stylistic grounds it is likely that Wastell was the designer of much of Lavenham church, Suffolk, between 1495 and 1515, and the tower of Dedham, Essex, from 1494.
Outside the circle of official masters, Wastell was the most significant architect of his time.
[A. Oswald in J. Harvey,English Mediaeval Architects , 1984, and Supplement , 1987.]
Michael D Crane
,Samuel (1798–1859), naturalist, geologist, and museum curator, was born 15 January 1798 in London, the third of ten children and the second son of Joseph Stutchbury, ‘citizen and joyner’, and his wife Hannah Smith.
In 1820 Stutchbury was appointed assistant to William Clift [q.v.], conservator of the Hunterian museum of the Royal College of Surgeons.
He resigned in 1825 to sail as naturalist on the Pacific Pearl Fishing Company's commercial expedition to the Tuamotu archipelago.
Stutchbury's journal contains important observations on coral reefs and is one of the few detailed accounts of the early pearling industry in the Tuamotus.
After his return to England in 1827 he worked with his brother Henry Rome Stutchbury (1796–1853), a dealer in natural history specimens, until in 1831 he was appointed curator of the museum of the Bristol Institution.
For almost twenty years Stutchbury devoted himself to the museum.
He was a competent scientist with a modest and helpful nature; the curatorial role was one for which he was well suited.
He published a number of scientific papers during this period, but arguably his most important contributions were the provision of the specimens and information which greatly aided the work of others, notably Charles Darwin, Sir Charles Lyell, and Sir Richard Owen [qq.v.].
Stutchbury was also an able field geologist with a good reputation as a coal surveyor.
In 1850 he resigned his curatorship to take up the post of mineral surveyor for New South Wales, an appointment that provoked the hostility of W. B. Clarke [q.v.].
After completing extensive surveys Stutchbury returned to Sydney in 1855, his health much undermined, and thence to Bristol.
There he practised as a coal and mineral surveyor, particularly for the Duchy of Cornwall, during the few difficult years before his death.
Stutchbury was elected an associate of the Linnean Society in 1828 and a fellow of the Geological Society in 1841.
In 1820 he married Hannah Louise Barnard (died 1865).
They had one daughter.
Stutchbury died in Bristol 12 February 1859.
[D. F. Branagan in Royal Society of New Zealand, Bulletin 21,In Search of New Zealand's Scientific Heritage , 1984; M. D. Crane in Notes and Records of the Royal Society of London , vol. xxxvii, 1983.]
Kenneth O Morgan
,Thomas Edward (1859–1899), Liberal politician and Welsh nationalist, was born at Cynlas farm, Cefnddwysarn, near Bala, Merioneth, 16 February 1859, the third of six surviving children and only son of Thomas Ellis, tenant farmer, and his wife Elizabeth Williams.
That same year, one of Ellis's relatives was evicted from his holding by the local landlord for voting Liberal in the general election.
A Calvinistic Methodist, Ellis was educated at the British School, Llandderfel, and then at the grammar school in Bala.
In 1875 he entered the newly established University College of Wales, Aberystwyth, where his contemporaries included many other nationally-minded young Welshmen.
He left Aberystwyth in 1879 and spent a year in Oxford on a non-collegiate basis.
Entering New College as an undergraduate in October 1880, he became deeply stirred by the social and imperialist ideas current in Oxford at the time.
He graduated in 1884 with a second-class honours degree in modern history, taking his BA in 1885 and his MA in 1897.
After a short period as a private tutor, he became private secretary to the Liberal industrialist MP, Sir John Brunner [q.v.].
A political career was now inevitable and in the July 1886 general election he was elected MP for his native county of Merioneth.
In the next six years, he emerged as an ardent champion of the nonconformist causes of Welsh Church disestablishment and tithe reform, the Welsh tenant farmers' campaign for land reform, and Irish home rule.
He was also much involved in the passage of the Welsh Intermediate Education Act in 1889 and the movement for a national university of Wales.
He became close to other young Welsh Liberal members, including David Lloyd George (later first Earl Lloyd-George of Dwyfor).
In September 1890 Ellis's declaration at Bala on behalf of a Welsh legislative assembly made a strong, though transient, impression: he seemed the very embodiment of ‘Young Wales’.
However, he suffered from indifferent health, and a visit to Egypt led to his becoming seriously ill from typhoid.
To help him recover, he travelled to South Africa in the winter of 1890–1, where he met Cecil Rhodes [q.v.], who greatly impressed him.
When the Liberals returned to power in 1892, it was generally assumed that Ellis would receive government office.
But it was a surprise when W. E. Gladstone offered him the post of deputy whip, an offer which he decided to accept.
This was to drive something of a wedge between him and Lloyd George and other former Welsh allies.
Ellis could still work on behalf of Wales, notably in the appointment of a Welsh land commission, and the foundation of a University of Wales, both in 1893; but he disapproved of Lloyd George's efforts to turn Welsh Liberalism into a nationalist movement somewhat on the lines of the Irish one.
Ellis became chief whip in March 1894 when the fifth Earl of Rosebery succeeded Gladstone as prime minister, and found life exceptionally difficult since the Liberals had only the narrowest of majorities.
He was blamed for being too lax a disciplinarian, and indeed for the defeat on the snap ‘cordite’ vote on 21 June 1895 which saw the government resign.
After his party's heavy defeat in the subsequent general election, Ellis stayed on as chief whip.
In addition to his close involvement in Welsh affairs, he was active in trying to recruit more Labour candidates for the Liberals.
He was broadly in the Liberal Imperialist camp, and played a somewhat curious role in the manoeuvres that followed the Jameson raid in South Africa.
Tom Ellis was a deeply cultured man, of much personal charm, with a strong interest in Welsh art and literature: he edited the works of the seventeenth-century Puritan mystic, Morgan Llwyd [q.v.].
He was active in the movement for a national library and became warden of the University Guild of Graduates in 1896.
His politics and cultural interests combined to make him a nationalist of an unusually rounded kind.
Some saw him as a prophet, a Welsh Kossuth or Mazzini, a ‘lost leader’.
He would hardly have risen as high as his colleague Lloyd George but, had he lived, would surely have been a major figure in the Liberal government of 1905–15.
In 1898 he married Annie, the daughter of Robert Joseph Davies, freehold farmer and a leading Calvinistic Methodist, of Cwrt-Mawr, Llangeitho, Cardiganshire.
She bore him one posthumous son.
His health continued to be uncertain and 5 April 1899, aged only forty, he died in Cannes during a brief holiday on the Riviera.
There are two dramatic statues of Ellis, one in the main square of Bala, the other in the quadrangle of the University College of Wales, Aberystwyth.
The college also houses a portrait of Ellis by J. F. R. Wood.
[Ellis papers in National Library of Wales, Aberystwyth, along with papers there of D. Lloyd George, D. R. Daniel, J. Herbert Lewis, Stuart Rendel, and Ellis Griffith; A. J. Ellis (ed.),
Speeches and Addresses of the late T. E. Ellis M.P.,
1912; T. I. Ellis,Thomas Edward Ellis: Cofiant , 2 vols., 1944, 1948; Neville Masterman,The Forerunner , 1972; Kenneth O. Morgan,Wales in British Politics, 1868–1922 , 3rd edn., 1980.]
Nicholas Vincent
(d. 1245), confidential clerk and estate steward especially associated with building projects, was a native of West Dereham, Norfolk.
His earliest patron was Hubert Walter, later archbishop of Canterbury [q.v.], a fellow native of West Dereham and founder there of a Premonstratensian abbey whose charters are witnessed by Master Elias, perhaps as early as 1188.
Between 1193 and 1201 it is possible that he is to be identified with a master Elias, steward to Gilbert de Glanville, bishop of Rochester [q.v.], a close friend and kinsman of Hubert Walter.
Less likely, but by no means impossible, is the suggestion that he is to be identified with a man named master Elias the engineer, or Elias of Oxford, who prior to 1201 had charge of the king's houses in Oxford and of various castle-building operations across southern England.
The only certainty is that by 1201 he was attached to the household of Hubert Walter at Canterbury, being credited at least once with the title of archbishop's steward.
At about this time he acquired the churches of Brightwalton and Melton Mowbray, gifts from the monks of Battle and Lewes.
Hubert Walter's death in 1205 forced him to transfer to the household of Bishop Jocelin of Wells [q.v.], again as steward.
With the imposition of the papal interdict, Jocelin and Elias went into exile in France, together with Jocelin's brother, Bishop Hugh of Lincoln [q.v.].
Hugh promoted Elias to the Lincoln prebend of Lafford and in November 1212 appointed him executor of his will.
The most important of Elias's contacts made in exile was with Archbishop Stephen Langton [q.v.].
He was twice employed as Langton's envoy to England, and in 1213, at the end of the interdict, returned to Canterbury as Langton's steward.
In the next year he had custody of Rochester Castle.
Following the award of Magna Carta in 1215 Elias helped distribute the charter around the shires, becoming an enthusiastic adherent of the rebel barons and preaching their cause at St Paul's cross in London.
As a result he was despoiled of his various churches and exiled to France when the Royalist party triumphed in 1217.
By 1220 he was pardoned and allowed to return to Langton's household, assisting the construction of a new shrine to St Thomas Becket [q.v.]in Canterbury, in which context he is described by the chronicler Matthew Paris [q.v.]as an ‘incomparable artificer’.
Before 1222 he had acquired a prebend in Salisbury under Langton's pupil, Bishop Richard Poer (q.v. under ‘Poor’).
For the remainder of his life he was to be closely associated with the building of Salisbury's new cathedral.
He is said to have served for twenty-five years as rector of the cathedral fabric fund and is undoubtedly found in association with the cathedral's masons and workshops.
Before 1234 he had supervised the construction of a model dwelling-place for himself within the cathedral close, the profits from whose sale he later put towards Salisbury's fabric fund.
Elsewhere he renewed his contacts with Bishop Jocelin of Wells, then in the midst of rebuilding the cathedral church in Wells.
He served three successive archbishops of Canterbury: Langton, Richard Grant, and Edmund of Abingdon [qq.v.], either as steward or executor.
In 1228 Bishop Richard Poer was translated from Salisbury to Durham, whereafter Elias is found witnessing deeds relating to both these sees.
He was later to serve as Poer's executor and, perhaps as proxy for Poer, as the executor of William Marshal, first Earl of Pembroke (d .
1219, q.v.).
He also found service with Peter des Roches, bishop of Winchester [q.v.], a leading political rival of Langton and Poer, whom Elias none the less assisted with the foundation of monastic houses in Selborne and Titchfield, and for whom he subsequently acted as executor.
Probably under Archbishop Edmund [q.v.]he was promoted to the Canterbury peculiar of Harrow, the chancel of whose church he was repairing in 1242.
Throughout these years his services were much in demand at court.
Between 1233 and 1238 he had charge of royal building work at the great hall of Winchester Castle, besides supervising the installation of windows and pavements at Clarendon Palace, helping to construct a tomb used for the burial of Queen Joan of Scotland [q.v.], and being sent to direct the enclosure of an anchoress in Britford.
Inevitably, given his association with building projects, his work on Becket's shrine, the fact that Matthew Paris preserved Elias's drawing of a wind-rose, and since most of his employers were renowned as patrons of cathedral or monastic architecture, Elias of Dereham has been canvassed as one of the principal influences in the development of early thirteenth-century English Gothic.
Specifically, an attempt has been made to present him as the architect of Salisbury Cathedral.
The attempt has failed, through scepticism that one man could have supervised such a major project whilst still discharging Elias's functions as steward and administrator elsewhere.
The best that can be said is that to appeal to such a wide diversity of patrons he clearly possessed some very rare talent indeed.
It is more likely that such a talent lay in site administration and the guidance of taste rather than in any practical work as craftsman, architect, or mason.
Elias died shortly after April 1245, whereupon his benefices were seized for the use of a papal nuncio.
[A. Hamilton Thompson, ‘Master Elias of Dereham and the King's Works’,Archaeological Journal , vol. xc, 1941; J. Harvey (ed.),
English Medieval Architects: a Biographical Dictionary down to 1550 , revised edn. 1984; C. R. Cheney and E. John (eds.),
English Episcopal Acta III: Canterbury 1193–1205 , 1986; J. Thorpe (ed.),
Registrum Roffense , 1769.]
David M Walker
,William (1770–1813), architect, was born 25 May 1770 in Dunfermline, Fife, one of the family of three sons and two daughters of Mark Stark of Kirkhill, Lasswade, Midlothian, a Glasgow merchant, who had established spinning and beetling mills, and his wife Margaret Paton.
An elder sister, Sarah, had in 1787 married the Glasgow architect, John Craig, and it may have been his brother-in-law who provided his initial professional training.
In 1778 Stark was in St Petersburg with his elder brother, who died there.
He returned sometime before 1804 to Glasgow, where family connections enabled him to compete successfully against David Hamilton [q.v.]for the Hunterian Museum at the university.
Square on plan and domed, its Roman Doric portico was by far the grandest then built in Scotland.
In the following year, 1805, he designed for Greenock a domed school with a Greek Doric portico, and in 1808 a French neo-classical scheme with Greek Doric porticoes for the enlargement of Broomhall, Dunfermline, for Thomas Bruce, seventh Earl of Elgin [q.v.], both of which remained on paper.
In 1807 Stark designed the lunatic asylum in Glasgow, in which he adapted Benthamite prison planning to contemporary theories on the segregation of patients by sex, rank, and degree of derangement.
Built in 1810–11, it was a memorable exercise in neo-classical geometry, comprising four residential blocks radiating from a central drum of day-rooms crowned by a tall glass dome over the stairwell at its core.
Stark published the plans in the form of a pamphlet, subsequently developed into Remarks on the Construction of Public Hospitals for the Cure of Mental Derangement (1810) which resulted in the building's cruciform planning being widely adopted.
In his later asylums at Gloucester (1811) and Dundee (1812), Stark himself adopted markedly less institutionalized concepts, the former being planned as a crescent set in gardens and the latter as a domestically scaled rural farm.
Although Stark, uniquely at that date, had experimented with a severe part-Wren, part-Russian neo-baroque at the steeple of his St George's church, Glasgow (1807), his next major design, the Greek Doric Judiciary Buildings in Glasgow's Saltmarket established his reputation as the pioneer of the Greek revival in Scotland.
Internally its main court, a Doric colonnaded hemicycle, drew inspiration from the rebuilding of Chester Castle by Thomas Harrison [q.v.].
By 1811 Stark was in bad health and on medical advice left Glasgow for Edinburgh, where the writers to the Signet and the Faculty of Advocates commissioned him to redesign their libraries (later both occupied by the Signet) for which the carcase had already been erected by Robert Reid [q.v.].
In these he brilliantly overcame the problems set by Reid's window levels to create colonnaded interiors worthy of imperial Russia.
When he died Stark's career was on the brink of still greater success, his posthumously published report on the plans for Edinburgh's Calton area, in which he advocated attention to contours rather than the imposition of grid plans, having a profound effect on Edinburgh's town planning.
Sir Walter Scott [q.v.], for whom he designed ‘an English Vicarage House’ for Abbotsford, lamented that in him ‘more genius died than is left behind among the collected universality of Scottish architects.’
Stark married Catherine, sister of George Thomson [q.v.], collector of Scottish music, and daughter of Robert Thomson, schoolmaster.
They had one daughter.
Stark died in Drumsheugh, Edinburgh, 9 October 1813, and was buried in Greyfriars churchyard.
[Memoir by R. Gordon Stark (1935) in National Library of Scotland, MS 1758; H. M. Colvin,A Biographical Dictionary of British Architects 1600–1840 , 1978; T. A. Markus (ed.),
Order in Space and Society , 1982.]
John A Bagley
,James (1753–1828), aeronaut and engineer, was baptized 27 February 1753 in Oxford, the son of Thomas Sadler, pastry-cook and confectioner.
Nothing is known of his early life, but it is clear that he acquired practical experience of chemistry and engineering.
In 1784 he began experimenting with small model balloons, and on 4 October that year he became the first Englishman to fly a hot-air balloon, with a short flight in Oxford.
On 12 November he made a fourteen-mile flight from the Physic Garden in a balloon filled with hydrogen, which was witnessed by most of the population of Oxford.
During 1785 he made six more balloon flights, notably taking William Windham, MP [q.v.], as a passenger on 5 May, but then gave up ballooning for twenty-five years.
Sadler acted as occasional assistant to Dr Thomas Beddoes [q.v.], reader in chemistry at Oxford University 1788–92, and in 1793 he went with Beddoes to Bristol, where Beddoes later established his Pneumatic Establishment.
By this time Sadler was interested in steam engines: in 1791 he obtained a patent for an unsuccessful rotary engine.
In 1792 and 1793 he supplied two small steam winding engines to Coalbrookdale.
He then moved to London, where he built several steam engines, including one for (Sir) Samuel Bentham [q.v.].
This was intended to equip a shipyard near Southampton where Bentham built six small vessels of experimental design for the Royal Navy, but it was not actually used there.
Bentham's ships were equipped with guns made by Sadler, installed on non-recoil mountings: both Bentham and Sadler claimed credit for this installation.
There were conflicting views of its usefulness, and Sadler's cannon-founding seems to have been an unprofitable venture.
In 1796 Sadler was appointed chemist to the newly founded Board of Naval Works of the Admiralty, under Bentham as inspector-general.
He installed his twelve horse-power steam engine at Portsmouth dockyard in 1798–9, the first to be used in a royal dockyard.
Bentham was continually at loggerheads with the Navy Board and its officials, and in 1808 the Admiralty was advised to abolish the Board of Naval Works.
Sadler's post of chemist seems to have been terminated in 1809 without compensation, leaving him in severe financial straits, but these were relieved by a subscription among his friends in Oxford.
Sadler then resumed ballooning with an ascent from Oxford on 7 July 1810 to celebrate the installation of Lord Grenville (later first Duke of Buckingham and Chandos, q.v.) as chancellor of the university.
In the next five years he made about forty ascents as a professional balloonist.
Sadler was twice married and had two sons, Windham William [q.v.]and John, who assisted him and became professional aeronauts.
He also had at least two daughters.
He died in Oxford 27 March 1828.
[J. E. Hodgson,History of Aeronautics in Great Britain , 1924;idem , ‘James Sadler of Oxford’,Cornhill Magazine , April 1928, and Transactions of the Newcomen Society , vol. viii, 1927–8; J. E. Stock,Memoirs of the Life of Thomas Beddoes M.D. , 1811; Sir Samuel Bentham,Naval Papers , no. vii, 1828; J. G. Coad,The Royal Dockyards 1690–1850 , 1989.]
Roy Strong
,Levina (1510/20? –1576), painter, was one of the daughters of Simon Bening or Benninck, the finest Bruges illuminator of the sixteenth century.
She was presumably trained in her father's workshop, and she came to England into royal service in about 1545.
She was by then already married to George Teerlinc, who became a gentleman pensioner, while she was granted in November 1546 an annuity of £40 p.a. which continued until her death.
The Teerlincs resided in more than one London parish and Levina, for a painter, enjoyed an unusual degree of social status.
In the new year's gift list of 1563 she is described as ‘gentlewoman’ and by her son, in 1595, as ‘sworne as one of the privye chamber to the Quenes Majestie’.
In that role she annually presented a miniature.
In 1553 she gave Mary I ‘a smale picture of the Trynite’ and nine more miniatures are recorded in the surviving new year's gift lists between 1559 and 1576.
These were either portraits of the young queen or of her in a group with, for example, her knights of the Garter or on progress.
As early as 1551 she was sent to the Princess Elizabeth ‘to drawe owt her picture’.
No signed or documented work by her is known and what can be assembled as an oeuvre emerges from the few surviving miniatures between 1545 and 1575.
The most important of these is that depicting the Royal Maundy (Beauchamp Collection) and an early portrait of Elizabeth I (Royal Collection).
Others can be more speculatively added to that nucleus, both miniatures and illuminations, but we can have no certainty that they are by her.
Her style is that of the illuminators in the Ghent–Bruges tradition, although her portrait miniatures show the influence of Lucas Hornebolt [q.v.], her predecessor, and, in terms of composition, Hans Eworth [q.v.].
Her most characteristic feature is a head attached to a too small, spindly body.
Her technique remained awkward, thin, and often cursory.
Resident in Stepney, she died 23 June 1576.
[Roy Strong,Artists of the Tudor Court : the Portrait Miniature Rediscovered, 1520–1620 , Victoria and Albert Museum exhibition catalogue, 1983, pp. 52–7, and The English Miniature , 1984, pp. 54–64.]
George W Carpenter
,Charles Edward (1887–1945), electrical and mechanical engineer, was born in Bradford 5 September 1887, the only son of Robert Fairburn and his wife Elizabeth.
He was educated at Bradford Grammar School, where he gained an open scholarship in mathematics to Brasenose College, Oxford.
Brasenose awarded him a senior Hulme exhibition and he obtained first classes in mathematical moderations (1906), mathematics (1908), and engineering science (1910).
For the next two years he was a pupil under (Sir) Henry Fowler [q.v.], chief mechanical engineer of the Midland Railway at its Derby works.
He studied engineering drawing at Derby Technical College and metallurgy at Sheffield University, gaining his MA in 1912.
Fairburn then joined the railway engineering department of Siemens Dynamo Works Ltd. in Stafford and from 1913 to 1916 was assistant to the resident engineer for the electrification of the first freight railway in Britain to be operated by electric traction, the Newport (Middlesbrough) to Shildon line of the former North Eastern Railway.
In this he was responsible for the design and installation of the overhead contact system and for putting the locomotives into service.
In 1916 he joined the Royal Flying Corps as an officer in an experimental squadron developing new flying formation and fighting techniques, and he attained the rank of major in 1918.
In 1919 he joined the English Electric Company Ltd.
He established and developed their engineering department for railway electrification in Britain and overseas.
In addition, in 1926 he became general manager of their Preston works and in 1928 of the Stafford works also.
In 1931 he became manager and chief engineer of the traction department, which carried out many important railway electrification schemes, including those of the Southern Railway, New Zealand government railways, Great Indian Peninsular Railway, Danish state railways, and the Post Office electric railway in London.
In 1934 he joined the London, Midland and Scottish Railway as chief electrical engineer and in 1937 became deputy chief mechanical engineer and electrical engineer under (Sir) William Stanier [q.v.].
In 1942 the latter was seconded as scientific adviser to the Ministry of Production and Fairburn became acting chief mechanical engineer, an appointment confirmed in 1944.
His wide experience, combined with great technical and organizing abilities, enabled him to achieve improved efficiency in the railway workshops, which became all the more necessary when during the war tank, gun, and aircraft production and repair were added to their activities.
From 1934 he was responsible for the introduction on the LMS of substantial numbers of diesel-electric locomotives for heavy-duty service in marshalling yards, where they showed great economies over steam and were the forerunners of more than 1,400 of this type on British Railways.
He also had a keen grasp of steam locomotive matters and was responsible for introducing suburban passenger locomotives in 1945, in which year he also made proposals for the first LMS (and British) main-line diesel-electric locomotives, which were finally introduced under his successor H. G. Ivatt two years later.
He was an outstanding engineer with quick perception of any issue and great powers of concentration.
He was an active member of the Institutions of Civil, Electrical, Mechanical, and Welding Engineers and a vice-president of the Institution of Locomotive Engineers, to which he gave two important papers on diesel-electric shunting locomotives.
In 1914 he married Eleanor, daughter of Dr Cadman of Bradford.
They had one son and one daughter.
Fairburn died in London 12 October 1945 following a heart attack.
[Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers , vol. cliv, 1946;Engineer , vol. clxxx, 19 October 1945; E. S. Cox,Locomotive Panorama , vol. i, 1965; personal information.]
David Lewis Jones
,Dadabhai (1825–1917), the first Indian elected to the House of Commons, was born in Khadak, near Bombay, 4 September 1825, the only son of Naoroji Palanji Dordi, a poor Parsi priest, and his wife Manekbai.
He was educated at Elphinstone College where he remained as a teacher and became the first Indian professor with his appointment to the chair of mathematics and natural philosophy (1854).
He established a newspaper,Rast Goftar , in 1851; he was active in reform societies, being a founding member of the Bombay Association (1852).
A partner in Cama & Co., Naoroji opened an English branch in 1855, the first Indian firm to be established in England, and combined commerce with politics until 1881.
He was professor of Gujarati at University College London (1856–65).
He persuaded Indian princes to fund the East India Association (1866) which gave him a platform for his campaign to open the Indian Civil Service to Indians and for publicizing his ‘drain theory’, which presented British rule as a drain on the financial resources of India.
The fullest account of this theory is in his Poverty and un-British rule in India (1901).
The gaekwar of Baroda made him diwan in 1873 but Naoroji left after thirteen unhappy months.
He served on the Bombay Corporation (1875–6, 1881–5) and accepted nomination as Indian representative on the Bombay Legislative Council (1885–6).
He was one of the founders of the Indian National Congress in 1885 and presided at the 1886 and 1893 sessions.
An unsuccessful Liberal candidate for Holborn in 1886, Naoroji was adopted for Central Finsbury after a struggle within the constituency party (1888).
He gained public sympathy after the third Marquess of Salisbury, the prime minister, doubted that ‘a British constituency would elect a black man’.
He was elected to the Commons by 2,961 votes to 2,956 in 1892, which brought him great popularity in India.
In the Commons he devoted himself to Indian affairs with an emphasis on finance and on opening the Indian Civil Service to Indians.
He was assiduous, if rarely successful, in using questions to obtain information on Indian affairs.
He lost his seat in the Conservative landslide of 1895.
He served as a member of the royal commission on Indian expenditure (1895–1900) but he made an error in appearing as a witness before the other commissioners.
He signed a minority report.
In 1906 he stood for North Lambeth, where he split the Liberal vote and came third.
Naoroji was president of the twenty-second session of the Indian National Congress in 1906 when he tried, without great success, to heal the split between extremists and moderates.
He retired in 1907 to Versova, near Bombay.
Bombay University belatedly awarded him an honorary LLD in 1916.
At the age of eleven Naoroji married Gulbai, the seven-year-old daughter of Sorabji Shroff, a Parsi priest.
She died in 1910.
They had one son, who died in 1893, and two daughters.
Naoroji died in Bombay 30 June 1917.
[A. Moin Zaidi (ed.),
The Grand Little Man of India: Dadabhai Naoroji, Speeches & Writings , 1985–8; R. P. Masani,Dadabhai Naoroji: the Grand Old Man of India , 1939; R. P. Patwardhan (ed.),
Dadabhai Naoroji Correspondence , 1977; autobiographical remarks in his evidence to the royal commission on Indian expenditure.]
Frank Greenaway
,Peter (1806–1883), industrial chemist and alum manufacturer, was born 19 February 1806 in Brechin, Forfarshire, Scotland, the son of a hand-loom weaver of Brechin, and his wife, whose family had been farmers for generations.
He had an older brother.
Spence was educated at the parish school in Brechin, but began his working life very early, apprenticed to a grocer, an uncle, in Perth.
After finishing his apprenticeship he set up a business with this uncle, but it failed.
In 1832 Spence joined a gasworks in Dundee, acquired a good knowledge of practical chemistry, and patented minor innovations in manufacture (for example, of Prussian blue).
In 1834 he set up on his own in London as a general chemical manufacturer.
He did not prosper, and moved to Burgh-by-Sands, near Carlisle.
Here his fortune changed after his discovery in 1845, after much experimentation, of a new and rapid method of making alum from coal shale (colliery refuse) and the ammoniacal liquor by-product of gasworks.
Alum, an outstanding mordant, was an essential chemical for the printing and dyeing sections of the textile industry.
In a crude form it was also useful in the treatment of sewage.
In 1846 he moved his main manufacture to Pendleton, near Manchester, and became the principal supplier of this important substance, which was also valuable for the expanding paper industry.
He opened a second factory in Gode in 1854.
Spence's product was an ammonium alum which gradually displaced the potash alum which had been made principally at Whitby.
He was awarded a medal for his process at the exhibition of 1862.
In the 1860s Spence became interested in copper smelting, and in 1866 he set up a company in Gode to develop his ideas.
He was forced to sell this in the 1870s, after the failure in Redonda, in the West Indies, of his company formed to mine phosphate deposits and convert them to fertilizers.
As a public man and staunch Congregationalist he was active in social reform, notably in promoting total abstinence.
He also campaigned against pollution but suffered the irony of being prosecuted himself for pollution in 1857, which caused him to move his works to Miles Platting.
He never forgave the chemist (Sir) Edward Frankland [q.v.], who had been a colleague, for appearing for the prosecution.
He was an active member of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society, his papers to it showing a wide range of interests.
In 1832 Spence married Agnes (died 1883), second daughter of Francis Mudie, linen manufacturer of Dundee.
They had four sons and four daughters.
Spence died in Manchester 5 July 1883.
[J. Fenwick Allen,Some Founders of the Chemical Industry , 1906; D. W. F. Hardie, ‘Chemical Pioneers, 9: Peter Spence’,Chemical Age , vol. lxxviii, 1957; Peter J. T. Morris and Colin A. Russell,Archives of the British Chemical Industry 1750–191 4: a Handlist , 1988.]
W R Meyer
,John (d. 1720), pirate, known as ‘Calico Jack’, is of obscure origin.
According to one story he started out as a liveryman in England and ran away to sea after stealing his mistress's jewels.
He first appears as quartermaster under Charles Vane, one of the leaders of the New Providence ‘pirate republic’.
When Vane's crew turned against him, Rackam became captain and at the end of 1718 cruised in the Caribbean, taking several prizes.
After a further cruise, and more depredations, Rackam put in at Cuba to refit and carouse.
Attempting to leave, he was surprised by a Spanish guarda-costa , but escaped capture by making off in a sloop previously taken by the Spaniard which he and his gang seized under cover of night.
In September 1720 he was again at sea ‘on the account’, but at the end of October, while scouting the coast of Jamaica, he was engaged and taken with little resistance by an armed trading sloop commanded by ‘a brisk fellow, one Jonathan Barnet’.
On 16 November 1720 Rackam, along with his sailing-master George Fetherston, his quartermaster Richard Corner, and others of his crew, was tried for piracy before a vice-admiralty court held at Spanish Town under the presidency of the governor of Jamaica, Sir Nicholas Lawes: the specific charges related to the merchant and fishing vessels taken and plundered during the final cruise.
Against ample evidence for the prosecution the accused offered no real defence and were all condemned and sentenced to hang.
After a separate trial, held ten days after Rackam's execution, two additional, and notably active, members of his crew were also sentenced to hang: these were the female pirates Mary Read and Anne Bonny, who were both reprieved upon informing the court that they were ‘quick with child’.
Rackam was supposedly a tall, dark-eyed, handsome man, and a great hand with the ladies.
Legend links him romantically with Anne Bonny, though it is likely that his men also claimed their share of her — and Mary Read's — decidedly uncouth favours.
Rackam's swashbuckling manner was matched and supported by his theatrical dress: his shirt, jacket, and trousers were of striped calico, whence came the name ‘Calico Jack’.
Rackam was hanged at Gallows Point, Port Royal, Jamaica, 18 November 1720, dying a ‘most profligate impudent villain', and was afterwards gibbeted.
A sandy islet off Port Royal is named Rackam's Cay.
[Daniel Defoe,A General History of the…
Pyrates , 1724;Tryals of Captain John Rackam, and Other Pirates , Public Record Office, CO 137/14, 1721;Calendar of State Papers, America and West Indies, 1720–21 , 1933.]
D M Prout
,(Mackay Hugh) Baillie (1865–1945), architect, was born at Beard's Hill, St Peter's, near Ramsgate, Kent, 23 October 1865, the oldest of the fourteen children of Mackay Hugh Baillie Scott, a Scottish baron who owned sheep ranches in Australia, and his wife Martha Waters.
He was educated at the Royal Agricultural College in Cirencester (1883–5), graduating with honours in drawing and science.
It was intended that he should manage his father's sheep ranches in Australia, but in 1886 he was articled to Charles E. Davis [q.v.], city architect of Bath, where he remained until 1889.
Scott is regarded as one of the most outstanding late nineteenth- and early twentieth-century arts and crafts architects.
His oeuvre consisted almost entirely of small houses.
In 1889 he moved to Douglas, Isle of Man, where he was employed by the surveyor and land agent, Frederick Saunderson, and attended the school of art.
In 1893 Scott set up in independent practice.
His earliest houses rejected the formal plan of the average Victorian house, but his exteriors owed much to the historic vernacular styles of the older generation.
In 1895 his article ‘An Ideal Suburban House’, published in the Studio , exposed Scott's talents to a wider audience and he received his first commissions from the mainland.
When these designs were published, it was remarked that ‘the room as left by the builder before it is inhabited at all, is already more than half finished.’
His fitted furniture became a marked feature of his work and greatly influenced architects such as Barry Parker and Sir Raymond Unwin [q.v.].
Increasingly from 1895 Scott adopted the style of C. F. A. Voysey [q.v.].
Between 1895 and 1898 he published regular articles in the Studio .
In 1897 he was asked to decorate and furnish the dining-room and drawing-room for the Grand Duke of Hesse's palace in Darmstadt.
In 1898 he was commissioned to decorate a fantastic tree house, Le Nid, for Princess Marie of Romania.
This notoriety brought more house commissions from Britain, the most important being Blackwell in Bowness, Westmorland (1898–9); White Lodge in Wantage, Berkshire (1898–9); and White House in Helensburgh, Scotland (1899–1900).
In 1901 Scott moved to Bedford, where he remained for twelve years.
He gained little local success, but by this time was internationally known.
He received numerous one-off commissions and designed model dwellings in Letchworth, Hampstead Garden Suburb, and Gidea Park in Essex.
In 1904 Hermann Muthesius described Scott as one of ‘the poets among the domestic architects’ inhabiting ‘the world of fantasy and romance of the ancient bardic poetry’.
The decade between 1901 and 1911 was his heyday.
Major works included Bill House in Selsey-on-Sea, Sussex (1907); Undershaw in Guildford, Surrey (1908–9); and Home Close in Sibford Ferris, Oxfordshire (1910).
In 1905 A. Edgar Beresford joined Scott's office; he appears to have been chiefly responsible for the technical and financial success of the practice.
At this time Scott might have had twenty-five or thirty houses going up at once.
In 1919 Scott made Beresford his partner.
The practice closed during World War I, but reopened in London in 1919 and continued to flourish until 1939.
Because of his fully integrated and flowing plans, his fitted furniture, and his stripped exteriors, Scott has often been seen as one of the fathers of Modernism.
While undoubtedly progressive and innovatory, however, Scott loathed flat-roofed houses and after World War I increasingly designed in traditional styles.
His philosophy of design is expressed in Houses and Gardens (1906 and 1933).
In 1889 Scott married Florence Kate (died 1939), of 13 Dunsford Place, Bath, daughter of John Pearson Nash (a descendant of Richard ‘Beau’ Nash, q.v.), who had practised medicine in India.
They had one daughter and twin sons, one of whom did not survive.
Scott died at Elm Grove Hospital in Brighton 10 February 1945.
[James D. Kornwolf,M. H. Baillie Scott and the Arts and Crafts Movement , 1972; Hermann Muthesius,Das englische Haus , 1904 and 1905.]
Richard Ingrams
,(Gavin) Graham (1908–1940), the cartoonist ‘Pont’, was born in Newcastle upon Tyne 4 July 1908, the only son and younger child of George Gavin Laidler, owner of a painting and decorating business, and his wife Kathleen Crosby.
He was educated at Newcastle upon Tyne Preparatory School and later at Trinity College, Glenalmond.
His father died when Laidler was thirteen and his family moved south, eventually settling in the village of Jordans, Buckinghamshire.
He started drawing cartoons when still a schoolboy and was determined to earn his living in that way.
But in 1926, as a result of family pressure, he enrolled at the London School of Architecture.
He became seriously ill shortly after taking his first job in a surveyor's office.
A tubercular kidney was diagnosed and Laidler was advised to give up office work and to spend his winters abroad.
He concentrated on drawing cartoons and in 1932 had his first acceptance from Punch , the beginning of a partnership that established him as a major comic artist and one of the most original talents in the long history of the magazine.
His exceptional talent was eventually recognized by the editor, E. V. Knox [q.v.], who placed him under an exclusive contract, an almost unprecedented arrangement.
Pont's cartoons were in the Punch tradition of George du Maurier [q.v.]and Frank Reynolds, poking fun at the middle classes.
But his drawings were remarkable for their acuteness of observation and their complete lack of sentimentality, qualities that placed them in a different league.
He excelled at grumpy anti-social males, harassed mothers, and their stony-faced domestic servants.
His most successful series, called ‘the British Character’(later published in book form in 1938 with an introduction by E. M. Delafield, q.v.), included a number of his most memorable drawings, with such titles as ‘Weakness for Old Seams’, ‘Strong Tendency to Become Doggy’ and ‘Love of Travelling Alone’(a bowler-hatted man who has covered the seats of his railway compartment with umbrella, briefcase, etc.).
Pont, who became an associate of the Royal Institute of British Architects, came into his own at the outbreak of war in 1939.
Another book,The British Carry On (1940), portrayed the atmosphere of the ‘phoney war’ and the national response to the threat of invasion.
Examples of this are his fierce-looking lady (to a heavily armed German soldier advancing over the lawn): ‘How dare you come in here!’, or a placid scene in a country pub where the radio on the bar is tuned to the German propaganda station: ‘Meanwhile, in Britain, the entire population, faced by the threat of an invasion has been flung into a state of complete panic.’
These cartoons have frequently been used to illustrate the social history of that period.
Laidler was a tall, very good-looking man, quiet and observant, who remained cheerful in spite of his illness.
He was remembered with great affection by all who knew him in the course of his short life.
He travelled widely, usually for reasons of health, which gave him an opportunity to observe the habits of British tourists.
He died 23 November 1940 at Hillingdon County Hospital, Uxbridge, at the age of thirty-two.
He was unmarried.
During his brief career he had drawn over 400 cartoons, enough to furnish the material for five books, two of which were published posthumously.
[G. G. Laidler,Pont (introduction by Fougasse), 1942; G. G. Laidler,The British Character Studied and Revealed by Pont , 1982, and The World of Pont , 1983; A. Bernard Hollowood,Pont , 1969.]
Janet Ing Freeman
,John (1791–1873), artist and facsimilist, was born 17 November 1791 in Kennington, the son of John Harris (1767–1832, q.v.), with whom he has often been confused.
Both his father and his grandfather Moses Harris [q.v.]were artists; the younger John Harris exhibited at the Royal Academy from time to time between 1810 and 1834.
As an academy student he specialized in portrait miniatures, and with his father he executed the illuminations in the British Library vellum copy of John Whittaker's 1816 gold-printed Magna Carta.
Harris worked for Whittaker, a printer and bookbinder, from 1815 until about 1820.
By then he had also begun to produce the works for which he is principally remembered, pen or lithographic facsimile reproductions of early printing and wood engraving, generally intended to remedy defects in existing copies of books.
Both Thomas Grenville and G. J. Spencer (second Earl Spencer)[qq.v.]were among the collectors who employed him as a facsimilist.
Harris married in 1820 and about the same time began his long association with the British Museum, where, in addition to supplying facsimiles, he served as an attendant in the reading rooms.
In his memoirs Robert Cowtan described an incident in which (Sir) Anthony Panizzi [q.v.]and two other librarians, unable to identify the facsimile leaves in a rare volume, called in Harris to point out his own work, which he was able to do only after considerable examination of the book.
On 8 July 1843, following this episode, the Museum trustees at Panizzi's request ordered that Harris in future sign any leaf he restored with the formula ‘This is by J. H.’; other signatures used on facsimiles include ‘F. S. J. H.’, ‘by H’, and ‘J. H.’ Harris's unsigned work is often difficult to distinguish from an original, and his minute signature is sometimes overlooked, as when the British Museum for many years reproduced as genuine a signed Harris facsimile of the printer's device of William Caxton [q.v.].
In 1851 Harris showed his facsimiles at the Great Exhibition; his own brief account of his technique and early work appears in the 1852 Reports by the Juries .
By August 1856 he had become totally blind, and in 1858 an appeal for contributions on his behalf was launched in the advertisement columns of Notes and Queries .
Two years later Harris and his wife Mary became residents of the Royal Masonic Benevolent Institution for Aged Freemasons in Croydon; he had been an active Freemason since 1818, and in 1849 had published a set of designs for lodge tracing boards, which became standard for many years.
Whilst resident at Croydon, where he died 28 December 1873, Harris published two poems, ‘Lines on the Royal Masonic Benevolent Institution’, sold in aid of the Freemasons' Life Boat Fund in 1871, and ‘Lines on the Fiftieth Anniversary of the Wedding Day of John and Mary Harris’(1870).
His son, John Alfred, for a time continued his father's business of supplying facsimiles.
[Robert Cowtan,Memories of the British Museum , 1872; ‘John Harris, Facsimilist’,Times Literary Supplement , 23 January 1919, p. 48; Barry Gaines, ‘John Harris and the Rylands Copy of Caxton's Edition of Malory’,Bulletin of the John Rylands Library , vol. lii, 1969–70, pp. 115–28; private information from Philip J. Weimerskirch.]
P R Coss
, Sir Geoffrey (c. 1200–1274), royal minister, was the son of a minor knight with property at Siddington in Gloucestershire and at Pinley near Coventry.
He was probably of age by 1222 and first appears in royal service in 1233–4 as constable of St Briavels, Gloucestershire.
Joining the royal curia, he then became knight-deputy to the earl marshal and marshal of the household.
The Gascon campaign of 1242–3 proved a turning-point in his career.
On his return he was given custody of the honour of Arundel.
From late 1244 to early 1250 he was associated with the general forest eyre conducted under the headship of Robert Passelewe [q.v.].
On 4 March 1250 he was made chief justice of the forest on both sides of the Trent, an office which he exercised for two and a half years until 25 October 1252.
As a forest justice he earned some notoriety.
According to Matthew Paris [q.v.], he had gained a reputation for parsimony whilst marshal of the household.
Now he was to be particularly zealous in the interests of the king.
Langley's northern eyre was a very lucrative one and undoubtedly caused murmurings.
By 1252 he was at the height of his power and high in royal esteem.
A member of the council, he functioned as escort to the king's daughter, Queen Margaret of Scotland [q.v.], during 1252–3, and in March 1254 took responsibility for the English and Welsh lands of the young Prince Edward.
This proved to be a disaster, however, for he provoked the Welsh rising of November 1256.
Paris says that he conducted himself here in a typically high-handed manner, whilst the Dunstable annalist writes of his boasting before the king and queen that he had the Welsh in the palm of his hand.
Out of favour with the king, he was eventually pardoned on 14 February 1258.
He was unpopular, too, with the opposition baronage, and was among those royalists whose lands were pillaged in the spring of 1263.
He had died by 22 September 1274.
Although Langley inherited some property and acquired other estates through marriage, it was his service to the Crown which raised his family's fortunes.
He added to the estates received directly from the Crown by acquiring the estates of landowners indebted to Jews.
He paid considerable attention to the improvement and consolidation of his estates.
At its height his income from land must have been at least £200 per annum.
In addition he was able to acquire an heiress and her estates for his eldest son, Walter.
He was married twice, first to Christine, of unknown parentage, and secondly to Matilda, daughter of Robert de Brightwell.
Geoffrey and Matilda, and Geoffrey's son, Walter, were all buried in the church of the Franciscans in Coventry.
The division of his estates between the two branches of his family helps to explain why the Langleys failed to rise further, as Geoffrey's own career might well have suggested.
[P. R. Coss (ed.),
The Langley Cartulary , Dugdale Society Main Series, vol. xxxii, 1980.]
Elizabeth Vallance
,Elizabeth Margaret (‘Bessie’)(1899–1970), trade-union activist and Labour MP, was born in Liverpool 24 September 1899, the elder daughter of Hugh Bamber, bookbinder, and his wife Mary, daughter of Andrew Little, Edinburgh lawyer.
Mary Bamber became national organizer of the Union of Distributive and Allied Workers and a passionate socialist, E. Sylvia Pankhurst [q.v.]once calling her ‘the finest fighting platform speaker in the country’.
She left elementary school at fourteen to take a job filling seed packets for five shillings a week; later she worked for a draper and subsequently for the Co-op, where she joined the union movement of which she was to be a lifelong member.
Her main interest, however, was in politics.
From socialist Sunday School she moved to the Independent Labour party, which she left in 1920 because she found it insufficiently radical, and joined instead the recently formed Communist party of Great Britain.
In 1924 she repudiated communism and returned to the Labour movement.
In 1922 she married John (‘Jack’) Braddock, a former boxer, who shared her political and social interests.
They had no children.
Their marriage, which was very close, lasted until Jack's death in 1963: by then ‘the Braddocks’ had become legendary in the politics of Merseyside.
He became leader of the Liverpool city council; she was a member of the city council from 1930 to 1961, for the last six years as an alderman.
In 1936 she was adopted as the prospective parliamentary candidate for the Exchange division of Liverpool.
Because of the extensions of the life of that Parliament as a consequence of the war, she had to wait until 1945 to fight an election, which she won with a majority of 665.
She was the first Labour candidate to be returned for that constituency and the first woman MP for a Liverpool seat.
She was elected to the Labour party national executive committee in 1947 and remained an MP until 1970, despite an attempt by her local party to oust her in 1955 because of her right-wing position.
She became one of the notable personalities of the House of Commons, and in 1952 she was the first woman MP to be suspended from a sitting.
Always outspoken — and there were some who found her language over-rich for the Palace of Westminster — she was defiant in her support of working people.
She argued passionately for better housing, education, and welfare services for the poor, and was a particularly strong advocate of the National Health Service, making herself an expert on mental health.
She was also a defender of the sport of boxing.
A large woman, who confessed to weighing fifteen stone, she championed the manufacture of outsize clothes at modest prices.
She was not gracious to those whose arguments she rejected, whether they came from the opposition or her own party, as Aneurin Bevan [q.v.]and Michael Foot were both, at different times, to discover.
Deeply antagonistic towards the Left, she opposed Bevanism.
When offered a post in the Labour government of 1964 she refused, saying that she could do more fighting for the government in Liverpool.
Thus she stayed on the back-benches, retained her roots in Merseyside, and fought for the people and ideals which she had always supported.
She died in Liverpool 13 November 1970.
[The Times , 14 November 1970;Sunday Times , 15 November 1970; J. and E. Braddock,The Braddocks , 1963; private information from Lord Wilson of Rievaulx.]
Michael Maclagan
,(Arthur) Oswald (1868–1939), journalist and heraldist, was born 3 January 1868 in London, where his family had lived for many generations, the only child of Henry Stracey Barron (1838–1918), engineer in Constantinople, and his wife Harriet Marshall (1836–1918).
He was educated at Merchant Taylors' School, 1877–83.
Besides his journalism for the Evening News , he early developed a wide interest in heraldry and genealogy; in particular, his knowledge of medieval blazon was unrivalled.
His article on heraldry in the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica remains one of the best and most erudite introductions to the subject: he also made a shorter contribution to Shakespeare's England (1916).
He enjoyed gently mocking the established heraldic writers.
His most substantial achievement in these fields is to be found in his articles and editorship of the Ancestor in twelve notable volumes from 1902 to 1905.
In the latter year he also published the massive and learned Northamptonshire Families for the Victoria County History (2 vols.).
Barron served as a gold staff officer at the coronation of George V in 1911.
At first his relations with the official College of Arms were inclined to be acerbic; but, as his work and scholarship came to be appreciated, they became more cordial.
As a result he was appointed in 1937 to be Maltravers Pursuivant Extraordinary: he thus played an official role at the coronation of King George VI in that year.
He became a frequent and esteemed visitor to Queen Victoria Street.
Meanwhile he continued to produce his articles for the Evening News .
Many bought that paper simply to read him.
His range of subjects was enormous; his prose distinctive, lucid, and distinguished.
Some seventy of his essays were published as Day In and Day Out by ‘The Londoner’in 1924.
He had a gift for the unexpected word and an unusually wide range of knowledge.
Quite often he would draw on his genealogical expertise.
Although he was a good heraldic artist and wrote a fair hand, he typed almost illegibly.
Barron enjoyed friendship and conversation.
He was a great lover of cats.
His home in Brook Green (the Brugglemith of Rudyard Kipling, q.v.) always nurtured at least one, generally Persian, as well as other household treasures.
He loved talking and was also fond of swimming.
He married in 1899 Hilda L. F., daughter of William Bliss Sanders; they had one daughter.
Both survived him.
He died in Bristol 24 September 1939 and is buried there.
He bequeathed his valuable genealogical collections to the Society of Antiquaries, of which he had been a fellow since 1901.
Barron never achieved the major work on heraldry for which his friends hoped; his learning is scattered through the pages of the Ancestor and the Victoria County Histories.
He was in fact a profound scholar with an enormous gift for friendship and conversation, and also a highly accomplished journalist.
[The Times , 9 and 28 September 1939;Antiquaries Journal , vol. xx, p. 124; information from Sir Anthony Wagner; personal knowledge.]
John Bold
,Henry (1647–1711), architect and merchant, was baptized 8 July 1647 in King's Lynn, Norfolk, the son of Henry Bell, mercer.
He was educated at the local grammar school and then Caius College, Cambridge, where he took his BA degree in 1665, before embarking on a grand tour.
In 1686 he inherited his father's properties and continued his successful business as a producer of linseed and rape oil.
His status in the merchant community is attested by his becoming an alderman in 1690 and, following his father, serving as mayor of King's Lynn in 1692 and 1703.
An educated and cultivated gentleman, Bell's travels played an important part in the formation of his taste, both as a connoisseur of paintings and as an architect.
His own collection, bequeathed to his youngest son William, included works said to be by Hans Holbein [q.v.],
Rembrandt, Egbert van Heemskerk [q.v.]and his father, and Goltzius.
He practised architecture as a pastime rather than as a full-time profession.
In the brief memoir of his life, which prefixes his posthumously published An Historical Essay on the Original of Painting (1728), Bell's travels are said to have ‘conduced very much to his Improvement’ in architecture, the ‘Mistress of…(his) Affections’.
His style owed a great deal to the example of Holland as well as to the work of Sir Christopher Wren [q.v.].
He comes first to notice for his role in planning the rebuilding of Northampton after the fire of 1675.
He was certainly at least jointly responsible for the rebuilding of the town's All Saints' church (1677–80) and was perhaps involved also in the designing of the Sessions House (1676–88) as well as houses in the Market Place.
Bell's most important surviving building is the Customs House, King's Lynn, built in 1683 as an exchange and sold to the customs authorities in 1718.
This square building, with an arcaded ground floor, steep roof, and lantern is articulated by superimposed orders which carry Bell's characteristic, garlanded, Ionic capitals.
This motif occurs also at his church of North Runcton, Norfolk, rebuilt 1703–13, which shares with All Saints' in Northampton the plan of a Greek cross within a rectangle, probably derived from Wren's St Mary-at-Hill.
Of Bell's other documented works, all in King's Lynn, the domed, octagonal market cross (1707–10, demolished 1831) was the most notable.
Bell has a small but significant place in English architectural history, not only for the strength of his designs but also as an occasional architect coming, unusually, from the mercantile community rather than from the court or the gentry.
Bell was married 28 February 1678 to Anne Brumble; they had five sons and one daughter.
He signed his will (PCC 99 YOUNG) in 1706 and died 11 April 1711, leaving substantial properties to his wife and family.
He was buried in St Margaret's church, King's Lynn, in which he had been baptized and married.
[H. M. Colvin,A Biographical Dictionary of British Architects 1600–1840 , 1978; H. M. Colvin, ‘Henry Bell of King's Lynn’,Architectural History , vol. iv, 1961; J. Summerson,Architecture in Britain 1530–1830 , 1983.]
Isobel Grundy
,Elizabeth (1769–1831), slavery abolitionist, was born in Leicester in December 1769, the eldest daughter and second child in the family of two girls and three boys (of whom one died young) of dissenting parents.
Her father, John Coltman, a pupil of John Aikin the elder [q.v.], was a scholarly worsted manufacturer; her mother, Elizabeth Cartwright, was a skilled handicraftswoman, a published poet and book reviewer, and a friend of Robert Dodsley and William Shenstone [qq.v.].
John Wesley [q.v.]visited their house.
Elizabeth, or Bess, ‘was singular in her childhood’: anecdotes depict her giving scarce pennies to a beggar and rescuing a kitten.
Her talent for landscape painting gave her father ‘half a mind’ to ‘make an Angelica Kauffman of her’.
Instead, in 1789, aged nineteen, she married John Heyrick, eldest son of John Heyrick, Leicester town clerk, and descendant of the poet Robert Herrick [q.v.].
He soon exchanged a legal career for a cornetcy in the Fifteenth Light Dragoons, and they lived thereafter in English and Irish barracks.
He died of angina in 1797, in the act of proof-reading a sheet of his own poems.
The marriage was said to have been stormy, but she mourned fervently, with lifelong observance of the anniversary of his death.
There were no children.
Elizabeth Heyrick rejoined her family, became a member of the Society of Friends, and ‘stepped boldly forward the champion of black men and tortured beasts’.
Her twenty or more books and pamphlets also address war, prisons, corporal punishment, the level of wages and the plight of the industrial poor, election issues, and vagrancy legislation.
In 1809 she stopped a bull-baiting in Derbyshire by purchasing the bull; with her friend Susannah Watts [q.v.], she canvassed large areas of Leicester, promoting the boycott of West Indian sugar.
She visited prisons and liberated long-incarcerated poachers by paying their ‘gaol-fees’.
Late in life she campaigned against capital punishment, in alliance with William Allen of Guy's Hospital.
She published anonymously, in Leicester and London.
Her first work,The Warning [1805], opposes war: ‘multitudes , equally unacquainted with the origins and the object, are always eager to rush to the standard of blood.’
She imitates Hannah More [q.v.]in Bull-Baiting: a Village Dialogue between John Brown and John Simms [1809], and treats public as well as private morality in Familiar Letters Addressed to Children and Young Persons of the Middle Ranks (1811), written for a sister-in-law's children.
Her anti-slavery works include appeals to British women and ‘not to the Government, but to the People of England’.
The best known is Immediate, Not Gradual Abolition of Slavery (1824), a pamphlet which broached the idea of speedy abolition while William Wilberforce [q.v.]and other male leaders were still gradualist.
It sold hundreds of thousands of copies in Britain and the USA.
Heyrick's philanthropy has been better recognized than her executive acumen, her grasp of power systems and of pressure-group politics, or her forceful analysis of the interdependence of social evils.
She left ‘a mass of unpublished manuscripts, chiefly consisting of essays, sermons, prayers, etc.’
She died in Leicester 18 October 1831.
[Family MSS at Leicester County Record Office; anon.,A Brief Sketch of the Life and Labours of Mrs. Elizabeth Heyrick , 1862; Catherine Hutton, ‘A Sketch of a Family of Originals’,Ainsworth's Magazine , ed.
W. Harrison Ainsworth, vol. v, 1844; Catherine Hutton Beale,Catherine Hutton and her Friends , 1895; Kenneth Corfield, ‘Elizabeth Heyrick: Radical Quaker’ in Gail Malmgreen (ed.),
Religion in the Lives of English Women, 1760–1930 , 1986.]
Mary R S Creese
,Ida Smedley (1877–1944), biochemist, was born in Birmingham 14 June 1877, the second daughter of William T. Smedley, chartered accountant, businessman, and philanthropist, and his wife Annie Elizabeth Duckworth, daughter of a Liverpool coffee merchant.
Her sister Constance married Maxwell Armfield [q.v.].
She grew up in a cultured and progressive home atmosphere.
She was taught by her mother till she was nine, when she entered King Edward's High School, Birmingham.
An accomplished pianist, she also had great histrionic gifts, but had little time to pursue these interests in later years.
She was a student at Newnham College, Cambridge, from 1896 to 1899, obtaining a first class in part i of the natural sciences tripos (1898) and a second class in part ii (1899).
From 1901 to 1903 she held a Bathurst studentship, doing postgraduate research under H. E. Armstrong [q.v.]at the Central Technical College, London.
She served as demonstrator in chemistry at Newnham College from 1903 to 1906, while also carrying out research at the Davy–Faraday research laboratory of the Royal Institution.
She received a D.Sc.
from London University in 1905.
In 1906 she was appointed assistant lecturer in the chemistry department of Manchester University, the first woman to hold a staff position in that department.
She remained there for four years, during which time she conducted researches on the optical properties of organic compounds.
In 1910 she returned to London and began her work in biochemistry, which was to continue for the rest of her life.
She held one of the first Beit research fellowships (1910–14), and worked at the Lister Institute for Preventive Medicine with (Sir) Arthur Harden [q.v.].
She became a staff member of the Institute in 1932.
During World War I she worked at the Admiralty on various projects of national importance, including the large-scale production of acetone from starch by fermentation.
In 1915, in recognition of her early biochemical work, she received the Ellen Richards prize, an award presented by the American Association of University Women for outstanding research by a woman scientist.
Her special interests included fat synthesis from carbohydrates, and the biochemical function of the fatty acids in the animal body.
About thirty papers on this work, much of it collaborative, appeared in the Biochemical Journal between 1920 and 1941.
Her monograph,The Metabolism of Fat , published in 1943 as the first of Methuen's monographs in biochemistry, summarized her views on the field, in which she was by then a recognized authority.
Ida Smedley was instrumental in advancing the professional status of university women.
She was one of the founders of the British Federation of University Women, from which grew the International Federation.
From the start of the movement in 1907 she held high office, and later served as president (1929–35).
She was also a leader in the struggle for admission of women to fellowship in the London Chemical Society.
This long-drawn-out effort finally succeeded in 1920, and Ida Smedley was the first woman to be formally accepted into the Society.
She was later a member of its council (1931–4).
From 1941 to 1944 she served on the Cambridge University women's appointments board.
In 1913 she married Dr Hugh Maclean (died 1957), later professor of medicine at the University of London and St Thomas's Hospital.
He was the son of Hector Maclean.
They had one son, born in 1914, and a daughter, born in 1917.
Ida Smedley died 2 March 1944 in a nursing home and was cremated at Golders Green.
[Obituaries in Journal of the Chemical Society , 1946, pp. 65–7,Newnham College Roll Letter , January 1945, pp. 50–1;Newnham College Register , 1896; information from Ms Ann Philips, librarian, Newnham College archives.]
Graham K Scott
,George Robert (1847–1922), writer, was born at 8 Newton Terrace, Kennington, London, 2 September 1847, the eldest of the six children of George Sims, wine merchant, cabinet manufacturer, and plate-glass factor, and his wife Louisa Amelia Ann Stevenson, who became president of the Women's Provident League.
From Grove School, Eastbourne, and Hanwell College he went to Bonn, which he left prematurely after high-spirited behaviour.
He started work in his father's business in Aldersgate Street, but his real ambition was journalism.
He began with a column in the Weekly Dispatch , contributed to Fun , and wrote articles on sport and the theatre while sub-editing the Oxford magazine, the Dark Blue .
He also translated Honoré de Balzac's Contes Drolatiques , which were published in 1874 but withdrawn after complaints.
From 1877 until his death Sims contributed a miscellany, ‘Mustard and Cress’, under the pseudonym ‘Dagonet’, to the Sunday newspaper, the Referee .
Sims's ballads, including ‘In the Workhouse: Christmas Day’, appeared mostly in the Referee and the World , and were then published as books:The Dagonet Ballads (1879),Ballads of Babylon (1880),The Lifeboat and Other Poems (1883), and an omnibus edition,Ballads and Poems (1883).
He also wrote about three dozen plays and seventeen musicals, several of which had long runs, including Crutch and Toothpick (1879) and especially The Lights o' London (1881).
Many were taken from French originals, and written in collaboration.
He was a voluminous writer of fiction: his earliest novel,Rogues and Vagabonds , was serialized in One and All before being published as a book in 1885.
Dorcas Dene, Detective (1897–8) was reprinted in 1986.
Sims's social reporting began in 1881, with three sets of articles in the Sunday Dispatch —‘The Social Kaleidoscope’, ‘The Three Brass Balls’, and ‘The Theatre of Life’.
In 1882 he sat on a committee chaired by Arthur Cohen, MP for Southwark [q.v.], investigating social conditions in the borough.
In 1882–3, with the illustrator Frederick Barnard [q.v.],
Sims toured the slums of south London for articles in the Pictorial World entitled ‘How the Poor Live’.
These, and articles in the Daily News on the housing of the poor (later published as Horrible London ) led to his being called as a witness before the royal commission on housing in 1884.
In 1904 the Daily Mail published his campaign against what he considered to be the unjust imprisonment of Adolf Beck which, it was claimed, was partly responsible for the Criminal Appeal Act, 1907.
He attacked the white-slave traffic in articles in the Daily Telegraph , reprinted as London by Night (1906) and Watches of the Night (1907).
Sims was twice married: his first wife died of cancer aged thirty-two; his second, Florence Wykes, whom he married in 1901, survived him.
He had no children.
He died at home at 12 Clarence Terrace, Regent's Park, 4 September 1922.
[George R. Sims,My Life: Sixty Years' Recollections of Bohemian London , 1917;Prepare to Shed them Now: the Ballads of George R. Sims , selected and introduced by Arthur Calder-Marshall, 1968.]
Grahame Clark
, Sir Ellis Hovell (1874–1953), archaeologist and palaeographer, was born in Weston, Hampshire, 16 July 1874, the third in the family of two sons and a daughter of the Revd George William Walter Minns, vicar of Weston, and his wife Jane Porter Boggs.
He was educated at Charterhouse and Pembroke College, Cambridge, where he obtained first classes in each part of the classical tripos (1896 and 1897).
After mastering the language at the École des Langues Orientales Vivantes, Paris, he went to Russia where, between 1898 and 1901, he worked in Moscow, St Petersburg, Kiev, Odessa, and other centres, acquiring the detailed knowledge of the archaeology of the region on which his reputation was to be built.
Returning to Pembroke, of which he had been elected a fellow in 1899, he became librarian and lecturer in Slavonic studies in 1901.
In 1906 he became university lecturer in palaeography, in 1920 he received a Cambridge Litt.D., in 1925 he served as Sandars reader in bibliography, and in 1927 he was elected as the first full-time Disney professor of archaeology.
Before he retired in 1939 he had played a key role in the establishment of archaeology and anthropology at Cambridge.
Minns brought a broad range of expertise to bear on a field extending from eastern Europe to China, while at the same time paying close attention to the antiquities and books of his own college, where he occupied the same rooms over a period of fifty-five years as undergraduate, fellow, president (1928–49), and senior fellow.
As a palaeographer he enjoyed reproducing ancient scripts using implements of his own devising, just as an archaeologist he sought a deeper insight into ornaments by drawing them or even carving them with his own hands.
He was shrewd in personal assessments.
For those whose scholarship he respected he was prepared to go to endless trouble, but to those whom he suspected of pretensions exceeding their knowledge or understanding he gave short shrift.
On his sixtieth birthday he received a Festschrift edited from Helsinki with contributions from over thirty colleagues, covering a field ranging from Scandinavia and east Europe to China.
He did not allow the revolution of 1917 to interfere with his contacts with Russian colleagues and it was appropriate that he should have been asked to supply the inscription for the sword presented by George VI to the people of Stalingrad.
In his Scythians and Greeks (1913), Minns presented a survey of the ancient history and archaeology of the territory north of the Euxine from the Danube to the Caucasus.
The greater part dealt with the Greek colonies but his heart lay with the Scyths and their affinities, a topic which he  addressed in his 1942 British Academy lecture,The Art of the Northern Nomads (1944).
Minns was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1925, received the gold medal of the Society of Antiquaries in 1943, and was knighted in 1945.
In 1907 he married Violet (died 1949), daughter of Frederick Nalder, solicitor, of Falmouth.
They had a son and a daughter,(Lydia) Marian, who married Humphrey Mynors, later first baronet, deputy governor of the Bank of England.
Minns died in Cambridge 13 June 1953.
[Personal knowledge; information from Marion Mynors (daughter).]
Jack Simmons
,Joseph Thomas (1782–1850), industrialist, was baptized 1 May 1782, the eldest child in the family of one son and two daughters of Joseph Austen of Plymouth, brewer and mayor, and his wife Susanna, daughter of William Esco Treffry of Place, Fowey, Cornwall.
She and her sister inherited the Treffry estates in Cornwall from their brother in 1779, and after her husband's death in 1786 she lived in the family home, Place, at Fowey.
Her son changed his name to Treffry in 1838.
Nothing is known of his early education.
He was at Exeter College, Oxford, from 1801 to 1804 and left without graduating.
From then on he lived at Place, assisting his mother, who lived until 1842, in running her property.
His attention was first concentrated on its agricultural produce, remunerative because of high wartime prices, on making lime, and on planting trees.
He entered forcefully into local politics, strengthening his position in the town by the purchase of properties there and allying with the enemies of the unreformed municipal corporation of Fowey.
Though he appeared a fiery radical, his politics were individual, never doctrinaire, and after 1815 his interests shifted towards industrial activities.
He was high sheriff of the county in 1838–9.
He took a leading part in the development of copper mining round Fowey and St Austell.
His chief undertaking, Fowey Consols, became for a time the second largest producer in Cornwall.
He built and owned ships to handle his business and made a quay at Fowey, but the port remained inadequate, and he turned instead to the creation of an entirely new port at Par, opened in 1833, the most spacious port between Plymouth and Falmouth.
In 1836 he bought the pier and harbour at Newquay on the north coast, convenient for shipping the lead and stone that were being worked inland.
The canal and railways serving Par and Newquay acquired an additional importance with the growth of the working of china clay in the moorland between them.
Cornwall was not then connected with the main railway system of England.
Treffry appreciated that the county needed a trunk line through it.
From 1844 to 1846 he was chairman of the provisional committee formed to build one, and he presided over the board of the Cornwall Railway in 1846–50.
At home he did much to repair Place, a notable fifteenth-century house that had become partly ruined.
He had antiquarian interests and corresponded with Daniel Lysons [q.v.]in 1812–15.
He was his own architect, consistently maintaining the original style of the building.
In the closing years of his life he suffered serious illness.
When Queen Victoria and Prince Albert visited Place in September 1846 he was too ill to receive them.
He died at Place, unmarried, 29 January 1850, leaving property valued at £118,749.
[Autobiographical memoir, Cornwall Record Office, DDX/TF/996/1; diaries of William Pease, ibid., DDX/TF/715/1–12; Lysons correspondence, British Library, Add.
MS 9416, ff. 32–3, 37; J. Keast,‘The King of Mid-Cornwall’: the Life of Joseph Thomas Treffry (1782–1850), 1982; A. Rideout,The Treffry Family , 1984; A. L. Rowse,The Little Land of Cornwall , 1986.]
G H L Le May
,Samuel (1737–1807), architect, was born 8 September 1737 at Blackbrook Farm, Weeford, Staffordshire, the third of the seven sons and nine children of Benjamin Wyatt, farmer and timber merchant of Weeford, who also practised as a builder and architect, and his wife Mary Wright.
Samuel began in his father's business as a carpenter — hence his nickname ‘the Chip’.
In 1760 he was employed, first as carpenter and then as clerk of works, at the building of Kedleston Hall, Derbyshire, under Robert Adam [q.v.], an experience which constituted his architectural education.
He returned to Weeford in 1768, and in 1769 was first employed as an architect, on an addition to Blithfield Hall, Staffordshire.
He began a close association with his younger brother James [q.v.], notably at the Pantheon in Oxford Street (1769–71).
After the death of their father in 1772, the family firm passed to their eldest brother William, and in 1774 Samuel and James set up independent practices in London.
Samuel's career included business as a carpenter and timber merchant as well as architecture, in which he was predominantly concerned with country houses.
He also designed model farm buildings, including nearly fifty at Holkham for Thomas William Coke of Norfolk, first Earl of Leicester [q.v.].
During the 1780s he was manager and principal promoter, as well as builder and architect, of the Albion flour mill at Blackfriars.
This was the most advanced industrial building of its time: it was designed from the start to be powered by steam (with engines supplied by Samuel's partners in the enterprise, Matthew Boulton and James Watt, qq.v.), and was one of the first to incorporate a brick raft foundation.
The mill burned down in 1791.
Wyatt was appointed surveyor of Trinity House, and clerk of works at Chelsea Hospital in 1792, and surveyor of Ramsgate harbour in 1794.
In 1793 he was appointed surveyor to the Mint, but was dismissed in 1794 for inattention to duty.
His architectural work was predominantly in a neo-classical manner with the use of domed segmental projections, examples being Doddington Hall, Cheshire, 1777–98; Hooton Hall, Cheshire, 1778–88, since demolished; Herstmonceux Place, Sussex, 1777; and Belmont Park, Kent, 1787–92.
In some of his later work, such as Trinity House at Tower Hill, London, 1793–6 (his finest urban building), and Hackwood Park, Hampshire, 1805–7, he developed a heavier and more monumental style.
He saw himself as an engineer architect.
He designed a number of lighthouses, three of them — Longships, Cornwall, 1792; St Agnes, Scilly Isles, 1806; Flamborough Head, Yorkshire, 1806 — as part of his Trinity House duties, one at Dungeness, Kent, 1792, for a private client, and one (since demolished) for Ramsgate harbour.
He experimented with cast iron, made extensive use of slate — from the Penrhyn quarries managed by his brother, Benjamin (d .
1818)— for cladding and other purposes, invented a ‘sympathetic hinge’ by which both leaves of a double door opened simultaneously, and in 1787 devised a prefabricated ‘movable hospital’.
In 1799 he was consulted about a tunnel under the Thames, and in 1800 he submitted a proposal for a cast-iron replacement for London bridge.
He became a member of the Society for the Promotion of Arts, Manufactures and Commerce and of the Smeatonian Society of Civil Engineers.
In spite of the Albion mills disaster, he achieved his proclaimed ambition of making a fortune.
In 1765 he married Ann Sherwin, daughter of the land agent at Kedleston Hall.
They had no children, but on the death of his brother William in 1780 he adopted William's four-year-old daughter.
He died suddenly in Chelsea 8 February 1807.
[H. M. Colvin,A Biographical Dictionary of British Architects 1600–1840 , 1978; James Greig (ed.),
The Farington Diary , 1922; John Martin Robinson, ‘A Great Architectural Family’,Country Life , 13 and 20 December 1973, and The Wyatts , 1979.]
Judith Hawley
,Elizabeth (1776–1806), scholar and translator, was born 27 December 1776 at Burn Hall, near Durham, the second child and eldest daughter in the family of four sons and three daughters of George Smith, banker, and his wife Julia, daughter and sole heiress of Richard Mott of Carlton, Suffolk.
Sir Charles Felix Smith [q.v.]was her brother.
Her extensive learning was acquired in spite of many disruptions in her life.
In June 1785 the family moved to Piercefield Park, near Chepstow, Monmouthshire; but when her father's business collapsed after the declaration of war by France (1 February 1793), the family and their valuable library were broken up.
In 1794 her father took a commission in the army, serving for some years in Ireland.
For a few months in 1796 she and her mother joined her father in Sligo; here she studied the Irish language.
In summer 1799 they moved to Ballitor, county Kildare, where she had access to a good library.
Until they moved to Coniston in 1801 she did not have a settled home, spending much of her time visiting friends in London, Shirley, and Bath.
Aside from a governess who taught her French and a little Italian, from six to eight and again from ten to twelve years of age, she was largely self-taught.
In 1789 Elizabeth Smith became governess to her siblings and began an influential friendship with Henrietta Maria Bowdler [q.v.].
In 1794 she began learning Arabic and Persian from her brother's oriental dictionary; in 1796 she studied Hebrew from a Bible belonging to Henrietta Bowdler's mother.
Between 1795 and 1799 she learned Spanish, German, Arabic, Persian, Greek, Latin, Hebrew, some Syriac, and Erse as well as music, mathematics, and astronomy.
Henrietta Bowdler visited Coniston in 1802, introducing Smith to Elizabeth Hamilton [q.v.]who much admired her.
In 1803 she completed her translation of Job, and was encouraged to translate the Klopstock memoirs for publication.
She dreaded being called a learned lady: her mother said that ‘she was a living library; but locked up, except to a chosen few.’
Hannah More [q.v.]in Coelebs in Search of a Wife (1804) praised her acquirements, which were ‘beautifully shaded, by the gentle exercise of every domestic virtue’.
After Elizabeth Smith's death Bowdler published Fragments in Prose and Verse (1808), a selection of Smith's works interspersed with an account of her life; it ran into many editions.
The poems, some in imitation of Ossian, are graceful if unremarkable and her reflections conventional but lively.
It is in her flowing translations and philological work that she shines.
Also published from her papers were Memoirs of Frederick and Margaret Klopstock (1808); her translation of Job (1810), edited by Francis Randolph [q.v.]; and A Vocabulary, Hebrew, Arabic, and Persian , edited by John Frederick Usko, vicar of Orsett, Essex, who supplied ‘A Praxis on the Arabic Alphabet’(1814).
Usko thought this the first systematic collation of these languages.
Selections from her didactic writings appeared in The Lady's Monitor (1828).
Catching cold in 1805, she never fully recovered.
She died 7 August 1806 in Coniston.
[Elizabeth Smith,Fragments in Prose and Verse , 1808; A. K. Elwood,Memoirs of the Literary Ladies of England , vol. ii, 1843; Janet Todd (ed.),
A Dictionary of British and American Women Writers , 1984; Durham County Record Office.]
Anthony Thwaite
,Sylvia (1932–1963), poet, was born 27 October 1932 in Boston, Massachusetts, the older child and only daughter of Dr Otto Emil Plath, entomologist and teacher, and his wife Aurelia Schober.
Both parents were Americans of Germanic extraction.
She was partly brought up by her maternal grandparents, Otto Plath suffering much illness; and he died in 1940, just after Sylvia's eighth birthday.
Her father's death was the great wound not just of her childhood but of the rest of her life.
She determined to excel, at Bradford Senior High School in Wellesley, Massachusetts, and at Smith College, and she did so.
At Smith, which she entered in 1950, she was a prize pupil.
She had been writing poems since her childhood, and at university was busy with poems, stories, editing the Smith Review , keeping up a high academic standard, and leading a full social life.
She began to publish her poems in such places as Harper's , and won a guest post on the magazine Mademoiselle .
But she was already under stress, in her ambitions and her wish to please her mother with her success.
She attempted suicide in 1953, after undergoing electroconvulsive therapy.
Nevertheless, during her final year at Smith she took entrance examinations for Oxford and Cambridge, in the hope of doing further work in England.
She graduated from Smith summa cum laude , was awarded a Fulbright grant to study at Newnham College, Cambridge, and arrived there in October 1955.
She threw herself into the literary and social life of Cambridge.
Tall, pretty, vivacious, with an eager and obvious appetite for every kind of experience, she fell in and out of love, as she had at school and college.
She wrote and published in student magazines and in national magazines on both sides of the Atlantic.
Early in 1956, at a Cambridge party to launch a student magazine,St Botolph's , she met one of the contributors, the poet (later poet laureate) Ted Hughes, a recent graduate.
The next day she wrote in her journal: ‘And I screamed in myself, thinking: oh, to give myself crashing, fighting, to you.’
Sylvia Plath and Edward James (‘Ted’) Hughes were married in London on 16 June 1956.
He was the son of William Henry Hughes, carpenter and later shopkeeper.
After she completed her degree course, they moved to the United States, where she took up an appointment as an instructor in English at Smith College.
All this time she was writing prolifically, but she had not yet developed an individual voice.
Instead she produced intelligent and efficient pastiches drawn from a variety of models — W. B. Yeats, Dylan Thomas [qq.v.],
John Crowe Ransom, Robert Lowell, Theodore Roethke.
Ted Hughes himself dates ‘the first real breakthrough in her writing’ to the autumn of 1959, shortly before their return to England.
But her first book of poems,The Colossus , published in Britain in 1960, was put together too early to represent much of this new phase.
Between The Colossus and the end of her life less than three years later, Sylvia Plath wrote the poems (well over a hundred were written during this period) by which she is chiefly remembered.
Some are concerned with pregnancy, birth, and infancy: a daughter, Frieda, was born in April 1960, and a son, Nicholas, in January 1962.
Some have a vivid and excited sense of life and renewal.
But a great deal of the poems' subject matter is justly described by Philip Larkin [q.v.]in a review of the Collected Poems : ‘It was, variously, neurosis, insanity, disease, death, horror, terror.’
What gives the work excitement and, indeed, transcendence, is the verbal and rhythmical energy, the sometimes almost comic audacity (as in ‘Daddy’ and ‘Lady Lazarus’), and in other poems a dream-like remoteness and impersonality, as if these were messages from another planet.
In September 1962 Sylvia Plath separated from her husband and moved with the two small children to a flat in London.
Early in 1963 she published a novel,The Bell Jar , under the pseudonym ‘Victoria Lucas’.
On 11 February 1963 she gassed herself in the flat.
Much work, both verse and prose, was published after her death, and her posthumous fame can in particular be dated from the appearance of her volume of poems,Ariel , in 1965.
The Collected Poems , edited and with an introduction by Ted Hughes, was published in 1981.
[Frances McCullough (ed.),
The Journals of Sylvia Plath , 1982; Anne Stevenson,Bitter Fame: a Life of Sylvia Plath , 1989; personal knowledge.]
John Stevenson
,Walter (1896–1966), trade-union official and political activist, was born 17 June 1896 at 22 Randolph Street, Kentish Town, London, the youngest of four sons and the sixth of seven surviving children of Henry William Hannington, foreman bricklayer of Kentish Town, and his wife Eliza Smith.
Born and reared in lodgings in the basement of a three-storey house in a working-class district of north London, ‘Wal’ Hannington attended the local elementary school from the age of five.
He left school at fourteen and after several jobs became apprenticed to a toolmaker and joined the Amalgamated Society of Toolmakers in March 1916.
Largely self-taught in Marxist literature, he joined the Marxist British Socialist party, where he came into contact with Russian Marxist exiles such as Maxim Litvinov and Georgi Chicherin.
By 1917, aged twenty-one, he was a foreman in the Beta Engineering works in Camden Town and president of the Kentish Town Branch of the Toolmakers' Society.
World War I, which the BSP opposed, and the Bolshevik revolution in Russia reinforced his commitment to militant activity as part of the shop stewards' movement in the engineering trades.
After a period of unemployment in 1919 he found work at the government-run Slough Transport Depot where he became chairman of the shop stewards' committee, organizing strikes and demonstrations against its eventual closure in April 1920.
In July of that year he followed the Toolmakers' Society into the merger which created the Amalgamated Engineering Union and in the same month became a founder-member of the Communist party of Great Britain, in which the BSP was absorbed.
Both the AEU and the CPGB were to retain his allegiance throughout his life.
But it was as a leader of the unemployed that Hannington rose to national prominence.
Already established as a meticulous organizer, a good platform speaker, and an activist with a flair for publicity, he was instrumental in October 1920 in bringing together representatives of unemployed groups in the capital into a London district council of unemployed with himself as organizer.
Demonstrations were staged outside poor-law offices and the slogan of ‘work or full maintenance at trade-union rates’ adopted.
In April 1921 fifty delegates from England and Wales set up a national organization, the National Unemployed Workers' Committee Movement (NUWCM), with Wal Hannington as national organizer.
In 1922 it planned the first of a series of national hunger marches which were to become the NUWCM's principal contribution to the inter-war years.
Seen as a subversive organization by the government, the NUWCM was quickly penetrated by police informers and its activities were harried at local and national level.
In 1922 Hannington received his first term of a month's imprisonment for uttering seditious words.
Unabashed, he made a clandestine visit to Moscow in 1923 as a delegate to the Red International of Labour Unions.
In late 1925 he was one of twelve leading communists arrested and tried on charges of sedition and incitement to mutiny, for which he received twelve months' imprisonment.
Released in September 1926, following the defeat of the general strike, he organized national hunger marches in 1929, 1932, and 1934, which were largely ostracized by the Labour movement and were harassed by the police, sometimes leading to violence.
As a result of the 1932 hunger march Hannington served another three months in prison for offences against the 1931 Incitement to Disaffection Act.
The latter part of the thirties saw small triumphs amidst a larger failure.
Although led by communists, Hannington's movement was criticized by the Communist party for failing to politicize the unemployed, large numbers of whom joined the movement only to leave it quickly once work was obtained.
By the mid-1930s it was past its peak, but it played a prominent part in the agitation which led to the suspension of the National Government's unemployment assistance board scheme early in 1935.
The now renamed NUWM mounted a last national march in 1936 which obtained C. R. (later Earl) Attlee and Aneurin Bevan [qq.v.]as platform speakers for its rally in London, but even this success was overshadowed by the publicity attracted by the apolitical Jarrow crusade at the same time, the one hunger march in which the NUWM was not involved.
With the outbreak of war, the activities of the NUWM were suspended, and finally wound up in 1943.
Hannington returned to work as a lathe-turner and while serving as convener of shop stewards was elected a national organizer of the AEU in November 1941.
Taking up the post in February 1942, he held it until defeated in an election in 1951.
In 1952 he was elected assistant divisional organizer for division no. 25, retiring in June 1961.
Ebullient, sociable, and respected even by those who disagreed with his political views, Hannington's work in the AEU was rewarded in 1938 with the Tolpuddle award, the top award of Britain's trade-union movement, and the AEU's special award of merit in 1962.
Hannington unsuccessfully contested parliamentary seats in 1929, 1931, 1934, and 1950.
Amongst a large number of writings,Unemployed Struggles, 1919–1936 (1936),The Problem of the Distressed Areas (1937),Ten Lean Years (1940), and his unfinished autobiography,Never on Our Knees (1967), are important polemical documents of the inter-war years.
In 1917 he married Polly Winifred, daughter of Edwin Stanley, a railway labourer.
There was one daughter of the marriage.
Hannington died of a heart attack 17 November 1966, shortly after attending Hammersmith Hospital for a medical examination.
His wife survived him.
[Hannington's writings;The Times and Guardian , 19 November 1966; John Stevenson and C. P. Cook,The Slump: Society and Politics during the Depression , 1977.]
N G Coley
,Arthur (1872–1941), chemist, was born 10 October 1872 in Galashiels, the elder son in the family of two sons and one daughter of Charles Lapworth [q.v.], professor of geology at the University of Birmingham, and his wife Janet, daughter of Walter Sandeman of Galashiels.
Educated at a school in St Andrews and at King Edward's School, Birmingham, Lapworth graduated in 1893 from Mason College, Birmingham.
He then studied chemistry at the City and Guilds of London Institute under F. S. Kipping [q.v.], who became his friend.
His studies laid the foundations for his later researches on camphor and the mechanism of aromatic substitution.
He took a D.Sc.
at London University in 1895.
Lapworth's academic career began as lecturer in chemistry at the School of Pharmacy in Bloomsbury; in 1900 he moved to the Goldsmiths' Company's Institute at New Cross as head of the chemistry department.
In 1909 he was appointed senior lecturer in inorganic and physical chemistry at the University of Manchester, where he succeeded W. H. Perkin [q.v.]as professor of organic chemistry in 1913 and became Sir Samuel Hall professor of inorganic and physical chemistry and director of the laboratories in 1922, appointments which show his remarkable versatility.
At Manchester Lapworth studied the molecular constitution of camphor and its derivatives; his researches suggested new interpretations of organic reaction mechanisms employing the migration of double bonds within organic molecules, and the formation of organic ions and chemical equilibria.
He discovered new reactions and introduced improved preparative techniques.
His classification of organic reagents as anionic and cationic paved the way for the electronic theory of organic reactions, but, as the electronic formulations of (Sir) C. K. Ingold [q.v.]were simpler, these were generally adopted and Lapworth's pioneering work was largely forgotten until the late 1940s.
Elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1910, Lapworth served on its council (1927–9) and was awarded the Davy medal (1931).
He received an honorary LLD at Birmingham and St Andrews; on retirement in 1935 he was made emeritus professor at Manchester.
Lapworth was retiring, generous, especially to his students, and sincere, though he had a sharp wit.
He ran his department with firmness and wisdom; in controversy he was always courteous.
Outside chemistry he had many interests.
He loved radio, the cinema, and the theatre and had a wide knowledge of classical music, playing the violin, cello, and viola at Perkin's musical parties in Manchester.
He was a member of the council of the Manchester College of Music for many years.
Carpentry, microscopy, astronomy, geology, and botany were among his hobbies; he was an authority on British mosses and was interested in ornithology.
Mountaineering, golfing, and fishing were among his leisure pursuits; he was a member of the Yorkshire Anglers' Club.
In 1900 Lapworth married in Bridgwater, Somerset, Kathleen, youngest daughter of William Thomas Holland, JP.
There were no children.
Kathleen's two elder sisters married the chemists F. S. Kipping and W. H. Perkin respectively.
Lapworth died in Manchester 5 April 1941.
[R. Robinson in Obituary Notices of Fellows of the Royal Society , vol. v, 1945–8, pp. 555–72; repeated in Journal of the Chemical Society , 1947, pp. 989–96, and in A. Findlay and W. H. Hills,(eds.),
British Chemists , 1947; G. N. Burkhardt in Memoirs and Proceedings of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society , vol. lxxxiv, 1939–41, pp. vi–x, and in Nature , vol. cxlvii, 1941, p. 769; W. V. Farrar in C. C. Gillispie (ed.),
Dictionary of Scientific Biography , vol. viii, 1970;The Times , 7 April 1941.]
H G Pitt
,Walter Owen (1888–1971), designer, racer, and manufacturer of cars, was born 16 September 1888 at 78 Avenue Road, Hampstead, London, the youngest in the family of six sons and three daughters of Alfred Bentley, retired businessman of London, and his wife Emily Waterhouse.
After leaving Clifton at sixteen and a premium apprenticeship with the Great Northern Railway, in 1912 he acquired, with his brother Horace Milner, the London agency of the French car DFP.
He then made a major contribution to the development of the internal combustion engine, originating the use of aluminium for pistons.
Commissioned in 1914 and attached to the Royal Naval Air Service, he designed two rotary aero-engines, BR1 and BR2, which were successfully fitted to the Sopwith Camel and Snipe respectively.
In 1919 he was appointed MBE.
In that year, with F. T. Burgess and Harry Varley, Bentley designed, built, and marketed a 3-litre engine and car, aimed at the top of the market, with a high performance for fast, sporting touring.
He subsequently designed 4-, 6-, and 8-litre engines.
Speed and endurance record-breaking and long-distance racing were the surest forms of testing and advertising.
‘We were in racing, not for glory and heroics but strictly for business.’
Paradoxically, his ‘Bentley boys’, among them Wolf Barnato, son of the South African diamond millionaire, provided the British motor industry with its most glamorous episode.
The work-entered team won the twenty-four hours' race at Le Mans in the years 1927–30.
Chronically underfunded and overspending, development costs always outran returns.
Financial disaster was temporarily averted when Barnato put his money in and replaced Bentley as chairman in 1926.
But the Wall Street crash in 1929 (the first year in which the company showed a profit) exposed the vulnerability of the luxury car market.
In 1931 the company was bought, to Bentley's chagrin, by its rival, Rolls-Royce, Bentley's service contract being among the assets acquired.
He had no part as a designer in the new subsidiary, Bentley Motors (1931).
He felt ‘a hostage — a dangerous ex-enemy confined (with all the comforts) to my Elba’.
His contract expired, he moved to Lagonda in 1935, dangerously returning to the precarious world of the fast car.
There he improved the Le Mans 4-litre and introduced a new V12-cylinder.
During World War II Bentley worked with Lagonda on aircraft and tank components.
After the war Lagonda announced a 2-litre car to be sold as Lagonda-Bentley.
Rolls-Royce were swift to establish in the courts that their purchase of the trademark Bentley overrode their contract with him, which had banned his own use of his name for ten years only.
The car was then marketed as ‘Lagonda, designed under the supervision of W. O. Bentley’, but the flood of orders could not be met owing to the postwar shortage of steel.
The firm was sold to David Brown and Bentley's engine was used in the Aston-Martin DB2 developed in its successors.
Taciturn, precise, a perfectionist engineer, with little skill in a boardroom, Bentley was, by his own account, unresponsive and over-sensitive to criticism, dependent always on the riches of others whom he could not control.
Though not easily approachable, he inspired enthusiasm, lasting devotion, and, increasingly, historic reverence.
Bentley married three times.
In 1914 he married Léonie Gore, daughter of (St George) Ralph Gore, ninth baronet.
She died in the influenza epidemic of 1919.
His unsuccessful second marriage, to which he never referred, was to Audrey Morten Chester Hutchinson.
After a divorce he married in 1934 Margaret Roberts, daughter of Thomas Roberts Murray, mechanical engineer, and divorced wife of Charles Alan Hutton.
There were no children from these marriages.
Bentley died in Woking 13 August 1971.
[The Times , 16 August 1971;Independent , 10 July 1990; W. O. Bentley,W. O., an Autobiography , 1958,The Cars in my Life , 1961, and My Life and my Cars , 1967; J. M. L. Frostick,Bentley, Cricklewood to Crewe , 1980; A. F. C. Hillstead,Those Bentley Days , 1953; V. L. P. Davis,W. O. Bentley, MBE: Summary of his Life and Work , 1988.]
Robert Ashton
,Philip (d. 1644), financier, was born in Sedan of Italian stock.
Prior to settling in London around 1605 he had operated extensively in the Netherlands.
He became an English denizen in 1614 and was naturalized by statute in 1624.
His marriage to Elizabeth Calandrini cemented important business ties with her family, and one of her brothers, Philip Calandrini, was to be particularly closely associated with him, acting frequently as his agent in Amsterdam in a variety of business, including the pawning of jewels for Charles I in 1625.
Burlamachi's prime corresponds with the period of more active English involvement in continental affairs from about 1618 to 1630.
Both the scale of his operations and the degree of his specialization in financial business made him a unique figure in early Stuart England, though he did have a few other economic irons in the fire: among them, a share in the tobacco monopoly and the export of iron ordnance in the 1620s and huge purchases of East India Company pepper in 1623 and 1628.
In 1619, along with other merchants of alien extraction, he was fined in Star Chamber for illegally exporting gold.
Both the smallness of his fine of £2,000 and the fact that it was later remitted in return for a loan of £10,000 to James I provide early testimony of his value to the government.
Beginning with a modest advance of £6,000 to James I in 1613, his formal loans culminated in his truly massive advances of the war years 1624–9, amounting to more than £127,000, much of it to finance English and foreign military operations; not to mention the £55,000 which he and the Russia Company magnate Sir Ralph Freeman advanced in 1624.
His last recorded loan was £5,000 in July 1631.
Impressive though the scale of such formal loans was, they were not the most substantial of Burlamachi's financial services.
Hardly less important was his willingness to lend his credit to the government by standing security for its borrowings.
Here his skill in playing the bill market was often of crucial importance, as it was in providing funds abroad for such purposes as the payment of English ambassadors, the purchases of art treasures for the royal collection, and, above all, the transmission of subsidies for Charles I's foreign allies.
Most spectacular of all were Burlamachi's services as a sort of unofficial paymaster, notably of English and English-financed expeditions abroad, which provided the occasion for a multitude of ways and means advances in anticipation of slowly and irregularly mobilized government funds.
His occasional demands for ‘surplusage’ respecting the extent to which his disbursements exceeded his receipts on particular accounts are eloquent illustrations of the scale of these activities: for example, £26,000 for operations in the Palatinate in 1624, and £30,000 on another account in 1630.
Both sums were repaid, but by 1631 a further ‘surplusage’ of £12,000 had arisen on the latter account.
By this time the coming of peace had ended Burlamachi's usefulness to the government, but not his own indebtedness, notably for recurring interest, reckoned by him at £14,763 in 1632.
His bankruptcy in 1633 was the result of his inability to meet such charges due to the failure of the undertaking from the lord treasurer, Richard Weston, first Earl of Portland [q.v.], to keep up payments due to him.
In the meantime he was accorded royal protection from his creditors and the Crown's principal debt to him was discharged in 1637.
Interest and miscellaneous expenses were, however, quite a different matter, and the fact that it had been in the nature of his employment to disburse vast and unspecified amounts, as he put it, ‘upon the simple word of the treasurer’, who had died in 1635, did not help matters.
He was ultimately allowed £49,752 of such ‘pretences’, but as an ex gratia payment which did not take in further claims of £46,803.
It is perhaps ironic that a financier whose fortunes had foundered on the unreliability of the royal credit should have busied himself three years after his bankruptcy with devising a project for a national bank whose impracticability his own fate had spectacularly demonstrated.
In 1640 he was given the minor office of master of the Posts, but did not retain it beyond 1641, at the end of which year he suffered a short spell of prison for alleged defiance of a parliamentary order.
He died in penury in 1644, and it was said that his daughters had to enter into service as paid gentlewomen in order to live.
[A. V. Judges, ‘Philip Burlamachi…
’,Economica , vol. vi, 1926; R. Ashton,The Crown and the Money Market 1603–1640 , 1960, and ‘The Disbursing Official…
’,Bulletin of the Institute of Historical Research , vol. xxx, 1957; State Papers; Exchequer records.]
Anita McConnell
,James (1730–1793), silk weaver and natural philosopher, was born in Canterbury, Kent, 30 January 1730, and baptized in the Walloon church 26 February.
He was the son of James Six (1695–1743) and his wife Ester, daughter of Louis Ducaufour, and descended from the Huguenot refugee families who came to Britain in the sixteenth century and settled in Canterbury, where they engaged in the silk-weaving trade.
Six was brought up in the family business but declining trade prompted him to retire early and devote himself to the wide range of interests typical of an eighteenth-century intellectual, although there is no evidence that he ever received any formal training.
He was a good artist, and he was certainly a competent amateur astronomer, sending several observations of comets and of the planet Uranus to the Gentleman's Magazine and to the American Philosophical Society, which enrolled him as a foreign member in 1787.
Six is best remembered for the self-registering thermometer which he invented, the first to record maximum and minimum temperatures on a single instrument.
Twenty-five experimental forms of air and marine thermometer made by him have been preserved.
For this invention, and his own temperature observations, he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1792.
His book on these subjects was published posthumously as The Construction and Use of a Thermometer (1794).
Six never patented his designs.
He sent examples of the air thermometer to friends at home and abroad, and soon after his death it was adopted by the Royal Society and Kew Observatory.
Versions of his marine thermometer served for deep-sea measurements throughout the nineteenth century.
Two centuries after its invention, ‘Six's’ remained a popular house and garden thermometer.
All accounts of Six describe him as a competent yet modest and unassuming man of great integrity, and a devout Christian.
With Robert Deane he founded and supported a Sunday school in the parish of Holy Cross, which offered religious instruction and taught reading and singing to poor children, and much of his time was devoted to this cause.
Six married Mary Riquebourg (1733–1801) of Canterbury on 21 May 1754; they had four sons, three of whom died in infancy and one in 1786, and a daughter.
Six and his wife are buried in Holy Cross, Westgate, and are commemorated in a tablet within the chancel.
[Gentleman's Magazine , vol. lxiii, part 2, 1793; Royal Society records; records of the parish of St Mildred's church, Canterbury.]
Jane Barbour
,(George) Heywood (Maunoir)(1853–1940), artist and archaeologist, was born 14 October 1853 in Old Alresford, Hampshire, the youngest of three children and only son of the Revd George Henry Sumner, rector of Alresford and later bishop of Guildford, and his wife Mary Elizabeth Sumner [q.v.], the founder of the Mothers' Union and daughter of Thomas Heywood, a Liverpool banker.
He was the grandson of Charles Richard Sumner [q.v.], bishop of Winchester.
Sumner was educated at Eton and Christ Church, Oxford, where he read classics and then changed to modern history, being awarded second-class honours in 1874.
Two years later he entered Lincoln's Inn and was called to the bar in 1879, but he never practised.
During this time he shared lodgings with W. A. S. Benson, a metalwork designer and friend of William Morris [qq.v.].
Sumner was thus introduced to the Arts and Crafts Movement, and became a keen member for the next twenty years.
Sumner began his artistic career as an etcher and published two books of etchings —The Itchen Valley (1881) and The Avon from Naseby to Tewkesbury (1882).
In 1883 a new edition of The New Forest by J. R. Wise [q.v.]was published containing twelve additional etchings by Sumner.
These etchings were produced with a detailed traditional technique, but during the next twenty years his style altered radically to one that verged into the art nouveau school.
He illustrated editions of Sintram and His Companions (1883) and Undine (1888), both written by De La Motte Fouqué.
Sumner worked in a wide range of other media which included textiles, wallpapers, tapestries, tesserae, painted gesso, and stained glass.
Sumner became the leading English exponent of the technique of sgraffito, a method of decorating walls by incising designs on coloured plaster; he decorated eleven churches and several private houses in this way.
His churches included St Mary's, Llanfair Kilgeddin in Wales (1888), St Agatha's, Landport, Portsmouth (1895), and All Saints, Ennismore Gardens in London (1897–1903).
The last of these contains examples of Sumner's stained glass.
Sumner was associated with the Century Guild from 1884.
From 1885 to 1888 and in 1894 he was a committee member of the Art Workers' Guild.
With Walter Crane [q.v.]and W. A. S. Benson he organized the first arts and crafts exhibition in Crane Street in 1888.
At the turn of the century Sumner and his family moved out of London, and finally settled in 1904 near Fordingbridge in the New Forest in a substantial residence, Cuckoo Hill.
He designed not only the house, but also the garden, and all the furnishings and fittings.
His move to the New Forest and the forest itself were vividly described in his The Book of Gorley (1910).
Probably disillusioned with the Arts and Crafts Movement, he turned to archaeology and during the next thirty years worked on sites in the area.
His best-known excavations were those which he described in Excavations in New Forest Roman Pottery Sites (1927).
Sumner was a tall, strikingly handsome man with dark hair and a beard which turned white in old age.
In 1883 he married Agnes Elizabeth, daughter of William Benson, barrister.
She was the sister of W. A. S. Benson, Sir ‘Frank’ Benson, and Godfrey Benson (first Baron Charnwood)[qq.v.].
They had three sons and two daughters.
The middle son was Benedict Humphrey Sumner [q.v.], warden of All Souls College, Oxford.
Sumner died at Cuckoo Hill 21 December 1940, one year after his wife.
They are buried together in Ibsley churchyard.
[Margot Coatts and Elizabeth Lewis (eds.),
Heywood Sumner , Winchester City Museum, 1988;Heywood Sumner's Wessex , selected by Barry Cunliffe, no date (1985); Heywood Sumner,Cuckoo Hill, the Book of Gorley , 1987, introduction by Margot Coatts.]
John Pollock
,(James) Hudson (1832–1905), missionary, was born in Barnsley, Yorkshire, 21 May 1832, the eldest of the five children (two sons and three daughters, one son and one daughter dying in childhood) of James Taylor, chemist and Wesleyan local preacher, and his wife Amelia, daughter of the Revd Benjamin Brook Hudson, Wesleyan minister.
Taylor was educated at home and at a private day-school, and as apprentice to his father.
At fifteen he worked in a bank to learn accountancy, until his eyesight gave trouble.
At seventeen he underwent an evangelical conversion and determined to bring the Christian gospel to the Chinese, although inland China was closed to foreigners.
He began medical training, first in the slums of Hull, and then at the London Hospital, but sailed unqualified as first agent of the new Chinese Evangelization Society.
He landed in Shanghai 1 March 1854.
In 1855, to the disgust of established missionaries, he adopted Chinese dress and a pigtail.
Inland travel and preaching became easier at once, though he had hair-raising adventures and was not naturally brave.
Meanwhile his Society's inefficiency left him destitute.
He severed connections.
Following the example of George Müller [q.v.], and his own highly original survival training in Hull, he lived by the principles of faith and prayer on which he later built his mission: never appealing for funds except to God, and administering all gifts with scrupulous stewardship.
Ill health drove him, now married, back to England in 1860 and in 1862 he qualified MRCS and in midwifery.
The treaty of Nanjing had opened the interior of China, but no existing mission had accepted the challenge.
Taylor therefore published a pamphlet,China: its Spiritual Need and Claims , and founded the undenominational China Inland Mission in 1865, praying for twenty-four ‘willing, skilful labourers’, two symbolically for each province.
In 1866 the Taylors took their children and most of their twenty-four workers to Shanghai.
The China Inland Mission's early years inland were hazardous with riots, some internal dissension, and opposition from established missionaries who especially objected to the use of Chinese dress.
Despite sickness and discouragement Taylor persevered and every province was penetrated.
At home, his writings and dramatic appeals stirred the churches: among volunteers who responded was the celebrated C. T. Studd [q.v.]in 1885.
Taylor promoted all missions, and believed that the surest way to help the East was to deepen spirituality in the West.
The Mission now grew rapidly until by 1895 Taylor was directing nearly half the Protestant force in China.
He was ahead of his time in identification with the people, working towards indigenous leadership.
He also took a strong part in famine relief and the campaign to abolish the British opium trade to China.
In the Boxer rising of 1900 a total of seventy-nine China Inland Mission missionaries and children were killed.
Taylor refused compensation, to the amazement of the mandarins, who issued proclamations applauding the spirit of the Christians.
He retired as general director of the Mission in 1902.
Taylor's example and strategies, his integrity, saintliness, courage, and originality had a lasting influence on Christian missions worldwide.
The fast-growing, and later wholly indigenous, Protestant Church in China owed more to him than to any other foreigner.
Taylor, who had a strong sense of humour, was small, sandy-haired, musical, and affectionate.
In 1858 he married Maria Jane, orphaned daughter of the Revd Samuel Dyer, missionary in Singapore.
They were married at Ningbo.
They had five sons and three daughters before she died in childbirth at Zhenjiang in July 1870.
In November 1871, in London, Taylor married her best friend and fellow missionary, Jane Elizabeth (‘Jennie’)(died 1904), daughter of Joseph William F. Faulding, fret-cutter and piano frame-maker of St Pancras.
They had one son and one daughter.
Taylor died 3 June 1905 in Changsha, China.
[A. J. Broomhall,Hudson Taylor and China's Open Century , 7 vols., 1981–90; G. and H. Taylor,Hudson Taylor , 2 vols., 1911 and 1918; J. C. Pollock,Hudson Taylor and Maria, Pioneers in China , 1962.]
T F T Baker
, Sir Edward (ante 1495–1544), courtier and patron of reform, was the eldest in the family of three sons and two daughters of John Baynton of Bromham, Wiltshire, and his wife Jane, daughter of Thomas Diggs of Kent.
By 1516 he had inherited his father's lands, which had been augmented through the death in 1508 of a distant kinsman, Richard Beauchamp, sixth Baron St Amand.
Baynton was an esquire of the body by 1522.
Later that year, knighted, he was sheriff of Wiltshire, and in 1523 he joined the army on the Scottish borders.
Thereafter he prospered as a royal attendant, who at times served on campaign, and as a county magnate.
His family's local consequence reached a level exceeded only by the Seymours and the Herberts; like theirs, it flowed from success at court.
Baynton's long list of offices ranged from a keepership in Clarendon forest to the stewardship of Bristol.
In 1528, when he perhaps helped to garrison Guisnes, offices in Salisbury eluded him because Thomas Wolsey [q.v.]had already disposed of them; by 1530 it was Wolsey who needed Baynton's goodwill.
After the coronation of Anne Boleyn [q.v.]
Baynton wrote as a familiar to her brother, George, Viscount Rochford [q.v.].
Anne sought a favour for Baynton early in 1534, by which time he was probably her vice-chamberlain.
He continued in that post under her four successors, assisted by his second wife as a lady of the household, declaring his belief in Anne's adultery and in 1539 threatening to disinherit his son for failing in attentions to Thomas Cromwell [q.v.].
Catherine Howard [q.v.], the queen farthest from his Protestant sympathies, was connected through her father with Lady Baynton's family.
Baynton managed Catherine's retinue after her arrest and in 1543 was one of the few witnesses to the king's sixth marriage.
Baynton's religious leanings were attested first in 1532, in a friendly correspondence with Hugh Latimer [q.v.], and finally in 1546, when John Hooper [q.v.]mourned him as one of the ‘chief upholders of the gospel’.
Although he left no explicit statement of belief, recent scholarship has shown him as a consistent sponsor of reform, both in his local activities and as an intermediary between suitors and the Crown.
Anne Boleyn and Cromwell, the greatest patrons, soon fell; Baynton, like the royal physician Sir William Butts [q.v.], survived to be one of the midwives of the Henrician Reformation.
In Wiltshire, where Bromham had been held of Battle abbey, Baynton profited enormously from the dissolution.
He sat in Parliament and entertained the king at a new mansion, his family's seat until the civil war.
Baynton married by 1516 Elizabeth, daughter of Sir John Sulyard of Wetherden, Suffolk.
They had three sons and four daughters.
By 1531 he had married Isabel, daughter of Sir John Leigh of Stockwell, Surrey; they had two sons.
His eldest son was the scholar Sir Andrew Baynton (1515/16–1564, q.v.), a pupil of the court tutor John Palsgrave [q.v.]and, like three other sons, a Wiltshire MP.
Baynton left for the siege of Boulogne in 1544 and died 27 November in France or immediately after his return.
[S. T. Bindoff,The House of Common s, 1509–1558 , 1982; M. Dowling,Humanism in the Age of Henry VIII , 1986; P. Lake and M. Dowling,Protestantism and the National Church in Sixteenth-Century England , 1987.]
Eveline Cruickshanks
,Jane (c. 1654–1742), allegedly natural daughter of James II, was born c .1654.
According to an oral tradition first set down thirty years after her death by Samuel Peckover, a prominent local Quaker, she was said to have been born in Paris, the daughter of James, Duke of York, then in exile, and an unnamed maid of honour to Queen Henrietta Maria, and to have lived at the English court from the Restoration to 1688 without, apparently, any contemporary ever noticing her.
The legend of the ‘Royal Quaker’ was lent credence because of James's friendship with William Penn [q.v.]and his generosity to Quakers.
What is known about Jane is that she lived in a cellar in Wisbech, earning her living by reaping in the fields in the summer and spinning wool and flax in the winter.
She was a mystery to her neighbours, whose curiosity was aroused when she was found reading the New Testament in Greek.
After the 1688 Revolution, when she moved to Wisbech, she is reputed to have evaded questions from the government about the birth of the prince of Wales, whom she had nursed, but this was the last thing William III would have wanted to enquire into.
During the rebellion of 1715 she was reported as having hired a chaise to take her to Scotland to see her half-brother, ‘James III’.
Yet she never visited her ‘family’ at St Germain, nor did James II, a tender father to his natural children, ever mention her.
There is no connection between Jane Stuart and a namesake, a widow, who claimed to be a great-granddaughter of James I (Historical Manuscripts Commission,Portland , vol. x, p. 29).
Jane Stuart died in Wisbech 12 September 1742 and was buried in the Friends' burial ground there.
She was unmarried.
[F. J. Gardiner,History of Wisbech , 1898, pp. 263–4; M. R. Brailsford,Quaker Women , 1915;Notes and Queries , vol. clvi, 1929, pp. 21–3; research on Stuart court at St Germain-en-Laye.]
John F Maggs
,Edward (1775–1848), artist, engraver, and property developer, was born in Manchester in 1775, the thirteenth child of Aaron Orme, fustian manufacturer of Manchester, and his third wife Margaret Walmsley.
One brother, Robert (1767–1827), became solicitor to the East India Company at Madras, and Daniel (1766–1837, q.v.) and William (1771–1850) were professional artists.
Edward moved to London, and in 1794 his first engraving was published by his brother Daniel.
On 21 January 1799 he was appointed print-seller in ordinary to King George III, and on 5 April 1820 editor of prints in ordinary to King George IV.
Meanwhile, in 1801 he had exhibited a portrait at the Royal Academy, and in the same year had established himself at 59 New Bond Street, at the corner of Brook Street, and published Rudiments of Landscape , a volume of uncoloured etchings after William's drawings.
He advertised that he stocked ‘Books of Instruction in every Branch of Drawing, and Drawing Materials’.
Then began the publication of a series of coloured aquatint books, ending in 1819 with Historic, Military, and Naval Anecdotes .
Some separate engravings of London markets were issued in 1822, but in 1824 the shop was closed, and he concentrated on his new career.
In 1809 Edward Orme had begun buying land and property in Bayswater.
He exploited the gravel deposits, built houses, and in 1818 added a chapel of ease.
Orme Square, developed between 1823 and 1826, was named after him, and Moscow Road and St Petersburgh Place nearby may have commemorated the state visit of Tsar Alexander I in June 1814.
In the following year he published a volume of twenty coloured aquatint views of St Petersburg, and the reference in his will to jewellery presented to him by the emperor of Russia may be connected with these events.
Edward Orme was, after Rudolph Ackermann [q.v.], the most important publisher of illustrated books during the short golden age of the coloured aquatint, but there is no evidence that he followed Ackermann's move into lithography.
The only reference to co-operation between the two firms is on the original printed wrappers of An Historical Account of the Campaign in the Netherlands…
Waterloo (1817) by William Mudford [q.v.], where both names appear in the imprint.
Orme's output totalled some 700 illustrations, but his monument is his British Field Sports of 1807, described by C. F. G. R. Schwerdt (1928) as ‘the finest and most important sporting book of the last two centuries’.
Orme was married on 22 June 1802 at St George's Hanover Square to Hester (‘Etty’) Edmonds.
Three sons and two daughters are mentioned in his will.
He died at his home at 6 Fitzroy Square 28 September 1848, and was interred initially in the family vault at St Mary's, Paddington Green.
When Etty died 11 April 1864, the graveyard had been closed.
She was buried in the new cemetery two miles away at Kensal Green, and Edward's remains were moved to be with her.
[J. R. Abbey,Life in England in Aquatint and Lithography , 4 vols., 1952–6;Victoria County History of Middlesex , vol. ix, 1989; ‘Owen's Genealogy’, MS in Manchester Central Library (Misc. 687/1).]
R L Winstanley
,James (1740–1803), diarist, was born 27 June 1740 at The Parsonage, Ansford, Somerset, the sixth child in the family of four sons (one of whom died in childhood) and three daughters of the Revd Samuel Woodforde, rector of Ansford and vicar of neighbouring Castle Cary, and his wife Jane Collins.
The family came originally from Northamptonshire, making the transition from small open-field farmers to professional men in the seventeenth century, and its association with the Anglican Church was already three generations old when James was born.
After attending two preparatory schools, he was admitted as a scholar to Winchester College in 1752.
As he was only seventh on the Oxford roll in 1758, his last year, his place at the sister foundation (New College, Oxford) was by no means assured.
He was provisionally enrolled at Oriel College, Oxford, and it was not until 21 July 1759 that he was able to celebrate his acceptance by writing the first line of the diary: ‘Made a Scholar of New-College’.
In 1763 he was ordained and graduated BA.
He became MA (1767) and BD (1775).
For ten years after graduation he worked as a curate in Somerset, most of the time as assistant to his father.
Woodforde never married, but at one time was sufficiently attracted by Elizabeth or ‘Betsy’ White, a relation by marriage, to make her a sort of guarded proposal.
When he returned to Oxford in 1773 it was with the intention of claiming the first suitable benefice in the gift of New College to become vacant.
But Betsy did not wait for him.
‘She has proved herself to me a mere Jilt’, he told his diary.
Meanwhile he became sub-warden of his college, and a pro-proctor.
Late in 1774 he was presented to Weston Longville, Norfolk, a well-provided living worth some £400 a year.
In April 1776 he resigned his fellowship and went to live there, residing in the parish for the rest of his life, a quiet existence broken only by journeys to see his relations in Somerset, on average once every three years.
He and Nancy, his niece and companion, had five servants to look after them.
He was a gregarious, hospitable man, and kind-hearted, although his charities represented only a small fraction of his disposable income.
He did not possess a markedly religious temperament, and most of his concerns were those he could share with lay people.
Woodforde was a very ordinary man.
He read little, and his exclusively classical education left only the faintest impression on his mind.
His one outstanding characteristic was the keeping of his diary, the work of a lifetime, with an entry each day for forty-three years.
The diary was unknown until Oxford University Press published selections under the title of The Diary of a Country Parson (5 vols., 1924–32).
In this edition Woodforde became a semi-comic figure.
Food and meals are given such prominence that an unwary reader may be left with the notion that he was mainly remarkable for gluttony.
In reality, the great virtue of the diary lies in its value for the researcher, as primary source material for the history of its time and, for the general reader, in its vivid picture of country life.
As Woodforde noted the cost of everything he purchased, we can follow the fluctuation of prices.
He recorded the arrangements made with workmen he employed as carefully as he chronicled the minutiae of his social life.
The diary ends with an incomplete entry for 17 November 1802.
Woodforde died 1 January 1803 at Weston parsonage.
[Unpublished material in the possession of the Woodforde family; articles in the Quarterly Journal of the Parson Woodforde Society , 1968–91.]
Richard Greene
,Esther (1716–1794), poet, was baptized 10 April 1716 in Holt, Wiltshire, the only child of the Revd John Lewis, incumbent at the parish church of St Katharine, Holt, 1714–61, and his wife Esther.
Little is known of Esther Lewis's early life or education, except that her interest in literature was probably stimulated by her father, who was an antiquarian with a particular interest in heraldry.
Following her mother's death in 1744, Esther Lewis continued to live with her father in Holt.
She suffered smallpox at some point in the 1740s.
It is believed that she was attended by Samuel Bowden [q.v.], a physician who lived in Frome, Somerset.
Bowden was an accomplished minor poet who promoted Lewis's work.
Her poems were appearing in the Bath Journal by 1749 under the name of ‘Sylvia’.
Poems by herself and Bowden appeared in various London periodicals at about this time.
Bowden's Poems on Various Subjects (1754) contained a number of Lewis's compositions.
During the 1750s and 1760s Lewis made other literary acquaintances, including Dr Samuel Salter, master of the Charterhouse in London, and Sarah Fielding [qq.v.], who lived near Bath after 1758.
John Lewis died at the beginning of November 1761, and Esther Lewis appears to have been left without a home.
On 2 October 1762 she married Robert Clark of Tetbury, Gloucestershire, whose first wife had died in 1755 shortly after the birth of a daughter, Mary.
Clark owned an estate in Tetbury which was eventually given the name Highgrove by his grandson John Paul Paul.
Esther Clark was about eighteen years older than her new husband, but may not have revealed her actual age to him.
Esther Clark moved to Tetbury, where she cared for her step-daughter and took an active interest in local charities.
In 1774 she donated £50 for the maintenance of alms women in the town.
A collection of her work,Poems Moral and Entertaining (1789), was published for the benefit of charities in Bath and Gloucester and of Sunday schools in Tetbury.
Although many of the poems in this volume displayed genuine wit as well as acute social observation, they passed largely unnoticed by reviewers at the time.
An inscription in the church at Tetbury records Esther Clark's death 8 May 1794 at the age of seventy-five.
However, she had by that time passed her eightieth birthday.
[A. T. Lee,The History of the Town and Parish of Tetbury , 1857; R. Bigland,Gloucestershire , suppl. vol., 1889; N. M. Herbert (ed.),
Victoria History of the Counties of England, Gloucestershire , vol. xi, 1976; Janet Todd (ed.),
A Dictionary of British and American Women Writers 1660–1800 , 1984; Roger Lonsdale (ed.),
Eighteenth Century Women Poets: an Oxford Anthology , 1989; information from Wiltshire county archivists.]
Joan Hasler
,James (1539–1597), lawyer and parliamentarian, was born in 1539, the eldest son of William Morice [q.v.]of Chipping Ongar, Essex, courtier and MP, and his wife Anne Isaac of Kent, who was related to Sir Thomas Wyatt and (Sir) Thomas Wroth [qq.v.].
Morice was admitted to the strongly Calvinist Middle Temple in 1558 and in 1565 he was sharing chambers with his future colleague in the Commons, Edward Lewkenor.
He became a bencher in 1578, when he was autumn reader, and treasurer in 1596.
Morice was probably the MP for Wareham in 1563, but was active locally in Essex, from his house in Chipping Ongar.
He became a JP in Essex in 1573 and a member of the quorum in 1586.
He was on the commission for piracy in 1577, and for musters in 1583.
By 1578 he was town clerk of Colchester, a puritan borough, where he gave the address welcoming the queen in 1579.
In 1586 he was recorder of the similarly Protestant borough of Maldon.
He became MP for Colchester in 1584, with the support of Sir Francis Walsingham [q.v.], and he continued as its member in the Parliaments of 1586, 1589, and 1593, serving on many committees (sixteen in 1584 alone).
He was one of sixteen lawyers asked by the Privy Council in 1588 to prepare bills on judicial reform and to consider the revision of existing statutes; in 1589 he was appointed to the committee of privileges and to some ten others, including one concerning pluralities and non-residence.
In the same year he was appointed to the lucrative post of attorney of the court of wards, through the influence of William Cecil, Baron Burghley [q.v.].
Morice always worked and spoke for individual liberty and the rule of common law: ‘I will not be ashamed in good and lawful sort to strive for freedom of conscience, public justice, and the liberties of my country.’
He particularly opposed the arbitrary powers of bishops.
In 1593 he asked the House to consider the ex officio oath, an ‘ungodly and intolerable inquisition’; the articles of John Whitgift [q.v.], ‘a lawless subscription’; and the oath of ecclesiastical obedience.
He claimed that all three violated the law and Magna Charta and he presented two petitions, against illegal oaths and illegal imprisonment.
The next day he was examined by privy councillors and committed to the care of (Sir) John Fortescue [q.v.]for the rest of the session.
Burghley told him that Elizabeth still considered him ‘both an honest man and a good subject’ but said that he should not raise such matters in the House.
When Robert Devereux, second Earl of Essex [q.v.], suggested he should be attorney general the queen ‘acknowledged his gifts, but said his speaking against her in such a manner as he had done should be a bar against any preferment at her hands’.
By 1560 Morice had married Elizabeth, daughter of George Medley of Tilty Abbey, Essex.
They had four sons and three daughters.
Morice died 2 February 1597, bequeathing to his eldest son, John, ‘books of the laws of England…
Latin, French & Greek books’ and hoping his children would ‘be profitable members of Christ's church and good subjects in the commonwealth’.
[P. W. Hasler (ed.),
The House of Commons 1558–1603 , 1981.]
George W Carpenter
,John (1814–1897), mechanical engineer and inventor, was born at Todmorden, Lancashire, 11 September 1814, the son of a cotton spinner who owned the only steam-driven mill in the area.
He was educated by local schoolmasters and Baptist ministers.
His practical training started at his father's mill, where he was given a lathe and built small working steam engines.
He then rebuilt and re-erected the beam engine at his father's mill and invented the weft fork, later adopted universally, which enabled looms to be worked at high speed.
He was an active and enthusiastic member of the Todmorden Mechanics' Institute, showing quick perception and ability in all mechanical matters.
About 1839 he went to Manchester and joined Sharp, Roberts & Co., who already had a high reputation as builders of locomotives and cotton spinning machinery.
Here he gained experience in locomotive building and his ability sufficiently impressed Charles F. Beyer, in charge of the locomotive department, so that in 1842 he recommended Ramsbottom as locomotive superintendent of the Manchester and Birmingham Railway, which in 1846 became part of the London and North Western, of which he was then appointed district superintendent of the north-east division.
In 1857 he was promoted to locomotive superintendent of the northern division, covering all routes of the LNWR north of Rugby, at Crewe works where in the following year the first of almost 1,000 of his 0–6–0 type freight locomotives were built.
Some of these were still running over sixty years later.
In 1859 he built the first of his 2–2–2 type express locomotives, two of which took part in the railway ‘race’ between east- and west-coast companies from London to Edinburgh in 1888, and in 1863 he developed the 2–4–0 type for use over more heavily graded routes.
In 1862 Ramsbottom became all-line chief mechanical engineer of the LNWR, Britain's largest railway, with locomotive construction concentrated at Crewe works.
His mechanical and organizing abilities were given full scope during the rapid development of these works, where he introduced Bessemer open-hearth steel-making.
In 1868 he installed Siemens-Martin furnaces.
He reduced the number of individual locomotive types and standardized their components to the greatest possible extent, and new machine tools and equipment ensured accuracy in manufacture and facilitated transfer of components within the works.
The result was a more than twofold increase in the rate of locomotive production.
He was the inventor of water pick-up troughs laid between the rails, whereby a scoop lowered into the trough from the locomotive or tender allowed additional water to be picked up whilst the train was running, thus making possible much longer non-stop runs.
First applied in 1860, this was rapidly extended to most British and some American and French main-line railways.
In 1870 locomotive haulage replaced steel-rope haulage of trains up the steep gradient from Liverpool, and Ramsbottom designed ventilating extractor fans to remove foul air and smoke from the tunnel.
In 1871 he retired from the LNWR.
In 1883 he became consulting engineer and in 1885 a director of the Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway, where he was responsible for the design and construction of their Horwich (Bolton) locomotive works and was chairman of the rolling-stock and locomotive workshop committees.
He was also a director of Beyer, Peacock & Co., locomotive builders, a firm in which his two sons held important positions.
A modest and kindly man, he took a great interest in technical education and was a governor of Owens College, Manchester, where in 1873 he endowed the Ramsbottom scholarship for young men in the locomotive department of LNWR.
He was a founder member of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers in 1847 and its president in 1870–1.
He was a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers from 1866 and in 1868 received the honorary degree of M.Eng. from the University of Dublin.
Ramsbottom died 20 May 1897 at his home in Alderley Edge, Cheshire, and was buried in Macclesfield cemetery.
[Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers , vol. lii, April 1897;Locomotive, Railway Carriage and Wagon Review , July and August 1941; H. A. V. Bulleid,The Aspinall Era , 1967.]
Stephen Roe
,Johann Christian (1735–1782), composer, was born 5 September 1735 in Leipzig, the sixth and youngest son and the eleventh of the thirteen children of Johann Sebastian Bach and his second wife Anna Magdalena, daughter of Johann Caspar Wilcke, court trumpeter.
His father no doubt supervised his musical studies in Leipzig.
After J. S. Bach's death in 1750, Johann Christian moved to Berlin where his half-brother Carl Philipp Emanuel assumed responsibility for his welfare and education.
His first surviving large-scale compositions, including at least five keyboard concertos, date from his years in Berlin, where he also gained renown as a harpsichordist.
In 1755 Bach made a decisive break with the inward-looking Lutheran traditions of his forebears by travelling to Italy, possibly in the company of an Italian lady singer, where he took counterpoint lessons with Padre Martini in Bologna, composed several Roman Catholic church works, and secured a Milanese patron, Count Agostino Litta, through whose efforts he became ‘second organist’ at Milan cathedral in 1760.
But it was in the opera house not the organ loft that he found his true métier .
The success of his three operas for Italy,Artaserse (1760),Catone in Utica (1761), and Alessandro nell' Indie (1762), prompted an invitation to compose two works for the King's Theatre, London, and in 1762 Bach travelled to London, where he spent the remaining twenty years of his life as the dominant musical figure in the city, thereby earning the sobriquet ‘the London Bach’.
By February 1764 Bach was music master to Queen Charlotte.
His duties entailed accompanying the amateur music-making of the king and queen, teaching the harpsichord to the royal family, and organizing the queen's chamber-music concerts.
For the King's Theatre he composed five Italian operas, of which the first,Orione (1763), and the last,La Clemenza di Scipione (1778), were perhaps the most successful, and an oratorio Gioas, Rè di Giuda (1770).
Bach gave his first concert with his compatriot Carl Friedrich Abel [q.v.]in 1764 and in 1765 inaugurated the series of subscription concerts that eventually bore their names.
Between 1765 and 1767 these were held at Carlisle House, Soho Square, and were organized by the impresario Teresa Cornelys.
From January 1768 Bach and Abel managed the concerts themselves at Almack's assembly rooms in King Street, St James's.
The Bach–Abel concerts moved in 1775 to the lavish Hanover Square rooms, specially built for the purpose with the financial assistance of Giovanni Gallini [q.v.].
At these concerts many of Bach's symphonies, concertos, cantatas, chamber works, and keyboard sonatas were given their first performances.
As a composer and a soloist Bach did much to champion the pianoforte, an instrument then being developed in London by German immigrant craftsmen: the sonatas Op. 5 are apparently the first works published in England to include the piano on the title-page, and Bach is credited with performing the first solo on the instrument in public in London in 1768.
The composer visited France, Germany, and Italy on a number of occasions, writing operas to be performed in Mannheim and Paris.
He was acquainted with many great men of his age, including Sir Joshua Reynolds, John Zoffany, Thomas Gainsborough (who painted his portrait), Charles Burney [qq.v.],
Denis Diderot, and Leopold and Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart.
On the Mozarts' visit to London in 1764–5 Bach is reputed to have performed duets with the eight-year-old composer.
This friendship with young Mozart, who was much influenced by Bach's music, was renewed at another meeting in Paris in 1778.
In the early 1770s (the exact date is unknown) Bach married Cecilia Grassi, an Italian singer then past her prime.
There were no children.
Bach's last years were clouded by financial worries caused by declining receipts and heavy expenditure on the Hanover Square concerts.
He died, heavily in debt, in London 1 January 1782 and is buried in St Pancras's churchyard.
Two copies of Gainsborough's portrait survive in the National Portrait Gallery, London, and the Civico Museo Bibliografico Musicale, Bologna.
[C. S. Terry,John Christian Bach , 1929 (2nd edn. 1967); E. Warburton, ‘Johann Christian Bach’ in The New Grove Bach Family , 1983.]
Ronald M Birse
,Alexander (1848–1920), electrical engineer, was born 26 May 1848 at Barley Mill, Saltoun, East Lothian, the second son of John Muirhead, a farmer who also practised as an architect, and his wife Margaret Lauder.
At the age of three he received a blow on the head which left him partially deaf for the rest of his life.
Soon afterwards his father took up a post as superintendent with the Electric Telegraph Company in London.
Alexander spoke such broad Scots that in London he was not understood, and he was sent to a private tutor until he was fifteen, then to University College School.
In spite of his deafness he was an outstanding pupil, taking the principal prizes in mathematics and science.
He went on to University College London, where he graduated B.Sc.
with honours in chemistry in 1869, then pursued his studies in the natural sciences at St Bartholomew's Hospital, obtaining his D.Sc.
in 1872.
While there he succeeded in attaching wires to a seriously ill patient and obtaining a continuous record of his heartbeat, probably the first electrocardiogram ever made, fifty years before its time.
He became scientific adviser to the firm of telegraph engineers founded by his father, in partnership with Josiah Latimer Clark [q.v.], in about 1869, working on the development of techniques for duplexing signals in submarine telegraph cables, and making precision measurements of resistance and capacity.
Working with his elder brother John and H. A. Taylor, the problem of duplexing (transmitting and receiving signals simultaneously in both directions) was solved and patented in 1875.
Muirhead perfected the electrical standards of capacity, which he practically established and afterwards handed over to the National Physical Laboratory.
When his father's firm became Latimer Clark, Muirhead & Co.
Ltd. he and his brother were made directors, but there was apparently some friction between them and in 1882 he resigned and set up in practice on his own as a consultant.
After his father's death in 1885 the cable companies persuaded him to set up his own manufacturing business, Muirhead & Company, which was so successful that in 1894 he was able to take over his father's old firm when it was finally wound up.
Another field in which he became actively involved was wireless, his interest being aroused by a lecture on Hertzian waves given by his friend (Sir) Oliver Lodge [q.v.]in 1894.
The two men had collaborated before on the design of lightning protectors, and the Lodge–Muirhead Wireless Telegraphy Syndicate Ltd. was formed in 1901.
Muirhead was elected FRS in 1904.
Among his other interests were dynamos, arc lamps, insulating compounds, and the telephone.
His principal publications were: ‘Chloride of Silver Element as a Standard of Electro-Motive Force’(Journal of the Institution of Electrical Engineers , vol. vii, 1878); ‘Muirheads’ Duplex System' (Telegraph Journal , vol. vii, 1879); ‘New Form of Standards of EMF’(Electrician , vol. xvii, 1886); with Sir Oliver Lodge, ‘Syntonic Wireless Telegraphy: with Specimens of Large-Scale Measurements’(Proceedings of the Royal Society , series A, vol. lxxxii, 1909).
In 1893 Muirhead married Mary Elizabeth, daughter of William Blomfield of Upper Norwood.
They had no children.
His health was affected by a serious illness in 1891, and deteriorated still further after a slight paralytic stroke in 1909.
He died in Shortlands, Kent, 13 December 1920.
[Mary Muirhead,Alexander Muirhead , privately published, 1926;Journal of the Institution of Electrical Engineers , vol. lix, 1921, pp. 182–3;Nature , vol. cvi, 1921, pp. 668–9;Proceedings of the Royal Society , series A, vol. c, 1922, pp. viii–ix; D. J. Jeremy (ed.),
Dictionary of Business Biography , vol. iv, 1986.]
Trevor Dickie
,William (c. 1620–1689), merchant and MP, was the eldest son of William Love of Aynho, Northamptonshire, and his wife Mary, daughter of John Uvedale.
His family were members of the minor gentry, armigerous since Elizabeth I's reign.
As an adolescent he was apprenticed to Roger Vivian, an assistant of the Levant Company, and during the 1640s served as a factor to him in Smyrna.
In 1650 he returned to London with ‘a great estate’, and in July of that year took his freedom of the Drapers' Company and the Levant Company.
Seven months later he married Elizabeth, daughter of Sir John Burgoyne (MP for Warwickshire, 1645–8).
Love quickly became an important figure in the business world.
His commercial activities centred on the Levant trade, in which he invested heavily until his retirement sometime in the late 1670s.
He exported large amounts of cloth and tin and imported diverse goods, chiefly Persian silk, but also including galls, cordevants (articles made of leather), worm-seeds, and gum ammoniac.
In recognition of his eminence within the trade, the Levant Company elected him assistant in 1653, a post which he held until 1670, except for a brief stint as deputy governor in 1661.
He also invested in a number of trading voyages to the East Indies, and between 1657 and 1662 the East India Company elected him to their court of directors.
These commercial ventures led to many disputes, and Love was extremely litigious, appearing often as a plaintiff in Chancery.
From his base in the business world Love became active in first City and then national politics, concerning himself mainly with issues of trade and religion.
He was an alderman between 1659 and 1662, sheriff in 1659, and master of the Drapers' Company in 1660.
Prior to the Restoration he was councillor of state in January and February of 1660, and he was subsequently elected to the Cavalier Parliament of 1661 as one of four MPs for London.
On election, however, his refusal as a Congregationalist to take the sacraments debarred him from the House of Commons and caused his removal from the aldermanic bench under the Corporation Act.
Upon reinstatement in the Commons after the impeachment of Edward Hyde, Earl of Clarendon [q.v.], in 1667 he was prominent in advocating toleration for Nonconformists.
Engaged in the reform of the Board of Trade in 1668, he then served as a commissioner for trade between 1668 and 1672.
His most active period in the Commons came during the three Exclusion Parliaments: he served on no fewer than fifty-two committees, involving a wide range of issues.
Love voted for exclusion and concerned himself with related topics.
His dissenting and mercantile interests came together most poignantly when he attacked the East India Company under the leadership of the court-connected Sir Josiah Child [q.v.].
He did not seek re-election to the Parliament of 1685 and supported the Revolution of 1688, subscribing money to the new regime.
Returned to the convention of 1689, he attended only briefly before his death in April.
He was buried 1 May 1689 at St Andrew Undershaft in London.
Love lived most of his life in London, in the parishes of St Andrew Undershaft, St Martin Orgar, and in Lime Street, St Mary Axe.
His will indicates that he also acquired property in Clapham, Surrey.
Although three sons and a daughter survived infancy, only his daughter, Sarah, and second son, John, survived him, the latter to pursue a successful career in the City, centred on the Levant trade.
Love left £50 to the poor and, except for small legacies to his daughter and next of kin, he divided his estate between his wife Elizabeth and son John.
[J. R. Woodhead,The Rulers of London, 1660–88 , 1965;London Visitation Pedigrees 1664 , Harleian Society, vol. xcii; B. D. Henning,The House of Commons 1660–1690 , 1983; D. R. Lacey,Dissent and Parliamentary Politics , 1969; Public Record Office: PROB 11/395/67, SP 105/151/39, SP 105/152/20, SP 105/166.]
Ronald M Birse
,Nicholas (1795–1865), civil and mining engineer, was born at the farm of Daniel at Sourmires in the parish of Ryton, county Durham, 24 April 1795, the son of Nicholas Wood, tenant farmer.
It is said that he was of a delicate constitution in early life, and was accordingly placed in the care of his uncle, Mr Greener of Hallgarth, near Winlaton.
He went to the village school in Crawcrook, where his abilities were so marked as to attract the attention of his father's landlord, Sir Thomas Liddell (later first Baron Ravensworth), to whose collieries in Killingworth, Northumberland, he was sent in April 1811 to learn the business of a viewer or colliery manager.
Also at Killingworth at that time was George Stephenson [q.v.], fourteen years older than Wood, and the two were soon drawn into a lasting friendship by their mutual interests and ambitions.
Wood had evidently benefited a good deal more from his schooling than Stephenson, and unlike Stephenson's, his work was based more on learning than on intuition.
It was a tribute to Stephenson's opinion of him that his son Robert [q.v.]was apprenticed to Wood from 1819 to 1821 at Killingworth.
Wood assisted Stephenson in the development of his safety lamp, which was first tested in 1815.
He was also closely associated with Stephenson in his experiments with steam locomotives, and in 1821 accompanied him to Darlington, where they met Edward Pease [q.v.]and discussed the projected Stockton–Darlington railway line.
As a result of his experience and observations he was able to publish in 1825 A Practical Treatise on Rail-Roads, and Interior Communication in General , a classic work of early railway literature in which he discussed, for example, the various types of ‘motive power’ then in use; self-acting planes, fixed steam-engine planes, horses, and locomotive steam engines.
It appeared in three subsequent editions in 1831, 1832, and 1838, considerably enlarged and brought up to date.
Even in 1827 Wood's reputation in railway matters was such that he was invited to give evidence before committees of both Houses of Parliament on the Liverpool and Manchester Railway Bill.
In 1829 he was one of the three judges for the Rainhill locomotive trials on the Liverpool and Manchester Railway, won by the Stephensons' ‘Rocket’.
His knowledge of coalmining and the geology of the north of England coalfields was now such that his assistance was frequently called upon by mine owners and speculators, and he acquired interests in a number of mines in the area.
Up to 1844 he lived in Killingworth, but then he moved to Hetton Hall in the county of Durham, and assumed the management of the collieries belonging to the Hetton Coal Company, in which he was a partner.
He took a prominent and active part in the investigations which led ultimately to the Mines Inspection Act of 1851, and he was elected the first president of the North of England Institute of Mining Engineers, to which he subsequently read many papers, on its formation at Newcastle in 1852.
He was elected a member of the Institutions of Civil Engineers (1829) and Mechanical Engineers (1858), and a fellow of the Geological Society (1843).
He became FRS in 1864.
His most prominent characteristics were plain, practical good sense, perseverance in his pursuits, thoroughness in his investigations, and an equanimity of temper.
He married Maria Forster, daughter of Collingwood Forster Lindsay of Alnwick, clerk to the magistrates of Northumberland.
He was a widower for some years before his death.
There were four sons and three daughters of the marriage.
Wood died 19 December 1865 at 49 Sussex Gardens, Hyde Park, London, where he had gone for medical advice, and was buried in the churchyard at Hetton.
[T. Doubleday, ‘Memoir of the late Nicholas Wood, Esq.’,
Transactions of the North of England Institute of Mining Engineers , vol. xv, 1866, pp. 49–59;Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers , vol. xxxi, 1866, pp. 236–8;Engineer , 22 December 1865, p. 415, and 12 January 1866, p. 37;Proceedings of the Royal Society , vol. xvi, 1868, pp. 61–3; R. Welford,Men of Mark ‘Twixt Tyne and Tweed , 1895.]
Stephen Clucas
,Walter (c. 1558–1643), mathematician and natural philosopher, was born c .1556 in Leicestershire and educated at Oxford (BA 1579).
He had at least one brother.
Originally a protégé of Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester [q.v.],
Warner entered the household of Henry Percy, ninth Earl of Northumberland [q.v.], in 1590 as a gentleman servitor, becoming a pensioner in 1617.
Although a servant, Warner dined with the earl and his friends, and accompanied him constantly.
While at Syon House, Warner's duties largely concerned the purchase and care of the earl's books and scientific instruments.
He accompanied the earl on his military mission to the Low Countries in 1600–1, travelling back and forth across the Channel as his confidential messenger.
While Northumberland was imprisoned in the Tower (1605–21), Warner brought his books from Syon, and joined in with the learned discussions of the earl and his other mathematical and scientific clients — Thomas Harriot, Robert Hues, and Nathaniel Torporley [qq.v.].
Warner's unpublished natural philosophical writings date mainly from this period, and deal with such diverse topics as logic, psychology, animal locomotion, atomism, time and space, the nature of heat and light, bullion and exchange, hydrostatics, chemistry, and the circulation of the blood (which Warner claimed to have discovered before William Harvey, q.v.).
Warner was best known for his work on optics and mathematics.
His tract on the sine law was published posthumously as part of Marin Mersenne's Universae Geometriae Synopsis (1644).
His unpublished logarithmical tables were widely held to be a great advance on those of Henry Briggs [q.v.].
After 1620 Warner lived at the Woolstable in Charing Cross and at Cranborne Lodge, near Windsor, with Sir Thomas Aylesbury [q.v.], who sponsored his continued work on optics and mathematics.
In 1631 Aylesbury encouraged Warner to edit and publish Harriot's treatise on algebra, the Artis Analyticae Praxis , and wrote on his behalf to the ninth Earl of Northumberland for a reimbursal of expenses.
The earl died shortly afterwards, and his son Algernon Percy [q.v.]discontinued Warner's pension.
From 1632 until his death, Warner continued to work over Harriot's papers, and collaborated with the younger mathematician, John Pell [q.v.], on his logarithmical calculations.
In 1635 Warner sought the patronage of William Cavendish, first Duke of Newcastle, and his brother Sir Charles Cavendish [qq.v.], to whom he sent tracts on telescope construction and concave and convex glasses, receiving a reward of £20.
Warner corresponded with other members of the ‘Welbeck circle’, including Robert Payne and Thomas Hobbes [qq.v.], whom Seth Ward [q.v.]accused of plagiarizing Warner's ideas.
Hobbes ousted Warner as a Cavendish client, by writing to the earl and belittling his abilities.
Despite the assistance of Aylesbury, Warner died in poverty 28 March 1643.
Some of his papers fell into the hands of Seth Ward, Sir Justinian Isham, John Collins, and Herbert Thorndike [qq.v.], but in 1646 Pell lamented that most of his papers had been ‘unmathematically divided between sequestrators and creditors’.
Warner never married.
[Anthony à Wood,Athenae Oxonienses , 2 vols., 1691–2; John Aubrey,Brief Lives , 2 vols., 1898; J. P. Schobinger (ed.),
Grundriss der Geschichte der Philosophie , vol. 3, 1988; J. W. Shirley,Thomas Harriot, Renaissance Scientist , 1974, and Thomas Harriot: a Biography , 1983; Birch and Harleian MSS, British Library.]
Gifford Lewis
,Eva Selina (1870–1926), suffragist, social worker, and poet, was born 22 May 1870 at Lissadell, county Sligo, Ireland, the second of the three daughters and the third of the five children of Sir Henry Gore-Booth, fifth baronet, Anglo-Irish landlord and Arctic explorer, and his wife Georgina Mary, only daughter of Colonel Charles Hill of Tickhill Castle, Yorkshire.
Of these five children two others also gave up their privileged positions in society to promote a new order.
Josslyn introduced co-operatives to Sligo and became the first landlord in Ireland to sell his land to his tenants after the 1903 Land Act.
Constance (later Countess Markievicz, q.v.), became the ‘rebel countess’ of the 1916 Irish rebellion.
Eva was educated at home by a governess, Miss Noel, who grounded her in Latin, Greek, and Italian.
Strongly influenced by her devout grandmother, Frances Lumley, she was a studious and introspective child quite different from her flamboyant older sister Constance.
An illness, suspected consumption, led her to travel in Italy in search of health in 1896, and here she met Esther Roper, an organizer for the North of England Society for Women's Suffrage.
Captivated by the woman and her cause, Eva decided to leave Ireland and join Esther at work in Manchester.
She devoted herself to trade unionism, suffrage, and adult education for women, working with the Manchester University Settlement and the Lancashire and Cheshire Women Textile and Other Workers' Representation Committee.
She became the mentor of the young (Dame) Christabel Pankhurst [q.v.]in 1901, but after three years Christabel became irritated by Eva's gentle gradualism and pacifism and abandoned her friendship for militancy.
Eva and Esther were prominent in campaigns on behalf of pit brow workers, flower-sellers, and barmaids, but their greatest success was in attracting large numbers of women from the working class to the suffrage movement.
In 1901, when the membership of the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies was around 10,000, they organized a suffrage petition with 30,000 signatures.
She published ten volumes of poetry, including Unseen Kings (1904) and The Death of Fionavar (1916).
Her best-known poem was ‘The Little Waves of Breffny’.
Her poems, from the first volume of 1898, dwelled on constant themes: Christian mysticism, love of nature, distaste for the ‘iron fort’ of materialism and for the male urge to dominate and control, combined in the machinery of war.
During World War I she was amongst the pacifist seceders from the NUWSS and she worked as a representative of the No-Conscription Fellowship for conscientious objectors at their trials by tribunal and for the Women's Peace Crusade.
After the war her health broke down and she retired, with Esther, to Hampstead.
During the last years of her life she was the leader of a group — concerned to reform sexual behaviour and discard gender stereotyping — that published the journal Urania from 1916.
She died of cancer 30 June 1926 at 14 Frognal Gardens, Hampstead.
In her obituary in The Times Evelyn Underhill claimed that Eva Gore-Booth  would be remembered chiefly as a mystical poet, but it was W. B. Yeats [q.v.]who unjustly commemorated her — dreaming of that ‘vague Utopia’, her body and life wasted by politics.
She was unmarried.
[The Times , 9 July 1926;Poems of Eva Gore-Booth , with a biographical introduction by Esther Roper, 1929; Gifford Lewis,Eva Gore-Booth and Esther Roper: a Biography , 1988; Gore-Booth papers in the possession of the family.]
Willem D Hackmann
,Hertha (1854–1923), physicist, was born Phoebe Sarah Marks 28 April 1854 in Portsea near Plymouth, the third child and elder daughter in the family of six sons and two daughters of Levi Marks, clock-maker and jeweller at Petworth, the son of a Jewish Polish refugee, and his wife Alice Theresa, daughter of Joseph Moss, a glass merchant of Portsea.
At an early age she was sent with her cousins to a school in London run by her paternal aunt and her husband, Alphonse Hartog, a French teacher.
At the age of sixteen she began to earn her own living by teaching, first as a resident governess and then for six years as a freelance teacher of mathematics.
She adopted the name Hertha, perhaps to indicate her changed circumstances.
In 1873 she met Barbara Bodichon [q.v.], a wealthy woman interested in the women's suffrage movement, and one of the founders of Girton College, Cambridge, who remained her lifelong friend and benefactress.
Through Barbara Bodichon she met, among others, George Eliot, J. Hilaire Belloc, and William Morris [qq.v.].
In 1876 she went to Girton College where she gained third-class honours in the mathematical tripos in 1880, and showed her flair for experimentation and designing scientific instruments.
On returning to London, she patented a line-divider, a drawing device that allowed any line to be divided into any given number of equal parts.
In 1884 she enrolled as a special student at Finsbury Technical College under the tutelage of William Edmund Ayrton [q.v.], professor of applied physics and one of the pioneers of higher technical education.
He and H. E. Armstrong [q.v.], whose obituary of Hertha in Nature was somewhat ungenerous and anti-suffragette, were, in 1879, the first two professors to be appointed by the City and Guilds Institute.
In 1885 she married, as his second wife, W. E. Ayrton (the son of Edward Nugent Ayrton, barrister) and assisted him in his research on the electric arc.
They had one daughter; there was also a daughter of Ayrton's previous marriage, who married Israel Zangwill [q.v.].
Hertha Ayrton carried on with the experiments during her husband's absence in America in 1893 and subsequently became the leading authority on the subject.
Her articles in the Electrician (1895 and 1896) and papers before the British Association for the Advancement of Science (1895, 1897, and 1898) were put together in her book The Electric Arc (1902), the standard work on the arc for many years.
In their anomalous behaviour electric arcs seemed to defy Ohm's Law and she discovered the cause of this.
She also investigated the practical aspects of arc lamps — searchlights, and cinema and studio lamps — taking out several patents between 1913 and 1914.
She contributed to the design of anti-aircraft searchlights used in both world wars.
Her work also began to be recognized by the male-dominated science community, although attempts to join their establishments did not go unopposed.
Her two most faithful supporters in trying to breach these bastions were her husband and his partner, the professor of engineering, John Perry.
In 1899 her paper on the ‘Hissing of the Electric Arc’, read before the Institution of Electrical Engineers, was awarded a premium, and two days later she was elected its first woman member.
Moves to have her elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1902 were squashed when the council, on legal advice, decided that it had no power to elect a married woman.
It did award her the prestigious Hughes medal in 1906, the first medal awarded to a woman by the Royal Society.
In the early 1900s she began her research on the formation of sand ripples on the seashore caused by the oscillatory movement of water, and this led her to develop the ‘Ayrton fan’ in 1915, a hand-operated device for expelling poisonous gases from the trenches.
More than 100,000 were supplied to the troops after much official inertia had been overcome.
After the armistice she applied her invention to the propulsion of liquids and gases through pipes and the improvement of ventilation of mines, sewers, and warships.
Hertha Ayrton was a strong supporter of the women's movement, a representative of the Women's International League, and an original member of the International Federation of University Women (1919) and of the National Union of Scientific Workers (1920).
She was a talented artist and had considerable personal charm.
Her husband died in 1908 and she died 26 August 1923 while on holiday in North Lancing.
[The Times , 28 August 1923;Journal of the Institution of Electrical Engineers , vol. lxi, 1922–3, p. 1,151;Nature , vol. cxii, 1923, pp. 800–1;Electrical Review , vol. xciii, 1923, pp. 329–30, with photo portrait;Electrical Times , vol. lxiv, 1923, pp. 217, 451; Anthony Byers in Electrical Living , winter 1981, pp. 13–14; Evelyn Sharp,Hertha Ayrton 1854–1923.
A Memoir , 1926.]