

Ivan Roots
or ,William (fl. 1640–1660), Cromwellian soldier and MP, was born in the 1620s, a son of Neville Boteler of Barnwell, Northamptonshire.
There is little information about his early life but reputedly he attended Oundle School.
At the end of the civil war he was a captain of horse.
Over the next few years he was active in, first, local and soon national military affairs.
He acquired a residence in Oundle and land in Derbyshire.
Clearly he was on his way up economically.
His concern for religion was shown by service on the commission for the propagation of the gospel in Wales (where he became a JP) and by his part in petitions for toleration, which no doubt reinforced contacts with Oliver Cromwell.
As major-general in 1655–7 for Northamptonshire, Bedfordshire, and Huntingdon — a remarkable appointment for one who so far had never commanded a regiment — he was particularly harsh on Catholics, Quakers (then notorious as ‘disturbers of the peace’), and ‘rogues and vagabonds’, whom he seems to have lumped together.
He was noted, too, for vigorous, even violent, implementation of the decimation tax upon Royalists and was certainly among the most assiduous of the major-generals.
Elected for Northamptonshire to the second Protectorate Parliament (1656–8), he was prominent in the debates over the alleged ‘horrid blasphemy’ at Bristol of the Quaker James Nayler [q.v.], revealing thereby the limitations of his own toleration.
His ears tingled and his heart trembled to hear the report.
Such blasphemers by the Mosaic law were to be stoned to death and for his part he could freely consent to it.
When the Protector enquired about the grounds for the Commons proceeding to a trial, Boteler was satisfied they had ‘a judicatory power’ to do so.
Not unexpectedly, his defence of the major-generals in the debates over the decimation bill was ‘hot’.
He deplored the House's ‘dilatoriness’ in voting funds for the war with Spain.
Though he was opposed to the offer of the Crown to Cromwell in the spring of 1657, with that out of the way he came round in support of the revised draft of the Humble Petition and Advice (June 1657).
In the brief second session (January 1658) he argued strongly for transacting with the new ‘other House’ as a House of Lords, expounding the virtues of government by a single person and a bicameral Parliament.
In his interventions he displayed a familiarity with the Scriptures and a grasp of parliamentary procedure.
He did not sit in Richard Cromwell's Parliament (1659), where, however, he was assailed for gross abuses as major-general in Northamptonshire.
Though he claimed merely to have followed the Protector's orders, he was put out of the commission of the peace.
When further penalties were proposed Secretary John Thurloe [q.v.], for political (and perhaps personal) reasons, spoke up for him, pressing — ironically in view of Boteler's attitude in the Nayler trial — that he should be heard before sentence.
The abrupt dissolution of the Parliament in April rescued him.
The restored Rump, however, took away Boteler's regimental command and spurned his nomination as quartermaster-general.
Even so, he was given a garrison command at Rockingham.
At the Restoration his exclusion from the Act of Oblivion was rejected by a small majority.
He retired to live quietly at first at Oatlands Park, maintaining his religious Nonconformity.
Though he was questioned from time to time about radical plots and was even for a while held in the Tower, his claim to be moved now by conscience and not by political faction seems to have been accepted.
A later residence in Northamptonshire was licensed in 1673 for dissenter meetings, in spite of his earlier bad reputation there.
Otherwise his last years are as obscure as his earliest.
Boteler's was an unappealing personality.
His principles were narrow and his realization of them oppressive.
His career suggests that he was capable of combining a sense of duty with an urge to self-help.
But within its strait parameters his religion seems to have been genuine enough.
Boteler married sometime before 1646 Elizabeth Brooke of Great Oakley, Northamptonshire, by whom he had at least one child, a son.
The date and place of his death are unknown.
[Quarter Sessions records, Northamptonshire Record Office; T. Birch (ed.),
Thurloe State Papers , 1742;Visitation of Northants 1681 , Harleian Society; C. H. Firth and G. Davies,Regimental History of Cromwell's Army , 1930; J. R. Rutt (ed.),
The Diary of Thomas Burton, M.P.,
1828, 2nd edn. by I. Roots, 1974;Commons Journals ; C. H. Firth (ed.),
Clarke Papers , 1891–1901;Calendar of State Papers Domestic ; private information.]
Helen M Davies
,John (1801–1889), founder of the Cadbury cocoa and chocolate firm, was born 12 August 1801 in Birmingham into a family of four generations of Quakers, the fifth child and third son in the family of five sons and five daughters of Richard Tapper Cadbury, draper, and his wife Elizabeth, daughter of John Head of Ipswich.
He was educated from 1810 to 1815 at Joseph Crosfield's Quaker school at Hartshill.
In 1816 he was apprenticed to John Cudworth, a Quaker, of the firm Broadhead & Cudworth, Leeds, to learn the retail tea trade.
After six years his father sent him to work in the bonded tea house of Sanderson Fox in London, to broaden his experience.
In 1824 he was given a sum of money, and was able to set up his own business as a tea dealer and coffee roaster at 93 Bull Street, Birmingham.
Cocoa powder for making an instant drink was first marketed in about 1830.
John Cadbury saw the potential for the product, and with his experience in roasting beans and preparing nib for his shop, decided to open a factory.
He purchased a former malt-house at Crooked Lane in 1831, and this is considered the founding date of the Cadbury manufacturing firm.
During the first ten years he developed many new lines, and the earliest existing price-list (1842) offers sixteen varieties of drinking chocolate and eleven cocoas.
In 1846 he took his brother Benjamin into partnership and changed the name of the firm to Cadbury Brothers, moving it in 1847 to larger premises at Bridge Street.
In 1853 Cadbury Brothers were appointed cocoa manufacturers to Queen Victoria.
On his retirement in 1861 he handed the business over to two of his sons, Richard and George Cadbury [q.v.]
Convinced that there were practical solutions to the social evils of his day, he devoted himself particularly to the temperance movement.
His campaigns for total abstinence were based on appeals to reason.
The abstainer, he pointed out, could afford a good joint of beef on a Sunday.
As a Birmingham street commissioner from 1829 he was instrumental in shaping the powers of an elected town council, achieving his objectives of local self-government without ‘the interference of any central control’.
He also served as an overseer and guardian of the poor (1830–41).
He was prominent in the movement to replace ‘climbing boys’ with machines to sweep chimneys.
In 1826 Cadbury married Priscilla Ann, daughter of John Dymond, a draper and Quaker minister.
She died two years later.
In 1832 he married Candia, daughter of George Barrow, merchant and shipping-fleet owner, of Lancaster.
They had five sons and one daughter.
Cadbury died 11 May 1889 at his home in Edgbaston.
[John F. Crosfield,A History of the Cadbury Family , vol. i, 1985; Tom Insull,John Cadbury 1801–1889 , 1979.]
P P Rickham
, Sir Denis John Wolko (1892–1967), paediatric surgeon, was born 28 April 1892 in Melbourne, Australia, the eldest in the family of four sons and two daughters of Sylvester Browne, explorer, gold prospector, and farmer, and his wife Anne (‘Nancy’), daughter of Sir William Foster Stawell, chief justice of Victoria, Australia.
He was educated at King's School, Parramatta, Sydney, and Sydney University (MB, 1914).
He joined the 13th Light Horse Regiment and served in Gallipoli before being invalided home.
He spent the last two years of the war in France as a major with Australian Field Ambulance units.
He was successively appointed house surgeon, registrar, and resident surgical officer at the Hospital for Sick Children, Great Ormond Street, London, from 1922 till 1927 (he gained his FRCS in 1922) and was made consultant surgeon at the same hospital in 1928.
He worked there until his retirement in 1957.
He was the first surgeon who operated exclusively on children and was the founder of modern paediatric surgery in England.
He made outstanding contributions to all branches of children's surgery but his lifelong interest was the aetiology of malformations.
From his great clinical experience he was able to postulate his ‘mechanical theory’, a conception of the fundamental part played by intra-uterine position and pressure on the production of congenital malformations.
He was a magnificent surgical technician, a perfectionist who constantly improved his techniques and ingenious in developing many new surgical instruments and splints.
His methods of treatment were new and often revolutionary and were frequently attacked and criticized, but they worked.
He was Arris and Gale lecturer (1934 and 1954) and Hunterian professor (1947, 1949, 1950, and 1951) of the Royal College of Surgeons, and co-founder and first president of the British Association of Paediatric Surgeons in 1953.
In 1957 he received the Dawson-Williams prize for services to paediatrics and the William E. Ladd medal in the USA for outstanding contributions to paediatric surgery.
In 1961 he was appointed KCVO and a chevalier of the Legion of Honour.
In 1965 he was made an honorary fellow of the Australasian College of Surgeons and became president of the International College of Surgeons.
He was visiting professor at many universities in all five continents.
The Denis Browne gold medal is the highest honour the British Association of Paediatric Surgeons can bestow.
He was widely read, had a keen cynical sense of humour, and was intolerant of ignorance, illogicality, and conformity.
He disliked committee procedures and bureaucracy.
All his life he fought against prejudice, a struggle he greatly enjoyed.
He was tall and elegant, a tennis player of Wimbledon standard and an excellent shot.
In 1927 he married Helen (died 1940), daughter of Edward Percy Simpson, solicitor of Sydney.
They had one daughter.
In 1945 he married Lady Moyra Blanche Madeleine, daughter of Vere Brabazon Ponsonby, ninth Earl of Bessborough [q.v.], former governor-general of Canada.
They had a son and a daughter.
Browne died in London 9 January 1967.
[Private information; personal knowledge.]
Peter Sluglett
, Sir Francis Henry (1879–1971), Indian administrator, diplomat, and chairman of several companies, was born in Oswestry, Shropshire, 24 April 1879, the eldest son of the Revd Walter Humphrys, assistant master at Oswestry Grammar School, and his wife Helen Agnes, daughter of the Revd Alfred Francis Boucher.
He was educated at Shrewsbury School (1893–8), where he was captain of cricket and head of the school, and at Christ Church, Oxford, where he graduated with a third class in classical honour moderations in 1900.
In the same year he joined the 2nd Worcestershire Regiment as a second lieutenant and served in the South African war.
In 1902 Humphrys began his career in the Indian Political Service, much of which was spent among the tribes of the North-West Frontier province.
During World War I he was political agent with the Waziristan Frontier Force, and also held a temporary commission in the RAF as a pilot (1918), an experience which evidently instilled an enthusiasm for flying which he retained for the rest of his life.
After the war Humphrys became political agent, Khyber (1919), and deputy foreign secretary of the government of India (1921), a post which he held until 1922, when he was appointed British minister to Afghanistan.
Three years before Humphrys's arrival in Kabul, King Amanullah had launched the third Afghan war against Britain, which had ended in Afghanistan's gaining the right to control its own foreign relations.
Amanullah's pursuit of his two most cherished objectives, to modernize his country in the shortest possible time and to make it independent of Britain, soon brought him into headlong conflict with Humphrys, whose previous eighteen years in India, mostly among the tribes across the frontier from Afghanistan, had not prepared him to deal with a ruler of such independence of mind.
In addition, Humphrys seems to have had some difficulty in adjusting to the fact that Afghanistan was no longer a dependency of British India.
Matters came to a head in the summer of 1928 after Amanullah's return from an eight-month visit to Europe.
He immediately announced a wide-ranging programme of social and political reforms, which appears to have aroused the wrath of the tribes.
In late autumn Kabul was besieged by rebel forces, and Amanullah was eventually forced to abdicate.
Early in 1929 Humphrys supervised the safe aerial evacuation of several hundred Europeans from the city (a pioneering feat of aviation in sub-zero temperatures over high mountain ranges); both he and his wife were commended for their ‘courage and fortitude’ in the House of Commons on 4 February.
The extent of British involvement in the revolt remains a matter of conjecture, but Humphrys and his colleagues warmly supported the candidature of Nadir Khan, Amanullah's successor, and vigorously opposed Amanullah's attempt to stage a comeback from his retreat in Kandahar.
In the autumn of 1929 Humphrys was appointed high commissioner (from 1932 first British ambassador) to the British mandated state of Iraq, where he stayed for six years.
The decision to support Iraq's candidature for the League of Nations in 1932 had been taken before Humphrys's arrival, but some misgivings were expressed about the lack of any guarantees for the Assyrian and Kurdish minorities after the transition to independence.
For his part Humphrys maintained with some justice that any binding provision would not be compatible with Iraq's future independent status.
Unfortunately subsequent events, particularly the tragic fate of the Assyrians in the summer of 1933, showed the minorities' fears to have been well founded.
In 1935 Humphrys left the public service and embarked on a career in the City.
He presided over the creation of the British Sugar Corporation, served as its chairman between 1935 and 1949, and was also chairman of a number of other companies, including the Iraq Petroleum Company between 1941 and 1950.
Humphrys took a keen interest in sport throughout his life; he is said to have bowled out W. G. Grace [q.v.]three times while at Oxford.
Photographs show a distinguished proconsular figure with a commanding presence.
He was appointed KBE in 1924, GCVO in 1928, KCMG in 1929, and GCMG in 1932; he was also an honorary air commodore.
In 1907 he married Gertrude Mary (DBE 1929), daughter of Sir Harold Arthur Deane, first chief commissioner of the North-West Frontier province.
They had one son and two daughters.
He died in London 28 August 1971.
[The Times , 1 September 1971;Sugar News , October 1971;Salopian , January 1972; Vartan Gregorian,The Emergence of Modern Afghanistan, Politics of Reform and Modernization, 1880–1946 , 1969; Leon B. Poullada,Reform and Rebellion in Afghanistan, 1919–1929 , 1973; Peter Sluglett,Britain in Iraq 1914–1932 , 1976.]
D W Hayton
, Sir Thomas , fifth baronet and first Baron Mansel of Margam (1667–1723), Tory politician, was born 9 November 1667, the second but first surviving son of Sir Edward Mansel, fourth baronet, of Margam Abbey, Glamorgan, and his wife Martha, daughter of Edward Carne of Ewenny, Glamorgan.
He was educated privately, by the local Presbyterian minister, and then at Jesus College, Oxford, taking his BA in 1686 and his MA, at New Inn Hall, in 1699.
Reacting violently against his strict upbringing, and in particular the tutelage of an overbearing father, Mansel became in adulthood a man of fashion, a wit, and a rake, persistently extravagant in the teeth of parental injunctions to economy.
In the same way he abandoned his family's Whig politics to become a pillar of the ‘Church interest’, influenced first by his fellow Welshman, Francis Gwyn, and later falling under the spell of a fellow refugee from a Presbyterian past, Robert Harley, first Earl of Oxford [qq.v.].
From his earliest experience of Parliament, where he sat, as a commoner and then a peer, from 1689 until his death (with one short interval in 1698–9), he ‘always made an agreeable figure’ without ever establishing a reputation as an orator.
A man of considerable charm, but of a facile and shallow intellect, his sparkle was somehow dampened on the public stage.
Not until Queen Anne's reign did Mansel attract much attention, when he took the eye as one of Harley's henchmen in the Commons, and his appointment to office in 1704, as comptroller of the household and a privy councillor, was an integral part of the ministerial reconstruction in which Harley's band of ‘moderate’ Tories came to the fore.
The years that followed were in many respects his heyday.
Not only was he an important member of the ministry (though without a cabinet place), he was also, from his father's death in 1706, the head of his family and the leader of the Tory interest throughout south Wales.
Although there are indications that he was increasingly concerned at the drift of the lord treasurer, Sidney Godolphin [q.v.], to the Whigs, he needed the resources of office to settle his debts and pursue his feuds with local Welsh rivals, some of which, notably his quarrel with the industrialist and projector, Sir Humphry Mackworth [q.v.], degenerated into actual physical violence.
He promptly resigned, however, with the fall of Harley in February 1708.
Returning to government with his mentor two years later, he was briefly a lord of the Treasury, but in 1711 became comptroller again and not long after that took a peerage as one of Harley's ‘dozen’ new lords (created en bloc to guarantee the Upper House's acceptance of the peace of Utrecht) and retreated to the lucrative but undemanding post of teller of the Exchequer.
He remained loyal to Harley until the bitter end, though his own influence in the administration was dwindling, lost all offices except a few local honours at the Hanoverian succession, and more or less retired from active politics to follow his mild interest in antiquarian matters and his somewhat keener passion for the refinement and embellishment of his country seat at Margam.
In 1686 Mansel married Martha, only daughter and heiress of a prosperous London merchant, Francis Millington; they had five sons and five daughters.
He also fathered at least three illegitimate children.
Mansel died at Margam 10 December 1723, allegedly of a ‘broken heart’, following difficulties with his own children, his eldest son having died young and one of his two surviving daughters having contracted what he viewed as a wholly unsuitable marriage.
He was buried in Margam with his ancestors.
[E. P. Statham,History of the Family of Mansell , 1917–20; B. D. Henning,The House of Commons 1660–1690 , 1983; unpublished biography, History of Parliament Trust; W. de G. Birch (ed.),
A Descriptive Catalogue of the Penrice and Margam Abbey Manuscripts , 1893–1905; National Library of Wales, Penrice and Margam MSS.]
Anne Baker
,Thomas (1860–1900), physicist, was born 23 May 1860 in Ballyhagan, Kilmore, county Armagh, Ireland, the youngest of three sons, the eldest of whom died young (there were no daughters), of Abraham Dawson Preston, a gentleman farmer of Mulladry, Kilmore, and his wife Anne, daughter of John Hall, quartermaster, and widow of John Ritchie, by whom she had a daughter.
He was educated at the Royal School, Armagh, and graduated from the Royal University of Ireland in 1884 and from Trinity College, Dublin, in 1885.
In Dublin he studied under G. F. Fitzgerald [q.v.], the mathematical natural philosopher.
In 1886 he published A Treatise in Spherical Trigonometry with his cousin W. J. McClelland, which ran to several editions.
In 1890 he published the first of his two major textbooks,Theory of Light , followed by Theory of Heat in 1894.
These, with many subsequent editions, became standard textbooks for undergraduates until World War II.
In 1891 he became professor of natural philosophy at University College, Dublin, a position he held until his death, and he was later appointed a fellow of the Royal University of Ireland.
In addition to this he held a government post as inspector of science and arts for Irish schools from 1894.
Preston's fame rests on his discovery of the Anomalous Zeeman Effect, which he first reported in a paper presented to the Royal Dublin Society in December 1897.
His discovery led to contacts with leading physicists who were investigating the recently discovered Zeeman Effect (the way in which an atom's spectrum is influenced by magnetism), including (Sir) Joseph John Thomson [q.v.],
William Thomson (first Baron Kelvin, q.v.),
Heinrich Hertz, and Albert Michelson.
Michelson, using expensive apparatus in Chicago, attempted to disprove the empirical rule discovered by Preston, but Preston publicly disproved him.
The Zeeman Effect was Anomalous whenever it departed from the form predicted by classical theory.
Preston's Rule helped the Zeeman Effect become an important tool in spectrum analysis, and opened up the possibility of quantum physics.
Preston also engaged George Johnstone Stoney [q.v.], vice-president of the Royal Society and the man responsible for coining the term ‘electron’, in a public dispute in the Philosophical Magazine over a mathematical conclusion, in which the president, J. W. Strutt, third Baron Rayleigh [q.v.], intervened on Preston's behalf.
Elected FRS in 1898, Preston was also awarded an honorary D.Sc.
by the Royal University of Ireland and the Boyle medal of the Royal Dublin Society.
In 1895 he married Katherine Mary, daughter of Thomas McEwen, dominie of Baldernock School.
They had two sons, one of whom died in infancy, and one daughter.
His widow became a pioneer of education for women in Ireland as principal of Alexandra College, Dublin.
Preston died at his home in Orwell Park, Rathgar, Dublin, 7 March 1900.
[Nature , vol. lxi, 1899–1900, pp. 474–5; D. Weaire and S. O'Connor, ‘Unfulfilled Renown: Thomas Preston (1860–1900) and the Anomalous Zeeman Effect’,Annals of Science , vol. xliv, no. 6, November 1987.]
Peter Leach
,Francis Howard (1777–1837), architect, was baptized 23 November 1777 in Mangotsfield, Gloucestershire, the youngest of the three sons of Francis Greenway, mason of Mangotsfield, and his wife Ann Webb.
He became a pupil in London of John Nash [q.v.], and it was presumably through Nash's connection with south Wales that in 1801 he was employed to design a small public building in Carmarthen.
The story of his subsequent career is an unusually dramatic one.
In about 1805 he and his brothers established themselves in Bristol as ‘stonemasons, architects, builders etc.’,
Francis being the architect member of the partnership.
In 1806 he designed the hotel and assembly rooms in the suburb of Clifton, which the firm contracted to build; but at the same time they were speculating by buying unfinished houses in Clifton which they completed and sold, and in 1809 they were overtaken by bankruptcy.
Then, some time later, Francis Greenway was accused of forgery in connection with a building contract made shortly before the failure; and, tried at Bristol assizes on 23 March 1812, he pleaded guilty and was sentenced to transportation for life.
Arriving in Australia in 1814, however, he quickly resumed his profession and became the virtual father of Australian architecture.
Within months he found a patron in Governor Lachlan Macquarie [q.v.]of New South Wales, who had ambitious plans for public works in the colony, and in 1816 he was appointed government architect, receiving his emancipation in the following year.
In 1822, following Macquarie's departure, he was dismissed from the post, but during his short period of office he had carried out or initiated a remarkable number of substantial projects in Sydney and its neighbourhood, the most important being the Macquarie lighthouse (c .1816–18, demolished), the churches of Windsor (c .1817), Liverpool (1818–24), and St James's Sydney (c .1820), the stables at Government House (1817), Fort Macquarie at Benelong Point (c .1817, demolished), and the Hyde Park convict barracks (1817).
The stables and the fort were in a conventional castellated style, but most of his work is in a bold and simple classical idiom of considerable originality and merit.
Greenway is said to have been self-confident, ‘temperamental and quick to take offence’.
After his dismissal he continued in private practice in a small way for some years, evidently living in somewhat reduced circumstances, until in 1837 he retired from Sydney to his government land-grant property on the Hunter River, where he died in September of that year.
He was unmarried.
[H. M. Colvin,A Biographical Dictionary of British Architects 1600–1840 , 1978; Morton E. Herman,The Early Australian Architects and their Work , 2nd edn., 1970; Walter Ison,The Georgian Buildings of Bristol , 1952.]
Maureen Borland
,Robert Baldwin (1869–1918), writer, art critic, and artistic administrator, was born in Tours, France, 25 May 1869, the youngest in the family of four sons and three daughters of John Ross, attorney-general of Upper Canada, and his wife Augusta Elizabeth, daughter of Robert Baldwin [q.v.], a former prime minister of Upper Canada.
After the death of his father, Ross came to London in 1872 with his family, where they settled.
His early education was mainly private; he went to King's College, Cambridge, in 1888 to read history, but, apart from writing for the Gadfly and Granta , his academic career was undistinguished.
He left before the end of his first year without taking a degree.
In 1886 he met Oscar Wilde [q.v.]; their friendship developed slowly, but in 1895, when Wilde was sentenced to two years' hard labour for homosexual crimes, Ross was his most constant and loyal friend.
After Wilde's release in 1897 and his exile to France, Ross continued to befriend and support him, and to act as intermediary between Wilde and his estranged wife and her advisers.
He was with Wilde when he died in Paris on 30 November 1900.
Before his release from Reading gaol, Wilde appointed Ross his literary executor; but with Wilde's estate bankrupt, it was not until 1905 that Ross was able to pay Wilde's creditors and annul the bankruptcy.
In 1905 Ross published De Profundis , an abridged version of Wilde's tormented prison letter to Lord Alfred Douglas [q.v.].
In 1908 Ross published, in fourteen volumes,The Collected Works of Oscar Wilde .
From 1901 to 1909 Ross was a director and administrator of the Carfax Gallery, a small avant-garde art gallery which, under his direction, gained a reputation for showing the work of unknown artists.
Between 1908 and 1912 Ross was art critic on the Morning Post .
He joined the National Art-Collections Fund and was elected to the executive committee in 1912.
He was also a member of the Contemporary Art Society.
In 1912 he was appointed London director of the new Johannesburg Art Gallery and also became valuer of pictures and drawings for the Board of the Inland Revenue (1912–14).
The years 1913–15 were marred by several exhausting litigations with Lord Alfred Douglas and T. W. H. Crosland, a journalist.
In 1915, however, Ross finally won a judgement against Crosland.
D. S. MacColl, keeper of the Wallace Collection, and Sir Edmund Gosse [qq.v.], angered at the harm Douglas and Crosland had caused to Ross's reputation, organized a testimonial for him.
Ross insisted that the money raised should be given to the Slade School of Fine Art, for a Robert Ross memorial prize.
In 1917 Ross served as an additional trustee to the Tate Gallery, and London buyer for the Felton bequest of the Melbourne Art Gallery.
He died suddenly 5 October 1918 at Half Moon Street, London, but even then his delicate sense of humour did not desert him: he left instructions in his will that he was to be cremated — a most unusual request for a Roman Catholic — and his ashes taken to Père Lachaise cemetery in Paris and placed within Oscar Wilde's tomb.
His family arranged his cremation, but his ashes were not taken to Paris until 30 November 1950, the fiftieth anniversary of Wilde's death.
He was unmarried.
[Maureen Borland,Wilde's Devoted Friend: a Life of Robert Ross 1869–1918 , 1990; Margery Ross (ed.),
Robert Ross, Friend of Friends , 1952.]
Hugh Lloyd-Jones
,Andrew Sydenham Farrar (1886–1978), classical scholar, was born 27 August 1886 at 100 Gower Street, London, the eldest of the three sons (there were no daughters) of the Revd Dr James Gow, who, after being a fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge, was headmaster of Nottingham High School and later of Westminster School, and his wife Gertrude Sydenham Everett-Green.
He was educated at Nottingham High School, Rugby School, and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he obtained first classes in both parts of the classical tripos (1908 and 1909), in part ii specializing in archaeology, and won several classical prizes.
In 1911 Gow won a Trinity prize fellowship with a dissertation consisting of a miscellany of papers, several of which were later expanded into valuable articles.
He applied four times for permanent posts in Cambridge, but was each time unsuccessful; it was feared that he would alarm and discourage his pupils, particularly the weaker sort.
Indeed Gow's appearance was formidable, an uncompromisingly Scottish kind of countenance being set off by bushy eyebrows and side-whiskers, and anything like conceit or pretentiousness on the part of a pupil might provoke a wounding sarcasm.
In 1914 he became a master at Eton College, where he remained during World War I, a heart murmur having disqualified him for military service.
Some pupils were indeed alienated by his dryness and his caustic wit; his frequent comment on an exercise shown up to him was ‘Oh, death, boy!’, and his highest expression of praise was ‘Not wholly bad!’
But some of the boys appreciated his solid scholarship and the great pains he took to help them, and the nickname ‘Granny Gow’ was bestowed upon him not without affection.
In 1925 Gow returned to Cambridge as a teaching fellow of Trinity.
He was better placed in a university than in a school, and enjoyed more than he could have done in any other society the life of that great college, which was to be his home for the remainder of his life.
He was a congenial colleague to A. E. Housman [q.v.], and in 1936, the year of Housman's death, brought out a brief memoir which, though mainly concerned with Housman's scholarship, throws more light upon him than almost any of the studies by literary persons.
Gow acted as Housman's literary executor, and supervised a reprint of his edition of Manilius.
Gow lectured effectively, particularly on Theocritus, and used the material collected for his lectures to compose a number of articles, all of solid merit.
He sacrificed precious time by taking on the onerous administrative post of tutor, which he held from 1929 to 1942, and also the pious labour of bringing out volume two of the posthumously published Early Age of Greece (1931) of Sir William Ridgeway [q.v.].
In 1943 he became a fellow of the British Academy, and in 1947 Brereton reader in classics in the university.
He had honorary degrees from the universities of Durham (D.Litt.) and Edinburgh (LLD).
In 1950, a year before his retirement from the latter post, Gow published a memorable edition of Theocritus, a second edition following three years later.
The editor's massive learning, unusual accuracy, and sober judgement render this book indispensable to scholars.
In 1952 Gow followed the Theocritus with an admirable edition of the Greek bucolic poets in the series of Oxford Classical Texts, and a year later he brought out a valuable translation of these writers with a useful introduction.
The year 1953 saw also the appearance of an edition of the difficult Hellenistic didactic poet Nicander, in which Gow collaborated with A. F. Scholfield.
Gow next began work on the Hellenistic epigrams contained in the Greek anthology.
A monograph called The Greek Anthology: Sources and Ascriptions appeared in 1958, and in 1965 it was followed by the two-volume Hellenistic Epigrams: the Garland of Meleager , in which Gow collaborated with (Sir) Denys Page [q.v.],
Page being primarily responsible for the poems of Meleager and Gow for all the rest.
The same year saw the appearance of Gow's edition, with commentary, of the fragments of the Alexandrian iambic poet Machon; none of his productions makes more entertaining reading than his edition of this scurrilous but amusing author.
In 1968 Gow and Page followed up their first volume by bringing out Hellenistic Epigrams: the Garland of Philip , again in two volumes; this time Gow was primarily responsible for the 650 epigrams which were either attributed to Antipater of Thessalonica or left over as being either his work or that of Antipater of Sidon.
Gow's work on Hellenistic epigrams has the same qualities as his Theocritus , and like that book will remain an essential instrument of scholarship.
The fears expressed early in Gow's career regarding the possible effects of his teaching did not prove entirely vain; his dryness and severity antagonized a number of his pupils, and the austerity of the regime at Trinity encouraged alarming departures from that quality by lesser scholars in certain other places.
But pupils of the more pertinacious sort profited greatly from his teaching and his company.
During World War II he regularly sent to pupils who were on active service a circular newsletter of a highly characteristic kind; these were published in 1945 in a book called Letters from Cambridge .
Gow also did much to interest undergraduates in art, a subject by no means popular among the Cambridge dons of his generation.
Several members of his family had been artists or lovers of art, and Gow himself became no mean collector and connoisseur.
From about 1909 he was a friend of (Sir) John Beazley [q.v.], with whom he once combined to buy a Sienese picture they had discovered in a dealer's; and he often travelled in Italy to look at pictures, sometimes in the company of his friend Scholfield.
Although in theory Gow disapproved of all art later than 1500 except for Rembrandt, Velázquez, and, with some reservations, Rubens, he left to the Fitzwilliam Museum, of which he had been a syndic from 1934 to 1957, twenty-four works by Degas and six each by Rodin and Forain.
From 1947 to 1953 he served as a trustee of the National Gallery, to which he left a fine collection of photographs of paintings which he had often used to stimulate a love of art in undergraduates.
They were accustomed to drop in on him between ten and eleven in the evening, when he could be an agreeable companion; and he, who had spent so little of his life with women, surprised his colleagues by making friends with the celebrated actress Dorothy Tutin.
In his last years his health became impaired, and in 1965 he left his rooms in Nevile's Court, with a fine Athena for a door knocker, for a set in the King's Hostel, where there was a lift.
After breaking a thigh in 1973 he moved to the Evelyn Nursing Home, where he died 2 February 1978.
He was unmarried.
[F. H. Sandbach,Proceedings of the British Academy , vol. lxiv, 1978, pp. 427–41; personal knowledge.]
David Smith
,John (c. 1754–1835), cartographer, was born c .1754 apparently in the Warminster area, the second of the four sons and one of possibly five or more children of George Cary, maltster, of Cowley, Wiltshire, and his wife Mary.
He is first recorded in 1770 beginning a seven-year engraving apprenticeship under William Palmer of London.
Cary established himself in business c .1783 at 188 Strand in London, subsequently trading at Johnson's Court, Fleet Street (c .1782), 181 Strand (from c .1791), and 86 St James's Street (from January 1820, when fire destroyed his workshop and his brother William's adjacent premises).
Although generally working independently, Cary did collaborate notably with John Wallis, who seemingly inspired his diversification into publishing c .1783/4, with his brother William in globe production and his brother Francis in engraving, and, most significantly, with William Smith [q.v.]and others in developing and publishing geological cartography.
Cary's first known engraved plan is dated 1779.
Henceforth, the quality of his engraving established new standards and a new style, with his effective, starkly beautiful, plain design being widely adopted.
Cary's firm's cartographic output was prolific and diverse, ranging through maps, plans, atlases, astronomical and educational works, road-books, guides, and globes.
Particularly noteworthy are the immensely popular New and Correct English Atlas (editions from 1787)— the standard county atlas of the period — and the Traveller's Companion (from 1790), both of which required replacement of the printing plates due to wear caused by excessive demand, and the particularly fine New English Atlas (from 1801) and New Universal Atlas (from 1808).
Despite the high quality of this multifarious output, Cary's only public recognition was the award of the Society of Arts gold medal (1804) for publishing Singer's Cardiganshire survey (1803).
Appointment as surveyor of the roads to the General Post Office (1794) led to the publication of authoritative road measurements in Cary's influential New Itenary (numerous editions from 1798).
John was joined in business by a George Cary in 1820.
This was undoubtedly his eldest son, who served his engraving apprenticeship under his father from 1802 and later took over the business c .1821 in partnership with his brother John, although their father probably remained a partner until his death.
The newly styled firm of G. & J. Cary continued at 86 St James's Street until 1850, although apparently it ceased cartographic publication c .1846.
It carried on William Cary's optician's business after his death (1825) until c .1853.
The firm's cartographic materials were subsequently acquired by George Frederick Cruchley and later Gall & Inglis, with both publishing adaptations of original stock and plates.
John Cary and the firm he created dominated British map production for a generation at least, being the most influential private-sector map-maker of the age.
His contemporary reputation is confirmed by the extended life of much of his output and by the widespread plagiarism of his productions.
Cary may have married Ann Jackson of Clerkenwell on 21 June 1779.
They had three sons and one daughter.
Cary died in Mortlake 16 August 1835.
[H. G. Fordham,John Cary: Engraver, Map, Chart, and Print-Seller and Globe-Maker 1754 to 1835 , 1925; D. Smith, ‘The Cary Family’,Map Collector , vol. xliii, 1988; D. Smith,Antique Maps of the British Isles , 1982;idem ,Victorian Maps of the British Isles , 1985;idem , ‘George Frederick Cruchley 1796–1880’,Map Collector , vol. xlix, 1989.]
Bernard Capp
,Mary (c. 1621–post 1653), millenarian writer, is known only through her publications, which reveal little of her background.
At first she identified herself by initials alone, styling herself a ‘minister or servant of the Gospel’, and she did not indicate her gender or give her full name until 1651.
She explained then that her surname had changed to Rande, presumably by marriage, but she continued to write under her maiden name.
Her husband has not been identified.
Christopher Feake [q.v.]described her as a gentlewoman, and her fluent and confident style points in the same direction.
She tells us that she had studied scripture from childhood, and had been drawn to the prophecies of Daniel and Revelation at the age of fifteen, in 1636.
Dedications in an early work to the Puritan MPs, Francis Rous [q.v.]and Thomas Boon, may indicate a west-country origin, though she was living in London during her years as a writer.
In her first published work, in 1645, Cary defended free grace while condemning the ‘licentious’ antinomianism with which it was often associated.
In A Word in Season (1647) she championed lay preaching, and urged that godliness was to be found in many forms.
She always condemned the use of force against religious Nonconformists, and prayed that the Presbyterians and Independents would never be in a position to impose their own brands of orthodoxy.
Cary's major interest was in the establishment of Christ's kingdom on earth.
Her prophetic framework was based largely on the writings of Thomas Brightman [q.v.]and John Archer; she expected the conversion and restoration of the Jews in 1656, and the full establishment of Christ's kingdom by 1701.
Her own contribution lay in revealing the apocalyptic significance of the English civil war.
In The Resurrection of the Witnesses (1648) she interpreted the outbreak of the Irish rebellion in 1641 as the killing of the two witnesses (Revelations xi) and the creation of the New Model Army in April 1645 as their resurrection.
The Little Horns Doom & Downfall (first drafted in 1644, published in 1651) interpreted Daniel's prophecies in a similar manner, identifying Charles I as the little horn of the Beast.
It was dedicated to Oliver Cromwell's wife and his daughter Bridget, and appeared with testimonials from three leading radical preachers, Hugh Peter, Henry Jessey, and Christopher Feake [qq.v.].
In a sketch of the New Jerusalem, Cary insisted that Christ would appear to reign in person.
She spoke mostly of the spiritual blessings to come, but she promised material joys too, predicting that infant mortality would cease and that poor men would no longer work ‘to maintain others that live vitiously, in idleness’.
Like many radicals Cary became disillusioned with the Rump Parliament and welcomed its fall.
In July 1653 she published a set of reform proposals addressed to Barebone's Parliament.
Many were concerned with the propagation of the gospel and with ways of maintaining the clergy by means other than tithes.
She wanted university endowments to be used to fund poor preachers and scholars from humble backgrounds.
She also suggested raising a fund to relieve the poor and unemployed by a levy on all letters or contracts, and called for drastic simplification of the laws and the establishment of local courts.
Cary's final work, an enlarged edition of The Resurrection (November 1653), was addressed to the saints meeting at Blackfriars and Christ Church, showing that she was now closely associated with the Fifth Monarchists.
Within a few years, she predicted, Christ's kingdom would spread through Europe, and she warned the Dutch and Danes that in fighting England (in the first Dutch war) they were fighting God.
Readers were told to beat their ploughshares into swords.
Cary then disappears from view.
Whether she had died or lapsed into silence as the millennial dream faded is not known.
[Christopher Hill,The World Turned Upside Down , 1972; B. S. Capp,The Fifth Monarchy Men , 1972; A. Cohen, ‘Mary Cary's The Glorious Excellencie Discovered ’,British Studies Monitor , vol. x, 1980.]
G E Aylmer
,William (1603–1675), parliamentary administrator, was baptized in Stafford 22 September 1603, the son of Thomas Jessoppe, and his wife Margery.
He moved to London, becoming a law clerk and then confidential man of business to Sir Robert Rich, second Earl of Warwick [q.v.].
Jessop served as secretary or chief clerk to the Providence Island Company from 1631 to 1641, and to the Saybrook plantation trustees; his command of shorthand (then known as secret writing) must have been a valuable qualification.
In 1640 he was on familiar terms with John Pym [q.v.], his colleague as treasurer of the Providence Island Company.
With the outbreak of civil war in 1642, he moved into both military and naval administration.
When his patron ceased to be Parliament's lord admiral, with the passage of the self-denying ordinance in 1645, Jessop stayed on as secretary to the Admiralty commissioners, holding this post until the demise of the Rump Parliament in 1653.
Through his service under the war treasurers back in 1642, he had also become man of business to Robert Devereux, third Earl of Essex [q.v.], and served conscientiously as an executor of the ex-lord general's encumbered estate after his death in 1646.
Jessop had considerable scruples about taking the ‘engagement’, or loyalty oath to the republic; the abolition of the House of Lords seems to have upset him more than the 1649 regicide and abolition of the monarchy.
He may have found service under the Protectorate more congenial than that of the Commonwealth; in 1653–4 he moved from the navy to the central executive, becoming assistant secretary and then clerk of Oliver Cromwell's council and treasurer of the protector's contingencies.
He also served on numerous other committees and commissions.
In the 1659 Parliament he sat for his old home town; in one of his two recorded speeches he had to justify having arrested a leading Fifth-Monarchy man on the orders of the late lord protector.
His Cromwellian sympathies were no doubt strengthened by the marriage of the protector's younger daughter to the Earl of Warwick's grandson early in 1658, and not surprisingly he left public life altogether with the restoration of the Commonwealth in 1659.
This and his aristocratic connections served him well at the Restoration.
He was assistant clerk of the Parliaments in the Convention of 1660, a witness against the regicides, and briefly employed under the navy commissioners.
Due either to age or lack of an appropriate patron, he held no central office again until 1668–9, when he was secretary to the public accounts committee, the body charged with investigating whether financial malpractice had contributed to the naval disaster at the end of the second Dutch war.
Jessop held two offices in the Duchy of Lancaster without a break, from the 1650s until his death at his house in Holborn in March 1675.
He married first Margaret Edwin, secondly Mary Cox, widow and sister-in-law of a politically moderate parliamentarian colonel.
His daughter by his first wife, and only child, married into the Hulton family of Lancashire, which accounts for the survival of his papers in the County Record Office at Preston and in the British Library.
Jessop's efficiency and discretion are as evident from the record as is his dislike of political extremism.
[G. E. Aylmer,The State's Servants , 1973; J. T. Rutt (ed.),
Diary of Thomas Burton , 4 vols., 1828; R. Latham and W. Matthews (eds.),
The Diary of Samuel Pepys , 11 vols., 1970–83; R. Somerville,Office-Holders in the Duchy and County Palatine of Lancaster from 1603 , 1972; British Library Add.
MSS 63854A and B.]
Ronald M Birse
,Herbert William (1864–1913), locomotive engineer and inventor of the Garratt articulated locomotive, was born 8 June 1864 at 11 Loddiges Road, Hackney, London, the son of William Garratt, umbrella manufacturer, and his wife Emma Hunt.
He was educated at private schools in London, then served his apprenticeship from 1879 to 1882 in the locomotive works in Bow.
From there he went to Doxford's Marine Engine Works in Sunderland, after which he served at sea as fourth and third engineer on several steamships.
From 1885 to 1889 he acquired more railway-engineering experience, first as an inspector of engines and railway materials for (Sir) C. Douglas Fox and (Sir) Alexander Rendel [qq.v.]respectively, then on the London and South Western Railway in conjunction with the Vacuum Brake Company.
From 1889 to 1906 he worked on railways in many other countries: the Central Argentine Railway appointed him district locomotive superintendent in 1894, but in 1897 he was summarily dismissed for being late in returning from leave in England; in 1900 he went as locomotive superintendent to the Cuban Central Railways, in 1902 to the Lagos Government Railway, and in 1904 to the Lima Railways in Peru.
In this way he acquired an unusually wide experience of railway engineering and management under difficult conditions.
During those periods of service on overseas railways he had made a special study of existing types of articulated locomotive, such as the Fairlie, Meyer, and Mallet, and the problems involved in achieving, especially on narrow-gauge track, adequate stability, traction, and speed.
His first sketches of the Garratt articulated locomotive show that he appreciated the advantages of mounting the boiler centrally between a pair of driving bogies carrying the fuel and water tanks.
He applied for a patent for his design on 26 July 1907.
After his ideas had been rejected by Kitsons, the locomotive builders of Leeds, he was fortunate in gaining the support of Beyer, Peacock & Co. in Manchester, who saw the inherent superiority of his design concept.
After some initial problems had been overcome the Garratts were outstandingly successful, running on all gauges from 2 feet to 5 feet 6 inches on gradients up to 1 in 20 or more, usually at modest speeds on heavily curved and graded routes, but capable of 75–80 m.p.h. on the Algerian expresses which were headed by probably the fastest articulated locomotives (4–6–2+2–6–4) ever built.
A total of 1,636 Garratts ran on eighty-six railways in forty-eight countries: of these, Beyer, Peacock built just over one thousand.
Between November 1885 and February 1913 he took out nine patents, eight relating to locomotive engines and one for ‘an improved egg-opener’.
Garratt was elected a member of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers in 1902.
He died in Richmond, Surrey, 25 September 1913.
[R. L. Hills,Beyer, Peacock: Locomotive Builders of Gorton, Manchester , 1882;Transactions of the Newcomen Society , vol. li, pp. 175–92;Railway Gazette , 3 October 1913, p. 374;Engineering , vol. xcvi, 1913, p. 461.]
Frank Spencer
,Charles (1864–1916), solicitor, palaeontologist, and antiquarian, was born 11 July 1864 at Fulkeith Hall, Lancashire, one of three sons of Hugh Dawson, barrister, and his wife Mary Anne Chaffer.
He completed his formal education at the Royal Academy, Gosport, in 1880, and then followed his father into the legal profession.
From 1890 until his death he practised as a solicitor in Uckfield, East Sussex, where he held several public appointments, and established his own law firm in partnership with Ernest Hart in 1905.
In his time Dawson was viewed as an exemplar of ‘that great class of men’ who provided ‘the driving power to British science — the thinking, observant amateur’.
His primary avocation was palaeontology, an interest he had lovingly nurtured since childhood.
Indeed, it was a precocious interest in Wealden fossils that led to the assembly of a large and valuable collection that was donated in 1884 to the newly opened Natural History Museum in South Kensington, and which gained him not only the title of honorary collector for the museum but also brought him the coveted fellowship of the London Geological Society at the age of twenty-one.
During his lifetime he was responsible for finding several new species of iguanodon, as well as a new species of the Mesozoic mammal Plagiaulax .
Dawson also won a reputation in Sussex geology and archaeology, the latter indicated by his election as a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1895.
He was a recognized authority on the Sussex iron industry, and his two-volume History of Hastings Castle (1909) became a standard work.
Although all this assured him a footnote in the history of British science, it was his intimate association with one of the most celebrated scientific forgeries that rescued him from relative obscurity.
Between 1908 and 1912 Dawson was responsible for recovering the remains of a human skull from a reputedly ancient gravel bed located at Barkham Manor (where he was steward), near Piltdown in East Sussex.
On 18 December 1912 a reconstruction of these remains was presented to the Geological Society of London by (Sir) Arthur Smith Woodward [q.v.], keeper of geology at the Natural History Museum, who was convinced they represented an early human form which he had dubbed Eoanthropus (‘dawn man’)dawsoni .
Although hailed at the time as ‘the most important discovery in England [and perhaps]…of greater importance than any other yet made at home or abroad’, during the next forty years it became increasingly difficult to reconcile this hominid with the burgeoning human fossil record from Asia and Africa.
In 1953 a detailed examination of the Piltdown remains demonstrated conclusively that they were faked and had been planted as part of an elaborate hoax, evidently aimed at manipulating scientific views on human evolution.
Though Dawson may not have masterminded this sophisticated and influential forgery, his complicity in the affair was strongly suspected.
But the glory he gained for his ‘discoveries’ at Piltdown was shortlived.
Late in 1915, in a letter to Woodward, Dawson reported that he was ailing from an ‘anaemic condition’, which did not improve.
He died 10 August 1916 at his home in Lewes.
In 1905 he married a widow (with two grown children) from Lewes, Hélène Leonie Elizabeth Postlethwaite (1859–1917), the daughter of Barnaby Gaffney of Curzon Street, London.
Dawson had no children.
[Joseph S. Weiner et al .,
The Solution of the Piltdown Problem , 1953; Joseph S. Weiner,The Piltdown Forgery , 1955; Frank Spencer,Piltdown, a Scientific Forgery , 1990, and The Piltdown Papers , 1990.]
Margot Fonteyn
,Anna (1881–1931), ballerina, was born 12 February 1881 (31 January 1881 in the old-style Russian calendar) in St Petersburg, the only child of Matvey Pavlovich Pavlov, a soldier, and his wife Lyubov Feodorovna Pavlova, a laundress.
She was a premature baby, and suffered weak health during early childhood.
When she was eight she was taken by her mother to see the Imperial Ballet at the Maryinsky Theatre.
The performance was the Sleeping Beauty , and from that moment her mind was made up.
She pestered her mother to enter her in the Imperial Ballet school, but two impatient years passed before she was old enough to audition, in 1891.
Once accepted, the frail child progressed well both in dancing and general education.
She attracted attention from her first appearances on stage while still a student.
On graduation in 1899 she entered the Imperial Ballet, bypassing the corps de ballet and rising through the ranks to ballerina in 1905 and prima ballerina a year later.
As such she danced all the great classical roles.
From the beginning of her career she studied with Enrico Cecchetti, and he became her chief teacher after she left Russia.
Pavlova aspired to take the beauty of her art to the whole world.
Her first opportunity to tour abroad came in 1908.
With a small group she danced in Scandinavia and Germany.
Her success was immediate and stunning.
Thereafter she toured abroad each year, sometimes taking long leave from the Imperial Ballet until she resigned altogether in 1913.
She made her début in Paris in 1909 with Serge Diaghilev's Ballets Russes, in New York in 1910 at the Metropolitan Opera House, and in London in 1910 in a variety performance at the Palace Theatre.
Sometime after her American tour in 1910 her Russian protector, Victor Dandré, appears to have become involved in some financial scandal in St Petersburg which may have influenced Pavlova's decision in 1912 to buy Ivy House in Golders Green, London.
It became her only home.
No certificate has been found for her presumed marriage to Dandré, with whom she spent the rest of her life.
They had no children.
Pavlova's last appearance in Russia was in 1913.
She never returned.
Caught in Berlin at the outbreak of war she was able to reach London, where she had already formed her own ballet company under Dandré's management.
Thereafter she toured the world with formidable endurance under often gruelling conditions of travel, climate, and work.
No town was too small, no theatre or hall to humble for her to dance for the people.
During eight American tours, two years in South America, and in South Africa, Australasia, India, and the Far East, thousands saw ballet for the first time.
‘The Dying Swan’, created for her in 1907 by Mikhail Fokine, was her most popular interpretation.
Pavlova was unusually slender in an era when women were expected to be well rounded.
Her oval face with its large dark eyes and high forehead was set on a long, graceful neck.
Her arms and hands were remarkably expressive, and her high, arched insteps gave beauty to the line of her feet sur les pointes .
These natural physical advantages were but the basis upon which to build her technique, and on that in turn to develop her exceptional artistry.
She could make a unique work of art out of the simplest dance, as fragments filmed in the 1920s show.
She was an emotional artist and woman with a lively intelligence, charming journalists wherever she went.
She dressed with consummate elegance, personifying grace both off and on the stage, and she was the most photographed woman of the time.
From her student days Pavlova was fired by stories of her legendary predecessor Marie Taglioni, who had travelled widely and appeared to great acclaim in St Petersburg during the 1837–9 seasons.
She herself inspired many who later became leading figures in the world of ballet, including (Sir) Frederick Ashton and (Sir) Robert Helpmann.
Death came to Pavlova at the age of fifty on the eve of a new European tour.
In her room at the Hôtel des Indes in The Hague she contracted pneumonia which turned to pleurisy.
Her last words were to ask for her Swan costume to be put ready.
She died in The Hague 23 January 1931.
[O. Kerensky,Anna Pavlova , 1973; J. and R. Lazzarini,Pavlova: Repertoire of a Legend , 1980.]
R M W Musson
,John (1850–1913), seismologist, geologist, mining engineer, and traveller, was born 30 December 1850 in Mount Vernon, Liverpool, the only child of John Milne, wool-dealer, of 147 Drake Street, Rochdale, and his wife Emma, daughter of James Twycross, JP, of Wokingham.
He was educated at Liverpool College, and subsequently at King's College, London, where he won many prizes, including an associateship of King's College and a Royal exhibition at the Royal School of Mines.
He studied mineralogy at Freiburg after some practical mining experience in Cornwall and Lancashire.
His first experience of exploration was a dangerous expedition to Iceland in 1871, made without parental leave.
He then spent two years in Newfoundland (1873–4) investigating mineral resources, and joined an expedition to Arabia in 1874.
But the real start to his career came in 1875 with an appointment as professor of geology and mining at the Imperial College of Engineering, Tokyo.
Here he began a comprehensive study of Japanese volcanoes, but became increasingly absorbed by the subject of earthquakes (having experienced one on the night of his arrival in Japan).
At this date the scientific study of earthquakes hardly existed.
In 1880 Milne founded the Seismological Society of Japan, the first such society in the world.
His experiments with pendulums, in association with his colleagues (Sir)(James) Alfred Ewing [q.v.]and Thomas Gray, led to the development of the first true seismograph for registering earthquakes.
On 17 February 1895 Milne's Tokyo house and observatory were destroyed by fire, and shortly after this he returned to England, settling at Shide Hill House, Isle of Wight.
Here he continued to experiment with seismograph design, while (as joint secretary of the seismological committee of the British Association) co-ordinating the reporting of earthquakes in observatories throughout the world.
His written output was immense, including two textbooks on seismology,Earthquakes and Other Earth Movements (1886) and Seismology (1898), and a Catalogue of Destructive Earthquakes A.D. 7–A.D. 1899 (1912).
The impact of his writings and theories fully justifies his appellation ‘the father of modern seismology’.
His early writing includes material on archaeology, crystallography, and natural history.
He was an honorary fellow of King's College, London, a fellow of the Geological Society (1873), and a fellow of the Royal Society (1887).
He gained an Oxford D.Sc.
and was awarded the Lyell medal (1894) of the Geological Society, the Order of the Rising Sun, third grade (given by the emperor of Japan, 1895), and the Royal medal of the Royal Society (1908).
In character he was kindly, genial, and modest, with an abundant sense of humour.
In his early life he was a keen explorer and traveller, and his photographs of life in Meiji Japan are of historical interest.
He was also a passionate golfer.
In 1881 he married Toné, daughter of Jó0kei Horikawa, abbot of the Ganjo-ji Temple in Hakodate.
They had no children.
Milne died 31 July 1913 in Shide.
[L. K. Herbert-Gustar and P. A. Nott,John Milne: Father of Modern Seismology , 1980; anon. (probably J. Perry), ‘John Milne 1850–1913’,Proceedings of the Royal Society , series A, vol. lxxxix, 1914, pp. xxii–xxv; anon.
(‘H. W.’), ‘Eminent living geologists — Professor John Milne’,Geological Magazine , vol. ix, 1912, pp. 337–46.]
Ronald M Birse
,William (1813–1881), mechanical engineer, was born in Paisley, near Glasgow, 27 May 1813, the son of John McNaught, steam engineer of Glasgow, and his wife Mary Lindsay.
He was apprenticed at the age of fourteen to Robert Napier [q.v.]at the Vulcan works in Glasgow, at the same time attending classes at the Andersonian Institution in the city.
After he had completed his apprenticeship he went out to India as manager of the Fort Gloster mills, but after three years returned to Glasgow and in 1838 joined his father in the manufacture of steam-engine accessories.
He became aware that the Boulton & Watt steam-engines installed in so many factories in the first quarter of the nineteenth century could no longer be coaxed to produce more power to meet ever-growing demands, and he came up with a very elegant solution which prolonged the useful life of these engines by many years.
Boulton & Watt's beam engines employed large cylinders operating at low steam pressures, and McNaught's expedient consisted of the addition of a small higher-pressure cylinder acting on the other half of the beam about midway along its length, with an appropriately shorter stroke, exhausting its steam into the original low-pressure cylinder.
This process of compounding, which he patented in 1845, came to be known as ‘McNaughting’, and as it was relatively inexpensive (even though new boilers were required to supply steam at the higher pressure) it was very popular in the second half of the nineteenth century.
McNaught moved to Lancashire in 1849, and the firm of J. & W. McNaught was established in 1860, acquiring new premises in Rochdale in 1862, and remaining in business until 1914.
He also invented an improved form of the steam-engine indicator, making it more suitable for higher speeds and pressures, which he patented in 1850.
In 1859 he took a leading part in the promotion of the Boiler Insurance and Steam Power Company, becoming chairman in 1865.
McNaught died in Manchester 8 January 1881, leaving a widow and a grown-up family; two of his sons continued to carry on their father's business.
[H. W. Dickinson,A Short History of the Steam Engine , 1939, 2nd edn. 1963;Engineer , vol. li, 1881, p. 53;Engineering , vol. xxxi, 1881, p. 66.]
T D Baxendale
,Joseph (1785–1872), transport entrepreneur, was born in Lancaster 28 September 1785, the eldest in the family of two sons and two daughters of Josiah Baxendale of Lancaster, surgeon, and his wife Mabella, daughter of Thomas Salisbury of Marshfield House, Settle.
Educated in Lancaster, Baxendale was from about 1805 in London with a wholesale linen-draper, agent for Bannister Hall, calico-printers of Preston, of which he became a partner in 1809 with Charles Swainson, his cousin through the Salisburys, borrowing his £4,000 entry capital from his family.
Leaving Bannister Hall in 1816, Baxendale purchased in April 1817 for £8,000 a one-sixth share in the old established business of T. & M. Pickford & Co., carriers of Manchester.
The poor condition of the firm's affairs (culminating in the bankruptcy of Thomas and Matthew Pickford in 1820), increased his active role in the business.
By 1824 he was a salaried managing partner.
During the ensuing twenty years his energetic and far-sighted management brought great prosperity and turned Pickfords into the largest carrying business in the country.
Baxendale's leadership and personality became a legend with his employees, whose welfare was his constant concern.
Pickfords had relied on canals and roads for the transport of goods, but Baxendale early appreciated the advantages of railways.
His dealings with the Liverpool and Manchester commenced in 1829 even before that line was opened.
In 1838 he accepted appointment as general superintendent of the new London and Birmingham Railway, and in 1837 became a director of the South Eastern, being its chairman from 1841 to 1845 and, as such, instrumental in the construction of the line to Paris via Folkestone and Boulogne.
He purchased and developed Folkestone harbour personally in association with(Sir) William Cubitt [q.v.], but afterwards resold it to his company at no profit.
He was, in the 1840s, a director of the Compagnie du Chemin de Fer du Nord, of the Amiens and Boulogne Railway, and of the East India Railway.
In the late 1830s Baxendale acted as consultant for the construction of the Belgian state railway system, and was a director of the Regent's Canal Company in 1836–9.
By degrees Baxendale acquired the remaining interests of the Pickford family and of his two other partners, so that by 1847 ownership of the business was entirely in the hands of himself and his three elder sons, who had become partners in 1843.
To them Baxendale resigned active management in 1847, devoting the last twenty-five years of his life to his various property, investment, and charitable interests.
He was a JP and deputy lieutenant for Hertfordshire and Middlesex.
In 1816 he married Mary, daughter of Richard Birley of Blackburn, a wealthy cotton-mill owner.
They had four sons and three daughters.
Baxendale died 24 March 1872 at Woodside, his residence of fifty years at Whetstone, Middlesex.
He was buried in St John's church there, which he built in 1832.
A lifetime's endeavours brought rich rewards (a personal estate of £700,000 at his death) and gained him the admiration of Samuel Smiles [q.v.].
[Samuel Smiles,Thrift , 1875; C. G. Harper,Stage-Coach and Mail in Days of Yore , vol. ii, 1903; G. L. Turnbull,Traffic and Transpor t: an Economic History of Pickfords , 1979.]
Anthony Hyman
,(Augusta) Ada , Countess of Lovelace (1815–1852), mathematician, was born 10 December 1815 at 13 Piccadilly Terrace, London, the only child of George Gordon Byron, sixth Baron Byron [q.v.], poet, and his wife Anne Isabella, daughter of Sir Ralph Milbanke Noel, baronet.
Soon after her birth and the subsequent celebrated break-up of her parents' marriage, she became famous through the lines of Byron's poem ‘Childe Harold’(canto 3, lines 1–5):
Is thy face like thy mother's, my fair child!
Ada! sole daughter of my house and of my heart?
When last I saw thy young blue eyes they smiled,
And then we parted,— not as now we part,
But with a hope.
She had a disjointed upbringing with a series of tutors.
She was a fearless horsewoman, and, at a time when it was rare and exceedingly difficult for a woman to do so, became a competent student of mathematics.
Probably through Mary Somerville [q.v.], the popularizer of science, she met Charles Babbage [q.v.], the reformer and computer pioneer.
They had many friends in common, including Charles Dickens, Augustus De Morgan, and Sir Charles Wheatstone [qq.v.].
In 1843 she translated a paper by General Menabrea, later to be prime minister of Italy, describing Babbage's analytical engine, later seen as the forerunner of the modern computer.
Under close supervision by Babbage she prepared extensive supplementary notes to Menabrea's paper.
These notes constitute in many ways the best statement that exists of Babbage's views on the general powers of his engines.
The programs in them have given rise to the myth that she was the world's first programmer, but all the mathematical work in the notes was actually carried out by Babbage.
In 1835 she married William King, eighth Baron King and Baron Ockham, lord lieutenant of Surrey.
He was created Earl of Lovelace in 1838.
They had a daughter, who married Wilfrid Scawen Blunt [q.v.], and two sons who succeeded each other as Baron Wentworth and second and third Earl of Lovelace.
In 1850 she discovered she had cancer of the uterus.
By 1852 she was in serious pain and her death chamber was the scene of a drama presided over by her vulturine mother.
There have been many suggestions that she was thousands of pounds in debt from gambling.
Certainly she was desperately trying to raise money, and one John Crosse, with whom she may have had an affair, was involved.
However, the gambling stories may have been exaggerated to cover up some story of compromising letters and blackmail, and the matter is obscure.
She died 27 November 1852 at her house in London.
[Anthony Hyman,Charles Babbage, Pioneer of the Computer , 1982, and Science and Reform , 1988; Doris Langley Moore,Ada, Countess of Lovelace , 1977.]
Stephen Sedley
,John (fl. 1649), radical pamphleteer, stands out among the polemicists of the civil war period as an advanced thinker on constitutional law and theory with a talent for vivid prose.
‘Even truth itself’, he wrote, ‘will jostle its adversary in a narrow pass.’
On the evidence of his writings, which is all that we have, Warr had a classical education and some experience of litigation, but he was probably not a lawyer.
His publisher was the radical bookseller Giles Calvert.
A John Warre is found in the 1650s, buying up sequestrated Royalist estates, but there is no evidence that he is the same man.
Warr is not readily allocated to any single faction, though his suspicion of all governments, his eventual antipathy to land tenures (‘slavish ties and badges upon men’), and his vocabulary place him close to Gerrard Winstanley [q.v.]and the Diggers.
Most memorably, Warr declares his belief in the ability of the common people to secure their own liberation: ‘There are some sparks of freedom in the minds of most’, he wrote, ‘which ordinarily lie deep and are covered in the dark as a spark in the ashes.’
His first work,Administrations Civil and Spiritual (1648), counterposes the ‘darkness’ of formal religion and imposed social order to the inner light of personal spirituality and reason.
In it Warr indicates his belief in the Everlasting Gospel, the enduring millenarian heresy which forecast the coming of an age of justice and equality.
In a much finer pamphlet,The Priviledges of the People, or Principles of Common Right and Freedom , published early in 1649, Warr advances the idea that the natural and rational order of society is not hierarchical or authoritarian but is based upon ‘people's rights’.
He upturns the conventional view of law as a constraint on the people and argues that its proper purpose is to liberate the common people by confining ‘the mighty’, among whom he includes both kings and parliaments.
Between rulers and ruled he perceives ‘an irreconcilable contest…which will never cease till either prerogative and privilege be swallowed up in freedom or liberty itself be led captive by prerogative’.
He no longer looks to a divine plan to resolve the contest: ‘the minds of men are the great wheels of things; thence come changes and alterations in the world.’
Nor does he now believe in an inevitable outcome: ‘He that hath the worst cause may sometimes have the best success.’
Warr's third and comparably fine pamphlet,The Corruption and Deficiency of the Laws of England , published later in 1649, develops the widespread critique of the legal system as an expensive snare.
For Warr, however, the issue is historical as well as moral, the reflection of an age-long struggle for rational laws rooted in ‘a spirit of understanding big with freedom and having a single respect to people's rights’.
It is perhaps Warr's amalgam of democratic ideals with an advanced sense of history, both past and future, which marks him out as a significant political thinker of his time.
[Warr's writings; Donald Veall,The Popular Movement for Law Reform 1640–1660 , 1970; Christopher Hill,The World Turned Upside Down , 1972.]
John C Findon
,Matthias (1690–1740), nonjuring writer, was born 11 July 1690 in Hoveton St Peter, Norfolk, the son of the Revd Matthias Earbery, vicar of Hoveton and Neatished.
Matthias Earbery the elder had sworn allegiance to William and Mary only ‘as a conquered person’.
In 1695 Earbery the elder was presented by Charles Finch, fourth Earl of Winchilsea, to the mastership of Wye Grammar School in Kent, though retaining his livings.
He published in 1697 an answer to Spinoza's Tractus Theologico Politicus , entitled Deism Examin'd and Confuted .
He also published A Review of the Bishop of Bangor's [Hoadly's]Sermon from Neatished in 1718.
In 1730 he became rector of Barsham in Suffolk, where he died in 1735.
Matthias Earbery the younger was educated by his father before entering St John's College, Cambridge, then noted for its nonjuring sympathies.
He was ordained to a curacy in Kent, where he became a friend of Thomas Brett [q.v.].
On 18 November 1715 he was received by George Hickes [q.v.]into the nonjuring communion, and became minister to a congregation in Holborn.
In June 1716 he signed the petition which began the ‘usages’ controversy, but soon changed his opinion, fiercely attacking Brett and the ‘usagers’in Reflections Upon Modern Fanaticism (1720).
His views on the rights of hereditary monarchy and  episcopacy were those of Charles Leslie [q.v.], whom he admired, but Earbery had none of his wit or power of reasoning: his numerous works are largely made up of quantities of historical narrative, related with a strong ideological bias, often laced with personal abuse.
In 1717 The History of the Clemency of Our English Monarchs , contrasting the treatment of the rebels after the battle of Preston with the leniency of previous reigns, was seized by the government.
Earbery escaped to France, and published a second edition, complete with a portrait of himself, in 1720.
He was arrested in London in 1723 for seditious libel, and again in 1732 for attacks on Sir Robert Walpole (later first Earl of Orford) and George II in The Royal Oak Journal .
His targets ranged from the ‘filth of Bangorianism’ to John Wycliffe, Gilbert Burnet, and Sir John Oldcastle [qq.v.].
He lived apparently by his writing, which accounts perhaps for his translation of Thomas Burnet's notoriously heterodox State of the Dead (1727).
He died at ‘a gentleman's house in Yorkshire’ 3 October 1740, leaving no account of some £350 subscribed to a projected edition of his works.
[Hoveton registers; Bodleian Library MSS: Rawlinson C735, D367 and D1254, Engl.
Theol.
C35 and C40, Carte 114; C. E. Doble (ed.),
Remarks and Collections of Thomas Hearne , 3 vols., 1885–9; Henry Broxap,The Later Non-jurors , 1924; J. H. Overton,The Nonjurors , 1902.]
Ann L Hughes
,Alice (1626–1707), autobiographer, was born 13 February and baptized 19 February 1626 in Kirklington, north Yorkshire, the fifth child and youngest daughter in the family of four sons and three daughters of Christopher Wandesford [q.v.]of Kirklington, lord deputy of Ireland, and his wife Alice, daughter of Sir Hewett Osborne of Kiveton, Yorkshire.
Her father was the kinsman, friend, and protégé of Thomas Wentworth (later first Earl of Strafford, q.v.), and she spent her childhood as the pampered daughter of a prospering family: ‘I enjoyed great easiness and comfort during my honoured father's life, having the fortunate opportunity…of the best education that kingdom could afford.’
She was educated with Wentworth's daughters in the traditional female pursuits of French, music, dancing, embroidery, and ‘other suitable housewifery’, besides receiving ‘pious, holy and religious instructions’ from her parents.
The death of Christopher Wandesford in December 1640 was ‘the beginning of troubles in our family’, followed as it was by the public catastrophes of the Irish rebellion and the English civil war.
The family escaped to Chester and then settled, much impoverished, on their mother's jointure estates in Yorkshire.
In 1651 Alice married William Thornton esquire of East Newton, Yorkshire, son and heir of the late Robert, whose parliamentarian connections were seen as useful to her Royalist family.
William's health was poor, while his improvidence and family quarrels weakened their estate, but on Alice's own account the marriage was an affectionate one and she mourned him sincerely on his early death in 1668.
Between 1652 and 1667 Alice gave birth to nine children, five daughters and four sons, only three of whom survived to adulthood.
Little is known of Alice's long widowhood: she lived in retirement in East Newton, noted for her charitable and religious activities, and supervised the education and marriages of her children.
Her son Robert (1662–1692), an Anglican clergyman, predeceased her.
Alice Thornton's life made little public impact but her 800-odd pages of autobiographical writings, preserved by the Comber family and published, in part, in the nineteenth century, provide a fascinating account of her personality, and more generally, of the family life of a gentlewoman in later seventeenth-century England.
It was perhaps the poignant contrast between her privileged youth and the straitened circumstances of her later life that stimulated Alice to write ‘my own book of my life, the collections of God's dealings and mercies to me and all mine till my widowed condition’.
More immediately the autobiography, several times reworked, was circulated amongst friends and relatives to vindicate her conduct in a series of family quarrels with her husband's kin, her own niece, and especially with her younger brother Christopher, the eventual heir to the Wandesford estates.
Within a providential framework, her writings reveal staunch Royalist views and a distinctly Anglican Restoration piety expressed through the set forms of the Common Prayer Book and the regular orderly celebration of the sacraments.
They commemorate her father and mother, ‘such a holy and sanctified a couple’; and describe, in great detail, her relationships with her siblings, her husband, and her children.
They are an invaluable source for women's health problems in this period, especially the ‘dangerous perils’ of childbirth, and movingly discuss the traumas of the early deaths of children, which she met with resigned submission to the will of God.
Above all, Alice Thornton's autobiography suggests the tensions between her strong-minded, independent personality and the allotted role of a seventeenth-century woman.
While overtly and inevitably she accepts women's subordinate position, there are strong undercurrents of resentment at the restrictions of marriage and at her lost prosperity.
She was reluctant, given her ‘more than competent fortune’, to give up ‘that happy and free condition’ of a single life and suffered a collapse on her wedding day.
When her younger brother tried to challenge her inheritance from her mother, ‘I told him that though he was now the heir, as being son, yet I was two years the elder by my birth, and though he had got the birthright, yet I ought to have a share of her blessing.’
A sense of her own importance, which survived despite the sadnesses of her adult life and prompted her to tell her own story at such length, is summed up in her quotation of a relative's comment on her autobiography, ‘it was not writ as if a weak woman might have done it, but might have become a divine.’
Alice Thornton died in 1707 in East Newton and was buried in the parish church at Stonegrave.
Her will indicates a modest estate, although the bulk of her household goods had been settled earlier on her daughters Alice (born 1654), the widow of Thomas Comber, DD, dean of Durham [q.v.], and Katherine (born 1656), wife of Robert Danby of Northallerton, gentleman.
[The Autobiography of Mrs Alice Thornton of East Newton , Surtees Society, vol. lxii, 1875; parish registers in North Yorkshire Record Office, Northallerton.]
Douglas Gray
, Sir Richard (c. 1410–1482), courtier and poet, was the fifth son in the family of five sons and four daughters of William, seventh Baron Roos of Helmsley (d .
1414), and his wife Margaret, daughter of Sir John Arundell (d .
1379, q.v.), naval commander.
His kneeling figure appears in the ‘St William window’(c .1423) in York Minster, which commemorates his father.
In 1435–9 he is heard of lodging in the ‘cornertowre’ at a property in Penshurst, Kent.
He was serving in France in December 1436 under John Talbot, first Earl of Shrewsbury [q.v.], at Gisors, and was by then a knight.
In November 1444 he was among the knights in the English party which went to France to witness the proxy wedding of Henry VI with Margaret of Anjou [qq.v.], and is mentioned as a participant in the dress rehearsal of her royal entry into Rouen in 1445.
Later in that year, after the queen had been escorted to England, Roos was appointed constable of St Briavel's Castle (Gloucestershire) for life, and, in December, received a grant from the king of 1,500 livres tournois for the defraying of the expenses of his French journey.
His name appears among the ‘promoters of the establishment’ at the foundation of Queen's College, Cambridge, in 1448.
Early in the 1450s he married Margaret, daughter of Sir Richard de Vernon of Haddon [q.v.].
In 1454 he was alnager for Northamptonshire and Rutland, charged with examining the measurement and quality of woollen goods in those counties.
There are records of various annuities and grants, and of the burglary of his house in Baynard's Castle ward, London, in November 1445.
The events of the last part of his life remain obscure, but his will (drawn up on 8 March 1482, proved 1 April 1482) implies that he held some post at the court of Edward IV.
It shows him to be a man of sufficient moveable property but with hardly any land.
There are benefactions to the church of St Peter the Little in Thames Street and to the Carmelites in Fleet Street.
He  bequeathes a number of books: a ‘little booke of praiers’ and service books belonging to his chapel, ‘my saulter clasped with silver’, and ‘my grete booke called saint Grall’(British Library Royal MS 14.
E.iii).
He had a daughter, Mary, who married Sir Giles Capel.
He is usually taken to be the author of a polished English version of Alain Chartier's poem ‘La Belle Dame Sans Mercy’, a fashionable contribution to the courtly debate about love provoked by the Roman de la Rose .
Its date is uncertain, but if the Fairfax MS in which it appears was commissioned by Sir John Stanley, his death in c .1469 would provide a terminus ad quem .
In MS Harley 372 the work is ascribed to Sir Richard Ros, and this has been generally accepted.
If it is not, a claim could be made for his nephew, Richard Roos, esquire (1429–? 1493), a correspondent of the Pastons, who seems to have been a respected figure, but was never knighted.
An erudite attempt by Dr Ethel Seaton to prove (by the use of anagrams and hidden wordplay) that Sir Richard was the author of a number of other fifteenth-century poems has not won acceptance.
[Ethel Seaton,Sir Richard Roos…
Lancastrian Poet , 1961; R. A. Foley, ‘Richard Pynson's Boke of Fame and its non-Chaucerian Poems’, D.Phil. thesis (1987) for the University of Oxford.]
Anne Baker
,William (1872–1961), morris dancer, was born 8 September 1872 in Old Road, Titup, a hamlet on the edge of Headington Quarry, Oxford, the eldest child in the family of four sons and two daughters of William Kimber, a brick-maker of Titup, and his wife Sophia Ann, née Kimber, a smock-maker from Horspath.
He left Headington Quarry school at the age of nine, and was later apprenticed as a bricklayer.
He remained a bricklayer all his working life, although, as Cecil Sharp [q.v.]said, he was ‘a builder by trade, but a dancer by profession’.
His father, foreman of the Headington Quarry morris ‘side’ for fifteen years, played him the morris tunes in the cradle, and later taught him the dances.
Kimber first danced in public at the golden jubilee celebrations in 1887, but the side was disbanded after this, only to be revived by the Oxford don Percy Manning in 1897, and Kimber did not perform with them again until 1899.
On Boxing day 1899 Cecil Sharp, spending Christmas with his mother-in-law at Sandfield Cottage, Headington, saw the Headington Quarry side dance ‘Laudnum Bunches’ and four other dances in the snow outside his window, with Kimber playing the concertina.
Kimber had previously done some building work there, and had promised to bring the dancers the next time the side was out.
The bad weather and shortage of building work had led to this unseasonal appearance, the morris traditionally being performed at Whitsun.
Sharp was very excited, and asked Kimber to come back the next day to play the tunes, while he wrote them down.
It was not until 1905, when Mary Neal asked Sharp if he knew any folk dances suitable for the girls at her Esperance Working Girls' Club in Cumberland Market, St Pancras, that Sharp remembered Kimber.
As a result, Mary Neal sought Kimber out, and invited him and his cousin ‘Dobbin' Kimber, to London to demonstrate the dances to the girls.
Sharp became interested in the morris dances himself, collecting dances in the midlands and lecturing extensively with Kimber demonstrating the dances and playing the concertina, frequently losing his bricklaying job as a result.
When disagreements between Cecil Sharp and Mary Neal developed — Kimber said one was church and the other chapel — both sides sent deputations to Headington Quarry to question several of the old dancers.
Sharp was concerned with authenticity while Mary Neal's main concern was that there should be in the dances something ‘which…adds to the joy of life’.
Mary Neal began to call in doubt the authenticity of Kimber's version of the dances, but Sharp used Kimber, who supported him throughout the battles, as his yardstick of what the morris should be.
Together they revised and expanded The Morris Book (first published in 1907) in 1912.
William Kimber's fame as a dancer grew.
He danced at the Royal Albert Hall, the Mansion House, and in front of King Edward VII and Queen Alexandra at the Chelsea Hospital.
Maud Karpeles wrote of Kimber's ‘perfect carriage, the dignity of his bearing, his loose-limbed yet controlled movements and, above all, the sparkle of his step’.
In 1922 he was presented with the gold medal of the English Folk Dance Society at the music festival held in the gardens of New College, Oxford, with the professor of music, Sir Hugh Allen [q.v.], presiding in a smock and a garlanded top hat.
Kimber and Sharp continued to correspond until Sharp's death in 1924, and when Cecil Sharp House was built in London, Kimber helped to lay the foundations in 1929, and laid a course of bricks.
For the rest of his life Kimber continued to teach, dance, and play the concertina.
In 1920 he revived the Headington Quarry side that he had formed in 1910, some of whom had been killed or wounded in World War I, including his own son William, whose leg had been shattered.
Kimber's last appearance with them was on Whit Monday 1961.
From 1946 he taught morris dancing to the boys at Headington Quarry Secondary School.
In 1894 Kimber, who was called ‘Merry’ by his friends, married Florence, daughter of Thomas Henry Cripps, a railway labourer of Cold Harbour, St Aldates, Berkshire.
She died in 1917, and in 1920 he remarried.
His second wife was Bessie Clark, a widow, daughter of William Joseph Kethro, a stonemason of Oxford.
There were at least two sons and five daughters from these two marriages.
Kimber died 26 December 1961 in Headington Quarry in the house he had built himself, ‘Merryville’.
At his funeral his coffin was carried by the Headington Quarry morris men in morris rig.
[Unpublished archives in the Vaughan Williams Memorial Library, Cecil Sharp House; K. Loveless, ‘William Kimber’(notes accompanying LP record ‘William Kimber’, EFDSS LP1001), 1963; T. W. Chaundy, ‘William Kimber’,Journal of the English Folk Dance and Song Society , vol. viii, no. 4, December 1959; R. W. Grant, ‘Headington Quarry and its Morris Dancers.
A Brief Chronology up to 1961’,Morris Dancer , vol. ii, no. 10, 1990; Maud Karpeles,Cecil Sharp, his Life and Work , 1967.]
George W Carpenter
,Dugald (1840–1912), mechanical engineer, was born 1 January 1840 in Ardrossan, Ayrshire, the son of George Drummond, a permanent-way inspector on the Bowling to Balloch Railway, and his wife Christina Thomson.
He had at least one brother, Peter [q.v.].
In 1856 he commenced an engineering apprenticeship with Forrest & Barr of Glasgow.
After gaining experience with his father's railway and with Peto, Brassey & Betts at Birkenhead, he worked under Samuel Waite Johnson at the Cowlairs (Glasgow) works of the Edinburgh and Glasgow (later North British) Railway.
In 1865 he became foreman erector at the Inverness workshops of the Highland Railway, under William Stroudley [q.v.], and works manager in the following year.
In 1870 he followed Stroudley, with whom he had developed a close friendship, when the latter moved to the London, Brighton and South Coast Railway as locomotive and carriage superintendent and became locomotive and carriage works manager of that railway.
In 1875 Drummond was appointed locomotive superintendent of the North British Railway, where he found the locomotive stock and workshops somewhat run down.
He rapidly took steps to improve and re-equip the Cowlairs workshops and to introduce new passenger and freight locomotives of improved performance, initially closely following Stroudley's designs.
He then introduced a new type of 4–4–0 express locomotive, with a leading bogie which gave much smoother and safer negotiation of curved track at speed, and these ran for fifty years from their entry into service in 1876.
This type of locomotive was repeated by him after he transferred to the Caledonian Railway in 1882 and was further developed by his successors on that railway for the next thirty years.
Some of these locomotives took part in the railway ‘race’ from London to Aberdeen in 1895, when there was keen competition between the west and east coast routes for Anglo-Scottish passenger traffic, and averaged well over 60 m.p.h. from Carlisle to Aberdeen on severe gradients.
Drummond also carried out extensive tests to improve the efficiency of his locomotives.
In 1890 he resigned from the Caledonian Railway to establish an engineering works in Queensland.
This project was abortive and he returned to form the Glasgow Railway Engineering works, where industrial locomotives were built.
In 1895 he was appointed to succeed William Adams [q.v.]as locomotive superintendent of the London and South Western Railway, where he had new and well-equipped locomotive workshops built in Eastleigh to replace the existing inadequate facilities in Nine Elms in London.
He introduced new main-line and suburban passenger and freight locomotives developed from those he had designed in Scotland, which gave excellent results and had similarly elegant outlines, although his later and more powerful 4–6–0 type locomotives were less successful.
He was a highly innovative engineer, introducing developments in boiler design and the use of locomotive exhaust steam for pre-heating the feed water.
Drummond was a forceful personality and could be dour and difficult, although fair in dealings with his men, who appreciated his locomotives and respected him personally.
He was a member of the Institutions of Civil and Mechanical Engineers, becoming a Telford medallist of the former for his outstanding paper in 1897 on locomotive efficiency trials on the Caledonian Railway.
He died at his home in Surbiton, Surrey, 7 November 1912, whilst still in office.
He was married and had one son and four daughters.
[Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers , vol. cxcv, 1914;Engineering , vol. xciv, November 1912, p. 685; Charles S. Lake, ‘Some C.M.E.'s I Have Known’,Railway Magazine , vol. lxxxix, July/August 1943, pp. 213–15; C. Hamilton Ellis, ‘Famous Locomotive Engineers’,Locomotive Carriage and Wagon Review , 15 June 1938, pp. 192–6.]
Paul Brand
(c. 1236–1294), administrator and judge, was a younger son of the Richard de Lovetot (d .
1235), who was lord of one-third of the Huntingdonshire barony of Southoe, and his wife Christine, who survived him.
John cannot therefore have been born later than 1236.
It was probably this John de Lovetot who acted as bailiff of the escheated honour of Peverel of Nottingham from 1258 to 1260 or 1261.
In 1263–4 he was one of four men who administered the county of Yorkshire in opposition to its royalist sheriff.
In the late 1260s he was an under-sheriff in Norfolk and in the early 1270s successively steward of Norwich Cathedral priory and in the service of Robert de Vere, fifth Earl of Oxford, again possibly as his steward.
He may have owed his entry into royal service to Robert de Tibetot (or Tiptoft)[q.v.], whom he represented when Robert went on crusade with the future Edward I in 1270.
He had certainly entered Edward's service by 1274, when he was appointed joint custodian of the vacant see of Durham.
John became a justice of the Common Bench in Easter term 1275 and the formal records of the court show him acting as a justice continuously down to the end of 1289.
He is, however, known to have been sent abroad by the king on at least eight different occasions during these years, both on diplomatic missions and on commissions concerning the administration of Ponthieu, and these overseas journeys caused him to miss part or all of several law terms.
John was also active during the same period as an assize and gaol delivery justice and managed to find time to act as one of the trusted servants of Edward's wife, Queen Eleanor.
John was disgraced early in 1290 with his judicial colleagues for failing to prevent the chief justice of the court Thomas de Weyland [q.v.]altering the record of a case heard in the court.
Between June 1290 and October 1293 he paid the fine of £1,000 which had secured his release from the Tower of London.
In 1293 he was committed to the Tower for a second time, perhaps for misconduct in the service of Queen Eleanor, and only released for a second fine of 1,000 marks.
John de Lovetot's first wife Margaret was the daughter of Robert d'Eyville and his wife Denise.
They were certainly married by 1268.
His second wife was Joan, daughter of William of Standon, who had previously been married to Bartholomew de Briaunzon.
This marriage probably took place in 1290 or 1291.
John had at least four sons and three daughters, probably all by his first wife.
He died shortly before 5 November 1294.
In 1302–3 his son and heir John alleged that he had been murdered at the instigation of Walter Langton, bishop of Coventry [q.v.].
The younger John claimed that Langton had been carrying on an adulterous relationship with his stepmother Joan.
John was unable to prove his allegations.
[Public Record Office, Feet of Fines, CP 25 (1); Memoranda Rolls, E 159; Common Pleas Plea Rolls, CP 40;Calendars of Patent and Close Rolls ; A. Clarke et al .
(eds.),
Foedera , 1816–69, vol i, part II, pp. 956–7.]
Angela V John
,Elizabeth (1862–1952), actress, writer, and feminist, was born in Louisville, Kentucky, 6 August 1862, the eldest daughter of Charles Ephraim Robins, a banker turned metallurgist, and his wife Hannah Maria Crow.
She had two sisters, three brothers, and a half-brother.
Her mother, mentally unstable, eventually entered an asylum in 1885.
After childhood on Staten Island, New York, Elizabeth Robins lived in Zanesville, Ohio, with her paternal grandmother, a strong-minded woman who features in her semi-autobiographical novel,The Open Question (1898).
Her youngest brother was Raymond Robins, the human rights activist.
She attended Putnam Female Seminary and discovered acting and the habit of diary-keeping.
In 1881 she moved to New York to act, touring the United States in several companies and working with Lawrence Barrett and Edwin Booth.
Whilst with the Boston Museum Stock Company, in 1885 she married an intense fellow actor, George Richmond Parks, the son of John A. Parks, a hotelier.
They had no children.
Two years later he drowned himself.
Robins sought refuge in travel to Norway in 1888.
En route she visited England in 1889 and remained there.
She acted in many plays on the London stage but really gained fame as England's first Hedda Gabler (1891) and as Hilda Wangel (her favourite Ibsen part) in The Master Builder (1893).
Mrs Patrick Campbell (B. S. Campbell, q.v.) called her England's ‘first great intellectual actress’.
Yet this lone, beautiful, and sensitive actress who openly espoused Ibsen and portrayed his bold, modern women did not find it easy living in late Victorian Britain.
She attacked and circumvented the restrictive actor-manager system, producing independent subscription theatre with good roles for women.
With her close friend, William Archer [q.v.], she founded the New Century Theatre (1897).
She never remarried but had many admirers and friends, including William Heinemann and John Masefield [qq.v.].
Her correspondence with Henry James [q.v.]was published as Theatre and Friendship (1932).
Much of it concerned her confidante and co-playwright, Lady Bell.
The first of fifteen novels appeared in 1894 (her early fiction sported the pseudonym of C. E. Raimond) and she retired from the stage in 1897 and devoted herself to writing.
Short stories, pamphlets, and articles appeared on both sides of the Atlantic and her novel,The Magnetic North (1904), was a best seller, and was compared to the work of Daniel Defoe [q.v.].
It drew on her visit to her brothers Raymond and Saxton during the Klondyke gold rush.
Her fiction tackled social issues — suicide, divorce, abortion, and prostitution — whilst her spectacular play,Votes for Women (1907), the basis for the novel,The Convert (1907), began suffrage theatre.
She was on the executive of the Women's Social and Political Union and her suffrage speeches and articles appeared in Way Stations (1913).
Her study of sex antagonism,Ancilla's Share (1924), prefigures some of the work of her friend Virginia Woolf [q.v.].
For her last forty years her close companion was Dr Octavia Wilberforce.
Both actively supported women doctors.
In 1927 they converted Robins's fifteenth-century Sussex house, Backsettown, into a women's convalescent home, which it remained until 1989.
Retaining American citizenship (between 1904 and 1925, she and Raymond owned a home in Florida), she made her final visit to the United States at the age of eighty-eight.
She died in Brighton 8 May 1952.
[Elizabeth Robins papers and catalogue, Fales library, New York University; Elizabeth Robins,Both Sides of the Curtain , 1940; Jane Marcus,Art and Anger.
Reading like a Woman , 1985.]
Theo Aronson
,Emilie Charlotte (‘Lillie’)(1853–1929), actress, was born 13 October 1853 at St Saviour's rectory, Jersey, the only daughter and sixth of the seven children of William Corbet Le Breton, dean of Jersey, and his wife Emilie Davis Martin.
Educated at home, she developed into a socially ambitious and remarkably beautiful young woman.
In 1874 she married Edward Langtry, son of a Belfast shipowner.
Within three years the couple were established in London where Lillie became celebrated, not only as a ‘professional beauty’— a society woman whose photographic likenesses were on sale to the public — but as the mistress of Albert Edward, Prince of Wales.
For the following three years she enjoyed a period of heady social success.
Her portrait was painted by most leading artists of the day; the best known being ‘A Jersey Lily’ by (Sir) John Everett Millais [q.v.], which is in the possession of the Société Jersiaise in Jersey.
Towards the end of her three-year liaison with the Prince of Wales, Lillie met Prince Louis of Battenberg.
In Paris, in March 1881, she bore him a daughter, who was christened Jeanne-Marie, with the surname of Langtry.
The birth of this child coincided with the bankruptcy of Edward Langtry and the break-up of Lillie's marriage.
Exceptionally resilient, Lillie embarked on a new career — as an actress.
Her appearance in a charity performance led to an offer to join the Bancrofts' company at the Haymarket Theatre.
Appreciating that it was her notoriety, as the ex-mistress of the Prince of Wales, that was attracting audiences, Lillie soon founded her own company.
Between 1882 and 1889 she divided her time between tours of the United States and appearances on various London stages.
Although never more than a competent actress, she was an extremely decorative and popular one, at her best in plays about upper-class society.
In 1889 she returned permanently to England.
To her career as an actress, the always practical Lillie now added another: that of a highly successful racehorse owner.
In 1899, two years after the death of the by then destitute Edward Langtry, Lillie married Hugo, the son of Sir Henry de Bathe, baronet.
Her new husband was eighteen years her junior.
On the death of her father-in-law in 1907, Lillie became Lady de Bathe.
With her attempt to establish a company at the Imperial Theatre, Westminster, having failed, Lillie resumed touring.
After World War I, she bought a villa in the south of France and in 1925 published a highly selective book of memoirs.
She died in Monte Carlo 12 February 1929 and was buried in St Saviour's churchyard, Jersey.
[The Times , 13 February 1929; Emilie Charlotte Langtry,The Days I Knew , 1925; Philip Magnus,King Edward the Seventh , 1964; private information.]
D A Carpenter
(c. 1215–1295), bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, was a kinsman of King Henry III.
He is once referred to by the chronicler, Matthew Paris [q.v.], as ‘Master Longespee’ and it is thus possible that he was a son of William Longespée, third Earl of Salisbury (died 1226, q.v.), who was Henry III's uncle.
The reason why Roger was styled ‘de Meuland’(or ‘Meuleng’, ‘Meulent’, ‘Molend’, etc.) is unclear, although it probably indicates some connection with Meulon in Normandy.
Perhaps it was there that Roger was born or brought up.
Nothing seems known of Roger's early career.
By 1257 he was a canon of Lichfield and a papal chaplain.
He owed his election to the bishopric of Coventry and Lichfield, in the January of that year (his consecration followed in March 1258), to the influence of the king's brother, Richard, Earl of Cornwall [q.v.].
Later in 1257 Roger went out to Germany with Richard, where the latter had been elected king.
He repeated the journey in 1258.
Roger was no mere creature of Henry III and his brother, however.
In 1259 he incurred Henry's wrath by attempting to subject the royal free chapels in his diocese to episcopal control, a dispute which rumbled on until Roger's final capitulation in 1281.
On the other hand, Roger cannot be ranked as one of the episcopal supporters of Simon of Montfort [q.v.].
In July 1263 the king empowered him, with Richard de Gravesend, bishop of Lincoln, and Henry de Sandwich, bishop of London [qq.v.], to reach a settlement with Simon, but the reimposition of the Provisions of Oxford which resulted reflected the realities of the political situation rather than Roger's own political stance.
The latter is seen more clearly in March 1264 when Roger represented Henry III in the abortive negotiations before the final outbreak of hostilities.
Roger was prepared to co-operate with the subsequent regime of Simon of Montfort — in December 1264 he helped to arrange a temporary settlement with the Marcher barons — but he was not one of the bishops suspended from office after the battle of Evesham.
Between 1258 and 1272 Roger, like previous bishops of Coventry and Lichfield, was frequently appointed as the king's representative in negotiations with the Welsh.
After 1272, this and any other political activity ceased.
Despite being ‘bound to the king by right of blood (iure sanguinis ) before all other prelates of the realm’, as Henry III put it (Close Rolls 1256–9 , p. 486), Roger appears to have played but a modest part in affairs of state.
As bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, Roger's record was mixed.
In 1282 Archbishop John Peckham [q.v.], after a visitation of the bishopric, wrote him a blistering letter of criticism.
Peckham had discovered the prevalence of incest, an infinite multitude of children lacking confirmation, the appropriation of churches to the great damage of the cure of souls, and Roger himself, ‘as though not caring about these things and others’, living outside the diocese.
Roger was ordered to appoint a suffragan bishop ‘knowing the language’, a hint perhaps that Roger himself (having been brought up in France?) did not.
While there is evidence to support some of Peckham's accusations, especially over appropriations, they were made when Roger was already a sick man in decline: when he died in 1295 he was described as of great age.
On the more positive side, Roger and his officials ordained or enlarged at least five vicarages.
Roger was also the first bishop of Coventry and Lichfield to keep an episcopal register (later lost).
If he did neglect his diocese, he certainly spoke of his ‘devotion to his spouse, the church of Lichfield’ and did much to display it.
‘For the increase of divine worship’(though also to provide patronage for his protégés), he created three new prebends, one endowed with land he himself had acquired.
One of his last acts was to issue new statutes governing the conduct of the chapter, which increased the daily provision for each prebendary.
Earlier, in 1278, when Roger permitted the appropriation by Stafford priory of the church of Stowe by Chartley, he made no stipulation about the creation of a vicarage, but he did obtain a ten-mark annual pension for the dean and chapter of Lichfield's common fund.
Likewise, when he secured a thirty-mark annual pension from the church of Wigan, he assigned ten marks to the fabric fund of the cathedral and twenty marks to the sacrist, of which half was to be assigned to six boys appointed by the bishop.
The reference to the fabric fund is significant.
It was during Roger's episcopate that the whole of the present nave of Lichfield Cathedral was built, together with the lower part of the great west front.
Roger may have played a significant part in raising funds for the enterprise.
He may also have been behind certain elements of the design.
In particular, the unique clerestory windows, consisting of three trefoiled circles, were modelled on the external triforium windows of Henry III's Westminster Abbey, perhaps a graceful tribute by Bishop Roger to his royal kinsman.
Both as a political and diocesan bishop, Roger de Meuland's record was mediocre.
As a builder he has a least a claim, although an unprovable one, to fame.
[Chancery rolls; H. E. Savage (ed.),
The Great Register of Lichfield Cathedral Known as Magnum Registrum Album , William Salt Archaeological Society, 1924; C. T. Martin (ed.),
Registrum Epistolarum Fratris Johannis Peckham, Archiepiscopi Cantuariensis , 3 vols.
(Rolls Series), 1882–4; M. W. Greenslade (ed.),
The Victoria History of the Counties of England: a History of the County of Stafford , vol. iii, 1970; P. Brieger,English Art 1216–1307 , 1957.]
Richard Landon
,James (1756–1816), antiquarian bookseller, auctioneer, and collector, was born 8 September 1756 in Halifax, Yorkshire, the second son of William Edwards of Halifax [q.v.], founder of the renowned firm of bookbinders.
He seems to have been trained, along with his three brothers, to carry on the family business, which also included bookselling.
In 1874 James and his younger brother John established the firm of Edwards & Sons in Pall Mall, London, and issued a catalogue of antiquarian books which, according to John Nichols [q.v.], ‘astonished, not only the purchasers of books, but the most experienced and intelligent booksellers in the Metropolis’.
John Edwards died in the 1780s but James quickly moved the firm into a leading position, issuing a series of elegant catalogues from his fashionable shop.
Together with James Robson [q.v.],
Edwards acquired the famous Maffeo Pinelli collection of early printed books from Venice and sold it at auction in 1789 and 1790.
In 1791 he offered at auction the much smaller, but very choice collection, known as the Bibliotheca Parisina, with catalogues in English and French.
His business relationships with French collectors and dealers seem to have been remarkably close during the whole period of the revolution and the early years of Napoleon, and he was obviously able to exploit the opportunities of acquisition created by European upheaval.
He even acted at least twice as an official British diplomat, once at the behest of George, second Earl Spencer [q.v.], the greatest book collector of his time and a primary customer of Edwards.
In 1799, having decided that strict attention to work was undermining his health, Edwards turned his business over to R. H. Evans [q.v.]and set up as a gentleman collector.
He had established himself spectacularly in this sphere in 1786 by outbidding the king for the Bedford Book of Hours at the Duchess of Portland's sale, and his library contained many choice early printed books and manuscripts.
On 10 September 1805 he married Katharine Bromhead and moved to a manor house at Harrow, described in glowing terms by T. F. Dibdin [q.v.]in his Bibliomania and Bibliographical Decameron .
Edwards's health having deteriorated during 1814, he determined to sell his library and it went under the hammer of R. H. Evans on 15 April 1815, the 830 lots bringing £8,432.
His timing was prescient, as he died 2 January 1816, leaving a widow and five children, and was buried in Harrow churchyard in a coffin constructed from his library shelves.
[Gentleman's Magazine , February 1816; William Beloe,The Sexagenarian , 1818; John Nichols,Illustrations of the Literary History of the Eighteenth Century , vol. iv, 1822; T. W. Hanson, ‘Edwards of Halifax’,Book Handbook , no. 6, 1948; James Edwards's catalogues.]
Fiona MacCarthy
,Ernest William (1864–1919), craftsman and architect, was born in Leicester, 21 December 1864, the fourth child and second son in the family of three sons and four daughters of Josiah Gimson, iron-founder, engineer, and industrial entrepreneur, who established the Vulcan works in Leicester, and his second wife Sarah Ansell.
Josiah Gimson's father was a carpenter.
From an early age Gimson's interest in buildings was obsessive; as a young man he was quoted as saying ‘I am thinking of architecture all the time I am awake.’
After leaving Franklin's School in Leicester in 1881 Gimson was articled to a local architect, Isaac Barradale, and also attended Leicester School of Art, where he won national medals for suburban housing and for furniture design.
His father was a leading free thinker, founder-member and president of the Leicester Secular Society, and a Liberal member of the city council.
Gimson's view of life — which was always to be that of the ‘idealist individualist’— was formed more by the mood and the standards of that crowded, argumentative, intellectually zealous, middle-class, provincial household than by his formal education.
In 1884 Gimson went to listen to William Morris [q.v.]lecturing to the Leicester Secular Society on ‘Art and Socialism’.
Afterwards he met Morris, who suggested the way that he should go in combining his radical conscience with his practical abilities in making and designing.
It was Morris who encouraged him to go to London, recommending him to J. D. Sedding [q.v.], the church architect.
Gimson was a deeply solitary man with a contradictory need for close male friendships.
In the mid-1880s in Sedding's office, he joined the small convivial group of young Arts and Crafts architects, satellites around Morris and Philip Webb [q.v.], becoming a member of such early architectural action groups as the Art Workers' Guild and the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings.
In 1890 Gimson, Detmar Blow, and W. R. Lethaby [q.v.]set up an individualistic decorating firm, a brotherhood of craftsmen making and selling their own furniture designs.
This short-lived (until 1892) but enthusiastic enterprise was called Kenton & Co. and was obviously modelled on Morris's own firm.
Gimson subscribed to the principle that ‘doing is designing’.
He was fascinated by the practicalities of a new approach to traditional crafts.
Before Kenton & Co. opened he had travelled to Bosbury in Herefordshire to learn the craft of turned rush-seated chair-making from an old man, Philip Clissett, who had been bodging chairs since 1838.
He also learned the techniques of moulded and modelled plasterwork from the London trade firm of Whitcombe & Priestley.
As his furniture workshops expanded Gimson was less able to take part in the actual processes of making: his chief role became that of director and designer.
But plasterwork was the one craft he continued all his life.
In 1893 Gimson left London with Sidney Barnsley, a furniture maker, and went to live in Pinbury, Gloucestershire.
It was a move rich in symbolic overtones, true to Gimson's conviction that one must live near to nature in uncorrupted, incorruptible surroundings.
The architect Ernest Barnsley, Sidney's brother, joined them with his family.
They settled in Sapperton, and Gimson had his workshops and showroom at Daneway House.
Gimson and Ernest Barnsley, having quarrelled bitterly, spent many years scarcely on speaking terms.
But their work has recognizable stylistic affinities: a clear respect for techniques and materials, a deep love of tradition, and a belief in the vernacular which had a considerable impact on both theory and practice of British twentieth-century industrial design.
Gimson's furniture was his supreme achievement, the only relatively modern work to bear comparison with that of the great English cabinet-makers of the eighteenth century.
As an architect he was a disappointed man.
Amongst his few realized projects the most original are Stoneywell Cottage in Markfield, near Leicester, and the magnificent timbered library at Bedales School, built posthumously.
With his tall well-built frame, his broad and rather florid features, his open honest gaze, his country yeoman's tweeds, Gimson often seemed the rural Englishman personified.
He loved the country deeply.
Beneath his bluff exterior was an immense austerity.
He took his pleasures seriously, and when he led the country dances in the village hall at Sapperton it was reported ‘there were no idle feet.’
In 1900 he married Emily Ann, daughter of the Revd Robert Thompson, vicar of Skipsea in Yorkshire.
They had no children.
Gimson died in Sapperton 12 August 1919 and was buried in the churchyard there.
[Ernest Gimson: his Life and Work , 1924; Norman Jewson,By Chance I Did Rove , 1973; Mary Comino,Gimson and the Barnsleys , 1980; information from Edward Barnsley.]
Jacob M Price
,Sampson (1699–1779), founder of Lloyds Bank, was born in Birmingham 15 July 1699, the second son and second child in the family of two sons and one daughter of Sampson Lloyd, a Quaker ironmonger, and his second wife Mary (sister of Sir Ambrose Crowley, q.v.), daughter of Ambrose Crowley of Stourbridge, another Quaker ironmonger and nailer.
There were also four daughters from the first marriage.
Sampson I, from a rural Welsh minor gentry background, was drawn to the iron trade partly through the example of his father-in-law.
In Birmingham, Sampson I was a wholesale supplier of bar iron, rods, and other metals to nearby manufacturers, particularly nail and hardware makers.
Sampson II was apprenticed in 1717 to Thomas Sharp at a brass-wire firm in Bristol, but ill health led him to go home in 1720.
He then began to convert his father's quiet business into something much more ambitious, integrating backwards into slitting mills, forges, and ultimately furnaces.
By his first, brief marriage in 1727 to Sarah Parkes (died 1729), a local Quaker heiress, Sampson Lloyd II had one son.
By his second marriage, on 17 September 1731, to Rachel, daughter of Nehemiah Champion, a Bristol Quaker merchant with metallurgical interests, he had three more sons and two daughters.
In 1757 his daughter Mary married Osgood Hanbury, a great Quaker Chesapeake merchant of London; in 1767 his other daughter Rachel married David Barclay [q.v.], a leading Quaker merchant, banker, and brewer of London.
Sampson Lloyd's iron business prospered during the Seven Years' War, but the peace in 1763 posed a challenge, as did the need to provide careers for his four sons.
The war had made many businessmen conscious of the need and opportunities for private banks in both London and the provinces.
Perceiving the new opportunities, in 1765 Lloyd joined with a rich Unitarian neighbour, John Taylor, to found the first real bank in Birmingham, Taylors & Lloyds, the four equal partners being Taylor, his son John, Sampson Lloyd II, and his eldest son, Sampson III.
Shortly afterwards, in 1770, Sampson's son-in-law Osgood Hanbury founded a bank in London — Hanbury, Taylor, Lloyd & Bowman — in which both Sampson III and John Taylor junior of the Birmingham bank were partners.
This became the necessary London correspondent and support of the quite prosperous Taylors & Lloyds.
In his lifetime and by his will, Sampson II provided his three eldest sons with partnerships in both the Lloyd iron firm and the Birmingham bank.
His fourth son, John, was placed in London where he became a partner in the Hanbury tobacco concern in 1772 and in the Hanbury bank in 1790.
In the next century, the descendants of Sampson Lloyd II abandoned the iron business but not the bank.
After the withdrawal of the Taylors in 1852, the Lloyd family bank was converted into a joint-stock company in 1865.
The affiliated Hanbury bank in London merged in 1864 with another London bank of Quaker origins, Barnett, Hoare & Co.; the new Barnetts, Hoares, Hanburys & Lloyd merged in turn with the main Lloyd bank of Birmingham in 1884, bringing under one corporate roof connections that had their origins in the marriages more than a century before of the children of Sampson Lloyd II.
Sampson Lloyd II died 30 November 1779 in Birmingham.
[Humphrey Lloyd,The Quaker Lloyds in the Industrial Revolution , 1975; R. S. Sayers,Lloyds Bank in the History of English Banking , 1957.]
H F Oxbury
,Frederic (1843–1916), lawyer and biographer, was born 7 October 1843 in Larrigan, near Penzance, the youngest in the family of four sons and two daughters of John Josias Arthur Boase, banker, and his wife Charlotte, daughter of Robert Sholl.
He was educated at Penzance and Bromsgrove Grammar Schools, and in 1861 was articled to a firm of solicitors in Penzance.
He passed his law finals in London in 1867 and was admitted attorney and solicitor in that year.
For the next two years he worked as a solicitor in Exmouth.
Then in 1870 he moved to London to a post as an articled clerk, and in 1877 was appointed librarian of the Incorporated Law Society.
In 1891 he published a Catalogue of Printed Books in the Library of the Incorporated Law Society , and in the following year, 1892, published the first volume of his Modern English Biography , containing many thousand concise memoirs of people who had died since the year 1850.
This was printed privately in a limited edition of 250 copies, and in its preface the author expressed his gratitude to his father and to his eldest brother, Charles William Boase [q.v.], ‘for their great kindness in conjointly defraying the cost of printing this work which I claim to be an important contribution to the English biography of the nineteenth century’.
Boase explained that for twenty years he had made a collection of notes relating to English persons deceased since 1850, and that in compiling his work he had kept in mind the dictum of James Anthony Froude [q.v.], ‘we want the biographies of common people’, so that many hundreds of the thousands of entries included in his compilation related to persons who had not been eminent but had led interesting lives, accounts of which could not be found in any other book.
The second and third volumes of Modern English Biography were published (also in limited editions) in 1897 and 1901.
In 1903 Boase retired from his post of librarian of the Law Society and devoted the rest of his life to his biographical work.
Volume iv was issued in 1908, volume v in 1912, and volume vi in 1921 (by which time the author had been dead for five years).
In 1965 all six volumes were republished with a new preface written by Anna Kate Rance.
The full six volumes of Boase's magnum opus contain 30,000 entries, a stupendous achievement to come from the pen of one author.
From 1870 Boase lived in London with his brother, George Clement Boase [q.v.], bibliographer, who, up to the time of his death in 1897, assisted his younger brother with his biographical studies.
Charles William Boase, the Oxford historian, together with George Clement and Frederic, all collaborated in the preparation of An Account of the Families of Boase or Bowes Originally Residing at Paul or Madron in Cornwall .
This was printed as a limited edition of seventy-five copies for private circulation in 1876, and a second edition limited to a hundred copies appeared in 1893.
Frederic Boase never married.
He died in St Leonards-on-Sea 23 December 1916.
[C. W. Boase et al .,
An Account of the Families of Boase or Bowes , 1893; prefaces to Modern English Biography , 1965 edn.]
D E Mathew
,William (1770–1843), pioneer of food preservation, was born in Aldford, near Chester, in 1770, the son of William Leftwich and his wife Martha Barns.
He was descended from an old family of local landowners, the Leftwich family of Leftwich Hall, Cheshire.
Leftwich moved to London and set himself up as a wholesale confectioner, with outlets in Fleet Street and Kingston upon Thames.
He became increasingly frustrated by his inability to preserve food, especially dairy products, during hot summer months.
In the early nineteenth century ice was used for this purpose only in a most limited way, on a few country estates and in the area around Barking, where it was collected from the marshes most winters.
Leftwich seems to have been amongst the first to realize that the widespread use of ice for preserving food would be both highly beneficial and immensely profitable.
Accordingly, he chartered a vessel to go from Great Yarmouth to Norway early in 1822, returning in May of that year with a cargo of 300 tons of ice.
Confirmation that importing ice was not then regular practice comes from the fact that customs officers in London were unclear what import duties to levy, and delayed so long in coming to a conclusion that Leftwich feared his cargo might melt.
When eventually landed and sold at auction there was widespread interest in this novelty, as well as sufficient demand from fishmongers and pastry-cooks for Leftwich apparently to realize a considerable profit.
In this action Leftwich was well ahead of his time, as Norwegian ice later became widely used for refrigeration during the nineteenth century.
In particular, the advent of the railways ensured that fresh fish, meat, and dairy produce could be speedily transported to urban centres.
Previously most food had become unfit for human consumption after forty-eight hours: now the use of ice extended its ‘shelf life’, and undoubtedly contributed to contemporary improvements in diet and food hygiene.
It was probably similar concerns which led to Leftwich's interest in adequate water supplies.
In 1825 he used an artesian tube to sink what was then the largest well known in the country, eighty feet deep and thirty feet wide.
Other wells followed, and Leftwich seems to have prospered until his death 17 November 1843, at 43 Cumberland Market, Regent's Park, London.
He was buried in Kensal Green cemetery.
Almost nothing is known of his family life, but there were fourteen people with the name Leftwich buried in three graves in Kensal Green cemetery between 1841 and 1904, seven of them, including William, in the same grave between 1841 and 1851.
His son Thomas registered his death.
[‘Great Yarmouth and the Ice Trade’,Norfolk Weekly Standard , 11 December 1907; T. Ashbourne, ‘The Ice Trade’,Yarmouth Archaeology , 1989.]
G R Searle
,Noel Pemberton (1881–1948), pioneer aviator, inventor, writer, and MP, was born 31 January 1881 in Hampstead, the youngest child of Charles Eardley Billing, a Birmingham iron-founder, and his wife Annie Emilia Claridge.
He was educated at the High School, Hampstead; Cumming's College, outside Boulogne; Westcliff College, Ramsgate; and Craven College, Highgate.
At the age of thirteen Billing stowed away on a ship bound for Delagoa Bay.
In Durban he drifted into a succession of menial jobs before joining the Natal Mounted Police.
From 1899 to 1901 he fought in the Boer war.
In 1903 he finally returned to England.
Billing was quick to see the military significance of air power, and this gave purpose to an otherwise chaotic life.
He edited the new journal,Aerocraft (1908–10), and in 1908 designed and tested, on his own airstrip in Fambridge, Essex, three light monoplanes, two of which left the ground.
Billing then threw himself into land speculation, writing, yacht broking, and ‘ship-running’, and by 1913 had amassed enough capital to found a yard on Southampton Water, where he pioneered the construction of flying boats (‘supermarines’).
With characteristic bravado, he had meantime obtained a pilot's certificate after only four hours two minutes in the air.
In 1914 Billing joined the Royal Naval Air Service.
He organized the raid on the Zeppelin sheds in Friedrichshafen in November 1914.
But in early 1916, then a squadron commander, he retired in frustration, in order to publicize his complaints about the way the war in the air was being conducted.
The tall, monocled, and debonair ‘P.-B.’ drew large enthusiastic crowds to his meetings.
Although defeated as an independent candidate at Mile End in January 1916, he achieved success two months later at another parliamentary by-election in East Hertfordshire.
Revelling in his role of ‘first air member’, Billing campaigned for a unified air service, helped force the government to establish an ‘air inquiry’, and advocated reprisal raids against German cities.
He also became adept at exploiting a variety of popular discontents.
In the spring of 1918 his increasingly outrageous language led to his being sued for criminal libel by the dancer, Maud Allan.
With his usual flair for publicity, Billing conducted his own defence, amusing and scandalizing the nation with his claim that the German government was in a position to blackmail 47,000 prominent British ‘perverts’, among them Mr and Mrs Asquith (later first Earl and Countess of Oxford and Asquith, qq.v.), whose names, he alleged, figured in a ‘black book’.
On being acquitted, Billing further annoyed the main parties by running his own ‘purity’ candidates at by-elections, under cover of an organization called the ‘Vigilantes’, of which he was president.
Although Billing retained his seat at the 1918 general election, ill health forced his retirement in 1921.
In 1928 he had a play,High Treason , performed at the Strand Theatre.
But most of his time was now absorbed by his various inventions, which included a miniature camera, a two-sided stove, and a gramophone; he claimed to have taken out 500 patents.
At the start of World War II Billing produced a design for a pilotless flying bomb; the British authorities turned it down.
In 1941 he stood as an independent candidate in four by-elections; but although he retained his deposit on each occasion, there was to be no political comeback for this highly cantankerous patriot.
In 1903 Pemberton-Billing married Lilian Maud (died 1923), daughter of Theodore Henry Schweitzer, of Bristol.
The marriage appears to have been childless.
Billing died 11 November 1948 at his home in Burnham-on-Crouch.
[N. Pemberton-Billing,P-B — The Story of His Life , 1917; G. R. Searle,Corruption in British Politics 1895–1930 , 1977.]
Richard Russell
,Horace Henry (1840–1916), printer, was born in Sudbury, Suffolk, 23 March 1840, the son of William Hart, tradesman and schoolmaster, and his wife Caroline Elizabeth Clark.
After schooling in Sudbury, he was apprenticed as a compositor in London at fourteen, and later held three managerial posts with London printers.
He was appointed controller of the printing business of Oxford University Press in 1883: the position later became known as printer to the university.
Hart soon adjusted to the style and demands of an academic press.
Meanwhile, Benjamin Jowett [q.v.]started an inquiry into the alleged deterioration in the quality of Oxford's printing which gave impetus to Hart's re-equipment and extension of the machine-room.
He introduced new papers, notably Oxford India, and enlarged the ink and roller factory.
New type was badly needed, which meant Hart searching for new faces, as Bishop John Fell [q.v.]had done two centuries earlier.
Oxford's type foundry was re-equipped from German sources, and thus the Press became self-sufficient for type until mechanical composition developed.
Hart installed Monotype in 1903.
He established collotype printing for illustrations and created the nucleus of a bindery.
Hart, when a member of the London Association of Correctors of the Press, had collected samples of preferred spellings and styles as nonconformity in the trade was general.
He started afresh on this work which appeared privately in 1893 as Rules for Compositors and Readers at the University Press, Oxford .
This modest and pioneering rule-book was in such demand that he was forced to publish the fifteenth edition in 1904.
Hart's Rules was respected worldwide and ran into thirty-nine editions.
Oxford University Press had collected a unique treasury of punches and matrices.
There had been occasional attempts to re-use the Fell types but this was frustrated by their condition.
Hart realized their importance and organized the cleaning, preservation, and classification of the 7,000 matrices and related punches in his monumental Notes on a Century of Typography (1900).
This led to the Fell material being used again and widely appreciated.
Hart was well respected but somewhat feared by his men.
He once annotated a proof: ‘The man who mixes Fell and Caslon will get the sack.’
Hart was a great master printer and, as he had said of Charles, third Earl Stanhope [q.v.], ‘he did solid good to the Art of Printing at a time when help was sorely needed’(Hart,Charles, Earl Stanhope, and the Oxford University Press , 1896).
Hart was twice married, having two daughters by his first wife and a son and daughter by his second, whose forenames were Susan Ellen.
Ill health forced him to retire in 1915.
He was found dead in a pond near his home at Boar's Hill, Oxford, 8 October 1916; suicide was assumed.
[Horace Hart,Notes on Typography , 1900, and reprint of 1970 with new material;Signature , new series, vol. xviii, 1954;Printing World , vol. ii, 1892;The Times , 10 October 1916; Oxford University Press archives.]
M R D Foot
,John (1912–1945), traitor, was born 14 March 1912 at 9 Embankment Gardens, Chelsea, London, the elder son (there were no daughters) of Leopold Charles Maurice Stennett [q.v.], politician, and his wife Adeliza Florence (‘Bryddie’), daughter of John Hamar Greenwood of Whitby, Ontario, and sister of Hamar (first Viscount) Greenwood [q.v.].
At sixteen he ran away from Harrow, and set up as a film director, work which took him to central Europe and east Africa, but proved financially unrewarding.
It combined ill with his taste for fast cars and high life; in 1936 he was declared bankrupt, and settled with his family that he had better live abroad.
Two years earlier, experiences in Vienna on the verge of civil war had awakened in him vehement, if premature, anti-communism.
Accordingly, he went to Spain when civil war broke out there in July 1936, to take an active part on the insurgent General Franco's side, smuggling arms across the Pyrenees, and receiving the Italian medal for valour in action.
In 1939 bad health drove him to a sanatorium in French Savoy.
His first marriage (in Athens), which his parents disapproved, to Una Wing had rapidly broken down.
He contracted a second, to Jeannine Barde, a Frenchwoman who had plenty of friends at Vichy.
She died in April 1944; the following October he married another Frenchwoman, Michelle Thomas.
There were no children.
During his gun-running activities he had met Jacques Doriot, a renegade French communist who had turned ardent fascist.
Doriot summoned him to Paris in the autumn of 1942, convinced him that Germany was going to lose the war unless Great Britain joined against the USSR, and enlisted Amery's aid.
For the next eighteen months Amery toured prisoner-of-war camps, seeking to recruit a Legion of St George — unromantically renamed by the Germans the British Free Corps — to fight alongside the Germans against the Russians and save Europe from Bolshevism.
From thousands of prisoners, thirty men elected to join him; they never went into action.
He also broadcast to his fellow-countrymen in England, seeking to persuade them to change sides, and gave anti-communist lectures, notably in Oslo and Belgrade.
In April 1945 he and his wife were in northern Italy, making for Switzerland, when they were captured by communist partisans.
He was handed over to the British army and sent back to England.
His brother (Harold) Julian's efforts to establish Spanish nationality for him did not succeed.
He was arraigned on eight counts of treason before Sir Travers Humphreys [q.v.]at the Old Bailey on 28 November 1945.
He pleaded guilty, knowing this would mean execution, and was hanged in Wandsworth prison 18 December 1945.
[Rebecca West,The Meaning of Treason , 2nd edn., 1982; private information.]
Colin Watson
, Sir Herbert Ashcombe (1868–1949), railway general manager, was born 16 May 1868 in Paddington, the only child of Dr George Stephen Walker, MRCS, and his wife Ellen Frances Ley.
He was educated at the North London Collegiate School, and studied medicine for one year at St Francis Xavier College, Bruges.
It was intended that he should enter the medical profession but for financial reasons this became impossible, and when only seventeen he joined the office of the district superintendent of the line of the London and North Western Railway at Euston.
He loved the work and soon grasped the essentials of railway operation.
By 1910 he was outdoor goods manager for the large southern division of the L&NWR and a year later became assistant to the general manager, Sir Frank Ree.
In 1911 he was chosen to become general manager of the London and South Western Railway and remained there till 1923.
At Waterloo, the L&SWR headquarters, there was much to do; many platforms had to be replanned and the rebuilding of the terminus speeded up, but Walker saw at once that he must entice more commuters, and his electrification of the London suburban lines, which was to be pursued long after he was running the future Southern Railway, was of lasting significance.
At the outbreak of World War I, though not the most senior of chief railway officers, he was made chairman of the Railway Executive, which controlled all aspects of railway operation.
With characteristic confidence and zeal Walker did both this exacting job and his work at Waterloo.
He was knighted in 1915, and in 1917 was appointed KCB.
The Railways Act of 1921 called for the establishment of four groups in Britain.
The southern group, which became the Southern Railway, included the L&SWR.
Walker emerged as its sole general manager, from 1923 to 1937.
Walker knew what he wanted to do at Waterloo and he had the backing of the Southern board.
Under his aegis the tentacles of the electrified lines stretched south and west.
The port of Southampton was enlarged so that ocean-going liners were attracted to its facilities and in 1933 what was then the largest dry dock in the world was opened by King George V.
Though a firm manager, Walker was no dictator.
He appointed able men, such as Alfred and Gilbert Szlumper, Alfred Raworth, E. C. Cox, and John Elliot.
Walker fostered cross-Channel traffic; in 1929 the ‘Golden Arrow’ service was inaugurated which, in its prime, ran with almost French élan .
In 1931 the autocarrier with room for forty cars appeared, the vehicles being slung aboard from the quayside.
Yet Walker also knew that railways were no longer omnipotent; he became associated with the Great Western Railway in running a coach service to the west and acquired for his company a financial interest in Imperial Airways.
He also kept a watchful eye on Channel tunnel plans as they came and went.
Walker retired in 1937 and joined the Southern board, on which he sat until railway nationalization in 1947.
He was physically well made, having stamina and a commanding presence.
He looked what he was, a man who knew his job and meant to do it.
He wore pince-nez spectacles, a round-ended stiff collar, and a moustache.
On board days he would wear a tailcoat.
He lacked social graces and had no small talk but this, to some extent, was compensated for by his unfailing memory.
He could stand by the footplate of a steam locomotive knowing at once the names of driver and fireman who, for their part, knew that he had a very good idea of what each did and how he did it.
He had a taste for the theatre and when on the Continent enjoyed a flutter at a casino.
He became a grand officer of the Legion of Honour and a lieutenant of the City of London.
There is a plaque in Walker's memory on Waterloo station.
In 1895 he married Ethel Louisa, daughter of John Robert Griffith, a solicitor, of Llanrwst, north Wales.
She died in 1909 and he married in 1910 Lorina Elizabeth, widow of A. Shield, a member of the Stock Exchange.
She was the daughter of Alfred Webb, mechanical engineer.
There were no children of either marriage.
Walker died 29 September 1949 in London.
[C. F. Klapper,Sir Herbert Walker's Southern Railway , 1973;The Times , 30 September 1949.]
Nigel Ramsay
,Humfrey (d. 1633), book collector and notary public, was probably the son of Christopher Dyson, wax chandler of the parish of St Alban, Wood Street, London (d .
1609) and his wife Mary.
He was practising as a notary public by 1609, when he witnessed Christopher's will, and continued to do so until shortly before his death, drawing up wills and other documents.
He was a citizen of London, as a member of the Wax Chandlers' Company, from 1603.
Thomas Baker [q.v.]wrote: ‘There are Books (chiefly in old English) almost in every Library that have belong'd to H. Dyson, with his Name upon them’(Thomas Hearne,Collections , vol. vii, p. 369).
Dyson's will directed simply that his books be sold by William Jumper; a great many of them were acquired by Richard Smith (d .
1675, q.v.) and were dispersed when his library was sold in 1682.
No catalogue of Dyson's library is known, apart from six notebooks (All Souls College, Oxford, MS 117) listing in order of date of publication those books ‘touching as well the State Ecclesiasticall as Temporall of the Realme of England’: in 1631 these alone totalled nearly 1,100.
He also owned a large number of works of Elizabethan and Jacobean literature, of quite a few of which the unique surviving copy is his own.
Nearly all the extant printed proclamations of Queen Elizabeth I's reign belong to the seven sets, each of which he collected together, bound, and provided with its own specially printed title-page (1618).
Dyson printed nothing else, but he collaborated in the 1633 revision of John Stow's Survey of London — an edition that included many copies of Acts of Parliament and of the common council of London.
He married Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Speght [q.v.], the editor of Geoffrey Chaucer and John Lydgate [qq.v.].
In his will, made as a parishioner of St Olave Jewry, London, dated 7 January, and proved 28 February 1633, he made monetary bequests to his four daughters and two sons, allowed the use of his professional papers to his apprentices, and gave a two-volume book of statutes to ‘my noble friend Sir William Paddy [q.v.]…to be by him put and given to the library of St John's College in Oxford’.
[R. L. Steele, ‘Humphrey Dyson’,The Library , 3rd series, vol. i, 1910, pp. 144–51; W. A. Jackson, ‘Humphrey Dyson and his Collections of Elizabethan Proclamations’,Harvard Library Bulletin , vol. i, 1947, pp. 76–89;idem ,Records of a Bibliographer , ed.
W. H. Bond, 1967, pp. 135–41.]
Clyde Binfield
,(Charles) Silvester (1865–1914), Congregational minister, was born in Cuckfield, Sussex, 15 April 1865, the youngest of three sons and four children of Charles Horne, Congregational minister and later editor of the Newport Advertiser , and his wife Harriet Simpson, daughter of the superintendent of government tobacco warehouses in Liverpool.
Horne was educated at Newport Grammar School, joined Newport's Congregational church and, with the ministry in mind, went to Glasgow University (MA, 1886) and then Mansfield College, Oxford, where he took the three-year college course in theology.
In 1887 he was invited to Kensington chapel, where he was ordained 17 October 1889: determined that Horne should be its minister, Kensington waited eighteen months for him to complete his course.
He arrived the freshest star in the Nonconformist firmament; he left heir presumptive to Hugh Price Hughes and John Clifford [qq.v.].
He galvanized his congregation, as admired for his campaigns to students or country towns as for his commemorative services.
He wrote a novel A Modern Heretic (1893);A Manual of Church Fellowship (1893); and popular histories of the London Missionary Society (1895) and the Free Churches (1903).
Thus he became known and he declined repeated calls to important churches before accepting the challenge of the debt-burdened Whitefield's Tabernacle in Tottenham Court Road, London.
Horne moved there in September 1903 to promote a mission modelled on Wesleyan central halls.
The Whitefield's combination of Congregationalism and club-cum-business house for Christ, captured in its banner (a knight ascending to shining towers burdened by a broken comrade) and its motto ‘No quest, no conquest’, appeared to be effortless.
In 1910, at the height of the New Theology controversy, Horne became chairman of the Congregational Union of England and Wales, his friendship with the chief protagonists preventing undue blood-letting.
He was now a national figure, a passive resister, pro-Boer, and a rumbustious electioneer, fighting as a Progressive in London, and being urged to fight in Birmingham.
In December 1909 invitations to become their MP came from both Merthyr and Ipswich.
Encouraged by friends who saw him as a Nonconformist Lord Hugh Cecil (later Baron Quickswood, q.v.),
Horne stood for Ipswich.
He sat from January 1910, the first Nonconformist MP in pastoral charge since Praisegod Barebones [q.v.].
He gained no instant parliamentary fame although he was a useful back-bencher.
His maiden speech was on the Congo and his last was on home rule for Ireland.
In between he delivered speeches on peace, colonial exploitation, and Welsh disestablishment.
By 1914 he was faltering, for his effortlessness was illusory.
The voice which had charmed his early hearers grew hoarse.
The techniques of the pulpit were too dominant for Westminster, and those of the platform worried Whitefield's.
Their doubts shook him.
He resigned from Whitefield's and intended to resign from Parliament, and went to lecture at Yale University on ‘The Romance of Preaching’.
After Yale he travelled to Canada.
He died 2 May 1914 while standing on deck as his steamer entered Toronto harbour.
Horne, whose passion was golf, seemed forever off in a taxi to address a meeting somewhere.
He attracted children and men, but women were less at ease with him.
He was a poor but amusing correspondent.
Oddly for so fluent a man he wrote his sermons and he also prayed with his eyes open, which added to the impact of his public prayer.
In London he lived at Campden Hill Gardens and later at Ampthill Square.
He built The Bluff at Sheringham and The White House at Church Stretton, whose architect, P. R. Morley Horder [q.v.], collaborated with him in plans and designs for The Institutional Church (1906).
In August 1892 he married Katharine, elder daughter of Sir Herbert Hardy (later first Baron) Cozens-Hardy [q.v.],
MP, later master of the rolls.
The youngest of their seven children (three boys and four girls), C. Kenneth Horne [q.v.], became a notable radio comedian.
[W. B. Selbie,The Life of Charles Silvester Horne , 1920; C. Binfield,So Down to Prayers: Studies in English Nonconformity, 1780–1920 , 1977; J. O. Baylen and N. J. Gossman (eds.),
Biographical Dictionary of Modern British Radicals , vol. iii, 1870–1914, 1988; private information.]
Michael De-la-Noy
,Sidney Arthur Kilworth (1922–1943), poet, was born 27 May 1922 in Dartford, Kent, the only child of Captain Reginald Keyes of the Queen's Own Royal West Kent Regiment, and his second wife Edith, daughter of the Revd Arthur Blackburn, rector of St Paul's, Bradford.
Because his mother died from peritonitis when he was only six weeks old, Keyes was brought up in Dartford by his paternal grandparents, and his grandfather, Sidney Kilworth Keyes, a wealthy farmer, dominated his childhood.
On the death of his grandfather in 1938 Keyes was inspired to write his first serious poem ‘Elegy’.
Keyes's childhood was lonely and isolated.
Because he was frail it was thought unwise to allow him to mix with other children or to spend time out of doors, and in consequence he became an avid reader.
Being attracted to books dealing with history and legend he soon created an imaginary world of his own, and birds and reptiles provided him with companionship until at the age of nine he was eventually sent to a preparatory school in Dartford.
When he was eleven he attended Dartford Grammar School, and three years later he went to Tonbridge School, where his main interests continued to centre on literature and the natural world.
By the time he left Tonbridge in July 1940 Keyes had written more than seventy poems, discovered in a manuscript book shortly after the war; many are inevitably juvenilia, but ‘Nefertiti’, written when he was seventeen, marks an advance towards maturity, and his poem ‘The Buzzard’, the last to be written at Tonbridge, is probably his most accomplished schoolboy work.
On entering Queen's College, Oxford, with a history scholarship in October 1940, Keyes embarked on a fruitful friendship with the future winner of the Queen's gold medal for poetry, John Heath-Stubbs.
Heath-Stubbs, whose own disturbed childhood had been marred by insensitivity to his progressive blindness, instinctively responded to the darker images of Keyes's own imagination.
He understood very well Keyes's desire to investigate through poetry the subjects of pain and death, and his feeling of being in far closer communion with William Blake, William Wordsworth [qq.v.], and Johann Schiller than with any living contemporaries.
In particular, Keyes had come to identify with the Romantic movement, and it was Heath-Stubbs who was able to broaden Keyes's base by tracing for him the origins of Romanticism in primitive legends through the medieval to the Augustan poets.
It was Heath-Stubbs, too, who helped to perfect Keyes's poetic technique, which had tended to trail behind the complexity and variety of his ideas.
Keyes became editor of Cherwell .
In 1941, with Michael Meyer, he edited Eight Oxford Poets .
He was awarded a first class in part i of the history examination (1941).
He had been writing on average a poem a week, and by the end of 1941 he had enough poems to form a first volume,The Iron Laurel , but he withheld publication until 1942 in order to include ‘The Foreign Gate’, a long poem in which, for the first time in his work, Death appears as a real presence.
Keyes joined up in April 1942 and in September that year he was commissioned in his father's old regiment.
He sailed for Algiers in March 1943 and during the last days of the Tunisian campaign he saw a mere fortnight's active service.
He was killed near Sidi Abdulla 30 April 1943.
The military historian, James Lucas, who served in Tunisia as Keyes's runner, remembered him as ‘a gallant Christian gentleman who sacrificed himself for the men under his command’.
He was twenty when he died.
A second, posthumous, collection of Sidney Keyes's poems,The Cruel Solstice , was published in 1943 and won the Hawthornden prize.
His collected poems were edited in 1945 by Michael Meyer, who has recalled that, although Sidney Keyes was inclined to be taciturn in a large gathering or among strangers, to his friends he was witty and  delightful company.
Notwithstanding his extreme youth, his output was prodigious and far-ranging, and, with Keith Douglas and Alun Lewis [qq.v.], he must be regarded as one of the outstanding poets of World War II, so much of his work having been inspired, before his brief sortie into battle, by an internal preparation for death.
[John Guenther,Sidney Keyes: a Biographical Inquiry , 1967.]
Walton of Detchant
,Henry Charlton (1837–1915), physician, neurologist, and naturalist, was born 26 April 1837 in Truro, Cornwall, the third son in a family of four sons and one daughter of James Bastian, merchant, and his wife Charlotte Eliza Bullmore.
He was educated in Falmouth, and as a child he was interested in natural history.
In 1856 he entered University College London, graduating BA (1859), MA (1861), and MB (1863).
He became MRCS (1860), MRCP (1865), and FRCP (1870).
He worked at St Mary's Hospital as assistant physician and lecturer in pathology and in 1866 graduated MD before returning to University College as professor of pathological anatomy in 1867, becoming a physician to University College Hospital in 1878.
He was also physician in nervous diseases at the National Hospital, Queen Square, from 1868 to 1902, while holding the chair of medicine at UCH from 1887 to 1898.
He was fascinated by abiogenesis or spontaneous generation, and this interest ultimately resulted in his premature retirement from clinical neurology.
Among his early publications were studies of the flora of the Falmouth area and he also published a monograph on free nematodes, describing 100 new species, in 1864.
His belief in spontaneous generation led him to publish The Modes of Origin of Lowest Organisms (1871),The Beginnings of Life (1872), and Evolution and the Origin of Life (1874).
Bastian also made several fundamental contributions to neurology.
From 1869 he published several papers on speech disorders, describing a visual and later an auditory word centre, as well as word blindness and word deafness (later known as Wernicke's aphasia).
His classical A Treatise on Aphasia and Other Speech Disorders (1898) was the topic of his Lumleian lectures and was later translated into Italian and German.
He also wrote on The Brain as an Organ of Mind (1880), on Paralyses: Cerebral, Bulbar and Spinal (1886) and on Various Forms of Hysterical or Functional Paralysis (1893).
Bastian was elected FRS in 1868, served as a censor of the Royal College of Physicians of London (1897–8), and later received an honorary fellowship of the Royal College of Physicians of Ireland and an honorary MD from the Royal University of Ireland.
He was a close friend of Herbert Spencer [q.v.]and was one of his executors.
Bastian's sponsorship of spontaneous generation and his opposition to the germ theory of disease clouded his later reputation and many of his papers were rejected by learned bodies.
In 1866 he married Julia Augusta, third daughter of Charles Orme, brewer, of 81 Avenue Road, Regent's Park, London; they had three sons and one daughter.
Bastian died in Chesham Bois 17 November 1915.
[Munk's Roll , vol. iv, 1955; C. C. Gillispie (ed.),
Dictionary of Scientific Biography , vol. i, 1970; F. W. Moth in Proceedings of the Royal Society , vol. lxxxix, 1917; private information from relatives.]
Charles Sebag-Montefiore
, Sir Gregory , second baronet (1689–1775), collector and builder, was born in Greenwich in 1689, the elder son of Sir Gregory Page, first baronet (1668–1720), and his wife Mary, daughter of Thomas Trotman, citizen of London.
Both his father and his grandfather had been directors of the East India Company.
The first baronet was MP for New Shoreham in 1708–13 and 1715–20: on his death in 1720, his executors sold his large shareholding in the South Sea Company, and his son was left around £600,000.
Sir Gregory Page, second baronet, was also a director of the East India Company (1719–20), and a large stockholder.
In 1717 he began buying land in Kent and the city of London, which eventually placed the family among the largest landowners in the county; it was said to be possible to walk for a day in north-west Kent without leaving Page property.
In 1721 he married Martha, third daughter of Robert Kenward of Yalding, Kent; they had no children.
In 1723 he bought the freehold of Wricklemarsh on Blackheath from the executors of the widow of Sir John Morden [q.v.], the founder of Morden College, Blackheath.
Almost at once the construction of a new house was begun, Page's ample fortune ensuring an astonishing rate of progress.
Page chose as his architect John James of Greenwich (c. 1672–1746, q.v.), who had succeeded Nicholas Hawksmoor [q.v.]as clerk of the works at Greenwich, and who designed a restrained Palladian house: a ground plan and cross-section through the rooms were included in Vitruvius Britannicus , volume iv, by J. Badeslade and John Rocque [q.v.], 1739.
According to a contemporary description, Wricklemarsh was ‘one of the finest houses in England, resembling a royal palace rather than a residence of a gentleman.
The gardens are laid out in the most elegant manner and both the paintings and furniture are surprisingly fine.
All rooms are hung with green or crimson silk damask and the cornices, door-cases and chair-frames are all carved in gilt.
The chimney pieces are all fine polished marble.’
A complete list of Page's collection of pictures was printed in London and its Environs Described in 1761 (vol. i, pp. 315–22) by Robert Dodsley [q.v.].
It comprised 118 pictures, with paintings by Claude, Poussin, Veronese, Van Dyck, Rubens, Salvator Rosa, Nicolaes Berchem, and a group of ten pictures by Adriaen van der Werff, a contemporary Dutch classicist painter much admired in the eighteenth century.
Six Dutch East India wood chairs inlaid with the Page/Kenward arms in mother of pearl are in the Soane Museum.
Page was the founder and patron of the dining club, the Free and Easy Society, for which a number of Qianlong Chinese armorial punch-bowls were made c. 1755.
He died at Wricklemarsh 4 August 1775 and was buried alongside his wife in the family vault at St Alphege parish church, Greenwich.
He left Wricklemarsh and its collections to his great-nephew, Sir Gregory Turner, baronet, of Ambrosden in Oxfordshire, who took the name and arms of Page in compliance with his great-uncle's request.
Turner did not live at Wricklemarsh, but let it to a succession of tenants.
Horace Walpole (later fourth Earl of Orford, q.v.), wrote in 1779 that ‘half the van der Werffs, which cost an immense sum…are spoiled since Sir Gregory Page's death by servants neglecting to shut out the sun.’
The picture collection was sold in parts in 1775, 1783, and 1787.
Wricklemarsh was sold in 1784 to John Cator, who instructed Christie's to auction the materials of the house in 1787: its shell was finally demolished in 1800.
[Denys Sutton, ‘Aspects of British Collecting’,Apollo , December 1982; John Brushe, ‘Wricklemarsh and the Collections of Sir Gregory Page’,Apollo , November 1985.]
Valerie Pearl
,Lawrence (c. 1579–1654), Puritan MP, was, according to Anthony Wood [q.v.],
‘Somersetshire born’, but he bore arms associated with the Whitakers of Lancashire.
Matriculated at St John's College, Cambridge, in 1593 (BA 1597, MA 1600) and Oxford in 1603, he wrote verses for Crudities and Crambe (1611), by Thomas Coryate [q.v.], and was associated with the Mermaid Club.
The patronage of Sir Edward Phelips [q.v.]probably brought him admission to the Middle Temple (1614), James I gave him fee-farm rents in sixteen counties (1619–24), and he became clerk extraordinary to the Privy Council (1624–40).
Meanwhile his patrons changed.
Phelips died; Robert Carr, Earl of Somerset [q.v.], was disgraced; and in 1626 he reported on Parliament to Sir Dudley Carleton (later Viscount Dorchester, q.v.).
MP for Peterborough (1624, 1625, 1626, 1628), he resided in Drury Lane (becoming a JP for Middlesex and Westminster) and Chiswick (1624).
A variety of commissions from the king and council provided many opportunities to pry into economic activities, maintain monopolies, and exact fees.
When he came to serve the Parliament, Charles I thought that he was as great a monopolist as those arraigned.
Keeler suggests that his change of front was due to being passed over as council clerk (1635) and to his second marriage (1638) connecting him with a Puritan family, the Bedingfields, but a more consistent thread can be found in his earlier parliamentary career and in his abiding anti-Catholicism and Puritanism.
Whitaker was a vestryman of St Giles in the Fields (1622) and supported a fund for building a new church.
The threat from Catholics was constantly raised by him, for example, when he linked the failures of foreign policies with the activities of domestic papists (1625) and raised the bogy of their ‘swarming’ in the suburbs, claiming that in his neighbourhood of Covent Garden they outnumbered Protestants by three to one and had set up an autonomous community too strong for ‘us the justices’to ‘cast out’.
He opposed the Arminians and gave evidence to the Lords as one who had heard the notorious sermon at St Giles by the king's chaplain, Roger Manwaring [q.v.](1628–9).
Yet on more overtly political issues he was moderate.
MP for Okehampton (January 1641), he signed the Protestation (May) but was sent to the Tower for a week (July) when his seizure of the papers of Sir John Eliot [q.v.]thirteen years earlier was brought up.
He was forgiven and rapidly advanced by the Commons' managers, joining the important recess committee (September) and chairing the inquisitorial information committee (January 1642).
He continued to serve on commissions and committees, notably helping to draft the New Model Army ordinance (1645), chairing the committee on church government (1645–6), and agreeing to try the king, although he did not sit on the trial commission (1648).
An MP who fled to the army (August 1647), a Rumper, and a dissentient from the crucial vote for further negotiations with the king (1648–9), he served the regime continuously in Middlesex and Westminster, supervising money-raising and defence (1643–52) and ‘judging scandal’ in Suffolk (1647).
Whitaker kept a diary of proceedings in the House, mainly giving the sense of the Commons (1642–7).
He was twice married, first to Margaret (died 1637), daughter of Sir John Egerton of Egerton, Cheshire, and secondly, in 1638, to Dorothy, daughter of Charles Hoskins of St Andrews, Holborn.
There were no children of either marriage.
Whitaker died 15 April 1654 and was buried in St Giles, where memorials to him and his first wife were erected.
He left a modest fortune, chiefly property and rents, to his wife, and bequests of money.
[Anthony à Wood,Fasti , 1813; Mary Keeler,The Long Parliament , 1954;Calendars of State Papers Domestic ;Acts and Ordinances ;Commons Debates ; British Library, Add.
MSS 18779–80, 31116, Harleian MSS 162–5, Lansdowne MS 878; Bodleian Library, Rawl. 715 D, pp. 17–21; Public Record Office, PCC Alchin 44.]
Anne Baker
,John Nevil (1839–1917), magician, was born 22 December 1839 in Cheltenham, the son of John Nevil Maskelyne, a saddler, and his wife Harriet Brunsdon.
He was descended from Nevil Maskelyne [q.v.], astronomer royal, who had a crater on the moon named after him.
He was apprenticed to a watchmaker, and as a boy was a keen amateur conjuror, giving a public performance of his own tricks at the age of sixteen.
In 1865 his exposure of the famous spiritualists, the Davenport Brothers, as imposters led Maskelyne and his friend George Alfred Cooke, a cabinet-maker, to embark on careers as professional magicians.
Their first appearance, billed as ‘the only Successful Rivals of the Davenport Brothers’, was 19 June 1865 at Jessop's Aviary Gardens, Cheltenham.
After touring the provinces for eight years, Maskelyne and Cooke began a short season in 1873 at St James Hall, Piccadilly, with their ‘entertainment of pure trickery’.
This was so successful that in May 1873 they took a lease on the Small Hall at the Egyptian Hall in Piccadilly, and opened 26 May 1873.
They remained at the Egyptian Hall, soon moving into the Large Hall, until its demolition at 1904.
The Egyptian Hall became known as England's ‘Home of Mystery’, and was as essential for family outings as the Tower of London or London Zoo.
In 1904 the show moved to St George's Hall, Langham Place, and on Cooke's death in 1905, the famous magician David Devant became Maskelyne's partner.
The era of ‘Maskelyne and Devant's Mysteries’ lasted until 1915, when the partnership ended.
Maskelyne's repertoire included many famous tricks and illusions which were repeated and improved upon over the years.
One of his earliest tricks, first performed in 1865, was ‘escaping from a box’, in which he managed to escape from a locked, roped, wooden box inside a cabinet in seven seconds.
This box escape was later incorporated into ‘Will, the Witch, and the Watch’, a musical dramatic sketch performed over 10,000 times over four decades.
He developed many of these dramatic sketches, which embodied tricks and illusions: two of the most famous were ‘Elixir Vitae’, which involved the illusion of decapitation, and ‘A Spirit Case or Mrs Daffodil Downing's Light and Dark Seance’ which conjured up a ghost to the sounds of a violin suspended in the air.
One of his most famous illusions was his ‘Levitation’, which he first performed in 1867, when he caused his wife to rise from the stage.
He created several automatons, the most celebrated being Psycho, which first performed in 1875.
Psycho was a cross-legged Hindu figure, twenty-two inches high, which played whist with the audience.
Psycho made over 4,000 consecutive appearances before it was withdrawn in 1880.
Another of his specialities was plate-spinning — Maskelyne traced his first ambition to be a conjuror to his experience as a boy watching Antonio Blitz, a famous plate-spinner, perform.
In addition to developing his own tricks and illusions, Maskelyne was important as an impresario, booking guest performers to appear in his show, and many successful magicians began their careers at the Egyptian Hall: one who never performed there was Houdini, who wrote asking for an engagement in 1898, before he became famous, and was refused.
Maskelyne entered into several lawsuits.
One of the best known followed his offer of £500 to anyone who could reproduce the box used in his box trick.
He disputed the design of the trick box produced by Stolley and Evans, and the case went to the House of Lords, who found against him.
Throughout his career, he attacked and exposed bogus spiritualists, including Eusapia Palladino.
His publications included Modern Spiritualism (1876).
Maskelyne took out patents on over forty commercial inventions, which included a cash register, patented in 1869, which won a major award at the Paris exhibition, his 1889 typewriter, and his 1892 patent for a coin-operated lock for public lavatories, which was used in England until the 1950s.
In 1862 he married Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Taylor, a stagecoach driver.
They had two sons and one daughter.
His son Nevil and his grandsons kept the entertainments at St George's Hall going until 1933.
Maskelyne died 18 May 1917 at St George's Hall, Langham Place, London.
[The Times , 19 May 1917; Edwin A. Dawes,The Great Illusionists , 1979; John Fisher,Paul Daniels and the Story of Magic , 1987.]
Anne Baker
,Guy Francis de Moncy (1911–1963), Soviet spy, was born 16 April 1911 in Devonport, Devon, the elder son (there were no daughters) of Commander Malcolm Kingsford de Moncy Burgess, lieutenant in the Royal Navy, and his wife Evelyn Mary, daughter of William Gillman, gentleman.
Burgess's father died in 1924, and his mother later married John Retallack Bassett, a retired lieutenant-colonel.
Burgess was educated at Eton.
He went on to the Royal Naval College, Dartmouth, for two years before poor eyesight ended plans for a naval career, and he returned to Eton.
In 1930 he won an open scholarship to read modern history at Trinity College, Cambridge, and he gained a first in part i of the modern history tripos (1932), and an aegrotat in part ii (1933).
At Cambridge he was renowned for his brilliance and charm, and his exuberance, but he also soon became notorious for his homosexuality and drunkenness, and his dirty and dishevelled appearance.
Malcolm Muggeridge later said that Burgess ‘gave me a feeling of being morally afflicted in some way’, and described him as the ‘sick toast of a sick society’.
Anthony Blunt [q.v.]sponsored his entry into the exclusive intellectual secret society, the Apostles.
Burgess joined the Communist party, organized strikes among college servants, and joined hunger marches.
It is not clear whether he was recruited as a Soviet agent at Cambridge or during his trip to Moscow in the summer of 1934.
Hoping to become a history don, he embarked on research into the ‘bourgeois revolution’ of the seventeenth century in 1933, but the appearance of Basil Willey's The Seventeenth Century Background (1934) robbed him of his topic, and he left Cambridge.
At this point he announced his disillusionment with Marxism, and began to express right-wing views.
As secretary to Captain ‘Jack’ Macnamara, a Conservative MP and member of the Anglo-German Fellowship, from 1935 to 1936, he made several visits to Germany.
Burgess joined the BBC in October 1936 as a producer in the talks department, and later became producer of ‘The Week in Westminster’.
In December 1938 Burgess was offered a job in Section D of SIS (Secret Intelligence Service), set up to investigate sabotage and propaganda in the event of war.
It was he who managed to get H. A. R. (‘Kim’) Philby his first job in intelligence, in 1940.
When Section D was absorbed into the newly formed SOE (Special Operations Executive) in 1940, Burgess was not given a job, and he returned to the BBC in 1941, responsible for propaganda to occupied Europe and liaison with the SIS and SOE.
In the summer of 1944 Burgess got a temporary job in the press department of the Foreign Office.
In 1947 he became private secretary to Hector McNeil [q.v.], minister of state at the Foreign Office, and despite his drunkenness and unreliable behaviour he not only survived but was promoted.
Later in 1947 he spent three months in the Information Research Department, which was formed to launch a propaganda counter-offensive against Russia.
During his time with the IRD he provided the Russians with useful details of its staff and operations.
Following a period in the Far Eastern department of the Foreign Office, from November 1948, he was posted to Washington in August 1950 as a second secretary with special responsibility for Far Eastern affairs, just after the beginning of the Korean war.
He clashed with his superior and was moved to a different section, and after a series of complaints about his behaviour he was sent back to England at the request of the ambassador at the beginning of May 1951.
Burgess defected to Moscow with Donald Maclean [q.v.]on 25 May 1951.
Maclean, a Cambridge contemporary of Burgess, fellow Apostle, and fellow communist, had recently been made head of the American department at the Foreign Office.
But investigations into the leaking of sensitive material from Washington had narrowed down to Maclean as chief suspect, and it seems that Burgess was detailed, probably by Philby, who was still in Washington, to warn him and organize his escape, although it does not seem to have been intended that Burgess should go too.
He was not under suspicion at the time, although he was about to be dismissed for his indiscretions and outrageous behaviour.
Later, Burgess was to tell friends that he had only intended to accompany Maclean as far as Prague before returning to London.
Philby remained bitter towards Burgess, whose defection had thrown suspicion on him and ultimately led to his unmasking.
The whereabouts of Burgess and Maclean were not revealed until February 1956, when they held a press conference in Moscow.
Once in the USSR, Burgess and Maclean spent six months in the provincial town of Kuybyshev before being allowed to settle in Moscow.
Burgess was lonely and bored, missed his bohemian life in Soho, never attempted to learn Russian, and never became a Russian citizen.
He did have a job in the Foreign Literature Publishing House, but he sought out any visitors from London, eager for gossip, and frequently talked about returning.
Burgess was memorably portrayed by Alan Bates in Alan Bennett's television play An Englishman Abroad (1983).
Burgess died unmarried of a heart attack in Moscow 30 August 1963.
His ashes were returned to England and buried in the churchyard in West Meon, Hampshire.
[The Times , 2 September 1963; B. Penrose and S. Freeman,Conspiracy of Silence: the Secret Life of Anthony Blunt , 1986; Robert Cecil,A Divided Life: a Biography of Donald Maclean , 1988; Philip Knightley,Philby: the Life and Views of the K.G.B.
Masterspy , 1988; Anthony Glees,The Secrets of the Service.
British Intelligence and Communist Subversion 1939–51 , 1987.]
George W Carpenter
, Sir Henry (1870–1938), mechanical engineer and metallurgist, was born in Port Street, Bengeworth, Evesham, Worcestershire, 29 July 1870, the eldest son of Henry Fowler, cabinet-maker, upholsterer, and house agent, and his wife Mary Hughes.
He was educated at Evesham Grammar School and, from 1885 to 1887, at Mason College, Birmingham, where he gained the junior engineering diploma.
From then until 1891 he was apprenticed under (Sir) John Aspinall [q.v.], chief mechanical engineer of the Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway at its Horwich works near Bolton.
In 1891 he gained the first Whitworth exhibition awarded to a member of the Horwich Mechanics' Institute.
He then became assistant to George Hughes, chief of the testing department, whom he later succeeded.
He was now able to pursue his appreciation and devotion to metallurgy, which had been first inspired by his mechanical engineering studies at Mason College.
In 1895 he became gas engineer and in 1900 transferred to a similar post on the Midland Railway at Derby, where he became assistant works manager in 1905, works manager in 1907, and chief mechanical engineer in 1909.
He made a major contribution to production methods in the railway's workshops and to the use of improved metallurgy, in locomotive and rolling-stock construction, as well as being an advocate of the use of superheated steam and compound expansion to increase locomotive power and efficiency.
Shortly after the outbreak of war in 1914 Fowler became secretary to the railway munitions committee and the following year was appointed director of production at the Ministry of Munitions.
He became superintendent of the Royal Aircraft Factory at Farnborough in 1916 and assistant director of aircraft production in 1917.
In 1918–19 he was chairman of the inter-allied conference on standardization of aircraft components and deputy member of the munitions council.
For his wartime work he was appointed CBE in 1917 and KBE in 1918.
Three years after his return to railway work he became deputy chief mechanical engineer of the newly formed London, Midland and Scottish Railway in 1923 and two years later succeeded George Hughes as chief mechanical engineer.
The task of integrating the locomotive, carriage, and wagon design, and the building and repair activities of six important former companies with their own individual practices was extremely difficult.
Fowler inaugurated the introduction of line production in locomotive repairs, greatly reducing time spent in workshops, and a firm standardization programme to reduce as rapidly as possible the 393 individual locomotive types inherited by the LMS.
By 1926 new and much more powerful express passenger and freight locomotive designs had been prepared to his directions and, whilst these were nullified by opposition within a divided management structure, in 1927 the Royal Scot express locomotives were introduced for principal main-line services.
In 1931 Fowler was appointed scientific and research adviser to Sir Harold Hartley [q.v.], vice-president of the LMS and director of research.
Fowler was a man of great energy and enthusiasm and pursued his wide interests in many fields of engineering with great vigour.
He took a keen and sympathetic interest in the education of young engineers and was a member of the governing body of the Midland Institute at Derby.
He was awarded an honorary LLD by Birmingham University and an honorary D.Sc.
by Manchester.
He was president of the Institution of Locomotive Engineers in 1912, the Institution of Automobile Engineers in 1921, section G of the British Association in 1923, the Institution of Mechanical Engineers in 1926–7, and the Institute of Metals in 1932–3.
He was also a member of the permanent commission of the International Railway Congress Association, in which he played a very active part, and a member of council of the Institution of Civil Engineers from 1928 to 1934.
In 1895 he married Emmie Needham (died 1934), daughter of Philip Smith.
They had two sons and one daughter.
Fowler died at his home, Spondon Hall, Derby, 16 October 1938, and was buried at Nottingham Road cemetery, Derby.
[Journal of the Institution of Locomotive Engineers , vol. xxviii, 1938, pp. 606–8;Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers , vol. cxl, 1938, p. 600; E. S. Cox,Locomotive Panorama , vol. i, 1965; H. A. V. Bulleid,Master Builders of Steam , 1963.]
A K Newmark
,James (1800–1867), chemical engineer, was born 24 April 1800 in Johnstone, Renfrewshire, the eldest of six sons of William Shanks, millwright and engineer.
His mother may have been Isabella Anderson.
In 1821, after assisting in his father's engineering works for several years, he went to Glasgow University, where he studied chemistry under Andrew Ure [q.v.]and medicine to qualify as a doctor.
He returned to Johnstone and practised medicine for three years, during which time he also gave scientific lectures at Johnstone's Mechanics' Institute.
He then abandoned medicine in favour of the chemical industry.
He started a small chemical works in Paisley, manufacturing alum and potassium chromate.
This did not prove a success and he subsequently accepted positions in Worcester, and later in Newcastle upon Tyne.
In 1836 William Gossage [q.v.]appointed him, together with George Elliott, to assist in the erection and development of Gossage's absorption towers (patented in 1836) at the British Alkali works in Stoke Prior, Worcestershire.
In 1841 he moved to St Helens and erected Gossage towers for Gamble & Crosfields.
When the Gamble & Crosfields partnership was dissolved in 1845, Shanks became a partner in the new firm, Crosfield Bros. & Co., a position he held for the rest of his life.
The firm became Crosfield & Shanks.
Shanks took out the first of several patents for alkali manufacture in the spring of 1841, for improvements in the manufacture of carbonate of soda.
In September 1858 he patented a process for preparing chlorine using calcium chromate, for which he was awarded a medal at the 1862 international exhibition.
His final patent, taken out in 1863, for improvements in the manufacture of caustic soda and caustic potash, seems never to have gone beyond the experimental stage.
Shanks's name is permanently associated with the system of vats, known as ‘Shanks's vats’, introduced in 1861 for the extraction of the soda from black ash in the Leblanc industry for the production of alkali, but these were never the subject of a patent.
Although there is a claim that these vats were introduced by Charles Tennant Dunlop and Heinrich Buff of Giessen, it is generally accepted that Shanks was responsible for their development.
Shanks was president of the Mechanics' Institute of St Helens.
He also assisted the St Helens Permanent Building Society.
An upright and honest man, he was a Baptist and regularly attended the Myrtle Street chapel in Liverpool, where the Revd Hugh Stowell Brown [q.v.]was minister.
He also worked hard to promote the formation of a Baptist church in St Helens.
Shanks was married twice but had no children.
The maiden name of one of his wives (probably the second) was Watt.
He died 13 August 1867 in St Helens.
[J. Fenwick Allen,Some Founders of the Chemical Industry , 1906; D. W. F. Hardie,A History of the Chemical Industry in Widnes , 1950;Report by the juries of exhibits in the international exhibition of 1862, p. 221.]
Peter Leach
,Robert (1639–1720), mason and architect, was baptized in June 1639 at Raunds, Northamptonshire, the son of Edward and Mary Grumbold, and was a member of a family of masons originating at the quarry villages of Raunds and Weldon which was active in the Northamptonshire area over several generations.
It is not known where he learned his trade, but if it was not in Raunds it could have been in Cambridge, where a Thomas Grumbold (d .
1657) had settled; and it was in Cambridge that he established himself, perhaps succeeding to Thomas Grumbold's business.
In the course of a long career he became the leading locally based figure in the architecture of the town during the later seventeenth century and the beginning of the eighteenth, being involved in many of the collegiate building projects of the period.
Like many other master masons, Grumbold worked as an executant of both his own and others' designs.
His first recorded project in Cambridge was the building of the west range of Clare College (1669–76), where Thomas Grumbold had worked previously and where the design was probably the joint work of Grumbold, a ‘surveyor’ called Jackson, and the college authorities.
Subsequent works designed by him include the north range at Clare (1682–6) and probably the rebuilding of St Catharine's College (1674–1704).
The most important project on which he acted as contracting mason only was the building of the library at Trinity College (1676–84) to the design of Sir Christopher Wren [q.v.], and he was also associated with the latter over some work at Ely Cathedral (1699).
The contact with Wren is of particular interest in that it provided an influence on his own architectural style, to be seen, for example, in the Clare north range; but otherwise his designs display a pleasant artisan manner rather than a full understanding of the grammar of classical architecture.
Grumbold's will indicates that he accumulated considerable wealth, acquiring a substantial amount of leasehold property in Cambridge.
He appears to have had one son and one daughter living at the time of his death, which occurred in Cambridge 7 December 1720.
[H. M. Colvin,A Biographical Dictionary of British Architects 1600–1840 , 1978; D. Knoop and G. P. Jones, ‘The Rise of the Mason Contractor’,R.I.B.A. Journal , 17 October 1936; G. F. Webb, ‘Robert Grumbold and the Architecture of the Renaissance at Cambridge’,Burlington Magazine , December 1925 and January 1926; Robert Willis and J. W. Clark,The Architectural History of the University of Cambridge , vol. iii, 1886.]
Norris McWhirter
,John Robert Daniel (1920–1974), Royal Air Force pilot, was born at The Manse, Holcombe, Somerset, 6 April 1920, the only son (there was also a daughter) of the Revd Ernest Goodall Braham, author, and himself a Royal Flying Corps pilot in World War I, and his wife, Ethel Randall.
He was educated at Taunton School, Somerset, but left before he was seventeen to work in the Lancashire County Police as a boy clerk in Wigan.
In December 1937 he applied for a short-service commission in the RAF and to his evident amazement was accepted and sent for elementary flying training in 90 m.p.h.
Tiger Moths.
He received his wings at Shawbury near Shrewsbury in 1938.
Though chafing to fly single-engined fighters, by the outbreak of war he was still flying twin-engined Blenheim F1 night-fighters in 29 Squadron from Debden, Essex.
With several Johns already in his squadron, Braham's radio call-sign became ‘Bob’ and this remained his service nickname for the rest of his career.
On 24 August 1940, flying from Digby, Lincolnshire, he downed his first victim — a Norwegian-based Heinkel III night intruder — off Spurn Head, Humberside.
In 1941 Braham teamed up with his remarkable navigator and operator of the then new airborne AI radar set, William James Gregory, known as ‘Sticks’ because of his proficiency as a drummer.
This pair became the most formidable night-fighting combination in the RAF.
By 12 November the thrice-decorated Braham had destroyed twelve enemy aircraft and in 1942 he was posted to command 141 Squadron at Ford, near Chichester, Sussex, as the youngest wing commander in the RAF.
After a period supporting Coastal Command based at Predannock, Cornwall, in 1943 Braham was switched to the experimental task of escorting bomber streams over Europe.
For this purpose sensitive ‘Serrate’ detectors were fitted into Beaufighters — aircraft which had been developed by the Bristol Aircraft Company from the ‘Britain First’, with substantial private sponsorship.
In February 1944, after his twentieth victory, nineteen of them at night, Braham was taken off intruder and escort work and put in charge of night operations at No. 2 Light Bomber Group headquarters.
Typically he extracted an understanding from his air officer commanding,(Sir) Basil Embry [q.v.], that he would still be allowed a ‘ration’ of operational flights.
After raising his score to twenty-nine and now uniquely entitled to wear the ribbons of both the DSO and the DFC, each with two silver rosettes denoting two bars, Braham's luck ran out over Denmark on 25 June 1944.
He was ‘jumped’ by a Focke Wulf FW190 flown by the German ace, Robert Spreckels, and forced down on to a Danish beach.
Braham flew 316 operational sorties and was hit eleven times in forty-one attacks on his aircraft.
He also survived five crash landings.
Braham was developing combat fatigue.
Despite his consummate low-flying ability he had already had a brush with some trees and had also once even grazed the ground in a Mosquito.
Some felt he owed his life to spending the last ten months of the war in Stalag Luft 3 at Sagan near Breslau.
But for the intervention of a lone SS soldier in black battledress, he and his navigator, the Australian Donald Walsh, might well have been lynched by a hostile crowd aboard the train carrying them to interrogation.
Braham was liberated by the British 11th Armoured division near Lübeck on 2 May 1945.
He was wearing the tunic in which he had been shot down.
Depressed by what he perceived as a work-shy post-war Britain, Braham in May 1952 sailed with his wife and his three young sons to take up a commission in the Royal Canadian Air Force.
He was posted as a group captain to SHAPE headquarters in Paris in 1960.
Since 1914 only ten British officers had ever been six times decorated for gallantry and one of these, Braham, who in 1951 was awarded the AFC for hazardous developmental work on all-weather fighter aircraft, uniquely achieved a seventh decoration.
He was also awarded by the Belgians their croix de guerre and the Order of the Crown.
His book ‘Scramble!’ was published in London in 1961 and described frankly and modestly the unrelenting exploits of one of the sharpest thorns in the side of the Luftwaffe.
In April 1941 he married Joan Helen, daughter of Edward Hyde, grocer, of Leicester.
They had three sons.
Braham died in Halifax, Nova Scotia, 7 February 1974.
[J. R. D. Braham, ‘Scramble!’, 1961 (new edn. 1985); Donald F. Aris, unpublished biography of Braham in Air Historical Branch, Ministry of Defence.]