

T C Farmbrough
,(Arnold) Henry (Savage)(1867–1924), painter and explorer, was born 2 June 1867 in Florence, the second of three sons (there was also a daughter) of Charles Savage Landor and his wife Esmeralda Armida Piselli.
His grandfather was Walter Savage Landor [q.v.].
He was educated at the Liceo Dante and the Instituto Technico, Florence, and studied portrait painting in Paris, which he abandoned in 1888 to travel round the world.
He supported himself by painting the portraits of the distinguished people he met on the way, and in Japan he went off alone to live among the aboriginal Ainu.
His book about these people (Alone with the Hairy Ainu , 1893), followed by one on Korea (Corea, or Cho-sen, the Land of the Morning Calm , 1895), were well received and in 1896 he undertook a scientific expedition to Tibet, where he was captured and tortured.
The book about his experiences,In the Forbidden Land (1898), was translated into all the major European languages.
His scientific data were less valued.
In 1899 he climbed Mount Lumpa in Nepal and in 1900 he joined the Allied march on Peking during the Boxer rising.
He undertook further expeditions between 1903 and 1911 over little-explored territory.
He traversed the deserts of Persia and Baluchistan by camel, crossed central Africa at its widest point (Across Wildest Africa , 1907), and explored the Matto Grosso of Brazil (Across Unknown South America , 1913) where his men mutinied and made two attempts on his life.
The party found its way back to civilization in a starving condition on an improvised raft.
In the Philippines he visited head-hunters in Luzon and discovered the white-skinned Mansaka tribe in Mindanao (The Gems of the East , 1904).
During World War I he toured the western front and submitted designs of improved armoured cars, motor bicycles, and airships, and a device for destroying barbed-wire entanglements.
He had experimented with flying machines as early as 1893.
Landor's want of training and his impatience to press on with all speed made him an unreliable surveyor, and there were those who impugned the veracity of his hair-raising escapes; but in energy and resourcefulness, in courage and power of endurance, he was the equal of any of the previous generation of great explorers.
He scorned special equipment and commonly appeared on a mountain or in a jungle as he would in Bond Street.
His contempt for ropes and nailed boots nearly cost him his life mountaineering on several occasions.
As a painter, he had the facility to produce a likeness in a single one-hour sitting, and the numerous illustrations to his books are competent.
A bronze bust of his father shows real ability.
He was elected a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society in 1892, and a member of the Royal Institution in 1897.
He died in Florence 26 December 1924, after being knocked down by a motor vehicle in London.
He was unmarried.
[The Times , 29 December 1924; A. Henry Savage Landor,Everywhere, the Memoirs of an Explorer , 1922; Royal Geographical Society archives, London.]
J M Innes
,John , fifth Viscount Torrington (1743–1813), diarist, was born 18 February 1743, the younger son (there were no daughters) of George Byng, third Viscount Torrington, of Southill, Bedfordshire, and his wife Elizabeth, daughter of Lyonel Daniel of Clapham, Surrey.
He lost his father in 1750, his mother in 1759.
He was nephew to the unfortunate Admiral John Byng [q.v.], who was executed in 1757.
Byng followed his brother to Westminster School, but was, as he wrote, primarily ‘Train'd up to glory’, that is, to follow his grandfather, father, and uncle in some form of military or naval career.
He was page of honour to George II; from January 1760 cornet of the Royal Horse Guards; from March 1762 captain of the 58th Foot (a nominal appointment, this regiment then being in America); then, from August of that year, lieutenant and captain of the 1st Foot Guards (Grenadiers).
He served with both Horse and Foot in Germany during the Seven Years' War, an experience to which he often subsequently referred.
In 1776 he was made lieutenant-colonel.
Not being detached for service in America, he probably spent most of the next few years in London.
Financial troubles marred these years: fear of arrest for debt probably motivated his flight to the Continent in November 1777; his resignation from the army in May 1780 may likewise have been prompted by such troubles.
He accepted minor administrative office under the ministry of Frederick North (Lord North), then from 1782 to 1799 served as a commissioner of stamps.
He succeeded his brother as viscount on 14 December 1812, but held the title only a few weeks before his own death.
In his lifetime an obscure figure (he was ignored by contemporary obituarists), he became known in the twentieth century through the publication of his Diaries , journals of horseback tours through England and Wales.
Byng did not chronicle his earlier travels; it is from the diary of William Windham [q.v.]that we learn that he and Byng toured the midlands and north in 1774.
Only in 1780 was Byng ‘first seized with this journalizing frenzy’.
His writings fill twenty-four manuscript volumes, spanning the years 1781 to 1794.
Byng wrote partly to enhance and prolong his pleasure in ‘tourism’, but also to preserve details of ‘the manners of our travelling, the rates of our provisions; and of castles, churches and houses’.
His diaries — particularly the manuscript originals, scattered with engraved prints (the picture postcards of the day)— do serve this function, but are most valuable as a record of individual sensibility.
Byng pertinaciously sought out ruined castles and abbeys: relics, in his view, of an age in which spiritual and temporal lords had accepted duties of stewardship they had since abnegated.
Though generally critical of his own era, Byng none the less extended qualified sympathy to developments which served ends he valued; to Methodism, inasmuch as it instilled ‘wholesome morals’, and to spreading industry, inasmuch as it provided employment, though he worried that, like religion, which had ‘overstretch'd her power…and was blown up…the cotton trade…may crack!’
Sometimes morose and tetchy, particularly when subjected to the formalities and longueurs of polite society, or when contemplating his reduced fortunes, Byng had yet a fund of good spirits, and endeavoured ‘to be pleased with the world, and content with its comforts’.
He wrote of himself that he had a ‘heart full of blood & quick of impression’, was ‘hasty of determination’, and ‘leaky of secrets’.
According to his wife, he had generally ‘a pleased or lively look’.
In 1767 Byng married Bridget (died 1823), daughter of the deceased Commodore Arthur Forrest [q.v.]and his wife Juliana, a notorious eccentric, whose company Byng shunned.
The marriage produced five sons and eight daughters, one of whom died young.
Three of the sons followed military or naval careers, two attaining the rank of admiral.
His youngest son was known to Regency society by the sobriquet Poodle Byng.
John Byng died 8 January 1813 at Tenterden Street, Hanover Square, London.
[R. W. Ketton-Cremer,The Early Life and Diaries of William Windham , 1930; C. B. Andrews (ed.),
The Torrington Diaries , 1934.]
George W Carpenter
,George Jackson (1857–1933), railway mechanical engineer, was born at Rowes Farm, Stoke Gabriel, south Devon, 31 January 1857, the second son in the family of three sons and two daughters of George Churchward, a farmer, and his wife Adelina Mary Churchward, a cousin.
He was educated at Totnes Grammar School.
The Churchward family had been squires of Stoke Gabriel from the end of the fifteenth century.
George had a keen mathematical flair, and in 1873 became a pupil of John Wright, the locomotive, carriage, and wagon superintendent of the South Devon Railway.
Churchward completed his pupillage at Swindon under Joseph Armstrong, the locomotive superintendent of the Great Western Railway.
From 1877 to 1880 he gained experience in the locomotive, carriage, and wagon drawing offices at Swindon and from then until 1882 worked with Armstrong's son on the development of an improved automatic braking system which overcame the defects of previous systems which had been the cause of serious railway accidents.
In 1882 Churchward became assistant carriage-works manager at Swindon and manager in 1885.
He was involved in the design of the first British train with vestibuled corridor connections between carriages and other improved rolling-stock, as well as the conversion of large numbers of passenger carriages from the broad gauge of 7 ft. between tracks designed by Isambard Kingdom Brunel [q.v.]to the standard gauge of 4 ft. 8½ ins., following conversion of the London to Penzance main line in 1892.
He also designed new and much improved axle bearings, which largely eliminated the overheating which had caused serious traffic delays.
Having clearly demonstrated his abilities he was appointed locomotive works manager at Swindon in 1895, and two years later this job was combined with the position of chief assistant locomotive superintendent, with the intention that he should succeed William Dean, whose health was failing.
Although not officially appointed locomotive superintendent until 1902, Churchward was effectively in control of the locomotive, carriage, and wagon departments from 1899 and so continued until his retirement at the end of 1921, with the new title of chief mechanical engineer from 1916.
He was responsible for over 3,000 locomotives, some 9,000 carriages, and 80,000 wagons, in addition to a total staff of some 27,000, of whom 12,000 were at Swindon.
Churchward was determined to provide Swindon works with the best and most modern plant and machinery possible, the works having been founded in 1842 by Brunel and (Sir) Daniel Gooch [q.v.].
When he took over control, machine tools were steam-driven by shafts and belting, which he replaced quickly by electric power from gas-engine-driven generators.
He created a new large workshop complex within a single building of one-and-a-half acres, where boilers and other locomotive components were made and erected.
By 1912 Swindon was the most modern locomotive works in the country.
Perhaps his greatest technical achievement was the introduction from 1903 to 1911 of a series of nine standard locomotive types, of which over 1,100 were built by 1921.
Of advanced design, these were based on detailed studies of the latest practice in Europe and America.
Carefully tested prototypes were built and evaluated before quantity production commenced.
Churchward purchased three French locomotives of a type which had an outstanding reputation for comparative tests against his own latest locomotives, which proved equally powerful and economical.
Nevertheless, he adopted several design features from the French machines.
His locomotive designs included the first British heavy freight 2–8–0 types in 1903, the Pacific 4–6–2 express type in 1908, and the first general purpose 2–6–0 type in 1911.
Maximum standardization of components was achieved in Churchward's locomotives, the advanced design features of which were later adopted by other railways.
He realized the need for a static locomotive-testing plant where detailed scientific investigations could be made.
The first British plant was built to his designs in 1904.
Churchward was a fine figure of a man and his even temperament and dignified bearing suggested the country squire, an impression heightened by his liking for tweed suits.
He was a tactful administrator and leader of men.
His depth of vision, grasp of essentials, logical thinking, and the intuition by which he seemed to sense what was in the minds of those about him always ensured the best results.
He gathered about him a technical staff of diverse talents, whom he inspired with an enthusiasm to give of their best.
During World War I the Swindon works was devoted largely to the production of munitions under Churchward's direction.
He was appointed CBE in 1918.
He was an active member of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, the Institution of Civil Engineers, and the Association of Railway Locomotive Engineers, of which he was president in 1917.
He was also active in the civic life of Swindon, then very much a ‘railway town’.
With the incorporation of the town in 1900 he was elected to the council, and became its first mayor.
Churchward was unmarried.
He died in tragic circumstances 19 December 1933, when crossing the railway between his home and the Swindon works in foggy weather.
[Harold Holcroft,An Outline of Great Western Locomotive Practice 1837–1947 , 1957; H. A. V. Bulleid,Master Builders of Steam , 1963; H. C. B. Rogers,G. J. Churchward: a Locomotive Biography , 1975.]
David B Quinn
,Edward (c. 1550– c. 1613), seaman and promoter, was born in West Derby, Lancashire,c .1550, the son of Edward Hayes and his wife Alice, small landowners in Lancashire.
His father moved into Liverpool before 1567 and established himself as a merchant, and the younger Edward probably attended a grammar school there before his admission to King's College, Cambridge, in 1565.
His presence was not continuous as he was entered again as a scholar commoner in 1571, but did not take a degree.
Shortly afterwards he apparently became tutor to a son or sons of Sir Thomas Hoby [q.v.], of Bisham Abbey, Berkshire, whose wife Elizabeth [q.v.]commended him to her brother-in-law William Cecil (later Baron Burghley, q.v.), whom Hayes apparently served in unknown capacities for at least twenty years.
He may have accompanied (Sir) Edward Hoby [q.v.]on a continental tour in 1576 or 1577.
Hayes evidently had a taste for the sea and for exploration.
In 1578 he subscribed to the first unsuccessful colonizing voyage of Sir Humphrey Gilbert [q.v.].
He acquired a small ship of 40 tons, which he named the Golden Hind in honour of Sir Francis Drake [q.v.].
After interminable waiting, he accompanied Gilbert to Newfoundland in 1583, witnessed Gilbert's actions there, and survived various disasters, culminating in the loss of Gilbert at sea, to bring his ship home in September 1583 as the sole vessel to survive the expedition.
He contributed information on the voyage to A True Report by Sir George Peckham [q.v.]before the end of the year, and sat down to record a detailed narrative of the voyage and some description of Newfoundland.
This he passed eventually to Richard Hakluyt [q.v.]for publication in his Principall Navigations in 1589.
This is one of the finest voyage narratives in this collection, vivid and informative, and conveying well the atmosphere of an exploring voyage.
During the Spanish war Hayes is found engaged in privateering between 1589 and 1591, but the rest of his life was spent largely in projecting.
He bombarded Burghley with schemes for exploiting Newfoundland in 1585 and 1586, interestingly proposing the financing of one of them on the tontine principle, but they involved impractical proposals, as the international fishery could not be controlled by any one country except at vast expense.
In the early 1590s he turned his attention to the Maritimes and New England and his long proposal for colonizing and developing the commerce of this region is one of the fullest and most sensible colonial projects of the period.
It was printed in shortened form in the Briefe and True Relation (1602) by John Brereton [q.v.].
Hayes moved his residence frequently.
He lived at Charing Cross in 1585, in 1589–90 in Writtington, Essex, by 1596 he writes from ‘my house in Hamsell Park, Sussex’, while early in the 1600s he may have lived for a time in Isleworth, Middlesex.
In association with his technically minded relative, Thomas (the exact relationship is not known), he may have had an iron furnace and hammer-pond at Hamsell Farm, and possibly a smelter and perhaps a coining press in Isleworth at the end of the century.
He wrote numerous promotion schemes, mostly involving the grant of monopolies to himself and his associate.
His favourite was the making of a copper coinage for England, with which he approached successive lord treasurers between 1579 and 1613.
He got his sole opportunity in 1599 when he induced Sir Robert Cecil (later first Earl of Salisbury, q.v.) to approve a copper coinage scheme for Ireland which was put into operation in 1601, though he was not able to secure a monopoly for its production.
He also planned the issue of a debased silver coinage, which caused much hardship in Ireland and was finally withdrawn in 1603.
He was for a time in Ireland overseeing the introduction of these changes, and he and Thomas were both given substantial pensions (£100 each) in 1603.
His other projects from time to time involved the militia, the London water supply, various technical innovations in rolling-mill design, a stamping machine for coinage (these may well have originated with Thomas Hayes), and others.
In 1606 he returned to the financing of colonies.
With Thomas, he proposed a scheme by which government and private capital could be combined for the financing of the proposed Virginia colony: this is some of interest, but was not taken up.
He disappears from view in 1613, and may have died shortly afterwards.
He was a typical projector of the period, and he also had gifts as a writer, though some of his projects appear wrapped in airy rhetoric: only his colonizing plans are of enduring interest.
[D. B. Quinn,England and the Discovery of North America , 1974; D. B. and A. M. Quinn and Susan Hillier (eds.),
New American World: a Documentary History of North America to 1612 , vols. iii and iv, 1979.]
Frances McDonald
,Gilbert (1622–post 1670), official licenser and newsletter writer, was baptized at St Mary's, Nottingham, 8 September 1622, the son of Edward Mabbott, cordwainer (?), of Nottingham.
As an assistant in early 1643 to John Rushworth [q.v.], clerk-assistant of the House of Commons, Mabbott became connected with the parliamentary army secretariat and acted as agent for the army, mainly in London, throughout the civil war and interregnum.
His importance lies in his combined role as army agent, official correspondent, and parliamentary licenser of newsbooks and pamphlets.
Throughout the 1640s and 1650s he was a prolific and energetic professional newsletter writer.
Apart from keeping army commanders in both England and Scotland informed about domestic and foreign affairs, he wrote regularly to individual correspondents, for example Ferdinando, second Baron Fairfax of Cameron [q.v.], during the civil war, and from September 1658 to Henry Cromwell [q.v.], lord lieutenant of Ireland.
Mabbott was also employed to supply news to the borough of Hull from 1652 to 1656, during and after the first Anglo-Dutch war.
Surviving examples of his newsletters show that they were often produced in multiple copies, with additions or subtractions as appropriate.
He also kept in constant touch with his brother-in-law, the army secretary Sir William Clarke [q.v.].
During the 1650s Mabbott was official agent for the town of Leith.
From March 1645, when he became deputy licenser to Rushworth, until March 1647 when both men were dismissed, presumably for political reasons, Mabbott's name appears regularly in the Stationers' Company register.
He was reinstated as licenser on 30 September 1647 at the express request of the commander-in-chief of the parliamentary army, Sir Thomas Fairfax (later second Baron Fairfax of Cameron, q.v.).
From then until his resignation or dismissal, in May 1649, Mabbott was increasingly less successful in controlling the press, his imprimatur often appearing without permission.
As ‘agent of the army’ his name reappeared in the Stationers' Company register during 1653–5, when he entered The Perfect Diurnall and several pamphlets.
Most of the printed newsbooks now attributed to Mabbott's editorship were probably not written by him, although there is some evidence that he may have had a hand in The Perfect Diurnall (1642–55), edited by Samuel Pecke.
Mabbott's reputation as a Leveller, which rests solely on the association which has been made between him and the radical newsbook, the Moderate , has been called into question.
It is possible that he contributed to early issues of the newsbook, but there is no evidence that he was responsible for editing it, and nothing in his future career or conduct to link him directly with the Levellers.
After the Restoration of Charles II Mabbott petitioned successfully for the lucrative office of manager for licences of wine and strong waters in Ireland for himself and his eldest surviving son, Kympton, then aged seven, letters patent being granted in January 1661.
Mabbott moved to Dublin during the summer of 1661, surrendering the office to the Crown in June 1664 for £4,800.
In December 1670 he was named in an Irish chancery decree.
No more is heard of him after this, although Kympton was acting as agent for the commissioners of the sick and wounded at Plymouth in 1703.
Mabbott married Martha, daughter of Thomas Hilyard of Hampshire, and sister of Dorothy, wife of Sir William Clarke, secretary-at-war.
They had at least two daughters and five sons.
[Hull corporation manuscripts; A. Cotton, ‘London Newsbooks in the Civil War: their Political Attitudes and Sources of Information’, D.Phil. thesis (1971) for the University of Oxford; C. H. Firth (ed.),
Clarke Papers , 1891–1901; Historical Manuscripts Commission,Leyborne-Popham Manuscripts , 1899.]
Charles Tennant
,George (1775–1833), Scottish laird and political reformer, was born 30 April 1775 in Dundee, the younger son (there were no daughters) of Captain George Oliphant Kinloch of the 53rd Regiment of Foot, and his wife Anne, daughter of Colonel John Balneavis.
Captain Kinloch had inherited the estate of Kinloch in Strathmore from his younger brother, John, who had purchased it from the proceeds of a fortune made as a sugar planter in Jamaica, and had died in 1770.
Captain Kinloch himself died in 1775 and his widow in 1782.
John, their elder son, was a permanent invalid, and for the sake of his health the boys were sent abroad to France and Italy.
John died in Nice in 1789, and George returned to Scotland in 1791.
He studied at Edinburgh University during 1791–2 but did not graduate.
He became laird of the Kinloch estate on his twenty-first birthday in 1796.
In that same year he married his cousin Helen, daughter of John and Joanna Smyth, and between 1797 and 1805 she bore him six daughters and two sons.
In 1797, as part of his duties as a young laird, Kinloch was appointed to command the Coupar–Angus Company of the Volunteers, territorials who were recruited to meet the danger of a possible French invasion, but in Scotland confined their activities to suppressing riots aroused by the Militia Acts and the press gangs.
Eleven years later, in 1808, Kinloch decided that he was opposed to the maintenance of a standing army in time of peace and resigned his commission.
However, he took his part in local politics as a JP and was active in working for the development of Dundee harbour as a member of the Dundee harbour board.
On 16 August 1819 there occurred in Manchester the event which came to be known as the Peterloo massacre.
Kinloch, who from his youth in France had held liberal views, now became actively opposed to the oppressive measures enforced by the authorities acting under the orders of the Tory government.
He agreed to preside over a public meeting of the inhabitants of Dundee to be held on 10 November 1819 to protest against ‘the unprovoked, cruel and cowardly attack made on the people of Manchester’ and ‘to suggest the means most likely to lead to a reform of abuses’.
The meeting was held as advertised and Kinloch addressed it in a wordy speech in which, after pleading with his audience to keep the peace, he criticized the government for excessive taxation, and declaimed: ‘In short, the whole of our misfortune as a nation, the whole of our misery, the whole of our distress, can be clearly traced to the circumstances of the people being deprived of their share of the British Constitution by not having a voice in the election of persons to represent them in the House of Commons.’
Two weeks after the meeting Kinloch was astounded to be confronted with a warrant for his arrest on a charge of sedition, issued on the authority of the Home Office in London.
He was allowed bail, but after consulting his lawyers, was convinced that it was highly probable that he would be convicted for sedition and sent to Botany Bay.
He decided that he had no alternative but to flee abroad.
For the next three years (1820–2) he lived in exile in France.
In January 1822 (Sir) Robert Peel became home secretary and in October the leader of the Peterloo riot was released from prison.
Hoping that, in the changed climate of opinion in England, he would soon be granted a pardon, Kinloch returned secretly to London, where for some time he remained under cover until early in 1823 he returned clandestinely to Scotland.
Then, in May 1823, the hoped-for pardon arrived and he was able to resume a normal life at Kinloch.
In 1832 the first parliamentary reform bill was passed and Dundee was one of the new constituencies created by the Act.
Kinloch stood as the Whig candidate in the election that followed, and in December of that year was elected the first MP for the borough.
He took his seat in the House in February 1833, but did not enjoy his position for long as, in the following month, he caught a chill and died in London 28 March 1833.
In 1872 a statue to his memory was erected by public subscription in Albert Square, Dundee.
[Charles Tennant,The Radical Laird , 1970.]
Meta Zimmeck
, Dame Adelaide Mary (1863–1936), civil servant, was born in 1863 in Melbourne, Australia, the eldest child in the large family of Alexander Gavin Anderson, a Scottish ship-broker, and his wife Blanche Emily Campbell.
The family later returned to Britain and settled in London.
She was educated at home by governesses and later attended schools in France and Germany as well as Queen's College, Harley Street.
She went to Girton College, Cambridge, where she was awarded the Gamble gold medal and took second-class honours in the moral sciences tripos (1887).
She then lectured on philosophy and economics for the Women's Co-operative Guild.
This introduction to the harshness of working women's lives was formative and determined her choice of career.
In 1894, having gained valuable experience as a clerk on the staff of the royal commission on labour (1892–4), Anderson followed several colleagues from the royal commission into the newly created post of ‘lady factory inspector’ in the factory department of the Home Office.
In 1897 she was appointed ‘principal lady inspector of factories’ and was given the task of heading the newly constituted women's branch.
As principal lady inspector Anderson sought to create a rational framework for inspection while preserving the independence and enlarging the sphere of activity of the women's branch.
Anderson met the demands of an expanding workload, chronic understaffing, and excessive travelling on her inspectors by moving the women's branch towards an approximation of the organization of the men's branch — though always under her own control.
The notable successes of the women's branch under Anderson's leadership, particularly women inspectors' ‘substitution’ for men inspectors during World War I, paradoxically led to the demise of the women's branch in 1921, when women and men inspectors were ‘fused’into an integrated inspectorate.
Anderson's heart was not in these changes, and she retired the same year.
She later published an account of the work of the women's branch in Women in the Factory: an Administrative Adventure, 1893–1921 (1922).
In retirement Anderson travelled extensively and continued her work for women and children in an international context.
She was a member of the municipal council of the international settlement of Shanghai's commission on child labour (1923–4) and published an account of her experiences in Humanity and Labour in China: an Industrial Visit and its Sequel, 1923–1926 (1928).
She was appointed to the Foreign Office's advisory committee on the Boxer indemnity fund in 1925 and made two visits to China (1926 and 1930–1).
Sandwiched between these trips to China she investigated child labour in Egypt in 1930 under the auspices of the International Association for Social Progress and the ILO.
Anderson, who was always accompanied by an umbrella and a bag bulging with papers and letters, gave an impression of philosophical detachment.
She was, however, a whole-hearted feminist who found her métier amongst blue books and red tape.
She was indomitable in her determination and tireless in her efforts to serve the women and children who were her special charge.
She was appointed CBE in 1918 and DBE in 1921.
She never married.
She died 28 August 1936 at a nursing home in Chelsea.
[Adelaide Anderson,Women in the Factory: an Administrative Adventure, 1893–1921 , 1922; Hilda Martindale,Women Servants of the State: a History of Women in the Civil Service, 1890–1938 , 1938, and Some Victorian Portraits and Others , 1948.]
Iain Mackintosh
,Francis (‘Frank’)(1854–1920), theatre architect, was born 22 November 1854 in Newton Abbot, Devon, the eldest son and second of nine children of Charles Matcham, subsequently manager of Mary Bridgeman's Torquay brewery, and his wife Elizabeth.
He was educated at Babbacombe School, Torquay, which he left at fourteen to join the office of George Bridgeman, an architect in Torquay, to whom he returned after being apprenticed to a quantity surveyor in London.
In the 1870s his career as a theatre architect started rapidly.
He joined the practice of Jethro Thomas Robinson, who was not only theatre architectural adviser to the lord chamberlain but was also responsible for the surviving interiors of the Old Vic in London (1872) and the Theatre Royal in Margate (1874).
On 9 July 1877 Matcham married Robinson's younger daughter Maria, by whom he had two daughters.
In 1878 Robinson died and Matcham took over his late father-in-law's architectural practice which, in the preceding seven years, had created seven successful theatres and was currently rebuilding the Elephant and Castle Theatre, London, which Matcham completed.
Between 1879 and 1912 Matcham built or rebuilt over 150 theatres, an achievement approached in Great Britain only by C. J. Phipps [q.v.], who designed seventy-two theatres.
Matcham's work covers the entire span of late Victorian and Edwardian theatre architecture, from the grand London Coliseum to smaller suburban and variety theatres, most of which were destroyed by enemy bombers in World War II or by later developers.
Innovative only in using cantilevers for the galleries and hence abolishing intrusive columns, he was uniquely pragmatic in his architectural and technical responses to the commercial manager's brief, which was to seat ever-larger audiences on ever-tighter city-centre sites.
Few Matcham exteriors excite but his interiors are always exuberant and eclectic.
The interiors encompassed Tudor strap-work, Louis XIV detail, Anglo-Indian motifs, naval and military insignia, delicate rococo panels, classical statuary, and robust baroque columns supporting heavy entablatures, often with more than one style competing in a single auditorium.
Whatever the style, Matcham was always prepared to bend the architecture to satisfy both the sight-lines and the all-important connection of performer to audience: tier fronts slope down towards boxes which frame the proscenium arch and, as an architectural ensemble, draw out rather than distance the performer.
In 1896 Edwin O. Sachs criticized Matcham for the impurity of his sloping tiers and juxtaposition of styles.
However, this was before the opening of his masterpiece, the London Coliseum, in 1905.
For half a century after Matcham's retirement his theatres were widely disparaged by architects and others who preferred unbuilt European projects to what the public and theatre profession still prized as ‘real theatres’.
It was only after 1970 that Matcham's genius was widely recognized.
Other major Matcham theatres which survive include the Everyman Theatre, Cheltenham (1891); Grand Opera House in Belfast, Grand Theatre in Blackpool, and Opera House in Wakefield (all 1894); Lyric Theatre, Hammersmith (1895, dismantled in 1972 and the auditorium only re-erected on a new site in 1979); Empire, Langton (1895); Tivoli, Aberdeen (1896 and 1909); Richmond Theatre, Surrey (1899); Gaiety, Douglas, Isle of Man (1900); Hackney Empire and Hippodrome in Brighton (both 1901); Opera House in Buxton, Devonshire Park Theatre in Eastbourne, Shepherds Bush Empire, and Royal Hall in Harrogate (all 1903); King's, Glasgow (1904); King's, Southsea (1907); His Majesty's in Aberdeen and Olympia in Liverpool (both 1909); London Palladium (1910); and the Victoria Palace (1911).
Matcham died at his home in Southend 17 May 1920.
[Brian Walker et al .,
Frank Matcham: Theatre Architect , 1980; Christopher Brereton et al .,
Curtains!!! or a New Life for Old Theatres , 1982; Victor Glasstone,Victorian and Edwardian Theatres , 1975; Edwin O. Sachs and E. A. Woodrow,Modern Opera Houses and Theatres , 3 vols., 1896–8.]
P J L Frankl
,Alice (1859–1935), pioneer in the teaching of Swahili and other Bantu languages, was born in Trieste 26 June 1859, one of seven children in the family of Reinhardt Joseph Werner of Mainz, teacher of languages, and his wife Harriett, daughter of John Taylor, a baker.
Alice's father, a naturalized British subject since 1852, indulged his wanderlust during Alice's first fifteen years, and thus she experienced a constant change of scene and sound, living in New Zealand, Mexico, the United States, and Europe, until the family settled in Tonbridge in 1874.
She was educated privately, and then attended Newnham College, Cambridge, from 1878 to 1880 as a Goldsmiths' scholar, but left, with no tripos, in order to teach at Truro High School.
From 1893 to 1895 she visited the Church of Scotland mission in Blantyre, Nyasaland, to do linguistic work and prepare school textbooks, and Maritzburg, Natal, where she acquired Zulu and Afrikaans.
Following the outbreak of the South African war in 1899 she gave private classes in London in these languages — classes which were transferred to King's College, London, in 1901; in 1910 these were formally recognized by the University of London, the first British university to promote the teaching of Bantu languages (Swahili had been taught in Berlin since 1887).
From 1911 to 1913 Alice Werner visited British East Africa on a Mary Anne Ewart travelling scholarship from Newnham.
She spent much of her time in Swahili-land, where she met the poet and scholar Muhammad Kijumwa al-Bakry, who provided her with manuscripts and information about the language and literature of the Swahili-speaking people.
From 1913 she held a two-year research fellowship at Newnham, while continuing to teach at King's.
After the School of Oriental Studies opened in 1917 Alice Werner was appointed lecturer and subsequently reader in Swahili and other Bantu languages (with her sister Mary as lecturer from 1918 to 1930).
In 1919 she completed her London doctoral thesis (submitted in 1929), ‘Introductory Sketch of the Bantu Languages’, drawing on her first-hand knowledge of south, central, and east Africa.
In 1922 she was promoted professor in Swahili and the Bantu languages, the first such chair in the British Isles; she then established the School's diploma in Swahili studies (1924), the first qualification of this kind in a British university.
She was awarded a D.Lit. in 1928 by London University.
When she retired in 1930, having served the School devotedly for its first twelve years, she was appointed CBE, and was awarded the silver medal of the African Society.
Her edition of Utendi wa Ayubu (the life of Job), subsequently reprinted in a Dar-es-Salaam newspaper, became the first of the Swahili epics to reach a wide public both in Europe and along the East African coast.
Her publication of The Advice of Mwana Kupona in 1934, a poem from northern Swahili-land, was the first literary composition by ‘an East African native woman’ to be published in Great Britain.
Myths and Legends of the Bantu (1933) was probably her most popular book.
Werner never met W. E. Taylor [q.v.], whose obituary she wrote; while not rivalling his mastery of Swahili, she excelled him in her wide command of Bantu languages.
Werner died at her home in Welwyn Garden City 9 June 1935.
She was unmarried.
[The Times , 11 June 1935;Bulletin of the School of Oriental Studies , vol. iv, 1926–8, and vol. viii, 1935, pp. 281–2;Zeitschrift für Eingeborenen Sprachen , vol. xix, 1928–9, and vol. xxvi, 1935–6;Dictionary of South African Biography , vol. ii, 1972.]
R G Davies
(c. 1340–1425), royal servant and bishop, was born in Fordham, Cambridgeshire, to a family of no obvious distinction.
His only certain kinsman, John Kirkby, worked for him in later years, as did John Fordham scutifer and Thomas Fordham.
Employed first by Edward III, he rose under Edward the Black Prince [q.v.], and became his secretary in 1375 and an executor of his will in 1376.
From 1 January 1377 he was general receiver and keeper of the Privy Seal to the Black Prince's young son, Richard, prince of Wales, and on the latter's accession to the throne, Fordham at once(on 26 June 1377) became keeper of the king's Privy Seal.
At that time this office was doubtless regarded as less significant than under an adult king, and Fordham was no politician, but proximity to the boy king and his household soon proved more important than had been intended.
The insurgents in London in 1381 called for Fordham's death, but in the event he suffered no more than damage to his house and wine-cellar.
He could afford this, for the royal household had brazenly looked after its own.
Having secured the deanship of Wells in 1379 by royal request and the prestigious archdeaconry of Canterbury in 1380/1, Fordham secured election on 30 May 1381 to the mighty see of Durham.
He resigned the Privy Seal (as was conventional) and was consecrated at Lambeth on 5 January 1382.
He went north in the summer and stayed there.
Problems over the Anglo-Scottish border he could not avoid, but, that apart, his days in royal service seemed done.
However, Richard II and his government were lurching towards an angry showdown with their critics.
With the crisis already well in motion, the beleaguered king recalled his family's loyal servant to become treasurer of the realm on 17 January 1386.
This was a hapless task, and inevitably Fordham could not survive the general onslaught on the chief ministers in the ‘Wonderful Parliament’.
He resigned on 24 October 1386 with the rest.
Even so, he remained with the king in 1387 as Richard prowled the midlands seeking to regain control.
When the opposition took to arms to break the king's affinity, Fordham was amongst those banished from court.
Still, he was not arrested or forced to flee, and could attend the ‘Merciless Parliament’ in February 1388 without fear of being amongst those indicted.
In March he was ordered with other northern lords to hasten to defend the border against Scottish invasion.
There, like others, he left the Percys to suffer from their rashness at the battle of Otterburn.
Already though, on 3 April, he had been translated by the pope (at the opposition's request) to Ely, as part of an unprecedented political reshuffle of the episcopate.
Yet, if Durham had special strategic and political features which made Fordham unacceptable there in the eyes of the Crown's opponents and of key northern lords, Ely was notoriously the rich neo-sinecure of English bishoprics, and for Fordham a homecoming.
He took to it at once after the bull arrived in September 1388.
Probably he was not sorry and never wanted to be recalled to secular politics again.
He attended Parliaments fairly regularly until late in life, and once (in 1406) agreed to help settle Baltic trade disputes.
That apart, he came to live almost permanently at his episcopal manor of Downham.
His longevity exasperated contenders for episcopacy, particularly his perennial ability to fail then rally.
His will (3 October 1425) is an attractive snapshot of an old man at peace in a little world of cathedral, household, and staff, for all of whom he made careful provision in a modest, surprisingly austere account.
From the outside world, only Edward III, the Black Prince, and Richard II entered his final thoughts, and that is no surprise.
Even now, he hung on seven weeks more.
He died 18 November 1425 and was buried, as he requested, not in the nave but in the Lady Chapel of Ely.
[E. F. Jacob (ed.),
The Register of Henry Chichele, Archbishop of Canterbury, 1414–43 , vol. ii, 1938, pp. 327–9 (will); R. G. Davies, ‘The Episcopate in England and Wales, 1375–1443’, Ph.D.
thesis (1974) for Manchester University;idem , ‘The Episcopate and the Political Crisis in England of 1386–88’,Speculum , vol. li, 1976, pp. 659–93.]
C Y Ferdinand
,Henry (1628–1704), bookseller-publisher, was born in Carshalton, Surrey, the son of John Herringman, yeoman, and was christened 14 March 1628 at the Carshalton parish church.
His mother's name may have been Margaret.
He served an apprenticeship with the London bookseller Abel Roper from 1 August 1644 until 28 June 1652, when he became free of the Stationers' Company.
Herringman is probably best known as the publisher of John Dryden [q.v.], but his first enterprising move was to purchase the stock of John Holden, who had died in May 1652, and to set up business at Holden's former shop at the Blue Anchor in the Lower Walk, New Exchange, during 1653.
Samuel Pepys [q.v.]writes of several occasions when he met friends and had news of Herringman's authors there.
At about the same time he began buying copyrights: the first book to bear his imprint was an edition of Horace's Lyrics , published in 1653; the first copyright he registered with the Stationers' Company was a translation by Sir Kenelm Digby [q.v.]of Albert the Great's Treatise Adhering to God , entered 19 September 1653.
By the late 1660s it is almost certain that, as Thomas Shadwell [q.v.]suggests in The Medal of John Bayes (1682), he began employing the young Dryden to write prefaces, commencing a relationship that developed through the 1660s and 1670s when Herringman bought up the copyrights to most of Dryden's work.
Dryden briefly mentions his publisher in MacFlecknoe (1682), describing Herringman as captain of a guard of ‘bilk'd stationers’.
Herringman's early association with the established literary publisher Humphrey Moseley [q.v.]was another important element of his career.
The two published a number of works together and, after Moseley's death in 1661, Herringman purchased from Moseley's estate copyrights to the poems of Abraham Cowley, Richard Crashaw, Sir John Denham, John Donne, Sir John Suckling, and Edmund Waller [qq.v.], as well as some of the plays of Ben Jonson and Sir William Davenant [qq.v.].
Although numerous entries in the Stationers' Company register attest to the variety of Herringman's early trade list, he concentrated on the publication of belles-lettres from the 1660s.
His middle career was assisted in some ways by the great fire of London, which saw the disruption of his competitors' businesses and the destruction of whole editions of many books, including much of Shakespeare's third folio.
Herringman was instrumental in the publication of the fourth.
Herringman bought few copyrights after 1678, concentrating instead on republishing popular literary works and bringing out collected editions — Francis Beaumont and John Fletcher [qq.v.]in 1679, Shakespeare in 1685, Jonson in 1692.
In 1684 he turned over the retail side of his business to Francis Saunders and his partner Joseph Knight.
A year later he became master of the Stationers' Company.
It is evident from his will, written the day before his death, that Herringman's hope was to keep his publishing business in the family.
He stipulated that his kinsman John Herringman should have ‘my Coppyes and partes of Coppys of Books as they stand entered in the Register Booke of the Company of Staconers…provided that he serves out his seaven years of Apprentishipp justly and truly’.
Instead the younger Herringman abandoned a book-trade career for the wardenship of the Carshalton parish church.
Many of these copies were acquired by Jacob Tonson [q.v.], who developed even more strongly the line of fine literary publishing begun by Moseley and Herringman.
Herringman probably retired to Carshalton in the mid-1690s, when his name no longer appears in the Poor Rate ledgers for the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields.
He married Alice Abel 29 September 1653 at the church of St Dunstan in the West, London, and with her had five daughters and four sons.
Herringman died in Carshalton 15 January 1704 and was buried at the parish church, where there is a memorial.
[C. William Miller, ‘Henry Herringman, Restoration Bookseller-Publisher’,Papers of the Bibliographical Society of America , vol. xlii, 1948, pp. 292–306; Henry R. Plomer,A Dictionary of the Booksellers and Printers who were at Work in England, Scotland and Ireland from 1641 to 1667 , 1907; Carshalton, St Dunstan in the West, and St Martin-in-the-Fields parish registers; Henry Herringman's will, PROB/11/474/40.]
Edward R Ward
,Anthony (1808–1883), scientific farmer, was born 30 November 1808 in Williton, Somerset, the eldest of three sons of Anthony Huxtable, a Bristol surgeon.
He was educated at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he obtained his BA in 1833.
He was ordained deacon in 1833 and priest in 1834.
In 1834 he became vicar of Sutton Waldron, north-east Dorset, a small parish and one of the most backward agriculturally in that county.
An energetic builder and engineer, he made use of innovative designs and newly available materials, such as india rubber.
He demolished the existing Saxon church and erected St Bartholomew's (1847), which was noted for the interior decorations by Owen Jones [q.v.].
A Tractarian, whose work for the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel attracted national attention, he became archdeacon of Dorset in 1862 but resigned, through ill health, nine months later.
About 1840, aided by his wife's wealth and the patronage of the first Viscount Portman [q.v.], a prominent member of the Royal Agricultural Society, he rented two farms in the parish to pursue experimental scientific farming with the object of relieving the misery of farmer and labourer alike in the face of the impending repeal of the Corn Laws.
In 1845 he published in vol. vi of the Journal of the Royal Agricultural Society of England the results of a successful experiment in cultivating swedes to determine what would happen when the essential constituents of a plant were supplied to ‘barren’ land.
This attracted national attention, causing Huxtable to be appointed to the chemical committee of the Society, of which he was a member till 1867.
His farming methods were unique in that all stock were housed and fed in sheds; there were no fences or trees.
Employing a steam-engine, liquid animal and artificial manures were pumped through ceramic pipelines to delivery points in the fields and, in collaboration with the sanitation pioneer (Sir) Edwin Chadwick [q.v.],
Huxtable also carried out experiments to test the possibilities of disposing of urban sewage by pumping it on to farm land.
In 1845 Huxtable passed liquid farm manure through a bed of Dorset loam, the emerging liquid being clear and free of any offensive smell.
This was a fundamental contribution to the phenomenon of absorption and led to changes in the composition of artificial manures.
It also inspired the Revd Henry Moule [q.v.]of Dorchester to design his patent earth closet, which enjoyed great commercial success.
Huxtable was an effective propagandist, by the spoken or written word, for his innovative ideas for recycling waste materials and conserving resources, his principle publication being The ‘Present Prices' (1850), which went through seven editions.
Although his farms attracted many distinguished visitors, including Sir Robert Peel, he became the centre of great controversy.
This probably exacerbated his tendency to long periods of nervous exhaustion, which caused his absence from his parish while he recovered.
Huxtable was twice married: to Maria Langstone in 1840 and Susannah Gott in 1875.
There were no children of either marriage.
He died 19 December 1883 and was buried in Sutton Waldron.
[E. R. Ward, ‘Archdeacon Anthony Huxtable (1808–1883), Radical Parson, Scientist and Scientific Farmer’,Proceedings of the Dorset Natural History and Archaeological Society , vol. ci, 1979.]
(c. 1794–1846), balladeer and street entertainer,[See ,Michael .]
Carolyn Poling Schriber
(c. 1105–1184), bishop of Lisieux, was born near Seés in Normandy between 1105 and 1109, the second son of Hardouin de Neuville and an unnamed mother; a younger brother and at least one sister completed the family.
Following the example of their maternal grandfather, Norman, dean of the chapter at Seés, and their maternal uncle, John, bishop of Lisieux (1107–41), both Arnulf and his older brother John, bishop of Seés (1124–44), were trained for careers in the church.
Arnulf began his formal education at the cathedral school of Seés and for a short time held the position of treasurer of Bayeux.
After he was named an archdeacon of Seés, he became a pupil of Geoffrey, bishop of Chartres, and travelled to Bologna to study law.
Arnulf made his first public mark in 1133 with the dissemination of a particularly vitriolic pamphlet directed against the antipope Anacletus II.
This Invectiva in Girardum Engolismensem Episcopum has been excoriated by modern readers as calumnious and anti-Semitic, but at the time it was promulgated by such church dignitaries as Bernard of Clairvaux, Peter the Venerable, and Haimeric, papal chancellor under Honorius II.
Arnulf completed his education in 1136 and travelled to England to serve the court of King Stephen.
His most important assignment during that period was an appearance at the Lateran Council of 1139, where he defended Stephen's claim to the throne of England by attacking Matilda's legitimacy.
Pope Innocent II accepted his arguments although the reasoning behind them was fallacious.
Arnulf was elected bishop of Lisieux in 1141.
He brought to his office a conviction that a bishop had a dual responsibility to serve both church and monarchy.
During the 1140s he wavered in his political allegiance, hoping to find a king who was both worthy of his support and in need of episcopal guidance.
For a time he offered his services to Louis VII of France and accompanied him on the second crusade as papal legate in charge of the Anglo-Norman contingent.
Upon his return Abbot Suger employed him as an ambassador to the court of Matilda and her son, Henry.
In Henry, Arnulf finally found the potential monarch for whom he had been searching.
From 1150 to 1154 Arnulf was an active member of the entourage of the young duke of Normandy, travelling with him as he consolidated his hold over Normandy and pressed his claim to the English throne.
In 1154 he accompanied Henry to England for his coronation, after which he was rewarded by the gift of the valuable chapelry of Bosham in Sussex and the title of chief justiciar for Normandy.
Extant charters show that Arnulf served as a testator to Henry's acts at least 121 times between 1154 and 1179.
Arnulf always considered himself a member of the court, although his services were somewhat sporadic and sometimes unappreciated by the king and his other advisers.
In 1156 Arnulf persuaded Henry to delay indefinitely his plans to invade Ireland by pointing out to him, quite correctly, that the papal permission obtained by John of Salisbury [q.v.]acknowledged the pope's overlordship of all islands — a matter of no small consequence to the ruler of an island kingdom.
Henry reluctantly agreed not to act on the papal permission, but John of Salisbury never forgave Arnulf for placing royal interest ahead of papal prerogatives.
During the papal schism of 1159, Arnulf was charged with the task of keeping Henry loyal to Alexander III.
Henry, however, refused to commit himself, leaving the decision to his assembled bishops.
Arnulf wrote a letter to the English bishops shortly before their meeting, telling them that the French king, the French bishops, and Henry himself were all agreed to support Alexander and that they were only postponing their announcement until the English bishops could vote to join them.
The facts were quite different; Henry and Louis had discussed the problem but had reached no settlement.
The archbishop of Canterbury was convinced, however, and the English bishops acquiesced, leaving Henry no choice but to support them as he had promised.
Arnulf achieved his goal, thereby opening himself to charges of duplicity.
The controversy over Thomas à Becket [q.v.]once again involved Arnulf in a test of the feasibility of a bishop serving both his church and his king.
At the beginning of the crisis, Arnulf seemed to support the king.
It was he who advised Henry to try to break the unanimity of the English bishops; he also made six trips to the papal court at Sens to persuade Alexander to confirm the Constitutions of Clarendon.
When those efforts failed, Arnulf turned to Becket, trying to persuade him to moderate his views for the sake of ecclesiastical unity.
Throughout the negotiations, Arnulf was on hand, advising all sides on possible compromises, sometimes deploring Henry's intransigence and sometimes losing patience with the obdurate Becket.
He was with Henry when the news of Becket's death arrived and wrote a sycophantic letter to the pope in Henry's defence.
And at Avranches, it was Arnulf who persuaded Henry to accept the final settlement.
Throughout the crisis, no one was quite sure which cause Arnulf espoused; no one trusted him completely.
Arnulf's last years displayed a steady decline of influence.
He alienated Henry one last time by seeming to offer support to the young king during the rebellion of 1173.
The canons of his cathedral turned against him, and Henry began an organized campaign to drive the cantankerous old bishop from his office.
In 1181 Arnulf formally resigned his bishopric and retired to the monastery of St Victor in Paris.
He left behind him two monuments: one inscribed on parchment, the other carved in stone.
The collection of his personal correspondence revealed much about the affairs of the twelfth century; the semi-Romanesque, semi-Gothic design of his new cathedral reflected his own dual goals.
Although he had influenced popes and kings, he ended his life as a disappointed man, mourning the passage of a simpler world in which a bishop could serve both church and monarchy.
He died 31 August 1184 at St Victor's.
[Frank Barlow,The Letters of Arnulf of Lisieux , 1939; C. P. Schriber,The Dilemma of Arnulf of Lisieux , 1990.]
Robert K G Temple
,Vincent (1614–1661), regicide, officer, and parliamentary commissioner to the army, was born in 1614, apparently in Warwickshire of unknown parents.
On 6 May 1635 Potter sailed to New England, and on 13 October 1636 was hired as a soldier at the Castle Island fort in Boston for £10 a year.
In 1639 Potter returned to England and traded with New England until the civil war began.
He was commissioned a captain of horse 30 January 1643 by Robert Greville, second Baron Brooke [q.v.].
His account book of his time in the Warwickshire militia survives.
Potter gave up his troop 25 July 1645, becoming parliamentary commissioner to the army in succession to his brother Captain John Potter, who was killed at the battle of Naseby.
He was later promoted to colonel.
The commissioners, answerable to the committee for the army chaired by Robert Scawen MP, were intermediaries between Parliament and the New Model Army, ultimately responsible for all financial accounts, and with authority to stop any soldier's pay.
Potter and his closest colleague, Thomas Herbert (later first baronet, q.v.), were extraordinarily conscientious and energetic, as their surviving letters show.
They were fanatically intent on maintaining military discipline, trying to prevent free quarter on the ‘poor oppressed people’.
It was their job to buy horses for the New Model Army and scour the country for food and provisions.
They can be credited with a major share of its successful sweep of the west of England, as they located the supplies in south Wales which made it possible.
Potter was later the leading official for settling military arrears, and drew up ‘Potter's lists’ of former soldiers.
Potter remained army commissioner throughout the second civil war, becoming also in 1648, after the battle of St Fagan's, a county commissioner for Pembrokeshire.
Having been parliamentary commissioner for the army in Scotland in 1646, he was reappointed to that post 3 May 1651, and by early 1652 held the equivalent post in Ireland.
Potter was named to the high court of justice to try the king, commenced sitting 10 January 1649, was present when sentence was pronounced, and signed the king's death-warrant.
He served also on the next major court to try James Hamilton (third Marquis and first Duke of Hamilton), Arthur Capel (first Baron Capel of Hadham), and Sir Henry Rich (first Earl of Holland)[qq.v.]for treason, signing their death-warrant on 6 March 1649.
At the Restoration Potter was seized by a Roger Howcott and handed over to the authorities.
He was tried with the other regicides, but his trial was marred by inhumane treatment towards him; he was in  paroxysms of pain due to an attack of kidney stones but the court refused his requests to be allowed to urinate.
He blurted out that he was unable to speak for pain, so his defence was never heard.
He was found guilty and was imprisoned in the Tower of London, where he died very quickly, probably from medical neglect and ill treatment, aged only forty-seven.
Potter's wife is unknown, but he had a brother-in-law named Thomas Fowle in Boston prior to the civil war.
From a devotional text which he carried in his pocket throughout the war, Potter seems to have been a devout Puritan.
[R. L. Greaves and R. Zaller (eds.),
A Biographical Dictionary of English Radicals of the Seventeenth Century , 3 vols., 1982–4;Calendar of the Committee for Compounding , vol. iii, pp. 1883–4; private research.]
Jon Stallworthy
,Isaac (1890–1918), artist and poet, was born in Bristol 25 November 1890, the second child and second son in the family of four sons and two daughters of Dovber (later Barnett) Rosenberg, a Lithuanian who had emigrated from Moscow to avoid conscription into the Russian army and settled in Bristol, working as a pedlar, and his wife Hacha, daughter of an innkeeper called Davidov of Drinsk in Lithuania.
The family moved to London in 1897, and Rosenberg was educated at the Baker Street Board School in Stepney, where his natural gift for both drawing and writing so impressed the headmaster that he allowed him to spend most of his time on them.
Out of school, he read poetry and drew with chalks on the pavements of the East End.
In 1904 he was apprenticed to the firm of Carl Hentschel, engravers, in Fleet Street.
His parents hoped that this might prove a stepping-stone to a painter's career, but Rosenberg hated the work, only deriving consolation from his reading of such poets as Byron, Keats, Shelley, and, most importantly, William Blake [qq.v.]; from his own writing; and from evening painting classes at the art school of Birkbeck College.
At last, his apprenticeship completed, he was free and, in 1911, three generous Jewish women undertook to pay his tuition fees at the Slade School of Fine Art.
There he came to know the painters, Mark Gertler, D. G. Bomberg, W. P. Roberts, C. R. W. Nevinson, and (Sir) Stanley Spencer [qq.v.], but increasingly found art and poetry incompatible and he himself was drawn towards poems, ten of which were privately printed as a pamphlet,Night and Day , in 1912.
‘Art is not a plaything,’ he wrote, ‘it is blood and tears, it must grow up with one; and I believe I have begun too late.’
Even so, he was a capable draughtsman and painted some impressive landscapes, portraits, and allegorical scenes, a few of which were exhibited at the Whitechapel Gallery's exhibition of twentieth-century art in 1914.
Rosenberg had hoped to earn a living from his portraits, but that year he learned that his lungs were weak and was advised to seek a warmer climate.
Having a married sister in Cape Town, he sailed for South Africa in 1914, where he painted some pictures, gave a series of lectures on modern art, and published a few articles and poems.
In 1915 he returned to England, where he published a second small pamphlet of poems,Youth , and enlisted in the army.
Hating the idea of killing, he had hoped to serve with the Medical Corps but instead was assigned to the ‘Bantam’ battalion, being, as he said, ‘too short for any other’.
The anti-Semitism that he there encountered made him more conscious of the Jewishness that had not been particularly important to him before.
He wrote a poem, ‘The Jew’, and a play, ‘Moses’, published in a pamphlet of that title shortly before he crossed the Channel with the King's Own Royal Lancaster Regiment in June 1916.
Rosenberg's poems from the front show him to have absorbed the great tradition of English pastoral poetry, but his tone is different: more impersonal, informal, ironic, and lacking the indignation characteristic of the work of Wilfred Owen and Siegfried Sassoon [qq.v.].
In such poems as ‘Break of Day in the Trenches’, ‘Returning We Hear the Larks’, and his masterpiece, ‘Dead Man's Dump’, Rosenberg succeeded in his intention of writing ‘Simple poetry — that is where an interesting complexity of thought is kept in tone and right value to the dominating idea so that it is understandable and still ungraspable.’
Rosenberg was killed on the western front 1 April 1918 and buried in an unmarked grave.
[Ian Parsons (ed.),
The Collected Works of Isaac Rosenberg,1979; Joseph Cohen,Journey to the Trenches: the Life of Isaac Rosenberg 1890–1918 , 1975; Jean Liddiard,Isaac Rosenberg: the Half Used Life , 1975.]
Isobel Grundy
,Mary Ann (c. 1746–post 1810), writer, was born c .1746, the only child and heiress of an Anglican retired merchant already past seventy when she was born and his thirty-year-old Roman Catholic wife.
Her father died when she was two, and, after education at the Bar Convent in York, she was courted at fourteen by the thirty-five-year-old Joseph Radcliffe: ‘poor, little me!…like a bird in a cage, I fluttered to be at liberty.’
She eloped while visiting London.
‘And from these transactions…have I to date the  aera of my misfortunes.’
She bore the first of her eight children at fifteen (the last two died young).
After her fortune was withheld by law and her husband's business ventures in London and elsewhere failed, she ran a coffee-house, took in lodgers, and chaperoned a pregnant unmarried young lady.
Her last spell of living with her husband ended when she sought work as a governess in London.
Other jobs included sewing, shopkeeping, and housekeeping, 1781–3, for Mary Stewart, Countess of Traquair, an old school friend at whose home she met Alexander Geddes [q.v.], the liberal Catholic theologian and translator of the Bible.
Her Memoirs (1810) mention the writing of fiction obliquely (‘was I soaring into the airy regions of fiction, I would quickly change the theme’), but do not mention any of the novels ascribed to her.
Her publisher set her name to her polemic,The Female Advocate (1799) though she wanted anonymity, out of‘a view to extend the sale, from the same name at that period standing high amongst the novel readers’.
Sales strategy and the fame of Ann Radcliffe [q.v.]probably account for other ascriptions and half-ascriptions to Mary Ann Radcliffe, first made in 1802 though some refer to 1790.
Radclife's New Novelist's Pocket Magazine published its two numbers as hers in 1802 (giving her current address correctly); the second credits her with The Secret Oath , also 1802, a chapbook.
The same year a Minerva Press catalogue listed ‘Mrs. Radcliffe’ as author of The Fate of Velina de Guidova (1790), an epistolary novel; in 1814 another of its catalogues listed ‘Mrs. Ann Radcliffe’as author of Radzivil , a romance ‘translated from the Russian of the celebrated M. Wocklow’(1790), whose text speaks of its author, translator (a ‘young gentleman’), and editor-reviser as all male.
In 1809 J. F. Hughes published Manfroné, or, the One-Handed Monk as by ‘Mary Anne Radcliffe’, and switched authorship of The Mysterious Baron (1808) to her from ‘Eliza Ratcliffe’.
Manfroné , reprinted in 1819, 1825, 1839,[1878], and 1971 as either hers or Ann Radcliffe's, was claimed in a letter to the Royal Literary Fund by Louisa Theresa Bellenden Ker.
An extremely gory, high-flown gothic novel, it is nothing like Velina or Radzivil , and none of them resembles Mary Ann Radcliffe's known work.
If not a novelist, Radcliffe remains an unusual writer.
The Female Advocate, or an Attempt to Recover the Rights of Women from Male Usurpation , 1799 (which, despite advice from Arthur Murphy, q.v., led to ‘an unlucky circumstance…between the bookseller [Vernor and Hood]and myself’), discusses the shrinking female job market and the snare of prostitution; its feeling but down-to-earth tone reflects harsh experience.
‘All women possess not the Amazonian spirit of a Wolstonecraft [sic ]; but, indeed, unremitted oppression is sometimes a sufficient apology for their throwing off the gentle garb of a female.’
Her Memoirs (which reprints her earlier book) were begun at Portobello near Edinburgh in 1807, finished in dire poverty after five years housebound with rheumatism, and published by subscription, 1810.
[Bar Convent MSS, York; Royal Literary Fund MSS, London; Letters BL 4/334/8, 9, and 11, Scottish Catholic Archives, Edinburgh; Lady Traquair's diary, Traquair House, Peebles;Memoirs of Mrs. Mary Ann Radcliffe; in Familiar Letters to her Female Friend , 1810; Montague Summers,A Gothic Bibliography , 1941; Dorothy Blakey,The Minerva Press, 1790–1820 , 1939 [for 1935]; Mary Ann Radcliffe,The Female Advocate , 1799 (ed. with introduction by Gina Luria, 1974); Reginald C. Fuller,Alexander Geddes, 1737–1802, Pioneer of Biblical Criticism , 1984.]
P C Seaward
or ,William (1617–1701), MP, was baptized at St Peter le Poer, London, 10 April 1617, the eldest of the ten children (five sons and five daughters), of whom the last three died in childhood, of Sir Henry Garraway [q.v.], draper and lord mayor of London in 1639–40, of Broad Street, London, and his wife Margaret, daughter of Henry Clitherow, merchant of London.
He was educated at Pembroke College, Cambridge, where he was admitted in 1632.
In 1635 he was granted a passport to travel abroad.
His father was one of the staunchest Royalists in the City during the civil war, and Garway himself took a commission in the royal army as captain of foot.
He was captured in November 1644.
In 1646 his father died.
After the Restoration Garway was in 1661 returned to Parliament for Chichester, and quickly became one of its most assiduous members.
He was soon associated with a group around Sir John Vaughan [q.v.], also including Sir Thomas Littleton and Sir Richard Temple [q.v.], who frequently voiced concern during the 1660s that the restored government's need to secure itself in power, coupled with Parliament's Royalist enthusiasm, might lead to the erosion of England's laws and liberties.
With Vaughan, he defended Temple and George Digby, second Earl of Bristol [q.v.], from the government's attempt to prevent their impeachment of Edward Hyde, first Earl of Clarendon [q.v.].
Before the second Dutch war they argued for parliamentary control of the revenue destined for the war, and during the session of 1666–7 Garway was in the forefront of the group's attacks on government corruption, proposing a statutory committee to examine the accounts of the money which had been given for the war with the Dutch.
Despite the failure of the bill to give effect to the committee, Garway was one of the government's critics who were included in the royal commission on public accounts appointed during the following prorogation.
With the fall of Clarendon and the rise to power of George Villiers, second Duke of Buckingham [q.v.], his ally in the session of 1666–7, Garway was appointed in 1668 to the committee of trade.
Nevertheless, throughout 1669, often in concert with Sir Thomas Lee [q.v.], he continued to press for further investigation of corrupt practices in government accounts, to argue for limits to the supply granted to the king and against the new assessment and excise taxes, the first of which he described as ‘a mark of our chains’.
In 1671, however, he accepted a commissionership of the customs.
Many were surprised when he and Sir Thomas Lee (who later admitted to receiving money from the lord treasurer, Thomas, first Baron Clifford of Chudleigh, q.v.) supported the government in February 1673 in its request for £1.2 million in order to carry on the war with the Dutch.
Despite this, though, Garway continued to articulate suspicions of the court.
From 1673 he was increasingly concerned over the growth of popery.
He criticized the French war, and joined the attack on the members of the cabal.
In 1675 he attacked the granting of money for rebuilding the navy.
At the end of the autumn session of Parliament he was finally dismissed from his position as customs commissioner.
While he continued to press the court against the excise and against France, he seems to have maintained his distance from the most prominent of the government's opponents, Anthony Ashley Cooper, first Earl of Shaftesbury [q.v.], and Buckingham.
During the Exclusion Parliaments, in which he sat for Arundel, he opposed the exclusion of the Duke of York (later James II): instead, he demanded measures against popery, frequent Parliaments, the disbandment of the army, and the uniting of the Protestants.
Garway's resistance to exclusion perhaps earned him the respect of the government of James II.
He was returned again to the 1685 Parliament, and in 1688 was approved as deputy lieutenant and JP.
Nevertheless, he greeted the Revolution with relief: in the Convention Parliament he was among the first to support William's coup, although he saw it as crucial to take the opportunity to make England's liberties more secure.
As the new government consolidated itself, Garway returned to his more customary role as the watchdog of the nation's purse: in 1689–90 he was active in pursuing miscarriages in the supplying of the troops in Ireland.
In the election of 1690 Garway finally lost his seat at Arundel.
Although he lived for eleven more years, he did not stand again.
Garway's learning and his frugality were widely admired, and he seems to have demanded of the government the same standards.
Garway was a staunch Royalist, who nevertheless, like his early associate John Vaughan, seemed to believe that constant vigilance had to be exercised to prevent the loss of England's liberties or the wasting of its wealth.
He never married, and died 4 August 1701.
He was buried in Ford, Sussex.
[B. D. Henning,The House of Commons 1660–1690 , 1983; Bodleian Library, Carte MSS 215, fol. 29.]
J K Almond
,John (1799–1868), ironmaster, was born in Worcester 21 December 1799, a son of John Vaughan, subsequently at Guest's Dowlais Ironworks.
He had at least two brothers.
He joined his father as an ironworker in south Wales, progressing at Dowlais to become a foreman.
Around 1825 he took a post in Carlisle as manager of a small ironworks, and in 1832 he was appointed mill manager for Losh, Wilson, & Bell's Walker Ironworks near Newcastle upon Tyne.
In 1839 Vaughan and Henry W. F. Bolckow agreed to enter into partnership to exploit the iron trade, Bolckow to provide the initial £10,000 capital, and profits to be shared equally.
The partners opened their works at Middlesbrough in 1841, making iron castings and wrought products.
Vaughan in 1845–6 erected four iron blast-furnaces at Witton Park in county Durham.
In 1850 he decided to mine the seam of ironstone cropping out on the Cleveland Hills east of Middlesbrough, soon erecting nine blast-furnaces for its treatment and establishing the commercial viability of Cleveland iron.
In 1855 the partners' output of manufactured iron exceeded 120,000 tons; they employed 4,000 people and consumed 600,000 tons of coal.
In succeeding years they continued to expand while others, attracted by their success, also produced iron in the district.
‘Jacky’ Vaughan was one of the great ‘working’ironmasters.
From nothing he amassed a fortune estimated at close to a million pounds by a combination of sustained hard work and practical technical ability.
After 1855 his grip on the business slackened; in 1864, when the partnership was converted into a joint-stock company with industrial assets valued at about one million pounds, Vaughan became deputy chairman of Bolckow, Vaughan & Co.
Ltd.
For many years he was a Wesleyan Methodist, but then he turned towards the Church of England.
He joined the first board of Tees conservancy commissioners in 1852, and a year later was among Middlesbrough's first councillors, becoming the town's third mayor in 1855.
He was appointed JP and a deputy lieutenant for the North Riding of Yorkshire.
He was twice married, first in the 1820s to Eleanor Downing (or Downie) of Cumberland, who bore him four sons but died c .1834, and second, to a widow, originally Anne Poole of Newcastle upon Tyne, sister of Henry Bolckow's first wife.
The youngest son by his first marriage, Thomas, survived to inherit the major part of the estate.
By his second marriage John Vaughan had no children of his own, but his wife's three children by previous marriages took his name.
He died at his house, 1 Hyde Park Gate, London, 16 September 1868.
[J. S. Jeans,Pioneers of the Cleveland Iron Trade , 1875; W. H. Burnett,Old Cleveland…
Local Writers and Local Worthies , 1886; C. A. Hempstead,Cleveland Iron and Steel Background and Nineteenth Century History , 1979; Ron Gott,Henry Bolckow — Founder of Teeside , 1968; newspaper clippings in Middlesbrough Central Reference Library.]
Adrian Johns
,John (c. 1618–1680), bookseller, was born in London about 1618, the son of John Martyn of the Merchant Taylors' Company.
He was apprenticed to a bookseller, Humphrey Robinson, on 4 February 1635, and became a freeman of the Stationers' Company on 1 March 1643 and a liveryman in 1657.
From 1651 he worked from the Bell in St Paul's Churchyard, developing a prosperous partnership with James Allestry, and becoming one of the most prominent booksellers of Restoration London.
He published works by Abraham Cowley, Samuel Butler, Margaret Cavendish (Duchess of Newcastle), Thomas Blount, and John Graunt [qq.v.], whose sister Sarah he married.
At the same time he established important links with the continental book trade.
The most significant of Martyn's activities involved publications on natural philosophy, and especially the works of the newly formed Royal Society.
In its charter Charles II gave the Society the right to license its own publications and to appoint privileged printers.
In 1663 Martyn and Allestry were sworn into the position.
In their capacity as the Society's ‘Printers’(neither was in fact a printer himself) Martyn and Allestry played an important role in the establishment of experimental philosophy, publishing such key works as the Micrographia (1665) of Robert Hooke [q.v.]and the History of the Royal Society (1667) by Thomas Sprat [q.v.].
Allestry died in 1670, but Martyn continued as the Society's main link with the book trade for another decade.
Martyn and Allestry also produced the first ‘scientific’ journal, the Philosophical Transactions , edited by Henry Oldenburg [q.v.], which became by far the most important international forum for natural philosophy and eventually the official journal of the Royal Society.
Readers attributed to Martyn a degree of responsibility for the content of the journal, and some sent their comments to him rather than to Oldenburg.
Scholars and gentlemen were much given to complaining of the venality and corruption of stationers, but Martyn was to a large extent an exception.
He was portrayed as the ‘thinking’ bookseller and by the 1670s his shop had become a place where London's intellectual élite could expect to meet, gossip, and scheme.
Martyn died 3 July 1680, aged sixty-two, at the home of his brother-in-law in Brockley in the parish of Deptford.
Hooke attended the funeral.
He was buried under the still-skeletal St Paul's of Sir Christopher Wren [q.v.], in the chapel of St Faith's, where his monument can still be seen.
[L. Rostenberg,Literary, Political, Scientific, Religious, and Legal Publishing, Printing and Bookselling in England, 1551–1700: Twelve Studies , 2 vols., 1965;idem , ‘John Martyn, Printer to the Royal Society’,Papers of the Bibliographical Society of America , vol. xlvi, 1952; C. A. Rivington, ‘Early Printers to the Royal Society, 1663–1708’,Notes and Records of the Royal Society , vol. xxxix, part 1, 1984; records of the Stationers' Company; A. R. and M. B. Hall (eds.),
The Correspondence of Henry Oldenburg , 13 vols., 1965–86.]
David Edward
,James Latham Mcdiarmid , Lord Clyde (1898–1975), lord justice-general of Scotland and lord president of the Court of Session, was born 30 October 1898 at 17 Heriot Row, Edinburgh, the elder son (there were no daughters) of James Avon Clyde [q.v.], later lord justice-general of Scotland, and his wife Anna Margaret McDiarmid, daughter of Professor Peter Wallwork Latham of Cambridge [q.v.].
His parents were formidable personalities.
Having, as a small boy, saved his pocket money to buy his mother a scarf for her birthday, he was sharply told to take it back: he had bought it at a Liberal shop.
Although he later followed almost every step of his father's career, he was under constant pressure to succeed but did not have the advantage of his father's majestic presence, intellect, or self-confidence.
His stern upbringing may explain an insensitivity to the feelings of others less resilient than himself which he sometimes displayed on the bench, particularly in criminal appeals.
He was educated at the Edinburgh Academy; Trinity College, Oxford; and the University of Edinburgh.
He was commissioned in the Royal Garrison Artillery towards the end of World War I. He obtained a third class in literae humaniores at Oxford in 1921 but a pass with distinction in the LLB at Edinburgh in 1924.
He was admitted to the Scots bar in 1924 and was counsel in three causes célèbres of the period.
As junior to Craigie (later Lord) Aitchison [q.v.]he appeared for John Donald Merritt at his trial for the murder of his mother in 1927, and for Oscar Slater at his appeal in 1928.
In 1932 he appeared in the House of Lords in Donoghue v. Stevenson .
He took silk in 1936, and became Conservative MP for North Edinburgh (1950–4).
Appointed lord advocate and admitted to the Privy Council in 1951, he became lord justice-general and lord president in 1954.
Slight of build and exceptionally agile in body and mind, he was rarely at rest.
Like his father, he did not practise unreceptive judicial silence.
Hitching of his gown, which was always falling off his shoulders, and faster twiddling of his pencil, meant that counsel would be wise to move on.
Further argument was profitless when he started shuffling his notes for the judgment which he would, in almost every case, deliver without hesitation or correction as soon as counsel sat down.
Clyde was not popular with some sections of the legal profession and of the press, which suggested that his appointment to high office was due more to birth and political influence than to legal talent.
But his shortcomings (of which he was engagingly aware) reflected those very traits of character which made him, in the words of The Times obituary, a great public servant and a most lovable man.
He was decisive and never wasted time on second thoughts.
His deceptively simple judgments dealt only with the essential points, stated the law tersely and clearly, and rarely provoked dissent.
Although (or perhaps because) his filing system consisted of used envelopes and a blunt pencil, his court administration was quick, simple, and efficient.
An agenda was something to be got through, not discussed.
He had a deep contempt for the bureaucratic mind and took particular delight in circumventing bureaucratic obstruction.
The backlog left by his predecessor (T. M. Cooper, Baron Cooper of Culross, q.v.) was soon cleared and was not allowed to build up again.
He sought out — he did not summon — those he wished to consult, and if persuaded would act at once.
Under his guidance, Parliament House was transformed from a nineteenth-century warren into a modern court-house and nothing gave him greater pleasure than to explore, and share with others, its secrets and treasures.
Known to everyone as Hamish, he was quite without side (he refused a peerage), and off the bench, and sometimes on it, he had the charm and endless curiosity of a small boy.
(His appearance on the bench was nicely caught in a cartoon by David Langton.)
He loved Scotland, its countryside, its history, its monuments, and its books.
He was happiest in old clothes, with a pipe in his mouth and his much-loved wife at his side, gardening, tending trees, reading, or playing with his model railway, at Briglands, the house at Rumbling Bridge designed for his father by Sir Robert Lorimer [q.v.].
He served for twenty years as vice-chairman of the National Library of Scotland.
With the chairman, David Lindsay, Earl of Crawford and Balcarres [q.v.], he worked tirelessly for the library at a critical period in its history.
He was appointed a deputy lieutenant of Kinross-shire in 1964, and was awarded the honorary degree of LLD by the universities of Edinburgh (1954), St Andrews (1955), and Aberdeen (1960).
In 1928 he married Margaret Letitia (died 1974), daughter of Arthur Edmond DuBuisson, barrister; they had one son, James John (the third Lord Clyde on the Scottish bench), and one daughter, Margaret Ann (Lady Butler).
Clyde died at home in Rumbling Bridge 30 June 1975.
[The Times , 8 July 1975; private information; personal knowledge.]
Susanne P Stark
,Dorothy Miller (1873–1957), novelist, journalist, and translator, was born 17 May 1873 in Abingdon, Berkshire, the third of four daughters (there were no sons) of Charles Richardson, grocer and tradesman, of Abingdon, and his wife Mary Miller, daughter of Edward Taylor, manufacturer, of East Coker, Somerset.
She attended schools in Abingdon and Worthing, where the family settled in 1880.
In 1883 the Richardsons moved to Putney.
There Dorothy was educated first by a governess and then in the intellectually stimulating environment of Southborough House, which provided the only formal education she valued in retrospect.
Charles Richardson's aspirations to rise socially and live the life of an intellectual gentleman, combined with his unwise investments, led the family into bankruptcy.
Dorothy thus had to start earning her own living when she was seventeen.
In 1891 she taught at a finishing school in Hanover for six months and, after her return to England, at a school in Finsbury Park.
Finding teaching too confining, she gave up a post as a governess in 1895.
Her parents, who had been forced to sell their house in London, had moved to Chiswick in 1893.
Mary Richardson, who suffered from depressions, committed suicide in November 1895 during a stay in Hastings with her daughter Dorothy.
In 1896 Dorothy Richardson moved to Bloomsbury, earning a meagre living as an assistant to a Harley Street dentist.
In London she showed an interest in various political, feminist, philosophical, and religious avant-garde movements of her time.
She was a close friend of H. G. Wells [q.v.], with whom she also had a brief affair, and who, amongst others, encouraged her to write.
Having suffered a breakdown, she gave up her job in 1907 and spent some time in Sussex.
There she felt attracted to Quakerism, which became the topic of her first two books, published in 1914.
From 1907 Richardson devoted herself to a journalistic career, publishing periodical articles on topics which ranged from literature and politics to dentistry, as well as reviews, sketches, short stories, and poems.
She began to write fiction in 1912 while staying in Cornwall with friends.
Eleven books of her best-known work,Pilgrimage , were published between 1915 and 1938; the first collected edition of all thirteen volumes of this novel appeared posthumously in 1967.
Pilgrimage provides an impressionistic account of the central character Miriam Henderson, which is modelled on the author's own migratory life between 1891 and 1915.
Plunging into Miriam's multi-layered consciousness, Richardson narrates everything through the mind of her heroine, thereby frequently sacrificing form and selectivity, which she considered to be characteristics of male writing.
Due to her innovatory use of the stream-of-consciousness technique, she has often been juxtaposed with James Joyce and A. Virginia Woolf [qq.v.], who claimed that Richardson had invented ‘the psychological sentence of the feminine gender’.
In 1917 Dorothy Richardson married the consumptive artist Alan Odle, fifteen years her junior, whom she looked after until his death in 1948, spending half the year in London and half in Cornwall.
He was the son of Samuel Odle, bank clerk.
There were no children of the marriage.
Dorothy Richardson died in a nursing home in Beckenham, Kent, 17 June 1957.
[John Cowper Powys,Dorothy M. Richardson , 1931; John Rosenberg,Dorothy Richardson: the Genius they Forgot , 1973; Gloria G. Fromm,Dorothy Richardson: a Biography , 1977; obituaries in The Times and Manchester Guardian , 18 June 1957.]
A J Stirling
,Philip Henry (1821–1889), photographer, drawing master, and book illustrator, a member of an old Huguenot family, was born in Sandhurst, Surrey, 21 April 1821, the fifth son of a family of five sons and four daughters of William de la Motte [q.v.], drawing master and water-colourist, and his wife Mary Anne Gage.
Tutored by his father, who was a drawing master at the Royal Military Academy, Sandhurst, Delamotte became skilful at drawing and engraving.
Among his earliest recorded works were the illustrations to the catalogue of the objects shown at the 1850 exhibition of ancient and medieval art at the Society of Arts.
Perhaps his greatest contribution to the arts was his key role as a pioneer photographer and photographic instructor, establishing himself as the most accomplished artist turned photographer of his generation.
He was a main contributor to the photographic exhibition held in the Great Room of the Society of Arts in London in 1852, which was the first of its kind.
In 1853 Delamotte's manual The Practice of Photography was published by his colleague Joseph Cundall, at whose Bond Street premises the artist held photographic exhibitions and gave photographic instruction.
The next year he displayed photographs of Ireland at the Society of Antiquaries.
Delamotte belonged to that Society and was a member of the Society of Arts, and of the Society of Artists, having exhibited a number of architectural drawings at the Royal Academy.
Among his best-known commissions was the photography (done weekly from 1851 to 1854) of the reconstruction of the Crystal Palace at Sydenham, where Delamotte displayed his skills of composition and perspective, applying the objectivity of the camera to produce masterly photographs that were artistically sound.
His landscape and portrait studies were equally successful.
However, in 1855 he took up the post of professor of drawing at King's College, London, which he combined with book illustration.
Over the next thirty years he was to write or illustrate over seventy books.
He also continued to give drawing lessons, and the grandchildren of Queen Victoria were among his pupils.
In 1873 he published The Art of Sketching from Nature , a sketching manual where he described the water-colour sketching technique, which he illustrated with his own lithographs; 1874 saw the publication of the History of Holland House which was illustrated by his own carbon photographic prints.
The versatility of the artist was shown in 1876 with the publication of the Buckland edition of Natural History and Antiquities of Selborne by Gilbert White [q.v.], for which Delamotte surprisingly contributed a charming series of bird and animal illustrations.
Delamotte was appointed to the chair of fine art at King's College, London, in 1879 and is remembered for introducing women to the art lectures.
He continued to practise photography as a hobby until 1887, taking an ‘unalloyed enjoyment of the art’, much as he had done with his drawing and engraving.
He married Ellen George.
They had five daughters and a son, Digby, who died in 1884.
Delamotte died in Bromley, Kent, 24 February 1889.
[Family archives; A. J. Stirling, ‘Philip Henry Delamotte: Artist and Photographer’,RSA Journal , vol. cxxxviii, June 1990; Royal Society of Arts archives; King's College, London, archives.]
Ian J Gentles
,Samuel (1616– c. 1672), haberdasher and radical pamphleteer, was baptized 13 September 1618 (two years after he was born) at St Chad's, Shrewsbury, the first of eight children of Daniel Chidley, tailor of Shrewsbury, and his wife Katherine [q.v.].
His parents were religious separatists who, to escape persecution, fled to London at the end of the 1620s.
Daniel became free of the Haberdashers' Company in 1632, and apprenticed Samuel to the same trade in 1634.
He was made free of the company in 1649.
In the 1630s the Chidleys were active in separatist circles and assisted John Lilburne [q.v.]in his struggle against the bishops.
Samuel, who lived with his mother until 1652 or later, collaborated with her in the 1640s in campaigning for religious freedom and upholding the autonomy of individual congregations.
Chidley was also a vehement sabbatarian and iconoclast, who denounced the observance of Christmas.
In the mid-1640s he became active in the Leveller movement.
From the time of the Putney debates (October 1647) if not before, he was a treasurer for the Leveller party.
In November 1647 he was at Ware promoting the Agreement of the People among the mutinous troops of the army of Thomas Fairfax (third Baron Fairfax of Cameron, q.v.).
For his pains the House of Commons put him in gaol.
His sojourn there was brief, because in January 1648 he was active in promoting the Leveller ‘Smithfield’ petition.
With the collapse of the Leveller movement in 1649 Chidley turned his energies to building a separatist congregation in London, promoting social reform, and enriching himself on the spoils of revolution.
Besides publishing pamphlets and organizing petitions, he brought out a short-lived newspaper, the Flying Eagle (November–December 1652), in which he denounced the abuses of the day.
These included the non-payment of military arrears, the excise tax, the slowness and excessive centralization of justice, tithes, and hanging for theft.
On the latter subject Chidley published his most famous tract,A Cry against a Crying Sinne (1652, reprinted 1657).
Radical activism was no hindrance to Chidley's treading the path to prosperity during the 1650s.
In 1649 he was appointed a registrar of military debentures.
From his vantage point in Worcester House he became involved in the speculative buying of soldiers' bills, with which he made fifteen purchases of Crown land, mostly on behalf of other men.
His financial dealings led to a number of lawsuits and accusations of fraud, but nothing was ever proved against him.
Before the end of the Interregnum he had amassed a modest fortune and had begun styling himself gentleman.
As with other ‘new men’ of lower social status who prospered in the 1650s, however, the Restoration spelled economic and political ruin.
All Crown lands were resumed by the king, and in 1664 Chidley landed in prison for refusing to swear the oath of allegiance and supremacy.
The following year his whole family was carried off by the plague, while in 1666 most of his remaining property was destroyed by the fire.
In 1668 he found himself in gaol once again, this time on a charge of disturbing the peace.
By 1672, bereft of family and fortune, he had returned to Shrewsbury, where he occupied a dwelling of only one hearth.
His date of death is unknown.
[I. Gentles, ‘London Levellers in the English Revolution: the Chidleys and their circle’,Journal of Ecclesiastical History , vol. xxix, 1978, pp. 281–309; D. Ludlow, ‘Samuel Chidley’, in R. L. Greaves and R. Zaller (eds.),
Biographical Dictionary of British Radicals in the Seventeenth Century , 3 vols., 1982–4; private research.]
John Harris
,George (d. 1714), nurseryman and garden designer, was apprenticed to John Rose, gardener to Arthur Capel, Earl of Essex [q.v.]and Charles II.
Rose recognized London's latent genius and sent him to study French gardens.
It may be significant that Rose was working for Henry Compton [q.v.], bishop of London, in 1675, for it was Compton who, in the words of Stephen Switzer [q.v.], was London's ‘great Encourager’, employing him at Fulham Palace.
Another catalyst in London's career may have been Lord Essex, who, with his gardener Moses Cook, laid out a forest garden at Cassiobury in 1677.
With others, Cook and London were partners in 1681 in the founding of the Brompton Park nursery, where London secured sole control in 1687 in partnership with Henry Wise [q.v.], thus beginning not only one of the great partnerships in garden history, but the rise to European fame of the nursery.
London and Wise were as one, not unlike Sir John Vanbrugh and Nicholas Hawksmoor [qq.v.]:
London was in the field and Wise administered the nursery.
An early reference to London's professional advice occurs jointly with Cook at Burghley House in 1683.
In the same year the gardens at Longleat were begun, and also London's association with the court architect William Talman [q.v.].
Wherever Talman built, London gardened.
Both Longleat and Burghley demonstrate London's virtuosity in the design of parterres, creation of waterworks, and planting of avenues, specialities which culminated in the huge works at Bretby House and Chatsworth in the 1680s and 1690s.
If Longleat was the first of London's parterre designs, Dawley (1695) perfected the style.
Nothing in England could match the stupendous parterre dug out of the hill at New Park, Richmond (1692), where London concurrently designed a forest garden, prophetic of the early liberated style at Wray Wood, Castle Howard.
At Cholmondeley Hall (1693) London demonstrated his great skill in kitchen gardening, but also showed an increasing interest in architectonic episodes.
His best water gardens were at Bretby, and here the art of fountain design was never bettered in England.
A contrast between Dyrham Park (1700) and Wanstead House (1706) is telling of London's versatility.
The former was empirical and ad hoc in composition, adumbrating the rococo garden, whereas the latter reflected the visit that London made with William Bentinck, first Earl of Portland [q.v.], to study French gardens in 1698, and to meet Le Nôtre.
For size and splendour Wanstead was excelled only by Versailles in the 1660s, and it earned London the sobriquet of the English Le Nôtre.
In 1688 Portland had become superintendent of the Royal Gardens, with London as his deputy.
These two, with Talman (as comptroller of the works), formed a junta for architecture and gardening under the patronage of William III.
London was involved in all the royal gardens, most notably at Hampton Court, and from 1694 he was assisted by Wise, who in 1702 succeeded Portland as superintendent.
London's influence was thus widespread, and the gardens attributed to him may be numbered in their hundreds.
Switzer noted that he could give ‘directions once or twice a Year in most of the…
Gardens in England’.
L. Knyff and J. Kip's Britannia Illustrata (1707) is an engraved memorial of his achievement.
London died 12 January 1714, leaving estates in Thames Ditton, purchased from Talman, who built there a small house for his lifelong friend.
He was buried in Fulham.
[Stephen Switzer,Ichnographia Rustica , 1718; Sandra Morris, London and Wise, Garden Makers, Architectural Association essay, June 1988; private information.]
Keith Goodway
,William (1730–1803), landscape designer and gardener, whose early life is obscure, took up the post of head gardener to Sir Nathaniel Curzon at Kedleston, Derbyshire, on 8 September 1756.
He remained there until 1760, perhaps leaving his post because the appointment of Robert Adam [q.v.]with ‘the intire manadgement of his Grounds’ left Emes with little scope.
While at Kedleston, he had already started altering the earlier, formal landscape and had made the upper lake.
Emes moved to Bowbridge Fields, Mackworth, a farmhouse about two miles away.
He developed an extensive practice as a landscape designer (seventy commissions are known), largely in the north midlands and Wales.
His style is similar to that of Lancelot Brown [q.v.], although there is no evidence that he ever worked with Brown, and at Eaton Hall in 1763, the first Earl Grosvenor [q.v.]called Emes in to replace Brown.
The elegant plans, in indian ink on vellum, which he presented to his clients, showed his proposed alterations to the landscape, often with serpentine lakes whose ends were concealed in woodland, with single trees and clumps set in parkland and with tree belts around the boundary, often with a ‘ride round the Improvements’ winding through them.
It was said that ‘Mr Eame excells in the laying out Water’ and he was called in to introduce it into landscapes where it was lacking, as at Hawkstone, where he made the River Hawk, a lake one and a half miles long, in 1786.
He anticipated the later work of Humphry Repton [q.v.]by creating flower gardens adjacent to the house, as at Sandon in 1781, where he laid out a garden under the windows of the drawing-room, planted with flowers and flowering shrubs and with a central basin of water with goldfish.
Some of his commissions continued for many years; at both Chirk Castle and Erddig he supervised the landscaping for twenty-four years.
Although Emes designed a few minor buildings, such as a lodge at Attingham and a greenhouse at Penrice, his role as an architect is not significant.
At a number of places his landscaping was contemporaneous with work on the house by Samuel or James Wyatt [q.v.], a professional association that may have started at Kedleston.
William Emes married his servant, Mary, the daughter of John Innocent, a tailor, in 1758.
They had five sons and three daughters.
One son, John Emes (1763–1808), was an artist and engraver, but later became better known, with his wife Rebecca, as a goldsmith.
After his wife died in 1789, Emes moved to Hampshire and took a lease of Elvetham Park from Sir Henry Gough-Calthorpe.
A number of commissions in the south of England date from this period, some of which were carried out in partnership with John Webb (1754–1828), who had earlier been his foreman and continued the practice after Emes's death.
Emes moved to London and died 13 March 1803 at Vicarage House, St Giles, Cripplegate, the home of his daughter Sarah, wife of the Revd William Holmes.
[Archives at Kedleston, Eaton Hall, and Sandon Hall; Elvetham archives (Hampshire Record Office); Bishop's transcripts of parish registers of Mugginton and Mackworth and marriage bond (Lichfield Joint Record Office); register of burials, St Giles, Cripplegate (Guildhall Library); PCC Wills 1398 folio 767, PROB 11 (Public Record Office).]
R Iden
, Sir Richard (1722–1799), merchant, MP, and founder of the seaside resort of Bognor, Sussex, was born in York 5 October 1722, the youngest of five children (of whom only he and his sister survived infancy) of Joseph Hotham, gentleman, and his wife Sarah Bradley.
In 1791 Sir Richard erected a memorial to his parents at Skelton church, near York.
Nothing is known of Hotham's early years, but at some time he established himself as a hatter and hosier in Serle Street, Lincoln's Inn, London, and later (c .1752) in the Strand, advertising his wares by circulating copper tokens in London and the provinces.
Around 1760 his interests extended to chartered shipping with the East India Company and he was the author of two pamphlets,Reflections upon East India Shipping (1773) and A Candid State of Affairs Relative to the East India Shipping (1774), which sharply criticized the company's bad management.
Hotham built his own house, Merton Grove, at Wimbledon.
He was knighted on 12 April 1769, allegedly for expressing the loyalty of Surrey to King George III during the agitation by John Wilkes [q.v.], and appointed sheriff of Surrey, 1770–1.
A prolonged dispute with Wimbledon vestry committee, over developing a public highway to Wandsworth, led to his election as their chairman in 1778.
In 1780 he was elected MP for Southwark, defeating Henry Thrale and thereby provoking the contempt of Dr Samuel Johnson [q.v.].
He was a member of the Whig opposition and of the St Alban's Tavern Group, which attempted a union of parties.
After narrowly losing the 1784 by-election, Hotham visited Sussex, where he embarked upon the ambitious scheme of transforming the fishing hamlet of Bognor into the select watering-place of ‘Hothamton’.
Some 1,600 acres of land were purchased and the building of several mansions and terraces commenced in January 1787.
Having created his sea-bathing resort, this enterprising and sometimes contentious individual achieved the recognition he sought: the patronage of the upper classes.
Substantial debts led to the dispersal of his estates after his death, but Bognor's reputation for health and respectability continued to attract royalty and nobility.
He married in 1743, by licence at Chelsea Hospital, Frances Atkinson, of Stockton-on-Tees, who died without issue 1 February 1777.
He had adopted, unofficially, arms similar to those of the Hotham baronetcy, to which he was not connected.
George Romney [q.v.]painted his portrait in 1793.
Hotham died in Bognor 13 March 1799 and was buried in the local parish churchyard of South Bersted.
[G. Young,A History of Bognor Regis , 1983; J. B. Davis,The Origin and Description of Bognor, or Hothamton , 1807; L. Namier and J. Brooke,The House of Commons 1754–1790 , vol. ii, 1964;Gentleman's Magazine , vol. xl, 1770, vol. xlvii, 1777, and vol. lxix, 1799; parish registers of Holy Trinity, King's Court, York, and Skelton, near York (both at Borthwick Institute, York); Chelsea Hospital marriage register at Public Record Office; parish register of South Bersted, Sussex, at West Sussex Record Office.]
David Underdown
,John (1600–1678), politician, was born in Somerset 26 March 1600, the eldest son of Thomas Pyne, gentleman, of Merriott, and his wife Amy, daughter of Thomas Hanham of Wimborne Minster, Dorset.
He was heir to his grandfather, John Pyne of Curry Mallet, who died in 1609.
He matriculated at Oxford in 1610 (BA 1612, MA 1615), entered the Middle Temple in 1619, and was called to the bar in 1629, keeping chambers until 1637.
The influence of his mother's family secured Pyne's election for Poole to the Parliaments of 1625, 1626, and 1628, but he did little in Westminster.
Most of the speeches by ‘Mr Pyne’ in 1628 were almost certainly made by his uncle, Hugh Pyne.
John may have spoken on the marriage bill on 22 April, however; he would have been especially interested, because of difficulties over his intended marriage to his cousin, Eleanor Hanham, with whom he eloped in 1629.
In the 1630s Pyne held minor offices in Somerset, but was not a JP until 1646.
He obstructed collection of ship money in 1638 and Poole returned him to both 1640 Parliaments.
He was regarded as one of the ‘rigid party’ against the king.
Named one of Parliament's deputy lieutenants in March 1642, his subsequent military record was undistinguished.
Moderately wealthy, he claimed wartime losses of £1,000.
By 1645 he headed an extreme parliamentarian faction in Somerset, which in the ‘recruiter’ elections assisted radical candidates.
Under his leadership the Somerset county committee became notorious for its vindictiveness.
Pyne used it ruthlessly to pursue royalists, harass political opponents, and bully witnesses and minor officials.
He promoted county petitions supporting the vote of no addresses and the trial of Charles I. But although named to the high court of justice in January 1649, he stayed away and returned to Parliament only after the king's execution.
Pyne occasionally attended the Rump Parliament, but his main achievement during the Commonwealth was to govern Somerset successfully.
He survived the abolition of the county committee in 1650, and sat in the Nominated Parliament of 1653.
Presbyterian in religion, he was tolerant of other sects, and supported proposals to abolish tithes and remodel the universities.
The Protectorate brought an end to his authority.
He appeared against John Penruddock [q.v.]and his rebels in 1655, but refused any office under Oliver Cromwell, and was badly beaten in the 1656 elections.
He sat in the restored Rump in 1659, but never regained his earlier predominance in the county.
At the Restoration Pyne took the oath of allegiance, but was debarred from holding public office.
He was several times imprisoned on suspicion of plotting, but otherwise lived quietly in Curry Mallet.
His first wife died sometime after 1654, and he was married again, to Amy White.
He died in 1678, having asked to be buried silently at night.
Two sons survived him (Pyne had disinherited John, the elder, making the younger, Charles, his heir); a daughter Susannah (Pitts) had died in 1676.
[S. W. Bates Harbin,Members of Parliament for the County of Somerset , 1939, pp. 156–7; M. F. Keeler,The Long Parliament , 1954, pp. 319–20;Proceedings in Parliament, 1628 , vols. i–iv, 1977–83;Historical Manuscripts Commission, 9th Report , Appendix ii, p. 494.]
Mark Goldie
,Edward (1649/51–1710), politician and friend of John Locke [q.v.], was born in either 1649 or, more probably, 1651, the only son of Edward Clarke, gentleman, of Chipley, near Taunton, Somerset, and his first wife Ann, daughter of Mark Knight of Buckinghamshire.
He matriculated at Wadham College, Oxford, in 1667, moved to the Inner Temple in 1670, and was called to the bar in 1673.
He became involved in Whig politics and in 1680 was appointed trustee of the estate of Anthony Ashley Cooper, first Earl of Shaftesbury [q.v.].
He marked his arrival in county society by rebuilding Chipley in the 1680s, and engaging in rivalry with the nearby Tory, John Sanford of Nynehead.
In 1675 Clarke married Mary, daughter of Samuel Jepp and Elizabeth Buckland of Sutton Court, Chew Magna, distant kin of Locke's.
The Correspondence of John Locke contains nearly four hundred letters to and from the Clarke family, from 1682 to 1704.
One series (1684–91), for the benefit of Edward junior, formed the basis of Locke's Some Thoughts Concerning Education (1693).
Locke sent Clarke drafts of An Essay Concerning Human Understanding , and left papers with him when he fled to Holland in 1683.
He was devoted to Clarke's children, nicknaming Betty ‘his wife’.
Locke called his west-country friends ‘the Row’: Clarke, Sir Walter Yonge (third baronet, q.v.) of Escott, and Richard Duke of Otterton.
They shared Whig exclusionist politics and were arrested during the Monmouth rebellion.
They were tempted to make peace with James II when offered revenge against Toryism: Clarke got the backing of James's electoral agents.
Consequently he suffered at the polls in the Revolution elections of 1689 and did not enter Parliament until 1690.
He had been defeated at his first attempt in 1685, and in 1689 petitioned the Commons against Tory violence at the hustings.
His seat throughout was Taunton, and once successful he sat until his death.
Although an Anglican, his sympathies lay with his dissenting, textile-artisan constituents.
In 1689, through Locke, he was appointed auditor-general to Queen Mary II; her death in 1694 was a great blow.
He remained a court Whig, becoming an excise commissioner in 1694, and serving the junto leader, Baron (John) Somers [q.v.].
Clarke mainly lodged in London, directed the education of a brood of children, and left Chipley and the nursing of his constituency to the redoubtable Mary.
He became Locke's voice in Parliament, the keystone of ‘the College’, which included Locke, John Freke, Yonge, and Somers.
Clarke's voluminous papers include many draft bills and policy documents.
He was engaged in the ending of press censorship (1695), the recoinage (1695–6), and the Irish Woollen Act (1697–8).
Among his nicknames were ‘Edward the Grave’ and ‘Standard Clarke’.
Illness rendered Clarke inactive in the 1700s.
Mary died in 1706; he at Chipley 20 October 1710.
They had five sons and six daughters, eight surviving infancy.
He left about £20,000, mainly in Bank and East India stock.
Chipley was demolished in the nineteenth century and the Sanford descendants withdrew to the smaller house adjacent, where today hangs Clarke's portrait, and legends persist about Locke composing philosophy in the bowling green.
[Editions of Locke's Correspondence (eds.
E. De Beer, 1976–; B. Rand, 1927, 1975) and Some Thoughts Concerning Education (eds.
J. L. Axtell, 1968; J. W. and J. S. Yolton, 1989); L. Davison and T. Keirn in Parliamentary History , vol. vii, 1988; Sanford collection, Somerset Record Office, Taunton; History of Parliament Trust, London.]
Henry D Rack
,John (1715–1759), Methodist preacher and subsequently Independent minister, was born 1 March 1715 in Whitehough near Chinley, Derbyshire, the son of William Bennet, Presbyterian farmer, and his wife Mary.
At a school in Chapel-en-le-Frith he acquired proficiency in Latin and Greek, intending to become a dissenting minister or attorney.
However, after a short period in 1732 at the Dissenting Academy in Findern, Derbyshire, he became a justices' clerk in Sheffield until 1737 and then commenced work as a carrier between Sheffield and Macclesfield.
On 1 January 1742 he experienced a religious conversion through the influence of David Taylor, an evangelical preacher formerly in the service of the family of Selina Hastings, Countess of Huntingdon [q.v.].
From March 1743 he began to preach and built up a network of religious societies in Derbyshire, Cheshire, and south-east Lancashire, which soon became part of the Methodist organization led by John Wesley [q.v.].
As one of Wesley's leading preachers he attended the first Methodist conference in 1744 and in 1748 promoted the system of ‘quarterly meetings’ to oversee the local Methodist ‘circuits’(groups of societies).
Relations with Wesley, however, became strained as a result of Bennet's marriage on 3 October 1749 to Grace Murray, the widow of a Newcastle ship's captain and daughter of Robert Norman of Newcastle upon Tyne, since Wesley claimed that Grace was already contracted to marry himself.
Bennet developed Calvinistic views and by the beginning of 1754 had broken with Wesley, followed by some of his societies, notably at Bolton.
Bennet continued to be a travelling preacher, hoping at first to obtain aid from George Whitefield [q.v.]and his Calvinistic Methodist connection.
Failing to achieve this, he was licensed as a dissenting preacher in January 1754, had a meeting-house built for him at Warburton in Cheshire, and on 9 November 1754 was ordained as an Independent minister.
Although he also continued to preach elsewhere, ill health probably curtailed his activities.
Bennet died in Chinley 24 May 1759 and was buried in the Presbyterian graveyard there.
His Warburton church probably soon became extinct.
No portrait of Bennet is known for certain to be extant.
He was among the better educated of the early Methodist preachers and more sober than some in his attitude to supernatural phenomena.
He was of a somewhat anxious and dependent temperament, especially when faced with persecution.
Bennet left five sons (no daughters), one of whom, William, became an Independent minister in London.
His wife returned to Methodism later in life and died in Chapel-en-le-Frith 23 February 1803.
[William Bennet,Memoirs of Mrs Grace Bennet , 1803; J. Augustin Léger,John Wesley's Last Love , 1910; Henry.
D. Rack, ‘Survival and Revival.
John Bennet, Methodism and the Old Dissent’, in K. G. Robbins (ed.),
Protestant Evangelicalism in Britain, Germany and America c.1750–1900 , 1990; Bennet MSS in John Rylands University Library, Manchester.]
V A McClelland
,Joseph Devonsher (1783–1857), Irish judge and politician, was born in Cork 23 June 1783, the eldest son of Strettel Jackson of Peterborough, Cork, a prosperous carrier, descendant of an English family which settled in Ireland in the early seventeenth century, and his wife Mary Cossens.
His early education in Cork was in the hands of the Revd Mr Lee, a Church of Ireland clergyman of evangelical disposition.
Matriculating at Dublin University in 1800, the Protestant tradition of his boyhood was reinforced by his tutor, Arthur H. Kenney [q.v.], later rector of St Olave's, Southwark.
He graduated BA with honours in 1806.
In 1832 he proceeded AM and in 1835 became a Cambridge MA.
Jackson entered as a student of law in the King's Inns, Dublin, in 1803 and the Middle Temple, London, the following year.
In 1806 he was called to the Irish bar and took silk twenty years later.
Initially attached to the Munster circuit, he was known as a zealous advocate and ‘an amiable man, of courteous manners, and prepossessing appearance, with a fine forensic countenance’(Madden).
Although he lacked the wit, pathos, or imagination traditionally associated with distinguished advocates of the Irish bar, his scrupulous fair dealing and evangelical propensities led Hugh Percy, third Duke of Northumberland [q.v.], to appoint him chairman of the Londonderry quarter sessions in 1830.
Service as a private in Westropp's Grenadiers and membership of Hardinge's Orange Lodge copper-fastened his acceptability by the conservative establishment.
In 1812 Jackson was co-opted to the committee of the Kildare Place Society, established in 1811, where, as secretary, he strengthened the Protestant influence.
He gave detailed evidence in 1824–5 before the commissioners of the Irish education inquiry.
The borough of Bandon was reputed to have the most sectarian electorate in county Cork and, in 1835, Jackson contested it in the Conservative interest.
He easily surpassed his opponent, James Redmond Barry of Glandore, a feat repeated two years later against William G. Cavendish.
In 1841 he was returned unopposed for the borough, a year before becoming one of the members for Dublin University.
Success in politics led to professional advancement.
In 1835 he was the third serjeant-at-law in Ireland and, shortly afterwards, second serjeant.
In 1841 he was named solicitor-general and, on the death of John Leslie Foster [q.v.]in 1842, justice of the common pleas.
He accepted the Chiltern Hundreds in September 1842.
Variously dubbed a ‘biblical barrister’ and a ‘scriptural Tory’, Jackson's parliamentary interventions were largely confined to representing Irish loyalist interests.
In 1837 he spoke for nearly four hours against the introduction of the Irish Corporation Reform Bill, a measure not destined to reach the statute book until 1840.
Thoughtful and trenchant, his prolix arguments could often be tiresome, although Thomas Babington Macaulay, first Baron Macaulay [q.v.], thought his attack on the National Board system, in the first debate on the issue when Sir Robert Peel came to power in 1841, led to ‘the very best parliamentary set-to between the secretary and the solicitor-general for Ireland which has ever been witnessed’.
In 1811 Jackson married Sarah Lucinda (died 1858), ninth daughter of Benjamin Clarke of Cullenswood, Dublin.
He died at Sutton House, Howth, 20 December 1857 and was interred there in St Fintan's graveyard.
[F. E. Ball,The Judges in Ireland 1221–1921 , vol. ii, 1926;The Constitution or Cork Advertiser , 22 December 1857;Freeman's Journal , 24 December 1857; Kildare Place Society records, I/MS 835, Church of Ireland College, Rathmines; D. O. Madden,Ireland and its Rulers since 1829 , vol. ii, 1844.]
Brian Loomes
,Ahasuerus (1607–1693), clock-maker, was baptized in the Dutch Reformed church at Norwich 25 February 1607, the eldest of a family of five sons and two daughters of Mordecai Fromanteel, wood-turner, of Norwich, and his wife Leah.
He was trained in Norwich by an unknown master and in June 1629 moved to London, where he joined the Blacksmiths' Company in 1631.
He was married in 1631 in London to Maria de Bruijne from Colchester, by whom he had six sons and two daughters.
He married for a second time about 1660 Sarah Winnock, a widow with three sons and a daughter.
She died in 1665.
In his early years as a clock-maker in London Fromanteel made lantern clocks of typical form with balance-wheel escapement, as well as some spring-driven table clocks.
He was constantly at loggerheads with the Worshipful Company of Clockmakers, who controlled the London trade, and he did not join the Company until 1656, when his freedom was granted by direct order of Oliver Cromwell, whose cause he supported during the civil war.
In October 1658 he advertised his pendulum-regulated clocks, including those of month and year duration, being ‘the first that were in England’, which were offered for sale from his house at Mosses Alley, Southwark, and at the Mermaid in Lothbury, the home of his son-in-law, Thomas Loomes.
His announcement implies that he had made pendulum clocks at least a year before then.
He also advertised fire-engines of his own invention, which were easily cleaned.
Fromanteel's importance in English clock-making lies in the introduction of the first pendulum clocks, and therefore the first long-case clocks, into England.
They were devised in conjunction (the exact degree of which remains unknown) with Christian Huygens of Zulichem, who is credited with making the very first pendulum clock in 1656.
Considerable evidence suggests that Fromanteel and Huygens worked in close co-operation, and Fromanteel's son John worked for a while in The Hague in 1657 under Salomon Coster, who had sole licence to construct Huygens's pendulum clocks there.
By 1668 Fromanteel himself had moved to The Hague, where he had earlier trading and perhaps family connections.
In 1676 he returned to London, where he died in February 1693, his place of burial being unknown.
Each of his three surviving sons became clock-makers, as well as two of his stepsons, his son-in-law, Thomas Loomes, and his brother-in-law, Andrew Prime.
[Brian Loomes, ‘The Fromanteel Story’,Antiquarian Horology , vol. ix, no. 2, March 1975; Brian Loomes,Country Clocks and their London Origins , 1976, and Complete British Clocks , 1978.]
Richard Greene
,Mehetabel Wesley (1697–1750), poet, was born in 1697 in Epworth, the seventh of nineteen surviving children of Samuel Wesley [q.v.], rector of Epworth and of Wroot in Lincolnshire, and his wife Susanna Annesley.
Her brothers, John and Charles Wesley [qq.v.], later founded the Methodist movement.
Mehetabel, or ‘Hetty’ as she was generally known, received the same education as her brothers, and is said to have been able to read Greek at the age of eight.
As a young woman she was intelligent, personable, and attractive.
She was apparently close to marriage on two occasions, but withdrew at a late stage.
She eventually fell in love with a lawyer, but her father objected to this match.
She eloped at least twice during 1725.
Following her second disappearance her father wrote, ‘I've had little hopes of her — I consider what I write — since she has been half a year old.’
She was found to be several months pregnant when she returned and was forced to marry William Wright of Louth, a plumber and glazier, at Haxey on 13 October 1725.
Wright was probably drawn to this marriage by the offer of a dowry.
Hetty moved to Louth with her new husband, and gave birth to a daughter by an unnamed lover on 18 February 1726.
The child did not survive and was buried on 27 December of the same year.
After her marriage the Wesley family continued to disagree about Hetty.
On 28 August 1726 John Wesley offended his father with a sermon on charity that obliquely criticized his treatment of Hetty.
Susanna Wesley spoke with her daughter in October and prayed that she would be given true repentance, ‘without which I desire to see her face no more’.
By 1729 Hetty had resumed a correspondence with her father.
Meanwhile she and her husband had moved by January 1728 to London, settling in Frith Street, Soho.
William Wright became a successful plumber and glazier.
Hetty, however, attributed the early deaths of her children to the lead works he maintained on the premises.
They had several children, all of whom died young.
Her husband was apparently a heavy drinker, and their marriage was deeply unhappy.
From 1743 she gradually adopted the religious opinions of her brother John.
Following a serious illness in 1744 she came to regard herself as sinful.
She avoided Methodist meetings, however, fearing that she would be a disgrace to her brother.
Wright produced a small number of remarkable poems, of which only two were published in her lifetime.
She is at her best describing the injustices of marriage and the grief surrounding the deaths of children.
She died 21 March 1750, probably in London.
[A. Clarke,Memoirs of the Wesley Family , 1823, pp. 486–510; anon.,The Bards of Epworth: Or, Gems from the Wesley Cabinet , 1856, pp. 244–63; Janet Todd (ed.),
A Dictionary of British and American Women Writers 1660–1800 , 1984; Roger Lonsdale (ed.),
Eighteenth Century Women Poets: an Oxford Anthology , 1989; Frank Baker (ed.),
The Works of John Wesley , vols. xxv–xxvi, Letters I 1721–1739, Letters II 1740–1755, 1980–2.]
Peter Leach
,Roger (1695–1749), architect, was born in London 19 April 1695, the eldest son in the family of three daughters and five sons of Owen Morris of Netherby, Yorkshire, and his wife Rebecca.
Nothing is known of his early life except that his background was in the building trades — in 1724 he was described as a bricklayer, and later as a carpenter — but by the mid-1720s he had established two connections which brought him a place amongst the innermost circles of English Palladianism.
One was with the architect Colin Campbell [q.v.], to whom he acted as assistant for a time.
He was certainly performing this service in 1729, towards the end of Campbell's life, drawing out designs for works at Studley Royal, Yorkshire, and he appears to have done so previously.
The other connection was with Henry Herbert (later ninth Earl of Pembroke, q.v.).
Morris was to become his architectural collaborator, in effect succeeding Campbell in this role, the contact presumably having originated at Pembroke House, the building of which appears to have constituted Lord Herbert's architectural apprenticeship.
The collaboration was then inaugurated at Marble Hill, Twickenham (1724–9), which was the first of the buildings credited to Lord Herbert, and it was continued at most, if not all, of his subsequent works — including amongst others the White Lodge, Richmond Park (1727–8) for King George II and the Palladian bridge at his own seat of Wilton House, Wiltshire (1736–7).
Morris's role appears to have been both that of a clerk of works, responsible to a greater or lesser degree for the erection of the buildings, and that of an architectural amanuensis employed to make ‘Drawings and Explanations of his Lordship's Directions’; but to what extent he was involved in the actual process of design is not certain.
At any rate Herbert clearly had a high regard for his services, for in 1734 he presented him with a large silver cup as a token of his appreciation.
From this position Morris was soon able both to develop a practice of his own and to secure the fruits of public office: as early as 1727 he was referred to in print as ‘the noted architect Mr. Morris’, and in 1731–2 he made a visit to Italy.
The private practice was never very large but it was highly prestigious.
His principal patrons were the family of the dukes of Argyll, his commissions from them including Combe Bank, Kent (c .1726)— his first major independent work — Whitton Place, Twickenham (c .1732–9, demolished), and his largest undertaking, Inveraray Castle, Argyllshire (begun 1745); and this was a contact which again appears to have originated at Marble Hill.
In addition he developed an association with Richard Boyle, third Earl of Burlington [q.v.]: it was under the direction of Burlington and Herbert that he remodelled Castle Hill, Devonshire (1729–40), and Kirby Hall, Yorkshire (begun 1747) was their joint design.
Meanwhile, in the Office of Works he was in 1727 appropriately appointed to the new post of clerk of the works at the White Lodge, doubtless through the influence of Herbert; while in 1734 he was made master carpenter to the Board of Ordnance, a lucrative preferment which he undoubtedly owed to John Campbell, second Duke of Argyll [q.v.], who was then master-general of the Ordnance.
A final aspect of his career was his extensive involvement in speculative building development in London, in Argyll Street (1736) and New Palace Yard (1740–2), an activity which evidently made a significant contribution to his prosperity.
The sum of the projects with which Morris was involved represents a major contribution to more than one strand of eighteenth-century architecture.
Of his collaborative works with Herbert, Marble Hill and the White Lodge are classic examples of the first-generation Anglo-Palladian villa, of which the former in particular was to be a highly influential model amongst later designers; while the bridge at Wilton is one of the most perfect and most memorably inventive of all Anglo-Palladian images, and was to be faithfully copied on four occasions — at Stowe (by 1742), Prior Park, Bath (1756), Hagley (by 1764), and Amesbury (1777).
His own Palladian compositions show a number of idiosyncrasies of detail, the only significant one being a frequent use of the pyramidal roof-form derived,inter alia , from Palladio's Villa Emo and already repeated at Pembroke Lodge and Marble Hill; but other elements are more noteworthy.
Combe Bank could be regarded as an attempt to reduce the four-corner-towered form of, for example, Lord Burlington's Tottenham Park to the scale of a villa; at Whitton Place he appears to have been one of the first Palladian architects to employ the three-sided bay-window motif; and his stable block at Althorp, Northamptonshire (1732–3), with its portico derived from St Paul Covent Garden is exceptional for the time in its exploitation of the bold simplicity of the Tuscan order.
Most remarkable, however, are his two houses in the Gothic style.
Clearwell Castle, Gloucestershire (c .1728) is a unique building, with no affinity either to the contemporary medievalizing modes of Sir John Vanbrugh and Nicholas Hawksmoor [qq.v.]or to the subsequent rococo Gothic of William Kent [q.v.]; while Inveraray Castle, by contrast, was to be another immensely influential creation, standing at the head of a whole series of castle-style houses throughout the eighteenth century.
Morris had as a ‘kinsman’ the architectural writer Robert Morris [q.v.], who in the dedication to his Lectures on Architecture (1734) acknowledged the ‘erudition’he had received in Roger's service.
He was married twice, first to Mary, daughter of Sir Peter Jackson of London, a merchant trading with Turkey.
She died in 1729, and in 1731 he married Elizabeth (died 1744), daughter of Sir Philip Jackson of Pontrilas, Herefordshire, who was evidently a relative of Mary's.
By his first marriage he had three sons (the youngest of whom died in infancy), and by the second one son and four daughters.
The eldest son James succeeded his father as master carpenter to the Ordnance and lived the life of a country gentleman in Surrey, serving as high sheriff of the county in 1764.
The second son was the soldier and American loyalist Colonel Roger Morris [q.v.].
Morris died in London 31 January 1749 and was buried at St George's, Hanover Square.
[Builder , vol. xxxiii, 1875; H. M. Colvin,A Biographical Dictionary of British Architects 1600–1840 , 1978; W. Papworth (ed.),
An Encyclopaedia of Architecture , 4 edns., 1852–88; G. L. M. Goodfellow, ‘Colen Campbell's Last Years’,Burlington Magazine , vol. cxi, 1969; J. Lees-Milne,Earls of Creation , 1962; H. Walpole,Anecdotes of Painting (ed.
James Dallaway and R. N. Wornum), vol. iii, 1849.]
Sibylla Jane Flower
,John (1805–1886), geologist and Alpinist, was born 26 July 1805 in Montreal, the eldest in the family of two sons and one daughter of Alexander Auldjo, a leading Montreal merchant born in Aberdeen, and his wife Eweretta Jane, daughter of Thomas Richardson of Portsoy, near Banff.
She and his infant sister died in 1808.
His father retired in 1813 to London, and Auldjo was educated at Atwood's School in Hammersmith, and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he matriculated as a pensioner in 1823 but did not take a degree.
He was admitted to Lincoln's Inn in 1827.
His father's death in 1821 left him financially independent.
In 1827 Auldjo visited Switzerland and, with the assistance of eight local men, climbed to the summit of Mont Blanc.
This was only the fourteenth successful ascent, and his account of this exploit, published in 1828,Narrative of an Ascent to the Summit of Mont Blanc, on the 8th and 9th August, 1827 , is a classic of Alpine literature: a vivid narrative of the pleasures and perils of mountaineering enhanced by examples of his skilful draughtsmanship made on the journey.
Later he lived in Naples, his name occurring in the letters and reminiscences of Sir William Gell [q.v.].
He made his first visit to Vesuvius in 1831, and published Sketches of Vesuvius, with Short Accounts of its Principal Eruptions in 1832.
Grangerized (see James Granger, q.v.) copies in the British Library, formerly in his possession, testify to a continued interest in both subjects.
Gell said Auldjo was considered ‘wet nurse to the Volcano’.
The published diary of his visit in 1833 to Greece and Turkey,Journal of a Visit to Constantinople, and some of the Greek Islands, in the Spring and Summer of 1833 (1835), was dedicated to Gell.
In the 1840s and 1850s he lived at Noel House, Kensington, and participated in the scientific, literary, and artistic life of London.
He was elected a fellow of the Geological Society (1828) and the Royal Society (1840); he joined the Royal Geographical Society on its foundation in 1830.
Financial problems forced him to settle abroad, mainly in Geneva, in the late 1850s.
He was acting British consul in Geneva 1870–1, and unpaid consul from 1872 until his death.
His surviving letters to Edward Bulwer Lytton, first Baron Lytton [q.v.], his friend of half a century, reveal a warm and enthusiastic personality.
In 1860 he married Caroline Hayden, daughter of Joseph Pope Hammet.
They had two daughters.
Auldjo died 6 May 1886 in Geneva.
[Notes and Queries , vol. clxvi, 1934, pp. 327–32; E. Clay and M. Frederiksen (eds.),
Sir William Gell in Italy.
Letters to the Society of Dilettanti, 1831–1835 , 1976; Lytton MSS in Hertfordshire Record Office, Hertford.]
D A Carpenter
,John (c. 1206–1258), justiciar of Ireland and a leader of the political revolution of 1258, was the son of Geoffrey Fitzpeter, justiciar of England (1198–1213) and fourth Earl of Essex [q.v.], by his second marriage, to Aveline, daughter of Roger de Clare, third Earl of Hertford [q.v.], and widow of William de Munchency.
In 1227 John Fitzgeoffrey gave the king 300 marks to have seisin of the lands which had descended to him by right of inheritance from his father.
Geoffrey Fitzpeter had intended these to be large, for King John had granted to him and his heirs by Aveline the castle and honour of Berkhamsted.
This grant, however, never came to fruition, Berkhamsted, after Geoffrey's death, remaining in the hands of the king.
Thus, with the earldom of Essex passing to the descendants of Geoffrey's first marriage, John had to make do with such manors as Aylesbury and Steeple Claydon in Buckinghamshire, Exning in Suffolk, and Cherhill and Winterslow in Wiltshire, the last the only part of the honour of Berkhamsted that he obtained.
John was a substantial magnate but, in terms of land held in hereditary right, not one of the first rank.
Probably this situation, and the example of his father, who had risen in the king's service from humble origins to the earldom of Essex, was the spur to his long career in the royal administration.
John began that career as sheriff of Yorkshire between 1234 and 1236.
Then, in 1237, at the request of a Parliament which conceded the king taxation, he was added to the king's council along with the earl of Surrey and William de Ferrers.
If this elevation to the highest level reflected John's standing with his fellow magnates, in the ensuing years he gained and retained the confidence of the king.
From 1237 until 1245 he seems to have acted as one of the stewards of the king's household, a post that he combined with the sheriffdom of Gloucestershire (1238–46) and more briefly with the justiciarship of the southern forests (1241–2) and the seneschalship of Gascony (1243).
He was thus well fitted for his long stint as justiciar of Ireland (1245–56), where he had private interests through the dower of his wife, Isabel (daughter of Hugh Bigod, third Earl of Norfolk), who was the widow of Gilbert de Lacy of Meath.
In 1254 Ireland was made part of the endowment of Edward, the king's son, and John Fitzgeoffrey, between 1254 and 1258, became the prince's leading councillor.
He also retained his place on the council of the king.
His rewards from the latter, over his long career, had included the manors of Whaddon (Buckinghamshire) and Ringwood (Hampshire), the wardship of the land and heirs of Theobald Butler in Ireland (for which he paid 3,000 marks), and ‘for his immense and laudable service’ the whole cantred of the Isles in Thomond.
In the political crisis of 1258, however, John Fitzgeoffrey was one of the king's chief opponents.
Indeed, a later chronicle, the Westminster Flores Historiarum , named him and Simon of Montfort [q.v.]as the ringleaders of the revolution.
Certainly he was one of the seven magnates whose confederation in April 1258 began the process of reform.
He was then one of the twelve chosen by the barons to reform the realm, and one of the council of fifteen imposed on the king by the Provisions of Oxford.
On 23 July 1258 he went with Roger Bigod, fourth Earl of Norfolk [q.v.], and Simon of Montfort to demand that the Londoners accept ‘whatever the barons should provide for the utility and foundation of the realm’(Cronica Maiorum et Vicecomitum Londoniarum , pp. 38–9).
John's sudden death on 23 November 1258 thus deprived the new regime of one of its bastions.
The Westminster Flores ascribed John's conduct to resentment at being removed from the justiciarship of Ireland.
Like other leading magnates, he was also provoked by the behaviour of the king's Poitevin half-brothers.
His place in Edward's councils was threatened by their growing influence over the prince.
In addition, he was engaged in a fierce dispute over the advowson of one of his manors — Shere in Surrey — with the youngest of the brothers, Aymer de Valence, Earl of Pembroke and bishop-elect of Winchester [q.v.].
This reached a climax on 1 April 1258 when Aymer's men attacked John's at Shere and killed one of them.
When John demanded justice, the king refused to hear him.
This episode helped spur the revolutionary action taken against the king at the Westminster Parliament which opened a week later.
Indignation at John's treatment spread the more easily because his brothers-in-law were Roger Bigod, Earl of Norfolk, and Hugh Bigod [q.v.], later appointed justiciar by the Provisions of Oxford.
Both were his colleagues amongst the seven original confederate magnates.
John Fitzgeoffrey was evidently a man of considerable parts, respected both by his fellow magnates and by the king.
Indeed, despite his role in the revolution of 1258, when Henry III heard of John's death he ordered a solemn mass to be celebrated for his soul and donated a cloth of gold to cover his coffin.
John was succeeded by his son, John Fitzjohn [q.v.], who became a leading supporter of Simon of Montfort.
[Calendar of Charter Rolls ;Calendar of Patent Rolls ;Close Rolls ; Fine Rolls;Calendar of Liberate Rolls ; Public Record Office JUST 1/1187, m.1; H. R. Luard (ed.),
Matthaei Parisiensis Chronica Majora , 7 vols.
(Rolls Series), 1884–9;idem ,Flores Historiarum , 3 vols.
(Rolls Series), 1890; T. Stapleton (ed.),
Cronica Maiorium et Vicecomitum Londoniarum , Camden Society, 1846; R. F. Treharne and I. J. Sanders (eds.),
Documents of the Period of Baronial Reform and Rebellion , 1973; H. W. Ridgeway, ‘The Lord Edward and the Provisions of Oxford (1258)’, in Thirteenth Century England , vol. i, ed.
P. R. Coss and S. D. Lloyd, 1986.]
Richard Sharpe
(c. 1140–1221), scholar and churchman, was born on his father's estates in or near Launceston, Cornwall, in 1140, the son of Jordan of Trecarrel, sometime praepositus of Launceston.
In his Liber Revelationum , Book I, chapter 6, he gives some account of his father's character, and he relates stories concerning his grandfather Ailsi and his uncles, Jordan's brothers, of whom the two eldest, Bernard and Nicholas, were scriptores in the royal chapel in the time of Henry I. Peter also mentions his kinship by marriage to Reginald de Dunstanvill, Earl of Cornwall; whence it has been conjectured that Peter's mother was a sister of the earl's wife, Beatrice, daughter of William Fitz Richard of Cardinan, the most important of the local nobility.
Little is known of Peter's early career.
He studied in London where his teacher was Master Henry of Northampton, a canon of St Paul's, who was often in residence during the 1170s and 1180s.
Godfrey de Lucy [q.v.], later bishop of Winchester, is once referred to as his fellow student.
After 1170 he was received as an Augustinian canon by Prior Stephen at Holy Trinity, Aldgate — the mother house from which the priory in his home town of Launceston had been founded.
In Stephen's company he attended a synod in London where a sermon preached by Gilbert Foliot [q.v.], bishop of London, provided the inspiration for his first work of scholarship, the massive Pantheologus , completed in 1189.
In this book he presented a great quantity of biblical material organized by subjects as an aid for preachers, using the method of treating a scriptural theme per distinctiones .
Of the extant copies, there is one complete set in a contemporary hand, British Library MS Royal 7 E VIII, 7 C XIII, 7 C XIV; this belonged to the library of Rochester Cathedral priory and may have been a presentation copy from Peter to his friend Gilbert Glanville [q.v.], bishop of Rochester.
In 1197 Peter succeeded Stephen as prior of Holy Trinity, Aldgate, one of the three major religious houses in London.
He continued in office until his death 7 July 1221 in his eighty-first year.
He was a conscientious administrator and was remembered as a great teacher.
In 1210 Peter and his friend Benedict, abbot of Stratford Langthorn, acted as intermediaries between King John and Stephen Langton [q.v.], archbishop of Canterbury, unsuccessfully seeking a reconciliation and an end to the Interdict.
Peter is now remembered principally for his scholarship, which was of a compilatory rather than an original nature.
His De Reparatione Lapsus Generis Humani (Taunton, Somerset Record Office MS DD/AH 66/17) is dedicated to Gilbert Glanville.
This work is referred to in the Liber Disputationum Contra Symonem Iudeum (Eton College MS 130 fols. 92–226v) which Peter dedicated to Stephen Langton in exile during the Interdict (1208–11).
The biblical compilation intended to introduce the latter work does not survive.
Lambeth Palace Library MS 51, Peter's personal manuscript of his Liber Revelationum , is an immense collection of visions relating to the next life, compiled between 1200 and 1206.
It is largely derivative, but it contains some stories written from his own experience and that of his personal acquaintances, including an account of his family and its devotion to St Stephen's church, Launceston.
These personal stories, together with the prefaces to his theological compilations, provide the principal evidence for his career.
[R. W. Hunt, ‘The Disputation of Peter of Cornwall against Simon the Jew’, in Studies in Medieval History presented to F. M. Powicke , ed.
R. W. Hunt, W. A. Pantin, and R. W. Southern, 1948, pp. 143–56; P. L. Hull and R. Sharpe, ‘Peter of Cornwall and Launceston’,Cornish Studies , vol. xiii, 1985 (1986), pp. 5–53.]
Anne Baker
,Agnes Elizabeth (1832–1868), pioneer of workhouse nursing, was born 10 November 1832 in Cambridge, the elder daughter of Major (later Lieutenant-Colonel) Joseph Jones of Londonderry, and niece of John (later first Baron) Lawrence [q.v.], later viceroy of India and friend of Florence Nightingale [q.v.].
The family spent six years in Mauritius, 1837–1843, and then settled in Ireland, at Fahan.
Apart from two years at Miss Ainsworth's school at Avonbank, Stratford-upon-Avon, 1848–50, Agnes Jones was educated at home.
In 1853 she visited Kaiserswerth in Germany, where nurses for the sick were trained.
Inspired by the work of Florence Nightingale in the Crimea, she was determined to become a nurse, and eventually, in 1860, she overcame her mother's opposition and embarked on eight months' training at Kaiserswerth.
In 1862 she became a Nightingale probationer at St Thomas's Hospital, London.
After one year's training there, where she was a model pupil, she worked as a sister at the Great Northern Hospital.
In April 1865, after months of hesitation, Agnes Jones decided that God had called her to Liverpool and agreed to become matron of the Liverpool Workhouse Infirmary at Brownlow Hill.
William Rathbone [q.v.]had offered to pay for a matron and trained nurses for three years, as an experiment, to be supplied by the Nightingale Fund, and Florence Nightingale had nominated Agnes Jones.
Previously, there had been no trained nurses in poor-law institutions, nursing being done by the paupers themselves, and there was widespread sickness among workhouse inmates.
She began work in charge of the male wards only, but in 1867 her authority was extended to all the wards, and the experiment was made permanent.
At first, her uncompromising attitude led to clashes with the governor, George Carr, but, after intervention by Florence Nightingale, relations improved.
She was greatly overworked, with between 1,300 and 1,500 patients, several hundred more than the number of beds, and only fifty nurses.
She had only four hours sleep a night.
Agnes Jones's intense religious fervour, which had led her into nursing in the first place, caused Florence Nightingale some anxiety.
She took Bible-reading classes among her nurses, and tried to lead sinners to repentance, and Florence Nightingale was afraid this might damage the reputation of workhouse nursing.
After Agnes Jones's death, her two aunts, Georgina and Esther Smythe, wrote to Forence Nightingale with stories of miracles performed by her.
She died of typhus fever in the Liverpool Workhouse Infirmary, 19 February 1868.
Florence Nightingale wrote about her work in Good Words in 1868 under the title ‘Una and the Lion’, without mentioning her name.
Una was Agnes Jones, and the lion represented the paupers she had to nurse.
This eulogy was designed as a recruiting appeal for women to train as hospital nurses.
Although the Liverpool scheme collapsed shortly after her death, as she had trained no successor and there was no one suitable to replace her, she had proved the importance of professional workhouse nursing, and in 1879 the Workhouse Infirmary Nursing Association was formed.
[Memorials of Agnes Jones by her sister, 1871; Edwin Pratt,Pioneer Women in Victoria's Reign , 1897; Margaret E. Tabor,Pioneer Women , 2nd series, 1927; Cecil Woodham-Smith,Florence Nightingale , 1950; Monica E. Baly,Florence Nightingale and the Nursing Legacy , 1986.]
Mark Girouard
,Robert (1534/5–1614), was a master mason and architect, Neither the date nor place of his birth are known, but, according to his memorial tablet in the parish church at Wollaton, Nottinghamshire, he was aged seventy-nine when he died in 1614.
His first recorded appearance is at Longleat House, Wiltshire, where he went to work for Sir John Thynne [q.v.]as a master mason in March 1568.
He brought with him his own group of masons, and a letter of introduction from Humphrey Lovell, the queen's master mason, according to which he had previously been working for Sir Francis Knollys [q.v.], probably at Caversham House, near Reading.
Smythson stayed at Longleat on and off until 1580.
Together with a French master mason, Alan Maynard, he was largely responsible for remodelling the exterior of the house, and for much internal detail; in both cases the design, as well as the execution, was probably due to them.
In 1576 there is evidence that he was involved with alterations made at Wardour Castle, Wiltshire, for Sir Matthew Arundell.
It may have been this connection that took him to Nottinghamshire in 1580, to work for Arundell's brother-in-law, Sir Francis Willoughby, at Wollaton Hall.
His position at Wollaton was that of surveyor of the work, rather than a practising mason.
The surviving building accounts and his own drawings make clear that he was responsible for the execution and design of this remarkable house between 1580 and 1588.
Smythson stayed on in the service of the Willoughby family, and was employed by them on administrative and financial business, as well as as a surveyor.
He is described on his monument at Wollaton as ‘architector and survayor unto the most worthy house of Wollaton, and diverse others of great account’; this is the first known occasion on which he was called an architect, a term and function then still only in embryo in England.
Some 150 drawings by Robert and his son John survive in the drawings collection of the Royal Institute of British Architects.
They include an interesting group of survey drawings made by Robert on a visit to London in 1611, but also many original designs (some of them drawings of considerable beauty), which supply evidence as to a number of the ‘diverse other’ houses mentioned on his monument.
They include Worksop Manor, Nottinghamshire (remodelled,c. 1585), Hardwick Hall, Derbyshire (1590–7), Burton Agnes, Yorkshire (c. 1601–10), and designs, only partially carried out, for remodelling Welbeck Abbey, Nottinghamshire.
The stylistic evidence of drawings and documented buildings, supported by patronage links and geographical proximity, enable a number of other houses to be attributed to him, including Barlborough Hall, Derbyshire; Doddington Hall, Lincolnshire; Worksop Manor Lodge, Nottinghamshire; Fountains Hall, Yorkshire; and Wootton Lodge, Staffordshire.
There is no evidence that at any of these houses Smythson was involved on the same day-to-day basis as at Longleat and Wollaton; his contribution must often have been limited to the provision of a set of plans and elevations, which were liable to alteration at the whim of the patron and executive craftsmen.
Even allowing for these limitations, Smythson's is the strongest architectural personality to have survived from the Elizabethan and Jacobean age.
This is partly because more is known about him, and because his drawings and those of his younger contemporary John Thorpe [q.v.](a high proportion of which are survey drawings) are the only large personal collection from this period that still exist, but it is also because of the distinctive and remarkable character of the houses with which he can be connected.
Both his drawings and the buildings show that he had, for the Elizabethan period, a capable grasp of the language of classical ornament; he knew and used the works of Serlio, possibly of Palladio, and of the Flemish Mannerist Vredeman de Vries, whose designs were extensively adapted at Wollaton.
But his drawings and buildings also show an interest in the native Gothic tradition.
His achievement was to draw on these two strains, and on the contemporary Elizabethan taste for the kind of ingenious conceits known at the time as ‘devices’ to produce a creative synthesis.
In the resulting buildings classical detail and a considerable degree of classical order can be found joined with dramatic combinations of towers, bay windows, and great expanses of glass, derived from the Gothic tradition, and with the complex and ingenious plans which were the architectural expression of the device.
Wollaton is the most extraordinary of his houses, but it suffers from an over-abundance of motifs not unlike the over-abundance which mars much Elizabethan literature.
Hardwick, in its combination of high drama, spatial ingenuity, and classical restraint, must be considered his masterpiece.
Nothing is known about Smythson's marriage, but his son John Smythson (d .
1634) was working as a mason at Wollaton in 1588.
He subsequently pursued a similar career to his father's, but in the service of the Cavendish rather than the Willoughby family.
In particular he was closely involved with the rebuilding of Bolsover Castle, Derbyshire, between about 1612 and his death; the riding-school range there, however, may be the work of his son, Huntingdon Smythson, who died in 1648.
Smythson himself died in Wollaton 15 October 1614.
[M. Girouard,Robert Smythson and the Elizabethan Country House , 1983;idem , ‘The Smythson Collection of the Royal Institute of British Architects’,Architectural History , vol. v, 1962; John Summerson,Architecture in Britain , 1530–1830 , 7th edn., 1983.]
Bernard Levin
,Stewart Duckworth (1847–1924), Anglican clergyman, was born 12 January 1847 in Wavertree, near Liverpool, the elder son and third of four children of Thomas Duckworth Headlam, underwriter of Liverpool.
He was educated at Eton and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he obtained a third class in the classical tripos in 1869.
At Cambridge he came under the influence of Frederick Denison Maurice [q.v.]who, it is clear, shaped his life, starting with Headlam's resolve to take holy orders.
His parental home was strictly evangelical, though not narrow or severe, but Headlam rejected with horror the doctrine of eternal punishment.
The ensuing clash was a symbol and a foretaste of the countless later occasions on which he challenged orthodox opinions, both religious and secular.
He was ordained deacon in 1870, and priest in 1872, but in his first curacy he fell foul of both his vicar and his bishop for his heterodox beliefs; the former asked him to leave the parish and the latter delayed his ordination.
It was not only, or even mainly, a matter of dogma.
He outraged respectable Victorian society by his public championing of the poor and his denunciations of the uncaring rich; in addition, he not only espoused the cause of the theatre and ballet as harmless and enjoyable pastimes, but rejected entirely the received opinion that these entertainments constituted the inescapable gateway to the everlasting bonfire.
To promulgate this cause, he founded the Church and Stage Guild, and caused another sensation by giving a lecture entitled ‘The Art of Dancing’.
Meanwhile, he was making friends of working men and trade unionists, and devoting himself to educational work.
He moved from parish to parish, almost always because of the complaints of the affronted orthodox; far from making compromises, he founded the Guild of St Matthew, one of the earliest focuses of Christian Socialism.
Among his publications were Municipal Puritanism (1905) and The Socialist's Church (1907).
He debated frequently with Charles Bradlaugh [q.v.], and conceived a great admiration for his opponent's integrity, then promptly made matters worse by advocating the repeal of the blasphemy laws.
He went even further than that; when Bradlaugh was imprisoned during the oath struggle, Headlam sent him a telegram reading: ‘Accept my warmest sympathy.
I wish you good luck in the name of Jesus Christ, the Emancipator, whom so many of your opponents blaspheme.’
The last straw — though a haystack could have been built with Headlam's last straws — was a speech in Trafalgar Square advocating the abolition of the House of Lords, after which he was refused a licence by his bishop, for eleven years.
Radical, impetuous, and hot-tongued, Headlam was nevertheless a profoundly devout man, and no broad churchman, either; he was a high ritualist, and refused, with great sorrow, the wish of the divorced Charles Stewart Parnell [q.v.]that he should officiate at his marriage to Kitty O'Shea.
He went bail for Oscar Wilde [q.v.], though he had only the slightest acquaintance with him; for Headlam it was a matter of justice.
His greatest passion was for spreading education, and the good works he did in this field were prodigious in number and scope; he was instrumental in the work of the Day Continuation Schools, the London Schools' Swimming Association, the London Shakespeare League, and the Men's Institutes.
He sat for sixteen years on the London school board, and seventeen on the London county council.
He married in 1878 Beatrice Rosamond, daughter of Charles Plumer Pennington, gentleman, but the marriage was a failure, and an early separation followed; there were no children.
Headlam died at his home in St Margaret's-on-Thames, after a number of heart attacks, 18 November 1924.
His memorial is the only one this lover of his fellow men would have felt acceptable; a school, in a poor London district, was named after him.
[F. G. Bettany,Stewart Headlam , 1926; Kenneth Leech,Stewart Headlam, 1847–1924 , 1968.]
P W Hammond
, Sir John Jacob (1874–1944), analytical chemist, was born 12 April 1874 in Whitechapel, London, the eldest of the five sons and one daughter of Mark Fox, furrier of London, and his wife Hannah Jacobs.
He was originally Jacob Fox and added the name John in the 1920s.
He was educated at St Thomas Charterhouse School and entered government service in 1896 as an assistant of excise.
He joined the government laboratory in 1897 and, by arrangements recently made for assistants, he attended courses in chemistry at the Royal College of Science for two years, 1897–9, but did not take his degree.
Instead he attended classes at the East London Technical (later Queen Mary) College, both in the evenings and during holidays, frequently working there for twelve hours.
He took his intermediate science examination in 1907, his B.Sc.
(by research) in 1908, and D.Sc.
(by thesis) in 1910.
He joined the permanent staff of the government laboratory in 1904.
Fox's abilities were soon recognized and he was chosen to assist Professor (Sir) Thomas Thorpe [q.v.], principal of the laboratory, in work on the development of ‘leadless glazes’ to avoid the dangers of poisoning factory workers.
Fox carried out much research at East London College and at the laboratory.
He became particularly interested in ultraviolet absorption spectra, and he carried out some important work in collaboration with (Sir) James Dobbie, his new principal (later termed government chemist), in the years before World War I.
During the war Fox devoted his energies to dealing with an enormously increased volume of work in his department.
He devised new rapid methods of analysis, and managed successfully without a great increase in staff.
In 1920 he was appointed a superintending chemist and exercised his encyclopaedic knowledge of organic chemistry, and his administrative abilities, to organize the considerable amount of new work arising from the Safeguarding of Industries Act of 1921 and from new silk duties in 1926, each case involving many thousands of samples.
He also wrote The Analysis of Pigments, Paints, and Varnishes (1927) with T. H. Bowles, and he reviewed annually between 1926 and 1933, with B. A. Ellis, all published analytical methods in the Annual Reports on the Progress of Chemistry .
He continued to carry out much research after the war with Dobbie and Sir Robert Robertson [q.v.], government chemist from 1920.
In 1936 Fox was appointed government chemist, having been deputy government chemist from 1929.
In 1940 he joined the staff of the director of scientific research in the Ministry of Supply, as chief adviser to the controller of chemical research, while retaining his duties as government chemist.
His interest in chemistry continued until the end of his life, together with his ready help to staff and enquirers.
He held many offices in learned societies.
Fox was appointed OBE in 1920 and CB in 1938, and was elected FRS in 1943.
He was knighted in 1944.
In 1899 he married Amelia (‘Millie’), daughter of Saul Boas, jeweller; they had a son and a daughter.
Fox died 28 November 1944 at a nursing home in Golders Green, London.
[A. G. Francis, ‘Sir John Fox’,Analyst , vol. lxx, 1945, pp. 1–2; J. T. Hewitt, ‘John Jacob Fox, 1874–1944’,Journal of the Chemical Society , 1945, pp. 719–22; Robert Robertson in Obituary Notices of Fellows of the Royal Society , vol. v, 1945.]
Donal A Kerr and David C Sheehy
,William Joseph (1841–1921), Roman Catholic archbishop of Dublin, was born in Dublin 30 January 1841, the only child of Ralph Walsh, a watchmaker and jeweller, of county Kerry, and his wife Mary Pierce, of a Galway family.
He was educated at St Lawrence O'Toole's Seminary School, Dublin, and entered the Catholic University of Ireland (then under the rectorship of (Cardinal) John Henry Newman, q.v.) in 1855.
He entered St Patrick's College, Maynooth, in 1858, and after an outstanding academic career was ordained to the priesthood in 1866.
In 1867 he was appointed professor of dogmatic and moral theology at Maynooth, in 1878 vice-president, and in 1880 president.
He gave evidence in support of the claims of the tenantry before the Bessborough commission (1880) but he had already come to prominence when he performed brilliantly as an expert witness on canon law in the celebrated O'Keefe law case in 1875.
In 1885, on the death of Cardinal Edward McCabe [q.v.],
Walsh was appointed archbishop of Dublin.
That this was done despite government intrigue in Rome — Walsh's nationalist sympathies being well known — was hailed as a triumph by Irish nationalists.
For the next quarter of a century Walsh was the dominating personality in the Irish Catholic Church.
He built or renovated churches and schools, conducted a busy schedule of pastoral visitations, and promoted initiatives in the areas of sacred music, catechetics, and temperance.
A champion of Catholic educational interests, he served on the senate of the Royal University of Ireland (1883–4), the National Education Board (1895–1901), and the senate of the National University of Ireland of which, in 1908, he became the first chancellor.
His life spanned the flood-tide of modern Irish nationalism.
In his childhood he was introduced to Daniel O'Connell [q.v.]; in 1921 Eamon de Valera [q.v.]expressed gratitude for his ‘ripe counsel…in any hour of need’.
An advocate of home rule and agrarian reform, Walsh's support for the controversial ‘plan of campaign’ earned him the displeasure of Rome and cost him the cardinal's hat.
During the commission set up in 1888 to inquire into charges made by The Times against Charles Stewart Parnell [q.v.]he provided crucial assistance to Parnell in exposing Richard Pigott [q.v.]as a forger.
When the Parnell divorce crisis broke in 1890, he resisted pressure from both nationalist politicians and ecclesiastics, such as Cardinal H. E. Manning and Archbishop T. W. Croke of Cashel [qq.v.], to come out against Parnell.
It was only when negotiations with Parnell failed to produce a compromise that he led the clerical attack on Parnell's leadership.
In later life Walsh became disenchanted with the Irish Parliamentary party, and in 1917 signalled his shift of allegiance to Sinn Fein.
He had a progressive mind, favoured women's rights to the vote and to university education, supported trade unionism, and advocated bimetallism.
Aloof in temperament, in private life he was pious, charitable, and of a simple way of living.
His many interests included music, cycling, and photography.
He died 9 April 1921 in Dublin.
[Patrick J. Walsh,William J. Walsh, Archbishop of Dublin , 1928; Myles V. Ronan,The Most Reverend W. J. Walsh D.D., 1927; Emmet Larkin,The Roman Catholic Church in Ireland and the Fall of Parnell 1888–1891 , 1979; D. Keogh,The Vatican, the Bishops and Irish Politics , 1986; D. Miller,Church, State and Nation in Ireland 1898–1921 , 1973; Walsh papers, Dublin diocesan archives; Croke papers, Cashel diocesan archives; Propaganda Fide archives, Rome.]
Steven Tomlinson
,Edmund Tyrell (1789–1847), geologist and archaeologist, was baptized 11 September 1789 in Saxmundham, Suffolk, the eldest in the family of three sons and three daughters of James Artis, carpenter, and his wife Mary Tyrell Watling.
Little is known of his childhood, though it is said he developed a talent for drawing at an early age.
At sixteen he went to work for his uncle, a London wine merchant, but by 1810 was established as a confectioner in Marylebone.
In that year he married a Bristol woman and their only child, named Elizabeth after her mother, was born in 1811.
During 1812 he attracted the attention of William, second Earl Fitzwilliam [q.v.], who employed him at Milton, his Northamptonshire home; he became house steward in November 1816.
Visits to Fitzwilliam's other residence at Wentworth Woodhouse led to an interest in geology, particularly the carboniferous plant fossils found in coalmines in Yorkshire and Derbyshire.
His studies, based on a collection of some 1,500 specimens (later sold to the British Museum), resulted in the publication in 1825 of Antediluvian Phytology , a pioneering work in palaeobotany.
He became a fellow of the Geological Society in 1824.
Simultaneously he pursued an interest in archaeology.
Searching for fossils on Fitzwilliam's estates at Castor in 1821, he discovered a large tessellated Roman pavement; this encouraged him to conduct a series of excavations, unusually systematic for their time, which continued until 1827.
From 1823 he produced a series of plates illustrating his discoveries, largely engraved from his own drawings, entitled The Durobrivae of Antoninus .
These appeared in a single volume in 1828, though the text to accompany them was never published.
He was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1825.
During this period he became friendly with the poet John Clare [q.v.], a frequent visitor at Milton from 1820.
Artis and Clare shared an interest in natural history and the latter often refers to Artis's opinions on local flora and fauna and to specimens which he saw in his collection of stuffed birds.
Artis even made a plaster bust of Clare, who once described his friend as ‘a clever man & everything but a poet’.
In August 1826 Artis left Milton to go into business on his own again.
After long negotiations he purchased the Doncaster race clubhouse, opening in time to provide food and accommodation for racegoers attending the St Leger meeting of 1828.
Although the venture was initially successful, race week alone could not sustain the business for the rest of the year; the property was leased and the clubhouse opened only in September.
In 1830 Artis returned to Castor and for the next few years divided his time between his business interests in Doncaster and small-scale excavations at Castor.
In 1844 he became a regional committee member of the newly formed British Archaeological Association and began to conduct larger excavations, communicating his discoveries through the Association's Journal .
He dug chiefly on the Duke of Bedford's land at Sibson, encouraged by finds made during construction of the Northampton -Peterborough railway.
Work continued until shortly before his death in Doncaster 24 December 1847.
He was buried in the churchyard at Castor.
[Parish registers of Saxmundham and St Mary, Marylebone;Gentleman's Magazine , May 1821;Literary Gazette , 8 January 1848;Proceedings of the Geological Society , 1849; Mark Storey (ed.),
The Letters of John Clare , 1985.]
Ronald Parkinson
,(Henry) Mark (1817–1886), landscape painter, was born 4 August 1817 at Rusholme Lane, Manchester, of Welsh ancestry, the second son of John Anthony, merchant, and his wife Phoebe.
They moved to Cowbridge, Glamorgan, in about 1823, where he was apprenticed to a doctor and amateur artist called Harrison.
Subsequently he is reported to have been a pupil of his cousin George Wilfred Anthony, a drawing master in Manchester, later a landscape painter and art critic (as ‘Gabriel Tinto’) for the Manchester Guardian .
He moved to London in about 1833.
Patronage, and a legacy some time in the 1830s, enabled him to travel; he studied at The Hague, in Paris at the Académie des Beaux-Arts with Paul Delaroche, Ary Scheffer, and Horace Vernet, and in Fontainebleau in 1837, where he was influenced by the Barbizon school, J. B. C. Corot, and Jules Dupré.
He was among the first to introduce the French style of plein-air landscape painting of the 1830s to London.
He exhibited regularly at the Royal Academy between 1837 and 1884, showing a total of thirty-six pictures.
He also exhibited seven paintings at the British Institution (1841–60) and eighty-four (1841–69) at the Society of British Artists, of which he was elected a member in 1845, resigning in 1852 in the hope that this would assist his election to associateship of the Royal Academy.
He exhibited once at the Grosvenor Gallery and the Liverpool Academy, winning the 1854 prize of £50 for ‘Nature's Mirror’.
He travelled in England, Wales, France, Holland, Ireland, and Spain.
Working directly from nature, he was admired by the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood (attending their ‘house-warming’ at Newman Street on 12 January 1850); he was a great friend of Ford Madox Brown [q.v.], mentioned frequently in Brown's diaries; and D. G. Rossetti [q.v.]was instrumental in securing for him the patronage of the important Newcastle collector James Leathart in the 1860s.
New developments in British art after 1860, and his failure to be elected to the Royal Academy, led to a solitary later career.
His works fetched high prices at auction during his lifetime, and were particularly admired for their detail, atmospheric effects, and melancholic mood, often enhanced by the light of dawn or early evening over an old church or castle.
He died at The Lawn, Hampstead, 1 December 1886.
His elder brother John (1813–1895) was a doctor, traveller, and distinguished microscopist.
He married Eleanor Sophia Marshall and had at least one daughter, Grace (born 1853).
[The Times , 10 December 1886;Athenaeum , no. 3,085, 11 December 1886, p. 790; George Fardo, ‘Mark Anthony: a Great Glamorganshire Artist’,Cardiff Public Library Journal , vol. iv, January 1904, pp. 91–2, April 1904, pp. 107–9, July 1904, pp. 123–5.]
Richard Greene
,Sarah (1672–1765), poet, was born in Kent in 1672, the daughter of James Dixon, a barrister originally of Rochester, Kent, who was admitted to the Middle Temple as a clerk on 20 May 1663 and called to the bar on 13 May 1670, and his wife Elizabeth Soulhouse.
Her only known brother, James Dixon, matriculated at University College, Oxford, on 17 February 1694, aged seventeen, but seems to have died soon afterwards; he was not awarded a degree.
Details of Dixon's life are sparse and sometimes contradictory.
She may have been born in Newnham, though much of her life seems to have been spent in or near St Stephen's parish, near Canterbury.
She is known from her single volume of Poems on Several Occasions , published anonymously in Canterbury in 1740 but attributed to her in inscriptions in the Bodleian and British Library copies of the book.
Though the 500 subscribers to this volume were chiefly local, members of the nobility, as well as better-known poets, including Elizabeth Carter and Alexander Pope [qq.v.], also appear on the list of them.
Additional poems bearing individual dates were transcribed on to the endpapers of the British Library copy from a manuscript owned by Dixon's niece, a Mrs Eliza (née De Langle) Bunce, possibly the child of an unidentified sister.
Eliza Bunce was the widow of the Revd John Bunce (died 1786), vicar of St Stephen's, who encouraged Dixon's writing and corrected it for publication.
This volume also has appended a poem ‘On the Ruins of St. Austin's, Canterbury’, which was published in the Kentish Gazette of 9 July 1774 and said to have been written sometime after Dixon was seventy-three years old.
An inscription in the Bodleian copy of her Poems describes her as a widow.
However, a memorial stone in the chancel floor of St Stephen's identifies her as the daughter of James Dixon, barrister.
Her writings contain references to members of her family: one, from 1739, is addressed to John and Eliza Bunce on the death of their young daughter; another, among those published in her Poems in 1740, is entitled ‘On the Death of My Dear Brother, Late of University College, Oxford’.
There are, conspicuously, no references or dedications to a husband or child.
Dixon's verse is chiefly pastoral; her preface suggests a source for her poetic impulse in the peaceful solitude of her youth in the country.
Individual poems range from light but pointed satire on the follies and failings of women, through romantic, ballad-like lyrics, to earnest, mature, religious verse.
She characteristically underplays her education, intellect, and talent as a ‘weaker Woman’, but her religious rationalization of women's intellectual and social position in relation to men has a rather bitter tone: ‘Eve's Theft serv'd but to dignify Man's Soul, /Her Sex denied the Knowledge which she stole.’
The only other recorded detail of Sarah Dixon's life also comes from the memorial stone at St Stephen's.
She died 23 April 1765 at the age of ninety-three.
[Middle Temple Admissions Register, vol. i, 1949, p. 168; Joseph Foster,Alumni Oxonienses , part 1, vol. i, 1891, p. 406; Janet Todd (ed.),
A Dictionary of British and American Women Writers , 1984; Roger Lonsdale (ed.),
Eighteenth Century Women Poets: an Oxford Anthology , 1989.]
Magnus Magnusson
,Eric Henry (1902–1945), missionary and athlete, was born in Tientsin, China, 16 January 1902, the second son in the family of two sons and a younger daughter of the Revd James Dunlop Liddell, a Scottish Congregational Church missionary from Drymen, and his wife Mary Reddin, a trained nurse from Paxton in Berwickshire.
His childhood was spent at the mission station in the village of Siaochang, southern Hopei.
In 1907, at the age of five, he was brought back to Scotland where he attended, first, the village school in Drymen, and, from 1908 to 1920, the School for the Sons of Missionaries in London (later Eltham College).
At school, both he and his elder brother (Robert Victor) excelled at sports; in 1919 Eric set a new (and still unbroken) school record of 10.2 seconds for the 100 yards.
In 1920 he matriculated at Edinburgh University for a B.Sc.
degree in pure science.
As a student he broke the Scottish records for the 100 and 200 yards, and set a new record for the inter-universities 440 yards (50.2 seconds).
His electrifying speed earned him seven international caps for Scotland as a wing three-quarter.
He was selected to run in the 100 and 200 metres in the 1924 Olympics in Paris, but declined to run in the 100 metres on religious grounds, because the heats were to be run on a Sunday.
He won the bronze medal in the 200 metres, and then had a spectacular and unexpected victory in the 400 metres to take the gold medal in a world record time of 47.6 seconds (10 July 1924).
Liddell graduated from Edinburgh University a few days later (17 July), and enrolled at the Scottish Congregational College in Edinburgh to read divinity for a year, for he had long since decided to devote his life to missionary work, like his parents.
He spent the year immersed in student evangelical activities, speaking all over Scotland at weekends.
In the summer of 1925 he took part in his last athletics meeting in Scotland, winning the Scottish Amateur Athletics Association titles in the 100, 220, and 440 yards, before leaving to take up an appointment as a missionary teacher at the Anglo-Chinese College in Tientsin.
He developed athletics at the college, and continued to run at meetings in China.
In 1931–2 he returned to Scotland on furlough in order to be ordained as a Congregational Church minister.
In 1934 he married Florence, who had trained in Canada as a nurse, the twenty-one-year-old daughter of Hugh McKenzie, a Canadian missionary at Tientsin.
They had three daughters, but he never saw his third daughter; she was born in Canada after the upheavals of the civil war and the Japanese invasion of China had persuaded Liddell to send his pregnant wife and young children to safety in 1941.
Meanwhile, Liddell had been working as a field missionary in war-torn Siaochang.
He wrote The Sermon on the Mount: For Sunday School Teachers (1937), and back in Tientsin, he worked on a Manual of Christian Discipline , to be translated into Chinese for the guidance of Chinese pastors, and published Prayers for Daily Use (1942).
In 1943, he and his missionary colleagues were interned by the Japanese in a camp in Weihsien.
They were officially internees, rather than prisoners, and life, although monotonous and full of deprivation, was not brutal.
Liddell was remembered by survivors for his modesty, his unfailing good humour, and his exemplary Christian conduct throughout their time there — and despite his strict Sabbatarian principles, he even refereed hockey matches on Sundays, for the sake of the youngsters with little else to do.
He died in Weihsien 21 February 1945 of a brain tumour.
The story of his athletic triumphs was retold in the film Chariots of Fire (1981).
[Sally Magnusson,The Flying Scotsman , 1981; David P. Thomson,Scotland's Greatest Athlete: the Eric Liddell Story , 1970.]
Barbara Stoney
, Dame Sibyl Mary (1884–1974), dame of Sark, Channel Islands, was born 13 January 1884 in Guernsey, at the house once owned by her privateer great-great-grandfather, John Allaire, whose business dealings led to the seigniory of Sark passing into her family.
The elder daughter (there were no sons) of William Frederick Collings, twenty-first seigneur of Sark, and his Canadian wife, Sophia Wallace (daughter of George Moffat of Montreal), she grew up on Sark to become a lively, intelligent, and headstrong young woman, encouraged by her eccentric father to ignore her congenital lameness and follow many physically demanding pursuits.
With the rest of the household she also had to contend with his uncertain temper and even wilder moments during occasional drinking bouts.
Few of her governesses stayed for long and, with the exception of two terms at a French convent near Tours, she had little formal education.
She met Dudley John Beaumont, son of Captain William Spencer Beaumont, of 14th King's Hussars, in the spring of 1899 when he visited Sark and painted her portrait.
Two years later, following a fierce argument with her father, she fled to England and married Beaumont in London.
The marriage produced four sons and three daughters, the youngest of whom was born seven months after her husband's death, at the age of forty-one, in the influenza epidemic of 1918.
From 1921 to 1923 she lived with her family in Cologne, helped run YMCA canteens, and learned the German which twenty years later was to prove so useful to her.
On her father's death in June 1927, she succeeded to the seigniory and became dame of Sark, determined from the outset to bring improvements to the island without sacrificing its unusual charms.
After a brief engagement to a man later convicted for bigamy and fraud, in 1929 she married American-born Robert Woodward Hathaway (second of three sons of Charles Hathaway, a Wall Street banker).
According to Sark law, by her marriage her estate, including the seigniory, passed to her husband, but she had no intention of relinquishing her hold on island affairs and, although he then became the official seigneur, she sat beside him at meetings of the chief pleas (Sark's governing body), prompting his actions and continuing, albeit illegally, to give voice to her own opinions.
It was during World War II that she was to face her greatest challenge when Sark, with the other Channel Islands, was occupied by the Germans in July 1940.
She managed throughout the following years to maintain a front of firmness and dignity, earning the respect of the Germans and at the same time extracting the best terms she could for Sark and its people, with whom she shared the hunger and other privations of occupation, the anxieties engendered by two unsuccessful British commando raids, and the pain of separation when many islanders, including her husband, were deported to German prison camps.
Liberation finally came on 10 May 1945.
When Robert Hathaway died in December 1954, she regained her full status as dame of Sark and, despite many stormy passages with her islanders, continued to be treated by the majority with the greatest respect, if not always with affection.
Through her travels and writings (which included a novel,Maid of Sark , in 1939 and an autobiography,Dame of Sark , 1961) and television, radio, and press interviews, her island became known worldwide and its subsequent prosperity owed much to her determination to retain its unique laws and peaceful atmosphere, unpolluted by cars or aeroplanes.
She was appointed OBE (1949) and DBE (1965).
She died 14 July 1974 on Sark, having outlived five of her children.
Her eldest son was killed in an air raid on Liverpool in 1941, the second died in Australia in 1973, the third (aged nine months) in 1909, and two of her daughters in 1948 and 1967 respectively.
Her grandson,(John) Michael Beaumont, succeeded her to the seigniory.
[Barbara Stoney,Sibyl, Dame of Sark , 1978; Sibyl Hathaway,Dame of Sark , 1961; official documentation; personal information.]
David S Katz
,Jacob (c. 1630–1685), leader of the Sephardi Jewish community in London, was born in Spain and taken with his brother Isaac [q.v.]to Hamburg as a child.
Jacob studied at the Yeshiva de los Pintos at Rotterdam and at the age of twenty-five was already a rabbi in Amsterdam.
As early as 1660 or 1661 he was in contact with Adam Boreel, the continental Christian Hebraist of the circle dominated by John Dury and Samuel Hartlib [qq.v.], who commissioned him to translate the Mishnah, the Hebrew part of the Talmud, into Spanish.
After finishing this task, Jacob collaborated with his brother Isaac to put out in 1662 an edition of the Mikhlal Yofi , Solomon ibn Melik's thirteenth-century commentary on the Bible, with Rabbi Jacob's own super-commentary.
The work was published with the approbations of Christian scholars, including the celebrated Jean Buxtorf the younger, a new departure by Jewish authors of a Hebrew book.
Jacob Abendana followed up this success with a Spanish translation of Judah HaLevi's twelfth-century Kuzari , which was published in 1663 and dedicated to Sir William Davidson, the English resident in Holland.
By the beginning of 1668, Jacob had joined his brother Isaac in England, and with him set about selling Hebrew books to a devoted clientele that included Henry Oldenburg, Robert Boyle, and Thomas Barlow of the Bodleian Library [qq.v.].
During this visit to London, the Jewish community there gave him a gift equivalent to the yearly salary of the congregation's rabbi, perhaps in the hope that he would stay.
In fact he returned to Amsterdam, but in 1681 he agreed to serve as leader of the English Sephardi community which had been so generous to him years before.
In that year he was host to the Princess Anne, who came to the synagogue during Passover, the first occasion on which a member of the royal family visited the Jews at prayer.
Jacob Abendana died in London in 1685; he had no children.
Although his Spanish translation of the Mishnah was never published, and indeed is now lost, when Surenhusius began publishing his own Latin version at Amsterdam in 1698 he paid tribute to Abendana's work.
[D. S. Katz, ‘The Abendana Brothers and the Christian Hebraists of Seventeenth-Century England’,Journal of Ecclesiastical History , vol. xl, 1989, pp. 28–52.]
J A Secord
,Alexander Ross (1828–1914), geodesist, was born 16 December 1828 in Reading, the eldest son of David Ross Clarke, merchant, and his wife Eliza, daughter of Charles Hall.
After early years in Jamaica and Erriboll, Scotland, the family settled in London.
Clarke entered the Royal Military Academy, and in 1847 came first in his class and was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the Royal Engineers.
In 1850 he was posted to the Ordnance Survey in Southampton; from 1851 to 1854 he was in Canada, returning in 1854 to serve under (Sir) Henry James [q.v.]as the Survey's chief mathematical and scientific adviser.
Clarke entered the Ordnance Survey at a crucial time, just as the observations from the principal triangulation of Great Britain were nearly complete.
A skilled mathematician, he reduced the measurements into a usable form with the method of least-squares, developed by leading continental mathematicians such as F. W. Bessel, C. F. Gauss, and O. W. Struve.
The results were published as an Account…of the Principal Triangulation (1858), which greatly enhanced the Ordnance Survey's reputation for precision.
In 1860 Clarke began an elaborate comparison of the standards of length used in England, France, Germany, Belgium, and Russia, as well as those of India and Australia.
This was part of a European project, organized by Struve, to measure an arc from Valentia in Ireland to Orsk in Russia.
The aim was to co-ordinate triangulations across Europe.
Clarke thereby played a major part in the thrust towards international standardization that became so important in late nineteenth-century European science.
Clarke had a passionate interest in calculating the figure of the Earth, another central problem for an accurate topographical survey.
He tackled the problem on at least five separate occasions, and his results (especially one in the 1866 survey of standards of length) were employed throughout the world.
In 1880 he published Geodesy , a textbook based on a major article written for the Encyclopaedia Britannica .
This remained a standard work well into the next century.
Clarke was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1862 and received a Royal medal in 1887.
He was appointed CB in 1870, and served as a delegate to the International Geodetic Congress in 1883.
The pursuit of abstract science within the military was not without critics.
When the War Office discovered in 1881 that Clarke had been at a home station for twenty-seven years, it ordered him to sever his connection with the Ordnance Survey and take up a post in Mauritius.
Clarke was furious and retired.
Despite protests, the official decision stood.
For his last three decades Clarke played no part in science or public affairs.
Clarke was a deeply religious man who enjoyed mathematics, music, and domestic life.
In 1853 he married Frances (died 1888), daughter of (Major-General) Matthew Charles Dixon of the Royal Engineers.
Clarke usually worked at home, often with their five daughters and three sons playing in the same room.
He died 11 February 1914 at his home in Reigate, Surrey.
[C. Close in Royal Engineers Journal , vol. xxxix, 1925;Nature , vol. xcii, 1914; E. H. Hills in Proceedings of the Royal Society , series A, vol. xc, 1914; W. A. Seymour (ed.),
A History of the Ordnance Survey , 1980.]
John N Adams
,James (1752–1812), barrister, was born 9 March 1752 in Thetford, Norfolk, the second child and elder son in the family of ten children of James Mingay, surgeon, of Thetford, and his second wife Dorothy, the daughter of William Fuller of Caldecot, Huntingdonshire.
He was educated at Thetford Grammar School and Trinity College, Cambridge (1768).
He went down without taking a degree and was admitted to the Inner Temple in 1770.
He read in the chambers of Charles Runnington [q.v.].
He was called to the bar (Inner Temple) in 1775 and joined the Norfolk circuit.
His practice quickly grew.
He took silk on 26 November 1784 and became a bencher on 25 January 1785, reader in 1790, and treasurer in 1791.
He retired from practice at the bar in the summer of 1802 at the age of fifty after a long and painful illness, having made a fortune.
Both before and after his retirement he was active in public affairs in his locality.
He was chairman of the quarter sessions for Norfolk and Suffolk for many years, JP for Thetford in 1806, and mayor of Thetford three times (1798, 1800, and 1804).
He also stood for Parliament, unsuccessfully, in 1794 and 1806.
An accident when he was a boy resulted in the loss of his right hand, and throughout his adult life he wore a hook, hence the reference in The Old Benchers of the Inner Temple by Charles Lamb [q.v.]:
‘Mingay with the iron hand.
He had lost his right hand by some accident, and supplied it with a grappling hook, which he wielded with tolerable adroitness…
He was a blustering loud talking person.’
Henry Crabb Robinson [q.v.]
(Diary , 1st edn., 1872, pp. 9–10, recording a case at Colchester spring assizes, describes him as ‘loud and violent’.
His obituary in the Gentleman's Magazine (vol. lxxxii, part 2, 1812, p.187), however, states that as an advocate he possessed ‘a persuasive oratory, infinite wit, and most excellent fancy’ and that he was ‘distinguished as the powerful rival of his friend, Lord Erskine’(Thomas, later first Baron, Erskine, q.v., lord chancellor 1802).
He was probably the most able lawyer among the benchers described by Lamb, and appeared in some important commercial cases long cited in later textbooks for the points they settle.
Mingay married Eliza (died 1817), daughter of Robert Corrall of Maidstone, gentleman.
They had no children.
He died 9 July 1812 in Great Ashfield, Suffolk.
[W. P. Courtney in Notes and Queries , 11th series, vol. viii, 1913, p. 41; Charles Lamb,The Old Benchers of the Inner Temple , ed.
Sir F. D. Mackinnon, 1927.]
Peter Leach
,John (1701–1776), connoisseur and amateur architect, was born 30 December 1701, the youngest in the family of five sons and five daughters of Edward Chute of The Vyne, Hampshire, and his wife Katherine, daughter of Sir Anthony Keck [q.v.], lawyer.
His education included a year at Eton; and for a period of seven years from 1740 to 1746 he lived in Italy, where at the beginning of his stay he met and formed a close and lasting friendship with Horace Walpole [q.v.].
As a youngest son his own prospects had been poor — his sojourn abroad had been in the company of his rich younger cousin Francis Whithead, to whom he may initially have acted as tutor — but on the death of his only surviving brother Anthony in 1754 he unexpectedly succeeded to the family estates.
Chute's activity as an architect was confined to a small number of projects only, but in them he established a distinct contribution, in two different directions.
One was as a significant figure in the early Gothic Revival: the other as a classical designer of marked independence.
As a member of Walpole's ‘Committee of Taste’ he played a leading role in the creation of the latter's celebrated Gothic villa of Strawberry Hill.
Walpole later described him as ‘an able geometrician and an exquisite architect, and of the purest taste both in the Grecian and Gothic styles…my oracle in taste, the standard to whom I submitted my trifles, the genius that presided over poor Strawberry’; and from c .1753 onwards he designed much of the exterior, as well as a number of the interiors.
Other works in the Gothic style included the tomb chamber he added to the sixteenth-century chapel at his own house of The Vyne c .1756, to receive a monument to his ancestor Chaloner Chute (d .
1659, q.v.), and Donnington Grove near Newbury, Berkshire, built in 1763 for the antiquary James Pettit Andrews [q.v.].
Of his designs in a classical manner the first identified was a proposal of 1752 — in the form of an Italianate palazzo and based in part on an elevation in Sebastiano Serlio's Tutte L'Opera D'Architettura (book vii, p. 49)— for rebuilding Hagley Hall, Worcestershire, for Sir George (later first Baron) Lyttelton [q.v.]; but this was rejected in favour of a conventionally Palladian one by Sanderson Miller [q.v.].
At The Vyne in 1770, however, he constructed a spectacular staircase within the former great hall, a tour de force which Walpole accurately described as ‘theatric’— meaning after the manner of stage design — and which has no parallels in English country-house architecture.
The monument to Chaloner Chute, also designed by him and in a seventeenth-century classical style, was eventually erected after his death by his cousin T. L. Chute.
Chute was a man of unimpressive appearance, frail and near-sighted, and although abstemious was a lifelong sufferer from gout; but like Walpole he was a vivid and witty correspondent and conversationalist and a discriminating connoisseur of literature and the arts.
In 1757, like his father before him, he served as high sheriff of Hampshire.
He died unmarried 26 May 1776 and was buried in Sherborne St John, Hampshire.
[H. M. Colvin,A Biographical Dictionary of British Architects 1600–1840 , 1978; John Frederick Harris,Catalogue of British Drawings for Architecture…in American Collections , 1971; Warren H. Smith,Originals Abroad , 1952.]
John Physick
,Simon Carl (‘Charles’)(1703–1761), sculptor and stuccoist, was born in Copenhagen of a British father and a Danish mother 12 January 1703.
He was apprenticed in 1718 to a Danish sculptor-stuccoist, J. C. Sturmberg, and assisted his master at Fredensborg Castle and with a monument in Roskilde Cathedral.
Following a period in Amsterdam with Jan van Logteren, Stanley came to London in 1727 and entered the studio of Peter Scheemakers [q.v.], a former assistant of Sturmberg.
Only three well-executed monuments have been identified as by Stanley, all of them of the 1740s and obviously reminiscent of those by Scheemakers.
Two are large, with life-size figures, and are to members of the Maynard family at Little Easton, Essex, and at Hoxne, Suffolk.
The third, in Ely Cathedral, is a simpler mural monument, with a bust of Humphry Smith (d .
1743), and was designed by the architect, John Sanderson.
Stanley was also an able stuccoist, but, as with his sculptural works, little can as yet be assigned to him with certainty until the 1740s.
Ceilings decorated by him are at Compton Place, Sussex,c .1728, with reliefs of mythological subjects in high relief, as well as a plaster medallion with a portrait of an architect, who might be Colin Campbell [q.v.].
Among other houses in which Stanley was engaged on decoration are Ditchley, Oxfordshire (c .1739), Langley Park, Norfolk (c .1740), and perhaps Kirtlington Park, Oxfordshire (c .1745).
For a time Stanley worked in collaboration with an Oxford plasterer, Thomas Roberts, at the Radcliffe Camera (c .1744).
In 1738 he took John Dawson, a plasterer, as his apprentice.
While working at Okeover, Staffordshire (c .1745), on decorative plaster-work, chimney-pieces, and picture-frames, Stanley left England suddenly in October 1746, on being offered the post of court sculptor to Christian VI of Denmark.
As the king had died before Stanley's departure, he landed to find an uncertain future, until the appointment was confirmed by Frederick V. He spent the remainder of his life in Denmark, was appointed professor of sculpture at the Danish Royal Academy, and besides continuing to produce monuments, ceilings, garden sculpture, and other decorative artefacts, he was a musician, composed an oratorio, and translated books into Danish, including Joseph Andrews (1753) by Henry Fielding [q.v.].
Stanley married twice.
On 21 May 1730 he married Anna Allen (died c .1735), in Eastbourne, Sussex; they had three daughters.
Secondly, on 2 August 1737, he married Magdalen Margrethe Lindemann (died 1763), half-sister to Dr Butjeman, German chaplain to the Court of St James.
They had two sons.
Stanley died 17 February 1761 in Denmark.
[K. A. Esdaile in Times Literary Supplement , 3 April 1937; G. Beard,Craftsmen and Interior Decoration in England 1660–1820 , 1981.]
Alison Shell
,William (1745? –1814), publisher, was born c .1745, probably in Whitechapel, the son of John Lane, poulterer, and his wife Mary.
He became a liveryman of the Poulterers' Company in 1767, and in the same year was admitted into the Honourable Artillery Company, in which he was to achieve some eminence.
He began his bookselling activities in about 1770 from his father's shop, but had moved to 13 Aldgate High Street by the end of 1773; it was at this time that his first publications came out, among them the Ladies' Museum (1773–1814), and that he began to explore the possibilities of circulating libraries.
While retaining an interest in the Artillery Company, he transferred to the Stationers' Company in 1777, becoming a liveryman in 1776 at the time of his move to 33 Leadenhall Street.
In about 1784 he set up a press there, and founded an ambitious system of circulating libraries; to anyone wishing to set one up he offered a stock of books, a catalogue, and instructions.
He was a pioneer in establishing circulating libraries in country districts; earlier, they had been confined to major towns and watering-places.
Also, as a means of diffusing his own publications, this time through advertisement, he was among the backers in 1788 of the first evening daily, the Star and Evening Advertiser ; it created a precedent in offering a copy service to others.
Lane's partnership with the printer of the Star , Peter Stuart [q.v.], was curtailed in 1789 at the time of the Regency Bill, when Stuart allegedly printed anti-Pitt propaganda; in revenge, Stuart began a short-lived rival to the Star in which Lane was pilloried as a ‘scribbling poulterer’ and his paper as the ‘Dog Star’.
Lane's Star continued till 1831 when it was absorbed by the Albion .
In 1790 Lane adopted for his business the title ‘Minerva Press’.
It was under this imprint that the light romantic novels were issued which constituted the staple fare of Lane's circulating libraries.
Often written by women and intended for a female readership, the novels are characterized by a blend of sentiment and sensationalism with elements of the fashionable Gothic; a number of them were translations from the French.
By the end of the eighteenth century, Lane had become wealthy by profits from them and from military activities.
In 1801 he took as a partner Anthony Newman, and was himself replaced by John Darling in 1809.
Lane married twice; his second wife, Phoebe, was the daughter of Lewis Shepheard of Richmond, Surrey.
Lane died 29 June 1814 at Gloucester Place, Brighthelmstone.
He had no children.
[Dorothy Blakey,The Minerva Press, 1790–1820 , 1939; Hilda Hamlyn, ‘Eighteenth-Century Circulating Libraries in England’,Library , series 5, vol. i, 1947, pp. 197–222; Ian Maxted,The London Book Trades 1775–1800: a Preliminary Checklist of Members , 1977; Stanley Morison,The English Newspaper , 1932.]