

John Physick
,William (1639–1705), sculptor and mason, was born, probably in London, 6 April 1639, the son of Edward Stanton (died 1686).
he was apprenticed to his uncle, Thomas Stanton (1610–1674), master of the Masons' Company in 1660 and founder of the sculptors' yard in the parish of St Andrew, Holborn, of which Stonecutter Street possibly marks the site.
William became free of the Masons' Company in 1663.
He was employed, together with Edward Pierce [q.v.], on the rebuilding of St Andrew's church, Holborn, in 1684, and other buildings on which he worked were Belton House (Lincolnshire), Denham Place (Buckinghamshire), and Culverthorpe Hall (Lincolnshire).
From 1672 until his death he was the mason to Gray's Inn, London.
It is, however, for his accomplished monumental sculpture that William Stanton is best known.
He was one of the first sculptors in England to sign his work, and he had a thriving practice, several families, among them the Shireburns of Mitton, Lancashire, and the Brownlows of Belton, commissioning him more than once.
His monument to Richard and Isabella Shireburn,c .1699, at Mitton, with its two recumbent white marble effigies in contemporary dress, is a work of realism and sensitivity.
One of his largest monuments is that to Thomas, first Earl of Coventry, in the church at Elmley Castle, Hereford and Worcester, of about 1700, which fills the height of the transept The earl (in contemporary dress as was usual with Stanton) is bewigged, and reclines comfortably, elbow on a cushion, with his coronet beside him.
On either side is a life-sized angel with gilded wings, standing within a tall architectural frame, which is surmounted by a curved, broken pediment resplendent with seated figures and a lavish heraldic achievement.
Besides such large and expensive works, Stanton produced a considerable number of relatively simple mural tablets, in a distinctive style.
Of these, the memorials to the two wives (died 1674 and 1680) of Sir Samuel Morland [q.v.], in Westminster Abbey, demonstrate his skill as a letter-cutter, for not only are the inscriptions incised in Roman letters, but some texts are also in Greek, Hebrew, and Ethiopic characters.
Stanton died 30 May 1705, and was buried in the churchyard of St Andrew's, Holborn, as were his uncle, Thomas, his father, Edward, and other members of their family.
Details of his life are scanty.
His wife Dorothy died 7 May 1707, aged sixty-seven.
They had two sons, Thomas, who died at Leghorn, and Edward (c .1681–1734), who carried on the family business, becoming free of the Masons' Company in 1702 and master in 1719.
From 1708 he was the City mason, and in 1720 was appointed master mason to Westminster Abbey.
He produced many large monuments (some in partnership with Christopher Horsenaile), as at Strensham, Hereford and Worcester, and Knebworth, Hertfordshire, which were similar to those of his father, as well as innumerable mural memorials.
Edward Stanton's elder son, William, who was master mason to the Mint, attempted to carry on the sculptors' yard, but was declared bankrupt in 1735.
[K. A. Esdaile, ‘The Stantons of Holborn’,Archaeological Journal , 2nd series, vol. xxxv, 1930; R. Gunnis,Dictionary of British Sculptors 1660–1851 , 1953; H. M. Colvin,A Biographical Dictionary of British Architects 1600–1840 , 1978.]
David S Katz
,Antonio Fernandez (d. 1659), Marrano merchant, was probably born in Portugal, for in his youth he seems to have lived in Fundão.
He may have fled to Spain at some time, and apparently owned land in the Canary Islands.
By the early 1630s he was in London, masquerading as a Roman Catholic in order to evade the prohibition of Jewish settlement in England.
Although no evidence of his activities before 1643 survives, we know that by then he had married, had established a house and warehouse at Leadenhall Street, and had brought over many of his relatives to work for him in England.
On 14 March 1643 he petitioned the House of Lords for payment for 300 barrels of gunpowder which he had shipped from Amsterdam, but which had been confiscated by Robert Rich, second Earl of Warwick [q.v.], for use by the parliamentary armies.
Carvajal was also very active in the bullion trade by that time, importing as much as £100,000 per annum during the early 1650s, and thus made himself so indispensable to the parliamentary side that, when he was denounced as a recusant in 1645, a number of City merchants petitioned Parliament to have the charge dropped, and the House of Lords soon put an end to the prosecution.
Like many other very wealthy Jews during the early modern period, Carvajal became an army purveyor, and in 1649 was one of the City merchants who were given the corn contract for the parliamentary forces.
His reward came in July 1655 when Carvajal and his two sons were endenizened, thus making him the first English Jew, at least since the expulsion in 1290.
His becoming a British subject put his Spanish goods at risk, and Oliver Cromwell himself took extraordinary precautions to ensure that they could be spirited out of the country and sent to England.
Like other Marranos in London, Carvajal prayed at the Catholic chapel of the Spanish ambassador, while simultaneously playing a leading role in the secret Jewish community, which met at the clandestine synagogue at Creechurch Lane.
Although he sat on the fence with the rest of London's Jews during the noisy campaign of Rabbi Manasseh ben Israel [q.v.]of Amsterdam to secure a public readmission of the Jews to England, eventually he was forced to show his hand.
Spain's war with England in February 1656 put the Spanish subjects in the Jewish community at risk, and when the goods and ships of a fellow Marrano Antonio Rodrigues Robles were seized as belonging to an enemy alien, Carvajal finally joined with Manasseh ben Israel and five others on 24 March 1656 in petitioning the Protector for a formal statement permitting Jewish residence.
In doing this, Carvajal and his colleagues finally threw off the disguise of Roman Catholicism, which by then must have worn very thin.
The following February, Carvajal and Simon de Caceres successfully petitioned Cromwell to allow the Jews to lease a bit of land at Mile End for use as a cemetery.
Carvajal's character may perhaps be gauged from his actions in the summer of 1658, when £15,000 worth of his logwood was seized by English customs off a Dutch vessel docked in London.
Carvajal and his associates raided the warehouse, kidnapped the customs official, and liberated the logwood.
The council of state was still examining the incident when Carvajal died in November 1659, according to Samuel Pepys [q.v.], after having been ‘lately cutt (by the same hand with my selfe) of the Stone’.
He was buried in the new Jewish cemetery at Mile End, and the great bell of St Katharine Creechurch was rung in his honour.
Carvajal was survived by a wife and two sons: one of them became a broker on the exchange, but neither of them seems to have married.
[L. Wolf, ‘The First English Jew’,Transactions of the Jewish Historical Society of England , vol. ii, 1896, pp. 14–46;idem , ‘Crypto-Jews Under the Commonwealth’,idem , vol. i, 1895, pp. 55–88; W. S. Samuel, ‘Carvajal and Pepys’,Miscellanies of the Jewish Historical Society of England , vol. ii, 1935, pp. 24–9; D. S. Katz,Philo-Semitism and the Readmission of the Jews to England , 1982.]
David Hey
,Richard (1635–1723), local historian, was born in Newton-on-the-Hill in the parish of Myddle, Shropshire, and baptized 18 January 1635, the son of Richard Gough and his wife Dorothy Jenks, formerly of Cockshutt.
He was the fifth Richard Gough in succession to live as a small freeholder and yeoman farmer at Newton.
His younger sister, Dorothy, married Andrew Bradocke, of Cayhowell, gentleman.
In 1661 his father died at Cayhowell.
About this time Gough married Joan Wood, of Peplow, by whom he had eight children between 1663 and 1678.
As a young man he served as a clerk to Robert Corbett, of Stanwardine,custos rotulorum of Shropshire and MP in 1654–5.
He continued to serve the Corbetts, for example, as manorial steward, after he had inherited the Newton freehold.
He was a member of the Shropshire grand jury and frequently acted on behalf of his parish in legal matters.
In 1700 he wrote The Antiquityes and Memoyres of the Parish of Myddle .
During 1701–2 he added his Observations Concerning the Seates in Myddle and the Familyes to which they Belong , in which he systematically recorded the personal histories of each family in the parish.
He was buried 12 February 1723, having outlived his wife (who died in 1694) and all but two of his children.
His manuscript was preserved by the descendants of his daughter, Anne.
An imperfect version was printed in 1834; the full manuscript was published in 1875.
With its uniquely detailed account of all the members of a rural community, the book has established Gough as the most important of the early parish historians.
[D. Hey (ed.),
Richard Gough: The History of Myddle , 1981.]
Joseph Needham
,Conrad le Despenser Roden (1869–1942), Christian socialist, was born 12 July 1869 in Kew, the eldest son and second of the three children of the Hon.
Berkeley Wriothesley Noel [q.v.], poet, and his wife Alice Maria Caroline, daughter of Paul de Broë, the Swiss manager of a bank in Beirut.
His grandfather was the first Earl of Gainsborough.
At the time of his birth, his father was a groom of the privy chamber.
After very unhappy schooldays at Wellington School and Cheltenham College, he went to Corpus Christi College, Cambridge.
He was rusticated from Cambridge for a year, and never returned.
After studying with Herman Joynes, he went on to Chichester Theological College.
Ordained in the Church of England in 1894, he held a number of curacies, including one at St Mary's, Primrose Hill, in 1904, where he worked under Percy Dearmer [q.v.].
In 1910 he was presented to the living of Thaxted in Essex.
The Thaxted tradition which he established consisted of three features: firstly, a very thoroughgoing Christian socialism; secondly, a marked attention to music and all that went with it; and thirdly, a liturgiological care for distinctively English medieval antecedents.
Noel had been converted to socialism at Cambridge by reading The Socialist Cathechism by James Joynes, and after hearing Annie Besant [q.v.]speak at the Cambridge Union.
He joined the Social Democratic Federation, and also joined the Guild of St Matthew organized by Stewart Headlam [q.v.].
Noel's Christian socialism saw the kingdom of God as the coming state of mankind on earth, the crown of social evolution, intended by God from the very beginning of creation and the outcome of the teaching of his son, Jesus Chrismatos; if only mankind would listen, and practise the things that would lead to it.
It was what his successor, Jack Putterill, used to call ‘God's international co-operative commonwealth of love and justice’.
All current affairs in the whole world of lamentable war and strife needed to be weighed in this balance.
Noel was unashamedly ‘political’, but he felt that being ‘non-political’ only too often meant in practice tacitly supporting the dominion of Mammon, and ignoring the needs of the poor and the oppressed all over the world, attitudes which were not in his reading of the Christian faith.
It could only too easily lead to acquiescence in the evil done by the powers of this world.
Thus the kingdom of God was not some impossible dream, but had all the authority of evolution behind it — a notion similar to that of the French Jesuit, Teilhard de Chardin.
In his younger days Noel had been influenced by F. D. Maurice [q.v.], who had said ‘I strongly believe that Christianity is the foundation of all socialism, and that socialism is the necessary result of all true Christianity.’
In later years, Noel was from 1907 the organizing secretary of the Church Socialist League, which Maurice had founded in 1906.
He himself founded the Catholic Crusade in 1918.
He had known all the famous Christian socialists of his generation.
His attention to music was notable.
Plainsong tunes were prominent, and there was an orchestra, nearly all of whose members were people from Thaxted, which played the music of the liturgy at all festivals.
Noel also encouraged many musicians to settle there, notably Gustav Holst [q.v.], who wrote much music for the church, while his daughter, Imogen Holst [q.v.], used to conduct the orchestra.
As part of his revival of a medieval atmosphere, Noel encouraged morris dancing outside the church.
Thaxted church was built in about 1340 and the finishing touches were made in the 1550s; with its magnificent structure it could easily have been the cathedral of north-west Essex if one had ever been needed.
The English used at Thaxted was based on the researches of the Alcuin Club, Percy Dearmer, and others.
As regards the furnishings, Noel was greatly helped by the good taste of his wife, and the architect Randall Wells.
Among Noel's many books were Socialism and Church History (1910),Byways of Belief (1912), and The Battle of the Flags (1922).
This last was named because he had hung the green flag of the Irish Free State and also the red flag of Russia in the church, but a band of reactionary students from Cambridge tore them down, and eventually they were condemned as illegal by a consistory court.
Noel's preaching continued as before.
Then came his Life of Jesus (1937) and Jesus the Heretic (1939).
In 1894 Noel married Miriam (died 1961), daughter of Walter Greenwood, singer.
They had one daughter.
From 1935 Noel was increasingly oppressed by the diabetes from which he suffered, blindness, and a cancerous growth, but nothing could dampen his spirits, and when he could no longer sing the liturgy, he learned it off by heart.
He died 22 July 1942 in Thaxted.
[Sidney Dark (ed.),
Conrad Noel, an Autobiography , 1945; Reginald Groves,Conrad Noel and the Thaxted Movement: an Adventure in Christian Socialism , 1967; personal knowledge.]
K H D Haley
or ,Edmund (1627–1712), magistrate, was born, according to his own account, 4 July 1627, one of twenty-one children of Samuel Warcup of English, near Henley, Oxfordshire, and later bailiff of Southwark.
His mother, Anne, was the sister of William Lenthall [q.v.],
Speaker of the Long Parliament, and it was probably through his influence that (after a short stay at St Alban Hall, Oxford) he became secretary to the parliamentary commissioners in the Isle of Wight in 1648.
In the spring of 1660 he vainly produced his papers to George Monck, first Duke of Albemarle [q.v.], and others to form the basis of a bill setting out terms for the restoration of Charles II.
In January 1660 he became a captain in the regiment (formerly Fleetwood's) of Sir Anthony Ashley Cooper (later first Earl of Shaftesbury, q.v.), and the connection continued after the Restoration, when Lord Ashley (as he had become) was chancellor of the Exchequer, and Warcup, among other financial concessions, was a farmer of the excise in Wiltshire and Dorset.
He also availed himself of some relationship to Monck, but he presumed too much on his use of the name of Henry Bennet, Earl of Arlington [q.v.], to cover his own corrupt financial transactions and was committed to the Fleet prison, from which he was released after pleading ‘nine small lamenting children’.
Once more on the fringes of the court, he was involved in fruitless attempts to reconcile first John Maitland, first Duke of Lauderdale [q.v.], and then Thomas Osborne, first Earl of Danby [q.v.], with Shaftesbury in 1676 and 1677.
It was, however, as the ‘Justice Warcup’ of the Popish Plot that he was most notorious.
A JP of Middlesex and Westminster for many years, he searched for papists and for popish books, and was employed by the committee of the House of Lords for the examination of witnesses, dominated by Shaftesbury.
He claimed to have taken the informations of over a hundred witnesses, English and Irish.
As long as Shaftesbury was lord president of the council he found no difficulty in reconciling his loyalties, and even after that earl's dismissal in October 1679, he was used, following an hour's private conversation with the king alone in the royal bedchamber, in trying to bring Charles and the earl together again.
But in February 1681 many witnesses began to see more advantage in making themselves acceptable to the government than to the Whigs, and in stating that attempts had been made to suborn them to give evidence.
In that same month Warcup had several meetings with the king and his ministers, Laurence Hyde, later first Earl of Rochester, and Sir Leoline Jenkins [qq.v.]; and on 4 March the council ordered him £1,500 by privy seal, for his expenses.
His dealing with the witnesses now had a different purpose, and he was employed to sift their informations as they related to the alleged treason of Shaftesbury, sitting with Richard Graham, the government solicitor, ‘ten hours at a time without moving’.
After Shaftesbury's acquittal it was Warcup's turn to face counter-accusations of conspiracy to suborn witnesses, as well as(he said) being burnt in effigy with the pope, libelled, and assaulted in the streets.
As compensation he was knighted in 1684.
He spent most of his old age peacefully on his estate at Northmoor, near Eynsham, Oxfordshire, and died 1 May 1712.
As his two sons, Edmund and Lenthall, were both killed at Steenkirk in 1692 he was, in the words of his epitaph ‘Warcupporum ultimus’.
[K. Feiling and F. R. D. Needham, ‘The Journals of Edmund Warcup, 1676–84’,English Historical Review , vol. xl, 1925, pp. 235–60; Historical Manuscripts Commission,House of Lords MSS, 1678–88 ;Calendar of State Papers Domestic .]
Brian Harrison
,Richard (1790–1846), temperance pioneer, was born 25 July 1790 in Bilsborough, the youngest of five children.
He had poor sight following a childhood attack of measles.
He became a spinner in a Preston cotton-mill, but disliked the restricted life and left at the age of seventeen.
On 25 November 1817 in Preston he married Betty Cook of Preston; the couple were unable to sign the register.
Betty bore him two daughters.
He became a plasterer, but left his wife in 1825 and became a fish hawker — hence his nickname ‘Cockle Dick’.
Early in the 1830s an alliance between progressive provincial middle-class reformers and respectable working men was seizing control of the London-based anti-spirits movement from its well-to-do leaders and converting it into a broader-based total abstinence crusade against all alcoholic drinks.
Not entirely sober one evening in 1832, Turner entered a Preston temperance meeting for a joke but came out converted.
He was among the pioneering ‘Seven Men’ of Preston who signed the pledge of total abstinence in that year.
He became a Wesleyan Sunday-school teacher and an enthusiastic if unsophisticated temperance advocate — the sort of convert to respectability whose transformed life the new movement liked to advertise.
His strong dialect and ungrammatical turns of phrase often made him unintentionally amusing, but his dark and ruddy complexion, coarse features, and shabby clothes gave him a hold over the type of working man the total abstainers sought to reach.
It was on the teetotal platform in September 1833 that ‘Dicky’, as temperance reformers affectionately called him, won his modest place in British history.
Dismissing the anti-spirits movement's idea of imposing a pledge only to moderation in wine and beer, he announced amid cheers that ‘nothing but the tee-total would do’ or, according to some accounts, ‘I'll be reet down out-and-out t-t-total for ever and ever.’
This gave the total abstinence movement the eye-catching label it needed.
There was much subsequent controversy about who invented the word and how to spell its derivatives.
Irishmen had long used it to denote ‘complete’ or ‘permanent’, and Irish labourers brought it to Lancashire; Turner did not invent the term, but merely gave it a new and more specialist application.
Like many titles embraced by new reforming movements, it was at first thought rather vulgar.
Turner suffered from asthma for many years, but persisted with his rather eccentric temperance lecturing.
In later life he had to be subsidized by the teetotal movement and lived with his eldest sister.
In August 1846 he walked from Preston to the World's Temperance Convention in London, preaching teetotalism on the way.
On 27 October 1846 he died in Preston when he burst a blood vessel during a fit of coughing, and was buried in St Peter's churchyard, Preston.
[P. T. Winskill,The Temperance Movement and its Workers , vol. i, 1891; B. Harrison,Drink and the Victorians , 1971.]
Anne Baker
,Thomas (1846–1917), jockey and trainer, was born 23 April 1846 in Eton, the elder son of Thomas H. Cannon, a Windsor livery stable keeper, and his wife Harriett Townsend.
Tom Cannon rode his first winner in 1860, and shortly afterwards came to the attention of the trainer, John Day of Danebury, whose daughter he later married.
His first classic success was in 1866, when he won the One Thousand Guineas.
During his racing career he rode 1,544 winners.
He was champion jockey in 1872 with eighty-seven winners.
He rode winners for the stable managed by his brother Joseph in Bedford Cottage Yard at Newmarket, including Lord Lonsdale's Pilgrimage, on which he won the One Thousand Guineas and Two Thousand Guineas in 1878.
He won the Two Thousand Guineas on Shotover for John Porter of Kingsclere in 1882 and on Shotover he won his only Derby, also in 1882.
For three seasons he rode for the Scottish millionaire George Baird (‘Mr Abington’), training and riding Busybody.
He was closely associated with James Ryan's stables at Newmarket, and for Ryan he won the Two Thousand Guineas on Mr Douglas Baird's Enterprise in 1887, and on Enthusiast in 1889.
Later in his career, when his delicate health forced him to give up racing, he took over the Danebury stables from John Day, and became renowned as a trainer of steeplechasers as well as flat racers.
He trained many distinguished jockeys, including John Watts [q.v.]and W. T. (‘Jack’) Robinson.
He gave up training in 1892, and his son Tom Cannon took over the Danebury stable.
From 1892, until racing stopped there in 1898, he acted as clerk of the course at Stockbridge.
He then bought the Grosvenor Arms, Stockbridge, and spent the rest of his life there.
He lived for racing, and he, Fred Archer, and George Fordham [qq.v.]were considered the finest jockeys of their time.
He was particularly successful riding two-year-olds.
He handled his horses gently, and was never known to punish a horse, relying on gentle persuasion and perfect timing in winning his races, holding back and making a late challenge.
Fred Archer referred to him as a ‘pretty’ jockey.
He was slight and delicate-looking, reserved, and rarely smiled.
He married (although no record can be found) Catherine, daughter of John Day of Danebury.
They had three sons, all of whom became jockeys, and one daughter.
His son Mornington was champion jockey for many years.
His daughter Margaret married the steeplechase jockey Ernest Piggott, and their son Keith was the father of the jockey Lester Piggott.
Tom Cannon died in Stockbridge 13 July 1917.
[The Times , 14 July 1917; Roger Mortimer, Richard Onslow, and Peter Willett,Biographical Encyclopaedia of British Flat Racing , 1978.]
Brenda Hough
,John (c. 1823–1865), publisher of Crockford's Clerical Directory , was born c .1823.
His origins and parentage are obscure.
No baptism has been traced, though his marriage certificate records him as the son of John Crockford, schoolmaster.
By his early twenties he was in business as a printer and publisher at 29 Essex Street, Strand; and it was from that address that Crockford's Clerical Directory was first published in 1858.
Crockford's long association with Edward William Cox [q.v.]had begun by 1843, when the Law Times first appeared.
The two men shared the same business address in Essex Street, and were joint founders of a number of periodicals, including the Critic and the Field .
Cox, as the elder, more established, and richer man, was the financial backer and often the named publisher.
When the Clerical Directory came to be planned, Cox's professional ethics (he was then recorder of Helston and Falmouth) forbade the use of his name in the title.
However, the legend that he therefore picked, almost at random, the name of one of his office clerks, is far from the truth.
Crockford was manager of the joint enterprises, ‘a splendid man of business’.
It was he who bought the embryonic Field ‘for a trifling sum’, and within a short time achieved profits amounting to £20,000 a year.
The Clerical Directory was first published in weekly parts from 1855 to 1857.
The first full edition seems to have been assembled in a very haphazard fashion, with names added as fast as they could be obtained, out of alphabetical order, and with an unreliable index.
By 1860 the Directory had become a very much more useful work of reference; and by 1917, with the absorption of its only serious rival, the Clergy List , reigned supreme.
No more than glimpses survive of John Crockford's personality.
John C. Francis (of the Athenaeum ) recorded that, ‘I had occasion to call on him a short time before his death, when we joined in a hearty laugh over his former furious attacks upon the Athenaeum .
‘Dilke's Drag’ he used to call it.’
John Crockford married Annie Ellam 24 December 1847 at St Pancras Old Church.
No children are recorded.
His sudden death occurred at his home, 10 Park Road, Haverstock Hill, 13 January 1865, when he was aged forty-one.
His will, proved 6 February 1865 at the principal probate registry, left everything to his widow.
His personal effects were valued at less than £1,000, but the family must have lived in some style, since one of the witnesses to the will was the resident coachman.
[The Times , 16 January 1865;Athenaeum , 29 November 1879, p. 695;Notes and Queries , 31 January 1903, pp. 82–3; Oxford University Press archives; marriage register of St Pancras Old Church.]
J G Darwin
, Sir Charles Vyner (1874–1963), third and last raja of Sarawak, was born in London 25 September 1874, the third of four sons and fourth of five children of Sir Charles Anthony Johnson Brooke [q.v.], second raja of Sarawak, and his wife Margaret, daughter of Clayton de Windt of Blunsdon Hall, Highworth, Wiltshire.
His two elder brothers and one sister all died as children.
He was heir to one of the most exotic personal fiefdoms carved out in the age of European colonial expansion.
His great-uncle, Sir James Brooke [q.v.], the son of a civil servant of the East India Company, had, in the manner of a filibuster, made himself master of Sarawak (40,000 square miles in extent), then a province of the sultanate of Brunei, and was proclaimed raja in November 1841.
Raja James resisted British annexation and on his death in 1868 his title passed to his nephew Charles Johnson, who took the name of Brooke, an active and vigorous administrator of austere though unconventional disposition.
The succession, however, had been preceded by bitter family quarrels, a contributory factor to the ending of the Sarawak raj in 1946.
Under Raja Charles the state created by James Brooke was consolidated and effective rule established in the interior.
In 1888 Sarawak, Brunei, and British North Borneo were all brought under British protection, but there was no interference with the internal government of the country, which remained essentially under the personal rule of the raja.
Vyner, as he was known, was a very different personality from his father.
Charles Brooke seemed happiest in the remote forests of Sarawak.
His son was educated at Winchester and Magdalene College, Cambridge, where he failed to take a degree, and preferred fast cars and horse-racing to the solitude of the bush.
Nevertheless, in 1897 he entered the Sarawak service as a cadet to be trained as heir to the raj.
From the early age of thirty he acted as his father's representative when the raja was away in England.
But relations between father and son deteriorated sharply on Vyner's engagement to Sylvia Leonora, daughter of Reginald Baliol Brett, second Viscount Esher [q.v.], an influential official in court and political circles.
They married in 1911 and were to have three daughters.
Charles Brooke was deeply suspicious of the social and financial circles to which this marriage would introduce his son and suspected a plutocratic conspiracy to capture Sarawak's natural resources.
Fearful that Vyner would lack the resolution to preserve Sarawak's autonomy, he devised various short-lived constitutional checks and then in 1912 elevated Vyner's brother Bertram to a ceremonial status barely inferior to that of the heir to the raj.
Vyner resented this treatment bitterly.
Charles Brooke was not the only one to suspect that Vyner would lose interest in Sarawak and prefer a comfortable existence in England.
In the Colonial Office, which disliked the raj as a constitutional anomaly, a swift voluntary abdication was hoped for.
But after his installation as third raja on 22 July 1917 Vyner proved less pliable than expected.
Although he spent a good part of each year in England, he ruled in the personal manner of his father and great-uncle.
His father's precautionary checks and balances dropped into desuetude.
But as Vyner grew older the question arose of the succession: he had three daughters and the male heir was his nephew Anthony Brooke, son of Bertram.
In 1938 there seem to have been tentative discussions with the Colonial Office over a sell-out to the British government.
Vyner's relations with Anthony Brooke worsened.
In the event, it was the outbreak of the Pacific war in December 1941 which sealed the fate of the Sarawak raj.
Sarawak was occupied by the Japanese in 1941, and the raja, in Australia at the time, was prevented from returning.
After the war, he decided to cede Sarawak to the Crown, and returned there from England in February 1946, to inform the people of his decision.
The resolution to end Sarawak's autonomy was forced through the Council Negri, Sarawak's representative body, on the votes of the raja's European officials, although the native vote was against it.
Sarawak was declared a British colony on 1 July 1946.
Brooke left immediately, and spent the rest of his life in London, where he died 9 May 1963, in the same year as Sarawak became part of the Malaysian Federation.
He had been appointed GCMG in 1927.
[S. Runciman,The White Rajahs , 1960; C. N. Crisswell,Rajah Charles Brooke, Monarch of all he Surveyed , 1978; R. H. W. Reece,The Name of Brooke: the End of White Rajah Rule in Sarawak , 1982.]
Willem D Hackmann
,Edmund (c. 1670–1738), scientific instrument-maker, was born c .1670 in Tarrant Gunville, the son of Edward Culpeper, formerly a servitor at Merton College, Oxford, who took his BA from Merton in 1858, and later became rector of Tarrant Gunville in Dorset.
Both Edmund Culpeper and the herbalist and astrologer Nicholas Culpeper [q.v.]were probably poor relations, descended from junior branches of the Culpeper or Colepeper family, a large, wealthy, landed family in Kent and Sussex.
In 1684 Culpeper was apprenticed to Walter Hayes, engraver and mathematical instrument-maker of Moorfields, London.
He eventually took over his master's shop at the Cross Daggers, Moorfields, before 1700 and this was given as his address in various advertisements from 1707 to 1731, an address emblematically represented on his trade card.
In 1710 he was visited by the noted German traveller Conrad von Uffenbach, who sought out the most eminent instrument makers in London.
Rather curiously Culpeper did not become a freeman until 1714.
He must have decided to do so because he took on an apprentice the day after he was freed.
Culpeper was famous for his optical instruments, especially microscopes, but also known for a wide variety of mathematical instruments in silver, brass, ivory, and wood, although it is difficult to determine at what point he moved from being a maker to a retailer.
Culpeper was a skilled engraver and there is a memorial brass by him, dated 1694, for Dorothy Williams in Pimperne church, Dorset.
Other early examples of Culpeper's work are a wood-block engraving of a trencher design dated 1687, when he was still an apprentice, and a fine gilt-brass horizontal sundial, signed ‘E.C.’,
probably made for his sweetheart, as it has engraved underneath an interlaced geometrical pattern inscribed ‘Ann Porteman.
This is a True Loues Knot for Thou Cans Part it not 1687’.
Perhaps she was his intended bride.
He had a son, Edmund, who became free by patrimony of the Grocers' Company in 1758.
Indeed, three generations of Culpepers joined this guild, as Edmund II's son, John Chandler, in turn became his apprentice the following year.
Both Edmunds may also have been members of the Spectaclemakers' Company.
Culpeper achieved fame as he gave his name to a certain type of tripod microscope made in the early eighteenth century, but it is not at all clear that he was its inventor.
He was making the Wilson-type screw-barrel microscope from at least 1700.
In 1710 he advertised ‘several sorts of new contrived Microscopes…
I may boldly say, no one but my self in the Kingdom has the like variety of ‘em…’, but his characteristic works are his engraving of scales, dials, and sectors.
He died 14 May 1737 at his house in Moorfields.
[Joyce Brown,Mathematical Instrument-Makers in the Grocers' Company 1688–1800 , 1979; Dr Gloria Clifton of Project Simon (national archive of data about instrument-makers).]
Stan Shipley
,Benjamin (1913–1946), boxer, was born 2 April 1913 at 17 Florence Street in the Hutchesontown district of Glasgow, the second son (his elder brother died when he was a child) of John Lynch, railwayman, and his wife Elizabeth Alexander.
Lynch began to box as a schoolboy, first at a Catholic church club, then with an amateur boxing club called LMS Rovers.
He never worked long at another job and slipped easily between amateur and professional at boxing saloons in the Gorbals.
His fine balance in the ring was spotted by his future manager, Samuel Wilson, who ran a sixpence-a-week gymnasium.
Wilson, who was still in his early thirties, was an astute trainer who sparred with his boxers.
It was customary for boxers to box frequently, and Lynch had twenty-five contests in his twentieth year, by which time he was acknowledged to be the best ‘wee’ man in Glasgow.
In May 1934 he won the Scottish flyweight championship narrowly on points over fifteen rounds.
The local man who promoted this match was George Dingley, an entrepreneur and referee, who, with Wilson and Lynch, developed great enthusiasm for boxing among people on the Clyde.
When the return match was fought six weeks later, more than 10,000 spectators watched the same result at Third Lanark football club's ground.
When Lynch beat Jackie Brown (of Collyhurst) at Belle Vue, Manchester, overwhelmingly in two rounds in September 1935, it was only his third contest outside Scotland in five years of professional boxing.
He thus became Scotland's first world boxing champion.
Lynch successfully defended the world flyweight title three times in three years against worthy contenders, an achievement unsurpassed by British boxers before.
Lynch moved the headquarters of boxing in Scotland from Edinburgh to Glasgow, and made practicable the use of football stadiums for open-air boxing shows.
He was a fine orthodox boxer, fiercely determined in the ring, with a strong punch.
Lynch ungraciously dropped Wilson early in 1936 before losing his first fight in two and a half years, a non-title match in Belfast.
In theory he was his own manager, although Dingley had organized his serious bouts.
The initial defence of his title was the first world championship held in Scotland.
It brought 40,000 people to Clyde football club's ground, where Lynch won comfortably.
His third defence (the second was in London) packed this south-side football stadium again, and the gate money was reputed to exceed £12,000.
Lynch knocked out Peter Kane of Golborne in the thirteenth round, and it was generally agreed that this had been one of the finest contests between flyweight boxers.
It also turned out to be Lynch's last world championship fight.
Boxing almost fortnightly demanded minimum training and Lynch thrived with this pattern of exercise.
World champions took matches much less frequently and in between Lynch liked to drink.
He did not relish training, though the flyweight limit was eight stones.
For his fourth defence in June 1938 Lynch was six pounds overweight and he was stripped of his title.
He had two more contests in the autumn, losing both, by which time the little man who had so recently been Scotland's pride was an alcoholic.
Cures were tried twice without effect, and his licence to box was refused on medical grounds in September 1939.
The Gorbals produced flyweight boxers and hard drinkers in profusion in the 1930s, and Lynch died there 6 August 1946.
He had married a Glasgow girl, probably in 1934, and the marriage broke up in 1939.
They had at least one son (died 1970).
[Peter McInnes,Ten and Out!, 1990; Brian Donald,Fight Game in Scotland , 1988; W. Barrington Dalby,Come in Barry!, 1961; Gilbert E. Odd,Ring Battles of the Century , 1948.]
Francis Herbert
,Edward (1827–1904), stationer, printer, map-maker, bookseller, and publisher, was born 31 May 1827 in Holborn, London, the second son and third child in a family of four sons and three daughters of William Stanford, tailor and draper, of 29 Holborn Hill, and his wife Ann Phillips.
Educated at the City of London School, after Easter 1841 he was apprenticed to a printer and stationer in Malmesbury, Wiltshire.
In London he worked for Thomas H. Pettitt (diary and account-book publisher); Wilson, Richard & Co. (wholesale stationers and account-book manufacturers); and briefly in 1848 for T. W. Saunders.
He returned in October 1852 to 6 Charing Cross in partnership as Saunders & Stanford, ‘Publishers, Booksellers, Mapsellers, and Stationers’; the partnership was mutually dissolved July 1853.
In October 1853 Saunders proposed Stanford for fellowship of the Royal Geographical Society.
Maps of Heinrich Barth's central African travels and of the geology of India by G. B. Greenough [q.v.]were published by Stanford in 1854.
As agent he sold Ordnance Survey, Admiralty, Geological Survey, Trigonometrical Survey of India, and India Office publications.
By 1856, owning the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge's maps, he prepared for Harrow School the Harrow Atlas of Modern Geography and one of classical geography; and he delivered the Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society, later publishing its ‘new series’.
In 1857 he founded Stanford's Geographical Establishment, employing Saunders and A. K. Johnston [q.v.](of Edinburgh) to prepare and engrave his ‘library maps’: ‘Europe’(1858), ‘London and its environs’(1862), and others.
From 1859 he supplied maps to the Society for the Promotion of Christian Knowledge, the National Society, Metropolitan Board of Works, Palestine Exploration Fund, and the School Board of London.
The ‘Map of Western Palestine’(1880) by C. R. Conder and H. H. Kitchener [qq.v.],
E. G. Ravenstein's ‘A Map of Eastern Equatorial Africa’(1881–3), H. H. Kitchener and S. C. N. Grant's ‘A Trigonometrical Survey of…
Cyprus’(1885), and the multi-authored Compendium of Geography and Travel (1878–85) were noteworthy productions.
His products' quality won recognition (two gold and one silver medals) at international exhibitions from 1862 to 1884.
The bookselling business of C. H. Law was acquired in 1860, the plates and stock of the map-maker John Arrowsmith [q.v.]in 1874, and Staunton & Son (stationers) in 1877.
Illness meant that he gradually relinquished active control of his firm to his son;Stanford's London Atlas of Universal Geography…
Folio Edition , dedicated to Queen Victoria (1887), was his swansong.
John Palliser [q.v.]named the Stanford range (British Columbia) after him.
He subscribed to Parisian colleagues' relief during the 1870–1 siege, becoming an honorary member of their Cercle de la librairie, de l'imprimerie, de la papeterie…
A fellow publisher, Edward Marston, wrote: ‘In business he was clear-headed, prompt, and decisive, and all who knew him would testify to his absolute straightforwardness and integrity.
Socially he was lovable, kind, and generous.’
In 1855 Stanford married Mary, daughter of William Nesbitt Baker, bookseller and stationer, of Harrow, Middlesex.
A son, Edward (appointed geographer to the queen, 1893), was born in 1856; Henry Woodbridge of Harrow was adopted.
Mary died in 1867, and in 1871 he married Constant Mary, daughter of William Hewer, in Battersea.
Of this marriage William and Arthur Edward were born.
Stanford died 3 November 1904 at ‘Helens’, Sidmouth, Devon, where he had moved with his wife in 1890.
[Edward Stanford (son),A History of the Firm of Stanford , 1902; Royal Geographical Society archives, library, and map room; private information.]
Watkins Shaw
,Muzio (1752–1832), composer and pianist, was born 23 January 1752 in Rome, the eldest of seven children of Nicolo Clementi, silversmith, and his wife Magdalena Kaiser.
He was baptized as Mutius Philippus Vincentius Franciscus Xaverius.
He showed musical ability at an early age, and while yet a boy received a sound education in organ playing, singing, and composition.
When not quite fourteen years old he became organist of his parish church, San Lorenzo in Damaso, Rome.
But in 1766 he came to the notice of Peter Beckford [q.v.], then travelling in Italy, who, in return for payments to the father, brought the boy to live at his home in Stapleton Iwerne, Dorset, for seven years.
Beckford's intentions are not known, but while living quietly there from 1766 or 1767 Clementi pursued a disciplined curriculum of self-study in music and practice on the harpsichord and published his Op. 1, a set of six sonatas dedicated to Beckford, in 1771.
In about 1774 he was free to move to London, where he attracted favourable notice by the publication of three keyboard sonatas, Op. 2, in 1779 and which thenceforward was his base for work as performer, composer, and teacher.
Among his important pupils were J. B. Cramer and John Field [qq.v.].
He also ventured into musical commerce, and after joining with John Longman as Longman, Clementi & Co., 1798–1801, he entered into partnership with F. W. Collard [q.v.]and others as music publisher, dealer, and pianoforte maker as Clementi & Co., 1801–6.
After his retirement this became the well-known pianoforte manufacturing firm of Collard & Collard.
By an extended tour in 1780–2 he had become known as a pianist in Paris, Strasburg, Munich, and Vienna, and in 1802 he was enthusiastically received in St Petersburg.
From 1802 to 1810 he travelled abroad, to Berlin, Dresden, Naples, Rome, Milan, and Vienna, partly as a representative of his firm.
In 1813 he was one of the original directors of the Philharmonic Society.
He was acclaimed in Leipzig in 1820–2 and he retired in 1830, moving to Lichfield, Staffordshire, and then to Evesham, Worcestershire.
In 1801 he published a valuable pedagogical work,Introduction to the Art of Playing on the Piano Forte .
As a composer he cultivated various forms, including the symphony, but his lasting importance rests on his series of over sixty solo sonatas for keyboard (after Op. 7, distinctively for pianoforte rather than harpsichord) and his famous ‘Gradus ad Parnassum’(1817–26).
This is not exclusively a collection of technical exercises but includes also canons, fugues, sonata movements, characteristic pieces, and études of an artistic type.
The inscription ‘Father of the Pianoforte’, placed over his grave in the cloisters of Westminster Abbey in 1877, is both too emphatic and too exclusive.
Nevertheless, as composer and teacher his influence was a formative contribution to the development of pianism in the nineteenth century.
Clementi married Caroline, daughter of Johann Georg Gottfried Lehmann, cantor of St Nicholas church, Berlin, in 1804.
She died in 1805 after giving birth to a son.
In 1811 he married Emma, daughter of Zachariah Gisborne, whose forebears came from Birmingham.
They had two sons and two daughters.
Clementi died in Evesham 10 March 1832.
[Quarterly Musical Magazine , vol. ii, 1820, pp. 308–16;Harmonicon , vol. ix, 1831, pp. 183–6; Max Unger,Muzio Clementis Leben , Leipzig, 1914; Alan Tyson,Thematic Catalogue of the Works of Muzio Clementi , 1967; Leon Plantinga,Clementi, his Life and Music , 1977.]
P C Seaward
, Sir Edward , second baronet (1625–1684), MP and office holder, was born 8 November 1625 at Surrenden Dering, Kent, the only son (there was also a daughter) of Sir Edward Dering, later first baronet (1627)[q.v.], antiquary and politician, of Surrenden House, Kent, by his second wife, Anne, daughter of Sir John Ashburnham.
He had two brothers and two more sisters by his father's third wife.
He was educated at schools in Kent and London, and at Sidney Sussex and Emmanuel Colleges, Cambridge.
He was entered in the Middle Temple in 1641.
Dering joined his father with the king at the raising of his standard in Nottingham, but returned to Cambridge, where he took his degree in 1643.
He continued his studies at Leiden, where he learned of the death of his father in 1644, and for two more years he travelled further in France and the Netherlands.
He refused public office during the Interregnum, until, on the eve of the Restoration, he became a militia commissioner in Kent and secured election as knight for the shire to the Convention Parliament.
Dering's evident application, as well as a connection with Sir Heneage Finch (later first Earl of Nottingham, q.v.), the newly appointed solicitor-general (Dering had married his sister-in-law), marked him out for government office.
In July 1662 he was appointed as one of seven commissioners to execute the Act for the Settlement of Ireland.
He became a member of the Irish House of Commons and in 1667 of the Irish Privy Council.
His work under the commission, and under a second court of claims appointed under the 1665 Act of Explanation, occupied him until 1669, when the court's work was complete.
Soon after his return to England, he was made one of the three commissioners of the Privy Seal, a post he held until the appointment of Arthur Annesley, first Earl of Anglesey [q.v.], as lord privy seal in 1673 superseded the commission.
He was compensated with a pension secured for him by the new lord treasurer, Sir Thomas Osborne (later Earl of Danby, q.v.).
Dering was returned to Parliament in 1670 for East Retford in Nottinghamshire.
By 1675 he was acting regularly in the Commons as spokesman for Danby and Heneage Finch (now lord keeper), particularly in the debates on supply in October–November 1675 and in Danby's bill of 1677 for the bringing up of the children of the Duke of York (later James II) as Protestants.
In December 1675 he was appointed one of the commissioners of the customs: two years later he was also made a commissioner to enquire into abuses in the mint.
His parliamentary role continued to grow in importance: in early 1678 he chaired committees of the whole House on supply and on ways and means.
But the allegations of a popish plot which broke at the end of 1678 embarrassed Dering deeply, dividing him between a strong anti-Catholicism and his loyalty to the monarchy and his patrons in the government.
He urged the unity of Protestants in the face of the popish threat and promoted measures for the removal of penalties from Protestant Nonconformists.
In the Parliament of 1679 he voted against the exclusion of the Duke of York from the throne.
In that of 1680, however, Dering announced his support for exclusion, after the Lords' rejection of the bill.
Danby's fall in 1679 may have deprived Dering of a political ally and patron, but it provided him with his most prestigious government position.
In March 1679 he was appointed one of the five commissioners who replaced Danby at the Treasury, an appointment he held until his death.
Dering was a scholarly man, who maintained an informed interest in religious controversy and dabbled in literature.
In 1675 he was elected governor of the Hamburg Company.
He married in 1648 Mary (died 1704), daughter of Daniel Harvey of Coombe in Croydon, a merchant trading with Turkey.
She bore him eight sons (of whom four died in infancy) and nine daughters.
Dering died 24 June 1684.
[M. F. Bond,The Diaries and Papers of Sir Edward Dering, second Baronet , 1976; B. D. Henning,The House of Commons 1660–1690 , 1983;idem ,The Parliamentary Diary of Sir Edward Dering 1670–1673 , 1940.]
A V Simcock
,Christopher (c. 1650–1695), chemist and laboratory technician, was born about 1650, probably in Oxford, though his origins remain obscure.
He is, however, known to be the boy ‘Kitt’ who in 1663, with his (unnamed) father, assisted in the experimental chemistry courses given privately at Oxford by the German alchemist Peter Stahl, under the patronage of Robert Boyle [q.v.].
He remained a trainee assistant to Stahl for about three years, and then served as Boyle's assistant for ten years, moving to London with him in 1668.
Having returned to Oxford, he became on 21 April 1676 a privileged (i.e. tradesman) member of the university, championed by the mathematician John Wallis [q.v.].
His business was (and remained) making chemical medicines, but he was soon designated to run the university chemical laboratory projected as part of the Ashmolean Museum.
Begun in 1679, the new institution was opened on 21 May 1683.
White himself chose, and perhaps helped to design, some of its apparatus and furnaces.
As ‘operator’, or ‘university chemist’, his main duty was to demonstrate experiments and techniques in extension of lectures by the professor of chemistry — Robert Plot until 1689, and then (Sir) Edward Hannes [qq.v.].
The first course began in September 1683.
In addition, White was authorized to run a public dispensary from the laboratory, where he maintained a storeroom of chemical preparations.
He was also in charge of a small library, to which he presented his copy of Joannes Zwelfer's Pharmacopoeia (1653).
In 1686 he was one of the stewards of the Oxford and Oxfordshire feast; and when the university went in ceremonial procession to meet James II in 1687, he deputized for the superior bedel of arts.
From at least 1688 he was an acquaintance of John Aubrey [q.v.], who lodged with him whenever he visited Oxford.
Among references to White in Aubrey's letters, mentions of ‘a rare medicine that he hath for the stone’(1689) and ‘a good lusty vomit’(1694) offer some insight into the nature of his pharmaceutical practice.
From an early age White had been moulded into a new kind of professional chemist, combining the skills of the alchemist, the apothecary, and the ‘philosophical’ experimenter.
This is reflected in his use of the new occupational title ‘chemist’.
He inspired the creation of Oxford's earliest ancillary scientific post, becoming in effect the first professional laboratory technician.
A contemporary account describes him as ‘skilfull and industrious’.
He did well financially, through the sale of medicines; yet there must have been disappointment, even before his untimely death, at the lack of real academic achievement in his laboratory.
By his wife Elizabeth (died 1724) he had two sons and two daughters.
He trained both sons as chemist apothecaries, the older, Christopher, succeeding to his university post.
No record of White's death or burial has survived.
When he made his will in Oxford on 27 August 1695 he was already seriously ill, and he probably died shortly after.
He was buried at St Cross church, Oxford.
[Archival sources including Oxford University archives — SP/E/14/4 and chancellor's court wills; Andrew Clark (ed.),
The Life and Times of Anthony Wood , 5 vols., 1891–1900; Anthony Powell,John Aubrey and his Friends , 1948; A. V. Simcock,The Ashmolean Museum and Oxford Science 1683–1983 , 1984.]
R G Davies
,John (d. ante Feb. 1315), popularly regarded as a saint, should not be assumed to have come from the village in Kent of that name.
Unlike other English ‘saints’ of his time, Schorne was neither political in his appeal nor of reported charisma in his life, of which next to nothing is known.
There was a minor, uninfluential theme in his posthumous reputation that he had come by abnormally horny knees from long hours in prayer.
Schorne's real fame in picture and text lay invariably in his exploit of trapping the Devil in his boot, but what, if any, incident or allegory underlay this celebration remains completely obscure.
He was evidently a magister by 1273 (of Oxford University, according to the fifteenth-century antiquarian William Worcester, q.v.), when he was presented to the rectory of Steppingley (Bedfordshire) by Dunstable Priory.
This he vacated by May 1282.
Perhaps it was then, rather than in 1290 as often supposed, that the priory presented him to the rectory of North Marston (Buckinghamshire), where his cult was to develop, and which he held until his death.
One of his name and style was acting as deputy for the absentee archdeacon of Buckingham (the brother of the future Pope Adrian V) in Chesham on 11 May 1280.
Since Schorne was described in an episcopal record in 1273 as a subdeacon and became an incumbent with cure of souls at that time, it is probably wrong to identify him with the namesake collated by Archbishop John Peckham [q.v.]to the rectory of Monks Risborough (Buckinghamshire) on 24 September 1289, a man who had been ordained subdeacon on the title of that benefice just twelve days earlier in Kent.
(This man became a deacon on 17 December 1289 and a priest on 27 May 1290 and still held that rectory in 1294.)
In what purports to be his will (9 May 1313), which is singular in style, Schorne spoke of old age and rendered to God what was God's (his soul), to the earth what was the earth's (his body, in a tomb he had designated before the high altar of North Marston), and his goods to be divided between intercessors and the poor, for the welfare of his soul.
Whilst some very local cult developed quickly, it spread only in the mid-fifteenth century, from which time come all the extant depictions of him (complete with diabolical captive), in groups from Norfolk (Cawston, Suffield, Gateley), Suffolk (St Gregory's, Sudbury, and possibly Bury St Edmunds Abbey) and Devon (Hennock, Alphington, and Wolborough); two texts of a lengthy invocation to him; and the prosecution (in 1448) of the then vicar of North Marston for counterfeiting his head from an exhumed skull.
(Three bloody wounds were a regrettable excess of artistic licence.)
The perpetual spring Schorne had divined for his parish in time of drought came replete with gypsum, Epsom salts, and carbonic acid, and thereby lent considerable support to his posthumous reputation, principally as a healer of rheumatic and eye afflictions, but with an occasional talent in respect of dead oxen, the drowned, and the consolation of ‘wretched, lonely boys’.
So substantial was his fame and profitability that on 7 April 1478 Richard Beauchamp [q.v.], bishop of Salisbury and dean of Windsor, secured a licence from Pope Sixtus IV to relocate his bones.
In fact, in 1480 the chapter of Windsor secured the appropriated rectory of North Marston itself, presumably to control and maximize the market.
Schorne's lavish new shrine was the first part of St George's chapel, Windsor, to be built, in the prime south-east corner.
Even without his well, he proved the reliable crowd-puller and money-spinner he had been bought to be, although neither records nor general report substantiate the enormous revenues and popularity sometimes claimed for him.
He continued also to thrive at North Marston, where the chapter took pains to market their investment with a modish development of the church.
Although deplored by Lollards and reformers such as Erasmus (and later John Bale and John Foxe, qq.v.), pilgrimages to both shrines were used by the Church as a reputable penance and remained popular, in southern England, down to the Reformation.
Despite the fame of the boot, Schorne's cult seems to have been a sensitive one, neither coarse nor exhibitionist.
It may be compared with the gentle popularity in Exeter of Bishop Edmund Lacy [q.v.].
Significantly, both escaped the long pre-Reformation decline of saints generally.
Schorne's image at North Marston was sent to London for destruction by the commissioner to Thomas Cromwell [q.v.],
Dr John Stokesley [q.v.], in September 1537.
In 1585 his chapel at Windsor was redeployed as a tomb for Edward Clinton, first Earl of Lincoln [q.v.].
Schorne had died by February 1315.
[W. Sparrow Simpson, ‘On Master John Schorn’,Journal of the British Archaeological Association , vol. xxiii, 1867; E. Clive Rouse, ‘John Schorne's Well at North Marston’,Records of Bucks.,
vol. xv, 1951–2, and vol. xviii, 1970; A. B. Emden,A Biographical Register of the University of Oxford to A.D. 1500 , vol. iii, 1959; W. H. St J. Hope,Windsor Castle , 1913.]
E A Reid
, Sir John (1591–1664), MP, was baptized 20 October 1591 in Kingston upon Thames, Surrey, the second son of John Evelyn, manufacturer, of Godstone, Surrey, and his wife Elizabeth, daughter and heiress of William Stephens of Kingston.
The family fortune had been established by Evelyn's grandfather, who had acquired the monopoly of making gunpowder under the Tudors.
Evelyn was educated at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, and the Middle Temple, and succeeded to his father's business in 1627, by which time the monopoly was under attack and the business itself in financial difficulty.
In an attempt to defend his position he secured election to Parliament for Bletchingley the following year and immediately introduced a bill, which was lost in committee, for the easier supply of saltpetre.
Finally losing the contract to supply gunpowder in 1636, Evelyn petitioned for compensation for losses, but it was several years before he was cleared of all responsibility for the failure to maintain supplies.
Re-elected to the Long Parliament in 1640, in which his nephew, Sir John Evelyn of Wiltshire (1601–1685, q.v.), sat for Ludgershall, he was ‘galled’ at the attacks on the family's monopoly.
Knighted in June 1641, as late as December he urged consultation with the king over suppression of the Irish rebellion.
A reluctant supporter of Parliament after the outbreak of civil war, Evelyn was only persuaded to subscribe the oath of loyalty to Robert Devereux, third Earl of Essex [q.v.], on threat of imprisonment.
With the failure of peace moves Evelyn's allegiance to Parliament faltered in August 1643: he retired to Godstone but came under suspicion following the interception of a letter which seemed to suggest that he and his nephew were preparing to make their peace with the king.
Interrogated by a Commons committee, he failed to answer questions ‘clearly and ingenuously’ and was suspended from the House for over a year.
Evelyn's subsequent political actions, unlike his nephew's, were commended by the diarist, Sir Simonds D'Ewes [q.v.], as those of a ‘gallant and honest man’.
Evelyn favoured accommodation with the king and in February 1648 acted as teller against upholding the vote of no addresses.
He did not sit in Parliament after Pride's Purge in December 1648 but took his seat after the readmission of the secluded members in February 1660, and was re-elected to the Convention Parliament (April 1660).
Reconciled to death ‘with patience and comfort’ by ‘seeing what befell my soverign lord and master King Charles I the best of men’Evelyn was buried in Godstone 18 January 1664.
By his marriage to Thomazine, daughter of William Heynes of Chessington, Surrey, he had seven children, four of whom survived him.
His elder son was created a baronet at the Restoration in 1660, and the younger entered Parliament for Bletchingley as an exclusionist.
[A. Davidson, ‘Sir John Evelyn’, E. A. Reid, ‘Sir John Evelyn’(typescript drafts for History of Parliament); B. D. Henning,The House of Commons 1660–1690 , 1983; British Library, Harleian MSS 165, ff. 156–9; M. Keeler,The Long Parliament , 1954.]
Nigel Ramsay
,Scipio (1579–1659), record keeper and antiquary, was the eldest son of Edmund Le Squyer (third son of George Squyer), later rector of King's Nympton (county Devon), and his wife Martha, second daughter of Mark Slader of Bath.
He left home for London in 1597, and was a student at an inn of Chancery, New Inn, for four years from 1599.
In 1603 he became marshal of his fellow Devonian (Sir) John Doddridge (later justice of the King's Bench, q.v.), retaining this position until Doddridge's death in 1628.
But in 1620 he entered Crown service, as one of the two deputy chamberlains in the receipt of the Exchequer.
He apparently continued in this office until 1655, when, with essentially unchanged duties, he was appointed one of the two chamberlains of the Exchequer and keeper of its records.
The deputy chamberlains gained some of their fees from those wishing to consult Domesday Book and other records in their custody; it was a matter at their discretion whether to index or calendar the records.
Le Squyer was as active in this side of his work as his predecessor and friend, Arthur Agarde [q.v.], had been, and about twenty volumes of his abstracts and calendars survive in the John Rylands University Library, Manchester.
In 1627 he was granted an extra £10 p.a. for his ‘extraordinary service and charges in sorting, ordering and digesting’ the contents of the Westminster treasuries.
He also had a disinterested fascination with the records of the middle ages, especially those of the west country.
He was a friend of such antiquaries as Sir Robert Cotton (with whom he swapped medieval manuscripts and from whose collection he copied extracts), Sir Simonds D'Ewes, and Sir William Dugdale [qq.v.](who in his History of Warwickshire , 1730 edition, p. 913, thanked him as ‘a gentleman of great knowledge in Antiquities and a special furtherer of this worke’).
A more general indication of his interests is given by the catalogue of his library, which he drew up in 1632, when he had just moved house to Long Acre, Covent Garden.
Quite apart from over 200 manuscripts, many heraldic or about Devonshire and some medieval, he owned nearly 500 printed books, including about 130 each of ‘theological’ and ‘historical’works, over seventy works of ‘Poesy’and over forty of ‘Morality’.
He had made his own translations of one of the Psalms and Prayers of Cardinal John Fisher [q.v.](although his theological books show a Puritan tendency) and of ‘The Life and Death of Edward II’, and he had part of the original manuscript of the Advancement of Learning by Francis Bacon [q.v.].
He was twice married: before 1620, to Frances, third daughter of Sir Hugh Brawne, by whom he had at least two sons and two daughters, and secondly, by 1656, to Elizabeth, who survived him.
He died in September 1659 and was buried in Westminster Abbey; in his will he had requested that he should be buried near to Agarde's monument there.
[F. Taylor, ‘An Early Seventeenth Century Calendar of Records preserved in Westminster Palace Treasury’,Bulletin of the John Rylands Library , vol. xxiii, 1939;idem , ‘The Books and Manuscripts of Scipio Le Squyer, Deputy Chamberlain of the Exchequer (1602–59)’, ibid., vol. xxv, 1941.]
Judith Collins
,(Rosa) Winifred (1893–1981), painter and writer, was born 21 December 1893 in Oxford, the eldest child in the family of two daughters and one son of Charles Henry Roberts, MP, of Oxford, and his wife Cecilia Maude, daughter of George James Howard, ninth Earl of Carlisle [q.v.].
She studied art formally at the Byam Shaw School of Art in London c .1910–14 and 1918–19, but as a teenager learned much from her grandfather, George Howard, a self-taught painter who befriended the artists Edward Burne-Jones, William Morris [qq.v.], and Giovanni Costa.
In 1920 she married the painter Ben (Benjamin Lauder) Nicholson [q.v.], son of the painter Sir William Newzam Prior Nicholson [q.v.]and his wife Mabel Pryde, also a painter.
They had two sons and a daughter.
Their marriage was dissolved in 1938 and Ben Nicholson married the sculptor (Dame) Barbara Hepworth [q.v.], but the eighteen-year working partnership that Winifred and Ben Nicholson shared was most fruitful for the development of their artistic careers.
In 1924 Winifred Nicholson purchased Bankshead, a stone farmhouse built over the remains of a Roman mile-castle on Hadrian's wall, and this unusual residence remained her home all her life.
Although it was at a high altitude and windswept, she created at Bankshead a garden full of her favourite wild flowers, which were a source of inspiration both for her painting and her writing.
In 1925, at the Mayor Gallery, London, she had the first of her eighteen one-woman exhibitions, which was well received critically.
There was a major retrospective at the Tate Gallery in 1987.
During the years 1926 to 1935, when, with her husband, she was a leading member of and exhibitor with the Seven and Five Society, her work was consistently praised for its idiosyncratic approach to light and colour, which can be seen to be her most important artistic legacy.
From 1926 to 1930 she shared her ideas about colour with the painter Christopher Wood and for those few years their work looked similar.
She kept to a narrow range of subject-matter, the most prominent being a composition of flowers on a window-ledge with a panoramic landscape beyond.
Winifred Nicholson's ideas on colour theory appeared in an essay entitled ‘Unknown Colour’, published in Circle, an International Survey of Constructive Art (ed.
J. L. Martin, Ben Nicholson, and Naum Gabo), in 1937.
In this she stated her belief that colour was not tied down to form but instead floated free, and that research into the nature of colour would lead to questions ‘about being itself’.
Her mind was of an imaginative and spiritual bent, and from the 1930s until her death she was an ardent Christian Scientist.
This led her to shun alcohol and medical establishments and to follow a practical, independent, and disciplined life.
She designed and made her own clothes, sometimes colouring the fabric with home-made dyes; this gave the articles a most individual style and character.
Her pea-pod soup and her manner of driving were legendary.
She died at Bankshead 5 March 1981, three weeks before an exhibition of new paintings opened in London.
[Winifred Nicholson,Flower Tales , 1976; Judith Collins,Winifred Nicholson , Tate Gallery exhibition catalogue, 1987; Andrew Nicholson (ed.),
Unknown Colour: Paintings, Letters, Writings by Winifred Nicholson , 1987; private information.]
R B Duthie
,Joseph (1837–1911), surgeon, was born at 22 St Andrews Square, Edinburgh, 2 December 1837, the eldest child of Benjamin Bell [q.v.],
Edinburgh surgeon and past president of the Royal College of Surgeons, and his wife Cecilia Craigie.
Joseph Bell was the last of five generations, spanning over 150 years of a surgical dynasty in Edinburgh, all being fellows of the Royal College of Surgeons.
His ancestors belonged to Dumfriesshire from the beginning of the fifteenth century and were leaders of the clan Bell.
Bell was educated at the Edinburgh Academy and entered the University of Edinburgh at the early age of sixteen, graduating MD in 1859.
He travelled to the Continent but was not attracted to stay and study there.
He returned to become house surgeon to the famous Professor James Syme [q.v.], and then house physician to (Sir) William Gairdner [q.v.].
He became a demonstrator in anatomy and then, at the early age of twenty-six, he set up his own classes of systematic and operative surgery.
He became special assistant to Syme for five years and was held in high esteem by his master and mentor.
He became a senior surgeon to the Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh in 1872.
In addition he served with great distinction in the Edinburgh Eye Infirmary and, having reached the statutory rule of fifteen years service, ‘retired’ from the Royal Infirmary to become the first surgeon to the Royal Hospital for Sick Children.
His reputation as a brilliant, caring craftsman and surgeon has been extensively recorded but he was also a dedicated mentor of nurses, introducing the new Nightingale ward design to the Royal Infirmary and the clinical teaching of nurses on Sunday morning rounds.
He was the founder and vice-president of the Queen Victoria Jubilee Institute of Nurses.
He was a strong churchman and after seeing two or three patients on a Sunday morning would go without fail to St George's United Free church, where he was a senior elder.
He was not a prolific writer, but his book Some Notes on Surgery for Nurses (1887) was dedicated to Florence Nighingale [q.v.], the sixth edition being published in 1906.
His other publications included A Manual of the Operations of Surgery , which ran to seven editions, and articles on scapulo-humeral dislocation and pulsating tumours of the orbit.
He served Edinburgh University from 1895 as the assessor of the university court and was soon elected a curator of patronage, a post he held until he died.
He was also committed to and involved in the admission of women to the medical school, which obviously involved much tact and understanding in order to break down prejudices.
He was an examiner for the Royal College of Surgeons for over forty-two years, treasurer for eleven, and president in 1887–9.
He was a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh and deputy lieutenant of the county.
Bell won notoriety as the inspiration for the creation of the character of Sherlock Holmes.
(Sir) Arthur Conan Doyle [q.v.]was a medical student in Edinburgh and had been impressed if not inspired by Dr Bell's professional appearance —‘a tall, stately, kindly man, keen eyes and aquiline features contributing to his air of intent investigation.
He would study with close interest all the mannerisms, features, expressions and personal traits of a patient.’
In 1865 Bell married Edith Katherine, daughter of the Hon.
James Erskine Murray of the Elibank family.
She died in 1874, leaving a son and two daughters.
Their son joined the army and died after an appendix operation.
Bell died 4 October 1911 at home at Mauricewood, Milton Bridge, Midlothian.
[British Medical Journal , 14 October 1911, pp. 954–6;Lancet , 14 October 1911, pp. 1,107–8;Edinburgh Medical Journal , November 1911, pp. 454–63;Scotsman , 23 May 1959, p. 7;Journal of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh , vol. xiv, 1969, p. 304; Ely Liebrow,Dr Joseph Bell, Model for Sherlock Holmes , 1984.]
Roger Bowers
or ,John (fl. 1480–1500), church composer and musician, Of his biography virtually nothing is known, and of his works few survive; and yet, in the quality of his accomplishment he may be considered the greatest English composer of the period between John Dunstable (d .
1453, q.v.) and John Taverner (d .
1545, q.v.).
In the compilation of the Eton College Choirbook of c .1500–4 his music was accorded pride of place.
His fifteen compositions originally included there comprised eleven Marian votive antiphons and four settings of the Magnificat, of which total, nine pieces survive in a state either complete or completable.
(Three songs to vernacular texts in carol form, surviving in an early sixteenth-century volume of courtly and devotional songs and attributed just to ‘Brown’, are probably by a different composer.)
To the scribe of a recently discovered source of his Stabat mater , the composer was ‘John Browne of Oxford’(‘Oxoniensis’); corroboration of Oxford as his working milieu is offered by the text of his eight-part O Maria, salvatoris mater , which includes among its invokees St Mary Magdalen and St Frideswide, the Oxford saint.
Yet the surviving archives of the three principal choral establishments there — New College, All Souls, and Magdalen College — indicate that he was never a member of the permanent staff of any of their chapel choirs.
He may perhaps be identifiable with the ‘Brown’ who deputized as organist at New College on two occasions during 1493; otherwise his identity remains resolutely obscure.
Browne's polyphony is dense (particularly in the compositions for five and six men's voices) and endlessly resourceful.
He is a master of cogency of overall planning, deploying cantus firmus technique and the alternation of reduced-voice and full scoring with an effortless artistry that wholly conceals the fact that several compositions stand upon an elaborately mathematical disposition of their successive and component proportions.
Overall, Browne is representative of the English florid style of choral composition at not only its most assured but also at its most imaginative.
Few closing periods approach in breadth and sweep the ‘Salve’ concluding his five-part ‘Salve regina’; and long before the contrivances of the madrigalists, he could create in his six-part Stabat mater a mood of brooding, despairing introspection and melancholy that gathers an inexorable momentum and energy until finally it erupts into the startling, percussive outburst of ‘Crucifige, crucifige!’
(‘Crucify, crucify!’) that is articulated at the very top of the treble register and brings the work to its climax — an unforgettable piece of composition unequalled anywhere in the European music of its time.
[Frank Harrison, ‘The Eton Choirbook’,Annales Musicologiques , vol. i, 1953, pp. 151–75; Frank Harrison (ed.),
The Eton Choirbook ,Musica Britannica , vols. x–xii, 2nd edn., 1969–73; Iain Fenlon (ed.),
Cambridge Music Manuscripts 900–1700 , 1982, pp. 114–17.]
Derek Howse
,Jeremiah (1733–1779), surveyor and astronomer, was born in Bishop Auckland, county Durham, 27 July 1733, the fifth of the seven children of George Dixon, a well-to-do Quaker coalmine owner, and his wife Mary Hunter of Newcastle.
He was educated at John Kipling's School in Barnard Castle, where he acquired an interest in mathematics and astronomy.
While still a young man in south Durham, he made the acquaintance of the mathematician William Emerson, the instrument-maker John Bird, and the natural philosopher Thomas Wright [qq.v.].
In 1760 the Royal Society chose Charles Mason [q.v.]to go to Sumatra to observe the 1761 transit of Venus, and, probably on Bird's recommendation, Mason suggested Dixon should go as his assistant.
An encounter with a French frigate delayed their final sailing so that they could not reach Sumatra in time.
They therefore landed at the Cape of Good Hope, where the transit was successfully observed on 6 June 1761.
On the passage home, they stopped at St Helena in October and, after discussion with Nevil Maskelyne [q.v.], who had observed the transit there, Dixon returned temporarily to the Cape with Maskelyne's clock to carry out gravity experiments.
Mason and Dixon eventually reached England early in 1762.
In August 1763 Mason and Dixon signed an agreement with Thomas Penn and Frederick Calvert, seventh Baron Baltimore [qq.v.], hereditary proprietors of the provinces of Pennsylvania and Maryland, to go to North America to help local surveyors define the disputed boundary between the two provinces.
Arriving in Philadelphia with their instruments in November, they began operations before Christmas 1763.
When work for the proprietors on what was to become the famous Mason–Dixon line was complete late in 1766, they began on the Royal Society's behalf, at Dixon's suggestion, to measure a degree of the meridian on the Delmarva peninsula in Maryland and to make gravity measurements with a clock sent out by the Society, the same one that Maskelyne had had in St Helena and Dixon took to the Cape in 1761.
They reported their task complete on 21 June 1768 and sailed for England on 11 September.
Before leaving, they were both admitted as corresponding members of the American Society held in Philadelphia for Promoting Useful Knowledge.
In 1769 Dixon sailed to Norway with William Bayly [q.v.]in the Emerald to make observations of the transit of Venus on 3 June on the Royal Society's behalf.
Dixon observed on Hammerfest Island, Bayly at North Cape, about sixty miles apart in case of cloudy weather.
They reached England again on 30 July.
Dixon returned to Durham, resuming his work as a surveyor.
Among places he surveyed at this time were the park of Auckland Castle and Lanchester Common.
He died unmarried in Cockfield, county Durham, 22 January 1779.
He should not be confused with his contemporary, Jeremiah Dixon, FRS (1726–1782) of Gledhow, near Leeds, son-in-law of John Smeaton [q.v.].
[H. W. Robinson, ‘Jeremiah Dixon (1733–1779)— a biographical note’,Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society , vol. xciv, June 1950, pp. 272–4; A. Hughlett Mason, ‘The Journal of Charles Mason and Jeremiah Dixon’,Memoirs of the American Philosophical Society , vol. lxxvi, 1969; D. Howse,Nevil Maskelyne , the Seaman's Astronomer , 1989; C. C. Gillispie (ed.),
Dictionary of Scientific Biography , vol. iii, 1970.]
Karl W Schweizer
, Sir John , fifth baronet (1708–1789), diplomat, was born in Ribston, near Knaresborough, 20 May 1708, the eldest of three sons (there were no daughters) of Sir Henry Goodricke, fourth baronet, and his wife Mary, daughter of Tobias Jenkins of Yorkshire.
After receiving his early education from a tutor, he entered Trinity College, Cambridge, as a fellow commoner in 1725.
He took his BA in 1728 and MA in 1734.
On 28 September 1731 he married his second cousin Mary, illegitimate daughter of Robert Benson, Baron Bingley [q.v.], politician.
They had two sons and one daughter.
Goodricke succeeded as fifth baronet 21 July 1738; left with an encumbered estate, he spent some difficult years in attempting to restore the family fortune.
These attempts, none too successful, ranged from various business ventures to a stint in the Netherlands (1745–7) as observer for the British government.
In 1750, thanks to his Yorkshire connections, he was appointed as British resident in Brussels, an appointment suddenly revoked for reasons unknown.
He remained in The Hague, 1751–7, where he established friendships with the British minister, Joseph Yorke (later Baron Dover) and his brother Philip (Viscount Royston and later second Earl of Hardwicke)[qq.v.], both sons of Philip Yorke, first Earl of Hardwicke, lord chancellor [q.v.].
It was through their influence that Goodricke was appointed as minister-resident to Sweden in 1758; he had to wait in Copenhagen until 1764 before the Swedish government resumed diplomatic relations with Britain that had been severed at the outset of the Seven Years' War.
He remained in Stockholm until 1773.
He collaborated closely with the Russian ambassador, Count Ostern, and worked to secure a defensive alliance with Sweden (1766), safeguard British trade, and prevent France's resurgence in the Baltic by supporting the party of the Caps in their resistance to the pro-France Hats.
French influence revived after the coup d'état of 19 August 1772 by which Gustavus III, a protégé of France, restored royal absolutism.
Goodricke relinquished his Stockholm appointment in 1773, following his wife's succession to the Yorkshire seat of Branham Park, which brought sudden wealth; he was then free to take his ease as a country gentleman, and devote himself to estate and agricultural improvement.
He was elected to Parliament for Pontefract in 1774; he supported Lord North's government on the American war, and was in favour of granting further relief to Protestant dissenters.
He did not stand for re-election to the Parliament of 1780; but he was elected for Ripon in 1787, and became a commissioner of the Board of Trade in 1788.
He died in New York 6 August 1789, and was buried in Hunsingore.
[J. and J. A. Venn,Alumni Cantabrigienses , 1922; Michael Roberts,British Diplomacy and Swedish Politics, 1758–1773 , 1980; L. Namier and J. Brooke,The House of Commons 1754–1790 , 1985; Galway papers, 12779–81, University of Nottingham library; British Library Add.
MSS 35425, Egerton MSS 1755.]
Peter Thornton
,Walter Lewis (1848–1917), architect, was born 17 July 1848 in Headington, Oxford, the youngest in the family of five sons and two daughters of Richard James Spiers, stationer, and his wife Elizabeth Phené Joy.
In 1858 he won a choristership at Magdalen College, Oxford, and entered the college's school.
In 1864 he entered the engineering department of King's College, London.
He was articled to his brother, Richard Phené Spiers, in 1866, when he also joined the Architectural Association, later gaining first prize in the class of design.
He became a student at the Royal Academy in 1868.
From 1870 to 1880 he was at the office of the architect Thomas Henry Wyatt [q.v.], and later went into partnership with the latter's son Matthew.
In 1875 he was elected an associate of the Royal Institute of British Architects.
In 1887 he was appointed district surveyor for Charlton, Lee, and Kidbrooke under the Metropolitan board of works and continued in this post under the London county council.
His appointment as curator of Sir John Soane's Museum at a salary of £300 p.a. was announced on 16 July 1904; he had been acting curator while his predecessor George H. Birch [q.v.]had been on sick leave.
His successor as curator, Arthur T. Bolton [q.v.], claimed that ‘it is no disrespect to his distinguished predecessors in that office to assert that he was the best curator that ever held that position of trust’, an opinion that was shared by (Sir) John Summerson, who succeeded Bolton.
Spiers did much to make the museum's collections more accessible to students and placed his wide-ranging knowledge ungrudgingly at the service of enquirers.
The inventory of the museum's contents that he drew up with such meticulous care, accompanying his sections for each room with an admirable sketch showing the location of each item, remained in use and he catalogued the museum's large collection of drawings by Robert Adam [q.v.].
Spiers enjoyed the ardours of research.
While at the Soane he edited and wrote a commentary on two small books in the museum,The Notebook and Account Book of Nicholas Stone, Master Mason to James I and Charles I (Walpole Society, vol. vii, 1919), which he illustrated with photographs of that sculptor's monuments taken during numerous journeys devoted to studying Stone's work.
He also contributed several important articles to the Journal of the London Topographical Society , of which he was one of the earliest members and to the council of which he was elected in 1902.
As a result of this special interest he made a topographical index to the drawings in the Soane Museum.
He was elected FSA in 1916.
Spiers was trained in the Gothic school, but Bolton, who knew him well, insists that he never referred to any buildings of his own and little is apparently known about his work as an architect.
He did carry out some repairs to the fabric of the Soane Museum.
Bolton stated that Spiers ‘disliked his name being quoted in any way’ and that it was ‘difficult for his services to be adequately acknowledged’.
Spiers was an unassuming and kindly man, whose painstaking scholarship was greatly admired by those who knew him.
He refused to take a holiday of even a single day during the German air attack on London in 1916–17, wishing to be present should any emergency arise.
This confinement apparently affected his health and, after a short illness, he died suddenly at the museum 28 May 1917.
He was buried at Brookwood cemetery.
[Journal of the R.I.B.A. , June 1917;Record of the London Topographical Society , 1917.]
A V Simcock
,Robert (1801–1865), experimental philosopher, was born in 1801 in Dover, the third of at least five sons of Robert Walker, gentleman, of Dover.
On 20 January 1819 he entered Wadham College, Oxford, where he was an exhibitioner.
He obtained a second class in literae humaniores and a first in mathematics in 1822.
He took holy orders as a deacon in 1826, and was immediately appointed junior chaplain of Wadham College, but had to relinquish the post when he married in 1831.
He was ordained priest in 1827.
As early as 1826 he served as a university examiner in mathematics, the first of many occasions.
From 1828 until 1853 he was mathematics tutor of Wadham College, though he was never a fellow.
He was elected FRS in 1831.
In 1839 he succeeded Stephen Rigaud [q.v.]as reader in experimental philosophy (physics) at Oxford, becoming responsible not only for a well-established course but also for an extensive collection of apparatus with an endowment for its development.
One of the first pieces which he added was the Oxford dry pile, an extremely durable battery.
Walker's appointment as reader (upgraded to professor in 1860) was significant, for he was the first to hold the post in its own right, rather than annexed to a professorship in another subject.
Inspired by the meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science in Oxford in 1847, at which he was one of the local secretaries and president of the physics section, Walker, along with(Sir) Henry Acland, Charles Daubeny, and Philip Duncan [qq.v.], launched a vigorous campaign for the reform of scientific education in Oxford.
The eventual results were the creation of a new degree in natural science in 1850, and the building of a new scientific teaching centre, which became known as the University Museum.
Walker was one of the most active members of the steering committee appointed in 1853 to establish the museum; and as secretary of the British Association in 1859–61 he helped organize the Oxford meeting of 1860, which inaugurated the museum but became famous for its discussion of Darwinism.
Walker was not an original physicist, but kept pace with the work of his great contemporaries in order to demonstrate their experiments to his students, and also to senior members of the university in the Ashmolean Society.
He made his lecture demonstrations as lively as possible in order to capture the interest of the undergraduates.
A brief account of them occurs in the memoirs of William Tuckwell.
His vocation as a clergyman was not eclipsed by his scientific career.
He was one of the university's select preachers in 1840–2 and 1847–9, and became vicar of Culham, Oxfordshire, in 1848, moving with his family to Culham vicarage.
He resigned this living in 1862.
Little is known about Walker's personality, though Tuckwell describes him as ‘cheery’.
He married Elizabeth Holdsworth of Alverstoke, Hampshire, in 1831, and they had (so far as is known) two sons and two daughters.
He died in Iffley, near Oxford, 28 September 1865.
[Frederic Boase,Modern English Biography , vol. iii, 1901; Robert Barlow Gardiner (ed.),
The Registers of Wadham College Oxford , 1895; W. Tuckwell,Reminiscences of Oxford , 1900; H. M. and K. Dorothea Vernon,A History of the Oxford Museum , 1909.]
Ruth Dudley Edwards
,Patrick Henry (1879–1916), teacher, journalist, poet, and Irish revolutionary, was born 10 November 1879 in Dublin, the elder son and second of the four children of James Pearse, stone carver, of London, Birmingham, and Dublin, and his second wife Margaret, shop assistant, one of two surviving daughters of Patrick Brady, coal factor, of Dublin.
A most important influence was an aunt who stirred Patrick's romantic soul with patriotic ballads and tales from Irish history and mythology.
From childhood onwards he was a dedicated if uncritical student of Irish language and literature: his view of Ireland past, present, and future was always to have mystical overtones.
At sixteen he joined the Gaelic League and took every opportunity to improve his writing and public speaking.
He attended the Christian Brothers’ School, Westland Row, and University College, Dublin.
In 1901 he took a good second-class BA in English, French, and Irish, won an exhibition, and was called to the bar, having studied for a BL at Trinity College, Dublin, and the King's Inns.
After his father's death in 1900, Pearse became head of his family and, along with his brother, tried and failed to keep the family firm prosperous.
None of the siblings married: Patrick was almost certainly unconsciously homosexual.
Slightly above average height, of sturdy build, he was always self-conscious about an eye disfigurement: in maturity he was a solemn and imposing presence.
As a lecturer, committee man, writer, and teacher of Irish, Pearse was respected within the Gaelic League for his dedication and high-mindedness, though his reserve precluded popularity.
From 1903 to 1909 he was paid editor of the League organ,An Claidheamh Soluis .
Although the League had to control his over-ambition and financial recklessness, he was a success because of his enthusiasm and industry, as well as his courageous and provocative articles on such topics as education, history, literature, politics, religion, and theatre.
The Irish language was his paramount concern: in its interests he even praised the British government, although he was a nationalist, and attacked the clergy, although he was a devout Catholic.
During this time he taught Irish extensively and in 1908 founded St Enda's, a boys' bilingual secondary school.
He was a gifted, humane, and exciting headmaster with a talented staff: the school was a triumph.
In 1910 St Enda's moved outside Dublin and became a boarding-school.
Henceforward, Pearse had a constant battle to avoid bankruptcy.
James Stephens [q.v.]wrote that ‘when something had to be done he did it, and entirely disregarded logic or economics or force.’
As with teaching and journalism, so with literature: he developed his small talent to the full, writing short stories, poems, and plays in Irish and English, which ranged from the mawkish to the genuinely moving.
Martyrdom became an important theme as Pearse became disillusioned with the language movement, worn down by financial worries, and increasingly political: W. B. Yeats [q.v.]thought him ‘a dangerous man; he has the vertigo of self-sacrifice’.
In 1913 he was a co-founder of the Irish Volunteers and joined the secret Irish Republican Brotherhood.
Three months in America in 1914, raising funds for St Enda's and mixing with hard-line Irish-Americans, set him single-mindedly on a revolutionary course.
Valued by the IRB strategists as a great and passionate orator and a highly persuasive political propagandist, in 1915 he joined their inner circle.
In 1916 he published several political pamphlets justifying a military uprising, and on Easter Monday he and six IRB colleagues issued a Proclamation declaring an Irish Republic: Pearse was designated commandant general and president of the provisional republic.
A thousand Irish Volunteers and 120 members of the Citizen Army formed by James Connolly [q.v.]took over major Dublin buildings.
Pearse and Connolly were based in the General Post Office, with Connolly directing operations and Pearse producing morale-boosting propaganda.
On Saturday 29 April Pearse surrendered to avoid further deaths.
He was court-martialled and on 3 May 1916 he was executed by a firing squad at Kilmainham Gaol, Dublin, as on 4 May was his brother William, who had acted as his aide-de-camp.
Pearse became the best-known of the fifteen executed rebels and the centre of a powerful mythology.
[Ruth Dudley Edwards,Patrick Pearse: the Triumph of Failure , 1977; Séamas O'Buachalla (ed.),
The Letters of P. H. Pearse , 1980; Desmond Ryan,Remembering Sion , 1934.]
Gavin White
,Alexander (1814–1873), Episcopal bishop of Argyll and the Isles, was born in Aberdeen 25 March 1814, the eldest of the two sons and one daughter of John Ewing, advocate in Aberdeen, from Loch Lomond, and his wife Elspet Aitken.
He was educated at the Marischal College of Aberdeen and a private school in Chelsea, and from 1831 till 1835 he attended classes at the University of Edinburgh.
He was awarded a DCL by Oxford University in 1851.
Much of his early life was spent in Italy for reasons of health.
In 1838 he was ordained, returned to Italy, and then undertook charge of the Episcopal chapel in Forres for three years.
After his consecration as bishop of Argyll and the Isles in 1847 he lived in Lochgilphead and struggled with the problems of his diocese, Italy, Calvinism in Scotland, and factional struggles in the Episcopal Church.
Most of his flock had been lost to emigration, but there were still 1,500 in Appin, usually with no priest, and remnants elsewhere.
Ewing lamented his failure to learn Gaelic, and he never managed to train enough priests who did.
Taken together with his absences for reasons of health, Ewing's work as a bishop was not successful.
With regard to Italy, he had hopes of providing espiscopacy to the Waldensians, but they did not want it, and his dream of a non-papal Catholicism in northern Italy came to nothing.
With regard to Calvinism, Ewing had joined Thomas Erskine [q.v.]of Linlathen as early as 1836 in opposing predestination, and he later came close to a doctrine of universal salvation.
It was thought that if Calvinism were undermined the Presbyterian churches would give up their people to the Episcopal Church; in fact the slow waning of Calvinism in the Presbyterian fold took away the one advantage the Episcopalians had and doomed them to irrelevance.
Factionalism in the Episcopal Church centred on doctrines of the Eucharist.
Ewing had been abroad during the key years of the Catholic revival, did not share these concerns, and resented an incursion of Oxford Movement clergy from England.
These last did in Scotland what they could not do in England, causing Protestant zealots, whom Ewing also disliked, to oppose the Oxford men with constant litigation.
In 1858 Ewing wrote an open letter complaining of these controversies without which, ‘at the time of the great Presbyterian disruption…we should have absorbed within our pale the bulk of the sober-minded and educated of Scotland.’
Describing himself as the only bishop born, ordained, and consecrated in Scotland, Ewing nonetheless found a solution to the troubles of the Episcopal Church in its future alignment with, or incorporation into, the Church of England.
There its tumult would be more easily contained, and the trouble-making English clergy would go home.
Since incorporation would have required parliamentary approval, and alignment not much less, the scheme was impractical, but it was typical of the man.
In his last years Ewing wintered in the warmth of Pollok House in Glasgow, still working with Erskine on theological projects.
Perhaps the most interesting Scottish bishop of his day, he was remembered for his scholarship and his good nature, rather than for any accomplishment.
In 1835 he married Katherine (died 1856), daughter of Major Ludovic Stewart of Pittyvaich, Banffshire.
They had three sons and two daughters.
In 1862 he married Alice Louisa (died 1913), daughter of George Sholto Douglas, seventeenth Earl of Morton.
They had one son.
Ewing died 22 May 1873 at Westmill rectory, Hertfordshire.
[Alexander J. Ross,Memoir of Alexander Ewing, DCL, Bishop of Argyll and the Isles , 1877;A Letter to the Rt.
Rev. the Primus of the Scottish Episcopal Church from the Bishop of Argyll , 1858.]
J R Maddicott
(c. 645–685), king of Northumbria, was the elder son of Oswiu, king of Northumbria [q.v.], by his marriage to Eanfled [q.v.], daughter of King Edwin of Northumbria [q.v.].
Born in 645 or, less probably, in 646, he is first heard of in 655, at the time of the battle of the Winwaed between the Mercians and the Northumbrians, when he was a hostage with Queen Cynewise of Mercia.
He became king after his father's death in February 670.
Ecgfrith's reign was marked by his generous endowment of the Northumbrian church, by his bitter quarrel with its most flamboyant leader, Saint Wilfrid, bishop of York [q.v.], and by a militancy towards neighbouring peoples, the Mercians, the Picts, and the Irish, which eventually brought him disaster.
His reputation as ‘a venerable and most pious king’— the words of Bede — rested chiefly on his friendship with Benedict Biscop [q.v.],
Oswiu's former thegn turned monk, and with the ascetic Saint Cuthbert [q.v.].
His provision of seventy hides of land for Benedict's new foundation in Wearmouth in 674 and a further forty hides for his parallel foundation in Jarrow in 681 associated him with the two houses, which were to become pre-eminent in Northumbrian monastic culture and scholarship.
He was equally generous to Cuthbert, pressing him to accept the bishopric of Lindisfarne in 685 and granting him and his church land in Cartmel and Carlisle in the north-west and in Crayke in the vale of York.
With Wilfrid, who had a sharper sense of his own worth than either Benedict or Cuthbert, his relations were more difficult.
Initially his friend and patron, and present when Wilfrid's splendid new church in Ripon was consecrated between 671 and 678, he later fell out with him, for two main reasons.
The first concerned Ecgfrith's wife.
He had married, probably in 660, Æthelthryth, daughter of King Anna of the East Angles and widow of Tunberht,princeps of the South Gyrwe.
Despite her previous marriage, Æthelthryth had always lived as a virgin and was determined to remain one, retiring altogether to live as a nun in Coldingham about 672.
Wilfrid seems to have been her spiritual adviser: she had endowed his new monastery in Hexham, he had veiled her on her entry to religion, and Ecgfrith had reportedly offered Wilfrid land and wealth in order to get him to persuade the queen to live as his wife.
Frustrated dynastically as well as sexually, Ecgfrith is likely to have blamed Wilfrid for Æthelthryth's contumacy.
Secondly, Wilfrid was excessively powerful.
His huge diocese, covering not only Northumbria itself but also the tributary territories of the Picts and the Irish colonies in western Scotland, his riches, and the numbers of his monasteries and his followers, made him very much a prince bishop.
In 678 Ecgfrith, urged on by his second wife Iurminburg, expelled Wilfrid from his see and divided it in two, with a new bishop in Hexham as well as York.
Archbishop Theodore [q.v.]confirmed these changes, which fell in neatly with his own plans to break up unmanageably large tribal dioceses.
Wilfrid appealed to Rome and secured a papal judgement in his favour; but vainly.
On his return in 680 he was deprived of his relics by Iurminburg, imprisoned for nine months by Ecgfrith, and then expelled for a second time from the kingdom.
It gave Eddius [q.v.],
Wilfrid's biographer, some satisfaction to point out that Ecgfrith's partnership with Wilfrid coincided with the king's years of military success and that his failures followed from their differences.
Before 675 he had defeated Wulfhere of Mercia [q.v.], bringing the kingdom of Lindsey (north Lincolnshire) and possibly a larger part of Mercia under his direct rule: his presence at the synod of Hertford in 672 may be a mark of this temporary overlordship.
About the same time he defeated the Picts in battle.
But in 679 he himself was defeated by Æthelred of Mercia at the battle of the Trent, where Ecgfrith's brother Ælfwine was killed.
Lindsey was lost and the Humber restored as Northumbria's southern frontier.
The main threat now came from the north and west: from the Picts and their allies the Irish, with whom Aldfrith [q.v.],
Ecgfrith's half-brother, may also have been in alliance.
Aldfrith's exile in Irish territory, and his relationship through his mother with the Uí Néill, the most powerful of the Irish tribes, partly explains the successful attack by Ecgfrith on the Uí Néill lands in Ireland in 684.
In the following year he invaded Pictish territory, where he was defeated and killed at Nechtansmere, now Dunnichen Moss, near Forfar, on 20 May 685.
The battle was a turning point in Northumbrian fortunes.
The Picts and the Irish of western Scotland recovered their independence, the Forth was probably re-established as Northumbria's northern frontier, and the bishopric at Abercorn on its southern shore, established by Ecgfrith for the Picts, was abandoned.
Ecgfrith has suffered historically by comparison with Edwin, Oswald [q.v.], and Oswiu, his great Northumbrian predecessors, and by reason of his final failure in the north.
Like his predecessors, he was both a barbarian warlord and (as Eddius admitted)‘a most Christian king’.
Although he lacked the control over the southern kingdoms which might have put him on Bede's famous list of kings holding imperium in the south, he remained a formidable ruler, with the resources to endow the church lavishly and to raise the navy which must have been necessary for his invasion of Ireland.
Deprived after Nechtansmere of the land and tribute from the Picts and Irish which probably underlay such power, Northumbria is likely to have been a poorer as well as a less dominant kingdom.
[Bede,Historia Ecclesiastica , ed.
C. Plummer, 1896; B. Colgrave (ed.),
The Life of Bishop Wilfrid by Eddius Stephanus , 1957;idem (ed.),
Two Lives of St. Cuthbert , 1940.]
Michael De-la-Noy
,(Rupert) John (1915–1936), poet and political activist, was born in Cambridge 27 December 1915, the eldest son and second of the five children (three sons and two daughters) of Francis Macdonald Cornford [q.v.], professor of ancient philosophy at Cambridge University, and his wife Frances Crofts Darwin — the poet Frances Cornford.
Through his mother (the daughter of Sir Francis Darwin, q.v.) he was a great-grandson of Charles Darwin [q.v.].
It was ironic that John Cornford should be named Rupert in memory of the poet Rupert Brooke [q.v.], who had died in April 1915, for Cornford came to despise the school of Georgian poets, of whom Brooke was the supreme exemplar and his mother a loyal adherent.
His father described him as ‘a large, placid baby with very dark eyes and skin and thick black hair…good-tempered and easy to amuse, even when unwell’, and there were few indications, as a small boy, of the vigorous intellect and independence of mind that was to flourish so strikingly in adolescence.
Initially Cornford was taught as a day boy in Cambridge, but when he was nine he was sent as a boarder to Copthorne Preparatory School in Sussex.
Already he had developed an interest in military history, particularly in the campaigns of Napoleon.
At the age of fourteen he obtained a scholarship to Stowe School which had only been in existence six years.
The first headmaster, J. F. Roxburgh [q.v.], had been a pupil of Professor Cornford's at Trinity College, Cambridge.
Cornford's individualism caused him to refuse to join the Officer Training Corps.
At fifteen he was writing poetry under the avant-garde influence of Robert Graves, T. S. Eliot, and particularly W. H. Auden [qq.v.], from whom he solicited a letter of encouragement.
His political theories were being shaped by reading Das Kapital and the Communist Manifesto , and at sixteen he won an exhibition to Trinity College, Cambridge.
But, having outgrown Stowe and with time to kill before going up to Cambridge, he gravitated, almost inevitably, to the London School of Economics, where his active interest in politics began to overshadow his desire to be a poet.
He joined the Young Communist League, and although he did attend lectures, he used his time in London as an opportunity to deepen his commitment to the abolition of poverty by establishing communism in England.
At this period Cornford had so separated politics from poetry that he even published a poem in the Listener under a pseudonym.
Cornford was still only seventeen when he entered Trinity, in October 1933.
During the three years he was at Cambridge he wrote only nine poems, for he was spending fourteen hours a day on political activities, and in March 1935 he became a full member of the Communist party of Great Britain.
Despite his insistence on Marxian analysis and his exhausting programme of extra-curricular activities, he achieved first classes in both parts of the history tripos (1935 and 1936).
He found time too to father an illegitimate child, shortly afterwards abandoning both child and mistress for the woman he might well eventually have married, Margot Heinemann.
In 1936 Trinity gave him a scholarship and he planned to study the Elizabethans, but when the Spanish civil war broke out on 18 July 1936, on a sudden impulse and without even saying goodbye to his family he left for Dieppe.
By 8 August he was in Barcelona, unable to speak a word of Spanish but armed with a press card.
Cornford is said to have been the first Englishman to enlist in the International Brigade to fight against Franco.
During his first period in Spain he fell seriously and mysteriously ill, and spent some time in hospital.
During three weeks' leave in England he resigned his Trinity scholarship and made a conscious decision to return to Spain for the duration of the war.
He took part in the battle for Madrid, which began on 7 November 1936, and received a severe head wound.
At this time his poetic inspiration returned, and some of his finest work was written in the last weeks of his life, including his most famous poem, ‘Heart of the Heartless World’.
The battle near Lopera in which John Cornford was killed was a shambles, and the precise circumstances and date of his death are not known.
He may have died 27 December 1936, his twenty-first birthday.
His body was never recovered.
John Cornford's poems appeared in New Writing , the Cambridge Review , and the Student Vanguard , and they were collected in 1938 in John Cornford: a Memoir , edited by Pat Sloan.
His best work has a direct simplicity, benefits from its autobiographical inspiration, and stands as a worthy memorial to all those who died in the Spanish civil war.
Cornford himself came to be regarded as much as a typically doomed and respected idealist of his generation as a poet.
[Peter Stansky and William Abrahams,Journey to the Frontier: Julian Bell and John Cornford, their Lives and the 1930s , 1966.]
A C Howe
,Samuel (1756–1828), cotton manufacturer, was born 5 October 1756 in Anderton, Lancashire, the eldest in the family of two sons and one daughter of Samuel Oldknow, a muslin manufacturer originally from Nottingham, and his wife Margaret, daughter of Thomas Foster, a small landowner of Anderton.
After his father's early death his mother married a local farmer, John Clayton, and had three more children.
Educated at Rivington Grammar School, Oldknow was apprenticed to his uncle in Nottingham, and then returned to Anderton in 1781 as his uncle's partner in rebuilding the Anderton muslin business.
The invention of the spinning mule in 1779 made high quality cotton yarn possible, and it was a propitious moment to compete with the Indian muslins which monopolized the quality market.
Oldknow, with his important family contacts, and his delight in technical detail, together with a strong sense of ambition and immense energy, was well placed to exploit this opportunity.
Within three years he had become the most successful muslin manufacturer in Britain.
By 1789 he produced sales of between £80,000 and £90,000 per annum, 90 per cent of them fine muslins, which now found customers as distant as Botany Bay.
Oldknow's costly portrait by Joseph Wright [q.v.]in c .1786 depicts the successful Enlightenment man of business, reason, and science, equal to any in status, talent, and attainment.
Oldknow initially based his enterprise on his warehouse in Anderton.
Yarn purchased from Nottingham or from the Arkwrights, the leading firm in the cotton industry, was turned into cloth by numerous hand-loom weavers organized by Oldknow's talented managers.
By 1784 a new pool of weavers and a new warehouse in Stockport had been added.
Here Oldknow centralized warping and winding, with some weaving, while at nearby Heaton Mersey he established a sizeable finishing works under the control of his brother, Thomas.
His ambitions now centred on adding fine-spinning to manufacturing.
He turned down offers of partnership with the Peels and Arkwrights, and in 1790 erected the first steam-powered mill in Stockport, during a boom period.
Oldknow seems to have had in mind a great combined enterprise, with 1,000 factory workers and 1,000 weavers, and was on the way to becoming one of England's greatest cotton lords, to rank with the Peels, Arkwrights, and Strutts.
Yet his business limitations and overblown ambitions were now exposed.
He had already become dependent on Richard Arkwright [q.v.]for funds (a loan of £10,000 in 1788) but the prosperity of muslins now evaporated, while Oldknow failed to achieve the same mastery of technical perfection in fine-cotton spinning.
The economic crisis of 1792 ended this phase of his career, forcing him to sell or let all his works in Stockport and Anderton.
His future now rested, as it did until his death, on the forbearance of his main creditors, the Arkwrights.
He owed Richard Arkwright £205,000 by his death.
In 1787 Oldknow had purchased a landed estate at Mellor in Derbyshire, the security for his debts and now the focus for his industrial aspirations.
Even before his Stockport vision had collapsed, Oldknow had begun a consuming preoccupation with this largely rural community.
He had begun building a water-powered factory and consolidating his landed estate by purchase.
He now built an intricate series of reservoirs, together with houses for himself, workers, and apprentices.
The mill was never to be in the forefront of industry.
It produced coarse yarn and employed at its peak only about 550 workers, including many parish apprentices.
Yet Oldknow's historical reputation largely derives from the community which he created in this rural setting.
He dominated both Mellor and Marple, setting up diverse enterprises: limekilns, coal-shafts, building bridges, and turnpike roads.
He was also the mainstay of the Peak Forest canal.
Oldknow the man of romantic sensibility came to the fore.
His limekilns were designed to resemble medieval fortresses.
Uniting industry and the countryside, he emerged as one of Derbyshire's leading high-farmers during the Napoleonic wars.
Oldknow joined the county élite as lieutenant-colonel in the Volunteers, high sheriff of Derbyshire (1824), and chairman of the Agricultural Society (1828), and he rebuilt the parish church in Mellor, renting 325 pews for his workers.
Oldknow died in Mellor 18 September 1828.
He had never married.
[Oldknow papers, John Rylands University Library, Manchester; Oldknow letters and apprenticeship papers, Manchester City Library (microfilm); G. Unwin, with A. Hulme and G. Taylor,Samuel Oldknow and the Arkwrights (1924, 2nd edn. 1968);Gentleman's Magazine , vol. xcviii, part 2, November 1828; J. Wainwright,Memories of Marple , privately printed, 1899; D. J. Hodgkins, ‘Samuel Oldknow and the Peak Forest Canal’,Derbyshire Archaeological Journal , vol. xcvii, 1977.]
A G E Jones
,John (1794–1843), merchant service master and explorer, was baptized in Enfield 28 June 1794, the third son and youngest child of Thomas Biscoe of Waltham Abbey, and his wife Ann Tibbs.
Nothing is known of his early years.
On leaving school he became a clerk.
On 11 March 1812 he volunteered for the San Domingo (74 guns), probably to avoid being pressed into the navy.
He served off North America.
On 4 January 1813, as volunteer first-class he entered the brig Colibri (16 guns) which was lost off South Carolina in a hurricane.
In 1813–15 he was midshipman, quartermaster, and acting master in the Moselle (16 guns) in the West Indies and off the coast of the United States.
Captain John Moberley of the Royal Navy said of him, ‘keeps a good reckoning, is attentive and promises to make a good officer’.
Nothing is known about his employment from 1815 to 1830, when Messrs C., H., and G. Enderby proposed an Antarctic sealing voyage, and appointed him master of the brig Tula (150 tons), which was not a good sea boat, with the cutter Lively and twenty-nine men and boys in all.
The two ships left the river Thames on 10 July 1830 and returned in January 1833.
Biscoe called at the Falkland Islands for refreshment, searched in vain for the ‘Aurora Islands’, and in 17–31 December 1830 examined the South Sandwich Islands as best he could.
On 24–25 February 1831, in latitude 65° 57' S, longitude 47° 20' E, Biscoe discovered Enderby Land, sighting black mountain tops showing through the ice-cap.
His landfall was probably the Tange peninsula.
He charted cape Anne (named after his mother) and mounts Charles, Henry, George, Gordon, and Codrington.
At a cost to the health of the crew and himself, he persisted off the coast for a month, trying to make a fuller chart.
When he reached Hobart on 9 May 1831, due to scurvy only four men were still fit.
In a second season Biscoe visited New Zealand and the Chatham Islands, and then made for South Shetland.
On 15–16 February 1832 he discovered Adelaide Island; then he sighted Alexander Land, charted the Pitt Islands and Anvers Island, and called at South Shetland.
He returned home from the Falklands because his crew could stand no more of the Antarctic.
His voyage was outstanding for his persistence and seamanship and in 1833 he was awarded the royal premium of the Royal Geographical Society.
He applied in vain to the Admiralty for his master's warrant.
In 1833 Biscoe was appointed to the Hopefull and Rose for a similar expedition, but resigned before sailing.
In 1834–6 he was in the West Indies trade, and in 1837 sailed from London for Hobart, commanding the Superb (345 tons).
There he became master of the Emma , a brig of 122 tons.
In January 1839, at Campbell Island, he met John Balleny [q.v.].
On a sealing voyage in 1839 he penetrated the ‘Ross Sea’ to latitude 75° S, probably on the Pennell Bank, before its ‘discovery’by (Sir) James Clark Ross [q.v.].
In 1839–41 Biscoe commanded the Marian Watson and the Trugenina , trading out of Sydney.
His health was failing and there was a subscription for his return to England.
He embarked in the Janet Izatt , and died at sea or in a port somewhere between Sydney and London at some time between February and June 1843 (the ship's log has been destroyed).
He left his wife Emma Crowe (to whom he was married in 1836 in Whitechapel) and a daughter and three sons in extreme poverty.
One of his sons was given a place, as a charity, at the Greenwich Hospital School and in 1901 his daughter was given a civil list pension of £30 for her father's discoveries.
The Royal Geographical Society has a copy of his journal of 1830–3 (MS 357) and another is in the British Library (Add.
MS 15,716).
[A. G. E. Jones, ‘John Biscoe (1794–1843)’,Mariner's Mirror , vol. l, no. 4, 1964, ‘The Voyage of the Hopefull and the Rose 1833–34’, ibid., vol. li, no. 5, 1965, and ‘John Biscoe's Voyage round the World, 1830–1833’,Mariner's Mirror , vol. lvii, no. 1, 1971; A. G. E. Jones, ‘John Biscoe, Tracing a Master Mariner’,Local Historian , vol. viii, no. 5, 1969.]
Trevor I Williams
,John (1738/9–1810), chemist, was reputedly of Greek descent, consistent with a contemporary description of him as dark-complexioned with black hair.
According to family tradition he lived among Arabs and came to England in early life as a refugee from religious persecution.
The first assured biographical fact is that he was married 22 November 1762 in the parish church of St Peter, Wolverhampton, to Mary, spinster of that parish, daughter of William Stringer.
He was then aged twenty-three and had resided there ‘for the space of four weeks last past’.
Despite his obscure origins Warltire established himself as a fashionable itinerant lecturer on chemistry and a supplier of laboratory chemicals.
In 1774 Joseph Priestley [q.v.], one of the leading chemists of the day, referred to him as ‘a good chymist’ and five years later Erasmus Darwin [q.v.], who knew Warltire as ‘a celebrated itinerant teacher of natural philosophy’, sent his son to Etruria to join the sons of Josiah Wedgwood [q.v.]in private chemical tuition with him.
Clearly, he was highly regarded by the members of the Lunar Society of Birmingham, one of the most influential provincial scientific societies of Georgian England.
In 1782 Warltire was elected one of the first forty-five honorary members of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society, the others including such illustrious men as Antoine Lavoisier, Alessandro Volta, and Benjamin Franklin.
Honorary membership of the Society was accorded men of distinction who lived too far from Manchester to attend meetings regularly.
This reflects Warltire's peripatetic way of life, which in turn explains why precise biographical details are so elusive.
Archival material shows him giving courses of lectures in widely scattered centres: London, Exeter, Chesterfield, Calne, and Plymouth, among others.
There is a suggestion that in the 1770s he was briefly associated with James Keir [q.v.]at his chemical works in Stourbridge.
A remarkable letter from Warltire to Priestley, dated 3 January 1777, indicates his acute powers of observation.
He says that when a jet of ‘inflammable air’[hydrogen]was burned in a receiver filled with ‘common air’…‘the common air is contracted a full fifth of its original dimensions; immediately after the flame is extinguished, there appears through almost the whole of the receiver, a fine powdery substance like a whitish cloud’.
The ‘full fifth’ fraction of common air was, of course, oxygen and the ‘whitish cloud’condensed water vapour.
Thus Warltire was very close to making one of the great chemical discoveries of the late eighteenth century, that water is a compound of hydrogen and oxygen.
Had he done so, he would have ranked with Priestley, Lavoisier, and Henry Cavendish [q.v.].
Warltire published many ephemeral works to complement his courses of lectures.
Additionally, he wrote two substantial books.
His Analysis of a Course of Lectures in Experimental Philosophy (5th edn. 1767), ranging over the whole of the natural sciences, went through many editions, as did his Concise Essays upon Various Philosophical and Chemical Subjects (1770?)
Warltire's end is almost as obscure as his beginnings.
He gave a course of lectures in Rotherham in 1803, but thereafter the next certainty is that he died in Tamworth and was buried there 23 August 1810.
[D. McKie, ‘Mr Warltire, a Good Chymist’,Endeavour , vol. x, 1951, p. 46.]
Frank Kermode
,Herbert Percy (1864–1916), art historian, architect, poet, and connoisseur, was born in London 18 February 1864, the son of Horace Horne, architect, and his wife Hannah Louise Porter.
At Miss Moore's day school at Hereford Square, Kensington, he was taught by Daniel Barron Brightwell, art critic of the Birmingham Post , to whom he dedicated his book on Botticelli in 1908.
He went on to Kensington Grammar School before being articled to a surveyor in the City of London.
An ‘aesthete’ and an expert collector of water-colours from a very early age, he became, in 1883, a partner of the architect A. H. Mackmurdo [q.v.], founder of the Century Guild, which was dedicated to the unification of the arts.
The partnership lasted until 1890.
He became co-editor with Mackmurdo of the Century Guild Hobby Horse , a journal that published new poetry as well as essays of artistic and antiquarian interest.
Horne's qualifications for this post were his own skills as bookbinder, architect, and designer; he was also an authority on furniture and antique musical instruments, as well as a connoisseur of music-hall.
Horne's principal architectural achievement, the chapel of the Ascension, Bayswater Road, partly modelled on Santa Maria della Grazie at Pietrasanta in Tuscany, was destroyed by bombing in 1940, as were most of his London buildings.
His single publication as a poet was Diversi Colores (1891), with his own typography and design.
It is accomplished though of small importance, very much of its historical moment.
In 1891 he also became, socially speaking, the central figure of the newly founded Rhymers Club.
His extensive acquaintance included Oscar Wilde, Walter Sickert, Walter Crane, Roger Fry, Lionel Johnson, Ernest Dowson, Arthur Symons, W. B. Yeats, Selwyn Image, and Arnold Dolmetsch [qq.v.], one of whose harpsichords he decorated.
After a quarrel with Mackmurdo and the demise of the Hobby Horse in 1894, Horne developed a learned interest in the Italian quattrocento, and especially in Botticelli, who had been rediscovered in mid-century.
In 1904 he sold part of his collection of eighteenth-century English water-colours to (Sir) Edward Marsh [q.v.]and thereafter devoted much time to his Botticelli studies, from 1905 living mostly in Florence, where he bought and restored an old palazzo, which became the Museo Horne after his death.
Meanwhile he had written his Alessandro Filipepi called Sandro Botticelli: Painter of Florence (1908), a book he himself designed throughout, allowing neither chapter divisions nor index, and printing only 240 copies.
He was much admired by Friedrich (‘Fritz’) Saxl [q.v.], an art historian also dedicated to Botticelli.
Horne was unmarried.
He lived frugally in Florence, and died there on or about 14 April 1916, leaving his house to the municipality.
What remained of his collection of English water-colours was transferred to the Uffizi art gallery, Florence, in 1963.
[Ian Fletcher, ‘Herbert Horne: the Earlier Phase’,English Miscellany, Rome , vol. xxi, 1970, pp. 117–57, and Rediscovering Herbert Horne , 1990; Herbert Horne,Sandro Botticelli: Painter of Florence , 1908, facsimile reprint with introduction by John Pope-Hennessy, 1980; Fritz Saxl, ‘Three ‘Florentines’ ', in Lectures , 1957; Randall Davies,The Burlington Fine Art Club Exhibition of Mr Herbert Horne's Collection of Drawings , 1916.]
J R Maddicott
, Sir Robert (c. 1283–1328), baron, was the son of Sir Robert Holland of Upholland, Lancashire, and his wife Elizabeth, daughter of Sir William Samlesbury of Samlesbury, Lancashire.
Robert Holland senior held moderately extensive estates in his county and played an active part in its government, but his son's career was to be altogether more exceptional.
Through his friendship with Thomas, Earl of Lancaster [q.v.],
Edward II's cousin and the most powerful of his earls, he rose from the middle ranks of the gentry into the upper ranks of the baronage.
Their connection probably began in 1298, when Holland served Lancaster as his vallettus on the Falkirk campaign.
By 1305 he had been knighted.
From 1300, if not before, he began to receive a steady stream of lands from Lancaster, amounting eventually to some twenty-five manors worth perhaps £550 p.a.
Lancaster was also responsible for his marriage, which took place about 1308 and led to still greater gains.
His wife was Maud, one of the two daughters and co-heiresses of Alan la Zouche, a prominent Leicestershire magnate, who brought to her husband, on Zouche's death in 1314, the greater part of her father's lands, worth nearly £720 a year.
It was probably in consequence of this great accession of landed wealth that Holland was summoned to Parliament for the first time in July 1314.
At the height of his career his whole estate, including his patrimony, was probably worth rather more than £1,300 a year.
In return for all this Holland became Lancaster's chief agent and confidant.
‘He truste more oppon him than oppon eny man alyve,’ says the Brut chronicle.
Chronicles and records suggest that he exercised a general supervision over all Lancaster's affairs: directing his estate officials, receiving dubiously acquired lands to which the earl wished to bar legal claims, acting as Lancaster's intermediary with the king, and supporting him in his political and military ventures.
He joined in the pursuit of Piers Gaveston [q.v.]in 1312 and served Lancaster in Scotland in 1318.
He also served the king, acting for three periods as justice of Chester and holding the usual range of local commissions.
It was to the king that Holland turned during the great crisis of 1321–2, when Lancaster rebelled against Edward.
In early March 1322, when Lancaster was retreating through the north midlands before the royal army, Holland crossed over to Edward.
His treachery cost Lancaster the campaign and ultimately his life, and Holland his reputation and his freedom.
For the next five years he remained the king's captive, and only in December 1327, a year after the old reign had ended in a revolution, did Edward III order his release and the return of his lands.
His restoration was short-lived.
On 15 October 1328 he was murdered in Borehamwood, near Elstree, in Hertfordshire, probably by a group of Lancastrian partisans and possibly with the connivance of Henry, Earl of Lancaster [q.v.],
Thomas's brother.
The bulk of his lands descended to his eldest son, another Robert, but it was his second son, Sir Thomas Holland, first Earl of Kent [q.v.], who refounded the family's fortunes, winning fame in the French war, marrying Joan of Kent, granddaughter of Edward I, and acquiring the earldom of Kent in right of his wife.
Holland's linkage with the most powerful noble of his generation, and the scale of his consequent enrichment, made his career in some respects sui generis .
In another way, however, it typified one of the main routes to social advancement in the middle ages: through service in the following of a great man.
[J. R. Maddicott, ‘Thomas of Lancaster and Sir Robert Holland: a Study in Noble Patronage’,English Historical Review , vol. lxxxvi, 1971.]
Richard J Howarth
,Cargill Gilston (1856–1922), physicist and seismologist, was born 30 June 1856 in Penicuik, Midlothian, the sixth son in the family of seven sons and one daughter of Pelham Knott, paper-maker and later commission agent of Penicuik, and his wife Helen Macintyre, daughter of Patrick McOmish, writer of Edinburgh.
His father died prematurely and Knott was brought up by an aunt and uncle while attending Arbroath High School (1864–71).
He went on to Edinburgh University in 1872.
After gaining his B.Sc.
in 1876 he became a research assistant to P. G. Tait [q.v.], professor of natural philosophy.
Knott worked in his laboratory (an ‘ill-equipped attic’) until 1883, after obtaining his D.Sc.
on researches in contact electricity in 1879.
In 1883 Knott travelled to Japan to succeed (Sir) J. A. Ewing [q.v.]as professor of physics in the Imperial College of Engineering (later Imperial University of Japan).
Knott worked closely with J. Milne [q.v.],
T. Gray, and F. Omori to develop the new science of seismology.
He applied Fourier analysis to investigate annual periodicity of earthquake shocks (1886) and developed a theory to explain the reflection and refraction of earthquake waves at the boundary between rock and water (1888).
In 1887 he and A. Tanakadate conducted the first magnetic survey of Japan.
On his return in 1891, Knott was appointed lecturer in mathematics and in 1892 reader in applied mathematics at Edinburgh University.
In 1899 he extended his earlier theory to wave behaviour at the interface between two different types of rock.
This work laid the foundation for the later unravelling of the interior structure of the earth, through observation of the behaviour of seismic waves as they are transmitted through it from distant earthquakes.
He became a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1880 and its general secretary in 1912, and was a principal founder of the Edinburgh Mathematical Society.
He was Thompson lecturer, United Free Church College, Aberdeen, in 1905–6 and 1913–14.
His publications include Electricity and Magnetism (1893);The Physics of Earthquake Phenomena (1908); and the Life and Scientific Work of Peter Guthrie Tait (1911).
He had the unusual distinction of being decorated by the emperor of Japan with the Order of the Rising Sun (class iv) in 1891 for his work on the magnetic survey of Japan.
He received the Keith prize of the Royal Society of Edinburgh for work on the magnetic properties of iron and nickel in 1897.
He held an honorary LLD of the University of St Andrews (1916) and was elected FRS in 1920.
Knott was kindly, painstaking, cheerful, and imperturbably good-natured.
He enjoyed golf and chess and held office in the United Free Church of Scotland.
In 1885 he married Mary, eldest daughter of the Revd James Main Dixon, minister of Free Martyrs church, Paisley; they had one son and three daughters.
Knott died 26 October 1922 in Edinburgh.
[Proceedings of the Royal Society , series A, vol. cii, 1923; C. C. Gillispie (ed.),
Dictionary of Scientific Biography , vol. vi, 1972.]
Beloff
,Lucien (1857–1930), journalist, was born in London 20 January 1857, the elder son of Edward Wolf, pipe manufacturer, a refugee from Bohemia after the 1848 revolution, and his wife Céline, daughter of Ludwig Redlich, a Viennese banker.
He was educated at private schools in England, the Athénée Royal in Brussels, and in Paris.
Wolf began his career in journalism at an early age, and rapidly made his way both in the Jewish press, culminating in his editorship of the Jewish World from 1906 to 1908, and in the general newspaper and periodical press, most notably as foreign editor of the Daily Graphic from 1890 to 1909.
While his journalism concentrated on international questions, Wolf also became an amateur historian of much distinction, mainly in the field of Anglo-Jewish history.
A selection of such writings appeared posthumously as Essays in Jewish History (1934) under the auspices of the Jewish Historical Society of England, of which he had been a principal founder.
The editor, Cecil Roth [q.v.], contributed a memoir.
His other books included his Life of the first Marquess of Ripon (1921).
Wolf identified himself with the existing élite of Anglo-Jewry in regarding Jewish emancipation in England as a success story, and expecting that the growth of tolerance would enable Jews elsewhere to live both within their ancestral religion and culture, and as full citizens of their respective countries.
But such a faith was challenged by the growth on the Continent of the new political anti-Semitism of which Wolf wrote a notable account and analysis in the eleventh edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica (1911).
Should the Jews then seek territorial self-determination in a ‘national home’?
Between 1896 and 1902 Wolf did explore the possibility of co-operation with the Zionist leader Theodore Herzl but then moved sharply away from Zionism, which in his Encyclopaedia Britannica article he described as ‘vitiated by its erroneous premises…the idea that anti-semitism is unconquerable’.
Henceforward Wolf pursued two objectives, both within the leading institutions of the Anglo-Jewish community and as a journalist — thwarting political Zionism, which he thought would place Jews in a situation of conflicting loyalties, and calling attention to the denial of human rights to Jews, particularly in Russia and Romania.
The former led to his organizing opposition within Anglo-Jewry to what became the Balfour declaration; the latter accounted for his role in the Liberal opposition to the Anglo-Russian entente.
During World War I Wolf was much involved with efforts to alleviate the sufferings of the Jews of Poland and western Russia, caught between the German and Russian military machines.
As a representative of non-Zionist Jews Wolf played an important role at the Paris peace conference of 1919, where his close association with the British delegation helped to bring about the conclusion of the minority treaties.
By now he conceded that individual rights for Jews, as in the western democracies, would not meet the needs of the Jewish masses in eastern Europe, for whom some form of group (though not ‘national’) rights would be essential.
His last years were spent monitoring the application of the treaties, and as an adviser to the League of Nations high commissioner for refugees.
In 1880 Wolf married Frances, daughter of Moses Moses of Maida Vale, London.
They had four sons and three daughters.
His wife died in 1912.
In 1923 he married Margaret Kavanagh, upon whose assistance in his work he had increasingly relied during the growing blindness that afflicted his later years.
Wolf died in London 23 August 1930.
[Mark Levene, ‘Anglo-Jewish Foreign Policy in Crisis — Lucien Wolf, the Conjoint Committee and the War, 1914–18’,Transactions of the Jewish Historical Society of England , vol. xxx, 1987–8; Chimen Abramsky, ‘Lucien Wolf's Efforts for the Jewish Communities in Central and Eastern Europe’, ibid., vol. xxix, 1982–6; Josef Fraenkel, ‘Lucien Wolf and Theodor Herzl’, ibid., vol. xx, 1959–61; Max Beloff, ‘Lucien Wolf and the Anglo-Russian Entente 1907–1914’ in The Intellectual in Politics and the Other Essays , 1970.]
Ronald Hutton
,Henry (1629–1692), journalist, was born in the Strand, London (he was baptized 5 February 1629), the son of Edward Muddiman, a prosperous tradesman who had come from Wolfamcote, Warwickshire.
He was educated at St Clement Danes school and St John's College, Cambridge, before returning to the Strand to become a schoolmaster.
In 1659 he was a member of the ‘Rota’ club of metropolitan intellectuals.
Upon 26 December of that year he used the opportunity of the restoration of the Rump Parliament to issue the first of a succession of twice-weekly news-books.
It is very likely that he was urged to do so by his neighbour (Sir) Thomas Clarges [q.v.], who as brother-in-law and agent of General George Monck (later first Duke of Albemarle, q.v.) was seeking a journalist to publicize the general's actions.
Muddiman continued to report the doings of both Monck and the Rumpers until they quarrelled, whereupon he used his papers to support the former.
He was rewarded on 16 April 1660 when the council of state outlawed all news-books except his pair.
At the Restoration the Privy Council confirmed this monopoly, but a former Royalist journalist, Sir John Birkenhead [q.v.], was appointed editorial supervisor.
Muddiman worked with him until August 1663, when a court intrigue resulted in the removal of the journals from both, in favour of(Sir) Roger L'Estrange [q.v.].
Muddiman, however, had meanwhile built up a lucrative sideline by sending handwritten news reports to private correspondents, which could include items on parliamentary proceedings which were forbidden in print.
He retained this business and the access to the dispatches sent to secretaries of state from which much of his material was drawn.
In return he performed clerical work for the secretaries themselves.
By 1665 he was wealthy enough to own a country house with thirteen acres in Earl's Court.
In that year, also, L'Estrange's ineptitude cost him control of the official news-books and Muddiman regained it because of the regard he had won from both secretaries of state.
He launched what became (from February 1666) the London Gazette , which remained the government newspaper until well into the next century.
His private newsletters were none the less still fuller and became celebrated.
By 1677 he was sufficiently influential at court to obtain favours there for other people.
His monopoly of printed and written news was breached by the exclusion crisis but then restored.
It was only decisively ended by the Revolution of 1688, Muddiman having become too closely associated with the fallen regime.
He retired in October 1689, died in March 1692, and was buried in the same month beside his wife in Kensington parish church.
His literary style was plain and factual, without witticisms or flourishes, and his character seems similar.
He was clearly intelligent, shrewd, and businesslike.
Samuel Pepys [q.v.]thought him both learned and mercenary, and both observations appear just.
He must have been charming and amenable to have earned the approval of the secretaries of state.
His only personal enthusiasm to feature in the records is a love of horses.
His great claim to fame is that he was the first Englishman to build a long and lucrative career out of the dissemination of public news.
[J. G. Muddiman,The King's Journalist , 1923; P. W. Thomas,Sir John Berkenhead , 1969; Public Record Office, State Papers Domestic, Series 29.]
Darryl R Sycher
,John (1855–1930), religious leader, was born 7 October 1855 in Liverpool, the younger child and only son of Frederick Francis Trevor, linen-draper, and his wife Harriet, daughter of John Cripps of Wisbech, a local shop-owner.
By the time he was nine both parents had died, and Trevor and his sister were brought up in Wisbech by their maternal grandparents.
In 1870 Trevor left boarding-school and was articled to a Norwich architect for five years.
Owing to lingering physical and mental depression, he travelled to Australia in 1877.
In 1878 he arrived in the United States and studied for the Unitarian ministry at Meadville Theological School in Pennsylvania.
In 1879 he returned to England and began studies at Manchester New College in London.
Disillusioned by Unitarianism's lack of zeal for reform, he established an architectural practice in Folkestone in 1880.
In 1884 he retired to Ballingdon in Essex.
Three years later he returned to Manchester New College, and in 1888 he became assistant minister to Philip Wicksteed in Little Portland Street, London.
At this Unitarian chapel Trevor had opportunities for studying social problems and began to see the relationship between politics and religion.
Trevor moved to Manchester in 1890 to become minister of Upper Brook Street Free church.
In April 1891 he attended a conference of Unitarian churches in London and heard Ben Tillett [q.v.]deliver a harsh attack on how the existing churches had alienated themselves from the working man.
He was now motivated to found the first Labour church and on 4 October 1891 the initial service was held at the Chorlton town hall in Manchester.
In 1892 Trevor founded a monthly publication entitled Labour Prophet .
In 1893 he became chairman of the movement's main organizing body, the Labour Church Union.
He also expressed his thoughts and ideas about the Labour church movement in a series of tracts.
By late 1893 churches had arisen in Lancashire and Yorkshire, and the movement spread to Birmingham and the midlands, south Wales, and Scotland.
Trevor's leadership role was frequently weakened by personal tragedy and illnesses, and he was not suited to the position of a national organizer.
This unwillingness to exert strong leadership was to lead to an eventual decline of the Labour churches by the end of the century.
Trevor moved to a farm at Horsted Keynes, Sussex, in 1897.
From 1899 to 1902 he encouraged young Labour church workers to visit him for informal religious training.
This ‘school of natural religion’ met with little success and Trevor soon severed his formal ties with the church.
In 1902 he lived for a short period in Clerkenwell, east London.
While there he tried to form the Labour Church Settlement, a community to function as a centre of intellectual and cultural life for the surviving Labour churches.
In 1909 Trevor moved to Hampstead and for several years worked as a professional photographer.
In late 1909 he also published a pamphlet,The One Life .
This displayed his intense fascination with sexual questions and his interest in forming an autonomous group to be modelled along the lines of the American Oneida community.
In 1881 he married his first cousin, Eliza, daughter of Franklin Stanley Cripps, a small shopkeeper in Wisbech.
They had four sons, two surviving to adulthood.
Following his wife's death in 1894, he was married, in 1895, to Annie Jones Higham (died 1919).
They had two daughters.
Trevor died in London 7 January 1930 and was buried in Highgate cemetery.
[John Trevor,My Quest For God , 1897,The One Life , 1909, ‘The Labour Church in Manchester’,New Era , 1892, and ‘The Labor Church: Religion of the Labor Movement’,Forum , 1895; C. H. Herford,Philip Henry Wicksteed , 1931.]
John Harvey
,William (fl. 1360–1405), was warden of the masons at Windsor Castle in 1360 and next year became joint disposer of the work with John de Sponlee, From this time onwards Wynford was one of the most significant architects in the royal service.
Early in 1365 he was granted the post of master mason to Wells Cathedral, apparently through the influence of William of Wykeham [q.v.].
His private practice expanded and he was in charge of works at Abingdon Abbey in 1375–6, but continued to carry out commissions for the Crown, at Corfe Castle, Dorset, in 1377; and the following year, with Henry Yevele [q.v.], on the defences of Southampton.
Again with Yevele, and the carpenter Hugh Herland [q.v.], he was in charge at Carisbrooke Castle, Isle of Wight, in 1384–5.
For Wykeham he designed New College, Oxford, and supervised the works there from 1379 to 1386, after which he went on to design Winchester College, ready for occupation in 1394 but not completed until after 1400.
His portrait was included in the stained glass of 1393 in the chapel east window.
By 1378 he had been described as master of all Wykeham's masonry works at Bishop's Waltham Palace, Hampshire, and also had charge at the episcopal manors of Highclere and Farnham, Surrey (J. N. Hare in Archaeological Journal , vol. cxlv, 1988, p. 239).
From 1394 he was rebuilding the nave of Winchester Cathedral and in 1400–2 was paid by Queen's College, Oxford, in connection with building the hall.
At Wells Cathedral he redesigned the upper part of the west front and the south-west tower of 1385–95.
Abandoning the intended spires, Wynford's tower inspired the square-topped towers of the later middle ages, including his belfry at New College (1396–1405).
He probably designed Yeovil church, Somerset (c. 1380–1400).
Besides the spireless tower, Wynford pioneered the co-ordinated plan of lodgings, in the upper ward of Windsor Castle, at New College, and at Winchester, and perhaps also at the Vicars' Close in Wells.
Second to Henry Yevele, Wynford was an architect of genius who transformed and unified English building.
He died in Winchester 26 July 1405.
[J. Harvey,English Mediaeval Architects , 1984.]
B P Lenman
,Walter Biggar (1847–1928), engineer, printer, publisher, and historian, was born in Edinburgh 23 November 1847, the second son among the six children of the Revd William Garden Blaikie [q.v.], minister at Pilrig, a disruption father of the Free Church of Scotland, later professor of apologetics and pastoral theology at New College, Edinburgh, and his wife Margaret Catherine, daughter of Walter Biggar, a retired fish merchant resident in Edinburgh.
Like his relative Robert Louis Stevenson [q.v.], with whom he shared a childhood nurse, Blaikie was destined to be a civil engineer.
He was educated at Edinburgh Academy and privately in Brussels before attending classes at Edinburgh University and training in the office of B. & E. Blyth, noted railway engineers.
He went to India in 1870 to work first for the raja of Kathiawar, and then for the public works department of the government of India, in which he became executive engineer, military works.
In 1873 he married Janet Marshall (only daughter of John Macfie of Edinburgh) by whom he was to have five daughters, but, as the Indian climate suited neither her nor their first child, he returned to Scotland on leave and resigned in 1879.
About to emigrate to Australia, he happened to meet at King's Cross Station, London, Thomas Constable [q.v.], the queen's printer in Edinburgh, a fellow Edinburgh Academical, and an elder of Pilrig Free kirk, who suggested that he try a spell in the printing trade.
Six months later he was assumed a partner in T. & A. Constable, Thistle Street, Edinburgh.
Settling in Colinton, he rose to be chairman, an authority on the history of Scottish typography, and a printer of fine editions of, among others, the works of R. L. Stevenson.
Passionately interested in non-telescopic astronomy, he published annually from 1898 until 1920 an elaborate set of star maps designed to help amateurs.
His ingenious spherical planisphere calculating device was appreciated by the Greenwich and Edinburgh observatories.
He wrote articles for the magazine of the Royal Scottish Geographical Society, of which he was a founder, and for long a member of council.
A fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, he was prominent in the Scottish History Society, and a founder and president of the Old Edinburgh Club.
He was also a member and office-bearer of the Scottish Society of Arts.
As generous-hearted as he was brusquely businesslike, he was chairman of the Edinburgh Chamber of Commerce 1903–6, and from 1900 to 1920 a manager of the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary.
He wrote and printed for the Scottish History Society his meticulous Itinerary of Prince Charles Edward Stuart (1897) and the substantial volume,Origins of the Forty-Five (1916).
He put money into the Scots Observer (which in 1891 became the London-based National Observer ).
He also helped found the Celtic Review and was president of the Royal Celtic Society, 1921–6.
Edinburgh University awarded him an honorary LLD in 1913.
He was a JP and from 1918 a deputy lieutenant of Edinburgh.
One daughter married Robert Kilpatrick, managing director of T. & A. Constable.
Two others, Alice and Margaret Blaikie, presented his Jacobite pamphlets and MSS to the National Library of Scotland as a memorial after his death in an Edinburgh nursing home 3 May 1928.
[D'Arcy Wentworth Thompson et al .,
Walter Biggar Blaikie 1847–1928 , privately printed, 1929; N. L. Walker (ed.),
William Garden Blaikie: an Autobiography , 1901; Edinburgh Central Public Library biographical collection ref.
YDA1820B; Blaikie collections, National Library of Scotland.]
Laurence Worms
,Thomas (1719–1784), map-maker, engraver, and hydrographer to the king, was born in the parish of St Olave, Southwark, most probably 4 August 1719, apparently the eldest of several children of Thomas Kitchin, hat dyer, and his wife Mary Birr, whom he married in 1716.
Kitchin was apprenticed to the map-engraver Emanuel Bowen [q.v.]on 6 December 1732.
At work independently from at least 1741, his early production includes John Elphinstone's map of Scotland (1746), used before Culloden, the first pocket atlas of Scotland,Geographia Scotiae (1749), and The Small English Atlas (1749), co-published with Thomas Jefferys [q.v.], another of Bowen's apprentices.
The Large English Atlas (serially produced with Bowen 1749–60) was the most important county atlas since Elizabethan times and the first real attempt to cover the whole country at large scale.
In 1755 Kitchin engraved the great John Mitchell [q.v.]map of North America, used at the peace treaties of Paris and Versailles.
Originally based in Clerkenwell, by late 1755 Kitchin was established at the Star (no. 59), Holborn Hill, opposite Ely House, producing all kinds of engraved material, even including portraits and caricatures.
Further county atlases appeared in the 1760s.
Larger individual works were Andrew Armstrong's survey of Northumberland (1769), awarded a fifty-guinea prize by the (Royal) Society of Arts, the twelve-sheet road map England and Wales (1770), and Bernhard Ratzer's elegant plan of New York (1769/70).
From 1773 Kitchin appears in the Royal Kalendar as hydrographer to the king.
Retiring from Holborn in 1776, Kitchin continued map-making to the end of his life.
Prolific and reliable, the 170 maps he produced for the London Magazine alone (1747–83) would prove sufficient companion for the entire history of his time.
As an engraver, he showed a fine technical facility, the lettering and decoration from his workshop among the most impressive of all English rococo work.
He is also known as an amateur painter.
Clues to his personal life are meagre.
An early publication,The English Orpheus , a songbook of about 1743, has much geniality.
The well-written Traveller's Guide (1783) has both wry humour and relaxed confidence.
He was active in the Baptist community and served as deacon of his chapel.
His will (Consistory Court DL/C/367), which requests burial ‘with as little expense as may be’, shows a more than conventional piety.
He married his master's daughter, Sarah Bowen, in 1739, and secondly Jane, daughter of the Baptist minister Joseph Burroughs [q.v.], in 1762.
To the latter he left a comfortable estate.
His son of the first marriage, Thomas Bowen Kitchin, apprenticed to his father in 1754 and also hydrographer to the king, had already inherited the stock-in-trade.
Kitchin died in St Albans 23 June 1784.
A memorial inscription in St Albans Abbey has not survived.
[Merchant Taylors' Company archives; Guildhall Library archives; parish register of St Olave, Southwark, and will in Greater London Record Office;British Museum Catalogue of Printed Maps, Charts and Plans , vol. viii, 1967; Ian Maxted,The London Book Trades 1775–1800: a Preliminary Checklist of Members , 1977.]
Richard J Howarth
,Charles (1858–1940), mathematician and writer on seismology, was born 1 May 1858 in Bishopswearmouth, county Durham, the second son of Edwin Charles Davison, fleet paymaster, Royal Navy, and his wife Elizabeth, daughter of Joseph L. Spence of Swayfield, Lincolnshire.
He went to the College of Physical Science (later Armstrong College), Newcastle upon Tyne (1874–7), and then to Emmanuel College, Cambridge (1877–81), where he became a scholar in 1879.
He obtained a BA in mathematics (thirteenth wrangler) in 1881 and an MA in 1885.
In January 1884 he became senior mathematics master at Blairlodge School, Stirlingshire; in January 1885 he was appointed mathematical master (later head of mathematics) at King Edward's High School, Birmingham, where he remained until his retirement in March 1920.
Between 1892 and 1931 he wrote nine mathematical textbooks for schools (one as co-author with R. Levett and one with C. H. Richards), covering aspects of plane and solid geometry, trigonometry, algebra, and calculus.
However, Davison was best known for his work as a writer on the history of British earthquakes and seismology in general.
In his day he was regarded as one of the principal authorities and his books:The Hereford Earthquake of December 17, 1896 (1899);A Study of Recent Earthquakes (1905);The Origin of Earthquakes (1912);A Manual of Seismology (1921);A History of British Earthquakes (1924);The Founders of Seismology (1927);The Japanese Earthquakes of 1923 (1931); and Great Earthquakes (1936) remained useful sources of reference.
He also published numerous papers in Nature , the Philosophical Magazine , the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society , and the Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America .
A constant theme throughout his writing, but particularly emphasized from 1928 onwards, was identification of periodicity in patterns of earthquake-shock occurrence.
This work was summarized in his Studies on the Periodicity of Earthquakes (1938).
Like (Sir) Arthur Schuster [q.v.],
Davison was one of the first to apply the analytical technique of Fourier analysis; and he claimed to find evidence of diurnal, 14.8- and 29.6-day lunar effects, in addition to 1-, 11-, and 19-year periods.
However, later data obtained using very sensitive, continuous, recording techniques offered little evidence in support of periodic seismic effects.
Despite a shy and diffident manner, Davison was a hard-working and gifted teacher of endless patience.
Among his pupils were the last two senior wranglers (A. W. Ibbotson and J. P. Daniell) before the rank was abolished.
In 1895 he became secretary to the British Association seismological committee for study of earth tremors and the following year he and the seismologist John Milne [q.v.], newly returned from his pioneering work in Japan, became joint secretaries of its newly established subcommittee for seismological investigation, until Davison retired from this position in 1899.
He had become Sc.D.
(Cambridge) in 1896.
In 1886 he married Margaret Blanche, daughter of James Harris, schoolmaster, of Great Chart, Ashford, Kent; they had one son and two daughters.
Davison died in Cambridge, where they lived following his retirement, 28 April 1940.
[Archives of King Edward's High School, Birmingham.]
J Winthrop Young
,William Cecil (1849–1929), mountaineer, was born 25 May 1849 in Bell Busk near Gargrave, Yorkshire, the eldest in the family of three sons and two daughters of William Slingsby, mill owner of Carleton-in-Craven, and his wife Mary Ann, daughter of Isaac Dewhurst of Skipton.
He was educated at Cheltenham College.
On leaving school he entered his father's cotton mill at Carleton-in-Craven, where he later became a partner; he retired in 1906.
Slingsby first visited Norway in 1872 and soon discovered that he was in a country with whose inhabitants he had almost everything in common; where the language was familiar to him from the vocabulary surviving in the Yorkshire dales, and where the temperament and customs were akin to his own.
In their turn the Norwegians accepted him as one of themselves; it was they who named him the ‘father of Norwegian mountaineering’.
Crossing the Jotunheim in 1872 he had seen Störe Skagastölstind, the Matterhorn of the northern Alps, and resolved to make its first ascent.
On 21 July 1876, accompanied by his friends Emmanuel Mohn and Knut Lykken, he attacked the mountain up the steep glacier later known as the Slingsbybrae, reaching the col under the final rock pillar; there the Norwegians refused to go on, considering the peak inaccessible.
Slingsby climbed on and reached the summit alone.
He made over fifty first ascents of peaks between the Jotunheim and the North Cape.
He was the first to recommend skiing as a sport to the Norwegians themselves and probably the first man to ski in the Alps.
His book Norway, the Northern Playground (1903) is not only a great story of adventure and exploration, but also a gold-mine of information about the folklore and way of life of the Norwegians in their mountain homes.
His enthusiasm was infectious and the composer Edvard Grieg was numbered among his many friends.
In 1878 he first visited the Alps, where he took part in several first ascents, chiefly with A. F. Mummery [q.v.].
In 1885 he started climbing in the Lake District, where his name is perpetuated in Slingsby's pinnacle and Slingsby's chimney on Scafell.
In 1882 Slingsby married Alizon, daughter of William Farrer Ecroyd, MP for Preston 1881–5, of Burnley, Lancashire.
They had two sons and three daughters.
Slingsby died in St Georges, Hurstpierpoint, Sussex, 23 August 1929.
[Family papers at Schule Schloss Salem, Germany; W. C. Slingsby,Norway, the Northern Playground , 1941 edn. with introduction by Geoffrey Winthrop Young.]
John H Appleby
,Benjamin (fl. 1720–1742), printer and compiler of Memoirs of the Royal Society, was of obscure origin.
It is possible that he is the Benjamin Badham, son of John Badham of Pembridge, gentleman, who matriculated at Brasenose College, Oxford, on 8 April 1701, aged twenty-four.
A person with this name was vicar of Lyonshall, Herefordshire, in 1737 and was buried at Pembridge parish church 24 May 1742.
A court case of 1731 mentions that Katherine Badham, late of the parish of Pembridge, deceased, and Benjamin Badham, of the same place, gentleman, son and heir of this lady, were both indebted to a man in Shropshire for £672.
At Wellclose Square, east London, Benjamin Baddam printed two anonymous publications in 1720:Crambo's Elopement.
Or the Austere Poetaster's Ramble , in imitation of John Wilmot, second Earl of Rochester [q.v.], and The True Protestant Account of the Burning of London , as an ‘antidote’ to a tract absolving papists from complicity in the great fire of London.
John Nichols [q.v.]lists him as a high-flying Fleet Street printer in the Literary Anecdotes of the Eighteenth Century (vol. i, 1812, p. 304).
It was from Fleet Street that he printed in 1732 a subscribed folio edition of Le Stourgeon's Compleat Universal History of the Several Empires…
Throughout the Known World , illustrated with maps by Henry Wilson and reprinted, with a new title-page, in 1738.
Calling himself a former pupil of J. T. Desaguliers [q.v.],
Baddam publicized in the Daily Advertiser the full range of experimental philosophy courses which he gave at the London Coffee House, Ludgate Hill, between 11 October 1732 and January 1733, alternating with Abraham Chovet, a Huguenot anatomy lecturer who was appointed demonstrator to the Barber-Surgeons' Company in 1734.
Baddam's experience qualified him for his most ambitious known project — an abridgement of the Royal Society's Philosophical Transactions .
On 12 October 1738, as ‘B.B. Philo Physiologiae’, he issued proposals in the Daily Advertiser for subscribers to this work which was then printed for him by Godfrey Smith in ten volumes, plus plates, between 1738 and 1741, under the title of Memoirs of the Royal Society; being a new Abridgment of the Philosophical Transactions for the years 1665 to 1735.
A second edition, extending to 1740, was published in 1745 for John Nourse (volumes iv–x are reprinted from the original edition, with cancel title-pages).
Previous abridgements of the Philosophical Transactions had been carried out on a piecemeal basis, whereas Baddam's version provided continuity and uniformity for the first time (see Nichols's summary of them in the above, pp. 482–3).
Baddam's preface gives an informative ‘short and succinct Narrative of the Royal Society and their Transactions’ and explains his own approach.
A rather crudely drawn frontispiece depicts several scientific instruments and some objects from the society's museum collections.
As Baddam indicates, the French were translating the Philosophical Transactions simultaneously (de Brémond, and then Demours, for the 1731–40 period).
His own competent and useful abridgement served its purpose well for nearly seventy years.
[Publication details of the Memoirs : R. M. Wiles,Serial Publication in England before 1750 , 1957, pp. 175–6 and 311; R. V. and P. J. Wallis,Biobibliography of British Mathematics and its Applications.
Pt. ii, 1701–1760 , 1986, p. 245.]
Jaromir Malek
,William Arnold (1882–1953), exponent of modern technical education in the Middle East and painter, was born 17 July 1882 in Ilkley, Yorkshire, the youngest of four children (two sons and two daughters) of John Reich Stewart, who was of Scottish descent, and his wife Naamah Arnold, who was from Yorkshire.
He was trained at Bradford Technical College and the Royal College of Art, and was employed as a textile designer in Bradford until 1911, when he took up a post as inspector of arts and crafts in the Egyptian Ministry of Education in Cairo.
In 1918, at the invitation of (Sir) Ronald Storrs [q.v.], the military governor of Jerusalem, he was seconded for several months to Palestine to advise on the renewal of crafts and light industries destroyed during the war, and worked closely with C. R. Ashbee [q.v.], the governor's civil adviser and secretary to the Pro-Jerusalem Society.
He returned there in 1922 to participate in the work of the Palestine crafts and industries commission.
In the summer of 1927 Stewart, like many other British officials, was retired from the Egyptian government service.
In September of the same year he started working with Dr George Andrew Reisner, director of the Harvard–Boston expedition, on the restoration of the furniture of Queen Hetep-heres, the mother of King Khufu (2560–2537 BC), discovered at Giza by Alan Rowe two years earlier.
Stewart's workshop was a mud-brick hut near the pyramids where he worked with his two Egyptian assistants.
Many of the tools had to be made on the spot specially for the task.
The reconstruction of all the objects could not be completed (this was later achieved by Bernard Rice and Ahmed Youssef Moustafa) because of Stewart's appointment as supervisor of technical education in Palestine in 1930, but his name remains connected with the first attempt in Egyptian archaeology to restore objects which the loss of wood reduced to a mass of precious metal and faience components.
The restored objects are on display in the Egyptian Museum in Cairo.
In his new post Stewart displayed enthusiasm and flair.
He personally was responsible for the instruction of many young Arab teachers in drawing, design, and handicraft, and for the introduction of these subjects to schools.
He was actively involved in the preservation and revival of local crafts such as glass-blowing, leather-work, dyeing, spinning, and weaving, and maintained contacts with craftsmen in various parts of Palestine.
He was never patronizing, and freely admitted that ‘if I taught them anything, I certainly learnt (as) much by watching them at work.’
He helped to establish the Palestine Conservatoire of Music and was chairman of its board of directors 1932–47.
In July 1942 he was  appointed technical adviser to the controller of light industries in Palestine.
Stewart was a versatile artist; painting was his lifelong passion and his pictures can serve as a guide to his career.
In 1915 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Arts.
His ‘Feast of Nebi Musa’, showing a Muslim public procession near Jericho, was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1938.
In 1919 or 1920 Stewart married in Cairo Kathleen Margaret, daughter of Henry Cleveland Beardshaw, a stockbroker.
They had two daughters and a son.
In 1947 Stewart retired and went to live in High Wycombe.
He died at home 18 January 1953.
[Stewart's unpublished ‘Creative Work in Palestine’ and other papers, Griffith Institute, Ashmolean Museum, Oxford;The Times , 30 January 1953; catalogues of exhibitions at Calton Gallery, Edinburgh, 7–30 August 1986, and Bradford Art Galleries and Museums, 1989.]
Jeremy Catto
(b. c. 1220), Franciscan friar and theologian, was born c .1220 of unknown parentage and entered the Franciscan order in England by 1245, when Fr Adam Marsh [q.v.]requested the loan of a philosophy text assigned to him (Monumenta Franciscana , vol. i, ed.
J. Brewer, Rolls Series, vol. iv, 1858, p. 378).
He was probably then resident at the London convent and studying arts, but must have been sent to Oxford before 1249 (Mon.
Fran .
vol. i, pp. 91, 330).
While studying theology at Oxford he joined for a time the household of Robert Grosseteste [q.v.], bishop of Lincoln, probably through the good offices of Adam Marsh, who described him as ‘active, discreet, full of goodwill and devoted to the cure of souls’(Mon.
Fran .
vol. i, p. 115).
He was appointed lector at the Oxford Franciscan convent, but in 1253 a dispute arose at his presentation to incept as a doctor of theology, the opponents of the friars challenging his eligibility, as he had not been a master of arts.
Through the firm and persuasive advocacy of Marsh he was eventually permitted to incept, but the case provoked the university to decree that in future no scholar who had not ruled in arts could proceed to a degree in theology: a statute which would engender recurrent disputes between the friars and the university.
Thomas's confrère Roger Bacon [q.v.]was probably referring to him when he wrote scornfully of a colleague who had presumed to teach philosophy without having read it (Opus Minus , ed.
J. Brewer, Rolls Series, vol. xv, 1859, p. 327); his critics ignored his fruitful study of arts, evident in his ‘Sapientiale’, at the London Franciscan convent.
About 1256–7 he was lector at the Cambridge convent (Thomas Eccleston, q.v.,De Adventu Fratrum Minorum , ed.
A. G. Little, 1909, p. 58).
St Bonaventure's reference to his defence of the friars in 1269 implies that he was dead by then.
Thomas's defence of the mendicant friars' claims,Manus quae contra Omnipotentem (ed.
M. Bierbaum,Franziskanische Studien , vol. ii, 1920), was written c .1253–6; and his sermon on Christ's Passion (Trinity College, Cambridge, MS B. 15. 38) is probably contemporaneous.
His major and unpublished work, the ‘Sapientiale’(Biblioteca Nazionale, Florence MS Conv.
Sopp.
A. 6. 437) is a digest of the principal theological issues under debate in Oxford in the early 1250s, and was probably compiled from his university lectures and disputations.
He proposed independent solutions to the current problems of generation and becoming, individuation, universals, the nature of the soul, and immaterial intelligences, which were influenced but not dominated by Grosseteste's ideas.
In general he attempted a series of solutions to specific questions without displaying an overall metaphysical coherence, and the work's chief contribution was to bring into consideration the ideas of recently translated Arab and Jewish philosophers, especially Averroes and Moses Maimonides.
It was soon overtaken by the profounder and better known works of Bonaventure, Albertus Magnus, and Aquinas.
[A. B. Emden,A Biographical Register of the University of Oxford to A.D. 1500 , vol. iii, 1959; E. Longpré, ‘Fr Thomas d'York’,Archivum Franciscanum Historicum , vol. xix, 1926; D. E. Sharp,Franciscan Philosophy , 1930; authorities quoted.]
Frank Greenaway
,William (1799–1877), chemist and manufacturer, was born 12 May 1799 in Burgh-le-Marsh, Lincolnshire, the youngest of thirteen children of Thomas Gossage and his wife Eleanor.
He had little schooling, and went to work at the age of twelve, apprenticed to an uncle in a chemist and druggist business in Chesterfield.
At once he showed a determined character, setting himself, for example, to master the French language.
He took out his first patent at the age of twenty-four, after inventing a portable alarm to attach to watches and clocks.
For a time he was assistant to the manager at a works at Ardwick Bridge owned by the Tennant Company of St Rollox.
He set up on his own in Leamington, trading in medicinal salts, but in 1831 changed his scope to that of manufacturing salt and alkali in Stoke Prior in Worcestershire, a site valuable for its nearness to the Droitwich salt deposits, and to the new lines of transport communication of the Birmingham and Worcester canal.
In 1836 he demonstrated a solution to an outstanding environmental problem.
The main method of alkali manufacture at the time was that of Nicolas Leblanc, which had the defect of pouring into the air large quantities of hydrogen chloride gas, a pollutant of extreme severity.
In 1836 Gossage devised a method of absorbing the acid gas in which a steady stream of water descending a tower (the ‘Gossage tower’) containing twigs, bracken, and bricks, came in contact with a steady stream of the gas ascending the tower, so dissolving it and thus bringing the dangerous nuisance under a high degree of control.
This power of control made it possible to enact the Alkali Works Act of 1863, the first act to provide a quantitative measure of pollution control.
It also provided the starting-point for the process devised by Walter Weldon [q.v.]for making chlorine and bleaching powder, an invaluable aid to the textile industry.
For a time he manufactured white lead in Birmingham (1841–4), and then adventured in copper smelting in Neath in south Wales (1844–8).
Gossage moved to Widnes in 1850, and experimented with a method of extracting sulphur from copper ores, eventually concentrating on the manufacture of alkali.
Sodium carbonate had been the main product of the alkali industry but Gossage saw a need to develop sodium hydroxide (caustic soda) and pursued this.
The suppression of the tax on soap in 1852 encouraged him to embark on soap manufacture.
He set up his soap works in 1855 and produced his first bar of mottled soap in 1857.
This became famous under the brand name of Gossage.
Outside business he made a significant contribution to the development of Widnes.
In 1824 Gossage married Mary Herbert of Leamington; they had a family of seven children.
Two of the sons, Alfred and Frederick, continued to expand the family business after the death of William Gossage in Bowdon, Cheshire, 9 April 1877.
[J. Fenwick Allen,Some Founders of the Chemical Industry , 1903; D. W. F. Hardie,A History of the Chemical Industry in Widnes , 1950, and ‘Chemical Pioneers, 15: William Gossage’,Chemical Age , vol. lxxix, 1958; Peter N. Reed, ‘William Gossage and the Widnes Soap Industry’,Journal of the North Western Society for Industrial Archaeology and History , vol. iii, 1982; D. J. Jeremy (ed.),
Dictionary of Business Biography , 1984.]
John Culme
,William Arthur Smith (1854–1924), metalwork designer, was born at 6 Sussex Square, Paddington, London, 17 October 1854, the eldest in the family of four sons and two daughters of William Benson (1816–1887), who had been called to the bar, and his wife Elizabeth Soulsby, daughter of Thomas Smith of Colebrook Park, Tonbridge.
Among his brothers were Francis Robert (Sir Frank), the actor, and Godfrey Rathbone, first Baron Charnwood [qq.v.].
Educated first at Darch's Preparatory School, Brighton, and afterwards at Winchester, he entered New College, Oxford, in 1874.
In 1876 he decided to be an architect, the following year becoming articled to Basil Champneys [q.v.].
By a happy chance he became acquainted with (Sir) Edward Burne-Jones [q.v.]and his circle, through whom he also met William Morris [q.v.].
He remained with Champneys until 1880, but it soon became clear that architecture would never be his chief preoccupation.
Instead, with memories of boyhood visits to his uncle, William Arthur Smith, ‘a great worker with his hands’, who introduced the lad to lathes and elementary mechanics, Benson began to consider a career in handicrafts.
‘The long and short of it is,’ he wrote to his mother, ‘I must make something or be miserable.’
With the encouragement of Burne-Jones, Morris, and other friends, and a modest financial backing from his father, he established a business to manufacture domestic articles in metal to be designed by himself and made, in part, with specially constructed tools and machinery.
Benson's first workshop opened in 1880 at North End Road, Fulham, where a few men operated foot-powered lathes for turning metal.
This was eventually moved to a purpose-built factory, Eyot works, at St Peter's Square, Hammersmith.
The enterprise proved so successful that Benson, now nicknamed ‘Brass Benson’, established a showroom in 1887 at 82 and 83 New Bond Street.
The firm's range, much of it in combinations of copper and brass, gradually increased to include numerous patterns of gas and electric lamp fittings, furniture decorations, and tea-kettles.
The business was converted into a limited liability company named W. A. S. Benson & Co.
Ltd. in 1901 and was sold upon Benson's retirement in 1920.
Those who knew Benson only as ‘a rather dreamy artist’ were astonished upon visiting his factory.
This advocate of the ‘intelligent education of the hand and eye’ had after all shown himself to be a resourceful manufacturer.
Success lay in the fact that his products were fashionably artistic as well as affordable.
Nor did Benson let indifferent health interfere with many other projects and interests.
In 1884 he became a founder member of the Art Workers' Guild.
The Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society, which held its inaugural exhibition in 1888, came into being through his initiative.
After William Morris's death in 1896, Benson also became the first chairman of William Morris & Co.
Decorators Ltd.
Benson's books,Elements of Handicraft and Design ,Rudiments of Handicraft , and Drawing: its History and Uses , were published respectively in 1893, 1919, and posthumously in 1925.
He married on 26 October 1886 Venetia Margaret, daughter of the landscape painter, Alfred William Hunt [q.v.].
They had no children.
Benson died after only three days' illness 5 July 1924 at his cottage, Castle Corner, in Manorbier, Pembrokeshire.
[W. A. S. Benson,Drawing: its History and Uses , 1925, with a memoir of the author by W. N. Bruce;The Times , 9 July 1924; Sir Frank Benson,My Memoirs , 1930; J. C. Trewin,Benson and the Bensonians , 1960; Michael Collins, ‘William Arthur Smith Benson’, the introduction to an exhibition catalogue,W. A. S. Benson Metalwork , 1981.]
Elizabeth Longford
,Christian Friedrich , Baron Stockmar (1787–1863), adviser of Prince Albert, was born 22 August 1787 in Coburg of German parentage and Swedish descent, the eldest son and second child in the family of two sons and two daughters of Johann Ernest Gotthelf Stockmar, a scientific lawyer.
A quiet, unobtrusive youth, Stockmar was educated at Coburg Gymnasium and from 1805 to 1810 studied medicine at the universities of Würzburg, Erlangen, and Jena.
In 1812 Stockmar opened a military hospital in Coburg.
Favourably noticed by Prince Leopold of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld, Stockmar was invited in 1816 to be Leopold's physician-in-ordinary.
Leopold made Stockmar promise never to leave him after his wife, Princess Charlotte, died in childbirth in 1817 at Claremont near Windsor.
Prudently, ‘Stocky’ had not attended her, just held her hand.
He was promoted to be Leopold's private secretary and in 1831, when his master became king of the Belgians, a Bavarian baron.
He helped organize Leopold's court, devised the constitution, and inspired the Coburg–Portuguese marriage of 1835; above all he promoted the marriage between Queen Victoria and Prince Albert, Leopold's nephew, in 1840.
Stockmar's royal career was well under way.
On 20 June 1837 Victoria had ascended the British throne.
Sixteen days earlier ‘the Baron’(as Victoria and Albert called him) had been sent to England by her ‘Uncle Leopold’ as his alter ego , and was Victoria's guest at breakfast on her first day as queen.
He was soon working on a valuable theory of the Crown as above party politics.
He left England in 1838 to vet the suitability of Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha for Victoria's consort, returning when they married.
For the next seventeen years he spent only the summers in Germany, saying of Albert, ‘I love him as if he were my own son.’
With Albert he planned the royal children's education and systematized the royal household.
Before their reforms all footmen, livery-porters, and under-butlers were under the master of the horse.
Stockmar took care not to get involved in court favours, such as the bribe offered by an MP of £10,000 to obtain him a peerage.
Stockmar's political views were sometimes absurd.
‘The omnipotence of the House of Commons,’ he wrote, ‘is revolution itself and death to the true old English constitution’— of which he fancied himself the best judge.
He distrusted British statesmen: Sir Robert Peel was ‘myopic’, the third Viscount Palmerston (Albert's opponent)‘insane’.
He advised the monarch to avoid being ‘a Mandarin figure’ but to become a ‘Permanent Premier’.
The European revolutions of 1848 he saw as a golden opportunity for introducing constitutional monarchies and a united Germany in alliance with Britain.
By 1855 his health was failing.
In the past he had settled several disputes between Victoria and Albert.
Now his ‘nerves’ were too weak to make his advice effective.
He returned to Germany for good in 1857, moving for a time to Berlin to be near Prince and Princess Frederick William of Prussia (‘Fritz’ and ‘Vicky’).
When Prince Albert died in 1861, Stockmar's hopes were shattered.
His absence may even have contributed to the tragedy, for on his deathbed Albert lamented, ‘if only Stockmar were here…
’ It was not until his last years that Stockmar enjoyed a real home life, though married in 1821 in Coburg to a cousin, Fanny Sommer, the daughter of a physician.
They had two sons and one daughter.
Stockmar died 9 July 1863 in Coburg.
His son, Ernest, wrote Stockmar's Memoirs , describing them as lifting the veil ‘but a little’.
An angry Queen Victoria, however, felt it had been lifted far too much, particularly over the clashes between Palmerston as foreign secretary and the prince consort.
[F. Max Müller (ed.),
Memoirs of Baron Stockmar , 2 vols., 1872; E. Longford,Victoria R.I. , 1964; Roger Fulford (ed.),
Darling Child: Private Correspondence of Queen Victoria and the Crown Princess of Prussia 1871–1878 , 1976.]
Richard Greene
,Isabella (c. 1759–1857), poet and novelist, was born c .1759 at Cairnburgh Castle, the youngest of the three daughters of William Fordyce, a military officer of Aberdeen, and his wife Elizabeth Fraser, niece of Alexander Fraser, Lord Strichen.
She had at least one brother, who was younger than she.
Her grandfather, William Fordyce of Anchorthies, was a figure of scandal: a successful merchant and sometime baillie of Aberdeen, he was eventually convicted for his part in a kidnapping ring.
Her parents were both cut off by their wealthy families, following a clandestine marriage in the early 1750s.
Her father obtained a commission in the Royal Marines in 1755, was promoted to captain by 1761, and later became groom of the bedchamber to George III, though in time he fell from favour at court.
She claimed to have been ‘nursed in a cottage by one of the family cotters, and bred at Court’.
In December 1789 she married Robert Kelly, who had served with the East India Company in Madras since 1760, the son of Colonel Robert Kelly.
In 1794 she published her Collection of Poems and Fables , by which time she had suffered a number of domestic calamities, including the death of a child and apparently the imprisonment of her husband.
In a number of poems she speaks of having been deserted.
Robert Kelly evidently returned to Madras and died there with the rank of major by 1807.
In an attempt to support her two surviving children, Kelly became a professional writer, publishing her first novel,Madeline , in 1794.
She published a total of sixteen books in her career, of which ten were Gothic novels.
Two of her books were educational, suggesting that she may have worked as a teacher.
By 1816 she had married a wealthy merchant named Hedgeland, who was dead by 1820.
In 1819 her son,(Sir) Fitzroy Kelly [q.v.], entered Lincoln's Inn and subsequently enjoyed a distinguished career, serving variously as solicitor-general, attorney-general, and lord chief baron of the Exchequer.
Her last book,A Memoir of the Late Mrs. Henrietta Fordyce , was published anonymously in 1823, evidently in an attempt to silence rumours that she had taken advantage of a generous elderly relative.
She herself enjoyed a prosperous old age.
She is said to have been ninety years old in 1849.
She died in London 25 June 1857 after an accident.
[Gentleman's Magazine , 1782, p. 149; ibid., part 2, 1789, p. 1208; ibid., part 2, 1857, p. 229;The Royal Kalendar for 1785 , p. 89; J. Watkins,Biographical Dictionary of Living Authors , 1816, p. 152; A. D. Fordyce,Family Record of the Name of Dingwall Fordyce , 1885, pp. xlii–xliii, xlvii–xlviii; Janet Todd (ed.),
Dictionary of British and American Women Writers , 1984; Roger Lonsdale (ed.),
Eighteenth Century Women Poets: an Oxford Anthology , 1989.]
Jim Burton
,Robert Henry (1833–1916), meteorologist, was born in Dublin 28 January 1833, one of five sons and a daughter of James Smyth Scott, QC, a prominent Dublin lawyer, and his wife Louisa, daughter of Charles Brodrick, archbishop of Cashel, and sister of the sixth and seventh viscounts Midleton.
His elder brother Charles (died 1894) was headmaster of Westminster School from 1855 to 1883.
Scott was educated at Rugby School and Trinity College, Dublin, where he was classical scholar (1853), graduating senior moderator in experimental physics (1855), MA (1859), and honorary D.Sc.
(1898).
He also obtained a diploma from Dublin School of Engineering.
From 1856 to 1858 he studied chemistry, physics, mineralogy, and meteorology in Germany, working under Heinrich Dove in Berlin and Justus von Liebig in Munich.
Scott undertook the translation of Dove's famous book Das Gesetz der Stürme , which was published in Britain as The Law of Storms (1862).
Dove dedicated the book to Admiral Robert FitzRoy [q.v.], head of the Meteorological Department established under the Board of Trade in 1854, and FitzRoy ensured its acceptance within Britain by including it in his series of Meteorological Papers .
FitzRoy died in 1865 and two years later the department was reconstituted as the Meteorological Office under a meteorological committee appointed by the Royal Society.
Scott had begun teaching in Dublin in 1859.
He applied unsuccessfully for the chair of technology at Edinburgh, and in 1862 was appointed keeper of minerals to the Royal Dublin Society, His meteorological output was confined to the translation of Dove's book but in 1866 he was approached by his intimate friend (Sir) Edward Sabine [q.v.], then at the height of his influence as president of the Royal Society and prospective chairman of the new meteorological committee, and was offered the directorship of the Meteorological Office.
There were no other candidates and Scott was appointed director in January 1867.
It was a clear case of personal patronage, but he was to remain executive head for thirty-three years.
The Office's constitution changed in 1877, control passing to a Meteorological Council.
Scott's role and salary remained unaltered, although his designation became secretary to the council, a position he occupied until his retirement in 1900.
He was succeeded by (Sir) William Napier Shaw [q.v.].
Scott was never a leading scientific thinker, and probably owed his election as fellow of the Royal Society in 1870 to Sabine, but he was a capable administrator.
His most important legacy to meteorology was as secretary of the International Meteorological Committee from its inception in 1874 until 1900.
Meteorology is probably the most international of the sciences, and Scott played a significant part in establishing the tradition of ready co-operation between countries that became the accepted norm.
He retained an interest in mineralogy and served as president of the Mineralogical Society 1888–91.
He joined the Meteorological Society in 1871 and was its foreign secretary from 1873 until his death, apart from 1880–1 when secretary and 1884–5 when president.
Heavily bearded, Scott was a witty and apparently sociable man but became increasingly pedantic and intolerant of views divergent from his own, Doubtless this contributed to the personality problems within the British meteorological establishment during the later nineteenth century.
He published two books,Weather Charts and Storm Warnings (1876) and Elementary Meteorology (1883), the latter becoming a standard text and running into nine editions.
He also contributed over eighty papers and articles to a diversity of publications.
He married Susan Louisa Stewart (died 1901), daughter of Walter Stewart, island secretary of Jamaica, in 1865.
There were no children.
Scott died 18 June 1916 in London and was buried at Peper Harrow, Godalming, then the Surrey seat of the Brodrick family.
[Symons's Meteorological Magazine , vol. li, July 1916;Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society , vol. xlii, 1916, pp. 301–4;Nature , vol. xcix, 1916, pp. 365–6; Scott's correspondence in the Stokes collection, University Library, Cambridge, and in the Benyon papers in the Berkshire County Record Office; Mineralogical Society archives.]
A C Howe
,Richard (1776–1865), merchant, underwriter, and financier, was born 20 September 1776 in Burton-in-Lonsdale, Yorkshire, the third son in the family of four sons and five daughters of Robert Thornton, an impecunious yeoman farmer, and his wife Ellen.
He entered Christ's Hospital, London, in 1785, leaving in 1791 to become an apprentice to his uncle, Richard Thornton, a hop merchant in Southwark.
By 1798 he had moved into the business of insurance as a member of Lloyd's.
He also established himself in the Russian trade, which during the French wars offered exceptional opportunities for profit.
The government's need for naval stores, above all hemp, during the Napoleonic blockade, tempted Thornton into daring ventures through the Baltic in his own armed ships, especially in 1810, when this illicit trade was described as ‘the most lucrative in the world’.
Two years later, apprised by his elder brother and partner Laurence of the defeat of Napoleon at Moscow before this was publicly known, he secured large contracts for the forward delivery of Russian imports at their peak wartime prices.
Not surprisingly, he earned the lasting sobriquet, ‘the Duke of Danzig’.
The return of peace saw a redirection of Thornton's interests towards the recently opened markets in the East Indies.
In partnership with the West family, Thornton exploited the rich pickings of the Dutch East Indies.
Thornton, West & Co. were one of the leading British merchant houses in the eastern seas.
The firm was based in Rotterdam, though it was reorganized in London in 1837.
The East Indies remained a primary destination for Thornton's British registered ships — for example, in 1857 six ships traded between London, Java, and Singapore.
His fleet also carried French troops to the Crimea.
Thornton became a leading financier of struggling constitutional regimes in Iberia.
In 1834, for example, he headed a subscription for the Spanish politician and financier, Mendizabal.
But these foreign debts were only intermittently repaid and, as a result, in the 1830s and 1840s Thornton headed the committee of Spanish bond-holders urging British governments to intervene on their behalf.
Thornton was also an important lender to the British government, and at one point reputedly the largest holder of consols.
By the 1840s Thornton was in the forefront of the City of London, not only as merchant and financier but as shipowner and leading marine insurance broker.
He now receded from the City, rarely appearing at the exchanges, even the Baltic, the scene of his most memorable deals in Russian tallow.
He left a reputation for cockney oratory, for daring gambling of all types, but also for geniality and charitableness.
He built and endowed almshouses in Barnet for the Leathersellers' Company when he was its master in 1836–7.
In his will he left sizeable sums for schools he had built in his home parishes, as well as for Christ's Hospital, of which he had been a donation governor in 1833.
In all, his public bequests amounted to c .
£100,000, an impressive sum yet only a small proportion of his total wealth, whose probate value of £2,800,000 represented the largest fortune left in Britain before 1870.
Thornton was a strong, if irregular, family man.
The bulk of his fortune was left to his nephews and partners, Thomas Thornton and Richard Thornton West.
He never married, but lived with his housekeeper Lee, and his illegitimate children were major beneficiaries, Richard Napoleon Lee inheriting £400,000, and three daughters sufficient to maintain them in gentility.
Thornton died at his suburban mansion, Cannon Hill, in Merton, Surrey, 20 June 1865, and was buried in Norwood cemetery.
[Gentleman's Magazine , September 1865 and February 1871; W. G. Hoskins, ‘Richard Thornton, 1776–1865: a Victorian Millionaire’,History Today , vol. xii, 1962; Christ's Hospital archives; H. A. Roberts,The Records of the Amicable Society of Blues , 1924;Parliamentary Papers , vol. lxix, 1847, p. 839; Public Record Office, RG9/453;The Times , 18 February 1854, 21 and 28 June 1865.]
Harriet Jordan
,Thomas Hayton (1861–1933), landscape architect, was born 5 May 1861 in Nether Wyersdale, Lancashire, the second of the four children (one daughter and three sons) of John William Mawson, cotton warper, and his wife Jane Hayton.
He was educated at the local church school then, at the age of twelve, went to work for a builders' business in Lancaster.
Two years later he returned home to help his father set up a nursery, but the venture was unsuccessful.
Following John Mawson's death, the family moved to London, where Thomas secured work with John Wills, a well-known floral decorator.
In 1881 he took a job at Hale Farm Nurseries; then, not long after, in order to start experimenting with his ideas on design, accepted a partnership with a firm of contractors.
When this fell through he decided to set up a family business and, with his two brothers, established a nursery and contracting firm in Windermere.
From designing local private gardens, the firm progressed to contracts from all parts of the country, which included the design of public parks and town-planning schemes.
By 1900 Thomas Mawson had left Mawson Brothers to pursue a separate career in landscape design.
He achieved great success and became the leading landscape architect of the day.
His clients included Queen Alexandra, the maharaja of Baroda, Andrew Carnegie, and the first Viscount Leverhulme [qq.v.].
His public works included Haslam Park, Preston; Hanley Park, Stoke-on-Trent; and Broomfield Park, Southgate.
Mawson made several trips to America and Canada, where he was involved in major town-planning schemes in Ottawa, Vancouver, Calgary, and Regina.
His other significant work abroad included the gardens of the Palace of Peace in The Hague, and the royal gardens and a park system in Athens.
In 1917 Mawson was commissioned to replan Salonika, following extensive fire damage.
Mawson published two main works,The Art and Craft of Garden Making (1900), which ran into five editions, and Civic Art (1911), in which he discussed the principles of town planning.
From 1910 to 1924 he lectured regularly at the school of civic design, Liverpool University.
Conscious of his own lack of formal education, the need for education was a lifelong concern of his.
Brought up in a Nonconformist household, he remained deeply religious.
Politically he was an ardent Liberal.
Although by nature inclined to thought rather than action, through circumstance he became fond of hard work.
A family man, he was kind and gentle, genial, and without professional airs.
Mawson became a member of the Art-Workers' Guild in 1905 and was elected an honorary member of the Royal Institute of British Architects in 1903.
He was made a freeman of the City of London in 1917 and an honorary liveryman of the Worshipful Company of Gardeners.
In 1921 he became a fellow of the Linnean Society and in 1923 was elected president of the Town Planning Institute and appointed to the Fine Arts Commission.
Two years later Mawson became the first president of the Institute of Landscape Architecture.
On 1 August 1884 Mawson married Anna, a nurse, daughter of Edward Prentice, surgeon, of North Walsham.
They had four sons and four daughters, the eldest son, Edward Prentice Mawson, becoming a successful landscape architect and taking over the running of his father's firm.
From 1923 Mawson suffered from Parkinson's disease, which caused his death at Hest Bank, Lancashire, 14 November 1933.
[T. H. Mawson,The Life and Work of an English Landscape Architect , 1927; personal knowledge; information from relatives and friends.]
Joseph M McCarthy
, Sir James (1803–1877), trader and colonial governor, was born 5 June or 15 August 1803 in Demerara, British Guiana, the second of three children and younger son of John Douglas, merchant, and an unknown, probably coloured, woman whom he never married.
Her name may have been Miss Ritchie.
After a childhood in Lanark, Scotland, where he attended preparatory school, Douglas went to Canada in 1819 in the employ of a firm soon absorbed by the Hudson's Bay Company.
A hot-tempered individual, he early on fought a duel and beat to death an Indian accused of murder.
Transferred to Fort Vancouver as an accountant, he rapidly improved its management and was given more responsibilities, including negotiating with the Russians to the north and the Mexicans in California.
Having founded Fort Victoria in 1843, he was sent there as chief factor in 1849.
Two years later he was appointed governor of Vancouver Island.
Despite opposition to the duality of his role and criticism of his creating a judgeship for his brother-in-law, Douglas presided over the steady growth of company and colony.
During the gold-rush of 1858 he moved boldly to close Fraser's River to non-company trade, organized the policing of claims, assumed authority over the mainland, and sternly maintained law and order in the face of social upheaval.
His effectiveness in this, his finest hour, was admired as his arrogance and conflict of interest were deplored, and he was made governor of the new colony of British Columbia on condition he leave the company.
In 1859 he went to the brink of war with American troops over San Juan Island, despite his council's urging restraint.
He seemed disappointed when the dispute was settled at higher levels.
The project of a road connecting the Cariboo gold-fields to the coast occupied him from 1862.
Appointed KCB when his governorship of Vancouver Island ended in 1863, he retired from his British Columbia post in the following year, citing the state of his health.
A physically vigorous, tall, and muscular man of dark complexion, moderate in personal habits, industrious but volatile, he spoke fluent French and several Indian dialects.
Stiff and cold in personal relations, he was pompous and excessively attached to the trappings of power.
In 1828 he married ‘according to the custom of the country’ Amelia, the half-Indian daughter of William Connolly, chief factor at Stuart Lake, a marriage religiously regularized in 1836.
They had thirteen children, of whom one boy and five girls lived to maturity.
Douglas died in Victoria, British Columbia, 2 August 1877.
[R. H. Coats and R. E. Gosnell,Sir James Douglas , 1908; B. A. McKelvie, ‘Sir James Douglas: a New Portrait’,British Columbia Historical Quarterly , 1943; Derek Pethick,James Douglas, Servant of Two Empires , 1969; Walter N. Sage,Sir James Douglas and British Columbia , 1930; D. B. Smith,James Douglas in California, 1841 , 1965; Margaret A. Ormsby in Dictionary of Canadian Biography , vol. x, 1972, pp. 238–49.]
John Wolffe
,James Edward (1788? –1864), politician and Protestant propagandist, was born in Scotland (either in Abernethy, near Perth, or in Aberdeen) 11 March 1789, one of the numerous children of James (‘Brae’) Gordon of Little Folla, factor to the Duke of Gordon, and Ann McDonald.
He joined the Royal Navy at the age of fifteen on 14 April 1804.
He became a lieutenant in 1811, and in 1814 commanded the schooner St Lawrence , on the strength of which he later called himself ‘captain'.
After 1815 he first involved himself with the religious and social work of Thomas Chalmers [q.v.]in Glasgow and then moved to London where he initially promoted seamen's charities and was an associate of the Evangelical Clapham sect.
During the 1820s Gordon became a leading figure in the radically conservative wing of Anglican Evangelicalism, which rejected compromise with the world and eschewed theological and political liberalism.
Above all he was vehemently anti-Catholic, a position that was crystallized by his involvement in the second reformation movement in Ireland.
In 1827 he founded the British Society for Promoting the Religious Principles of the Reformation (later Protestant Reformation Society) as a vehicle for outright proselytism, and during the next few years participated in numerous public debates with Roman Catholics, both in Britain and in Ireland.
In 1831 Gordon was returned as MP for Dundalk and in the House of Commons clashed frequently with Daniel O'Connell [q.v.]over the Irish education question and the government grant to Maynooth College.
He saw himself as the political leader of the Evangelicals, but in reality his views were too extreme and his style too combative for him to command general support.
Accordingly, when he lost his seat as a result of the 1832 Reform Act his efforts to return to Parliament were unsuccessful.
He shifted his energies to pressure-group politics, playing a leading role in orchestrating the No Popery crusade of 1834–6 and organizing the Protestant Association as a focus for the anti-Catholic campaign.
Shortly afterwards a serious paralytic illness, from which he never fully recovered, forced his retirement from active public life.
In spite of the strong antagonisms he had aroused, he had been a key figure in the religious and political reorientation of Evangelicalism and in its forging of an alliance with the resurgent Conservative party around the defence of the Protestant Established Church.
In 1836 he married Barbara, daughter of Samuel Smith, a banker and MP.
They had a daughter and two sons, the younger of whom, George Maxwell Gordon, was a prominent missionary in the Punjab.
Gordon died at 36 Porchester Square, Bayswater, 30 April 1864.
[Arthur Lewis,George Maxwell Gordon, the Pilgrim Missionary of the Punjab , 1889; C. O. Skelton and J. M. Bulloch,Gordons Under Arms , 1912;Huntly Express , 31 August and 7 September 1906;Banffshire Herald , 9 April 1910; J. Wolffe,The Protestant Crusade in Great Britain, 1829–1860 , 1991; Chalmers papers, New College, Edinburgh; information from Dr I. S. Rennie.]
J R Smith
,Daniel (1735–1819), smallpox inoculator, was born 4 May and baptized 23 May 1735 in Kenton, Suffolk, the second of eight sons (there were also three daughters) of Robert Sutton [q.v.], surgeon, apothecary and inoculator, and his wife Sarah Barker of Debenham.
He trained under and worked for his father until about 1760.
He then became an assistant to an Essex doctor, returning to his father late in 1762 or early in 1763.
Disagreeing with him over the patients' preparatory period before inoculation, which he proposed to reduce from a month to eight or ten days, and recommending an open-air regime instead of confinement indoors following inoculation, Sutton left to set up his own practice at Ingatestone, Essex, in October 1763.
In his first year of independent practice Sutton earned 2,000 guineas.
He inoculated 923 people in the first twenty weeks of 1765 and by late September had three inoculation houses at Ingatestone for different classes of patients paying six, four, or three guineas.
Two inoculation houses were opened in London by the end of the year and, in conjunction with his father and brothers, he had begun setting up partnerships throughout the country with ‘Eminent physicians and surgeons daily applying…to be appointed partners for particular counties, or for foreign parts’.
The income of the practice in 1765 was £6,300.
In May 1766 in Maldon, Essex, Sutton performed his first mass or general inoculation.
In one day 487 inhabitants were inoculated, thereby curtailing an epidemic.
About the same time he purchased Maisonette, a country house and grounds in Ingatestone.
A few weeks later he appeared at Chelmsford summer assizes, charged with causing an epidemic then raging in the town.
Since all the doctors in Chelmsford practised inoculation it was impossible to prove him responsible and Sutton declared the prosecution to have been founded on the envy and malice of his enemies in the medical profession.
In July and August further successful general inoculations took place in Maidstone, Kent, and Ewell, Surrey.
In 1766 Sutton personally inoculated 7,816 people.
The total number inoculated by him, his assistants, and partners in the three years 1764–6 amounted to almost 20,000 without, it was claimed, a single death directly attributable to the treatment.
Events continued to move rapidly.
By 1767 his method was becoming known on the European mainland, where it was recommended by Sir John Pringle [q.v.].
In August 1767 he was granted a coat of arms with the motto ‘Safely, quickly and pleasantly’ and married Rachel, widow of William Westley of Shepton Mallet, Somerset, and daughter of Simon and Frances Warlock of Antigua and Westminster.
They were to have one son, Daniel, born in 1768, and a daughter, Frances.
The inoculating business had now reached its zenith with forty-seven ‘authorized’ partnerships (including Sutton, his father, and six brothers) in England, Ireland, Wales, Holland, France, Jamaica, and Virginia in 1768.
By about 1769 Sutton began to be superseded as first-choice inoculator of the wealthy by Thomas Dimsdale [q.v.].
Having successfully demonstrated the safety of his method of treatment so that it was being adopted by inoculators throughout the country Sutton had already unwittingly performed his greatest service in the fight against smallpox.
At the time of his father's death in April 1788 Sutton and his brothers were still ‘very eminent in the practice’ and in 1796 he published The Inoculator , in which he explained his method and displayed his contempt for the medical establishment.
In his final years he witnessed the introduction of vaccination (1798) and the rejection of inoculation by the majority of doctors.
He died in semi-obscurity at his London residence in Hart Street, Bloomsbury Square, in February 1819.
[J. R. Smith,The Speckled Monster , 1987.]
Gillian Lindsay
,Flora Jane (1876–1947), writer, was born in Juniper Hill, a hamlet in north-east Oxfordshire, 5 December 1876, the eldest child in the family of four daughters and two sons of Albert Timms, a stonemason, originally from Buckingham, and his wife Emma, a nursemaid, daughter of John Dibber from Stoke Lyne, an ‘eggler’, who took his pony and cart around local farms, collecting eggs and selling them in the market town.
Her favourite brother Edwin, born in 1879, was to die in 1916 during the battle of the Somme.
After elementary education at the village school in Cottisford she became, at the age of fourteen, an unofficial post-office counter clerk in the Oxfordshire village of Fringford.
Until her marriage in 1903 she worked in post offices in Buckinghamshire, Essex, and Hampshire.
In 1911 she won a magazine essay competition and went on to write short stories, newspaper articles, and during the 1920s two long series of articles for the Catholic Fireside magazine.
In alternate months she wrote nature articles and literary pieces.
She was a dedicated if self-taught naturalist.
An anthology of her nature articles called The Peverel Papers was published in 1986.
The literary articles were the result of her home study of literature — she had grown up during the establishment of the free library system in Britain, which she used extensively to supplement her elementary education.
Her first published book was Bog Myrtle and Peat (1921), a volume of poems which she was persuaded to submit for publication by her friend and literary mentor Dr Ronald Campbell Macfie.
In 1938 she sent essays on her country childhood to the Oxford University Press.
These were published as Lark Rise (1939), the story of the Oxfordshire hamlet where she was born.
Over to Candleford (1941) was followed by Candleford Green (1943).
These popular books were issued as the trilogy,Lark Rise to Candleford (1945), with a perceptive introduction by H. J. Massingham [q.v.].
Flora Thompson was a reserved woman of little confidence who was astonished when reviewers praised her work and Sir Arthur Bryant [q.v.]rated her books as high as Cranford .
The books, which have become classics of country writing, evoke the vigorous life of a hamlet, a village, and a country town in the England of the 1880s.
They are social history but also the lightly disguised story of Flora Thompson's youth.
Her last book,Still Glides the Stream , was published posthumously in 1948.
In 1903 she married John William Thompson, a post-office clerk and telegraphist from the Isle of Wight, son of Henry Thompson, formerly a chief petty officer in the Royal Navy.
They had two sons and one daughter.
In 1941 her much-loved younger son Peter was lost at sea when the ship on which he served was torpedoed in mid-Atlantic; she never recovered from this loss.
She died 21 May 1947 in Brixham, Devon.
[Margaret Lane,Flora Thompson , 1976; Gillian Lindsay,Flora Thompson: the Story of the Lark Rise Writer , 1990.]