

Stan Shipley
,Ted ‘Kid’(1894–1970), boxer, was born Gershon Mendaloff at 56 Umberston Street, St George's-in-the-East, Aldgate, London, 28 October 1894, the third of eight children and eldest son of Harris Mendaloff, cabinet-maker, and his wife Leah.
He was educated at the Jewish Free School in Bell Lane, and followed his father's trade.
Shortly before his fifteenth birthday he began boxing professionally as ‘Kid’ Lewis at the Judaean Club, Whitechapel, where he had nearly fifty contests, and when Premierland opened he boxed there thirty-five times in 1912.
In October 1913 he won the British Featherweight Championship at the National Sporting Club, and the European title four months later.
In 1914 an offer from Australia took Lewis and his trainer, Alec ‘Zalig’ Goodman, to Sydney and five matches in three months, from where they sailed to the USA on business which lasted five years.
It was here that ‘Ted’ was added to his name.
Boxing mostly on the east coast, Lewis had half his contests restricted by law to no-decision contests.
He won the World Welterweight Championship in Boston in August 1915 from Jack Britton and lost the title to the same man eight months later.
Lewis regained the title from the Irish-American in June 1917, and lost it back to him in March 1919.
They had met nineteen times.
Lewis returned to England for a contest on Boxing day 1919 at the Royal Albert Hall.
He won the British and European welterweight titles in March and June respectively of 1920, and the British Middleweight Championship a year later.
In May 1922 he lost by a knockout in the first round to Georges Carpentier in his challenge for the world's light-heavyweight crown.
Lewis lost all his boxing titles during 1923–4, and had his last contest in 1929.
In over 270 boxing matches Lewis lost only thirty times.
He never refused to fight and earned money voraciously, spent it excessively, and gave hand-outs endlessly.
He was sentimental and politically naïve, and the outstanding British boxer at the heavier weights in the first half of the twentieth century.
In January 1917 Lewis married Elsie Schneider in New York; she was from a Jewish family.
They had one child, a son.
Lewis died 20 October 1970 in Brighton.
[Morton Lewis,Ted Kid Lewis: his Life and Times , 1990; Gilbert E. Odd,Ring Battles of the Century , 1948; Jack Goodwin,Myself and my Boxers , 1924.]
A D C Simpson
, Sir Paul (1613–1685/6), courtier, scientific patron, and founder member of the Royal Society, was born in Westminster, where he was baptized 11 May 1613.
His father was Richard Neile [q.v.], bishop of Lichfield and Coventry, and later archbishop of York.
He was admitted a fellow-commoner at Pembroke College, Cambridge, in 1627, matriculating in 1628 and graduating BA in 1631.
He was knighted by Charles I at Bishopthorpe, his father's palace near York, on 27 May 1633, being described as of Hutton Bonville, an estate near Northallerton which he held until at least 1667.
As a measure of the regard in which the family was held by the king, Archbishop Neile was able to secure a royal pardon for his son when Sir Paul was indicted for the manslaughter of a carman and other felonies in January 1636.
Neile was returned for Ripon in the Short Parliament of April–May 1640, and he was one of the Yorkshire gentry who signed the Yorkshire engagement for the support of the Royalist cause.
During the Protectorate he was associated with the circle of natural philosophers and mathematicians at Oxford which centred around Seth Ward [q.v.],
Savilian professor of astronomy, and John Wilkins [q.v.], warden of Wadham College.
The young (Sir) Christopher Wren was a part of this group, as was Neile's son William, who entered Wadham as a gentleman-commoner in 1652.
Neile's particular contribution was the provision of the longest and most powerful telescopes that had been produced in England for Ward's observatory at Wadham, and these were used by Wren in developing his theory of Saturn's rings.
They were constructed by the prominent London optical craftsman Richard Reeve, at White Waltham, Berkshire, a property leased by Neile from 1653, and Neile is credited by Wren with the detailed direction of Reeve's work.
The most impressive telescope, of 36-feet focus, was provided for Wren's use when he was appointed professor of astronomy at Gresham College, London, in 1657.
To the diarist John Evelyn, writing in 1656, Neile was ‘Sir P. Neale famous for his optic-glasses’.
The Gresham telescope was demonstrated to Charles II in October 1660 and then at the king's request was moved to the garden at Whitehall Palace.
Further telescopes were made for use as diplomatic and royal gifts.
Neile was one of the twelve members at the November 1660 foundation meeting of the Royal Society.
He played a prominent part in the society's business in the late 1660s and early 1670s, but although he remained associated with practical optics his only communication was a ‘Discourse on Cider’ which was printed by John Evelyn [q.v.]in his Sylva of 1664.
He became a gentleman usher to the privy chamber in 1662, and his influence with the king was of continuing value to the society.
He inherited, but then dissipated, his father's fortune.
His financial interests appear to have been in land and minerals.
In 1670 he was one of the original adventurers listed in the royal charter of the Hudson's Bay Company.
He is noted in Treasury records from 1671 as a member of a number of official commissions, notably as a commissioner for appeals in excise.
From 1673 to 1677 he was MP for Newark, but he did not sit.
He married Elizabeth, sister of Gabriel Clarke, archdeacon of Durham.
Their first son William [q.v.], a mathematician of distinction, was born in 1637 at Bishopthorpe.
A second son, Richard, disinherited by Sir Paul because of his involvement in escapades considered discreditable to the family, subsequently became sheriff of Northumberland and was knighted in 1686.
There were two daughters.
In his will of 1682 Neile is recorded as resident at Codnover Castle, Derbyshire.
He died in London before February 1686, with Margaret, dowager Countess of Marlborough (widow of William Ley, fourth and last Earl) as sole executrix.
[M. Hunter,The Royal Society and its Fellows , 1982; H. Hartley (ed.),
The Royal Society , 1960, pp. 159–65; R. Surtees,The History…of Durham , 1816–44; M. Hunter and S. Schaffer (eds.),
Robert Hooke: New Studies , 1989, pp. 33–61;Victoria History of the Counties of England ,Berkshire , vol. iii, 1923,Yorkshire North Riding , vol. i, 1914;Calendar of State Papers Domestic ;Calendar of Treasury Books .]
E M Paintin
, Sir Frederick Augusta (1743–1830), principal librarian to George III, was the son of John Barnard (died 1773), page of the back stairs to Frederick, Prince of Wales [q.v.], and the prince's wife Augusta (after whom Frederick was named), who may have been his godparents.
F. A. Barnard started in royal service as page of the back stairs to George III; by 1765 he was a member of the staff of the royal library.
The old royal library had been given to the British Museum by George II in 1757.
George III employed Barnard as chief agent in his lifelong endeavour to build up a new collection, which later came to be known as the King's Library.
Between 1768 and 1771 Barnard, on a salary of £200 a year and with a purchasing allowance of £2,000 a year, travelled on the Continent, buying books, visiting many of the principal cities, and taking advantage of the recent dispersal of many Jesuit libraries.
In 1774 Barnard succeeded Richard Dalton [q.v.]as royal librarian.
He followed the king's wishes in building up a genuinely working library, albeit one well stocked with rarities, and including a magnificent topographical and cartographical collection, manuscripts, coins and medals, and drawings.
By 1823, when George IV presented his father's library to the nation for deposit at the British Museum, the collection comprised 65,000 volumes, 19,000 pamphlets, and the king's topographical collection of some 50,000 maps and charts.
Barnard became FSA in 1789 and FRS in 1790.
He was largely responsible for compiling the catalogue of the King's Library, which was published in five volumes between 1820 and 1829 as Bibliothecae Regiae Catalogus .
He retired from the royal library in 1828, having overseen the transference of it and its staff to the British Museum.
In 1828 he was made a knight commander of the Guelphic Order.
A portrait of him by John Knight [q.v.]was presented to the British Museum by his great-great-granddaughter in 1926.
In October 1796 Barnard married Catherine (died 1837), daughter of John Byde; they had one son, George (died 1817), and at least one daughter, who died young.
Barnard died 27 January 1830 at his house in St James's Palace.
[Edward Edwards,Memoirs of Libraries , 2 vols., 1859, and Lives of the Founders of the British Museum , 1870; E. M. Paintin,The King's Library , 1989; John Brooke, ‘The Library of King George III’,Yale University Gazette , vol. lii, 1977, pp. 33–45.]
Alston Kennerley
,Frank Thomas (1857–1915), merchant seaman, lecturer, and author, was born in Paddington, London, 5 April 1857, the son of Frank Robert Bullen, stonemason of Crewkerne, Dorset, and his wife Margaret.
When he was eighteen months old, the family broke up, his care passing to a maiden aunt.
An elder sister disappeared, and he saw his mother only once again, though contact with his father was re-established later in life.
Existence depended on his aunt's ability at home sewing, yet two foundations of his later development were laid down, an awareness of literature and familiarity with religion.
A natural pre-school reader, he attended dame and junior schools and a chapel, but was otherwise cloistered until, in 1866, aged nine, he was thrown on the streets following his aunt's death.
Thereafter he was self-educated.
In and out of errand-boy jobs, Bullen now lodged for the cost of his keep or, between jobs, slept rough and lived on scraps.
Thus he learned a ‘street wisdom’ which helped him through similar periods between passages at sea.
In January 1869, when not yet twelve, he persuaded an uncle, a ship's master, to take him as cabin-boy.
So commenced the most influential phase of his life, largely in the lower strata of British merchant shipping.
By the age of thirteen he had twice been shipwrecked and had survived two epidemics of yellow fever, a hurricane, and two serious illnesses.
Most of his sea service was in sail.
Bullen served in over twenty-five ships, rising to able seaman, and, after passing the examinations for second mate and first mate, in those capacities when such employment offered.
In 1882 Bullen became a clerk in the Meteorological Office, augmenting his income by running simultaneously a picture-framing business and haberdashery shop.
This led to a collapse from overwork and, in the mid-1890s, to voluntary bankruptcy.
Though he disliked clerical employment, his writing ability and theoretical understanding of marine science were developing.
Following a conversion at sea he became an evangelical Christian, and spare-time preaching developed his ability at public speaking.
The acceptance of his first article in about 1895 led to regular contributions to popular journals, including the Spectator and the Cornhill Magazine , with syndication in American journals.
Appointed columnist on the Morning Leader , and financially stable, he left the Meteorological Office in 1899, and also began accepting engagements as a paid circuit lecturer.
Later he undertook lecture tours in Australia, New Zealand, and North America.
His first of thirty-six books, and most widely acclaimed,The Cruise of the ‘Cachalot' (1898) established his international reputation.
All Bullen's writing and lectures derived from his sea experience, keen observation, and a good memory, and were concerned mainly with marine science and sea life.
His easy, natural style made his works compulsive reading and he did much to explain the maritime world to the public ashore.
Maritime historians rate his revelations of seafaring conditions highly.
Born the same year as Joseph Conrad [q.v.], his reputation became established earlier, though his work did not retain the same general literary esteem.
In 1879 Bullen married Amelia, daughter of Voltaire Lucifer Grimwood, shoemaker.
They had three daughters and a son who died young.
Bullen was awarded a civil list pension in 1912.
He died 26 February 1915 during a visit to Madeira.
[Frank T. Bullen,The Log of a Sea-Waif , 1899,With Christ at Sea , 1900,Confessions of a Tradesman , 1908, and Recollections , 1915;The Times , 2 March 1915; official records at Public Record Office and National Maritime Museum.]
Peter Leach
,Benjamin (1813–1858), architect, was baptized 15 February 1813 in Horsley, Northumberland, the younger son of John Green [q.v.]of Newcastle upon Tyne, architect and civil engineer, and his wife Jane Stobart.
A pupil of Augustus Pugin the elder [q.v.], in the mid-1830s he became a partner of his father.
Thereafter they practised together until the latter's death in 1852, and it is not always possible to distinguish the work of one from that of the other.
The somewhat undistinguished Gothic-style churches in Northumberland and Durham, which formed a substantial element in the firm's output, for example, are in general simply ascribed to ‘John and Benjamin Green’, and the same applies to their best-known work, the monument to John Lambton, first Earl of Durham [q.v.], at Penshaw Hill, county Durham (1844), in the form of a Greek Doric temple.
However, the normal pattern appears to have been that the father concentrated on the civil engineering works and the son on the more purely architectural.
They were active as railway architects, and the stations on the main line between Newcastle and Berwick-on-Tweed, commissioned by George Hudson [q.v.]in 1846 —‘Fine, handsome buildings…more like the villas raised by retired tradesmen than residences for railway officers’— are said to have been by him.
More important, the Theatre Royal (1836–7) and the Grey column (1837–8) in Newcastle, stately neo-classical structures which were key elements in the heroic replanning of the city centre by Richard Grainger [q.v.], were evidently also his conceptions, and suggest that he might have become a more significant figure in his own right had he not died relatively young, surviving his father by a mere six years.
In contrast to his father, Green was ‘an artistic, dashing sort of a fellow’ whose style was ‘ornamental, florid and costly’.
He died in a mental home at Dinsdale Park, Durham, 24 November 1858.
[H. M. Colvin,A Biographical Dictionary of British Architects 1600–1840 , 1978; R. Welford,Men of Mark ‘twixt Tyne and Tweed , vol. ii, 1895.]
Huw V Bowen
, Sir George , second baronet (1729–1809), banker and politician, was born 14 June 1729 in Chilham, Kent, the youngest in the family of three sons and seven daughters of James Colebrooke, a London banker, and his wife Mary Hudson.
He was educated at the University of Leiden between 1747 and 1749, and then entered the family's banking business.
A key figure in the world of high finance, Colebrooke sat in the Commons as MP for Arundel between 1754 and 1774, and close links with Sir Thomas Pelham-Holles, first Duke of Newcastle [q.v.], secured him a number of lucrative government contracts.
This led to involvement in a wide range of speculative projects throughout Europe, North America, and the West Indies, and the huge resources at his disposal enabled him to embark on a vigorous attempt to secure control over the affairs of the East India Company.
He was elected a director of the rapidly expanding Company in 1767, and was appointed deputy chairman the following year.
He served as chairman in 1769, 1770, and 1772, and was thus at the centre of public attention at a crucial stage in Anglo-Asian relations.
His decisions and negotiations with the government shaped the manner in which the British Crown extended its control over both the Company and its Indian possessions, a process which culminated in the passing of the Regulating Act of 1773.
But this success was tempered by the fact that Colebrooke's period in office coincided with the Company's financial collapse.
When his own business affairs fell into a state of disarray in 1773, he was forced to withdraw from public life.
Bankruptcy followed and he fled to France.
Colebrooke, much lampooned in the press, was a rather pompous, self-important man who considered himself to be the second most influential politician in England.
He succeeded his brother James as second baronet in 1761, gained election as a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, and was appointed as chirographer to the Court of Common Pleas in 1766.
In 1754 he married Mary, daughter of Patrick Gaynor of Antigua.
They had three sons and three daughters, the youngest son being Henry Thomas Colebrooke [q.v.], who became a noted Sanskrit scholar.
Colebrooke died 5 August 1809 in Bath-Easton and was succeeded in the baronetcy by his second son James Edward (born 1761), his eldest son having died in April 1809.
[Sir George Colebrooke,Retrospection , 1898;Gentleman's Magazine , vol. lxxix, 1809; Sir Lewis Namier and John Brooke (eds.),
The House of Commons, 1754–1790 , vol. ii, 1964.]
R B McDowell
,Ulick John de , first Marquess of Clanricarde (1802–1874), politician, was born 20 December 1802 in Belmont, Hampshire, the only son and second child in the family of one son and two daughters of John Thomas de Burgh, thirteenth Earl of Clanricarde, army officer, and his wife Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Thomas Burke, baronet, of Marble Hill, county Galway.
The family had been settled in the west of Ireland from the early thirteenth century and on the death of his father in 1808 Ulick John de Burgh inherited, in addition to the earldom, 56,000 acres in county Galway.
In 1825 he married Harriet, the gifted daughter of George Canning, foreign secretary and later prime minister.
They had two sons and five daughters.
After his marriage it was rumoured he had been involved in a gambling scandal, but his father-in-law stood by him and it was largely through him that de Burgh was created a marquess in the peerage of Ireland in 1825 and Baron Somerhill in the peerage of the United Kingdom in 1826.
Clanricarde was appointed under-secretary of state for foreign affairs in 1826, a post he resigned after Canning's death in 1827.
A few years later he was accused of having speculated on the Paris Bourse, using official information.
This he vehemently denied.
A Canningite, he became a Whig.
In 1830 he was appointed captain of the Yeoman of the Guard and in 1831 knight of St Patrick.
In 1834 he resigned his office because he felt slighted by the ministry (another Irish peer, the second Marquess Conyngham, having been appointed postmaster-general).
In 1838 he was appointed ambassador to St Petersburg.
He served there until 1841, and, moving easily in Russian society, was a shrewd commentator on Russian social conditions, personalities, and policy.
From 1846 until 1852 he was in Lord John Russell's cabinet as postmaster-general.
He was an administrative reformer, working cordially with (Sir) Rowland Hill [q.v.], who was much pleased with ‘his businesslike, straight-forward manner’ and his courageous willingness to follow ‘a novel and decided course of action’.
As a member of the cabinet which had to cope with the Irish famine, Clanricarde pressed hard for remedial measures, pointing out that from time to time‘an adherence to sound principle will cause an immediate sacrifice’.
He was not included in the coalition cabinet of George Hamilton, fourth Earl of Aberdeen, in 1852.
In 1855 his name was opprobriously mentioned in the Irish case of Hancock v. Delacour , which attracted much attention.
It was alleged that John Delacour, a minor, was Clanricarde's illegitimate son by Josephine Hancock, the wife of William Henry Hancock, an Irish landowner, and that Clanricarde had schemed that Hancock's property should pass to Delacour.
The case ended in a compromise.
Clanricarde published long statements in which he denied the allegations and explained that he had become involved with the Hancock family's legal arrangements purely out of a good-natured wish to be of assistance.
Nevertheless when Henry Temple, third Viscount Palmerston, at the close of 1857 invited Clanricarde (the Lord Brittleback of Anthony Trollope, q.v.) to join his cabinet, a large section of public opinion professed to be shocked.
Punch published two harsh cartoons and, when at the end of February 1858 the government was defeated,The Times , with possibly a touch of exaggeration, declared that Clanricarde had been able by his ‘mere presence’ in the cabinet to destroy an exceptionally strong administration.
For about forty years Clanricarde spoke frequently in the House of Lords on a wide range of subjects.
Although it was said that his main contribution to debate was his sonorous ‘hear, hear’, his speeches, reflecting the outlook of a liberal-minded Whig, were usually sensible and to the point.
He seems to have possessed an ingenuous self-assurance which could get him into difficulties and arouse antagonism.
He died at Stratton Street, Piccadilly, London, 10 April 1874 and was succeeded in the marquessate by his second son, Hubert George Canning de Burgh [q.v.].
His first son died in 1867.
[F. Leveson-Gower (ed.),
Letters of Harriet, Countess Granville , 2 vols., 1894, vol. i, pp. 341–2; F. Bamford and the Duke of Wellington (eds.),
The Journal of Mrs Arbuthnot , 2 vols., 1950; A. D. Kriegel (ed.),
The Holland House Diaries , 1977, p. 254; G. B. Hill,The Life of Sir Rowland Hill , vol. ii, 1880, pp. 40, 55.]
D C Witt
,Abraham (1749–1799), pioneer in the experimental study of electricity, was baptized in Taxal, Cheshire, 20 December 1749, the son of Abraham Bennet, schoolmaster, of Whaley Lane, Cheshire, and his wife, Ann Fallowes of Cheadle.
He appears to have been the eldest child, with at least one brother, William.
It is presumed that the younger Abraham was educated by his father.
His name does not appear in university records of the time, but in September 1775 he was ordained in London, and appointed to curacies first at Tideswell, and in the following year at Wirksworth, also in Derbyshire, but at double the stipend, £60 p.a.
He remained curate of Wirksworth for the rest of his life, working with four successive vicars.
He held other posts simultaneously, including that of domestic chaplain to the Duke of Devonshire, perpetual curate of Woburn (and librarian to the Duke of Bedford), and (from 1796 to 1799) the living of the Derbyshire village of Fenny Bentley.
It is not known how his interest in electricity developed, but in 1787 two papers by him were published in the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society .
In 1789 he published a book,New Experiments on Electricity , and was elected FRS.
He made many observations of atmospheric electricity, and tried to relate them to the weather.
He was led into the development of sensitive instruments for this purpose, and his most lasting achievement was undoubtedly the ‘gold-leaf electroscope’ which could still be found 200 years later in school science laboratories as a detector of electrical charge.
His clear understanding of how the electrical ‘capacity’ of a conductor was increased by putting another, earthed, conductor nearby, and of the ‘induced’charge then acquired by this second conductor, enabled him to devise a means by which small charges could be repeatedly ‘doubled’until they were detectable.
The technique, which he published, was quite complicated, and he described in his book how he was on the point of making a rotary machine to do it all automatically, when William Nicholson [q.v.]sent him his own version, which performed very well.
Bennet also did numerous experiments on the electrostatic precipitation of powders.
His last Royal Society paper was concerned with the detection of magnetic fields, and the use of spider's-web filaments to suspend magnetized needles for this purpose.
He was clearly a most meticulous experimenter.
Bennet and his wife Jane had two sons and six daughters.
He died in Wirksworth after what the Derby Mercury described as a ‘severe illness’, and was buried 9 May 1799.
[A. Bennet,New Experiments on Electricity , 1789; Bennet's papers in Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society ; information from M. R. Handley, churchwarden of Wirksworth.]
V Sillery
,Thomas (1717/18–1772), scholar, was born in 1717/18, the son of Thomas Fry, plebeian of Pipe Lane, Bristol.
He was educated at Bristol Grammar School until 1732, when he was admitted to St John's College, Oxford, as a Bristol fellow.
He took his BA degree in 1736, was MA in 1740, taking priest's orders in 1744, a BD in 1745, and a DD in 1750.
Regularly resident in college during term, he held most college offices, beginning as logic reader (1737–40) and dean of arts (1740–4), having been natural philosophy reader (1740–1 and 1745–6).
The college preacher in 1743–4 and 1746–7, he was dean of divinity in 1750–1.
He served the college as Waple's preacher (1748–9) and Wood bursar (1748–9, 1755–6), became senior bursar (1751–2), junior bursar (1752–3), and rhetoric lecturer (1755).
Having been twice vice-president (1754–5, 1757–8), he was elected president on 9 December 1757 on the resignation of William Walker.
Curate in three college livings between 1749 and 1757, St Giles', Oxford (1749), Fyfield until 1755, and Kirtlington (1755–7), he was often an absentee incumbent.
In 1757, on being elected president, he became rector of Hanborough.
Determined to maintain the authority of the president, in 1766 he overruled the appointment of a new steward (who oversaw the domestic arrangements of the college) made at a meeting presided over by the vice-president, having persuaded eight of the senior fellows to protest at the action and ruling that the proceedings were contrary to statute.
Later the same day, with a new vice-president and the senior bursar, he elected the same man steward and clerk of accompts.
However, he does not seem to have felt so strongly about public affairs, when in May 1768 he refused a seat on the bench.
‘The Master of Ball.
[Balliol]pressed me much to have my name inserted in the new Commissn for the Peace, but I absolutely declined it.
Clergymen have no business to concern themselves with Civil affairs.’
In the diary covering the last four years of his life there is little mention of books, but he had brought out an edition of Aristophanes' ‘Plutus’ and ‘Clouds’in 1767.
It is plain that food was a permanent interest, and he faithfully records details of dinners, with comments on the madeira in the common-room cellar.
This perhaps accounts for the gout from which he suffered in 1771 and for which he collected prescriptions from friends.
As an old friend of John Wilkes [q.v.]he seems to have been, if not an active radical, at least a passive sympathizer and when in 1768 action was taken against young Methodists he comments ‘The V.C.
acknowledg'd that the characters of the men were very unexceptionable in every respect…but the Statutes of the Univy, he thought, obliged him to proceed in this Manner — thus is Persecution carried on under the masque of Mildness and Moderation.’
A tolerant man, enjoying solitude, although he had Protestant sympathies, he gives no sign of any antipathy to Catholicism.
He died intestate in Bristol 22 November 1772 and was buried in the churchyard at Clifton.
[Blackwood's Magazine , January 1923; Oxford University matriculation register, 1732; St John's College records; Thomas Fry's diary 1768–72 (original in possession of Fry's descendants, copies of parts at St John's College).]
Peyton Skipwith
,Arthur Heygate (1851–1942), architect, designer, and social reformer, was born 12 December 1851 in Edmonton, Middlesex, the eldest child and elder son (there was at least one daughter) of Edward Mackmurdo, chemical manufacturer, of Edmonton, and his wife Anne Jones.
He was educated at Felsted School, Essex.
Apprenticed to the architect, T. Chatfield Clarke, he moved in 1873 into the offices of James Brooks.
Brooks attended to every detail of his churches and Mackmurdo later acknowledged his debt to him as an exemplar of methodical thoroughness.
During these years Mackmurdo absorbed the main aesthetic and moral influences that were to guide him through his life, not so much from immediate masters as from the writings of John Ruskin, Herbert Spencer [qq.v.], and Auguste Comte.
Ruskin's Fors Clavigera was probably Mackmurdo's greatest single inspiration, and he modelled his first pamphlet,The Immorality of Lending for Payment of Interest or of any Usurious Gain (1878), on Unto this Last (1862).
Most accounts of Mackmurdo's early life state that he travelled with Ruskin in Italy in 1874, but no mention of this appears in any contemporary writings.
Study of Mackmurdo's character reveals a strong vein of the mountebank and many of his claims seem to have little basis in fact.
He was largely self-taught through wide reading and attendance at public lectures.
None of this seriously detracts from his achievement as an architect and designer during the 1880s and 1890s: a fruitful diversion from his lifelong obsession with monetary reform.
In whatever he did he displayed a strong didactic tendency and was always guided by his self-proclaimed precept that every ‘social organism must possess a definite physical structure’.
Mackmurdo set up his own architectural practice at 20 Southampton Street, Strand, in 1875; moving to 20 Fitzroy Street, Bloomsbury, in 1888.
He was an associate of the RIBA from 1882 to 1885.
Apart from a cold-storage warehouse in Charterhouse Street in the City of London, his architectural output was limited to a handful of houses in London and the Manchester area, including 25 Cadogan Gardens, Chelsea, in partnership with George Hornblower, for the Australian artist Mortimer Menpes.
Interesting as these houses are individually they barely begin to support Mackmurdo's reputation, which rests principally upon the foundation and achievements of the Century Guild.
The Century Guild was founded in 1882 ‘to render all branches of Art the sphere no longer of the tradesman but of the Artist’ as Mackmurdo wrote in April 1882 in the first number of the Guild periodical,The Hobby Horse .
The Guild was employed in cabinet-making, decorative metalwork, and the designing of wallpaper and fabrics involving many craftsmen.
Mackmurdo's own designs are noted for their sinuous patterns based on plant and bird forms.
The frontispiece of his book,Wren's City Churches (1883), with its swirling pattern, is one of the precursors of English Art Nouveau, as is his famous chair of similar date with its fretted back with a design of sub-aqueous plants.
A major collection of the Guild's work is in the William Morris Museum, Walthamstow.
Unlike C. R. Ashbee [q.v.]and other confrères within the guild-revival movement, Mackmurdo was less than generous in acknowledging the contributions of others.
During the six years that the Century Guild existed its output was modest, though its participation in public exhibitions gave it a considerable influence.
Sadly, the underlying amateurishness of the organization could not stand the strain and the Guild disintegrated in 1888.
Mackmurdo was also involved at this period with several other pioneer reform movements such as the Society for the Preservation of Ancient Buildings, the Home Arts and Industries Association, and the Art for Schools Association.
In 1902 Mackmurdo married Eliza, daughter of the musician Richard Carte.
He retired from architectural practice in 1906 and concentrated once again on his utopian schemes for social and economic reform.
His major book on the subject,The Human Hive: its Life and Law , was published in 1926.
He died in Wickham Bishop 15 March 1942, having been predeceased by his wife.
There were no children of the marriage.
[Nikolaus Pevsner, ‘Arthur H. Mackmurdo’,Architectural Review , vol. lxxxiii, 1938; Aymer Vallance, ‘Mr. Arthur H. Mackmurdo and the Century Guild’,Studio , vol. xvi, 1899; Trevor Price, ‘Curious Mr. Mackmurdo’(thesis for degree of Bachelor of Architecture, University of Newcastle upon Tyne, 1981).]
H G Pitt
, Baroness Louise (c. 1784–1870), royal governess, was born c .1784 in Hanover, a younger child among the two sons and seven daughters of a Lutheran pastor and his wife, Melusine Palm, herself the child of a clergyman.
Lehzen came to England, after service in the aristocratic family of von Marenholtz, in December 1819 as governess to Princess Féodore, daughter (by her first marriage) of Princess Victoria of Leiningen, since 1818 Duchess of Kent, to whom was born, shortly before Lehzen's arrival, the future Queen Victoria.
In 1824 Lehzen was appointed governess to the young princess.
When in 1830 the Duchess of Northumberland was appointed official governess, Lehzen stayed as lady in attendance and Victoria's constant attendant, without an official appointment, until 1842, acting latterly as her secretary in private matters.
Lehzen made it a condition of her appointment that the princess should never see strangers except in her presence.
She herself was never to receive her own acquaintances in her quarters.
Though she encouraged the princess to keep a journal, she never kept one herself, thinking it inappropriate to her position.
The accession of William IV in 1827 brought serious friction between the Duchess of Kent and the new king.
William resented the mother's influence over the heir presumptive, while the duchess asserted, not always successfully, her own and the princess's position.
In the quarrels arising from the ‘Kensington system’ established by Sir John Conroy [q.v.], comptroller of the duchess's household, the princess was an unhappy pawn.
Until her accession her only true, constant, and ever-present friend and champion was Lehzen.
When, ill with typhoid in October 1835, Victoria was pressed hard by Conroy to nominate him as her personal secretary on her accession, she persistently and successfully resisted, with Lehzen's support.
By this time Lehzen ‘occupied the first place in her pupil's thoughts and affections’(Esher).
After Victoria's accession Lehzen, never skilled in personal relationships, failed to adjust to changed circumstances and her charge's coming of age.
Jealousy, first of William Lamb, second Viscount Melbourne, and then, more seriously, of Prince Albert, whom the queen married in 1840, led to serious tensions in the royal household.
Lehzen was blamed, probably wrongly, for the queen's ineptness in the Lady Flora Hastings [q.v.]affair, and fear of losing Lehzen was a major contribution to the queen's stubbornness in the ‘bedchamber crisis’ of 1839.
In September 1842, after quarrels about the management of the royal nursery, Lehzen left the royal service on Albert's insistence, with the gift of a carriage from the queen and a pension of £8,000 p.a.
She lived out her life unmarried in Buckeburg in Hanover, first with her remaining sister, who died within the year, and then alone.
She saw the queen occasionally on royal visits to Germany.
‘My dearest, kindest Lehzen’ died 9 September 1870 in Buckeburg.
Though not lettered, Lehzen read (and read aloud to the princess) and imparted to the child a love of history.
She provided the affection and discipline which the princess never received from her mother.
The princess was taught to curb her natural impetuous temper and to own her mistakes to all she had wronged, regardless of rank.
‘She was very strict’, the queen remembered, ‘and the Princess had great respect and even awe of her, but with that the greatest affection.’
Lehzen was the greatest single influence, and that for good, in the formative period of the character of the lonely, little-loved princess.
‘That Lehzen handed over to the nation a potentially great queen must be to her credit’(Longford).
There is a miniature of Lehzen by Koepke in royal possession.
She was made a baroness on the Hanover establishment by George IV in 1827.
[Elizabeth Longford,Victoria R.I. , 1964; R. B. Brett (Viscount Esher),The Girlhood of Queen Victoria , 2 vols., 1912; C. Woodham-Smith,Queen Victoria, her Life and Times, 1819–1861 , 1972; Philip W. Wilson (ed.),
The Greville Diary , 2 vols., 1927, vol. i, p. 27; Royal Archives, Windsor, Y 203/80, Y 203/79.]
Hugh Shields
,Michael (‘Zozimus’)(c. 1794–1846), balladeer and street entertainer, was born c .1794 to poor parents in Faddle Alley off Black Pitts in the Liberties of Dublin (and not ten years later as the Memoir by ‘Gulielmus’ implies in giving his age at death as forty-three).
Blind from infancy, he followed a well-established Dublin occupation that suited his disability and temperament, covering in his circuit an area from the river quays to the old city, where he lived with his wife and children.
The nickname ‘Zozimus’ was acquired in manhood from a character in the ‘Life of St Mary of Egypt’, which he recited in a verse version by Bishop Antony Coyle.
Though no great singer, ‘Zozimus’ is best remembered for his song ‘The Finding of Moses’(cf. the Bible, Exodus chapter 2), known in such versions as Songs of Dublin (ed.
Frank Harte, 1978).
It is uncertain whether he composed this song himself or adapted an existing poem to the mocking, sentimental tone that was his and was already regarded as typical of Dublin.
With his nickname and reputation he remained a Dublin legend after his death.
Dublin comic magazines were named after him (Zozimus , 1870–2,Zoz, or, the Irish Charivari , 1876–9), a New York collection of Irish stories was fathered on him (The Zozimus Papers , 1889), and W. B. Yeats's The Celtic Twilight (1893), with a frontispiece painting of ‘Zozimus’ by J. B. Yeats [qq.v.], subsumed him as ‘the Last Gleeman’.
Over a similar period several depictions show comparable evolution: from the comic entertainer to the pensive bard.
According to the Memoir he was twice married, and his second wife was the widow Curran.
They had one son.
Moran died 3 April 1846 at his lodgings, 15 Patrick Street, Dublin.
[Gulielmus Dubliniensis Humoriensis,Memoir of the Great Original Zozimus (Michael Moran), 1871, repr. 1976; W. B. Yeats,The Celtic Twilight , 1893.]
W R Owens
,Agnes (1652–1720), religious autobiographer, was born in Edworth, Bedfordshire, and baptized Ann 1 September 1652, the youngest of seven children (of whom three died in infancy) of John Beaumont, yeoman farmer of Edworth, and his wife Mary Pakes of Pirton, Hertfordshire.
She was the author of a brief autobiographical account describing the death in 1674 of her father, whom she was accused of having poisoned with the help of John Bunyan [q.v.], a crime for which, had she been convicted, she could have been burned.
Her family was strongly Nonconformist, and in 1672, having come under the spell of Bunyan's preaching, Agnes joined a congregation of his at Gamlingay.
Her father had turned against Bunyan, and when he heard that she had ridden behind him to a meeting, he locked her out of the house for two days.
When she promised not to attend any more meetings without his permission, they were reconciled, but he died the same night, probably of a heart attack, with only Agnes in the house.
A former suitor, Mr Feery, the family lawyer, maliciously suggested that she had murdered him, and her brother had to summon a coroner and jury, which, in the event, cleared her of any guilt.
She subsequently married twice: first, in 1702, Thomas Warren of Cheshunt, who died in 1707, then in 1708 Samuel Storey, a prosperous Highgate merchant, who survived her.
She died 28 November 1720, and was buried in the Tilehouse Street meeting yard in Hitchin.
Her autobiography remained in manuscript, but copies began to circulate and in 1760 it was published in a frequently reprinted collection of conversion narratives.
It is a rare example of the genre at this social level in the seventeenth century, and a testimony to the power of radical religious belief to inspire resistance to patriarchal authority.
[British Library, Egerton MSS, 2414 and 2128; Samuel James,An Abstract of the Gracious Dealings of God with Several Eminent Christians , 1760 (9th edn., ed.
Isaac James, 1824); G. B. Harrison (ed.),
The Narrative of the Persecution of Agnes Beaumont in 1674 , 1930.]
Denis Richards
,Edward Maitland (1880–1921), air commodore and airship and parachute pioneer, was born in London 21 February 1880, the elder son of Arthur Gee, farmer and later barrister-at-law and JP, of Shudy Camps Park, Cambridgeshire, and his wife Margaretha Marianne Maitland.
Arthur Gee and his family assumed the name of Maitland in 1903.
Educated at Haileybury and Trinity College, Cambridge, Edward Maitland volunteered for service in the South African war while he was still an undergraduate.
Commissioned in the Essex Regiment, he served in South Africa during 1901–2, receiving the Queen's medal with four clasps.
Without resuming residence in Cambridge he took a BA (ordinary) in 1906, obtaining a third class.
Remaining in the army, in 1907 Maitland took up ballooning.
The following year, with two companions, he made a record 1,171-mile voyage to Russia.
He also made his first descent from a balloon by parachute.
After service at the Balloon School in Farnborough, he commanded the airship company in the short-lived air battalion of the Royal Engineers (1911–12), and then, on the formation of the Royal Flying Corps, was given command of No. 1 Squadron (Airships).
In 1913, when all British airships came under naval control, he transferred to the Royal Naval Air Service.
In the same year he made his first parachute jump from an airship.
In October 1914 Maitland was sent to Belgium in charge of an RNAS balloon detachment for artillery spotting.
He became impressed with the superiority of the French and Belgian kite-balloons over his own spherical type, reported accordingly to the Admiralty, and was promptly recalled to initiate kite-balloon training at Roehampton in March 1915.
From this he moved on to command the airship station at Wormwood Scrubs, and then went to the Admiralty to help in airship design and allocation.
During this period he made a parachute descent from a balloon at 10,500 feet to investigate ‘swinging’.
In 1916, as a wing captain, he was appointed to command the airship station in Pulham, Norfolk, where Zeppelin imitations — rigid airships of a greatly improved type — were later to be based.
In June 1917 Maitland was appointed to the DSO for ‘extremely valuable and gallant work in connection with airships and parachutes’.
Shortly afterwards he returned to the Admiralty as captain-superintendent, lighter-than-air, to take charge of the airships headquarters staff.
In this post he helped to build up the airship service into a major weapon in the war at sea.
RNAS non-rigid airships, able to stay aloft for many hours and send down reports by wireless, did important work on patrol and convoy escort, many times directing British destroyers into contact with the enemy's U-boats.
Further recognition followed for Maitland with appointment in 1919 as CMG, and the award of the AFC (1919) and the United States DSM (1917).
July 1919 saw what was probably Maitland's greatest moment, when the naval rigid airship R34, with Maitland as chief observer, crossed the Atlantic successfully in both directions.
The following month he received a permanent commission in the Royal Air Force, soon afterwards being promoted air commodore.
With the transfer in October of all rigid airships from the Royal Navy to the RAF, Maitland continued at the Air Ministry his work on airship development and operations, but with civil uses now in view.
In 1921 Maitland's previously brilliant career ended in misfortune and tragedy.
He was in command of the airship station in Howden, Yorkshire, when on 21 January the R34 struck some high ground and was buffeted in strong winds off the Yorkshire coast, later breaking up.
In May the Air Ministry decided to disband the RAF's airship arm.
The newly constructed R38, the largest airship yet built, had been sold to the USA in 1919, but was still based in Howden for training and trials.
When on 24 August 1921 she broke up over the Humber on a final exercise in sharp turns, Maitland, on board but not in command, died with forty-two others.
He was unmarried.
[Papers in the Air Historical Branch, Ministry of Defence; E. M. Maitland,The Log of HMA R34 , 1920;The Times , 25 August 1921; Sir Walter Raleigh,The War in the Air , vol. i, 1922; Robin Higham,The British Rigid Airship, 1908–31 , 1961; D. H. Robinson,Giants in the Sky , 1973.]
Raymond Klibansky
or  (c. 1105– c. 1170), logician, was born in Balsham, near Cambridge, on the estate of his father, whose family originated from Beauvais in France.
About 1122 he left England for Paris, at that time the goal of many young Englishmen who aimed to study the arts and theology.
By 1132, the date of publication of his main work, the Ars Disserendi , he was established as the master of a school, teaching on the little bridge which links the Ile de la Cité with the left bank.
John of Salisbury [q.v.], returning from Chartres to Paris in 1141, sought him out in order to facilitate his own preparation for teaching; he was thenceforward in close touch with Adam until his own departure from Paris in 1146.
John speaks of his knowledge of Aristotle and of his willingness to share his learning with him.
His personal appreciation of Adam's help, however, did not prevent him from strongly criticizing his cynical principle of teaching, by which (according to John) he cultivated an unnecessarily complicated approach to dialectic in order to enhance his own reputation; and John took care to stress that Adam was not his teacher.
But the lifelong affection for Adam's school of the distinguished scholar Alexander Nequam [q.v. under Neckam], who three decades later was a student there, suggests that John's criticisms may not have been entirely just.
About 1146 Adam became canon of the cathedral of Paris; as such he took part in the Paris synod of 1147, presided over by Pope Eugenius III, at which Gilbert of Poitiers had to defend himself against charges of heretical doctrines concerning the nature of God and the Trinity.
Adam and Hugh de Champfleury, the king's chancellor, testified under oath that they had heard Gilbert pronouncing the incriminating propositions.
Adam appeared again, in 1148, with other well-known masters, at the Council of Reims, where Bernard of Clairvaux's accusations against Gilbert were fully discussed.
Nequam, in his Supplementum Defectuum , implies that Adam was still alive near the time of his own arrival at the little bridge, around 1175.
He has frequently, but erroneously, been confused with another Master Adam, canon of Paris, who became bishop of St Asaph in 1175 and died in 1181 [q.v. under Adam Angligena].
Adam's main work, the Ars Disserendi , was a textbook of logic, novel in its approach and in its use of the newly translated Topics and Sophistical Refutations of Aristotle; it stressed the importance of the mastery of language as a safeguard against sophisms.
Its stylistic complexity was attributed by John of Salisbury to vanity rather than subtlety.
Adam also wrote the De Utensilibus ad Domum Regendam , a treatise composed after returning to his native village which he had left over eleven years before; its use of quaint and archaic words was designed to show his knowledge of learned terminology in naming objects of everyday life.
Its subject matter was a description of his family home; the courtyard, the stables with the horses, the house itself, a meal with his relatives, the collection of arms in a tower, the women's quarters with the clothes and ornaments it contained.
Though he mixes fact with imagination, he provides a lively picture of an English country house of the time.
[Adam of Balsham,Ars Disserendi , ed.
L. Minio-Paluello, in Twelfth Century Logic.
Texts and Studies , vol. i, Rome, 1956;idem ,De Utensilibus , ed.
B. Hauréau, in Notices et Extraits…, vol. iii, Paris, 1891; John of Salisbury,Metalogicon , ed.
C. C. J. Webb, 1929;idem ,Entheticus , ed.
R. E. Pepin, in Traditio , vol. xxxi, 1975; L. Minio-Paluello, ‘The Ars Disserendi of Adam of Balsham Parvipontanus’,Mediaeval and Renaissance Studies , vol. iii, 1954; R. W. Hunt,The Schools and the Cloister.
The Life and Writings of Alexander Nequam (1157–1217), 1984; W. and M. Kneale,The Development of Logic , 1975.]
Jennifer Loach
, Sir George (ante 1489–1552), MP, was the eldest son of Sir Robert Throckmorton of Coughton, Warwickshire, and his wife Catherine Marrow.
He had at least two other brothers.
He was admitted to the Middle Temple in 1505, and by 1512 had married Catharine, daughter of Sir Nicholas Vaux, first Baron Vaux of Harrowden [q.v.], courtier and soldier, whose family link with the Parrs was of subsequent advantage.
In 1518 Throckmorton's father, one of Henry VII's courtiers, died on his way to the Holy Land, and George succeeded to a considerable estate, which he was to enlarge further.
Although he was active in the local government of Warwickshire, Worcestershire, and, more briefly, Buckinghamshire, Throckmorton's chief claim to fame is as one of the few who openly attacked Henry VIII over the divorce of Catherine of Aragon [q.v.].
After one speech in the House of Commons, where he sat as knight of the shire for Warwickshire, Throckmorton was summoned before the king himself.
There he boldly repeated a story he had heard about Henry's relations with the sister of Anne Boleyn [q.v.]and her mother.
Henry, taken aback, replied weakly that he had not had carnal relations with Anne's mother.
Nor with her sister, firmly interposed Thomas Cromwell (later Earl of Essex, q.v.).
Throckmorton and several other conservative country gentlemen used to meet in the Queen's Head Tavern in Fleet Street to discuss parliamentary affairs, and they probably formed the nearest thing the Reformation Parliament saw to an opposition group.
Certainly Cromwell regarded them with some anxiety, and in 1533 he made Throckmorton promise that he would ‘stay at home and meddle little with politics’.
Late in 1536 Throckmorton was arrested for showing an unwise interest in the grievances of the northern rebels.
He was questioned about his earlier activities, and told his interrogators that he had been encouraged in his attack on royal policies by Catherine's confessor, Father William Peto, and by John Fisher, bishop of Rochester [qq.v.], who had given him a tract he had written about papal primacy.
Throckmorton said that after he had spoken in the House against the Act in Restraint of Appeals, he had been praised by Fisher and two other clerics, Nicholas Wilson and Richard Reynolds [qq.v.], who told him that he need not persevere with such speeches if they seemed to have no effect, but that his example might be of value to others.
Throckmorton also claimed that Sir Thomas More [q.v.]had once sent for him and promised that if he continued ‘in the same way’ and was not afraid, he would ‘deserve great reward from God’.
Soon released, Throckmorton was rearrested a few months later because of the involvement of his younger brother, Michael, with Cardinal Reginald Pole [q.v.]: once again no charge was sustained.
The fall of Cromwell in 1540 improved Throckmorton's position, and he was able to see his family of eight sons and eleven daughters well established.
His sons shared their father's independence of mind.
Some, including the eldest, Robert, were to be famous for recusancy, whilst others, like Clement, were convinced Puritans; Nicholas [q.v.]was indicted and acquitted of treason in 1554.
Throckmorton and his father were enthusiastic builders who erected an impressive stone gatehouse at Coughton, with polygonal turrets, large windows, and a battlemented skyline.
However, Sir George's plan of making the remainder of the timber-framed house ‘suitable’ to the gatehouse was not fulfilled.
He died 6 August 1552 and was buried in the church at Coughton.
[Coughton Court MSS; J. S. Brewer and J. Gairdner (eds.),
Letters and Papers, Foreign and Domestic, of the Reign of Henry VIII, 1509–47 , 1862–1910; W. Dugdale,Antiquities of Warwickshire , 1656; S. T. Bindoff,The House of Commons 1509–1558 , 1982.]
Garry O'Connor
,Samuel (c. 1797–1848), actor and comedian, is believed to have been born around 1797, but nothing is known about his parentage or background.
He gained lasting importance as the model for the character of Sam Weller in The Pickwick Papers , by Charles Dickens [q.v.].
Vale built up his reputation as a ‘low comedian’ in the provinces, playing mostly in farces and adaptations, among them the musical comedy,The Boarding House, or Five Hours at Brighton , by Samuel Beazley [q.v.], in which he played the comic militiaman Simon Spatterdash, a propounder of curious comparisons, a role with which he became completely identified off-stage, so that his fame spread far and wide.
The Boarding House had first been produced at the Lyceum Theatre, London, in 1811, but we have no record of when Vale first began acting, only that, according to the Gentleman's Magazine , he made his ‘metropolitan début at the Olympic under the management of the late Mr Wrench’(Benjamin Wrench, q.v.).
Vale was actively performing in London from 1831 to 1848, in revivals of The Boarding House , as well as other plays at the Royal Coburg Theatre and at the magnificent Surrey Theatre, decorated in gold and velvet.
One of the plays in which Vale appeared,Paul Clifford, or the The Highwayman of 1770, or Crime and Ambition , featured a stagecoach and six real horses ‘determined to have a run of some kind’.
Vale appeared as Dummie Dunnaker; then in 1835–7 he joined D. W. Osbaldiston's company at the Covent Garden Theatre, playing in popular burlettas at reduced prices.
With mellow voice and ‘unctuousness of utterance’ he became a West End favourite so that, as a contemporary wrote, ‘he was never surpassed by recent comedians…for the richness of his humour.’
‘Sam Velerisms’, as they were called, which became the basis for ‘Sam Wellerisms’, were famous in the period 1831–6, just prior to the first publication of The Pickwick Papers .
These illogical curiosities have something of the wit of Cervantes' Sancho Panza, and look forward to Alice in Wonderland .
‘Why here we are all mustarded’, as the roast beef said to the Welsh rabbit’; ‘‘Off with a whisk’, as the butcher said to the flies’; ‘‘When a man is ashamed to show the front of his face let him turn round and show the back of it’, as the turnstile said to the weather-cock.’
Vale, described in his obituary in the Gentleman's Magazine as ‘an eccentric low comedian’, died 3 March 1848.
[Gentleman's Magazine , new series, vol. xxix, 1848, p. 672; J. R. Allardyce Nicoll,A History of English Drama 1660–1900 , 1952–9;Notes and Queries , 6th series, vol. v, 1882, p. 826.]
Eric Halladay
,Rudolph Chambers (1856–1929), journalist, politician, and oarsman, was born in Eccleshall, Sheffield, 3 January 1856, the eldest in the family of three sons and one daughter of Frederick Lehmann, businessman, and his wife Nina, daughter of Robert Chambers (1802–1871, q.v.), the Edinburgh publisher.
Rudolf Lehmann (1819–1905, q.v.) was his great-uncle.
He was educated at Highgate School and Trinity College, Cambridge, taking a second class in the classical tripos (1878).
He was president of the Union (1876), a noted boxer, captain of First Trinity Boat Club, and twice rowed in the university trial eights.
On coming down, he was called to the bar in 1880 (Inner Temple) but soon abandoned legal practice.
An ample private income allowed him time to indulge his tastes for writing, politics, and rowing.
At Cambridge Lehmann had founded Grant a , which he continued to edit for some years after leaving university.
Much of his prose and verse, light-hearted in nature but containing some good pieces on rowing, appeared in Punch , of whose Table he was a member for thirty years from 1890.
Less happy were his efforts during the late 1890s to revive the Speaker as an organ for radical ideas, and his editorship of the ailing Daily News from 1901 to 1902.
He did not find the day-to-day life of a professional journalist congenial.
A public-spirited man, Lehmann was high sheriff of Buckinghamshire during 1901–2 and he was long active in the affairs of the National Liberal Federation.
He unsuccessfully contested parliamentary seats in Cheltenham in 1885, Central Hull in 1886, and Cambridge Town in 1892 before being elected in 1906 for the Harborough division of Leicestershire.
He had opposed the Boer war and South African issues were one of his major concerns as an MP.
He retained his seat in January 1910 but declined to stand again the following December.
Deteriorating health and financial worries, following careless judgements by his stockbroker in 1907, contributed to this decision.
His name was on the list of H. H. Asquith (later first Earl of Oxford and Asquith), had the prime minister been forced to create new Liberal peers in 1911.
Sport, more especially rowing, was his constant pleasure.
An inspiring coach, he was in considerable demand by both Oxford and Cambridge for their boat-race crews throughout the 1890s.
He captained Leander in 1894 and 1895 and was elected a steward of Henley royal regatta in 1898.
Secretary of the Amateur Rowing Association from 1893 to 1901, he tried unsuccessfully to widen its narrow definition of an amateur.
He coached abroad on a number of occasions, always refusing any kind of payment, even for his expenses, and his three visits to Harvard between 1896 and 1898 were rewarded by an honorary degree.
Nevertheless he was suspicious of international competition, especially the Olympic movement, fearing it would turn what was intended to be pleasure into too serious a business.
Talented but without driving ambition, Lehmann was during his last years handicapped by Parkinson's disease.
But his gift of friendship remained, reinforced by his marriage in 1898 to Alice Marie, daughter of Harrison Davis, of old New England Puritan stock.
Of their four children (one son and three daughters), three subsequently distinguished themselves — Beatrix as an actress, Rosamond as a novelist, and John as a man of letters.
Lehmann died 22 January 1929 at Fieldhead, the house he had built at Bourne End.
[John Lehmann,The Whispering Gallery , 1955, and Ancestors and Friends , 1962; personal knowledge.]
P J Waller
,Ralph Ward (1806–1880), founder of the port of West Hartlepool, county Durham, was born 7 June 1806 in Cleveland, the third in the family of eight sons and one daughter of William Ward Jackson of Normanby Hall, north Yorkshire, and his wife Susanna Louisa, daughter of E. Martin Atkins esquire of Kingston Lisle, Berkshire.
Educated at Rugby, Jackson served articles at Preston, Lancashire.
Living at Greatham Hall, Jackson practised as a solicitor in Stockton-on-Tees.
Commercial speculation rather than the law fired his imagination.
Exploitation of the Auckland coalfields entered a new era in 1825 with the Darlington–Stockton railway, soon extended closer to the sea at Middlesbrough, where a town arose with startling suddenness.
The promoters, led by the Pease family (Edward Pease and his sons Henry and Joseph, qq.v.), saw Middlesbrough ‘taking the lead of both Tyne and Wear’.
Their vision sparked rival ambitions in Jackson, subsequently dubbed ‘a bottomless man’ by Edward Pease (diary, 27 March 1857).
Jackson's counter-strategy emerged in the Stockton and Hartlepool Railway Company (1836) and Stockton and Durham County Bank (1838).
The bank was merely a device to raise capital for railway and port construction and was transferred to the National Provincial after Jackson obtained parliamentary authority to build the West Hartlepool harbour and dock in 1844.
Hartlepool then comprised 6,000 people, no longer a simple fishing village since dock facilities had recently brought it into the coal-export and timber-import trades; but Jackson's sights were set on the adjacent hamlet of Stranton, with a population of 350.
West Hartlepool grew there.
Two more docks were added in 1852 and 1856.
Jackson conceived that West Hartlepool would ‘ultimately become a port of Liverpool on the East Coast’.
He planned a trans-Pennine route to link the London and North Western Railway, and he promoted bills to eclipse the Pease interest in the north-east, where a struggle to control the movement of Cleveland ironstone intensified the original rivalry over coalfields.
Jackson's company became overextended financially, having invested in steamships and collieries as well as docks and railways.
Malpractice and recklessness there were, but it would be wrong to ascribe Jackson's errors to fraudulent intent for personal profit.
The agent of his downfall through protracted litigation, one Benjamin Coleman, was not motivated solely by shareholder's vigilance: he was embittered against Jackson's family and may even have been sponsored by rival railway interests, perhaps the North Eastern which subsequently absorbed Jackson's Hartlepool Company.
In 1861 the population of Stranton–West Hartlepool was 13,600.
Separated for local government purposes, the Hartlepools were united as one parliamentary constituency in 1868.
Jackson, widowed in 1865, became the first MP by a majority of three votes.
An election petition was initiated but withdrawn.
His zeal for West Hartlepool had roused antipathies, for he was apt to think that his personal preferences and the public good were synonymous.
An unedifying dispute with the incumbent of Christ church (a church built by his company) over control of local schools showed his uncompromising bent.
Jackson's family tradition in politics was Whig–Liberal; now he styled himself a Conservative ‘opposed to all rash and hasty innovations’.
He voted against church disestablishment in Ireland, also against the secret ballot, though for temperance reform.
In Parliament Jackson's principal interest was not party politics, rather the promotion of West Hartlepool.
He spoke only in the harbours of refuge debates, soliciting government money for docks improvements.
Jackson was not re-elected in 1874.
His commercial reputation was now in shade, but Jackson was hatching speculative schemes to the last.
He was never a utopian communitarian of the Owenite type.
His founding of a town was as the by-product of his business.
Nevertheless, community building increasingly occupied his time and money, and his lasting reputation is that of an urban pioneer, the first and foremost West Hartlepool patriot.
In 1829 Jackson married Susanna, daughter of Charles Swainson of Cooper Hill, Lancashire.
They had one son.
Jackson died 6 August 1880 in London and is buried in Kensal Green cemetery.
[Major R. Martin,Historical Notes and Personal Recollections of West Hartlepool and its Founder , 1924; Eric Waggott,Jackson's Town , 1980; Robert Wood,West Hartlepool: the Rise and Development of a Victorian New Town , 1969.]
Robert K G Temple
,John (c. 1599–1650), MP and regicide, was the eldest son of Edward Moore of Bank Hall, Walton, Lancashire, and his wife Katherine, daughter of John and Margaret Hockenhull (or Hocknell) of Prenton, Cheshire.
He had three brothers and four sisters.
His ancestors had been MPs for Liverpool on and off since 1307, and his father served in the Parliament of 1625, besides being sheriff of Lancashire in 1620.
Moore himself became justice of the peace by 1624, bailiff of Liverpool in 1630, and mayor in 1633.
In 1638 he was admitted to Lincoln's Inn, a late admission suggesting a serious interest in the law.
In 1633 he had married Mary, daughter of the future Royalist, Alexander Rigby of Burgh and Leighton, Lancashire (to be distinguished from his cousin, the parliamentary colonel and MP of that name, q.v.).
Moore was elected to the Long Parliament in 1640 as MP for Liverpool, sitting alongside his uncle, Major-General Ralph Assheton.
He made an immediate impression and by 4 December 1640 was on the first committee.
As an important Liverpool trader, he was on most of the parliamentary committees concerning trade, monopolies, and navigation.
He also kept extensive parliamentary diaries, of which six volumes survive, though his hand is nearly indecipherable.
With the approach of civil war, Moore pledged his support to Parliament, being named a deputy lieutenant of Lancashire on 24 March 1642 and taking part in July in the first military action of the war in Manchester, which was secured after a skirmish with Lord Strange.
Moore continued to serve the parliamentary cause in a variety of capacities.
In August 1642 he was Parliament's police officer, as colonel of guards in the capital.
In 1643 he was colonel of foot and captain of horse for Lancashire, as well as vice-admiral for Lancashire and Westmorland, and then in 1644 governor of Liverpool, which he was compelled to surrender to a superior Royalist force under Prince Rupert [q.v.], though he himself escaped.
He was reappointed in November when Parliament regained control.
In 1645, after a brief interval back on parliamentary committees, he was sent to Ireland with his regiment and named governor of county Louth and of Dundalk and a commissioner for Ireland.
He returned to England in January 1648, having had considerable military and political success, although his personal and regimental finances were in a desperate state.
He was now one of the most powerful men in England, and Pride's Purge increased his authority.
He was added to the committees of the army, for advance of money, and for settling courts of justice.
He seems to have resumed his job as colonel of the Guards, for he was given power to search anywhere.
On his own initiative, he began seizing enemies of the Rump Parliament as he saw fit.
He was named a commissioner to the high court of justice to try the king, attended its first meeting and most of its sittings, was present when the sentence was read out, and signed the king's death-warrant.
Thereafter he continued to be an influential committee-man until he returned to Ireland as a parliamentary commissioner in June 1649.
On 2 August he had a spectacular military victory at Baggotrath, calling it ‘the absolutest victory that ever was got in this kingdom and the least loss of our side’, and, after a short interval back in England, he was in command at the siege of Tecroghan Castle near Trim in May 1650.
The castle surrendered on 16 June, but by that date Moore had sickened and died, of either a pleurisy or a fever.
He died deeply in debt, with most of his arrears unpaid.
He left three sons and a daughter.
The eldest son, Edward, married Dorothy, daughter of the Royalist, Sir William Fenwick, and was created baronet in 1662.
Edward married secondly Mary Ben.
[M. J. Keeler,The Long Parliament, 1640–1641 , 1954; R. Greaves and R. Zaller (eds.),
A Biographical Dictionary of English Radicals of the Seventeenth Century , 3 vols., 1982–4; T. Heywood (ed.),
The Moore Rental , Chetham Society, 1847; J. Brownbill and K. Walker (eds.),
A Calendar of…
Papers of the Moore Family , 1913; British Library, Harleian MSS 541, 476–80 (Moore's Journals); private research.]
Jacob M Price
, Sir Ambrose (1658–1713), iron merchant and manufacturer, was born in Stourbridge, Worcestershire, 1 February 1658, the son of Ambrose Crowley (1635–1721) and his wife Mary Hall.
His Quaker father started out as an illiterate nailer at Stourbridge, but, through thrift and considerable business acumen, became a manufacturer of nails on the putting-out system, an ironmonger, and an owner of iron-refining works.
His interests extended to Taff Vale in south Wales where he was a part-owner of an ironworks with John Hanbury of Pontypool [q.v.], the inventor of the rolling process used in the manufacture of tinplate.
The younger Ambrose served an apprenticeship in London, where he settled and became a great wholesale ironmonger serving both the home and export markets.
Integrating backwards, he acquired three substantial manufacturing establishments in county Durham near Newcastle, including two slitting-mills, two forges, four steel furnaces, many warehouses, and innumerable smithies producing a very wide variety of ironmongery.
He supervised operations from a large warehouse at Greenwich on the Thames, whence he supplied the metropolitan market in particular.
Additional distribution warehouses were maintained in London, Blaydon-on-Tyne, Ware (Hertfordshire), Wolverhampton, Walsall, and Stourbridge.
The last was also used to buy bar iron for the Durham works, while Blaydon supplied other manufacturers in the north-east with semi-manufactured iron products, including steel and iron rods.
The firm prospered markedly during the wars of 1689–1713 when Crowley was a major supplier of ironware to the navy.
He was chosen member of the London common council (1697–1711), alderman for Dowgate ward (1711–13), and sheriff (1706–7), the office that brought him his knighthood on 1 January 1707.
In addition, he was master of the Drapers' Company (1708–9), and active in the new South Sea Company as director (1711–13) and deputy governor (1712–13).
As a Tory, he was elected MP for Andover shortly before his death.
Breaking with his father's strong Quaker commitments, Crowley had become an Anglican by the time of his marriage in March 1682 to Mary, daughter of Charles Owen, a Londoner from a Shropshire gentry family.
They had one son and five daughters.
Crowley died 7 October 1713 and was buried at Mitcham, Surrey.
The firm was continued by his only son John (1689–1728) and by his grandsons and lasted well into Victoria's reign, prospering from all the wars of the century following Sir Ambrose Crowley's death.
[M. W. Flinn,Men of Iron: the Crowleys in the Early Iron Industry , 1962.]
Philippa Glanville
,Paul Jacques (1688–1751), goldsmith, was born 9 April 1688 in ‘s Hertogenbosch, Holland, the only child of Paul Souchay de la Merie and his wife Constance le Roux.
His father, an officer in William III's army, moved to London in 1689 and Paul was apprenticed to his fellow Huguenot, the goldsmith Pierre Platel, in August 1703.
In February 1713 De Lamerie set up his own workshop in Windmill Street, where he rapidly established his prominence as both manufacturer and retailer.
Early customers included Sir William Trumbull, Baron Foley [qq.v.], and the jewel house of George I.
Between 1723 and 1728 De Lamerie was in partnership with Ellis Gamble, the latter apparently running the retail side of the business.
Gamble had been the master of William Hogarth [q.v.], who trained as an engraver on silver, before turning to copperplate engraving and painting.
This newly discovered Gamble–De Lamerie partnership reinforces the long-held attribution to Hogarth of the engraving on the famous Exchequer seal salver made for Sir Robert Walpole.
In 1738 De Lamerie moved to Gerrard Street and served as captain and later major in the Westminster volunteer association.
In 1737–8 he served on a committee of the Goldsmiths’ Company, promoting the Plate Offences Act, and moved up through the hierarchy of the court, only failing to serve as prime warden.
He supplied a magnificent ewer and rosewater basin to the company's order in 1741, richly chased with rococo ornament.
Characteristically, he charged considerably more than had been agreed for the work; the ewer and basin weighed 570 ounces, substantially more than the requested maximum.
He was always ready to flout the company's regulations, failing to register two alternative versions of his new sterling (Britannia) mark, and was criticized by the company for failing to submit plate for assay and hallmarking in 1717.
He evaded the duty payable from 1719 on newly wrought plate by inserting already hallmarked discs into newly made wares.
His wares made up the largest individual parcel in a massive consignment of plate exported to the Tsarina Anna in 1726, much of which again had paid no duty.
Since no ledgers survive, the size of his business and the names of his suppliers can only be suggested.
His was for thirty-five years the pre-eminent retail business at the upper end of the market, supplying tableware and massive buffet plate to the jewel house and the Russian court (Tsarinas Anna and Catherine, and Count Brobinski).
His long-standing clients included Sir Robert Walpole, the Earl of Ilchester, the Earl of Thanet, Viscount Tyrconnel, the Duke of Bedford [q.v.],
Baron Anson [q.v.], and a cross-section of the English nobility and gentry.
The diversity and volume of silver bearing his mark is far greater than can have emerged from a single workshop and it has been generally acknowledged, after a century dominated by the concept of the maker's mark, that De Lamerie, in common with many other goldsmiths registering marks at Goldsmiths' Hall, not only fulfilled orders with other goldsmiths' wares but also subcontracted orders to a range of London workshops, although striking the finished wares with his own punch.
His choice of modellers, chasers, and other specialists was the key to his commercial success.
His marks appear overstruck by that of Paul Crespin on ambassadorial plate issued to the Earl of Chesterfield [q.v.]in 1727; although George Wickes [q.v.]supplied the Bath presentation cup to Frederick Louis, Prince of Wales [q.v.], in 1739, it has much in common with a contemporary series of cups with De Lamerie's mark.
For twenty years De Lamerie's silver shows a strong dependence on French Régence designs, and techniques such as heavy formal cast and applied ornament, but from the late 1720s his work demonstrates asymmetry, with rich figurative chasing and a revival of the auricular and massive motifs of a century earlier.
The distinctive style of the modeller James Shruder, who was in his employment in 1751 and sorted out his estate, can be recognized in De Lamerie's output from the 1730s, as can that of Charles Frederick Kandler I.
His silver is dispersed across the world.
A pair of chandeliers hang in the Kremlin Armoury, Moscow, and there is a massive fountain and cistern in St Petersburg.
A large, recently formed collection is in the Los Angeles County Museum.
In Great Britain important silver bearing his mark may be seen at the Victoria and Albert Museum, the Ashmolean Museum, and the Mansion House.
On 11 February 1717 De Lamerie married Louisa Juliott.
They had two sons and four daughters.
De Lamerie died in London 1 August 1751 and was buried at St Anne's, Soho.
Obituaries stressed his standing as master silversmith, ‘very instrumental in bringing that Branch of Trade to the Perfection it is now in’.
[P. A. S. Phillips,Paul de Lamerie, Citizen and Goldsmith of London: a Study of his Life and Work , 1953; Susan Hare, ‘Paul de Lamerie 1688–1751’, in catalogue to exhibition ‘Paul de Lamerie’ at Goldsmiths' Hall, May 1990.]
Nigel Ramsay
(fl. 1260–1278), cartographic patron, is known for certain only as the author or at least the patron of the late thirteenth-century world map preserved in Hereford Cathedral.
This bears an inscription in its lower left corner requesting prayers for Richard de Haldingham o (or)de Lafford who made and drew (fet e compasse ) this history (cest estorie ).
Haldingham (later Holdingham) is a hamlet in the parish of Lafford (later Sleaford), Lincolnshire, and Richard is described as of either place in order to make his identity clear to people unacquainted with Haldingham.
Lafford is a prebend of Lincoln Cathedral, and Richard has been assumed to be also identifiable as Richard de Bello (of Battle, probably Battle in Sussex) who was prebendary of Lafford in 1277 and who was also treasurer of Lincoln Cathedral by October 1270, until at least April 1278.
He is first found as a canon of Lincoln in 1265; he died 4 November, perhaps in 1278.
The map gives some prominence to Lincoln and also names Lindsey (meaning either the later Lindsey or possibly the county of Lincoln), and the map's patron must have been just such a well-educated man with Lincolnshire connections as Richard de Bello, who was an MA.
A link with the Augustinian priory of Kirkham (Yorkshire) is also suggested by the presence on the map of this religious house alone.
Although the map has very possibly been at Hereford since the later middle ages, and certainly since 1682, Hereford has an inconspicuous place on it and then in the abbreviated form H'ford .
There is no reason to associate Hereford with the prebendary of Lafford, the map's putative patron.
One Richard de Bello was canon of Hereford from 1305 until he died in 1326, as well as being canon of Salisbury from 1298, but he cannot be identified with his namesake, the canon of Lincoln.
That the Hereford canon gave the map to Hereford remains a mere hypothesis; his ecclesiastical career was linked rather with the diocese of Salisbury, while the city of Salisbury is not included on the map.
World maps were not uncommon room furnishings in royal palaces and ecclesiastical institutions in the middle ages; one is listed in the mid-twelfth-century catalogue of the library of Lincoln Cathedral.
Their ultimate source is maps from Roman imperial times, but in the eleventh and twelfth centuries they received such modifications as the placing of Jerusalem in the centre, as on the Hereford map.
The Hereford map is datable on stylistic and palaeographic grounds to about the very late thirteenth century.
It includes Conwy and Caernarfon, whose castles were only begun in 1283 and not finished until 1292, and it has therefore been suggested that it was made over a period of years.
It does not have this appearance, however, and it may simply be a copy that updates but generally reproduces one that was written in about the 1270s by or for Richard of Haldingham.
[A. B. Emden,Biographical Register of the University of Oxford , vol. i, 1957; N. Denholm-Young,Collected Papers , 1969, pp. 74–82; W. N. Yates, ‘The Authorship of the Hereford Mappa Mundi and the Career of Richard de Bello’,Transactions of the Woolhope Naturalists' Field Club, Herefordshire , vol. xli, pt. 2, 1974; J. Le Neve,Fasti Ecclesiae Anglicanae , 1066–1300 , vol. iii,Lincoln , compiled by D. E. Greenway, 1977, pp. 20, 73; N. J. Morgan,Early Gothic Manuscripts , vol. ii,1250–1285 , 1988, pp. 195–200.]
Bernard Capp
,Edward (1565–1613), astrologer, of Stainford, Yorkshire, was born 14 April 1565.
He was probably connected to the London commercial and financial dynasty, perhaps through Sir Richard Gresham [q.v.], who had acquired extensive monastic properties in Yorkshire at the dissolution.
Gresham (or a namesake) matriculated at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1584, proceeding MA in 1606.
He divided his time between Stainford and London, where he lived next to Dyers' Hall at Thames Street.
Gresham held advanced ideas in astronomy.
During the plague of 1603 rumours were fathered on him and John Dee [q.v.]to the effect that its future course depended on the imminent fall of a planet to earth.
To dispel such idle notions he compiled a scholarly treatise on the planets, ‘Astrostereon’, in which he championed the Copernican system and denied the existence of solid planetary spheres, arguing that the heavenly bodies moved freely in space.
For several years, 1603–7, he published astrological almanacs.
The edition for 1605, no longer extant, was said to have foretold the Gunpowder Plot so accurately that it brought him under suspicion of complicity.
Gresham himself, however, placed little reliance on ‘vulgar astrologie’, and was one of the earliest English champions of a reformed astrological science.
A capable mathematician and astronomer, he compiled detailed planetary tables for astrological use.
To refute charges of atheism he cited two religious treatises he had written, ‘Sabbath-dayes exercises’ and ‘Positions in Divinitie’(apparently unpublished and now lost).
He also practised medicine and magic, and the latter brought him an unsavoury reputation.
In his last years, Gresham's fame as a magician drew him into the sordid court intrigues surrounding the divorce of Robert Devereux, third Earl of Essex [q.v.].
The Countess of Essex had employed the magician, Simon Forman [q.v.], to secure the love of Robert Carr (later Earl of Somerset, q.v.), the king's favourite, and to rid her of an unwanted husband.
On Forman's death in 1611 she approached Gresham through her confidante Anne Turner [q.v.], and he employed his skill in efforts to render the earl impotent and to win the queen's goodwill.
Essex's alleged impotence was the central issue facing the royal commission set up in 1613, which duly ruled the marriage unconsummated and granted a divorce, freeing the countess to marry Carr.
It seems that Gresham also employed his magical arts against Sir Thomas Overbury [q.v.], an open critic of the proposed marriage, whom the countess was determined to remove.
Richard Weston, an associate of Gresham's, was certainly involved in the plot against Overbury, and was later hanged for his part in the murder.
Gresham himself did not live to see the outcome of any of these nefarious schemes.
He died in London 13 January 1613, and was buried the next day at All Saints the Less.
Shortly before his death he had conveyed his magical paraphernalia (lead and wax images, crosses and charms) to Richard Weston, directing them to be buried secretly.
He left only a daughter, Jane, a lunatic.
A near-contemporary judged that ‘without all question he was a very skilfull man in the Mathematicks, and in his latter time in Witchcraft.’
He was fortunate in dying before the Overbury scandal became public.
A maidservant, less lucky, is said to have been hanged subsequently as a witch.
[‘Astrostereon’, Bodleian Library, MS Ashmole 242;(M. Sparke),The Narrative History of King James , 1652; B. S. Capp,Astrology and the Popular Press , 1979.]
D A Carpenter
(c. 1170–1217), sea captain, pirate, and hero of a thirteenth-century romance biography, was the son of Baudoin Busket, a lord of the county of Boulogne.
According to his biography, Eustace studied black magic in Toledo, returned home to become a monk at the abbey of Saint Samer near Calais, and then left the monastery to avenge the murder of his father.
Other evidence suggests that his father died soon after 1190 and proves that by the early 1200s Eustace was the seneschal of the count of Boulogne, Renaud de Dammartin.
Around 1204, however, the two quarrelled and Eustace became a fugitive: it is with his adventures in the next year or so that the biography, composed between 1223 and 1284 by an unknown poet from Picardy, is principally concerned.
Hiding out in the forest, Eustace duped and humiliated Renaud in a series of daring escapades, appearing before him in numerous disguises, ambushing him and his men, and time and again making off with his horses.
These adventures have obvious links both with the romance Fouke le Fitz Waryn and the tales of Robin Hood.
From 1205 onwards the main outlines of Eustace's career can be followed in the records of the English government as well as in the biography.
He established himself in the Channel Islands and from there preyed upon the shipping in the Channel.
Much of this was piracy on his own account, but from 1205 until 1212 Eustace was also employed intermittently by King John, whose conflict with King Philip of France was reaching its climax.
Indeed, the biography asserts that when Eustace first offered his services to John (probably in 1205), he was given command of thirty ships.
A decisive change of allegiance, however, took place in 1212, when Renaud Dammartin became John's ally and turned the king against Eustace, who consequently entered the service of King Philip.
In 1216 it was Eustace who commanded the fleet which ferried Philip's son, Louis, across to England when the latter mounted his bid for the English throne.
In August of the following year he commanded another fleet bringing Louis much needed reinforcements.
This was met off Sandwich on 24 August 1217 by an English force under Hubert de Burgh [q.v.].
Eustace's flagship was surrounded and captured.
Eustace himself offered huge sums for his life but, hated as he was by the men of the Cinque Ports, he was beheaded at once by an old enemy, Stephen of Winchelsea, an incident depicted in a graphic drawing by Matthew Paris [q.v.].
Under the peace of Kingston/Lambeth, in the following month, Louis promised to ensure that Eustace's brothers vacated the Channel Islands.
Eustace had played a significant part in the struggle between Angevin and Capetian royal houses, but, as with the case of his contemporary, Fulk Fitzwarine [q.v.], it was his exploits as a fugitive on the run from authority which really appealed to his biographer.
[D. J. Conlon,Li Romans de Witasse le Moine , University of North Carolina, Studies in Romance Languages and Literature, no. 126, 1972; J. C. Holt,Robin Hood , 1982.]
Margaret Pelling
,Timothy Richards (1841–1886), pathologist and parasitologist, was born 31 October 1841 in Llanboidy, Carmarthenshire, the eldest of eight children of William Lewis and his wife Britannia Richards.
Both parents came of established farming families, and Lewis's early years were spent at Crinow farm, Narberth.
He left the grammar school in Narberth at fifteen to become apprenticed to a Narberth druggist.
Four years later he was in London, first with a Mr Porter, an ‘operative chemist’ of Streatham, and next at the German Hospital in Dalston as an apothecary.
As well as acquiring skills in chemistry and the German language, Lewis attended lectures at University College London and was awarded the Fellowes medal in 1866.
His formal medical qualifications (MB, 1867) were, however, gained from the University of Aberdeen.
In February 1868 Lewis came first in the London examination for entry to the Army Medical School in Netley, and did equally well in the course.
He was commissioned assistant surgeon 31 March 1868, surgeon 1 March 1873, and surgeon-major 31 March 1880.
Lewis's career was decisively influenced by his being chosen in 1868 to study current theories of cholera causation, first in Germany and then in India.
His colleague on this officially sponsored mission was Douglas Cunningham, of the Indian Medical Service, with whom Lewis was to collaborate for most of his career.
While in Munich Lewis made another lifelong contact, with the epidemiologist Max von Pettenkofer.
Lewis and Cunningham reached Calcutta in January 1869, and Lewis worked in India, with one interval, until 1883.
In 1879 Lewis spent several months visiting European laboratories.
His pathological researches and field studies appeared regularly in the form of official reports presented by Dr J. M. Cuningham, then sanitary commissioner with the government of India, and were concerned with such subjects as cholera, leprosy, ‘oriental sore’, enteric fever, relapsing fever, and prison dietaries.
Lewis's pre-eminence as a microscopist led to his discovery, in 1869, in human urine, of one stage of the filaria parasite, later known as Wuchereria bancrofti .
Pursuing this finding, Lewis published in 1872 the first observation of nematode haematozoa in human blood, and coined the term Filaria sanguinis hominis .
In 1877 he observed the adult male and female forms.
In 1870 he gave the first authentic account of amoebae from the human intestine.
Lewis returned to England in March 1883 as assistant professor of pathology at the Army Medical School in Netley, where he introduced practical instruction in modern methods of bacteriological enquiry.
From 1884 to his death Lewis was involved in critically evaluating Robert Koch's bacteriological explanation of cholera.
On 8 October 1879 Lewis married Emily Brown of Lewisham.
There do not appear to have been any children (none are mentioned in his will).
Lewis died 7 May 1886 at his home in Woolston, near Southampton, from pneumonia, possibly aggravated by septicaemia.
He gained only minimal official recognition for his work; death prevented his election to the Royal Society.
His name is associated with the first description (published 1878) of a mammalian trypanosome (T. lewisi ).
[British Medical Journal , vol. i, 1886;Lancet , vols. i and ii, 1886; W. Aitken et al .
(eds.),
In Memoriam.
Physiological and Pathological Researches (T. R. Lewis), 1888; C. Dobell in Parasitology , vol. xiv, 1922, pp. 413–16; M. E. M. Walker,Pioneers of Public Health , 1930; L. T. Morton,A Medical Bibliography (Garrison and Morton ), 4th edn., 1983.]
Peter Leach
,Edward (1790–1870), architect, was baptized 20 September 1790 at St Chad's church, Shrewsbury, the second of the three sons of John Hiram Haycock, architect and builder of Shrewsbury, and his wife Elizabeth, daughter of William Trevitt of Newport.
He became a pupil of (Sir) Jeffry Wyatville [q.v.], studied at the Royal Academy Schools, and exhibited student's work at the Royal Academy from 1808 to 1810.
Returning to Shrewsbury to join his father in the family business, he exhibited at the Liverpool Academy from 1812 to 1814 and in the latter year became involved in an ambitious public project in the town, the erection of a monumental column in honour of the first Viscount Hill [q.v.].
A competition was held, in which Haycock won the second premium; and it was then decided to adopt his design but to put it ‘into the hands’ of Thomas Harrison of Chester [q.v.], who made certain minor modifications to it.
Thereafter it appears that Haycock himself rather than his father was the main architect member of the firm, although, in partnership with his brother Robert, he continued to engage in building as well as architecture until c .1845, after which he practised as an architect only.
From 1834 to 1866 he was also county surveyor for Shropshire, a post previously held by John Hiram Haycock from 1824 until his death in 1830.
He was a moderately prolific architect with an extensive practice in Shropshire, the Welsh Marches, and south Wales, his output encompassing further public buildings, numerous churches, and country houses.
The churches are in a conventional lancet Gothic style of no particular quality, but in his major country-house commissions, notably Clytha Court, Monmouthshire (c .1830), and Millichope Park, Shropshire (1835–40), he confirmed his promise as a neo-classical designer of considerable merit.
Haycock also played an active part in the political life of Shrewsbury, sitting on the council for thirty-four years, rising to become an alderman, and serving as mayor in 1842.
In 1827 he married Mary, daughter of Robert Hinckesman of London, merchant; they had three sons and four daughters.
The eldest son Edward Haycock junior continued his practice after his death, which occurred 21 December 1870.
[H. M. Colvin,A Biographical Dictionary of British Architects 1600–1840 , 1978; J. L. Hobbs, ‘The Haycocks’,Shropshire Magazine , February 1960.]
Sheridan Morley
,Charles (1899–1962), actor and film star, was born 1 July 1899 at the Victoria Hotel, Scarborough, the eldest of three sons (there were no daughters) of Robert Laughton, a prosperous hotelier, and his wife Elizabeth Conlon.
Laughton spent a childhood largely tormented by a glandular problem which made him constantly overweight and therefore unpopular at school and indeed at home, where his early determination to become an actor met severe parental opposition.
Brought up as a Catholic, he was educated at Stonyhurst, where even one of his few school friends described him as ‘the ungainliest of boys with a huge head’.
Laughton was sent, against his wishes, to study the hotel trade at Claridge's in London before being called up at the end of World War I; he was rapidly invalided out of the army after being gassed on the western front in 1918.
Returning to his parents in Scarborough, he continued to train in hotel management until in 1925 he at last defied the family and enrolled as a drama student at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art in London, where two years later he won the gold medal and was immediately given his start in the professional theatre by one of his teachers, the Russian director Theodore Komisarjevsky [q.v.].
His earliest stage roles at Barnes and the Everyman in Hampstead in 1926 were in classic Russian plays but in 1928, at the Little Theatre in London, he first made his name in the type of role which was to become his hallmark: that of the neurotic, greedy, sinister villain in A Man with Red Hair by Hugh Walpole [q.v.].
From there Laughton progressed to two more familiar roles, Poirot and Pickwick, before scoring another big success as the Chicago gangster loosely modelled on Al Capone in On the Spot (1930) by Edgar Wallace [q.v.].
He then made his New York début in 1931 as the squalid murderer in Payment Deferred , before accepting a Hollywood offer which took him to California for The Old Dark House (1932) and his first Nero in The Sign of the Cross (1932).
It was back in England for (Sir) Alexander Korda [q.v.]in 1933 that Laughton made his screen name in The Private Life of Henry VIII at the start of a sequence of major cinema biographies (The Barretts of Wimpole Street (1934),Mutiny on the Bounty (1935),Rembrandt (1936), and the unfinished I Claudius (1936)), which were to see him at the very peak of his reflective, anguished talent for larger-than-life monsters of reality.
In 1933 he joined the Old Vic Company for an impressive range of stage work (Henry VIII again,The Cherry Orchard ,Macbeth ,Measure for Measure ,The Tempest ) and in 1936 he was the first English actor ever to be invited to appear at the Comédie Française in Paris, where he played Molière's Le Médecin Malgré Lui .
He then settled in California, where despite occasional returns to the theatre (notably in the first production of Bertolt Brecht's The Life of Galileo in 1947, which he also adapted) he focused mainly on such films as Jamaica Inn (1939),The Hunchback of Notre Dame (1939),Witness for the Prosecution (1957),Spartacus (1960), and Advise and Consent (1962), returning only rarely to Britain and only notably for David Lean's Hobson's Choice in 1954.
But then, as if aware that his time was running out and that his film career was waning, he returned to Britain in 1959 for one last remarkable Stratford season in which he played both King Lear and Bottom in A Midsummer Night's Dream : his last London appearance was in The Party (1958).
In 1929 he married the actress Elsa Lanchester, daughter of James Sullivan, an Irish worker in a black-lead factory, and Edith Lanchester, a Cambridge graduate and active speaker and member of the Social Democratic Federation.
They had no children.
Throughout his long marriage his homosexuality caused him great unhappiness, and if there was any one key to Laughton's greatness as an actor then it was surely his sense of being a misfit, uneasy in his own skin and forever on the outside of the social, sexual, and familial demands of his upbringing and conditioning.
An American citizen from 1950, Laughton died in Hollywood 15 December 1962.
[The Times , 17 December 1962; Simon Callow,Charles Laughton: a Difficult Actor , 1988; Charles Higham,Charles Laughton, an Intimate Biography , 1976; Kurt D. Singer,The Charles Laughton Story , 1954; Elsa Lanchester,Charles Laughton and I , 1938; personal knowledge.]
Virginia Surtees
,Elizabeth Eleanor (1829–1862), painter, was born at 7 Charles Street, Hatton Gardens, Holborn, 25 July 1829, the third of eight children of Charles Siddall, ironmonger, and his wife Elizabeth Eleanor Evans.
Of respectable working-class background with some pretentions to gentility, without formal education, she nevertheless possessed an instinctive refinement of manner.
Her deportment, said to be ‘like a queen’, was perhaps formed by her work at the dressmaking and millinery shop, Cranborne Alley, Leicester Square, to which she journeyed from Southwark, where her family was living.
In 1850 she was noticed by the artist Walter Deverell, who asked her to sit for him and a group of young friends who were beginning to distinguish themselves as the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood.
To this she agreed and sat for Deverell, William Holman Hunt [q.v.], and for (Sir) John Everett Millais [q.v.]as the drowned Ophelia.
Within a short time she was sitting only for Dante Gabriel Rossetti [q.v.].
Her features are apparent in nearly all Rossetti's work until her death.
By brush and pencil he conveyed in his innumerable studies of this quite ordinary girl, the fragility of an idealized beauty, and the paths of ill health, for in an enfeebled frame she seemed to carry the seeds of consumption.
Heavy lids drooping over agate-coloured eyes, wings of copper-red hair framing a face singular in its remoteness, languor informing every portrayal, whether sleeping, reading, rarely standing, always passive.
In these representations ‘stamped with immortality’, she seemed to Ford Madox Brown [q.v.]‘thinner & more deathlike & more beautiful & more ragged than ever’.
‘Guggum’ or ‘the Sid’were her pet names; the final ‘l’in her surname was discarded to please Rossetti.
He fostered her slight talent for drawing, largely derivative from his own work, and saw genius in her strangely haunting imagery.
Some of her designs were included in the 1857 Pre-Raphaelite exhibition in Russell Square.
To improve, she attended an art class in Sheffield for a short time.
John Ruskin [q.v.]praised her water-colours and wished to settle money on her in exchange for any work her health permitted.
Two of her water-colours are owned by the Tate Gallery.
She wrote verse of a disillusioned and morbid character, echoing her own sense of neglect, for the passionate love of the early years had turned to disenchantment.
With sadly impaired health and frustrated by Rossetti's reluctance to commit himself to marriage, and his too apt inclination to infidelity, she resorted to ever-increasing doses of laudanum.
On 23 May 1860 she married Rossetti at St Clement's church, Hastings; a year later a child was stillborn.
Elizabeth Siddal took her own life 11 February 1862 with an overdose of laudanum, in their rooms at 14 Chatham Place, Blackfriars.
She was buried with other members of the Rossetti family in Highgate cemetery, where in October 1869 her coffin was opened by her husband's wish and a book of his poems, laid beside her at death, was removed.
These he published in Poems , 1870.
[Jan Marsh,The Legend of Elizabeth Siddal , 1989.]
Joan Counihan
,Ella Sophia (1841–1931), historian, archaeologist, and author, was born in Liverpool 3 March 1841, the second daughter in the family of four sons and ten daughters of Samuel Marshall Bulley, cotton broker, JP, of Liverpool and his wife Mary, only daughter of the Revd Thomas Raffles, first cousin to Sir T. Stamford Raffles [q.v.].
Educated at home, she in turn taught her younger brothers and sisters, which irked her as it prevented her from pursuing her own studies.
In early girlhood she vowed to overcome ‘the accursed thraldom of womanhood’ and cultivate her mind and abilities to the utmost.
She wrote this in code in her 1856 diary, the only one to survive her death.
This she did to good effect because she came to know French, German, Italian, and Latin well and to read Spanish, Norwegian, Danish, Welsh, and Early English.
In October 1871 she became one of the first five students at Newnham College, Cambridge, founded by Henry Sidgwick [q.v.]with Anne Clough [q.v.], a Bulley family friend, in charge.
Ella was their first research student.
In 1877–9 she taught history at the embryo women's department at Owens College (later Manchester University).
In 1887 she became the first and only woman on the school board at Rotherham.
In 1890 she was elected to the school board at Bradford and the West Riding education committee.
In 1894 she was appointed assistant commissioner to the royal commission on secondary education under James (later Viscount) Bryce [q.v.]to investigate girls' education in Devon.
She was a gifted pianist and musician, wrote several hymns, and spoke frequently for the London Missionary Society throughout the country.
But her abiding passions were medieval history and archaeology which she continued to study all her life.
When, in 1884, G. T. Clark [q.v.]published his Mediaeval Military Architecture in England , she realized that it contained false assumptions about the origins of the various mounds or mottes scattered over the British Isles.
Clark held that many were of Anglo-Saxon origin.
Together with J. H. Round [q.v.],
George Neilson in Scotland [q.v.], and Goddard Orpen in Ireland, she was to prove in a stream of articles and books that motte and bailey castles did not appear in these isles until after the Norman invasion.
An important paper was read for her in 1900 to the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland by her cousin, Gerard Baldwin Brown [q.v.], and thereafter controversial articles in learned journals culminated in 1912 in the publication by John Murray of The Early Norman Castles of the British Isles , which is still considered a seminal work on the subject.
She also contributed the section on earthworks in the Victoria History of the County of York in 1912.
In 1919 she received an honorary MA from Manchester University for her work in archaeology.
Described in her student days as tall and stately with magnificent hair worn in a plaited coronet, she was serious and slightly forbidding to some, but to family and friends was full of fun, having a deep chuckle when amused.
She was sharp and witty in her writings and observations.
In 1874 she married the Revd Elkanah Armitage, Nonconformist minister, also one of fourteen children, son of William Armitage, JP, of the manufacturing firm of Armitage & Rigby.
They had one son and one daughter.
She died 20 March 1931 at her daughter's home in Middlesbrough just after her ninetieth birthday, with her mental faculties unimpaired to the last.
[Family diaries and information; Joan Counihan, ‘Mrs Ella Armitage, John Horace Round, G. T. Clark and Early Norman Castles’,Anglo-Norman Studies VIII , 1985.]
Roger Taylor
,George Washington (1823–1893), artist and photographer, was born 7 February 1823 at Alvah, Brownside, in Scotland, the second son of the eleven children (four daughters and seven sons) of George Wilson, a crofter from Banff, and his second wife Elspet Wilson.
His father had fought in the Napoleonic wars, and his first wife and three children had been drowned in the Bay of Biscay.
Wilson was educated in the local parish school.
At the age of twelve he was apprenticed to a carpenter and house builder.
During this time he developed an interest in art, to such an extent that he gave up the security of work in 1846.
He moved to Edinburgh, and studied to become an artist.
Following a visit to London and Paris in 1849 he returned to Aberdeen to establish himself as a portrait miniaturist.
It cannot have been easy, as at this time photography was beginning to have a profound impact upon this branch of the arts, being more fashionable, cheaper, and offering the promise of greater veracity.
His first entry into photography was in a brief partnership with John Hay.
Together they established a portrait studio in Aberdeen, offering photography as an alternative to painting.
In the year they began, 1853, Queen Victoria laid the foundation stone of her new highland home, Balmoral.
Both she and Prince Albert believed wholeheartedly in the value of photography and through their patronage encouraged its early popularity.
They commissioned Wilson and Hay to record the building progress at Balmoral.
This began a long association between the royal family and Wilson, who undertook several commissions.
Wilson's photographs were used to illustrate Queen Victoria's Leaves from the Journal of our Life in the Highlands (1868).
He was granted a royal warrant in 1873.
Wilson's skill as a photographer and businessman lay in his understanding of the potential of the medium; he provided an ever increasing number of tourists with photographic souvenirs of their travels.
Initially he concentrated on Scotland, where the impact of railways had effectively opened the country for the first time to a large number of visitors.
His combination of aesthetic judgement and technical virtuosity led to his celebrated views of the Loch of Park, 1859.
These were the first photographs successfully to render sky and foreground in a single exposure.
Capturing motion in a photograph was a goal for many photographers.
Wilson's views of Prince's Street, Edinburgh, revealed to an enchanted audience, pedestrians and traffic stilled by his camera.
Critical acclaim at the 1862 international exhibition, and reviews in the leading art and photographic journals, encouraged sales of his photographs throughout Britain.
His was a household name when the craze for stereoscopic views was fashionable.
In 1864 he sold over half a million prints.
During 1876 he built new premises on the outskirts of Aberdeen, to cope with the increased demand.
Here were 45,000 negatives on file, a large staff, and an annual output of several million prints.
These were the first premises in Britain to mass-produce photographs, using a factory system.
Wilson and Isabella Johnstone had an illegitimate son in 1842.
She refused to marry him, and he brought the child up.
In 1849 he married Maria Cassie, daughter of an innkeeper in Banff.
They had five sons and four daughters.
Wilson died 9 March 1893 in Aberdeen.
[Roger Taylor,George Washington Wilson, Artist and Photographer 1823–93 , 1981.]
Trevor I Williams
,Henry John Horstman (1854–1929), chemist, was born 18 February 1854 in Ealing, the son of John Fenton, gentleman.
He was educated at Magdalen College School, Oxford, and then entered King's College, London, to study chemistry under C. L. Bloxam.
In 1875 he was awarded an exhibition in physical science newly created by the Clothworkers' Company; in the following year he was awarded an entrance scholarship at Christ's College, Cambridge.
He took the natural sciences tripos in 1877 with first-class honours, and was appointed an assistant demonstrator.
Shortly afterwards the university demonstrator in chemistry, J. W. Hicks, retired and W. J. Sell was appointed to succeed him.
At the same time the university created a second demonstratorship to which Fenton was appointed.
In 1904 both were given the title and status of university lecturers.
Until Sell's death in 1915 they were jointly responsible for teaching in the university chemical laboratory, at first located on the east side of the site of the former Botanic Garden and after 1887 in a new building in Pembroke Street.
Their responsibilities increased as the old college laboratories began to close.
Although Fenton was active in research he made no great discoveries.
He is remembered, however, in the context of Fenton's reagent — hydrogen peroxide containing a trace of ferrous salt, used to convert α-hydroxy acids to α-keto acids.
But it is as a superb teacher, over some forty years, that Fenton owes his prominence.
He took immense trouble in preparing his lectures and the experimental demonstrations that accompanied them.
His striking appearance — dark complexion, black hair, and athletic figure — compelled attention and his air of languid weariness when lecturing was no more than a pose, concealing an exceptionally acute mind.
Characteristically, he avoided dogmatism and presented his subject as one open to debate.
His mordant humour appealed to students, and it was by no means unusual for him to continue a lecture for half an hour in informal discussion with them.
He paid equal attention to devising his courses of laboratory work, to which his Notes on Qualitative Analysis (1883) was a valuable accompaniment.
Although outspoken about others, Fenton was naturally shy and very sensitive to criticism of himself.
He could be uncompromising in his opinions, persisting in his views even when in a minority of one.
This trait sometimes created difficulties when he served on university bodies.
At the same time he could be gentle with students; a thoughtless question would be sympathetically answered.
Fenton was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1899, serving on its council in 1913–16, and he became an honorary fellow of Christ's College in 1911.
In 1892 he married Edith Isabelle, daughter of George Ferguson, gentleman, of Richmond; they had no children.
At seventy he retired to Hove, but his last years were greatly clouded by illness.
He died 13 January 1929 in a London nursing home.
[Obituary in Nature , vol. cxxiii, 1929, p. 248; W. H. Mills, ‘H. J. H. Fenton (1854–1929): a Great Teacher’,Endeavour , vol. xiii, 1954, p. 205.]
Bernard Capp
,John (1615–1662), antinomian and Fifth Monarchist preacher, was baptized 25 March 1615, the son of Fabian Simpson, gentleman, of St Dunstan in the East, London.
He matriculated at Exeter College, Oxford, in 1631, proceeding MA in 1638.
From 1642 he held lectureships at St Dunstan's and St Botolph's Aldgate, and soon became notorious as one of the leading antinomian preachers in the city.
In October 1643 the Commons took away his lectureship at Aldgate and banned him from preaching.
The ban was not lifted till October 1646, but Simpson ignored it.
Parliament ordered his arrest in February 1644 after he clashed at Paul's Cross with the Presbyterian Cornelius Burges [q.v.], and he was soon in trouble again for preaching, allegedly, that Christ was to be found even ‘in hogs, and dogs, or sheep’.
In 1647 Simpson became pastor of the gathered congregation at Allhallows the Great, founded by the antinomian Walter Cradock [q.v.].
Invited to preach to the Commons in March 1651, at the suggestion of Major-General Thomas Harrison [q.v.], he used the occasion to champion lay preaching by soldiers, when inspired by the spirit, and to damn the professional clergy and human learning.
His sermon produced uproar in the House.
In 1653 he visited some thirty gathered churches on a preaching tour of Essex and East Anglia, in the company of his friend Henry Jessey [q.v.].
He did not, however, withdraw from the public ministry.
He remained a frequent lecturer in the parish church of Allhallows, and in March 1652 he was appointed to the sequestered rectory of St Botolph's Bishopsgate.
When Charles II and the Scots invaded England in 1651 the gathered churches raised forces to fight under Harrison against them.
Simpson served as a major in this campaign, which culminated in the victory at Worcester.
But by then he had already come to doubt whether Parliament shared the commitment he felt, with Harrison, to the kingdom of Christ on earth.
In December 1651 he joined Christopher Feake [q.v.]in calling a meeting at Allhallows to rally support for the millenarian cause.
It was here that the Fifth Monarchist movement was born, with Allhallows its centre and Feake and Simpson its first leaders.
Unlike many radicals, Simpson placed no trust in Oliver Cromwell as the instrument of God.
He reported visions in which God had revealed to him Cromwell's lust for power and his impending ruin.
When Cromwell became Protector in December 1653 Simpson and Feake attacked him ferociously at Allhallows.
They were arrested in January 1654 and held in Windsor Castle.
At first they continued to rail against the regime, but Simpson's ardour had cooled enough by July for the council to order his release, on condition that he did not come within ten miles of London.
In December, flouting the order, he reappeared at Allhallows and denounced Cromwell's church settlement.
Summoned before the Protector, Simpson boldly accused him to his face of treason, for taking the government upon himself.
Cromwell, remarkably, dismissed him with merely a caution, though the appointment at St Botolph's Bishopsgate was formally revoked a few months later.
Simpson's militancy reached a new peak in December 1655, when he denounced the Protector at Allhallows as a tyrannical usurper, and allowed the subversive tract,A Word for God , by Vavasor Powell [q.v.], to be read out to the congregation.
He promptly went into hiding but was eventually captured.
He was soon released, however, and the news spread that he had abruptly reversed his political stance and was now willing to accept the regime; whether prison or Jessey's advice lay behind the change is unclear.
This conversion, welcomed by the government, provoked anger among some of his former supporters.
When he preached restraint at Allhallows in February 1656 the meeting broke up in confusion.
A considerable part of his gathered congregation, already suspicious after his release in 1654, accused him of apostasy, and in 1656, following an acrimonious dispute, seceded to form a new church.
In January 1657 he clashed with Feake at Allhallows over his old ally's continued intransigence.
He was also involved in a long-running dispute at St Botolph's Aldgate with Zachary Crofton [q.v.], its Presbyterian minister.
In 1657 Crofton tried to bar him from the pulpit, as a heretic and troublemaker.
Simpson had the backing of an unlikely alliance of radicals and moderates, driven together by Crofton's rigid principles and choleric nature, and Cromwell and the council upheld his claims.
The council even suggested resolving the dispute by building a meeting-house next to St Paul's for him and his followers to use.
His rehabilitation soon went further.
In 1658 he was allowed to preach at Bishopsgate once more, as a Sunday lecturer, and in August 1659 the restored Rump, after much dispute and delay, voted to re-install him as rector.
But his triumph proved short-lived.
He was forced out of the Aldgate lectureship soon after General George Monck [q.v.]arrived in London, and a new rector was appointed at Bishopsgate on 10 August 1660, shortly after the Restoration.
The return of monarchy rekindled Simpson's old militancy.
In October 1660, at Bishopgate, he boldly defended the regicides, and at Allhallows he repeatedly urged the godly to stand firm.
He was arrested in November 1661 but released after taking the oaths of allegiance and supremacy, which aroused further suspicions of apostasy.
He died a few months later, and was buried 27 June 1662.
Simpson's collected sermons set out the Antinomian creed he never retracted.
In 1660 he defended free grace in two public disputations at Allhallows against John Goodwin [q.v.], the champion of free will.
He later attacked the Quakers.
He was generally known as an Anabaptist, but though he ridiculed infant baptism he insisted that adult or believer's baptism was also unnecessary.
His gathered church, like Jessey's, allowed members to decide the issue for themselves.
He attached no importance to outward forms, calling it ‘abominable popery’ to tie salvation to ordinances or church-membership.
Many contemporaries were bewildered by Simpson's volatile and passionate nature and thought him mad.
Even a funeral sermon,The Failing and Perishing of Good Men (1663), was apologetic about the controversies which had dogged his erratic career.
But his power as a preacher was widely recognized, and he remained true to his faith in the holy spirit as the sole guide for believers.
[Thurloe State Papers ; anon.,The Old Leaven Purged Out , 1658; Z. Crofton,The Vertue and Value of Baptism , 1663; J. A. Dodd, ‘Troubles in a City Parish under the Protectorate’,English Historical Review , vol. x, 1895; B. S. Capp,The Fifth Monarchy Men , 1972; R. L. Greaves,Saints and Rebels , 1985.]
Christopher Andrew
, Sir Mansfield George Smith (1859–1923), the first chief of the modern secret service (CSS or C), was born Mansfield George Smith 1 April 1859 in India, the youngest in the family of five sons and eight daughters of Colonel John Thomas Smith [q.v.], of the Royal Engineers, of Föellalt House, Kent, and his wife Maria Sarah Tyser.
After entering the Royal Naval College, Dartmouth, at the age of thirteen, he began his career afloat as acting sub-lieutenant on HMS Bellerophon .
He served in operations against Malay pirates 1875–6 and in Egypt in 1883.
He suffered, however, from severe seasickness and in 1885 he was placed on the retired list.
Cumming (he changed his name in 1889 after marriage) spent the early 1890s largely as a country gentleman on his second wife's Morayshire estate.
In 1898, while still on the Royal Navy retired list, Cumming was posted to Nelson's old flagship Victory ‘for special service at Southampton’.
The ‘special service’ included occasional intelligence work abroad, but his main work for the next decade was the construction and command of the Southampton boom defences.
In 1909 Cumming was appointed head of what became the foreign section of the Secret Service Bureau (the forerunner of the Secret Intelligence Service, better known as SIS or MI6).
He described pre-1914 espionage as ‘capital sport’, but was given few resources with which to pursue it.
His early operations were directed almost entirely against Germany.
Between 1909 and 1914 he recruited part-time ‘casual agents’ in the shipping and arms business to keep track of naval construction in German shipyards and acquire other technical intelligence.
He also had agents collecting German intelligence in Brussels, Rotterdam, and St Petersburg.
With the outbreak of World War I, Cumming's control of strategic intelligence gathering as head of the wartime MI 1c was challenged by two rival networks run by GHQ.
Cumming eventually out-performed his rivals.
His most important wartime network, ‘La Dame Blanche’, had by January 1918 over 400 agents reporting on German troop movements from occupied Belgium and northern France.
Cumming was less successful in post-revolutionary Russia.
Despite a series of colourful exploits, his agents obtained little Russian intelligence of value.
Like the rest of the British intelligence community, the postwar SIS was drastically cut back.
Cumming succeeded, however, in gaining a monopoly of espionage and counter-intelligence outside Britain and the empire.
He also established a network of SIS station commanders operating overseas under diplomatic cover.
To the end of his life Cumming retained an infectious, if sometimes eccentric, enthusiasm for the tradecraft and mystification of espionage, experimenting personally with disguises, mechanical gadgets, and secret inks in his own laboratory.
His practice of writing exclusively in a distinctive green ink was continued by his successors.
He was appointed CB in 1914 and KCMG in 1919.
Cumming had a fascination with most forms of transport, driving his Rolls at high speed around the streets of London.
In his early fifties he took up flying, gaining both French Aviators' and Royal Aero Club certificates.
But his main passion was boating in Southampton Water and other waters calmer than those which had ended his active service career.
In addition to owning ‘any number’ of yachts, Cumming acquired six motor boats.
In 1905 he became one of the founders and first rear-commodore of the Royal Motor Yacht Club.
In 1885 Cumming married Dora, daughter of Henry Cloete, esquire, of Great Constantia, Cape of Good Hope, South Africa.
After her death he married, in 1889, a Scottish heiress, Leslie Marian (‘May’), daughter of Captain Lockhart Muir Valiant (afterwards Cumming), of the 1st Bombay Lancers and Logie, Morayshire.
As part of the marriage settlement he changed his surname to Smith-Cumming, later becoming known as Cumming.
Their only son, Alastair, a dangerous driver like his father, was killed in October 1914, driving Cumming's Rolls in France.
Cumming himself lost the lower part of his right leg in the same accident.
He died suddenly at his London headquarters 14 June 1923, shortly before he was due to retire.
[Christopher Andrew,Secret Service: the Making of the British Intelligence Community , 1985; Nicholas Hiley, ‘The Failure of British Espionage Against Germany, 1907–1914’,Historical Journal , vol. xxvi, 1983, pp. 867–89; family information.]
Asa Briggs
, Sir Charles John (1921–1980), broadcasting administrator, was born in Dublin 13 October 1921, the only son and eldest of the four children of Felix Curran, an army schoolmaster, and his wife Alicia Isabella Bruce, from Aberdeen.
Curran referred later to his ‘Irish birth without an Irish upbringing’, since after three weeks he left Dublin for Aberdeen, his mother's native home.
He had no Scots upbringing either, since in 1924 his family moved to south Yorkshire, where he studied at the local elementary school and at Wath-on-Dearne Grammar School, before entering Magdalene College, Cambridge, in 1939.
He obtained a first class in part i of the history tripos in 1941.
Familiar with army ways, Curran served in the Indian Army in India, Cyprus, and Italy from 1941 to 1945 before completing his degree in history in 1946 with a first class in part ii and joining the British Broadcasting Corporation as a talks producer in 1947.
After only three years, however, he left the Corporation and the country to become for one year assistant director (1950–1) of the Canadian commercial journal,Fishing News .
His father's mother had been born in Nova Scotia, and he himself retained an active interest in Canada.
He had also shown a gift for learning languages, first in India, and when in August 1951 he returned to the BBC, it was to join its monitoring service at Caversham as a report writer.
In September 1953 Curran became the BBC's first internally selected administrative trainee, visiting or working for a time in different departments of the BBC in and out of London and assisting in the preparation of the BBC's first personnel manual.
His subsequent progress inside the Corporation was rapid and distinctive — from the external services in Bush House to Canada again, this time as BBC representative from 1956 to 1959; back to Bush House as head of external broadcasting administration; on to Broadcasting House as the BBC's secretary (1963–6), a post of varying status and influence at different times in the history of the BBC, but during the regime of the director-general, Sir Hugh Greene, who had personally selected Curran for the job, a key post drawing him into discussions of policy, often highly controversial policy, as well as of administration; back again to Bush House as director of external services (1967–9), which brought him into close touch with government; and on Greene's retirement, becoming, to his considerable surprise, director-general himself in April 1969.
He was knighted in 1974 and had honorary degrees from the City University (D.Litt., 1977) and the Open University (D.Univ., 1978).
In his autobiographical study The Seamless Robe , Curran's only book, published in 1979, he was to make much of the complementarity and underlying unity of his experiences before 1969.
The title (and contents) reflected even more strongly, however, his deep, but never flaunted, religious conviction.
He was the first Roman Catholic director-general of the BBC, taking over at a difficult time, when the Ulster issue was posing serious dilemmas for broadcasters as well as for politicians.
His religion did not prove a handicap, although his scrupulous conscience never made life easy for him, and his philosophy of broadcasting, set out in neat lectures, was very different from that of Greene, or of Baron Hill of Luton, his first chairman.
Curran, never immune to criticism, thought of himself as ‘a broadcasting manager’.
Yet he was not content with management.
He insisted on ‘quality’ of output.
Under his regime the BBC survived intact as an institution, although the Annan committee on broadcasting, which reported in 1977, the year of Curran's retirement, revealed most of the stresses, financial as well as political and social, which Curran had never been able to eliminate.
He remained until 1978 president of the European Broadcasting Union, a post to which he had been elected in 1973 and which he greatly treasured.
He was also from 1978 managing director of the television news agency, Visnews.
In 1949 he married Silvia, daughter of John Meyer, restaurateur.
They had one daughter.
Curran died 9 January 1980 at Barnet General Hospital following a heart attack.
[Sir Charles Curran,The Seamless Robe (autobiography), 1979; private information; personal knowledge.]
Michael D Crane
,Johann Samuel (1779–1830), naturalist, geologist, and museum curator, was born 26 February 1779 in Danzig (Gdansk, Poland), the only son of Johann Beniamin Müller and his first wife Eleonor Lehman.
Miller went to England in 1801 and settled in Bristol.
He Anglicized his name and a few years later he was being described as an accountant or merchant's clerk; a subsequent attempt to establish himself as a commission agent apparently failed.
In 1823 he was appointed curator of the museum of the Bristol Institution, a post he was to hold until his death.
While living in Bristol Miller published a number of scientific papers, including descriptions of new species of British molluscs and, most importantly, the pioneering study A Natural History of the Crinoidea (1821).
He received considerable encouragement and support from many of his contemporaries, including William Buckland, W. D. Conybeare, and Sir H. T. De la Beche [qq.v.].
However, the research on crinoids brought him into conflict with George Cumberland; it is also clear from comments by H. Jelly and J. B. Pentland [q.v.]that this work was not held in universal high regard.
Miller was unstinting in the service of the Bristol Institution and it was as a result of his efforts that the museum — a precursor of the later City of Bristol Museum and Art Gallery — became firmly established.
His extensive private collection was purchased by the Institution after his death, with some of his papers, but no trace was found of the manuscripts of a supplement to A Natural History of the Crinoidea and a major account of the corals on which he was known to have been working.
Miller was elected an associate of the Linnean Society in 1817.
In 1806 he married Margaret James of Bedminster, Bristol.
They had a daughter who died in infancy and three sons.
One of the sons, William James Müller [q.v.], achieved distinction as an artist.
J. S. Miller died in Bristol 25 May 1830.
[‘A Correspondent’ in Philosophical Magazine , vol. ix, 1831; H. J[elly] in Bath and Bristol Magazine or Western Miscellany , vol. ii, 1833; W. A. Sarjeant and J. B. Delair, in Bulletin of the British Museum (Natural History) Historical Series , vol. vi, 1980; unpublished papers in the department of geology, City of Bristol Museum and Art Gallery.]
Florence Hill
,Mary Elizabeth (1828–1921), founder of the Mothers' Union, was born 31 December 1828 in Swinton, Manchester, the younger daughter and youngest of three children of Thomas Heywood, a Liverpool banker, and his wife Mary Elizabeth Barton.
In 1832 the family moved to Hope End, Hereford, where Mary was educated by her parents, who also travelled widely.
While in Rome in 1845 Mary met George Henry Sumner, son of Charles Richard Sumner [q.v.], bishop of Winchester, who was to be ordained and later become the bishop of Guildford.
They were married in July 1848 in Colwall, Hereford, and went to live in Crawley, where George Sumner was chaplain to his uncle John Bird Sumner [q.v.], the archbishop of Canterbury.
A year later George and Mary Sumner moved to Farnham Castle, where their two daughters were born.
In 1851 George Sumner was appointed rector of Old Alresford, Hampshire, where they lived for thirty-four years, and where their son,(George) Heywood (Maunoir)[q.v.], artist and archaeologist, was born.
As well as working in the parish, Mrs Sumner was very conscious of her responsibility for training her children and creating a Christian home.
It was not until 1876 that she started the meetings for mothers which were to develop into the Mothers' Union.
A women's meeting was held during the church congress at Portsmouth in 1885 and the bishop of Newcastle, who was to be the speaker, persuaded Mary Sumner to tell the audience about her dream of a union of mothers.
She was an eloquent speaker, with a beautiful voice, and drew an enthusiastic response which was to lead to the official recognition of the Mothers' Union as a diocesan, national, and international organization, with Mary Sumner as its leader.
Despite her upper-class background, she cared passionately about marriage and family life and her main theme was that the strength of the nation depended on strong moral precepts being taught in the home, and family life being firmly rooted in the Christian faith.
The society grew rapidly and Mary Sumner, an indefatigable letter-writer, kept in touch with members all over the world.
In July 1908 Mary Sumner and her husband celebrated their diamond wedding anniversary and one of the gifts they received was a screen bearing the signatures of Queen Alexandra, the princess of Wales, and other royal patrons.
Her husband died in 1909 but Mary Sumner continued to write and speak for the Mothers' Union, taking a keen interest in all that was being done.
She addressed her last public meeting at the age of ninety-one at a garden party arranged by her daughter.
She died in Winchester 11 August 1921 and was buried with her husband in the shadow of the cathedral.
Over 4,000 members attended the service of thanksgiving for her life.
[Joyce Coombs,George and Mary Sumner: their Life and Times , 1965; Florence Mary Hill,Mission Unlimited, the History of the Mothers' Union , 1988; archives of the Mothers' Union.]
Sandra Raphael
,Martin Hope (1815–1901), seed merchant, was born 14 March 1815, the elder son of John Sutton, corn merchant, miller, and seedsman of Reading, who in 1806 had founded a shop dealing in agricultural seeds, especially those of corn and pasture grasses, which grew into Sutton & Sons, the Royal Seed Establishment.
In 1828, when he was only thirteen, Martin Hope Sutton joined the business in Reading, and in 1832 his younger brother Alfred also joined the firm.
Martin Hope became an enthusiastic botanist.
In the 1830s and 1840s he enlarged the range of Suttons' seeds to include vegetables and ornamental plants, with many new varieties of both groups constantly being added to those offered for sale.
From 1839 he was engaged in a campaign to improve the quality of seed available by preventing the adulteration then prevalent and trying to test the germination of selected samples.
This work found its reward in the passage of the Seeds Adulteration Act of 1869.
By commissioning their own growers, in Reading or further afield, setting rigid standards, and testing their products, Suttons tried to sell no seed but that of ‘highest purity and of full germination’.
In 1847, during the famine in Ireland, Sutton sent over seeds of turnips, cabbages, and other vegetables to be used as possible alternatives to the diseased potatoes, and he experimented with new varieties of potato to find one better suited to cold, damp climates.
He also introduced the mangel-wurzel to Britain as a fodder crop and encouraged the development of improved varieties of root crops and pasture grasses.
He was frequently asked for advice on the royal gardens at Windsor and Osborne, and Suttons received the first of several royal warrants from Queen Victoria in 1858.
The rapid growth of the firm is reflected in its catalogues.
From 1865 the annual Amateur's Guide to Horticulture (with a supplementary autumn catalogue) and Farmers' Year-Book grew into small books, with background articles added to lists and descriptions of seeds.
By 1850 the company had seventy employees and was using an early form of mail order to sell seeds in Britain and overseas, as postal and railway services helped to expand its activities.
In 1848 Sutton married Sophia Woodhouse, daughter of William Warwick.
Of their five sons three joined the firm, the oldest, Martin John Sutton [q.v.]succeeding his father as its head in 1887.
They also had four daughters.
Martin Hope Sutton died in Reading 5 October 1901.
[Martin Hope Sutton,Practical Hints to Young Men Engaged in Business, an Address , 1858, ed.
A. B. Cheales, 1901; A. B. Cheales,MHS , privately printed,c .1901; A. H. Japp,Successful Business-Men , 1892, pp. 142–52; T. K. Hodder, ‘Sutton's at Reading’,Journal of the Royal Horticultural Society , vol. lxxxi, 1956, pp. 234–41.]
Deborah Lavin
,William Miller (1885–1974), historian, was born in Aberdeen 1 October 1885, the youngest child in the family of three sons and four daughters of the Revd John Macmillan, Scottish Free Church minister and schoolmaster, who had served as a missionary in India, and his wife Elizabeth Caid Lindsay.
In 1891 the family emigrated to Cape Colony, and his father lectured at Victoria College, Stellenbosch (later Stellenbosch University) and was in charge of a college hostel.
Macmillan was educated at Stellenbosch Boys' High School.
In 1903 he went to Merton College, Oxford, as one of the first Rhodes scholars and in 1906 he gained a second-class degree in modern history.
He studied further at Aberdeen, Glasgow, and Berlin before being appointed lecturer in history and economics at Rhodes University College, Grahamstown, in 1911.
Here he embarked on research into poverty and the land question, publishing The South African Agrarian Problem (1919).
In 1917 Macmillan took the chair of history at the Johannesburg School of Mines (later the University of the Witwatersrand) where he worked on the radical Scots missionary Dr John Philip.
His analyses of the historic relations of black and white in the Cape,The Cape Colour Question (1927) and Bantu, Boer and Briton (1929), illuminated for him ‘this African and World Race Problem, ever increasingly urgent in our day’.
In Complex South Africa (1930) he emphasized the existence of a ‘common society’, history underpinning his political opposition to the segregation policies of successive South African governments.
Membership of the Johannesburg Joint Council of Europeans and Natives, an interracial forum of discussion and protest, led him to advocate co-operation with the progressive black élite, incorporation rather than segregation.
Macmillan's personal example inspired a generation of liberal historians: Margaret Hodgson (Ballinger), Cornelius de Kiewiet, J. S. Marais, and (Dame) Lucy Sutherland [q.v.].
In 1932 his speeches and articles incurred governmental censure of the university.
Dissuaded from resigning, Macmillan took extended leave rather than restrain his public utterances.
After travelling in Africa he settled in Britain, resigning his chair in 1933.
Without salaried employment, Macmillan turned journalist.
Helped by research grants and an association with All Souls College, Oxford, he wrote pioneering studies of social change in Africa which were published as Africa Emergent (1938, 1949) and used by Lord Hailey (first Baron Hailey, q.v.) in preparing the African Survey (1938).
He became a prominent critic of indirect rule and colonial self-sufficiency; in the London group on African affairs he opposed the transfer of Bechuanaland, Basutoland, and Swaziland to South Africa.
His graphic denunciation of neglect in the West Indies,Warning from the West Indies (1936), appeared months before serious West Indian riots, lending force to his advocacy of reconstruction by colonial development.
His arguments for revitalizing the colonies were realized in more active policies promoting colonial change.
From 1936 he joined the parliamentary labour advisory committee, opposing land bills in Kenya and Southern Rhodesia.
From African experience he identified ‘the real colonial problem’ as ‘natural poverty’and ‘conquering nature in tropical conditions’.
Membership of the advisory committee on education in the colonies (1940–3) confirmed his preoccupation with ‘the ‘emergent’ African who must be the architect of the future'; but, as British Council representative in West Africa (1943–5), he became disillusioned with ‘the nearly highbrow’.
He was appointed director of colonial studies at the University of St Andrews, Scotland (1947–54), continuing regular broadcasts as an African observer.
As acting professor of history at the University College of the West Indies (1954) he began The Road to Self-Rule (1959).
While encouraging westernized intelligentsias, he did not come to terms with their nationalisms, whether he was lecturing in South Africa (1949), advising on local government in Tanganyika (1950), observing the Seretse Khama [q.v.]affair in Bechuanaland (1951), or surveying the possibilities for a Central African Federation (1952).
He visited southern Africa regularly until 1973.
Honorary degrees were conferred on him by Oxford (1957), Natal (1962), and Edinburgh (1974).
In 1913 he married Jean, daughter of John Sutherland, headmaster.
They had no children.
Following their divorce in 1933, he married Mona, daughter of Sir Hugh Justin Tweedie, RN.
They had two sons and two daughters.
Macmillan died 23 October 1974 in Long Wittenham.
[W. M. Macmillan,My South African Years , 1975; Mona Macmillan,Champion of Africa: W. M. Macmillan, the Second Phase , privately printed, 1985; Hugh Macmillan and Shula Marks (eds.),
Africa and Empire: W. M. Macmillan, Historian and Social Critic , 1989; Lucy S. Sutherland, ‘William Miller Macmillan: an Appreciation’ in Kenneth Kirkwood (ed.),
African Affairs III , St Antony's Papers no. 21, 1969.]
A H Sykes
,Augustus Désiré (1856–1922), physiologist, was born in Paris 12 July 1856, the only son and younger child of Augustus Volney Waller, FRS [q.v.], physiologist, and his wife Matilda Margaret Walls.
The family lived in turn in Paris, England, and Switzerland until the death of his father in 1870 when, with his mother and sister, Matilda Amelia (born 1845), he moved to Aberdeen.
He was educated at the Collège de Genève and entered the University of Aberdeen in 1874, where he graduated MB in 1878 and MD in 1881.
He joined the department of physiology, University College London, in 1879 as a research scholar of the British Medical Association.
In 1883 he became lecturer in physiology at the Royal Free Hospital and in 1884 lecturer in physiology at St Mary's Hospital.
He remained there until 1903, when he was appointed the first, and only, director of the newly founded University of London Physiological Laboratory, established in the former Imperial Institute in South Kensington mainly as a result of Waller's initiative.
Waller's research interests started in the emerging field of electro-physiology, in which he made useful contributions to the study of fatigue in muscle and the nature of cardiac potentials.
He made the first recording of the human electrocardiogram in 1887, an important advance which, in other hands, had widespread applications in medicine.
He studied the physiological actions of volatile anaesthetics, stressing the importance of quantitive measurement.
Other subjects included human energy metabolism, bio-electro phenomena in tissues, and psycho-physiology.
He was dedicated to experimental work and wrote many scientific papers; he also wrote a manual of experimental physiology for medical students, and a major Introduction to Human Physiology (1891).
Physiology dominated Waller's adult life.
He was ambitious to be recognized as a physiologist as successful as his father.
But physiology was also a family activity; he had a laboratory at his spacious home in London.
His wife and children took part in experiments, entertained visiting scientists, and travelled with him to conferences at home and abroad.
He was a keen motorist, enjoyed skiing, skating, golf, and billiards, and kept a large family of bulldogs.
One of these, Jimmie, was used by him for a harmless demonstration of the electrocardiogram at the Royal Society and became the subject of a famous parliamentary reply to a question from the anti-vivisection lobby (Hansard , 8 July 1909).
Waller was argumentative, opinionated, and sometimes outspoken, but he had a sense of humour (‘I am the Wallerian degeneration’ in reference to his father's eponymous discovery) and he retained an unworldly delight in science throughout his life.
He was elected FRS in 1892 and gave the Croonian lecture in 1896.
Other honours included the Monthyon medal of the French Académie des Sciences (1888), the Prix Aldini from Bologna (1892), and honorary degrees from the universities of Edinburgh (1905), Western Australia (1914), and Tomsk (1914).
He was Fullerian professor of physiology at the Royal Institution in 1897 and became a professor in the University of London in 1912.
In 1885 he married Alice Mary, daughter of George Palmer [q.v.],
MP for Reading, founder of the biscuit manufacturers Huntley & Palmer.
They had three sons and two daughters; there were no grandchildren.
Waller died in London 11 March 1922 and was buried in a family grave in Finchley cemetery.
[Proceedings of the Royal Society , series B, vol. xciii, 1922, pp. xxvii–xxx; E. Besterman and R. Creese, ‘Waller — Pioneer of Electrocardiography’,British Heart Journal , vol. xlii, no. 1, 1979; A. H. Sykes, ‘A. D. Waller and the electrocardiogram’,British Medical Journal , 30 May 1987; University of London archives; private information.]
Eric Midwinter
,Benjamin (1774–1842), wine merchant and cricket administrator, was born 14 January 1744 in Newington Green, Middlesex, the third son and sixth and last child of Rawson Aislabie, soap and wine merchant of Newington Green, and his wife Frances Rayson of Dunham, Nottinghamshire.
He was educated at Eton.
A wine merchant by profession, with a well-established business in the Minories, he had a lifelong interest in cricket.
In 1802 he joined the Marylebone Cricket Club at its Dorset Square venue.
Thenceforth he played many games not only for the MCC but for a variety of sides.
He made something of a jovial name for downright failure: a big, heavy man (probably seventeen stone), he barely averaged more than four runs an innings and he took only eight wickets in his long but profoundly uneventful playing career.
He had a substitute not only to run for him when batting but also to field for him.
None the less, such was his amicable nature that all welcomed him as a playing companion.
He made his greater mark as a cricket administrator.
Cricket was somewhat uncoordinated before the early nineteenth century: many fixtures were impromptu and piecemeal, despite the use of rather grandiose labels.
In 1822, eight years after Thomas Lord [q.v.]had moved his famous turf to its last resting place at St John's Wood, Aislabie became the first secretary of the MCC, the first sign of any real formality of organization.
The following year he was also made president.
With a membership of less than 200, few of noble lineage, and with the whiff of Regency gambling, that mainspring of London cricket, still leaving a dubious odour, Aislabie set about his task with enormous energy.
He organized matches, canvassed for members, and collected subscriptions.
By his death, the membership had doubled, the MCC was developing its role as the judicious lawgiver of the game, and there were many more cleaner-cut fixtures, with schools and the universities, for example.
Aislabie, therefore, presided over the MCC as cricket was transformed into a more wholesome, well regulated, and even pseudo-religious pastime.
As the token of this ‘muscular Christianity’, it was Aislabie who, in 1841, took the MCC team to Rugby for the match celebrated in Tom Brown's School Days by Thomas Hughes [q.v.].
On 13 March 1798 he married Anne, eldest child of William Hodgson, merchant, of the City of London.
They had twelve children, of whom only six daughters and one son survived infancy.
Aislabie, who lived for most of his adult life at Lee Place, Eltham, Kent, and at East Park Place, Regent's Park, died at this latter residence 2 June 1842.
There are a bust and a portrait of him at Lord's.
[Aislabie papers in the possession of T. L. G. Landon (great-great-grandson);Country Life , 28 June 1941.]
W H Brock
,Percy Carlyle (1851–1935), metallurgist, was born in Lyme Regis 27 December 1851, the elder son (there were also two daughters) of Alexander Gilchrist [q.v.], barrister and writer, and his wife Anne [q.v. under Gilchrist], daughter of John Parker Burrows, solicitor.
His boyhood was first spent in Guildford and then, from 1856 to 1862, in Chelsea, in the house next door to Thomas and Jane Carlyle [qq.v.], who became close friends.
Despite his literary and artistic upbringing, Percy Gilchrist embarked upon a scientific career.
Unlike his cousin, Alexander's nephew, Sidney Gilchrist Thomas [q.v.], with whom he was to collaborate, Percy received a complete education, first at Felsted School, and then at the Royal School of Mines (1868–71), where he trained as a metallurgist and analytical chemist and was Murchison medallist in July 1870.
He subsequently gained membership of the Institutes of Civil and Mechanical Engineers.
His first post was that of analytical chemist at an ironworks at Cwm Avon in Glamorgan.
In 1876 he took a similar position at the Blaenavon ironworks in Monmouthshire under the management of Edward Martin.
In 1875 Thomas hit upon a way of removing phosphorus from iron ores in the process developed by (Sir) Henry Bessemer [q.v.]for the manufacture of steel.
To test his idea, Thomas persuaded Gilchrist to carry out experiments during his leisure hours at the Blaenavon works.
On learning their secret, Martin agreed to pay for further development and the cost of the patents taken out on the dephosphorization process in 1877 and 1878.
Upon the publication of the process in 1879, Gilchrist moved to Middlesbrough to help perfect the dolomite (magnesium limestone) liner for the converter in the works of Bolckow, Vaughan & Co.
In 1881 Gilchrist and Thomas developed their own steelworks, North Eastern Steel Co., at Middlesbrough.
When this was sold to Dorman, Long & Co. in 1903 Gilchrist retired from active work in metallurgy.
Between 1882 and 1894 he was also chairman of the Basic & Dephosphorizing Patents Co., which was set up to safeguard the many patentees with interests in the dephosphorization process and the agricultural disposal of the phosphorus-rich basic slag.
Gilchrist was elected FRS in 1891.
He was a vice-president of the Iron and Steel Institute (1891), a member of the Society of Chemical Industry, a fellow of the Royal Society of Arts, and a chevalier of the Legion of Honour.
Although when awarded the Bessemer medal in 1883 Thomas acknowledged Gilchrist's ‘unwearied exertions, conspicuous energy and ability’, Gilchrist was always overshadowed by his romantic inventive cousin, his vivacious mother, and his talented brother, the painter Herbert Harlakenden Gilchrist.
In later life he was an invalid.
In 1887 Gilchrist married Nora, the second daughter of Captain Lewis Roper Fitzmaurice of the Royal Navy.
They had a son and daughter.
Gilchrist died in Pinner, Middlesex, 15 December 1935, having survived his cousin by fifty years.
[C. C. H. Carpenter in Obituary Notices of Fellows of the Royal Society , vol. ii, 1936–8; D. J. Jeremy (ed.),
Dictionary of Business Biography , 1985.]
Brent Elliott
,John (d. 1883), gardener, first came to public notice in 1850.
His early life and antecedents have not been traced: the earliest detail offered in his obituaries was his residence with a Mr Aiton of Bardsea, Ulverston, around 1844.
From there he went to the Earl of Denbigh's garden at Newnham Paddox, and thence in 1850 to Harewood, Yorkshire, then in the course of transformation by Sir Charles Barry [q.v.], whom Fleming assisted in the creation of the terrace garden.
From 1853 to 1855 he was gardener to the Earl of Southampton at Whittlebury Lodge, Towcester.
From 1855 he was head gardener at Cliveden, Berkshire, first to the second Duke of Sutherland and then to H. L. Grosvenor, first Duke of Westminster [q.v.].
There he found himself working again with Barry, assisting him in the creation of a new terrace garden.
By 1859 he could display the results of his experiments with the planting of bulbs in the parterre for a spring display.
At this time there was much comment in the horticultural press about the excessive attention lavished on summer bedding at the expense of the other seasons, and Fleming was the first gardener to become well known for ‘spring gardening’, although by the 1870s there was a coterie which pressed the claims to priority of William Ingram of Belvoir Castle.
Fleming reported his experiments in the Journal of Horticulture , and published Spring and Winter Flower Gardening in 1864 (2nd edn., 1870).
In 1868, when a fashion for foliage came in, Fleming planted a bed of dwarf foliage plants and succulents, in the pattern of the Countess of Sutherland's monogram.
The Gardeners' Chronicle , reviewing the experiment, coined the name ‘carpet bedding’ for it, and recommended it for wider trial.
Carpet bedding was to become a dominant fashion in England in the 1870s, and an international one in the 1880s.
In 1870, with James Gray of Chelsea, Fleming erected new glasshouses at Cliveden, at the same time as he was engaged in landscaping a valley on the estate which was praised by William Robinson [q.v.]as a fine example of wild gardening (Garden , 14 September 1872, p. 235).
From 1862 to 1864 Fleming served on the council of the Royal Horticultural Society, and was a member of the committee for the international horticultural exhibition of 1866.
He died unmarried 25 November 1883, and the administration of his estate was granted to a Canadian relative.
[Gardeners' Chronicle , 1 December 1883;Garden , 1 December 1883;Journal of Horticulture , 6 December 1883.]
A J Nicholls
, Sir Neill (1869–1953), major-general, was born at 79 Lancaster Gate, Paddington, London, 8 October 1869, the second son and second child in the family of five sons and two daughters of Colonel Edward Donald Malcolm, CB, Royal Engineers, of Portallach, and his wife Isabella Wyld, daughter of John Brown.
Educated at St Peter's School in York, Eton, and the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, Malcolm was a sturdy youth who excelled at football.
He obtained a commission with the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders in 1889.
He served in India and Uganda, where he was appointed to the DSO (1899), before joining the staff of H. H. Kitchener (later first Earl Kitchener of Khartoum and of the Broome, q.v.) in the Boer war, in which he was wounded in action.
In 1902 he attended staff college, and was posted in 1903 to the staff of the Somaliland field forces.
In 1904–8 Malcolm worked in the military operations directorate of the War Office during the period of reform associated with R. B. Brett, second Viscount Esher [q.v.].
In 1908 he became secretary of the historical section of the committee for imperial defence.
This reflected a keen interest in military history which later manifested itself in his book on the Austro-Prussian war,Bohemia 1866 (1912).
When World War I broke out in 1914, Malcolm was well placed to play an important role in the British Expeditionary Force.
He was GSO 2 (operations) on the staff of I Corps.
He took part in the retreat from Mons and the first battle of Ypres.
In 1915 he was involved in the Gallipoli expedition as the chief staff officer of the 11th division.
After leaving the Dardanelles he spent some time in Salonika and Egypt, before being posted as brigadier-general (November 1915) on the staff of the reserve corps led by Sir Hubert Gough [q.v.]on the western front.
Gough was subsequently made commander of the Fifth Army, and Malcolm was his chief of staff.
In December 1917 Malcolm was given command (as major-general) of the 66th division, which was badly mauled in the great German offensive launched by Erich Ludendorff in March 1918.
Malcolm himself was severely wounded in the leg.
Later in the war he commanded two more divisions, before being sent to Berlin early in 1919 as the head of the British military mission.
He was awarded the French croix de guerre with palm.
Whilst in Berlin he witnessed the uncertain beginnings of German parliamentary democracy in the Weimar republic.
He had to ensure the observation of military restrictions on the Germans, and advise on such matters as the stability and honesty of the new German rulers.
His judgements were level-headed, and he saw clearly that the future peace of the world would depend on developments in Germany.
In 1921 he became general officer commanding the troops in Malaya.
He retired from the army in 1924, having been appointed CB in 1919 and KCB in 1922.
His association with the east was continued when he was then elected president of the British North Borneo Company.
He was credited with having sorted out and rationalized the administration of North Borneo, a country as large as Ireland.
He showed imagination in appointing as his personal assistant (Sir) John Wheeler-Bennett [q.v.], who was to become one of Britain's most distinguished experts on German politics.
It was in the course of a leisurely journey on the trans-Siberian Railway that he persuaded Wheeler-Bennett to devote himself to becoming a specialist on contemporary Germany.
Malcolm and Wheeler-Bennett, then in his early twenties, shared a passionate interest in international relations, and Malcolm, as a distinguished senior officer, was able to lend his weight to the Royal Institute of International Affairs at Chatham House, of which he and Wheeler-Bennett were founder-members.
In 1926 Malcolm became chairman of Chatham House, where a room was named after him, and he relinquished this task only in 1935.
His concern about Germany manifested itself again in 1936, when he accepted the post in Geneva of League of Nations high commissioner for German refugees, a position he held until 1938.
He was also a member of the advisory committee on aliens in Britain, and did what he could to ease the lot of refugees who managed to escape Nazi tyranny.
Malcolm's lasting interest in the Orient was illustrated by the fact that he became president of the China Society and helped to found the Oriental Ceramic Society.
His collection of Chinese porcelain was one of the most important in Britain.
In May 1907 he married his cousin Angela (died 1930), daughter of William Rolle Malcolm, banker.
They had a daughter, who died in 1934, and two sons.
Malcolm himself died 21 December 1953 at 8 Evelyn Mansions, Carlisle Place, London SW1.
[The Times , 23 and 31 December 1953; J. W. Wheeler-Bennett,Knaves, Fools and Heroes , 1974; family information.]
T R H Davenport
,Charles Henry (1767–1831), colonial governor, was born at Badminton, Gloucestershire, 12 December 1767, the second son in the family of nine sons and four daughters of Henry Somerset, fifth Duke of Beaufort, and his wife Elizabeth, daughter of Admiral Edward Boscawen.
He was a direct descendant of Edward III.
Educated at Westminster School and Trinity College, Oxford (MA, 1786), he became a colonel in the 1st West Indian Regiment (major-general, 1798), and attained the rank of a full general in 1814.
He was appointed gentleman of the bedchamber to the Prince of Wales in 1791, represented Scarborough (1796–1802) and Monmouth (1802–13) in the House of Commons, was made a privy councillor in 1797 and comptroller (until 1804) of the household, then joint paymaster-general of the forces under the premiership of William Pitt and the third Duke of Portland in 1804–13, before accepting the governorship of the Cape Colony, South Africa, where he arrived on 6 April 1814.
Lord Charles Somerset's governorship was marked by important developments on the colony's unsettled eastern frontier, in the administration of affairs related to the transfer from Dutch to British rule, and in political conflict with radical elements on the issue of freedom of speech.
In 1815 the authorities put down a rebellion by landless Dutch-speaking colonials and mismanaged the execution of convicted ringleaders.
Somerset tried to placate colonists' feelings by persuading Xhosa chiefs to allow them to follow the spoor of stolen cattle across the frontier and exact compensation.
But Chief Ngqika, through whom Somerset worked, did not have power to carry this out.
Somerset then cleared a buffer zone east of the Fish river; but a later decision to allow a military settlement there ensured further conflict.
Meanwhile Somerset had sought to stabilize the frontier by establishing British immigrants, the 1820 settlers, on the west bank of the Fish.
Somerset's governmental changes included the legalization of the English language as the official medium, the introduction of English currency, the setting up of a council of advice, and attempts to ameliorate the treatment of slaves in accordance with new policies laid down in London.
Doctrinaire Anglicization marked some of these changes, but Somerset's enduring reputation was rather that of an autocrat, as appeared from his conflict with leaders of English-speaking opinion in the colonial community, George Greig, John Fairbairn, and Thomas Pringle, who successfully used the governor's quarrels with two reprobate settlers to demand press freedom.
After overreacting, Somerset returned to Britain in March 1826, where his critics kept up pressure on him.
In 1788 Somerset married Elizabeth, daughter of William, second Viscount Courtenay.
She died in 1815, and in 1821 he married Mary (died 1860), daughter of John, fourth Earl Poulett.
Of the first marriage there were three sons and four daughters (one of whom died young) and of the second marriage two daughters and a son.
Somerset died in Brighton 20 February 1831.
[A. K. Millar,Plantagenet in South Africa , 1965.]
Joyce Fitch and Roy Stephens
, Sir Thomas , first baronet (1637–1688), master carpenter, bricklayer, and building contractor, was born in Barkway, Hertfordshire, the second son (the first died in infancy and there was also a daughter) of William Fitch and his wife Alice, and baptized 17 December 1637.
Nothing is known of his early years, though he seems to have been occupied initially as a bricklayer.
He is first recorded in April 1663, engaged on the brickwork of Sir Ralph Bankes's house at Kingston Lacy, Dorset, designed by Sir Roger Pratt [q.v.].
It was the great fire of London in 1666 which gave him his opening, however, and he became a prominent figure in the rebuilding of the city over the next decade.
His most important contract (first with another carpenter, John Ball, and then on his own) was for the deepening and wharfing of the Fleet ditch, an enormous task which employed 200 men, took two and a half years to finish (1672–4), and brought him a gift of plate worth £200 from the City on its efficient completion.
His other London projects included the stairs of Blackfriars and Three Cranes, the laystalls at Dowgate and Puddle Dock, wharfing at Whitefriars, and the imposing great storehouse at the Tower.
Outside London, his major contract was the execution (with his brother John) of the ambitious designs of Sir Bernard de Gomme [q.v.]for new fortifications in Portsmouth, where he also built the Garrison Hospital.
He was employed on the reconstruction of the bishop of Winchester's palace at Wolvesey, and he acted from time to time as architect as well as builder.
He probably designed the Court House in Windsor which was completed by Sir Christopher Wren [q.v.]after his death.
His prosperity is shown by the ‘magnificent dwelling house’ which he built for himself on the north Thames frontage immediately to the east of the Fleet canal.
At the time of his death he also owned the country seat of Mount Mascall, in North Cray, Kent.
He was elected sheriff for Kent in 1679 and knighted in the same year.
On 7 September 1688 he was created a baronet by James II, but died nine days later, 16 September, and was buried at St Anne's Blackfriars.
He was survived by his wife Anne, daughter and heir of Richard Comport, of Eltham, and a son Comport (born 1676), who succeeded him in the baronetcy.
His portrait by Michael Dahl [q.v.]hangs in the department of English local history at the University of Leicester.
[T. F. Reddaway,The Rebuilding of London , 1940;Burke's Landed Gentry , 1952; H. M. Colvin,A Biographical Dictionary of British Architects 1600–1840 , 1978; E. Hasted,History of Kent , 1778.]
Robert Pearce
,Francis (1806–1873), industrialist, was born 21 December 1806 in Derbyshire, the second son in the family of three sons and four daughters of John Wright of Lenton Hall, Nottinghamshire, co-founder of the Butterley Company in 1790, and his wife Elizabeth, the daughter of another co-founder, Francis Beresford of Osmaston, near Ashbourne.
Little is known of Francis Wright's early years, but in 1830, on the retirement of his father, he became the senior partner in Butterley, which he dominated for the next forty-three years.
He applied himself to business with intense seriousness of purpose.
‘Ad Rem’ was his family's motto.
The company soon took off, so that by the time of his death Butterley was the biggest industrial concern in Derbyshire and one of the greatest in the country.
The company had been valued in 1830 at £30,000; by 1858 its capital stood at £436,000.
The original coal and iron concerns of Butterley were expanded, and engineering work was undertaken for the railways.
The company constructed Vauxhall bridge over the Thames, the railway bridge at Trent junction, and the railway viaduct over the Derwent.
Perhaps Wright's success is best symbolized by the construction in 1869 of the roof of St Pancras station, a 240-foot tied arch of cast iron, weighing 9,000 tons, with no intermediate structure, probably then the largest single span of its kind in the world.
The outward sign of Wright's success was the building of a great country house, Osmaston Manor, outside Ashbourne, in 1846–9.
Measuring 333 feet by 192 feet, it had stables for seventeen horses, rooms for twenty servants, a brewhouse, a bakehouse, and a central tower standing 150 feet high.
It was said to be the first house since Roman times to have central heating: over three miles of piping were used but there was no chimney in the house itself.
A hydraulic lift ran up the mansion's four storeys.
It was the showpiece of the county.
A parapet round the clock bore the significant words ‘Work while it is Day.’
Wright was a high-minded evangelist who made Butterley into a model employer.
The company organized a sick fund for its workers and built, at Ironville, a school for about 200 of their children.
Among Wright's many charitable actions was the building of the church of St Martin at Osmaston (because he disapproved of the high-church tendencies of the parish church) and the founding of Trent College in 1866, one of whose houses was named after Wright.
A chapel there was built in his memory in 1875.
His puritanical streak led him as lord mayor to attempt to ban the ‘demoralizing pleasure fair’ in Ashbourne and to outlaw Shrovetide football.
Francis Wright was a magistrate, high sheriff of Nottinghamshire (1842), a fine horseman, and a lover and planter of trees.
On 12 August 1830 he married Selina, daughter of Sir Henry FitzHerbert, baronet, of Tissington Hall, Derbyshire.
They had five sons and six daughters.
Wright died 24 February 1873 in Osmaston.
[R. H. Mottram and C. Coote,Through Five Generations, the History of the Butterley Company , privately printed, 1949; Roy Christian,Butterley Brick , privately printed, 1990; Philip Riden,The Butterley Company, 1790–1830 , 1990; family papers in private possession.]
Margaret Beetham
,Isabella Mary (1836–1865), journalist and author of Beeton's Book of Household Management , was born 12 or 14 March 1836 at Milk Street, off Cheapside in the City of London, the eldest in the family of three daughters and a son of Benjamin Mayson, linen factor of Milk Street, London, and his wife Elizabeth Jerram.
Isabella's father died when she was four, and in 1843 her mother married Henry Dorling of Epsom, who had two sons and two daughters from a previous marriage.
To these eight, a further thirteen children were added over the next twenty years.
They were housed for most of the year with their ‘Granny Jerram’ in the Epsom grandstand, which was let to Henry Dorling in his capacity as clerk of the course.
As the eldest girl among the twenty-one children, Isabella was her grandmother's chief assistant, and in this unusual establishment her informal education began.
Her formal education, after a brief period in Islington, was in a school in Heidelberg where, as well as developing her musical talents, she acquired a facility in languages which was to be useful in her later career.
She also took to pastry-making, which she continued to practise at a local confectioner's when she returned to Epsom in 1854, though her family thought this to be ‘ultra modern and not quite nice’.
On 10 July 1856 Isabella married Samuel Orchart Beeton (1831–1877), the son of Samuel Powell Beeton, an innkeeper at Milk Street, London.
They had four sons, the first of whom died in infancy (1857) and the second aged three (1864).
Samuel Beeton had already begun to make a name for himself as a publisher and editor.
His early involvement in the English edition of Harriet Beecher Stowe's Uncle Tom's Cabin had helped to finance a series of innovatory publications.
The most important of these for Isabella was the English Woman's Domestic Magazine (EDM), a twopenny monthly launched in 1852, which pioneered the middle-class woman's magazine.
For the eight years of their marriage, the Beetons developed a partnership in which the personal and professional were intertwined.
Isabella entered almost immediately into her husband's publishing business, and within a year was writing on domestic matters for the EDM and had begun the ‘four years’ incessant labour' which she claimed Beeton's Book of Household Management cost her.
Her role in the production of the various Beeton journals is not self-evident in their pages, since a public persona was not part of her style.
However, she was ‘editress’ of the EDM and was involved in the upmarket weekly, the Queen , which was launched in 1861.
A visit to Paris in 1860 established a French connection for the firm, and the New Series EDM included monthly accounts of the latest Paris styles, a high-quality colour fashion-plate, and the offer of a pattern service for readers, a combination which was to become a staple of twentieth-century women's magazines.
Whether she was visiting Paris, writing articles, dealing with layout, even demonstrating how to cut out a pattern for a perplexed reader, Isabella's energy and organizational skills were crucial to the management of the publishing house.
It is not for this, however, that she is remembered, but for her writing on domestic matters and especially for Beeton's Book of Household Management (1859–61) which in its various editions made ‘Mrs Beeton’ a household name in a double sense.
Part of the extraordinary success of this book may be attributed to skilful marketing — of part-issues between 1859 and 1861, the illustrated edition in 1861, and the cheap reissues begun by Samuel Beeton and continued by Ward, Lock, & Tyler, to whom he sold his titles after Isabella's death.
Its success, however, also rested on its quality, especially the combination of clear structure and precise detail.
Recipes, for example, were arranged alphabetically in sections, with ingredients, prices, weights, and cooking times all precisely stated, on the basis of tests carried out by the author in her own kitchen.
The book's style moved easily between detailed instructions and neat aphorisms.
For Isabella Beeton, a people's ‘way of taking their meals, as well as their way of treating women’ were marks of civilization.
Dining well ‘implies both the will and the skill to reduce to order, and surround with idealisms and grace, the more material conditions of human existence’.
That will and skill she showed in large measure.
The popular image of Mrs Beeton as a middle-aged housewife given to the confection of extravagant recipes is doubly mistaken.
Firstly, her book is notable for its attempt to combine good living with economy.
Secondly, she never lived to middle age.
She died at her home in Greenhithe, aged twenty-eight, of puerperal fever 6 February 1865, eight days after the birth of her son Mayson, who had a distinguished career in journalism and government.
[Sarah Freeman,Isabella and Sam: the Story of Mrs Beeton , 1977; H. Montgomery Hyde,Mr and Mrs Beeton , 1951; Nancy Spain,The Beeton Story , 1956; Graham Nown,Mrs Beeton: 150 Years of Cookery and Household Management , 1986.]
Ann Spokes Symonds
, Sir William James , second baronet (1833–1917), the originator of fingerprinting as a means of identification, was born in Slough 9 January 1833, the eldest child in the family of three sons and nine daughters of Sir John Herschel [q.v.], astronomer and chemist, and his wife Margaret Brodie, daughter of the Revd Alexander Stewart, Presbyterian minister of Blair Atholl.
He was educated at Clapham Grammar School and the East India Company's college at Haileybury.
From 1853 he served in Bengal, where he was one of the secretaries to the Board of Revenue at Calcutta, commissioner of Cooch Behar (1874), district judge in Dingepore and Nuddea, and magistrate and collector in several districts including Midnapore (1866–71), Shahabad (1877), and Hooghly.
Whilst in Jungipoor in 1858 he realized that taking and recording fingerprints could prevent impersonation.
Over a period of fifteen years he noted that not only were the ridge and furrow patterns of each individual's prints unique, but that they never changed.
Although fingerprinting was not officially adopted in India until 1897 it was Herschel who, when a magistrate in Hooghly in 1877–8, instituted the first known system.
Despite claims made by Henry Faulds, who was the first to publish on the subject, the importance of Herschel's contribution is generally recognized.
His work as the pioneer of fingerprinting was later built upon by Sir Francis Galton and Sir Edward Henry [qq.v.], whose methodical and systematic methods had practical applications for the detection of criminals.
Herschel pays tribute to them in his book The Origin of Finger-printing (1916).
He succeeded to the baronetcy in 1871, left India in 1878, and settled in Oxford.
There he became an unattached member of the university and, in 1881, at the age of forty-eight, was awarded a first-class degree in theology.
For a few years he was a lecturer in divinity at Hertford College and in 1911 published A Gospel Monogram .
Living at Lawn Upton, Littlemore, he engaged in a wide variety of philanthropic and religious activities, including the Temperance Society, and recorded the local dialect and vocabulary.
He was a member of Oxfordshire county council from 1895 to 1904.
Inspired perhaps by his father's early photographic inventions, he took a special interest in colour photography.
When presiding at the photographic convention held in Oxford in 1901, Herschel described developments by F. E. Ives and G. J. Lippmann.
An efficient but gentle administrator, with a particular sympathy and concern for the least important, he let people make their own decisions whilst watching from the background.
‘Sir William the Good’, an Indian called him in a farewell tribute.
Typical of him, wrote a friend, was his willingness to ‘clothe himself in the humility of a commoner's gown’(Oxford Magazine , 2 November 1917).
In 1864 he married Anne Emma Haldane, daughter of Alfred Hardcastle of Hatcham House, Surrey.
She died at the birth of their youngest son in 1873, leaving three other young children, two girls and a boy.
Herschel moved to Warfield, Berkshire, in 1908, died there 24 October 1917, and is buried in the family vault in Hawkhurst, Kent.
He was succeeded in the baronetcy by his son John Charles William (born 1869).
[Frederick R. Cherrill,The Fingerprint System at Scotland Yard , 1954; Gerald Lambourne,The Fingerprint Story , 1984; India Office Library records; family papers (Bodleian Library); information from relatives, the Fingerprint Society, and the Royal Photographic Society.]
Doloranda H Pember
,Mercedes (1900–1979), swimmer, was born in Brighton 18 November 1900, the youngest of three daughters (there were no sons) of Heinrich Gleitze, baker, and his wife Anna Kurr.
She spent her childhood partly in Brighton and partly with her grandparents in Herzogenaurach, Bavaria, being educated in both countries.
In the early 1920s, while working as a bilingual secretary in Westminster, she spent her spare time training in the Thames to become a long-distance swimmer, accompanied by a hired oarsman in a boat.
In 1923 she set a British ladies' record for Thames swimming (10 hrs. 45 min.).
In 1927 she swam the 120 miles from London to Folkestone in stages; and on 7 October 1927, at her eighth attempt, she became the first Englishwoman to swim the Channel (from France to England in 15 hrs. 15 min.).
In 1928 she became the first person ever to swim the Straits of Gibraltar (in 12 hrs. 50 min.), braving the perils of whirlpools, currents, and sharks.
Between 1927 and 1932, she also swam the Wash; Lough Neagh; from Portstewart in Ulster to Moville in the Irish Free State; Loch Ryan; the Firth of Forth; around the Isle of Man (100 miles) in stages; the Hellespont (from Europe to Asia Minor); the Sea of Marmora; Wellington harbour; Galway Bay; and from Cape Town to Robben Island, plus many more swims in South Africa.
During these years she also held the British record for endurance swimming, extending it from 26 hrs. in January 1930 to 44 hrs. 30 min. by the end of the year, then to 45 hrs. in 1931, and finally to 46 hrs. in 1932.
These swims were mainly in municipal baths, and she was supported by the community singing of the hundreds of people who came to see her perform.
She retired in 1932.
She had earned a great deal of money from her swimming, which she then used to set up the Mercedes Gleitze Homes for Destitute Men and Women.
She bought a large eight-bedroomed house in Leicester, and had it converted into flats, which were then made available to homeless families.
This charity was run in conjunction with the Leicester Rotary Club, which was involved in a scheme to move families from distressed areas to Leicester; the Mercedes Gleitze Homes provided temporary accommodation until employment and permanent lodging could be found.
The house was used for this purpose from 1933 until the outbreak of war in 1939, when it was used by the Leicester committee for refugees from Czechoslovakia, until it was destroyed by enemy action.
In 1929 Mercedes Gleitze married Patrick Carey, of Dublin, the son of Patrick Joseph Carey, tinsmith; they had two daughters and a son.
She died in Kingsbury, London, 9 February 1979.
[Swimming logs and certificates (in the possession of her daughter); personal knowledge.]
A K Newmark
,Peregrine (fl. 1831), vinegar maker and inventor, was probably born in Bristol in the early nineteenth century, the only known child of Peregrine Phillips, tailor and vinegar maker of Bristol.
Almost nothing is known of his early life.
His father is first traced as opening a tailor's shop at 34 Milk Street, Bristol, in 1803, where he lived and continued his trade until 1831.
In 1824, together with John Thorne, he also started a vinegar-making business, Phillips, Thorne & Company, at 48 Thomas Street, Bristol.
Some time after that the younger Peregrine Phillips joined the partnership.
In July 1831 notice was given that the partnership agreement between Peregrine Phillips senior, John Thorne, and Peregrine Phillips junior, was dissolved with respect to Phillips junior, although his father and Thorne carried on with the business.
However, in October 1832, the plant and stock-in-trade of the well-equipped vinegar works were sold by auction on the premises.
After this no records have been traced of Peregrine Phillips, father or son.
Peregrine Phillips took out a patent in 1831 for the contact or catalytic process for the manufacture of sulphuric acid.
He proposed a method for combining sulphurous acid gas (sulphur dioxide) directly with oxygen, using finely divided platinum, and absorbing the resultant sulphur trioxide on moistened pebbles.
Catalytic processes were not fully understood at that time and it was over forty years before Messel in England and Winkler in Germany perfected manufacturing techniques.
Phillips's invention eventually proved of major industrial importance.
[Sir Ernest Cook, in Nature , vol. cvii, 1926, pp. 419–21; British Patent no. 6,096, enrolled 14 September 1831.]
Robert Bernard Martin
,Gerard Manley (1844–1889), poet, was born in Stratford, Essex, 28 July 1844, the eldest in the family of six sons (one of whom died when a year old) and three daughters of Manley Hopkins, marine insurance adjuster and consul-general in London of the kingdom of Hawaii, and his wife Catherine, daughter of John Simm Smith, a prosperous surgeon.
Two of his brothers became professional artists, and Gerard (he did not use his middle name), who had some talent at drawing, toyed with the idea of being a painter before wisely settling on his poetic bent.
It was an affectionate family, but its warmth and devout High Anglicanism were occasionally constricting for Hopkins.
After a family move to Hampstead when he was eight, he was sent to a local preparatory school, then to Highgate School, where he was a prefect, much liked by the other boys for his honesty and uprightness.
In 1860 he won the headmaster's poetry prize with ‘The Escorial’; another schoolboy poem appeared in February 1863 in Once a Week , one of the few to be published during his lifetime.
In 1863 he was matriculated at Balliol College, Oxford, with an exhibition from Highgate.
At Balliol, where the prevailing Broad Church theology was quite counter to his own, he studied with a succession of brilliant tutors, who recognized the independent, unconventional cast of his mind; Benjamin Jowett [q.v.]was reputed (probably wrongly) to have called him the star of Balliol.
Much of his training was linguistic, which obviously shaped the poetry he was to write, and he also absorbed a great deal of Hellenism from Jowett and aesthetic theory from Walter Pater [q.v.].
The breadth of his studies helped keep his poetry from being parochial.
In 1864 he received a first class in classical honour moderations, and then in 1867 a first in literae humaniores , even though he was said to have read no more than half the required books.
At Oxford he had many friends in religious and artistic circles, chief among them Robert Bridges [q.v.], his trusted confidant and poetic sounding-board for the rest of his life, as well as his first editor, who put his poems before the world.
One other acquaintance was Digby Dolben [q.v.], a wayward and charming Etonian cousin of Bridges, who was also a talented poet and extreme high churchman.
He and Hopkins met only once, but that was enough to cause an emotional crisis in Hopkins, who was upset at the unexpected depth of his feelings for him, even after he was drowned two years later at the age of nineteen.
As an undergraduate Hopkins became increasingly High Church, with Edward Pusey and Henry Liddon [qq.v.]as advisers and confessors.
His surviving private journals show how closely connected were his religious sense and his anxiety over his sexual nature.
In 1866 he became a Roman Catholic convert, was received into the Church by his model, John Henry Newman [q.v.], and confirmed by Archbishop Henry Manning [q.v.].
His conversion was at the cost of some estrangement from his parents and friends.
In 1867–8 he taught unhappily in Newman's school at the Oratory in Edgbaston before joining the Society of Jesus.
At Oxford he had written poems of considerable competence, most of them religious but a handful presumably composed with Dolben in mind; only one or two hinted at the great originality he was to display in maturity.
Shortly before he joined the Jesuits he burned all he had written, as a sacrifice to his vocation.
It is fortunate that Bridges had copies of most of them.
There followed a seven-year period in which he wrote nothing except ‘two or three little presentation pieces which occasion called for’.
In 1868 he began a two-year novitiate at Manresa House, Roehampton, after which he spent three years as seminarian at St Mary's, Stonyhurst.
In the seminary library he came across the works of the medieval Franciscan theologian Duns Scotus [q.v.], and almost instantly recognized in them the philosophical backing for his own instinctive perception of the uniqueness of each being and created thing.
From this awareness of individuation or, to use the Scotist term,haecceitas , came Hopkins's overriding concern with ‘inscape’ in every aspect of the created world: the obsession with the ‘selfhood’of every object or being, at the same time that he perceived behind it the generically divine.
Both idea and phrase had immediate applicability to religious and poetic symbolism.
Following three years at Stonyhurst, he returned to teach at Manresa for a year, then went to study theology at St Beuno's College in north Wales in 1874.
Although he was much attracted to both the inhabitants and the landscape of Wales, he still wrote no poetry until December 1875, when the rector suggested that he commemorate the shipwreck of the Deutschland in the English Channel, where five German nuns were among those drowned.
His response was the great ode, ‘The Wreck of the Deutschland’, a masterpiece reflecting all the thinking he had done about poetry, pain, and redemption during his years of silence.
The revolutionary, apparently irregular and discordant sprung rhythm in which it was written, the vivid, kinetic, but often difficult diction, the perception of the universality of suffering: all mark it as one of the greatest and most experimental of nineteenth-century poems.
Unfortunately, the editor to whom it was submitted refused to publish a poem he found incomprehensible.
In spite of his disappointment Hopkins now felt released from his renunciation of poetry, and a succession of exuberant lyrical celebrations of the natural world followed, including ‘The Windhover’ and many of his other best-known poems.
After ordination in 1877 he went to teach near Chesterfield, then spent several months at the fashionable Jesuit church in Farm Street, London.
Neither of these assignments nor his cure in a new church in Oxford, St Aloysius, to which he returned with high hopes, was conspicuously successful, although the Oxford stay resulted in another burst of lyricism, including ‘Duns Scotus's Oxford’ and ‘Binsey Poplars’.
The idea of publication had been all but strangled by the rejection of ‘The Wreck of the Deutschland’.
His basic unsuitability for parish work was further demonstrated by assignments during the next few years in Liverpool and Glasgow.
He returned to St Beuno's for his final vows in 1882, then taught classics for two years at Stonyhurst.
In 1884 he took up his last post, as fellow of the Royal University of Ireland and professor of Greek and Latin at University College, Dublin.
His university duties consisted chiefly of marking examinations five or six times a year, avalanches of which arrived from all over the country; he found it increasingly difficult to judge them, unable to make up his mind about marks while driven by conscience to become ever more scrupulous.
He was painfully aware of being an exile in a land he did not understand, and he reacted occasionally with a kind of jingoistic longing for England.
At times the yoke of his vocation was almost unbearable, although there is no indication that he ever regretted assuming it.
On the worst of occasions he felt he could no longer communicate with God.
Yet out of the alienation, the desperation, and the neurosis of his final five years came what Bridges called the ‘terrible’ sonnets, such magnificent poems of spiritual desolation as ‘Carrion Comfort’, ‘No worst, there is none’, or ‘I wake and feel the fell of dark’.
He had a quick sense of humour, with a Victorian weakness for outrageous puns, little of which shows in his mature poetry except in his play with language.
As a young man he made friends effortlessly, but after his conversion he withheld proffers of easy affection, as if afraid of rebuff.
His normally responsive facial expression was firmly controlled; an Oxford contemporary remembered that for all its serenity an observer seemed ‘to be gazing upon some great portrait of a face rather than upon a face’.
He was little more than five feet tall, slender all his life, and exuding a febrile energy that served in place of strength until it was periodically depleted and he fell into a relapse, paralleled as he grew older by deep depression of spirits.
He loved to swim and was capable of walking thirty or forty miles a day with a quick, light step described as slightly feminine.
As an undergraduate he was something of a dandy, and even as a priest his appearance was remarkably trim.
Hopkins's attitude to the publication of his poetry had always been ambivalent, but his habit of sending copies to Bridges indicates that he did not want them lost.
He left them in safe hands.
Bridges waited until 1918, by which time he was poet laureate, before publishing a nearly complete edition, but he had already published a few poems individually to test the reception of the shockingly unfamiliar rhythm and language.
Within a few years of this edition Hopkins was firmly established in the canon of English poetry.
His passionate compression, luxuriant sound, and eclectic mixture of Anglo-Saxon, Latinate, and Celtic diction have made him for many readers both the greatest of Victorians and the first of the moderns.
Some two dozen of his poems, chiefly lyrics, are among the most enduring in the language.
Hopkins died in Dublin 8 June 1889 of typhoid fever.
He was buried in the common plot of the Jesuits at Glasnevin cemetery.
At his death he was unknown as a poet; on 8 December 1975, the centenary of the wreck of the Deutschland , a plaque to his memory was unveiled in poets' corner, Westminster Abbey, honouring a Roman Catholic there for the first time since John Dryden [q.v.].
[Humphry House and Graham Storey (eds.),
The Journals and Papers of Gerard Manley Hopkins , 1959; Claude Colleer Abbott (ed.),
The Letters of Gerard Manley Hopkins to Robert Bridges , 1935;idem ,The Correspondence of Gerard Manley Hopkins and Richard Watson Dixon , 1935;idem ,Further Letters of Gerard Manley Hopkins, Including his Correspondence with Coventry Patmore , 2nd edn., 1956; Robert Bernard Martin,Gerard Manley Hopkins, a Very Private Life , 1991; private information.]
J D Miller
,Richard (1874–1953), publicist and theorist on imperial themes, was born at The Lyth, Ellesmere, Shropshire, 16 October 1874, the second son in the family of two sons and five daughters of Arthur Trevor Jebb, landowner, and his wife Eglantyne Louisa (a distant cousin), daughter of Robert Jebb of Killiney, Ireland.
His sister was the philanthropist Eglantyne Jebb [q.v.]and his uncle the classical scholar Sir Richard Jebb [q.v.].
His family had been landowners in Wales and Shropshire.
He was educated at Marlborough and at New College, Oxford, where he obtained second classes in classical honour moderations (1895) and literae humaniores (1897).
His interest in the British empire was stimulated by a schoolmaster's setting for a Latin essay prize a subject involving imperial federation.
Jebb won the prize, and made the empire his principle concern for the rest of his life.
He intended to join the Indian Civil Service, but while he was at Oxford his father and his only brother died, and he inherited the family estate, which provided him with an income for the rest of his life.
The years 1898–1901 were spent in travel abroad, mainly in the self-governing colonies.
He made many journeys on a bicycle, including a honeymoon trip the length of the north island of New Zealand.
The colonial experience gave him material for his propositions about colonial nationalism, the subject which he quickly made his own.
In 1905 he published Studies in Colonial Nationalism , the book which brought him into public notice.
A fervent follower of the tariff reform movement of Joseph Chamberlain [q.v.], he began to write leaders and articles for the Morning Post under the editorship of his friend (Sir) Fabian Ware [q.v.]; in 1906 he wrote articles for it during the course of a journey through Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa.
In 1910 Jebb made his only attempt to enter Parliament, contesting the seat of East Marylebone as a Unionist with tariff-reform beliefs; the official Unionist candidate won, with a Liberal second and Jebb third.
He took no further part in party politics, confining himself to local bodies: he was a magistrate and served on the Shropshire county council from 1923 to 1934.
He continued to express firm opinions in letters to newspapers, but seems to have lost faith in parliamentary institutions, even toying with Fascism and social credit.
In World War I he served from 1914 to 1919 in the King's Shropshire Light Infantry, mostly in Britain, and in World War II he commanded the Ellesmere company of the Home Guard.
His books included the two-volume The Imperial Conference (1911),The Britannic Question (1913),The Empire in Eclipse (1926), and His Britannic Majesty (1935).
In May 1914 he had apparently financed a journal, the Britannic Review , but it did not survive the outbreak of war in August.
The Imperial Conference received much public notice, but the other books did not.
Jebb's ideas were relatively simple.
He saw that there was a sentiment which he called colonial nationalism, which was not merely separation, but a complex of local feeling and attachment to Britain.
Imperial federations and the Round Table group headed by Lionel Curtis [q.v.]did not understand the strength of this sentiment: their proposals, not taking account of it, would therefore fail.
Jebb favoured a system of alliance or partnership between Britain and what came to be known as the dominions: he approved of separate dominion navies in co-operation with the Royal Navy; he wanted tariff reform and imperial preference as means of binding the dominions more closely; and he wanted the imperial conference turned into a continuous body handling large defence and economic questions.
In 1900 he married Margaret Ethel (died 1949), daughter of George Lewthwaite of Littlebank, Settle.
They had two sons and one daughter.
Jebb died peacefully at The Lyth in Ellesmere 25 June 1953.
[John D. B. Miller,Richard Jebb and the Problem of Empire , 1956; John Eddy and Deryck Schreuder (eds.),
The Rise of Colonial Nationalism , 1988.]
D A Carpenter
,Thomas (d. c. 1276), revolutionary mayor of London 1263–5, was a draper with considerable property in the city, whose family had been part of its aldermanic ruling class since at least the 1220s.
That class, composed largely of drapers, pepperers, goldsmiths, mercers, and vintners, controlled the city through its hold over the offices of mayor, sheriff, and alderman.
Fitzthomas became an alderman in the late 1240s and in 1257–8 served as sheriff.
During this period the city's rulers enjoyed mixed relations with King Henry III.
Some were closely linked to him through the goods and provisions which they supplied to the royal household.
Others resented and resisted his attempts to tax the city and bestow market privileges on Westminster Abbey.
Early in 1258, when the king attacked his enemies amongst the city's rulers, Fitzthomas escaped unscathed.
He became mayor for the first time in October 1261 and was reappointed in October 1262, years in which the king dominated London, having thrown off the restrictions imposed on him by the Provisions of Oxford in 1258.
In June 1263, however, when Simon of Montfort [q.v.]resurrected the cause of the Provisions and advanced on the capital, Fitzthomas placed himself at the head of ‘the people’ who had taken to the streets in Montfort's support.
Thereafter, until the battle of Evesham in August 1265, he helped to make London a bulwark of the Montfortian regime.
Fitzthomas based his power on a militia and a revived ‘folkmoot’, the traditional assembly of all the citizens, whose vitality had been sapped under the aldermanic regime.
Now the aldermen and magnates of the city were ignored as the folkmoot elected Fitzthomas mayor in the Octobers of 1263 and 1264.
It also ratified ordinances which allowed various crafts for the first time to organize their activities.
It was these crafts — cordwainers, girdlers, fishmongers, wool-packers, for example— which formed the heart of the popular movement, having greatly expanded in numbers during the previous hundred years yet been excluded from political power and forbidden to organize by the aldermen.
There was nothing lukewarm in Fitzthomas's role in the revolutionary regime.
In March 1265, when he renewed his oath of fealty to the king (then in effect a captive in Montfort's power) he made clear ‘before the people’ that his loyalty was highly conditional: ‘For as long as you will be a good lord and king to us,’he told Henry III, ‘we will be faithful and devoted to you.’
After the battle of Evesham, Fitzthomas and his leading colleagues were imprisoned by Prince Edward (later Edward I).
The people of the city did not forget him, however.
In April 1266, when the leading citizens were allowed to choose the staunch royalist William Fitzrichard as custodian of London, the people called instead for Thomas Fitzthomas.
He was finally released from prison two years later on payment of a £500 fine to Edward.
Just why Fitzthomas threw in his lot so completely with Montfort and the popular movement in the city is unclear.
He had links with the rulers purged by the king in 1258, some of whom likewise emerged as Montfortians in 1263.
On the other hand, he himself had escaped the purge; he was also a nephew of William Fitzrichard, and was clearly considered completely reliable by the king down to 1263.
Whatever the reasons, Fitzthomas played a central part in committing London to the cause of Simon of Montfort between 1263 and 1265.
He died in or shortly before 1276, leaving one son heavily in debt and another living outside London.
[G. Williams,Medieval London: from Commune to Capital , 1963; Chancery rolls; T. Stapleton (ed.),
Cronica Maiorium et Vicecomitum Londoniarum , Camden Society, 1846.]
Patricia H Allderidge
,Richard (1817–1886), painter, was born 1 August 1817 in Chatham, the third of the four sons and fourth of the seven children of Robert Dadd, apothecary and chemist, of Chatham, and his wife Mary Ann (who died in 1824), daughter of Richard Martin of Gillingham.
There were two sons by his father's second marriage.
He was educated at the King's School, Rochester.
When he was about thirteen he began drawing.
The River Medway and the Royal Naval Dockyard (where many of his family worked) aroused his interest in shipping subjects, and the landscape of Kent was another childhood influence.
Early water-colours show him already using some of the techniques of miniature painting, and the scale and meticulous detail of all his work suggest that he was truly a miniaturist at heart.
Around 1834 his father took up business as a gilder and ormolu manufacturer in London.
Dadd entered the Royal Academy Schools in 1837, being regarded as one of the most talented students of his generation.
He began to exhibit subjects from history and literature, and in 1841 two small fairy paintings, ‘Titania Sleeping’ and ‘Puck’, attracted attention with their strong vein of poetic fantasy.
Other fairy subjects followed, but his major work at this time was a large number of panels for Lord Foley's house at 26 Grosvenor Square, for which he chose scenes from Tasso's ‘Jerusalem Delivered’ and Byron's ‘Manfred’.
In 1842 he was commissioned to tour Europe and the Middle East with Sir Thomas Phillips [q.v.], former mayor of Newport, to record the journey.
They left in July, travelling through Switzerland, Italy, Greece, Turkey, Syria, and Palestine to Egypt.
Here he first showed signs of mental disturbance.
He had begun to feel that he was persecuted by devils, and eventually came to believe that the Egyptian god Osiris controlled his will.
This delusion remained with him for life.
He arrived home alone in May 1843 and resumed work, but it was soon obvious to his friends that he was insane.
On 28 August he persuaded his father to visit Cobham Park in Kent and there stabbed him to death, believing that he was killing the devil.
He escaped to France, but was captured after attempting another murder and confined in an asylum.
He was extradited in 1844, certified insane, and admitted on 22 August to the state criminal lunatic asylum, then situated at Bethlem Hospital in London.
In 1864 he was transferred to the newly built Broadmoor Hospital in Berkshire.
For the first twenty years he was confined in prison-like conditions, somewhat alleviated at Broadmoor, where terraces allowed views of the surrounding countryside.
Despite the loss of all external stimulus he continued painting throughout his life, working in both oil and water-colour.
Many of his pictures were imaginative figure compositions, including the water-colours produced during the 1850s called ‘Sketches to illustrate the Passions’.
He also painted landscapes and seascapes, often containing elements from his travels.
He sometimes used sketches, but clearly had a remarkable visual memory.
He painted several portraits, and at Broadmoor he painted scenery for the theatre, as well as murals, furniture, and other decorative items.
His water-colours acquired an increasingly remote and sometimes visionary quality, deriving in part from the delicacy of texture and colour which he achieved through a technique based on the miniaturist's use of hatching and stippling, developed to an extraordinary degree of refinement.
His major oils were ‘Contradiction.
Oberon and Titania’, and ‘The Fairy Feller's Master-stroke’, both painted over many years in Bethlem Hospital.
A hard-working and dedicated student, Dadd clung to his identity as an artist throughout the desolate circumstances of his later life.
As a young man he was a charming and lively companion, and it was said of him that ‘a person more invariably gentle, kind, considerate and affectionate, did not exist.’
Insanity did not destroy his intellect, though his personality was radically changed.
After three decades in an asylum he still talked intelligently about painting, read classical poetry, and played the violin.
For many years, however, he was unpredictable and sometimes violent, and his conversation became rambling and incoherent when touching on the subject of his delusions.
He was of medium height, with dark hair and handsome expressive features which later took on an air of rather gloomy abstraction.
In old age he gave the impression of a scholarly recluse, with a snow-white beard, and mild blue eyes gazing benignly from behind spectacles.
Richard Dadd died from consumption 8 January 1886 in Broadmoor Hospital.
[Patricia Allderidge,The Late Richard Dadd , 1974.]
Sandra Raphael
,William (1838–1935), gardener and writer, was born in county Down, Ireland, 15 July 1838, the eldest in the family of two sons and a daughter of William Robinson, land agent, and his wife Catherine.
When he was about ten his father left the family and ran away to America with his employer's wife.
Robinson's gardening began in the 1850s at Curraghmore, before several years at the National Botanic Garden in Glasnevin, Dublin, under David Moore [q.v.], continued his education.
Then he worked as garden boy at Ballykilcavan, but in the winter of 1860–1 he left abruptly after a quarrel.
Legend has it that as he departed he destroyed the contents of the greenhouses by opening all the windows on a freezing night.
Robinson moved to London and the Royal Botanic Garden, Regent's Park, under the curator Robert Marnock [q.v.].
He was soon given charge of herbaceous plants, and studied both wild and cultivated plants, staying at Regent's Park until 1866.
On 19 April of that year he was elected a fellow of the Linnean Society.
His sponsors included David Moore, Charles Darwin [q.v.], and the nurseryman James Veitch.
He had already begun contributing to the Gardeners' Chronicle .
In January 1867 he went to the Paris exhibition as horticultural correspondent for that weekly, as well as the Field and The Times , and started to write his first two books,Gleanings from French Gardens (1868) and The Parks, Promenades and Gardens of Paris (1869).
From France he went to the Alps and Italy, and in 1870–1 he made his first visit to America, where he may have encountered his father, as well as many unfamiliar trees and shrubs.
In 1870 he published Alpine Flowers for English Gardens and The Wild Garden , two books which began his campaign for hardy plants in mixed borders and more natural settings, in contrast to tender plants in the geometrical bedding then popular.
The following year Robinson founded the Garden and edited it until 1899, when he was succeeded for two years by Gertrude Jekyll [q.v.], his lifelong friend.
He owned the journal for another twenty years and it was his main periodical warhorse, supported by several others he established:Gardening (Illustrated)(1879–1919),Farm and Home (1882–1920),Cottage Gardening (1892–8), and Flora and Sylva (1903–5).
More books appeared too, from small ones on mushrooms and asparagus (1870 and 1881) to God's Acre Beautiful (1880) about cemeteries but encouraging cremation.
In 1883 Robinson published The English Flower Garden , the Bible of natural gardening, which ran through fifteen expanding editions during his life and several more thereafter.
Its advice on planting incorporated some from other writers, but the bulk of the book is a series of descriptions of plants ‘suitable in any way for the British flower garden’, among them many new introductions.
The book's aim was to replace ‘the lifeless and offensive formality of wall-paper or carpet’ with ‘an epitome of the great flower garden of the world itself’, using more plants in softer colours, subtler associations, and simpler settings, like permanent planting in mixed borders of native and exotic plants or spring bulbs massed in grass.
This gentler style was the prevailing influence in gardening during most of the following century.
In 1880 Robinson simplified some of the planting at Shrubland Park, near Ipswich, where he also made a small wild garden.
On 17 July 1885 Robinson bought Gravetye Manor, near East Grinstead, Sussex, an Elizabethan mansion built in 1598.
With the house came two hundred acres and he added more land later, planting woods which were bequeathed to the nation, with the house.
His garden is recorded in The Garden Beautiful (1907),Gravetye Manor (1911), and Home Landscapes (1914).
My Wood Fires (1917) describes his preferred fuel and the ideal chimneys for it.
Robinson's belligerence was often demonstrated.
A battle with Sir Reginald Blomfield [q.v.], who designed formal gardens to display his houses, was fuelled by editorials in the Garden , damning terraces and topiary planned by architects.
Kew was criticized for its fidelity to bedding-out and Latin plant names.
Robinson, following John Ruskin [q.v.], preferred English names, as in his book about clematis or The Virgin's Bower (1912).
A vegetarian, Robinson employed William Miller to translate Henry Vilmorin's The Vegetable Garden (1885).
He subsidized other books too, including Miller's dictionary of plant names and Thomas Baines's book on greenhouse plants.
In 1910 he became partially paralysed, losing the use of his legs, but he continued to drive about his garden and woods.
In spite of his age and fragility he attended Gertrude Jekyll's funeral on 11 December 1932.
He died at Gravetye 12 May 1935.
He was unmarried.
[Mea Allan,William Robinson 1838–1935 , 1982; Ruth Duthie, ‘Some Notes on William Robinson’,Garden History , vol. ii, 1974, pp. 12–21; Betty Massingham, ‘William Robinson: a Portrait’,Garden History , vol. vi, 1978, pp. 61–85; Geoffrey Taylor,Some Nineteenth-Century Gardeners , 1951, pp. 68–115.]
Brent Elliott
,William (1805–1891), gardener, was born 7 September 1805 in Eccles, Berwickshire, the son of John Barron, gardener, and his wife Betty Johnston.
(The year of his birth is usually cited as 1800, as a result of a mistake in his obituary in the Gardeners’ Chronicle .)
He served three years' apprenticeship at Blackadder, Berwickshire, before entering the Edinburgh Botanic Garden, where he was soon placed in charge of the glasshouses.
From there he went to Sion House, Middlesex, where he helped to plant the new conservatory.
On 1 March 1830 he was appointed gardener to Charles Stanhope, fourth Earl of Harrington, at Elvaston Castle, where he took up his post on 2 August, with instructions to create a new garden.
Early in 1831 he began transplanting mature trees, becoming expert in their removal; he described his techniques in his The British Winter Garden (1852).
The gardens he created were seldom visited until 1851, when a series of articles in the Gardeners' Chronicle created a sensation by describing the transplanting operations, the grafted conifers, the avenues of multiple rows of different species, the architectural topiary, and the series of formal gardens enclosed by hedges.
The revelation of Elvaston led to a topiary revival in the 1850s.
The fourth earl died in 1851 and his successor retrenched on expenditure, opened the gardens to the public, and instructed Barron to develop a commercial nursery at the garden.
In 1862, on the death of Leicester Stanhope, fifth Earl of Harrington [q.v.],
Barron bought forty acres for a nursery site in nearby Borrowash, to which he moved from Elvaston in 1865.
In addition to plant sales, Barron offered transplanting and landscape gardening.
Among his firm's commissions during Barron's life were Stancliffe Hall, Matlock; Impney Hall, Droitwich; Locke Park, Barnsley; People's Park, Grimsby; and, his most famous work after Elvaston itself, Abbey Park, Leicester (1877–82).
In 1880 he successfully moved the Buckland yew, with a documented age of 800 years.
One of his transplanting machines was preserved at Kew.
Barron retired in 1881, but came out of retirement for a commission for the ninth Earl of Dysart at Welbeck Abbey in 1886.
In 1887 he was the first witness called before the select commission on forestry.
He was noted for his prodigious memory, was deeply religious, and a staunch advocate of temperance.
Barron married Elizabeth Ashby, and their only child, a son John (born 8 June 1844), having trained abroad in landscape gardening, became his father's partner by 1867.
Barron died in Borrowash 8 April 1891.
The family continued the firm into the interwar years.
Among the firm's later commissions were Queen's Park, Chesterfield (1893); the Bedford Embankment (1894); and Whitaker Park, Rawtenstall (1900).
[Gardeners' Chronicle , 25 April 1891, pp. 522–4;Gardeners' Magazine , 25 April 1891, p. 242.]
H F Oxbury
,Henry Shakespear Stephens (1851–1939), classical scholar, author, and naturalist, was born in Naini Tal, India, 20 September 1851, the son of Thomas Henry Salt, lieutenant in the Royal Bengal Artillery, and his wife Ellen Matilda Allnat.
He was a King's scholar at Eton College (1866–71) and went on to King's College, Cambridge, where he was a Browne's medallist (Greek epigrams) in 1874 and gained a first in the classical tripos in 1875.
From 1875 to 1884 he taught classics at Eton.
In 1884, disenchanted with his life at Eton, Salt decided to live at Tilford in Surrey and concentrate on a simple life, following his many interests in the field of humanitarianism.
For the next thirty-five years he published a spate of pamphlets and books on the subjects about which he felt strongly and the authors whom he admired deeply or disagreed with emphatically.
In 1888 he published Flesh or Fruit?
An Essay on Food Reform and in 1892 Animals' Rights Considered in Relation to Social Progress (reissued in 1900, 1905, and 1915).
The Ethics of Corporal Punishment appeared in 1907 and he returned to this theme in 1916 in The Flogging Craze, a Statement of the Case against Corporal Punishment .
In 1891 Salt published a pamphlet on Humanitarianism , a subject on which he frequently lectured, since it embraced all those matters about which he held strong opinions.
In that year he founded the Humanitarian League which became a channel for the promotion of his ideas.
He worked as its honorary secretary until its demise in 1919 when, according to his own view in his Seventy Years among Savages (1921), ‘It ended as it began in its character of Forlorn Hope; we had the good will of the free-lances, not of the public or the professors.’
Salt in his care for natural beauty and condemnation of the spoliation of the countryside was in advance of his time.
In politics he was a socialist and became a member of the Fabian Society shortly after it was founded in 1884.
He had a wide variety of friends, including J. Ramsay MacDonald, W. H. Hudson, and M. K. Gandhi [qq.v.].
In one of his letters to Salt Gandhi wrote that he had become a confirmed vegetarian after reading Salt's essays published under the title The Logic of Vegetarianism (1897).
In the preface to Stephen Winsten's Salt and his Circle (1951) G. B. Shaw [q.v.]said that ‘Salt was a born naturalist and never went out of doors without a binocular to watch the birds.’
Salt himself expressed his love of natural beauty in books such as On Cambrian and Cumbrian Hills, Pilgrimages to Snowdon and Scawfell (1908) and Our Vanishing Wild Flowers (1928).
His biographies and works of literary criticism include The Life of Henry David Thoreau (1890, reissued 1896),Tennyson as a Thinker, a Criticism (1893, reissued 1909),Percy Bysshe Shelley, Poet and Pioneer (1896, reissued 1913), and De Quincey (1904).
He could not resist the urge to criticize the Eton of his time; hence Eton under Hornby: Some Reminiscences and Reflections (1910) and The Nursery of Toryism , Reminiscences of Eton under Hornby (1911).
He also continued to demonstrate his early understanding of classical authors by translations of Lucretius (1912) and his masterly verse translation of Virgil's Aeneid (1928).
In 1879 he married Catherine Leigh (died 1919), the daughter of Revd James Leigh Joynes, a master at Eton.
According to Salt's friend, George Bernard Shaw, she refused to sleep with her husband and had a number of affairs with her women friends.
In 1927 Salt married Catherine, daughter of Frederick Mandeville of Brighton.
Salt died in Brighton 19 April 1939.
[The Times , 20 April 1939; H. S. Salt,Company I have Kept , 1930.]
Pamela Gerrish Nunn
,Marie (1843–1927), painter and artist's model, was born in Tottenham, Middlesex, near London, 10 March 1843, the elder daughter (there was also a son) of Michael Spartali, merchant and later Greek consul-general in London, and his wife Euphrosyne Varsini.
Shortly after her birth the family moved to Clapham, south London, where she was educated at home.
Languages and artistic subjects were her main interests and, showing an early talent for drawing and painting, she became in 1864 the pupil of the Pre-Raphaelite painter Ford Madox Brown [q.v.].
He was known to the family through its cosmopolitan acquaintance among writers, artists, and musicians.
Brown remained her adviser for over a decade, although she also sought occasional assistance from the painter (Sir) Edward Burne-Jones [q.v.].
She made her exhibition début in 1867 at the Dudley Gallery, London, with three water-colours of female figures drawn from literary sources.
She rapidly expanded her exhibitions to include the Royal Academy (from 1870), provincial outlets such as Liverpool, Birmingham, and Manchester, minor London shows, and the Grosvenor Gallery (from 1879).
Acclaimed as a Pre-Raphaelite painter by this school's chief commentator W. M. Rossetti [q.v.]in 1871, she became during the 1870s a recognized member of that group of artists seen by critics to be following in the footsteps of Dante Gabriel Rossetti [q.v.]and Burne-Jones.
She also became a celebrated beauty through the depictions made of her by the photographer Julia Margaret Cameron [q.v.]and the painters Brown, D. G. Rossetti, Burne-Jones, and Val Prinsep [q.v.].
In 1871 she married the American journalist and painter William James Stillman, widower, former husband of Laura Macks, and father of two daughters and a son, who died in 1874.
They were to have a son and a daughter, and another child who died shortly after birth.
The match was against her father's wishes and caused considerable family conflict.
The Stillmans moved to Florence in 1878, whence she continued to send work regularly to exhibitions in Britain and the USA, where her first appearance in 1875 had drawn favourable notice from the novelist and art amateur Henry James [q.v.].
For health reasons she returned to England in 1883, but her husband's appointment in 1886 as Italian and Greek correspondent for The Times drew her back to Italy, where she lived in Rome until 1897.
On her return to England the Stillmans settled in Surrey, where her husband died in 1901.
She exhibited only sporadically from 1897, mostly at the New Gallery, London.
Her subject-matter expanded to include landscape and flower-painting.
In 1900 she met the American collector Samuel Bancroft, who became her foremost patron.
She had solo exhibitions in the USA in 1903 and 1908.
Her last major work was painted in 1914, although she continued to paint regularly until her death.
Marie Spartali Stillman was credited by her friends not only with great beauty but also with a generous and amiable disposition.
Brought up in a wealthy home, she had to supplement her husband's irregular income during their married life.
Her step-granddaughter recalled her ceaseless industry as an artist, as well as her ‘Greek rages’ and her enduring appeal to men.
One of a group of women who were seen in their own lifetimes as emblems of Pre-Raphaelitism, she made a considerable executive contribution to this important British art movement, and was recognized at her death as the last surviving link with it.
She died 6 March 1927 in Kensington, London.
[J. Marsh and P. G. Nunn,Women Artists and the Pre-Raphaelite Movement , 1989; R. Elzea, ‘Marie Stillman in the United States’,Journal of Pre-Raphaelite and Aesthetic Studies , spring 1989.]
Ronald M Birse
,Charles (1814–1896), civil engineer, was born at Capenhurst Hall near Chester 14 August 1814, the third son of Richard Richardson, JP, a deputy lieutenant for Cheshire, who died when Charles was six years old, and his wife Dorothea.
He was educated privately in England and France, and then at Edinburgh University which he left in 1833.
From his earliest years he showed exceptional ability in mechanics and a natural talent for engineering, which his mother in particular did much to foster.
At the age of nineteen he was apprenticed to Isambard K. Brunel [q.v.]who employed him on the Thames tunnel and on some sections of the Great Western Railway.
In 1858 he was appointed resident engineer under Brunel of the Bristol and South Wales Union Railway, which was to involve a ferry crossing of the river Severn.
After the death of Brunel in 1859 he was promoted engineer-in-chief, and it was while working on the ferry piers in 1862–3 that the idea of the Severn railway tunnel came into his mind.
Although the tunnel was at first rejected on the grounds of cost, eventually in 1872 the Severn Tunnel Bill was passed by Parliament and construction began the following year.
In October 1879 the headings from the English and Welsh sides were only 138 yards apart when a great inrush of water occurred, and the work was brought to a standstill.
It was the end of 1881 before the most strenuous efforts of the engineers, contractors, and divers enabled the tunnel to be pumped dry and work to continue.
At the end of 1886 the tunnel was opened to passenger and goods traffic; it was more than four miles long and its construction occupied almost fourteen years, at a cost of more than £2 million.
In spite of some bickering and belittling of Richardson at the time, it was later acknowledged that by far the greatest part of the credit for its successful completion belonged to him.
Richardson was the inventor of the cane-spliced cricket bat and a catapult for bowling which was successfully used for many years.
He was elected a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1875; in his later years he wrote three papers on the Severn tunnel, one on ‘arches’, and one on the disposal of sewage.
He was unmarried, and died in Bristol 10 February 1896.
[T. A. Walker,The Severn Tunnel: its Construction and Difficulties, 1872–1887 , 1888;Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers , vol. cxxiv, 1896, pp. 417–19;Engineering , vol. lxi, 1896, p. 219; A. W. Metcalfe, unpublished memoir, DNB archives, Bodleian Library, Oxford.]