

Anthony P Munford
, Sir Donald Coleman (1901–1985), civil engineer, was born in Rotherham 15 September 1901, the only child of Joseph Henry Bailey, commercial cashier, and his wife Caroline Coleman.
Educated at Rotherham Grammar School and the Leys School, Cambridge, Bailey attended Sheffield University where he obtained a B.Eng. in 1923.
He was employed by Rowntree & Co. of York, the civil engineer's department at the London, Midland, and Scottish Railway, and the city engineer's department in Sheffield, before joining the War Office in 1928, as civil engineering designer at the Military Engineering Experimental Establishment in Christchurch.
Among the unit's tasks was the development of improved transportable bridges for the increasingly mechanized army.
In 1936 Bailey conceived the idea of a simple bridge structure based on standard rectangular trussed welded units (10 ft. by 5 ft.) bolted together in combinations to suit the job in hand.
Each unit could be lifted by six men and fitted a standard three-ton lorry.
The panels were built up from small components, enabling work to be subcontracted to a large number of small engineering firms without disrupting heavy engineering production.
When the War Office displayed no interest, Bailey persevered with detailed design in his own time.
It was not until February 1941, after the tubular-girder design of (Sir) Charles Inglis [q.v.]had failed under test (as predicted by Bailey), that he was ordered to design a new, all-purpose bridge.
Bailey's private design work enabled the first prototype to be ready by 5 May, with production bridges reaching the army in December 1941.
Lieutenant-General Sir Giffard Le Q. Martel [q.v.]declared that the Bailey bridge doubled the value of Allied armoured and mechanized units.
Over two thousand Bailey bridges were erected in north-west Europe between June 1944 and May 1945 and the design was also used extensively in Italy and the Far East.
After the war both second-hand and new bridge panels found a ready civilian market and many Bailey bridges remained in use around the world.
Bailey was appointed OBE in 1944 and knighted in 1946.
In 1946 he was promoted to senior principal scientific officer and became assistant director of the Military Engineering Experimental Establishment, subsequently becoming director.
The royal commission on awards to inventors awarded him £12,000 in 1948 for his work on the bridge.
He became deputy chief scientific officer, Ministry of Supply, in 1952.
Bailey served on a number of technical committees, giving his name to the Bailey committee on house interiors (1952–3).
Appointed dean of the Royal Military College of Science at Shrivenham in 1962, he exerted a ‘benign influence on the modern scientist-soldier’ until his retirement in 1966.
He was an honorary D.Eng.
(Sheffield, 1946), a commander of the Order of Orange Nassau, a fellow of the Institute of Structural Engineers, a member of the Institute of Civil Engineers, and an honorary member of the Institution of Royal Engineers.
His quiet, unassuming exterior hid great determination and considerable inventive ability, which he applied not only to bridges but to a wide range of other technical equipment.
It was a source of satisfaction to him that his bridges found as ready a use in the civilian market as they had in the military.
In 1933 Bailey married Phyllis Amy (died 1971), daughter of Charles Frederick Andrew, a retired farmer, of Wick, Bournemouth.
They had one son, Richard Henry.
In 1979 Bailey married Mildred Stacey, his housekeeper, a widow, the daughter of Herbert William Crees, licensed victualler.
Bailey died in Bournemouth 5 May 1985.
[The Times , 6 May 1985; press reports in the Rotherham Advertiser ; Guy Hartcup,The Challenge of War , 1970; Col. J. H. Joiner,The Bailey Story: a Tribute to Sir Donald Bailey , 1987.]
William Thomas
,Thomas (1768–1838), Whig politician, was born in School Lane, Liverpool, 5 March 1768, the second child and only son of William Creevey, the captain of a slave ship, and his wife Phoebe Prescott.
His father died soon after his son was born, and Mrs Creevey married again.
The evidence that Creevey was the natural son of Lord Molyneux, later first Earl of Sefton, is suggestive but not conclusive.
His rise in the exclusive society of the Whig party was rapid, and he called the Molyneux his ‘real’ family.
Creevey was educated at Newcome's School, Hackney, which favoured ‘the sons of noblemen and gentlemen’, from c .1780 to 1787, when he was admitted to Queens' College, Cambridge, whence he graduated in 1789 as seventh wrangler.
In November 1789 he was admitted as a student of the Inner Temple, and in 1791 transferred to Gray's Inn.
While practising at the Chancery bar, he kept up an interest in Liverpool through Dr James Currie [q.v.], whose circle included many local liberals like William Roscoe [q.v.], as well as rising Whig politicians such as(Sir) Samuel Romilly [q.v.]and James Scarlett (later first Baron Abinger, q.v.).
His political career was helped by an old school friend, Charles (later Baron) Western [q.v.], who introduced him to Eleanor Ord, daughter of Charles Brandling, MP, widow of William Ord, and a distant cousin of Charles (later second Earl) Grey, the future prime minister.
She had five children, and her own independent income, and Creevey married her in 1802.
In the same year he used his interest with the tenth Baron Petre to secure the parliamentary seat of Thetford (31 electors) with the approval of Petre's guardian, Charles Howard, eleventh Duke of Norfolk [q.v.].
Creevey described his political creed as ‘devotion to Fox’.
During William Pitt's second administration, he was an outspoken critic, especially of its Indian policy.
He was one of the managers who drew up the articles of impeachment of Henry Dundas, first Viscount Melville [q.v.].
In the Ministry of all the Talents his reward was to be made secretary to the Board of Control, 1806–7.
On the death of Charles James Fox [q.v.]in 1806, Creevey became dissatisfied with the party's leaders, and his attacks on the Grenvilles helped weaken Whig unity.
In 1812 he accepted an invitation to stand for Liverpool at the election with his friend Henry Brougham (later Baron Brougham and Vaux, q.v.).
The candidature of two Whigs in tandem lost both the election, and in 1813 Creevey was found guilty of a libel on a Liverpool inspector of taxes and fined £100.
Heavily in debt, following the failure of his appeal to the King's Bench, he had to be rescued by his friends, Western and Samuel Whitbread [q.v.], the latter paying him an annuity of £1,000.
From 1814 to 1819 the Creeveys lived in Brussels.
Creevey was there during Napoleon's ‘Hundred Days’ and left a vivid account of his experiences before and during the battle of Waterloo.
He also came to know and admire Arthur Wellesley, first Duke of Wellington.
Mrs Creevey died in May 1818.
In the same year the Duke of Norfolk gave Creevey notice to quit Thetford, receiving a long but futile rebuke in return.
Creevey returned with his stepdaughters to England in the autumn of 1819.
Creevey was returned to Parliament in 1820 as MP for Appleby, through his friend Brougham's good offices with Sackville Tufton, ninth Earl of Thanet [q.v.], holding this seat until 1826.
He was thus a witness of the political crisis of the ‘trial’ of Queen Caroline in that year.
But his speeches in Parliament were less frequent and more restrained.
In 1825 Thanet died, and with him went Creevey's ambition to be a politician.
Thereafter he lived for society and gossip, projecting a ‘History of his Times’, the materials of which were to be his long, delightfully observant letters to his favourite stepdaughter, Elizabeth Ord.
The book was never written and his only publications were two pamphlets,A Guide to the Electors of Great Britain, upon the Accession of a new King (1820) and Letters of Lord John Russell, upon the original formation of the House of Commons (1826) in which he declared for a thorough reform of the close boroughs he had always represented.
On Grey's becoming prime minister in 1831, Creevey got the post of treasurer of the ordnance at £1,200 a year.
He was MP for Downton from 1831 to 1832, but the borough was destined for abolition in the Reform Act of 1832.
When his post at the ordnance was abolished in 1834, Creevey's luck held, with the auditorship of Greenwich Hospital, which he retained till his death.
Creevey's fame is based on the amusing letters which were preserved by the Ord family.
His importance as a historical source is considerable.
No one described more graphically the appearance or recorded more faithfully the looks and the talk of the royal personages and major politicians of the time.
His nicknames for leading characters have often stuck.
But he was, after 1819, an observer more than a participant.
He conveys vividly the absurdity of a situation, but he is incurious about the underlying processes which shape it.
He has not, as a source, the shrewdness of his friend Charles Greville [q.v.], nor the sharp asperity of his contemporary J. W. Croker [q.v.]; but he had a greater sense of humour than either.
Creevey died 5 February 1838 in London.
He had no children of his own.
[Sir Herbert Maxwell (ed.),
The Creevey Papers , 2 vols., 1903; John Gore,Creevey's Life and Times , 1934, and Creevey , 1948; R. G. Thorne (ed.),
The House of Commons 1790–1820 , vol. i, 1986; R. Fulford and L. Strachey,The Greville Memoirs 1814–1860 , 1938; Creevey MSS, microfilm, University College London.]
Denis Richards
,Richard Hope (1919–1943), Battle of Britain pilot and author, was born 20 April 1919 in Sydney, Australia, the only child of Michael Hillary, DSO, OBE, Australian government official, and his wife Edwyna Hope.
He came to England at the age of three, when his father received a London posting.
From Shrewsbury School Hillary in 1937 went up to Trinity College, Oxford, starting to read philosophy, politics, and economics and then moving to modern history.
He stroked the Trinity boat to head of the river, and as a notably good-looking but somewhat challenging undergraduate enjoyed to the full the leisured life of his college.
He also joined the University Air Squadron with the motive, he later asserted, not of patriotism but self-realization.
World War II began before he took his degree.
After enlistment and commissioning in the RAF and completion of his service flying training Hillary was posted on 6 July 1940 to No. 603 (City of Edinburgh) Fighter Squadron in Dyce.
The Battle of Britain was beginning, and on 10 August No. 603 was ordered south to Hornchurch.
Hillary's valiant combat career lasted three weeks, during which he was credited with five enemy aircraft.
On 3 September 1940, over the North Sea, he was himself shot down.
He fell from his Spitfire, but was sustained in the water by his buoyancy jacket and parachute.
Horribly burned about the face and hands, he was rescued after three hours by the Margate lifeboat.
There followed months in hospital and repeated operations, mostly by (Sir) Archibald McIndoe [q.v.].
His face was miraculously mended — he was given new upper eyelids and a new upper lip — but he was left with very wasted and weakened hands.
During 1941 Hillary persuaded the Air Ministry to send him to the United States on a speaking tour.
But when he arrived there the British embassy expressed fears that his scarred features would only reinforce anti-involvement sentiments among American parents.
His talks were confined to broadcasts, where he could not be seen.
In America Hillary met many prominent people and enjoyed the affection of the film star Merle Oberon.
He also finished a book and secured its publication there (in February 1942) under the title Falling Through Space .
Retitled The Last Enemy and published in England the following June, this begins with a vivid account of Hillary's final flight.
The narrative switches back to Oxford and the RAF, and then forward again to his hospital and surgical experiences.
But it is concerned less with the facts of his life than with his feelings and motivation.
The self-analysis is sustained and unflattering.
He presents himself as an individualist, who only later and almost reluctantly becomes aware of the wider aspects of the war as a battle for civilization and humanity.
The success of The Last Enemy was immediate.
Hillary was acclaimed not only as a born writer but also as a representative of the doomed youth of his generation, although in his constant self-analysis he was in fact a most untypical British fighter pilot of 1940.
After returning from the United States in October 1941 Hillary had gone through Staff College, and thence to HQ Fighter Command.
But he became obsessed with a desire to return to operations — as he saw it, to keep faith with his dead comrades.
After repeated pleas he secured a medical board to consider his case.
Surprisingly, it passed him fit for operations.
On 24 November 1942 Hillary joined No. 54 Operational Training Unit at Charter Hall in Berwickshire for training as a night fighter pilot.
On 8 January 1943, in a night of poor weather, he was circling a beacon on an exercise when his Blenheim lost height and crashed nearby, killing both Hillary and his radio operator.
The subsequent inquiry, unable to determine a specific cause for the accident, concluded that the pilot had lost control of his aircraft.
After Hillary's death a Richard Hillary Trust was instituted and a Hillary archive was accumulated at Trinity College, Oxford.
After Hillary's death a considerable literature developed.
Arthur Koestler, Eric Linklater, and John Middleton Murry [qq.v.]all wrote about him, the last-named falsely hypothesizing a death-wish and suicide.
Lovat Dickson, his publisher, wrote a biography.
Much later, in 1988, Michael Burn, in Mary and Richard , published a selection of the love letters which had passed in 1942 between Hillary and Mary Booker, an understanding and beautiful woman twenty-two years Hillary's senior, whom Burn later married.
Hillary's letters, remorselessly self-analytical as ever, confirm the writing talent of this brave, charming, self-assertive, mocking, and rather uncomfortable young man.
[Richard Hillary,The Last Enemy , 1942; Arthur Koestler, ‘The Birth of a Myth’,Horizon , April 1943; Eric Linklater, ‘Richard Hillary’ in The Art of Adventure , 1947, pp. 73–98; R. Lovat Dickson,Richard Hillary, a Biography , 1950; Michael Burn,Mary and Richard , 1988.]
G L'E Turner
,Joseph Edwin (1868–1949), hatter and microscopist, was born at 321 Bridge Road, Pimlico, London, 7 December 1868, the son of Walter Barnard, hatter of London, and his wife Elizabeth Phillips Jacob.
He was educated at the City of London School, leaving at the age of sixteen as head boy.
He entered his father's firm, with premises at 97 Jermyn Street, London, later becoming its proprietor.
This business gave him the time and money to pursue his hobby of microscopy to a highly professional level.
In his own private laboratory, he worked with ultraviolet radiation at the ultimate resolution of the optical microscope.
From 1899 he undertook photomicrographic work at the Jenner (later Lister) Institute of Preventive Medicine.
He became honorary lecturer in microscopy at King's College, London, in 1909, a position he held for sixteen years.
His book Practical Photo-Micrography (1911) remained the standard English textbook on the subject for over thirty years.
In 1916 he was co-opted on to the trench fever committee of the War Office, and attempted to discover the causal organism of the fever.
In 1920 he became honorary director of the department of applied optics, National Institute for Medical Research, retiring during World War II.
He was elected a fellow of the Royal Microscopical Society in 1895, and served three times as its president (1918–19, 1928–9, and 1938–45).
He was awarded an honorary fellowship in 1948.
In 1911 he was a founder member of the Photomicrographic Society, whose Barnard medal he endowed.
He was elected a fellow of the Institute of Physics in 1923, and FRS in 1924.
Barnard's achievement was to develop the ultraviolet microscope (invented in Germany in 1903) for the study of viruses.
In the course of twenty-five years of persistent pioneering work, he was responsible for novel design features, such as the duplex condenser (1924), objective changer (1926), and cone condenser (1930), the last allowing for the first time ultraviolet, dark-ground photographs of viruses.
He collaborated with his friend Conrad Beck, the optical manufacturer, in applying these improvements to a production model, and the Beck–Barnard instrument, the first really efficient ultraviolet microscope, was placed on the market in 1929.
As a result of his work, a number of viruses causing disease in plants, animals (he worked on foot-and-mouth disease), and humans were first observed.
In 1925 he received national press publicity for discoveries concerning malignant growths.
As well as his business, and his devotion to microscopy, Barnard found time for other interests.
He was musical, having an organ in his house; he enjoyed travel, motoring over much of the Continent; and he was a keen photographer.
In 1894 he  married Amelia Muir Cunningham (died 1923), daughter of William Mark Burge, hatter; they had no children.
In 1924 he married Daisy, daughter of Frederick William Russell Fisher, sheet metal worker.
They had one son and one daughter.
He died in Addiscombe, Surrey, 25 October 1949.
[J. A. Murray in Obituary Notices of Fellows of the Royal Society , vol. vii, 1950–1; obituary in Journal of the Royal Microscopical Society , 3rd series, vol. lxxi, 1951; G. L'E.
Turner,God Bless the Microscope!
A History of the Royal Microscopical Society over 150 Years , 1989.]
Sandra Raphael
,, or ,Roger (fl. 1660–1685), gardener and nurseryman, was in charge of the garden of William Cecil, second Earl of Salisbury [q.v.]at Hatfield in 1661, when Samuel Pepys [q.v.]met him there on 22 July.
By 1671 he had a nursery near St Martin-in-the-Fields, for from there he sold fruit trees for the gardens at Woburn Abbey.
In 1681 he described himself as ‘gardener to her Majestie’, probably Henrietta Maria [q.v.], the dowager queen, at Somerset House, before she left England in 1665, rather than Catherine of Braganza, Charles II's consort, who is not recorded as sharing her mother-in-law's interest in gardening.
Also in 1681, Looker was the senior member of the group of four gardeners who joined forces to establish the Brompton Park nursery, a large one covering a hundred acres on the site later covered by the Victoria and Albert Museum and its neighbours in South Kensington.
The other three were John Field (d .
1687), the Woburn head gardener; Moses Cook(e) (d .
1715), the gardener from Cassiobury, who had published a book on trees and their culture; and George London [q.v.].
The nursery was the first to offer garden designs and the workmen to carry them out, as well as stocks of all the necessary plants, from forest trees to flowering bulbs and evergreens — especially citrus trees, myrtles, jasmines, and other tender shrubs — for the greenhouse, and fruit trees, vegetables, and everything needed in the kitchen garden.
A large collection of fruit trees in the nursery was used in an attempt to settle standard names for the varieties available, which were often known by different labels in different regions, or even different gardens.
Several other gardens were supervised by Looker, among them those of Henry Hyde, second Earl of Clarendon [q.v.], at Cornbury in Oxfordshire and Swallowfield in Berkshire, of Richard Boyle, first Earl of Burlington [q.v.], in London and at Londesborough in Yorkshire, and of Elizabeth Murray, Duchess of Lauderdale [q.v.], at Ham House, Surrey.
Looker died 3 March 1685, leaving a widow, Bridgett, and a son, William, who inherited his father's share of the Brompton Park nursery, but died before 1687.
[John Harvey,Early Nurserymen , 1974.]
Leslie Plummer
,Charles Cotterill (1858–1938), headmaster, was born 15 June 1858 in Stoke-on-Trent, the eldest of fourteen children, ten sons and four daughters, of Charles Lynam, architect, and his wife Lucy Emma, daughter of Dr Robert Garner.
He was educated at King William's College, Isle of Man, described by his brother A. E. Lynam as ‘a romantic place in those days with few of the traditions or restrictions of the modern public school’.
Here he first developed his love for the sea, which influenced so much of his later life.
After leaving school he spent a short time in his father's office.
In 1879 he won a mathematics scholarship to Hertford College, Oxford, and was awarded a second in mathematical moderations (1880) and a third class in mathematics (1882).
He was a radical and something of an agnostic, and read a long paper on the evils of war at the Union Society at a time when such views were certainly not popular.
Meanwhile his passion for sailing was developing by cruising and sailing on the inland waters of the Thames.
His chief activity, however, was rugby football.
He played for the university for three years, being a three-quarter in the renowned XV captained by Harry (‘Jugs’) Vassall.
Unfortunately he suffered damage to a knee which left him with a permanent slight limp.
In 1882 he was appointed assistant master at the Oxford Preparatory School in Crick Road, founded as a day school in 1877.
In 1886 he became headmaster and in 1895 moved the school into premises designed by his father in Bardwell Road, where it became known as the ‘Dragon School’, starting the long Lynam tradition which continued with his brother ‘Hum’ and nephew ‘Joc’.
Affectionately known as ‘The Skipper’, in the preparatory school world he became renowned for his ‘advanced’ views.
In 1893 he was a founder-member of the Association of Preparatory Schools (IAPS) and first editor of the Preparatory Schools Review .
As chairman of the IAPS in 1908, and again in 1921, he made an inspired plea for a wider cultivation of a liberal humanism by all teachers of youth, actively encouraging originality in boys and affording them every opportunity to discover and develop their own interest and genius.
He was also a strong supporter of co-education and his daughter was the first girl to enter the school.
As a yachtsman he had a touch of genius.
His cruises in Blue Dragon I, II, and III up the west coast of Scotland and across the North Sea to Norway and the North Cape became legendary.
In recognition of the latter, a distance of 1,387 miles, he was awarded the Challenge Cup of the Royal Cruising Club.
In 1885 he married Catherine Alice, daughter of James Hall of Kynsal Lodge, Audlem, Cheshire.
They had one son and one daughter.
After his retirement in 1920 he continued his travels around the world, and on board the MV Alcinous bound for Australia he died 27 October 1938 and was buried at sea latitude 37° 13' N, longitude 11° 107' E. 
[C. H. Jacques,A Dragon Century 1877–1977 , 1977; issues of the Draconian ;The Skipper , privately published by the Dragon School, 1940; logs of Blue Dragon (copies in Dragon School library).]
D W Jones
, Sir Joseph (1639–1699), merchant, financier, and MP, was born in London and baptized 17 April 1639, the eighth son of Nicholas Herne, merchant tailor, and fourth son of Susan, his second wife.
His early career is obscure, but in 1671 he became a freeman of the East India Company and on 23 July 1672 he married Elizabeth, daughter of Sir John Frederick of Old Jewry, London.
Frederick was himself a major figure in trade with the Peninsula and Herne succeeded him as head of their joint firm in 1685.
The Hernes had seven sons and three daughters.
During the 1670s Herne's elder brother, Sir Nathaniel Herne c. 1629–1679, second son of Susan and also partner in the firm, was the more prominent in public life.
But in 1678 Joseph was elected to the committee of the East India company, serving continuously down to 1686, and then from 1687 to 1694 and from 1698 until his death.
In 1686 he became a London alderman, sitting for Broad Street; but he discharged himself the following year, probably in anticipation of the purging of Anglicans from the bench.
Membership of the Mercers' Company followed in 1687.
It was after the Revolution, however, that Herne, having been elected MP for Dartmouth on 28 November 1689 (representing the constituency until his death), and knighted on 15 September 1690, emerged to some prominence.
He invested widely in a number of the new industrial and trading concerns of the early 1690s and, in partnership with the goldsmith banker Sir Stephen Evance and others, used his international trading connections to handle the government's military remittances, first to Ireland (1690–1) and then, between May 1691 and October 1694, to the Continent.
This latter business was undertaken in the most difficult financial circumstances and, even after the newly founded Bank of England had taken over from Herne, it was his credit that kept the artillery train in Flanders from starving late in 1694.
Elected governor of the East India Company for 1690–2, Herne defended the company's monopoly and the record of its previous governor, Sir Josiah Child [q.v.], in the Commons.
With Sir Thomas Cooke, his successor as governor, Herne appears to have been party to some extremely shady deals to break up the opposition group in 1693–4, and to have engaged in bribery to help secure a new charter for the company in 1694; all this brought a parliamentary storm on his head in the spring of 1696.
But when in 1698 a new company finally won the trade in return for a loan of £2 million, Herne broke with Child and brought the ‘old’ company into the subscription so that it could continue in the trade.
East India affairs apart, Herne's parliamentary career was limited to sitting on a number of committees (the committee set up early in 1695 to prevent the clipping of the coin being probably the most notable).
During 1696 he was appointed one of the commissioners to receive subscriptions for a land bank, but the subscription failed; and in 1697 he was made one of the trustees for circulating exchequer bills.
As chairman of the trustees, it fell to Herne to face the parliamentary attack of early 1698 on the fraudulent endorsements of these bills by (Sir) Charles Duncombe [q.v.].
About the same time, and rather surprisingly for a Tory committed to the old East India Company and one who had lost the remittance contract to the newly founded Bank of England, Herne also joined the so-called tobacco contractors.
These contractors had won from Peter the Great the right to export tobacco from England to Russia, but many were ‘whiggish’ and closely connected with both the Bank of England and the soon to be established ‘new’East India Company.
(Possibly this connection has some bearing on Herne's break with Child.)
Herne died suddenly of a brain haemorrhage 26 February 1699 worth ‘near £200,000’ and received a sumptuous funeral.
[J. R. Woodhead,The Rulers of London 1660–1689 , 1965; B. D. Henning,The House of Commons 1660–1690 , 1983; unpublished biography of Herne for the 1690–1714 History of Parliament, History of Parliament Trust; D. W. Jones,War and Economy in the Age of William III and Marlborough , 1988; Jacob M. Price, ‘The Tobacco Adventure to Russia’,Transactions of the American Philosophical Society , new series, vol. li, part 1, 1961.]
Peter Leach
,James (1755–1794), architect, was born in Benvie, near Dundee, 5 August 1755, the third son in the family of five sons and two daughters of the Revd James Playfair, minister of Liff and Benvie, and his second wife Margaret Young.
His eldest brother was the distinguished mathematician and geologist John Playfair [q.v.], and after their father's death in 1772 he assumed responsibility for the upbringing of the family and, it appears, for launching James on his career.
Where or with whom James received his training is not known, but by 1783 he was established in London; and in that year he announced himself by publishing a pamphlet on A Method of Constructing Vapour Baths , and began to exhibit at the Royal Academy.
His practice, however, was to be mainly in Scotland, and it developed rapidly from that time.
In 1785 he won the competition for a public building in his native county of Angus, the town and county hall in Forfar; at about the same time he secured the patronage of Henry Dundas, first Viscount Melville [q.v.], the most powerful man in Scotland, for whom he designed Melville Castle, Midlothian (1786–91); while his small number of English patrons included the collector Sir George Beaumont [q.v.], to whose London residence he added a picture gallery (1790–2).
By 1789 he was employing five assistants in London, his brother Robert, a solicitor in Edinburgh, was attending to his Scottish business, and in spite of his Presbyterian background he was working on Sundays to keep up with the pressure of work.
In the course of this success he also travelled abroad on at least two occasions: in 1787 he visited Paris, where his youngest brother, the inventor and pamphleteer William Playfair [q.v.], was then the agent of the Scioto Land Company of Ohio — and for whom he later made abortive designs for an ideal ‘American City’— while in 1792–3 he was in Italy, where his itinerary included the Greek temples of Paestum.
This promising start to a career was, however, to be abruptly terminated, for after eleven years in practice Playfair died at the age of thirty-nine.
A significant proportion of Playfair's executed work must therefore be regarded as not fully mature, but in spite of this he is a figure of considerable interest as a pioneering exponent of the spare detail and basic geometrical forms of advanced neo-classicism.
These qualities were already present to a degree in certain early works, such as the Forfar town hall and the contemporary Kirriemuir church, while at Melville the somewhat perfunctory detail in the castellated style is accompanied by other features reminiscent of the work of Sir John Soane [q.v.]; but his style developed rapidly after his Parisian visit of 1787, when he doubtless encountered at first hand the revolutionary architecture of E.-L.
Boullée and C. N. Ledoux.
The results of this experience can be seen, for example, in the Graham mausoleum in Methven, Perthshire (1793) and a number of unexecuted projects of his later years, but most particularly in his finest and best-known work, Cairness House, Aberdeenshire (1791–7).
Here the clear-cut geometry of the main block is completed by the extraordinary service range which clearly shows the direct influence of French neo-classicism — semicircular in plan with a similarly shaped entrance arch and primitivist Doric details — the whole, with further features such as the ‘Egyptian’ billiard-room, forming one of the most remarkable neo-classical houses in Britain.
Playfair married Jessie Graham, and their children included the well-known Scottish architect William Henry Playfair [q.v.], who was only three years old at the time of his father's death.
Playfair died in Edinburgh 23 February 1794, according to Joseph Farington [q.v.], of ‘a broken heart in consequence of the death of his eldest boy’.
[H. M. Colvin,A Biographical Dictionary of British Architects 1600–1840 , 1978; James Greig (ed.),
The Farington Diary , 1922; A. G. Playfair,Notes on the Scottish Family of Playfair , 1913; D. Walker and C. McWilliam, ‘Cairness, Aberdeenshire’,Country Life , 28 January 1971.]
Larry J Schaaf
,Anna (1799–1871), botanist, publisher, and photographic artist, was born 16 March 1799 in Tonbridge, Kent, the only child of John George Children, FRS, scientist [q.v.], and his wife Hester Anne Holwell, whose death, probably due to the birth, eventually occurred twenty months later.
Some aspects of her early life are suggested in her pseudo-anonymous biography of her father; otherwise, little is known.
Anna's mother died shortly after childbirth (the same fate that had befallen her father's mother) and the father and daughter developed a close and mutually productive lifelong relationship.
It was from him that she learned a love of science and a facility at working with her hands.
Children's influential position in the British Museum and the Royal Society undoubtedly encouraged his daughter's acceptance in these traditionally male circles.
Anna Children proved to be a highly skilled draughtsman and contributed more than 200 illustrations to her father's 1823 translation of Jean Lamarck's Genera of Shells .
A member of the Botanical Society of London, Atkins was a pioneer in the application of photography to science and to publication.
Her father had chaired the Royal Society meeting in February 1839 when William Henry Fox Talbot [q.v.]first publicly revealed the details of photogenic drawing.
Within a short time father and daughter were experimenting with photography.
Atkins's major contribution, however, was entirely of her own making.
Among scientists, botanists especially had grasped the potential of the new art of photography for recording complex scientific specimens.
As an illustrator and lithographer, Atkins extended this potential to the field of publication.
She undertook the first serious application of photography to science by making photograms of her extensive collection of algae.
Anna Atkins had become a close friend of Sir John Herschel [q.v.], another photographic pioneer, and his daughters.
She turned to his 1842 invention of the cyanotype process for her photographic work.
It was a clever choice.
The cyanotype was inexpensive and relatively easy to work; its only disadvantage, a blue image tone, was hardly a drawback for her chosen subjects.
Most importantly, cyanotypes were far more permanent than other early photographs and much of Atkins's output survived in good condition a century and a half later.
Atkins employed these cyanotype plates to publish the first book illustrated with photographs, pre-dating her colleague William Henry Fox Talbot's better known The Pencil of Nature (1844–6).
Her privately published Photographs of British Algae: Cyanotype Impressions was issued regularly in parts between October 1843 and September 1853, eventually incorporating more than 400 photographic plates, and was distributed to scientific friends and institutions.
The text was photographic copies of her own handwriting and the thousands of plates required were laboriously produced on hand-coated paper.
Atkins was a sensitive photographer who continued after this to create cyanotypes of other natural objects, largely for their aesthetic value, and sometimes in conjunction with Anne Dixon (neé Austen), a close childhood friend, the wife of a vicar in Sussex.
In 1825 Anna married John Pelly Atkins, a sheriff and railway promoter, the son of John Atkins, alderman and lord mayor of London, MP for Arundel in 1830–1.
There were no children of the marriage.
After his retirement from the British Museum in 1840, John George Children went to live with his daughter at Sevenoaks, strengthening their collaboration in science.
After a lingering illness Anna Atkins died at her home, Halstead Place, 9 June 1871.
[A. A.,Photographs of British Algae: Cyanotype Impressions , 1843–53; A. A.,Memoir of J. G. Children, Esq .,
1853; L. J. Schaaf,Sun Gardens; Victorian Photograms by Anna Atkins , 1985; J. L. Wilson, ‘The Cyanotype’,Technology and Art , ed.
M. Pritchard, 1990.]
Ronald M Birse
,Alfred Rosling (1850–1928), electrical engineer, was born in Islington, London, 14 May 1850, the son of John Richard Bennett.
He was educated at a private school and later at the Bellevue Academy, Greenwich.
His original leanings were towards railway engineering and he maintained an interest in the subject all his life, but his first appointment in 1869 was to the Indian government telegraph department in Karachi, on whose behalf he visited Baluchistan, Mesopotamia, and Turkey, receiving special mention for his proficiency in the testing of land line and submarine cables.
In 1873 he returned to England to take up the post of electrician to the Highton Battery Company, and in 1877 set up the first experimental overhead telephone line in England, only two years after the invention of the telephone in the United States by Alexander Graham Bell [q.v.].
Soon afterwards he engaged in research which resulted in his patenting of the telephonic translator (1880), the caustic alkali and iron battery (1881), and a telephone transformer (1881).
He entered the service of the National Telephone Company in 1883, becoming general manager and chief engineer for Scotland and north-west England from 1886 to 1890.
After short periods as general manager and chief engineer of the Mutual and the New Telephone Companies he set up in practice in 1893 as a consulting telephone and telegraph engineer, in which capacity he acted as consulting engineer to the telephone departments of Guernsey (1896–1921) and Glasgow (1900–4), as well as Portsmouth, Hull, Brighton, and Swansea (1900–11).
He organized the railway section of the 1880 international electrical and engineering exhibition in Edinburgh, and was vice-chairman of the executive council for the Edinburgh international exhibition of 1890.
His last work was the reorganization of the telephone system in Malta.
His many publications include On an Electrical Parcel Exchange System (1891),The Telephone Systems of the Continent of Europe (1895),Proposals for London Improvements (1904),Historic Locomotives (1906),The First Railway in London (1912),London and Londoners in the Eighteen-Fifties and Sixties (1924); as well as numerous papers and pamphlets on telephony and railways in scientific and professional journals.
He was a member of the Institution of Electrical Engineers and a vicepresident of the Institution of Locomotive Engineers.
He was unmarried, and died in Matlock, Derbyshire, 24 May 1928.
An obituarist described him as ‘a man of remarkable energy, great sincerity and charm, always ready to acknowledge merit in others’.
[Locomotive , June 1928, p. 177, July 1928, pp. 235–6;Journal of the Institution of Locomotive Engineers , vol. v (18), 1928, p. 448;Transactions of the Newcomen Society , vol. vii, p. 151.]
William Kingston
,(Henry) Christopher (1889–1970), historian of ideas and social cultures, was born 12 October 1889 in Hay, Breconshire, the only son and younger child of Colonel Henry Philip Dawson, Yorkshire landowner, and his wife Mary Louisa, the eldest daughter of Archdeacon William Latham Bevan [q.v.]of Hay Castle.
He was educated at Winchester and Trinity College, Oxford, where he obtained a second class in modern history in 1911.
His health prevented him from active service in World War I but from 1916 he worked in the war trade intelligence department and in Admiralty research.
He had enough private means to be able to follow his own highly original path of historical research and reflection, so that his first book,The Age of the Gods (1928) was the result of fourteen years of research.
But it was his second,Progress and Religion (1929), that first displayed to the full the depth of his thought and the astonishing range of his learning.
In this, he articulated the theme of all his subsequent writings, that religion is the dynamic of all social culture.
The Making of Europe (1932) discussed a specific case of this, showing that the ‘dark ages’ were in fact the most creative period in the culture of the western world.
He developed both these topics further in his Gifford lectures for Edinburgh University,Religion and Culture (1948) and Religion and the Rise of Western Culture (1950).
Dawson, who had become a Roman Catholic shortly after going down from Oxford, was an influential member of the group of writers which formed around the new Catholic publishing house of Sheed & Ward from the 1930s.
For them he edited and contributed to a series of books entitled Essays in Order .
In 1933 he produced Enquiries into Religion and Culture , in 1934 Medieval Religion , and in 1943 a very personal socio-political testament,The Judgment of the Nations .
The admiration which churchmen such as Cardinal Arthur Hinsley and Bishop G. K. A. Bell of Chichester [qq.v.]had for Dawson involved him actively as vice-president in the Sword of the Spirit, a proto-ecumenical movement which, to his disappointment, proved to be too visionary for the Roman authorities of the time.
After World War II, Dawson's output of books and articles increasingly stressed the twin themes of Europe and education.
He campaigned for an integrated study of Christian philosophy, history, literature, and art in the same way as literae humaniores had studied every aspect of classical culture.
Only this, he believed, could overcome the schism between religion and culture in the West.
Dawson's achievement owed virtually nothing to the academic world, apart from a short part-time lectureship in the history of culture at the University College in Exeter (1925–33).
When he was eventually offered a chair, at the age of sixty-eight, it was not in Britain but at Harvard.
He was professor of Roman Catholic studies there from 1958 to 1962.
He was sensitive to this lack of recognition, but at the same time fully understood how much he owed to having been saved from the academic treadmill.
In any event, he was physically frail and temperamentally extremely shy and gentle, so that he was unable to do his thought and learning full justice before even small audiences.
In contrast, in a one-to-one relationship he was an incomparable teacher.
He was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1943.
In 1916 Dawson married Valery Mary, youngest daughter of Walter Edward Mills, architect, of Oxford.
She was the ideal partner for such an unworldly and impractical scholar and thinker, taking all the burdens of daily living off his shoulders.
They had two daughters and one son.
When his father died in 1933 Dawson inherited the family property in Yorkshire and went to live at Hartlington Hall, but stayed there only a few years because of his frail health.
The family then moved to Boar's Hill, near Oxford.
When his failing health caused his Harvard stay to be cut short, Dawson retired to Budleigh Salterton, Devon, where he died 25 May 1970.
[Christina Scott (daughter),A Historian and his World: a Life of Christopher Dawson , 1984; M. D. Knowles in Proceedings of the British Academy , vol. lvii, 1971; personal knowledge.]
T H Turner
,Henry (1835–1918), medical psychologist, was born 5 February 1835 at a farmhouse called ‘Rome’ near Giggleswick, Yorkshire, the third of the four sons and fourth of seven children of Thomas Maudsley, yeoman farmer, and his wife Mary Bateson, daughter of a Lancaster farmer.
He was educated at Giggleswick School.
At the age of fourteen he was sent as a private pupil to the Revd Alfred North, who ran a small school for dissenters in Oundle, and he spent two years pursuing classical studies there.
When he was seventeen he went to study medicine for five years at University College Hospital, London, apprenticed to J. T. Clover.
Awarded ten gold medals during his studentship, despite neglecting practical work, in 1856 he obtained his MB as university medical scholar, with prizes in surgery, physiology, and comparative anatomy, and MRCS, and in 1857 his LSA and MD (London).
After working as house surgeon to Jones Quain [q.v.]at University College Hospital, he became assistant medical officer at Wakefield Asylum (1857–8), before a brief period at Brentwood Asylum as assistant MO, during which he was elected a member of the Association of Medical Officers of Asylums and Hospitals for the Insane (later the Medico-Psychological Association) in July 1858.
Appointed in 1859 as medical superintendent to the Manchester Royal Lunatic Asylum in Cheadle, he now committed himself to a career in lunacy (i.e. psychiatry), gaining his MRCP in 1861.
After three successful years during which he published his first, well received articles, in 1862, in his own words, he ‘became restless and desirous of change…and threw [himself]on London’.
In private practice, and by virtue of his influential writings, Maudsley soon became the leading alienist of his generation.
Joint editor of the Journal of Mental Science from 1863 to 1878, he was appointed physician to the West London Hospital in 1864, lecturer on insanity at St Mary's Hospital (1868–81), professor of medical jurisprudence at University College London (1869–79), and was elected FRCP in 1869.
Joining B. A. Morel and W. Griesinger in 1867 in a consultation of eminent European alienists to assess the mental state of the (Habsburg) Archduchess Charlotte, empress of Mexico, he became an honorary member of the Imperial Society of Physicians of Vienna and the Medico-Psychological Society of Paris.
In 1870 he was elected president of the Medico-Psychological Association and was Goulstonian lecturer to the Royal College of Physicians.
After he resigned the editorship of the JMS in 1878, he concentrated on writing (eleven books in all), medico-legal work, and a successful office practice in London.
In 1884 he was made honorary LLD at Edinburgh University and an honorary member of the Medico-Legal Society of New York.
In 1905 he delivered the address in medicine at the BMA annual meeting, and in 1912 became an honorary fellow of the MPA (from which he had resigned for reasons unknown in 1890).
In 1907 he contributed £30,000 to the establishment of a hospital for early treatment of mental illness, and for research and teaching in psychiatry, resulting in the 1914 foundation of the Maudsley Hospital, and an annual lecture in his name.
Maudsley's contemporary fame derived from an extraordinary memory, wide reading in philosophy (for example Bacon, Locke, and Comte) and literature, an extensive series of about eighty articles and pamphlets, and an admired lecturing style.
A positivist and a materialist, convinced of the importance of an inductive approach to science, he believed in the physical basis of mental illness, and developed the evolutionary ideas of Herbert Spencer and Charles Darwin [qq.v.]and the neurophysiology of W. B. Carpenter and Thomas Laycock [qq.v.].
Themes of heredity and degeneration underscored his written and clinical work, as demonstrated in The Physiology and Pathology of Mind , published in 1867, which was widely admired, and extensively translated, revised, and enlarged in later editions.
Body and Mind in 1870 (his Goulstonian lectures),Responsibility in Mental Disease in 1874 (a much reprinted handbook of forensic psychiatry),Natural Causes and Supernatural Seemings (1886), and Organic to Human — Psychological and Sociological (1916), among other writings, developed these ideas, but in a style increasingly obscure and dense, and pessimistic in tone.
His atheist views, his contradictory and somewhat unscientific analyses, his dismissive attitude towards women, and his convinced hereditarianism created notoriety and left him isolated.
A proud, often sarcastic, hypercritical man, he was of a handsome and impressive bearing, scrupulous in appearance, but he had few close friends.
His considerable fortune (some £100,000 in his will, with bequests) probably accrued from a private (and discreet) practice amongst the wealthy.
Little is known of his personal life and he opposed formal biography.
He enjoyed cricket, visiting Australia in 1902–3 to watch it, was fluent in French and German, and quoted Shakespeare, Goethe, and other poets at length by heart.
In January 1866 he married Ann Caroline (died 1911), the third and youngest daughter of John Conolly [q.v.], the eminent alienist, medical author, and leader of the non-restraint movement.
There were no children.
Maudsley died in Bushey Heath 24 January 1918.
[British Medical Journal and Lancet , 2 February 1918;Journal of Mental Science , vol. lxiv, April 1918; Henry Maudsley, ‘Autobiography, 1912’,British Journal of Psychiatry , vol. cliii, 1988, pp. 734–40,; T. H. Turner, ‘Henry Maudsley — Psychiatrist, Philosopher and Entrepreneur’ in W. F. Bynum et al .
(eds.),
The Anatomy of Madness , vol. iii, 1988 (also printed in Psychological Medicine , vol. xviii, 1988, pp. 551–74); private information; personal knowledge.]
A P Norman
, Sir Alan Aird (1901–1971), paediatrician, was born in Bournemouth 9 October 1901, the second of three sons (there were no daughters) of the Revd William Moncrieff, Congregational minister, of Bournemouth, and his wife Isabella, daughter of John Masterson, who was in the army.
He was educated at Caterham School and trained at the Middlesex Hospital, qualifying at the age of twenty-one, then obtaining his MB, BS (1923) with honours and a gold medal.
He became MD and MRCP (1925) and FRCP (1934).
He held house-officer and registrar appointments at the Middlesex Hospital and the Hospital for Sick Children, with a year in Paris (1923) working for the Red Cross.
He later spent a year in clinics in Germany (1930), studying respiratory failure in the newborn.
He was appointed paediatrician to Queen Charlotte's Maternity Hospital (1933), and physician to the Hospital for Sick Children, the Middlesex Hospital, and the British Postgraduate Hospital, Hammersmith (1934), where he developed the renowned premature-baby unit in 1947.
In addition, he worked in school medical and infant welfare clinics and as consultant for newborn babies to the Infectious Diseases Hospital, Willesden.
None of these appointments brought a regular salary and he supplemented his income by medical journalism; he was for many years medical correspondent to The Times .
He wrote numerous articles in journals relating to children's health, and was editor and part author of a number of textbooks, including Nursing and Diseases of Sick Children (1930).
Child Health and the State (1953) was based on his three Newsholme lectures (1953).
He was appointed to the first Nuffield chair in child health in the University of London in 1946 and held this post at the Hospital for Sick Children, Great Ormond Street.
This brought a further surge in activity in addition to his clinical and teaching duties.
He served on numerous Home Office and Ministry of Health committees, on the clinical research board of the Medical Research Council and as chairman of the Central Midwives Board in 1967.
He was also on the executive board of UNICEF and on the WHO maternal and child health panel.
He was president of the British Paediatric Society in 1962.
As director of the Institute of Child Health from 1946 he was responsible for its rapid development and for the innovative departments of growth and development, and tropical medicine.
He was also a keen JP, sitting on juvenile courts until well after his retirement.
Moncrieff was a simple man, proud of being a son of the manse, with a retentive memory and a quick mind, capable of discarding irrelevant details without hesitation.
His interest in the social aspect of child health did much to shape the nature of British paediatrics.
He was appointed CBE in 1952 and knighted in 1964.
He was made an honorary FRCOG in 1958, and chevalier of the Legion of Honour in 1968.
In 1952 he was Charles West lecturer at the Royal College of Physicians, and received the James Spence medal of the BPA in 1961.
He retired in 1964 with the title professor emeritus of the University of London.
In 1928 he married Honor Mary Constance (died 1954), daughter of Cecil Wedmore, an author.
They had a daughter and two sons.
In 1955 he married her cousin, Mary Katherine, daughter of Ralph Wedmore, a businessman.
She nursed him through his final illness, until his death 24 July 1971 at his home in Waterford, Hertfordshire.
[The Times , 26 July 1971;Munk's Roll , vol. vi, 1982; personal knowledge; family information.]
Colin Ford
, EMIL OTTO (1878–1972), photographer, was born 14 April 1878 in Munich, Germany, the only son and elder child of Philip Hoppé, a Munich bank director, and his wife Marie von der Porter, pianist.
Educated in Paris and Vienna, he took some art classes.
Moving to London in 1900, he joined the Deutsche Bank.
Having received a camera as a twenty-fifth birthday gift, Hoppé taught himself photography and in 1907 won £100 in a photographic competition.
He left the bank and opened a portrait studio, using the prize money as capital.
In 1909 Hoppé organized the British pictorial contribution to the vast Dresden international exhibition; in 1910 he held his first one-man show.
Over the next decade he became one of London's most celebrated portraitists and established himself as a theatre photographer, working for Harley Granville-Barker [q.v.]and J. E. Vedrenne (at the Court), George Edwards, Max Reinhardt, and Diaghilev.
In 1913 Hoppé moved into 7 Cromwell Place, once the home of the painter Sir John Millais [q.v.].
Determined to make the house a Mecca for the rich and famous, he decorated it elaborately and expensively.
But he made the studio (which he used for twenty years) simple and plain, matching a portrait style in which, in his own words, ‘character rather than flattery was the dominant note.’
His celebrity portraits were soon in great demand, their frequent publication earning him handsome reproduction fees.
Late in World War I, Hoppé took up fashion photography: when Vogue came to Britain, he was well placed to become one of its leading photographers.
He also worked for Vanity Fair .
In 1921 Hoppé was invited to photograph the king and queen at Buckingham Palace: the unusually informal results were a great success.
In the next year, he exhibited no less than 221 photographs — mostly portraits — at the Goupil Gallery.
The catalogue introduction was by John Galsworthy [q.v.], the critics were enthusiastic, and the show was seen throughout Britain.
Feeling he had exhausted the possibilities of working in studios, Hoppé began to turn his attention to landscape, travel, and news photography, in Britain, Europe, and America, publishing several books of the resulting pictures.
Later he travelled further afield, to India, Ceylon, Australia, New Zealand, and the Dutch East Indies.
When World War II broke out he was on holiday in Austria.
He returned to London to run a picture agency and to work as a photojournalist.
If some of Hoppé's portraits and genre pictures have not stood the test of time, his influence on his contemporaries, his restless experimentation, his role in helping to found the London Salon of Photography, and his nineteen books made him an important figure in the history of twentieth-century photography.
Only at the end of a very long career did he occasionally depart from the highest standards of restrained good taste.
In 1905 he married Marion Bliersbach.
They had a son and a daughter.
Hoppé died in Wildhern, Hampshire, 9 December 1972.
[E. O. Hoppé,Hundred Thousand Exposures (autobiography), 1945; family recollections.]
H F Oxbury
,Rafael (1875–1950), author, was born 29 April 1875 in Jesi, central Italy, the only son of Cavaliere Vincenzo Sabatini, musician, and his English wife Anna Trafford.
He was educated at the École Cantonale, Zoug, Switzerland, and in Portugal at Oporto and Coimbra.
As a young man he emigrated to England but did not become a British citizen until 1918, though he served in the War Office Intelligence Department during World War I.
His first novel,The Tavern Knight (1904), recounts the adventures of a cavalier escaping from Puritan troops after the collapse of the Royalist cause at the battle of Worcester in 1651.
This book set the pattern for over forty similar historical romances, the most successful of which were The Sea Hawk (1915),Scaramouche (1921), and Captain Blood (1922).
Sabatini's hero in The Sea Hawk is accused of murder by his brother, the actual murderer, and, after enslavement by Muslims in North Africa, earns the respect of his master, and himself becomes Sakr-el-Bahr, a Barbary pirate.
In Scaramouche the main character, intent on avenging the death of a friend at the hands of an unscrupulous marquis, joins a band of travelling players and becomes involved in the French revolution.
The first part of Captain Blood is based on the real-life misadventure of Henry Pitman, an English surgeon sentenced to death by Judge George Jeffreys [q.v.]for helping rebels who had fought at Sedgemoor with James Scott, Duke of Monmouth [q.v.].
He escaped to the West Indies and the later adventures of Captain Blood derive from the history of piracy in the Caribbean, including the exploits of Sir Henry Morgan [q.v.].
The success of Captain Blood led to the sequels,The Chronicles of Captain Blood (1931) and The Fortunes of Captain Blood (1936).
Sabatini studied seriously the historical events which form the background to his novels but did not hesitate to glamorize the adventures of his characters and to disregard the accounts of professional historians whenever it suited his stories to do so.
His critics accused his work of lacking in realism, but this did not lessen his popularity with those readers who enjoyed his enthusiasm for romance and adventure.
He had a genuine interest in history, and, as well as using well-known figures such as Columbus, St Francis of Assisi, Joan of Arc, and Lord Nelson [q.v.]in his novels, he also wrote biographies, including The Life of Cesare Borgia (1911) and Torquemada and the Spanish Inquisition (1913).
Sabatini's six plays were not as successful as his novels, the most notable being those based on his novels, such as Bardelys the Magnificent (1926) and Scaramouche .
However, the films of Captain Blood (1935),The Sea Hawk (1940), and Scaramouche (1952) featured some of the leading stars of their time, including Errol Flynn, Stewart Granger, and (Dame) Flora Robson [q.v.].
For the last ten years of his life Sabatini retired to Clock Mill, Clifford, near Hereford.
There he was able to indulge in his favourite recreation, fishing for salmon in the waters of the Wye.
He edited the 1952 edition of A Book of the Sea Trout , by Hamish Stuart.
In 1905 Sabatini married Ruth Goad Dixon; they had a son who was killed in a car accident in 1927.
That marriage was dissolved in 1932, and in 1935 he married Mrs Christine Dixon.
He died 13 February 1950 whilst on holiday in Adelboden, a ski resort in Switzerland.
[The Times , 14 February 1950; James Vinson,Twentieth-Century Romance and Gothic Writers , 1982; Stanley J. Kunitz and Herbert Haycraft,Twentieth Century Authors , 1942; private information.]
A W McIntosh
,Thomas (d. 1659), merchant, financier, and regicide, was the son of Robert Andrewes of Feltham, Middlesex, a Plymouth Adventurer and subscriber to the Massachusetts Bay Company, and his wife Margaret.
He was a member of the Leathersellers' Company (and its master in 1638–9), and from 1631 ran a wholesale linen-drapery business at St Margaret's, New Fish Street, prospering sufficiently to become an undersharer in the farming of the customs.
He came to prominence, however, as a leading financier for the parliamentary side in the civil war.
As the conflict with the king developed, he became more and more involved with the opposition.
When he was nominated for alderman in January 1642, there was some trouble about his unwillingness to take the oath of supremacy and allegiance, but he was eventually sworn in.
As war developed he took on many treasurerships for the army and Parliament, becoming one of the treasurers for war in 1645 as well as a commissioner for the customs in 1643.
He advanced large sums to Parliament and later invested heavily on his own account in the purchase of bishops' lands.
With Maurice Thompson and Samuel Moyer [qq.v.]he was involved in trading ventures with West Africa, which brought him into competition with the East India Company, but he went on to become the company's deputy governor in 1657 and its governor in 1659.
He was nominated in January 1649 to the high court of justice for the trial of Charles I; he did not attend the early stages of the court, but in the trial week he attended busily, and was in the group of commissioners who stood up to pass the sentence of death on Saturday 27 January.
Although he did not sign the king's death warrant, he was present at his execution.
Shortly afterwards, he served on a high court of justice for the trial and condemnation of James, first Duke of Hamilton [q.v.]and others.
He remained a leader of the City (he became the first lord mayor under the Commonwealth in April 1649 and served again in 1650–1) and a firm supporter of Oliver Cromwell and republicanism in the moderate City government in the fifties.
He was knighted by Cromwell in 1657 and was buried 20 August 1659.
A year after his death, the Act of Oblivion exempted Andrewes from pardon in respect of his lands, goods, and all rights of properties.
Andrewes was married to Eleanor, daughter of Henry Bonwick, of Horsley in Surrey.
He had four surviving sons and one surviving daughter, as well as a number of children who died in infancy.
[J. C. Whitebrook in Transactions of the Congregational Historical Society , vol. xiii, 1937–9; A. B. Beaven,The Alderman of London , 1908; Valerie Pearl,London and the Outbreak of the Puritan Revolution , 1961.]
Bernard H M Palmer
,George Josiah (1828–1892), founder and first editor of the Church Times , was born in Clapham, Surrey, 30 June 1828, the eldest son and second child in the family of four sons and a daughter of George Josiah Palmer, printer, of Savoy Street, Strand, and his wife Charlotte, daughter of John Hatchard [q.v.], the Evangelical publisher and bookseller, founder of Hatchards in Piccadilly.
He was educated at Clapham Grammar School and King's College School, London, and entered his father's printing firm as a compositor, later becoming manager.
In 1852 he purchased a small bookselling and printing business in Bloomsbury.
Trade did not prosper, however, and in 1860 he was forced to sell out and take humbler premises at 32 Little Queen Street, Lincoln's Inn Fields, later to be the home of the Church Times .
The turning-point in his fortunes came in October 1861, when he was asked to take on the printing and publishing of the Union newspaper, which was trying to bring Tractarian Anglicans into touch with Roman Catholics.
The connection soon snapped, however, as by mid-1862 internal squabbles among the paper's managers led to its demise.
But Palmer's connection with the Union enabled him to build up a link with leaders of the advanced wing of the high church party.
He decided to enter journalism on his own account and launch a popular Church paper.
On 7 February 1863 the first number of the Church Times appeared.
Like the Union it was founded to forward the work and views of the Tractarians, who were then fighting an uphill battle against fierce opposition in the Church.
(Such practices as having candles on the altar were then considered popish.)
The paper soon attracted readers, outshining all its Anglican rivals, and its sales rose steadily throughout Palmer's lifetime.
Palmer himself edited the Church Times from its foundation until his retirement in 1887, besides being responsible for its general direction and management.
He was a realist, having little faith in committees.
His experience of the committee-managed Union convinced him that personal guidance was the safest way to run any enterprise.
His paper was certainly outspoken: and, as his Church Times obituary remarked, ‘our friend was no respecter of persons, however high in official standing, if he deemed it necessary, in support of God's truth or the Church's laws, to condemn their conduct.’
Like so many Victorians he looked the part, his face possessing an authority worthy of a minor prophet.
Palmer was closely concerned with the work of the Church of England Working Men's Society and was for long its honorary treasurer.
He married Marianne, daughter of James Beall, upholsterer, of Cheshunt, Hertfordshire, in 1851.
They had six sons and a daughter, three of the sons spending all or most of their working lives in the service of the Church Times .
(The paper remained in the ownership and under the control of the Palmer family until its sale to Hymns Ancient and Modern Ltd. in 1989.)
Palmer died in Ramsgate 27 January 1892.
[Church Times , vol. cxlvi, no. 5217, 8 February 1963; family papers;Church Times archives.]
G S Ritchie
, Sir George Henry (1820–1896), sailor and hydrographer, was born in Antony, Cornwall, 13 January 1820, the eldest of three sons and second of four children of Captain George Spencer Richards, RN, and his wife Emma Jane, daughter of Samuel Harvey.
Richards entered the Royal Navy in 1832 and in 1835 was appointed midshipman in the survey ship Sulphur , serving in the Pacific under Captain (Sir) Edward Belcher [q.v.].
Belcher was by reputation difficult to please, and, of the surveyors who piloted the fleet to Canton during the Opium war of 1840–1, Richards alone received his praise.
In 1842, as lieutenant, Richards served in the surveying brig Philomel off the Falkland Islands and the coast of South America.
He commanded the Philomel 's small-arms men at the storming of the forts in the Parana river, Argentina, in 1845, and was promoted commander.
From 1847 to 1851 he served under Captain John Lort Stokes [q.v.], surveying the coasts of New Zealand, sometimes from open boats.
In 1852 he served again under Belcher, this time in a voyage to the Arctic in search of the vanished expedition led by Sir John Franklin [q.v.].
No sign of Franklin was found, despite a number of prodigious sledge journeys, including one by Richards which lasted for ninety-three days.
He was promoted captain in 1854.
Between 1856 and 1863 he carried out surveys of the coasts of British Columbia.
In 1863 he was appointed hydrographer to the Royal Navy in succession to Rear-Admiral John Washington [q.v.].
Among his innovations was the provision of charts, bound up as atlases, for the use of officers in Her Majesty's ships, in addition to those specially provided for the ship's navigation, which were rarely seen by officers other than the captain and the navigator.
He also organized the compilation and publication of charts showing the prevailing winds and currents for each quarter of the year.
In 1869 Richards, with Colonel Clarke, RE, took soundings along the length of the Suez canal, then about to be opened to navigation, and surveyed Port Said and its approaches.
Following the successful laying of an Atlantic submarine cable from the Great Eastern in 1866, British ships began laying cables in other parts of the world.
Naval surveying ships pioneered the way, taking soundings along the proposed routes and sampling the seabed: these activities led to a surge of interest in the scientific exploration of the sea.
Richards used his influence with the Royal Society, of which he was a fellow (1866), to arrange for scientists to sail in his ships on oceanographic cruises from the Faroe channel to the Straits of Gibraltar.
The results induced the Royal Society to form a circumnavigation committee, to explore the depths of the three great oceans by sounding, dredging, and taking water temperatures.
In 1872 the steam corvette Challenger , with scientists chosen by the Royal Society on board, set out on a scientific voyage of three years.
Richards was promoted rear-admiral in 1870, and became CB in 1871.
He retired as hydrographer in 1874, and became managing director of the Telegraph Construction and Maintenance Company, which laid 76,000 miles of submarine cables under his guidance.
He was knighted in 1877, and in the same year became a vice-admiral on the retired list.
In 1847 he married Mary, daughter of Captain Richard Young, RE.
They had four daughters and four sons, the eldest, George, becoming a rear-admiral.
Mary died in 1881; in 1882 Richards married Alice, daughter of the Revd Robert Tabor of Cheam School; there were no children.
Richards died in Bath 14 November 1896.
[L. S. Dawson,Memoirs of Hydrography , 1885;Proceedings of the Royal Society , 1897;Illustrated London News , 28 November 1896 (portrait); information from Mrs H. C. Miers (granddaughter).]
D H Jenkinson
,Alfred Joseph (1885–1941), pharmacologist, was born 19 August 1885 in Northover, near Glastonbury, the elder son and second of four children of Francis Joseph Clark, partner in C & J Clark Ltd. (shoe manufacturers at Street, Somerset) and his wife Elizabeth Mary Smithson.
As with earlier generations of his Quaker family, his secondary education was at Bootham School, York.
He entered King's College, Cambridge, in 1903, and gained first classes in both parts of the natural sciences tripos (1905 and 1907).
From childhood he had been fascinated by natural history, and at Cambridge he decided on a career which would enable him to combine medical research with his interest in comparative biology.
To this end a medical degree was essential, and he undertook his clinical training at St Bartholomew's Hospital, where he again excelled.
Once qualified (MB 1910, MRCP 1912, MD 1914, FRCP 1921), he began a career in pharmacological and physiological research which was interrupted only by service in both world wars.
In December 1918 he was appointed professor of pharmacology at the University of Cape Town.
From 1920 to 1926 he held the chair of pharmacology at University College London.
Then, from 1926 until his death, he was professor of materia medica at the University of Edinburgh.
Clark made two key contributions to the development of pharmacology and hence medicine.
The first was to establish that the primary effects of drugs on cells (here ‘drug’ is used in its broader sense) are in principle fully understandable in terms of the known laws of physical and biological chemistry.
This was achieved partly by a classical series of experiments to study the action of acetylcholine and atropine on their targets (receptors) in ‘simple’ test objects such as the isolated heart of the frog, and partly by a painstaking and even-handed re-evaluation of the welter of information of very variable quality that was already available.
The outcome was The Mode of Action of Drugs on Cells , 1933, and an immensely influential monograph on general pharmacology (Heffter's Handbuch der experimentellen Pharmakologie , vol. iv, 1937).
His work in this area greatly strengthened what can fairly be described as the British school of pharmacology, which is exemplified by Clark himself, and included Sir John Gaddum [q.v.],
H. O. Schild, and, later, R. P. Stephenson,(Sir) William Paton, H. P. Rang, D. Colquhoun, and (Sir) James Black.
Its emphasis on careful measurement and exact analysis of the events mediated by receptors was to be justified by the key role this was to play in the subsequent development of novel drugs for the treatment of, for example, angina and hypertension.
A second major contribution was through his textbook Applied Pharmacology (1923).
This was characterized by its physiological and pathophysiological emphasis, by the inclusion of experimental evidence wherever possible, and by its quantitative approach.
Clark had always loved computation, and a childhood estimation of the minimum possible capacity of Noah's ark foreshadowed his later demonstration in Applied Pharmacology that the preparation of some homoeopathic remedies involved dilutions of such order that there would be only one drug molecule in a volume of solution equal to that circumscribed by the orbit of the planet Neptune.
New editions of Applied Pharmacology were prepared at regular intervals, first by Clark himself and then by his successors at University College London.
He also served the wider scientific community, and the general public, by his influential membership of the Medical Research Council from 1934, and by his lifelong interest in the provision of safe and effective medication.
The latter led him to publish a pungent tract on patent medicines.
He was as vigorous physically as intellectually, and rowed for his college at Cambridge.
Later, he became a keen and accomplished mountaineer.
Clark was profoundly influenced by his service as a field medical officer in World War I. He also served in World War II, becoming a lieutenant-colonel.
His total and sometimes even austere commitment to the highest professional and personal standards can be understood in the context of that harrowing experience.
It was also the occasion of his resignation from the Society of Friends.
His many honours included the award of the MC in 1917 and election to fellowship of the Royal Society in 1931.
He became MRCPE in 1926 and FRSE in 1927.
In Cape Town he met his wife, Beatrix Powell, daughter of Robert William Hazell, medical practitioner in Cape Town.
They married in 1919 and had two sons and two daughters.
Clark died in Edinburgh 30 July 1941.
[E. B. Verney in Obituary Notices of Fellows of the Royal Society no. 10, vol. iii, December 1941; David Hazell Clark,Alfred Joseph Clark: a Memoir , 1985.]
A V Simcock
,Frederick John (1848–1911), inventor and physicist, was born 2 April 1848 in Taunton, Somerset, the only child of Frederick Jeremiah Smith, prebendary of Wells, a wealthy philanthropist and educational reformer, and his wife Anne, daughter of John Glover, gentleman, of Taunton.
He was educated privately and, from 1868, at Pembroke College, Oxford, where he read classics but was awarded only a pass degree, graduating BA in 1872.
After a time at Wells Theological College he was ordained deacon in 1877 and became his father's curate at St John's church, Bishop's Hull, near Taunton.
He was ordained priest in 1880.
Smith's true interest, however, was mechanics, his natural talent in which was encouraged by the engineer W. E. Metford [q.v.].
His first patent was taken out in 1875; he constructed dynamometers which won a medal at the 1878 Paris exhibition; and in 1879 he invented the liquid microphone.
Although succeeding his father as vicar of St John's in 1885, he resigned two years later to pursue a scientific career.
He had been invited to establish a mechanical laboratory at Trinity College, Oxford, where he became Millard lecturer in experimental mechanics (and later engineering) in October 1885.
Equipped at his own expense, the Millard laboratory opened in January 1886.
Smith's course, based on that taught in London by (Sir) Alexander B. W. Kennedy [q.v.], was open to the entire university, a fact recognized in 1888 when he was made university lecturer in mechanics.
His own research flourished in its new setting, generating eleven patent applications in the years 1888–99.
One speciality was the measurement of high-speed events, such as explosions and gunshots, using his tram chronograph, invented in 1888.
This led to his appointment by the home secretary to a commission on explosions of compressed gas cylinders (1895–6).
In 1897 he used the chronograph to measure the speed of a vehicle in an Oxford street, and presented the results in court.
He also experimented with photography, and did significant early work with X-rays from 1896, and with radio waves from 1897.
On 14 February 1897, on the centenary of the great naval victory of his distant kinsman Admiral John Jervis, Earl of St Vincent [q.v.],
Smith changed his name by deed poll to Jervis-Smith.
After failing to be appointed to Oxford's new chair of electrical physics in 1900, he worked to achieve similar recognition for engineering.
In 1905 a diploma was created, and in 1907 the university finally decided to establish a chair of engineering science.
It was not, however, intended for Jervis-Smith; and in April 1908 he retired.
In retirement he continued his experiments, and compiled a book on Dynamometers (1915), which was completed posthumously by his friend (Sir) C. V. Boys [q.v.].
Jervis-Smith's other interests and recreations were world travel, anthropology, and music; he was an accomplished organist and pianist.
He held the medal of the Royal Humane Society for saving a person from drowning.
He was elected FRS in 1894, and in 1898 received a honorary MA from the University of Adelaide.
He married in 1874 Annie Eyton, the second daughter of Thomas Taylor, physician, of Taunton, formerly of Adelaide.
They had one son.
After six months of illness, Jervis-Smith died at his home, Battramsley House, near Boldre, Hampshire, 23 August 1911.
[Archives in Museum of the History of Science, Oxford, especially MSS Museum 29, 62, and 89; obituary by C. V. Boys in Proceedings of the Royal Society , series A, vol. lxxxviii, 1913; Victor G. Plarr,Men and Women of the Time , 15th edn., 1899.]
Norman Gash
,Francis Robert (1785–1863), Conservative party agent, was born in London 6 September 1785, he and an older sister Susan being the only surviving children (two sons and a daughter having died in infancy) of Francis Warren Bonham, landowner of Ballintaggart, county Kildare, who later settled in England, and his second wife Dorothea Sophia Herbert of Muckross, county Kerry.
After private tutoring he went to Corpus Christi College, Oxford, where he took his BA in 1807.
In 1808 he entered Lincoln's Inn and was called to the bar in 1814 though he never practised.
In 1830 he was elected for the government borough of Rye and the following year was active as Tory assistant whip.
Though defeated at Rye in 1831 he took part in the management of the 1832 general election.
When Sir Robert Peel formed his first ministry in 1834 he appointed Bonham storekeeper of the ordnance.
He sat in the 1835–7 Parliament as member for Harwich and assistant whip, losing his seat at the next general election.
From 1832 he replaced William Holmes [q.v.], who was out of the House of Commons from 1832 to 1837, as the Conservative party's chief electoral expert.
Though making no attempt to stand for Parliament in 1841, he was again appointed storekeeper of the ordnance in Peel's second ministry.
He resigned this post in 1845 as a result of a parliamentary enquiry into alleged improper acquisition of railway shares.
He continued nevertheless to act as unpaid organizer and adviser to the Peelites up to 1852.
In 1853, through the good offices of W. E. Gladstone and other Peelites in the ministry of G. H. Gordon, fourth Earl of Aberdeen, he was rescued from penury by an appointment as commissioner of income tax, retiring through ill health some time before his death.
Bonham was a founder-member of the Carlton Club from where he carried out most of his work.
His detailed and systematic accumulation of electoral information provided him with an unsurpassed knowledge of constituencies and candidates and greatly contributed to the efficient Conservative organization which triumphed in 1841.
Modest, discreet, industrious, and loyal, Bonham enjoyed the friendship, affection, and trust not only of Peel but of many other leading members of the party.
His career marks an important stage in the development of party management in the post-1832 era, when legal registration of voters constituted a new factor in electoral calculations.
He died unmarried 26 April 1863 in the Knightsbridge home he shared with his sister.
His voluminous political correspondence was purchased from her by Peel's literary executors, the fifth Earl Stanhope and Edward, Viscount Cardwell [qq.v.], and destroyed except for the two volumes incorporated in the Peel papers, now in the British Library, and letters of his own retained by Lord Stanhope.
[N. Gash, ‘F. R. Bonham: Conservative ‘Political Secretary’ 1832–47',English Historical Review , vol. lxiii, 1948, ‘Bonham and the Conservative Party, 1830–1857’in Pillars of Government and Other Essays , 1986, and Politics in the Age of Pee l , 1953.]
Leslie Harris
,Nathaniel , first Baron Scarsdale (1726–1804), art collector, was born 23 December 1726 at Queen Square, Bloomsbury, the elder of the two surviving sons of Sir Nathaniel Curzon, fourth baronet, MP and barrister of the Inner Temple, and his wife Mary, daughter of Sir Ralph Assheton, second baronet.
He was educated at Westminster School and while there, in 1742, led three other friends into carving their names on the back of the coronation chair.
He attended Christ Church, Oxford, in 1745–9, and was made DCL in 1749.
Following Oxford he made a brief tour through northern France and the Low Countries.
At Newmarket in 1751 Curzon and Lord March (William Douglas, later the notorious fourth Duke of Queensberry, q.v.) rode their horses, Silver Leg and Chance, against wagers of £50 and £100 of which Curzon won the second encounter.
It is for the splendid house and the surrounding park at Kedleston that Curzon will be especially remembered.
When he succeeded as fifth baronet in 1758 he was ready to rebuild the house.
Several years before inheriting he had been formulating his plans in which he brought together important features of a number of great buildings he had seen and admired.
Several architects made their contributions, the most significant being Matthew Brettingham the elder, James Paine the elder, and particularly Robert Adam [qq.v.], who was also responsible for much of the interior decoration.
However, the inspiration for the magnificent hall and saloon was entirely due to Curzon.
The picture collection is an important one, much extended in character and size by Curzon's purchases and commissions.
The other arts were catered for in the music room with organ and harpsichord, and the library, including fine bookcases by Adam.
For Horace Walpole [q.v.], the dining-room was in the best taste of all.
In the park Curzon replaced the formal rides, canals, and ponds of the 1720s with a series of lakes and a softening of the landscape, for which Adam designed a magnificent bridge and other architectural features.
By the good offices of John Leveson-Gower, first Earl Gower [q.v.],
Curzon was appointed chairman of committees in the House of Lords (1775–89), which took up much time, but provided a regular income to help in completing the house.
Curzon became first Baron Scarsdale on 9 April 1761.
In 1750 he married Caroline, daughter of Charles Colyear, second Earl of Portmore.
They had five sons, three of whom predeceased their father, and two daughters.
Curzon died at Kedleston 6 December 1804 and was succeeded in the barony by his eldest son Nathaniel.
[Archives at Kedleston; T. H. Taunton,Portraits of Celebrated Racehorses , vol. i, 1887; L. Harris, ‘The Picture Collection at Kedleston Hall’,Connoisseur , July 1978; L. Harris,Robert Adam and Kedleston , 1987; J. C. Sainty, ‘Origin of Chairman of Committees in the House of Lords’, House of Lords Record Office Memorandum, no. 52, 1974.]
Maryann Feola Castelucci
,George (d. 1668), Commonwealth civil servant and Quaker writer, was born in Bristol, probably the son of Thomas Bishop, brewer, who became a freeman of the city in 1612.
George Bishop fought with the parliamentary army during the civil war, and evidently was the politically radical ‘Captain Bishop’ who in the army debates at Putney in 1647 attributed the kingdom's difficulties to Charles I, ‘that man of blood’.
His appointment in 1650 as secretary to the committee for examinations of the republican council of state brought him to London, where he and Thomas Scott [q.v.]headed the intelligence operation that skilfully countered Royalist conspiracy.
Bishop's reports disclose an intense, perhaps overstated, concern for the fragile Commonwealth, which in his estimation had ‘clouds darkening over it’.
After Oliver Cromwell became lord protector, Bishop gradually turned over his duties to John Thurloe [q.v.]and retired to Bristol, where he unsuccessfully stood for Parliament in 1654.
Bishop's association with the Quakers followed the visit of itinerant preachers John Audland and John Camm [q.v.]to Bristol in 1654.
His conversion sharpened his criticism of national and local politicians, who in turn questioned his integrity.
Bishop soon abandoned the ‘exalted’ demeanour that troubled his brethren, and his organizational skills made him an invaluable member of the emerging movement.
His neighbour Edward Pyot and other imprisoned Quakers forwarded Bishop accounts of their experiences, which he published in The West Answering to the North (1656), a work formerly credited to George Fox [q.v.].
As a Quaker spokesman, Bishop denounced the Protectorate's religious and social policy, and in 1656 wrote to Cromwell admonishing him for not ‘pleading the cause of the Lord's oppressed’.
In 1659 he similarly petitioned the recalled Rump Parliament to remember ‘The Good Old Cause’, and initiate reform; and in June 1660 he addressed a ‘warning’ to the newly restored Charles II, explaining that like King David he must govern the faithful justly.
After 1660 he was arrested on several occasions for attending illegal religious meetings.
A man of evident education, Bishop wrote more than thirty Quaker tracts, employing apocalyptic imagery and grounding his arguments for religious liberty in scripture, early church history, and natural reason.
He advocated passive resistance to laws prohibiting Quaker worship, reasoning that mortal restraints on conscience were ineffective since force ‘can reach no further than to that which is of the same nature with it’.
Bishop's best-known work,New England Judged (1661, 1667, 1703), is a standard account of Quaker persecution in colonial America, compiled from the first-hand accounts of others.
In 1648 Bishop married Elizabeth, daughter of William Canne, mayor of Bristol and a powerful local figure.
His daughter Elizabeth, born in 1655, married the Quaker writer Richard Vickris [q.v.]in 1672 and raised eight or nine children at Firgrove, the Vickris estate in Chew Magna, Somerset.
Bishop died 7 November 1668.
A state official commented on the unusually large gathering of ‘that sect’ who attended the burial of their ‘archbishop’near Redcliffe parish: the turnout fittingly symbolized Bishop's contribution to the establishment of Quakerism in Bristol.
[G. E. Aylmer,The State's Servants: The Civil Service of the English Republic 1649–1660 , 1973; Quaker records in Bristol Record Office and Friends' House Library, London;Thurloe State Papers ;Calendar of State Papers Domestic ; Joseph W. Martin, ‘The Pre-Quaker Writings of George Bishop’,Quaker History , vol. lxxiv, 1985, pp. 20–7; J. Smith (ed.),
A Descriptive Catalogue of Friends' Books , 1867; M. F. Castelucci, ‘An Experience of Defeat: George Bishop, from Soldier to Quaker’, dissertation for the City University of New York, 1990.]
R V Jones
,Evan James (1903–1945), physicist, was born 8 June 1903 in Cwmsychpant, near Llanybyther, Cardiganshire, the youngest of the three sons of James Williams, stonemason, a zealous Congregationalist, and a winner of many prizes for Welsh lyrics at local eisteddfods, and his wife Elizabeth Lloyd, a local girl.
Educated at Llanwenog National School and at Llandysul County School, he won a scholarship in 1919 to Swansea Technical College, which became the University College of Swansea in 1920, where he gained first-class honours (1923) and, in 1924, an M.Sc.
degree.
Winning a fellowship of the University of Wales in 1925, he went on to work with (Sir) W. L. Bragg [q.v.]in Manchester, where he was awarded a Ph.D.
in 1926.
Then, with an 1851 exhibition, he went to Cambridge, gaining a Ph.D.
there in 1929, and a D.Sc.
(Wales) in 1930.
After a further spell in Manchester, a year with Niels Bohr in Copenhagen, and another in Liverpool with (Sir) James Chadwick [q.v.], he moved in 1938 to the chair of physics at Aberystwyth.
His research was mainly in atomic physics, where his theoretical studies of the impact of elementary particles on atoms were steps towards the discovery of the meson.
Equally adept as an experimenter, he built high-performance cloud chambers at Liverpool and Aberystwyth, and obtained some of the earliest photographs from which the mass of the meson could be deduced.
The brilliance of his contributions was recognized by his early election as a fellow of the Royal Society in 1939.
In 1940 Williams joined the Royal Aircraft Establishment at Farnborough to develop new physical methods of detecting submerged U-boats from the air.
In March 1941 as principal scientific officer he joined P. M. S. (later Baron) Blackett [q.v.]in the operational research section at Coastal Command, where his task was to improve the methods of finding and sinking U-boats.
To attack a U-boat an aircraft had first to sight it on the surface.
It was then the practice to drop depth charges with a setting of 100 feet, on the assumption that the U-boat would often have had time to submerge.
Williams showed that it would be much better to concentrate on attacking U-boats which could still be seen on the surface, with a depth-charge setting of 25 feet, and ignore those which had had time to submerge, because of the uncertainty in knowing their exact position.
He thereby substantially improved the lethal effect of attack.
In 1941 Williams became director of operational research at Coastal Command.
There he was particularly concerned with such questions as the size of convoys, which he successfully made larger, and the concerted offensive against U-boats in the Bay of Biscay on passage to and from their shore bases.
Blackett later wrote that ‘probably the anti-submarine campaign in 1943 was waged under closer scientific control than any other campaign in the history of the British Armed Forces.’
It gave rise to the term ‘slide-rule strategy’ and Williams was one of its foremost creators.
Ebullient, and with a broad grin, Williams early sensed his own powers — at sixteen he told a friend that he would have a fellowship of the University of Wales, an 1851 exhibition, a D.Sc., and an FRS by his middle thirties.
All these came about, and such was his nature that this seeming conceit offended none.
He had a special sympathy for the underdog, and he enjoyed hobnobbing with all and sundry.
Of stocky build and great physical strength, and with blue eyes, bushy eyebrows, and dark brown hair, he had a passion for cricket and a lasting propensity for practical jokes, which may well have contributed to his success as a scientific strategist.
In 1944 he learned that he had cancer.
After a second operation in January 1945 he nevertheless visited Washington in connection with the Far Eastern war and, although dying, he wrote a scientific paper for the sixtieth-birthday tribute to Niels Bohr.
He died unmarried 29 September 1945 at his parents' home in Llanybyther, Cardiganshire.
[P. M. S. Blackett in Obituary Notices of Fellows of the Royal Society , vol. v, 1947; various tributes, some in English and others in Welsh, collected in Yr Athro Evan James Williams D.Sc., F.R.S.
1903–1945 , ed.
J. Tysul Jones, 1970.]
T E Hartley
,Francis (c. 1530–1592), civil lawyer and MP, was the second son of Robert Alford and his wife Anne Brydges.
He gained a BA at Cambridge in 1549, and was admitted to Christ Church, Oxford, in 1550.
Until 1555 he was clerk of the market in Oxford and a proctor in the vice-chancellor's court.
The civil law was apparently his chosen career, and during 1557–9 he studied in Italy.
He wrote some short works, for instance on legal reform and trading corporations, but later hopes to be allowed to write an account of Elizabeth I's reign, with access to the papers of William Cecil, Baron Burghley [q.v.], were never fulfilled.
Despite his connections in high places, Alford's life was one of failed ambition.
With Thomas Sackville, Baron Buckhurst [q.v.], as a cousin and constant support, perhaps even financially, Alford was ostensibly well placed for advancement, and he was able to secure election to borough seats in Lancashire, Cornwall, Berkshire, and Sussex so that he sat in nine of the thirteen parliamentary sessions of Elizabeth's reign.
Beyond this, the minor offices of rector in Croxton, Cambridgeshire, and chanter at Lincoln Cathedral were the only posts to come his way.
Alford obviously aroused distrust.
He may have gone to Italy in order to escape the regime of Queen Mary I, and his support of the Protestant settlement of 1559 was clear, but his credit suffered because his Catholic wife practised her faith within his household.
A visit to France, the details of which remain unclear, also led to the accusation that he had associated with the supporters of Mary Queen of Scots [q.v.]there: this may account for the apparent loss of royal favour by the mid-1570s.
Neither was he popular in Parliament.
While most members were unreservedly against Mary by 1572, Alford insisted that being privy to the plots against Elizabeth was a necessary condition of her guilt, and he was uncertain of the legal propriety of trying her, a foreign sovereign, in England.
This was anathema to the predominant mentality of the time, and a stark contrast to the later argument of Job Throckmorton [q.v.]that Parliament had full competence in the matter.
The hostile reception of Alford's views led him to reflect that he was being denied the parliamentary right of free speech.
Curiously, his caution about the Scottish queen was apparently shared by Elizabeth, and, like her, he was out of sympathy with parliamentary initiatives for further reform of the Church.
But he was not always a parliamentary loner: in 1586–7 he supported the clamour for Mary's execution, and he also wanted to urge the queen to accept sovereignty of the Netherlands in the struggle against Spain.
More than this, he appears to have served on numerous committees dealing with a wide range of bills: in this way, perhaps more than any other, he may be considered to have, as he put it, ‘done my country some good, whereunto we are all called’.
He married Agnes, widow of Augustine de Augustinis, physician to Thomas Wolsey [q.v.], and he appears to have had one son.
He was buried 3 September 1592.
[J. G. Alford,Alford Family Notes , 1908; P. W. Hasler,The House of Commons 1558–1603 , 1981; G. R. Elton,The Parliament of England 1559–1581 , 1986; T. E. Hartley (ed.),
Proceedings in the Parliaments of Elizabeth, 1558–81 , 1981.]
Colin M Berkeley
, Sir Robert (c. 1547–1611), soldier and admiral, was born in Charlinch, Somerset,c .1547, the second son of the surviving seven sons and five daughters of William Crosse, gentleman, and his wife Elizabeth.
Although Crosse went to sea as early as 1569, he spent most of the years to 1584 in soldiering, at times in Ireland and in Scotland, where he served with the Regency forces and was wounded at the siege of Edinburgh Castle in 1573.
From 1585 to 1599 Crosse served at sea.
He sailed with Sir Francis Drake [q.v.]to the West Indies in 1585–6 and in 1587 took part in the raid on Cadiz.
During the Armada campaign he was rear-admiral of Drake's squadron, his good performance meriting the inclusion of his portrait in the Armada tapestries.
He was in charge of the resupply of the English forces during the 1589 Portuguese expedition, and he and his supply ships went on to sack the island of Porto Santo.
From 1590 to 1595 Crosse maintained an interest in privateering, often in association with Sir Walter Ralegh [q.v.].
His only official service during this period was in 1591, as rear-admiral of the royal fleet whose cruise climaxed with the loss of the Revenge .
In 1592 Crosse was vice-admiral of a fleet assembled by Ralegh.
His vessel, the Foresight , played a major part in the taking of the huge East Indian carrack Madre de Dios , the richest single prize ever brought into an English port.
In 1595 Crosse was preparing to accompany Ralegh to Guiana when he was recalled to the navy at the queen's specific order.
In 1596 Crosse was a vice-admiral at the capture of Cadiz, where he was knighted.
He served as an admiral in 1597 and 1598.
After his naval service Crosse remained about the court.
Four days after the failure of the 1601 rebellion led by Robert Devereux, second Earl of Essex [q.v.],
Crosse was approached by Captain Thomas Lee [q.v.]to participate in an attempt to take Queen Elizabeth hostage.
Crosse reported this and gave evidence at Lee's trial.
Crosse's close association with Ralegh ruined his prospects at the court of James I and he retired.
In 1604 he made an apparently excellent marriage but within a year his wife revealed her reversion to Catholicism, whereupon their estates were soon either sold or sequestrated.
Shortly before his death Crosse was petitioning the king for relief in 1611, or to be allowed to hide his poverty abroad.
By Elizabethan standards Crosse was remarkably honest, reliable, and trustworthy; qualities appreciated and much used by his superiors and by Sir Robert Cecil (later first Earl of Salisbury, q.v.),
Crosse's patron from 1592, and even, on occasions, by the queen herself.
He was also amiable, trusting, conciliatory, and sometimes self-defeatingly soft-hearted.
Crosse married Dorothy, daughter of Mitchell Green, a yeoman of the Stirrup; widow of firstly Geoffrey Lovell (died 1597), cofferer of the queen's household, and secondly Captain Henry Materson (died 1599), a soldier.
Crosse had no known children.
He died 18 October 1611 in Moulsham, Essex.
[MSS of the Marquis of Salisbury, Hatfield House; Public Record Office: State Papers Domestic of Elizabeth I and James I, Proceedings in the Court of Chancery, Proceedings in the High Court of Admiralty, and Probates and Sentences in the Prerogative Court of Canterbury.]
John Harvey
,Thomas (fl. 1292–1342), was a working mason at the first building of St Stephen's chapel in Westminster Palace in 1292–3 and again in 1294, His name indicates his birth in Witney, Oxfordshire, a manor of the bishop of Winchester, and this was significant for his career.
By 1311, with his wife Margery, Thomas was living in Winchester and had acquired six acres of rich meadow land at Michelmersh, which in November 1313 he granted to Winchester Cathedral priory, probably as the premium for a corrody.
He was already master mason to the cathedral and about 1310 undertook the new work of the presbytery, at the joint cost of the bishop and priory.
He visited Exeter in June 1313 to choose timber for the bishop's throne there, made with characteristic details for which Witney must have been responsible.
At Michaelmas 1316 he was master at Exeter Cathedral and from April 1317 to June 1324 was provided with a house rent free.
From 1321 to 1325 he was also in charge of works at the royal castle there.
In the cathedral he was responsible for completing the crossing and building the nave, for the reredos and sedilia of 1316–26 and the pulpitum of 1317–25, all in the same advanced style as the wooden throne.
Witney's fees of £6 13s. 4d. a year were paid in full until Michaelmas 1342, but he was dead by 1347, when he had been succeeded by William Joy.
In 1328–9 the bishop of Exeter, John Grandison [q.v.], wrote to the prior of Winchester to obtain for Witney payment of a daily corrody and yearly pension due to him and in arrears.
Grandison described him as a ‘dearly loved member of our household and a valuable and willing servant to us and to our church of Exeter’; and next year wrote to the abbot and convent of Sherborne to commend to them a young man, J. de Sparkeforde, son of Master Thomas de Wytteneye ‘whose industry is of special value for the repair and in part new building, by his skill, of the fabric of our church of Exeter’.
The highly idiosyncratic style of Witney's known works suggests that he was the architect of the lady chapel of Wells Cathedral, built c .1310–19.
The central tower at Wells, in its original form closely resembling the tower of Witney church, probably owed its design to Master Thomas, but may have been detailed by another hand (R. K. Morris in a paper delivered to the British Archaeological Association's conference in Exeter, 1986).
Thomas le Masun in 1323 witnessed a document with members of the Wells chapter and in 1327 was a well-to-do resident of Wells.
Before 1329 William Joy, then appointed master at Wells Cathedral, had been employed in a subordinate capacity, and was to succeed Witney at Exeter.
Again on stylistic grounds it is probable that Witney worked at Malmesbury Abbey and on the chapel and sacristy at Merton College, Oxford,c .1309–32, where the master was named Thomas.
[J. Harvey,English Mediaeval Architects , 1984.]
Ian R Christie
,Richard (1902–1958), historian, was born 25 August 1902 in Colchester, the eldest in the family of three sons and two daughters of (Sir) Bernard Pares [q.v.], historian, and his wife Margaret Ellis, daughter of Edward Austin Dixon, dental surgeon, of Colchester.
After winning scholarships at Winchester and at Balliol College, Oxford, he took a first class in literae humaniores in 1924 and was elected to a fellowship of All Souls which he held till 1945.
A one-year stint as assistant lecturer at University College London was followed in 1928 by a year of research in the United States and the West Indies, financed by a Laura Spelman Rockefeller memorial studentship.
In 1929 he was appointed lecturer at New College, Oxford.
War interrupted the early stages of a brilliant academic career: from 1940 to 1945 he served with distinction as an administrative-class civil servant in the Board of Trade, being appointed CBE in 1945.
He was joint editor of the English Historical Review , 1939–58; professor of history in the University of Edinburgh from 1945 till his resignation on health grounds in 1954; and in 1951–2 Ford's lecturer in Oxford, delivering the lectures which became probably the most widely known of his books,King George III and the Politicians (1953).
He was elected FBA in 1948.
Pares published extensively in a series of monographs illuminating various aspects of his chosen field, the role of the West Indies in the development of the British Empire, and the determination of British international policy during the eighteenth century: his pioneering investigations ranged widely over questions of war and trade and international law.
From the start his scholarship, like his wartime work in the Civil Service, was characterized by indefatigable industry, commanding intellectual powers, personal detachment, and complete integrity.
His first book,War and Trade in the West Indies, 1739–1763 (1936), a tour de force based on immense research, was infused throughout by his pursuit of what he once declared to be his prime interest in history —‘to find out how things worked’.
In these earlier years he eschewed biography as a path to understanding.
But he had revised his view by the time he wrote A West-India Fortune (1950): there, and in George III and the Politicians , the two approaches were fruitfully combined.
In the last-named work he opened up lines of interpretation which, even if somewhat modified since, set firm foundations on which other scholars might build: the exuberant vigour and almost Niagara-like outpouring of scholarship gave it a memorable quality.
Much of his later work, achieved under the shadow of inexorably crippling and ultimately fatal illness, which he faced with the utmost fortitude, was latterly facilitated by the research fellowship conferred on him by All Souls in 1954.
In 1937 he married Janet Lindsay, daughter of (Sir) F. Maurice Powicke [q.v.], historian.
They had four daughters.
Pares died in Oxford 3 May 1958.
He was considered to be among the outstanding historians of his time.
[The Times , 5 May 1958; introduction by Lucy S. Sutherland to Richard Pares,The Historian's Business, and other Essays , ed.
R. A. and Elisabeth Humphreys, 1961; A. L. Rowse in Proceedings of the British Academy , vol. xlviii, 1963; Sir Isaiah Berlin,Personal Impressions , 1981, pp. 91–5; personal knowledge.]
John C Day
,Henry (1792–1882), surveyor, geologist, and archaeologist, was born at Landguard Fort, Suffolk, 26 April 1792, the elder son of Andrew MacLauchlan, Board of Ordnance storekeeper, and his second wife Martha Haywood.
Following his father's death in 1795 Henry was taken to Chichester before serving as a cadet in the Royal Corps of Military Surveyors and Draftsmen at the Tower of London.
He trained as a military surveyor, spending several years in Cork, but along with most other draftsmen was placed on half pay when the Corps disbanded in 1817.
From 1823–4 MacLauchlan was employed by the Ordnance Survey in Gloucestershire, south Wales, and Bedfordshire.
In 1835, as one of the few surveyors with geological knowledge, he was seconded to work with (Sir) Henry de la Beche [q.v.]to add geological data to the Cornish OS sheets.
MacLauchlan had been elected a fellow of the Geological Society in 1832 (he read papers in 1833 and 1842), and was acknowledged by W. D. Conybeare and G. B. Greenough [qq.v.], both eminent geologists of the day.
By 1839 MacLauchlan transferred back to routine OS work until retiring in November 1844, although his cartographical opinion on future scales of OS maps and contouring was sought by a parliamentary commission in 1854.
On retirement MacLauchlan returned to Cornwall with the assessionable manors commission, surveying hill forts and linear earthworks.
His work culminated in six papers published between 1847 and 1853 in the Annual Reports of the Royal Institution of Cornwall.
By 1848 MacLauchlan was conducting a similar survey of ancient remains in the North Riding of Yorkshire for Algernon Percy, Lord Prudhoe (later fourth Duke of Northumberland, q.v.).
On its successful completion and publication (Archaeological Journal , 1849), the duke commissioned MacLauchlan to undertake further field surveys of Watling Street, Hadrian's Wall, the eastern branch of Watling Street, and other remains in Northumberland, all of which were carried out and published between 1850 and 1867.
MacLauchlan not only recorded with precision details of many ancient monuments, some of which have since been destroyed, but also provided accompanying texts based on his sound observations.
Later scholars who worked on Roman and prehistoric remains in the north of England freely acknowledge their debt to MacLauchlan's draughtsmanship, accuracy, and outstanding physical endeavours.
MacLauchlan never married, lodging in the Lambeth and Clapham areas of London when not engaged on archaeological work.
He died 27 January 1882 at 14 Liston Road, Clapham, Surrey.
[British Museum Map Room; National Museum of Wales; Alnwick Castle archives; D. B. Charlton and J. C. Day, ‘Henry MacLauchlan: Surveyor and Field Archaeologist’ in Between and Beyond the Walls , ed.
R. Miket and C. Burgess, 1984;Archaeologia Aeliana , 5th series, vol. xiii, 1985, pp. 147–61.]
Joseph M McCarthy
,Samuel (1816–1882), businessman and MP, was born in Upton, Essex, 3 February 1816, the second of three sons among the nine children of Samuel Gurney [q.v.], banker, and his wife Elizabeth, daughter of James Sheppard of Ham House, Essex.
He was educated at the Friends' School, Rochester, and Grove House, Tottenham.
Brought up to business in the City, he became a partner in the firm of Overend, Gurney & Company, moneylenders.
In 1846 he joined the committee of the British and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society, of which he was president for eighteen years, and immediately came to public attention as principal signer of a set of ‘resolutions and a memorial [to MPs]adopted at a meeting of gentlemen deputed from various parts of the United Kingdom to represent the sentiments of the inhabitants in their respective districts, on the subject of colonial slavery’.
In religion a Quaker, in politics a Liberal, he was MP for Penryn (later Falmouth) from 1857 to 1865 and gave general but independent support to the third Viscount Palmerston, while favouring the extension of free trade and acquiring a reputation as a respecter of the rights of all religious denominations.
In 1861 he was high sheriff of Surrey and served as a JP.
A fellow of the Linnean Society and of the Royal Geographical Society, he was founder of the Metropolitan Drinking Fountain and Cattle Trough Association.
After his retirement from Parliament, he was co-president of the Alliance Marine Assurance Company, as well as director of the Alliance, British and Foreign Life Assurance Company, the Mediterranean Extension Telegraph Company, and the Submarine Telegraph Company.
In 1837 he married Ellen, daughter of William Reynolds, of Carlton House, Surrey.
They had no children.
Gurney died at The Spa, Tunbridge Wells, 4 April 1882.
[Frederick Boase,Modern English Biography , vol. i, 1892;Burke's Landed Gentry , 1937;Dod's Parliamentary Companion , 1858 and 1865;Illustrated London News , 24 July 1859, with portrait;The Times , 6 April 1882;Biographical Catalogue of the London Friends' Institute , 1888.]
John Keegan
, Sir William George Shedden (1879–1964), lieutenant-general and governor of Malta, was born 12 July 1879 in Madras, the younger child and only son of William Herbert Dobbie, of the Indian Civil Service, and his wife and first cousin (Agatha) Margaret, only child of Colonel Robert Shedden Dobbie, of the Madras Staff Corps.
He was a classical scholar at Charterhouse, and was commissioned into the Royal Engineers in August 1899 from the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich.
At Woolwich Dobbie joined a group of the Plymouth Brethren and devoted much of his time to Sunday school and soldiers' welfare work.
On marriage the Dobbies agreed to dedicate a tenth of their income to ‘the Lord's work’.
Christian faith was the mainspring of Dobbie's life and he personified the ideal of the officer as missionary, propagated by Charles Kingsley [q.v.].
After training at the School of Military Engineering, Chatham, he served in the Boer war (1901–2) and then in Chatham (1904), Bermuda (1904–7), Harwich (1907–9), and Ireland (1909–12), before passing top into the Staff College at Camberley in 1912.
At the outbreak of war in 1914 he went to France and took part in the campaigns of the Marne and Aisne.
Thereafter his war service was entirely as a staff officer.
Promoted lieutenant-colonel in 1916, he signed the order to the British Expeditionary Force ending hostilities on 11 November 1918.
The war had proved Dobbie's exceptional ability as a staff officer and for nine of the ten following years he served in staff appointments in the Rhine Army, Aldershot, the War Office, and Western Command.
Promoted to command the Cairo brigade in 1928, he put down disturbances between Arabs and Jews in Palestine in 1929.
From 1933 to 1935, as major-general, he commanded the Chatham Area and the School of Military Engineering and was inspector, Royal Engineers.
His last appointment, before retiring in August 1939, was as GOC Malaya and Singapore.
On the outbreak of World War II he sought re-employment without success, until in April 1940 he was asked by General W. E. (later first Baron) Ironside [q.v.]to go to Malta, as governor and commander-in-chief, in the rank of lieutenant-general.
He arrived two months before the siege began in June.
For two years the Italians and Germans launched air raids, blockaded the island to the verge of starvation, and kept it under constant threat of invasion.
Dobbie shared the islanders' hardships and broadcast to and visited the people constantly.
His belief in divine aid was evident to all.
By May 1942 he was worn out and was relieved by Viscount Gort [q.v.], who brought with him the George Cross awarded to Malta by George VI.
Dobbie was colonel commandant, Royal Engineers, from 1940 to 1947 but was not actively re-employed and dedicated the remainder of his life to missionary work, serving on a number of Christian committees.
In 1945 he published A Very Present Help and in 1948 Active Service with Christ .
Dobbie was appointed to the DSO in 1916, and appointed CMG (1919), CB (1930), KCB (1941), and GCMG (1942).
He received an LLD from the Royal University of Malta in 1942 and from Leeds University in 1944.
In 1904 he married Sybil (died 1962), daughter of Captain Charles Orde-Browne, of the Royal Artillery, a leading army evangelical.
Her sister Mary was the mother of Major-General Orde Wingate [q.v.].
They had two sons, one of whom died on active service in 1944, and one daughter.
Dobbie died in Kensington 3 October 1964.
[Sybil Dobbie,Faith and Fortitude , 1979; private and family information.]
Sybil Oldfield
,Sophy (1881–1950), internationalist and labour-law reformer, was born 3 January 1881 in Westcott, near Dorking, the youngest of the three sons and three daughters of a wealthy London businessman Charles Sanger and his wife Jessie Pulford; she was the sister of C. P. Sanger, the legal authority on wills and friend of Bertrand (later third Earl) Russell [q.v.].
Sophy Sanger was educated at Dr Elizabeth Dawes' School, Weybridge, and at Newnham College, Cambridge, where she read mathematics (1899–1902) and then moral sciences, narrowly missing a first in 1903.
She was converted to pacifism by the Quaker Hilda Clark, while at university during the Boer war.
From 1903 to 1909 Sophy Sanger worked with Mary Reid Macarthur (later Anderson) and Margaret Bondfield [qq.v.]for the Women's Trade Union League, setting up its legal advice bureau while studying labour law at University College London, mastering insurance regulations for workers' compensation, and interviewing women factory inspectors on conditions in the workplace.
At the age of twenty-three she was called to give evidence on workmen's compensation before a parliamentary commission in the House of Lords and she also helped Labour MPs prepare their case for the Shops Bill.
Sophy Sanger soon realized that many of the worst evils of working life — occupational disease, industrial injury, and sweated labour — could be combated only by effective international action.
Therefore, in 1905, she set up a British section of the International Association for Labour Legislation, and soon, with the help of volunteer translators, was bringing out an English edition of its French and German Bulletin .
Between 1909 and 1919 Sophy Sanger edited and largely wrote the quarterly, the World's Labour Laws , which campaigned internationally on such issues as the abolition of child labour, the prohibition of the use of white phosphorus and lead, and the prevention of anthrax.
It was Sophy Sanger's belief that by co-operating internationally for such practical, specific reforms, human beings might evolve into peaceful internationalists.
World War I, therefore, came as a terrible blow, but she persevered in keeping alive both the British section of the International Association for Labour Legislation and the World's Labour Laws — to such effect that in February 1919 it was she who wrote the draft to the Paris commission on the basis of the International Labour Office to be established by the Versailles treaty.
When the ILO was set up in Geneva, Sophy Sanger was appointed chief of its legislative section, a post she held until 1924, when she was edged out of the organization by Albert Thomas, the director.
On her return to Britain in 1924, Sophy Sanger read for the bar at Gray's Inn, qualifying in June 1928.
However, she never practised, and neither did she publish more than an (authoritative) article on labour law for the Encyclopaedia Britannica .
She had been an exemplary, modest public servant, hoping to build a more just world.
Her life's motto was Goethe's ‘Law alone can give us freedom.’
She died 7 December 1950 in Cambridge, nursed by her lifelong companion Maud Allen.
She was unmarried.
[A. M. Allen,Sophy Sanger: a Pioneer in Internationalism , 1958; obituary by A. M. Allen in Newnham College Roll , 1951.]
V D Lipman
,Cecil (1899–1970), Jewish historian, was born 5 March 1899 in Dalston, north London, the youngest of the four sons of Joseph Roth, manufacturer of builders' supplies, and his wife Etty Jacobs; his third brother, Leon, became a philosopher of distinction.
Educated at the City of London School, he saw active service in France in 1918 and then read history at Merton College, Oxford, obtaining a first class in modern history in 1922, and a D.Phil. in 1924 with a thesis on The Last Florentine Republic (published in 1925).
He soon turned to Jewish studies, his interest from childhood, when he had a traditional religious education and learned Hebrew from the Cairo Genizah scholar, Jacob Mann.
Roth supported himself by freelance writing until in 1939 he received a specially created readership in post-biblical Jewish studies at the University of Oxford, where he was also mentor and host to Jewish students.
After retiring from Oxford in 1964, he settled in Israel and divided his last years between New York, where he was visiting professor at Queens' College in City University and Stern College, and Jerusalem.
His output was immense: bibliographies in his Festschrift,Remember the Days (1966), and in Transactions of the Jewish Historical Society , vol. xxv (1977) list 779 items by him, including translations of his works.
Some were, of course, ephemeral, including books and articles written in the 1930s when he lived by his pen.
But he wrote the definitive History of the Jews in England (1941) and History of the Jews in Italy (1946),The History of the Marranos (1932) and The Jews in the Renaissance (1959), and comprehensive, popular works such as The Short History of the Jewish People (1936) and The Jewish Contribution to Civilization (1938).
His style was vivid, with a penchant for colourful, even shady, characters, and a zest for historical detection.
He produced works of precise scholarship, especially bibliographical works and studies of painting, and he applied his historical skills to the Dead Sea scrolls, identifying the Qumran sect with the Zealots against the generally proposed Essene identification that is now generally accepted (1958, 1965).
His approach to economics and sociology tended to concentrate on personalities or small groups, rather than broader analysis, and he took but a limited interest in the philosophical aspects of history.
Roth was always interested in art, and especially in Jewish incorporation or adaptation of the motifs of western art forms in Jewish ceremonial contexts.
He made a scientific study of illuminated medieval Haggadot (service books for the home on Passover eve); he also collaborated with the Polish artist, Artur Szyk, in the most sumptuous of modern printed editions of the Haggadah (1940).
He was an avid collector, particularly of illuminated ketubbot (marriage contracts), silver ritual objects, rare printed books, and manuscripts.
These collections, which formed the setting of his home in Oxford, are now in the university library at Leeds (books and manuscripts) and in a museum attached to the Beth Tzedec synagogue, Toronto (art collection).
Both reflect his abiding interest in Italy and its Jewish communities, amongst which, until the massacres attendant upon World War II, he was a familiar figure.
Roth's crowning achievement was the editorship of the Encyclopaedia Judaica , which he held from 1965.
The sixteen volumes of this appeared in the year of his death.
He planned the allocation of space, edited contributions, and wrote much himself, displaying powers of leadership, administration, and editorial conciliation.
Roth's influence was less as a teacher, there having been during his lifetime much less scope than later for Jewish studies in Britain, than as a writer and lecturer.
He was much in demand for lecture tours in Europe, America, and Africa.
With hair parted in the middle, he retained the appearance of a youthful student almost to the end.
The academic world was then hardly prepared to acknowledge the presence of a specifically Jewish factor in European economic and political history.
The fact that it was later more generally recognized is in part due to the attention which Roth's scholarly and semi-popular writings attracted; and the circumstances that his findings have not always survived the scrutiny of able younger scholars itself attests his own success in helping to put Jewish history on the academic map.
Most of his contemporaries in Oxford and elsewhere assumed that the only appropriate approach to Jewish studies was through Semitic philology and biblical studies, and Roth never received in Britain the academic recognition that his publications and his international standing (especially in America and Israel) merited.
A contributory factor, perhaps, was his concealment of a warm and generous nature behind a self-assertive manner.
In 1969 the Italian government made him commander of the Order of Merit for services to Italian culture.
In 1928 he married Irene Rosalind, daughter of David Davis, property developer.
They had no children.
Roth died in Jerusalem 21 June 1970.
[Irene Roth,Cecil Roth: Historian Without Tears , 1982;Encyclopaedia Judaica , vol. xiv, pp. 326–8; Chaim Raphael in Commentary , vol. l, no. 3, September 1970, pp. 75–81; Lloyd P. Gartner,et al .,
Studies in the Cultural Life of the Jews in England , 1975, pp. 69–86; personal knowledge supplemented by R. Loewe.]
Lorna Hutson
,Emilia (1569–1645), poet, was christened in St Botolph without Bishopsgate, London, 27 January 1569, daughter of Giovanni Baptista Bassano, court musician, and his ‘reputed wife’ Margaret Johnson.
The Bassanos were a family of Italian Jews,émigrés from Venice, who came to be musicians and instrument-makers at court in 1531.
Baptista Bassano lived near the Charterhouse, but Emilia was brought up by Susan (later Wingfield), dowager Countess of Kent, whom she addresses as the ‘noble guide of my ungoverned dayes’.
Although we know nothing of her education, she writes that the Countess was ‘directed’ by a mother famed for her furtherance of Protestant and humanist learning, Catharine Bertie, dowager Duchess of Suffolk [q.v.], and we may suppose that more than usual attention was paid to her reading.
We learn from a visit Emilia made to Simon Forman [q.v.], astrologer, in 1597, that she had been a favourite at the court of Elizabeth, had become mistress of Henry Carey, first Baron Hunsdon [q.v.], and had been ‘maintained in great pomp’ until 1592, when, becoming pregnant, she was married to Captain Alphonso Lanier, of the other leading family of court musicians, the Laniers, who came to London from Rouen in 1561.
Though her outstanding achievement is undoubtedly the composition of the first original poetry by a woman to be published in the seventeenth century, a volume of religious verse entitled Salve Deus Rex Judaeorum (1611), she has become notorious as a result of attempts made to identify her as the ‘dark lady’ of Shakespeare's Sonnets (1609), on the conjectural grounds of her racial colouring, musical ability, and promiscuity.
Although there is insufficient evidence to establish the identification, it illustrates a tendency which, interestingly, her own poetry strives to overcome: that is, the tendency to read a woman's emergence into the sphere of public discourse as a form of indecency, signalling promiscuity.
The central poem of her volume, which celebrates the ‘worthy mind’ of her patron Margaret, dowager Countess of Cumberland, is remarkable for managing to avoid the identification of female virtue with chastity, articulating in its place a feminine mastery of those dialectical skills which constituted the humanist ideal of masculine virtue.
The volume concludes with the first country-house poem published in English, an encomium of the countess's estate at Cookham, in which the passing of the seasons suggests the ephemerality of patronage relations; the walks bear ‘summer Liveries’, and the prospect of hills and vales appears to ‘preferre some strange unlook'd for sute’ only as long as their mistress is in residence.
The ambiguity of an elegy which laments the loss of constancy in relations between household and patron, and yet offers itself in the public market-place as a suit for favour, aptly characterizes the circumstances of Emilia Lanier's life.
For court musicians were at once household servants and courtiers, suitors for office.
As well as inheriting stipend and liveries, Bassanos and Laniers competed amongst themselves for patents and privileges.
From the first Emilia occupied the position of a precariously privileged dependant, and complained of ‘hard fortune’, her father dying when she was only eight, leaving a ‘miserable’ estate.
Though she brought a substantial dowry in money and jewels to Alphonso Lanier, this was soon exhausted by his service in hope of preferment under Robert Devereux, second Earl of Essex [q.v.].
Her husband did, however, receive in 1604 a lucrative patent for the weighing of hay and straw, but on his death in 1616 she surrendered the patent to an enterprising brother-in-law, Innocent Lanier.
Consequently, she was again in financial difficulties in 1617, when she unsuccessfully attempted to set up a school in St Giles in the Fields for the education of children of the nobility.
When her son Henry, another court musician, died in 1633, his widow petitioned to get their four-year-old son, Henry, Emilia's grandson, trained in music, ‘as soon as he shall be capable thereof’.
In the meantime, Emilia Lanier tried to provide means for this grandson and his sister, Mary, by claiming in Chancery heritable rights in the patent for the weighing of hay and straw.
Though the Privy Council finally ruled in her favour in 1637, the patent fell foul of rising hostility to all such courtly monopolies and was blocked by the City of London.
She was buried in St James's, Clerkenwell, London, 3 April 1645.
[A. L. Rowse,Poems of Shakespeare's Dark Lady , 1978;Calendar of State Papers Domestic ; Patent Rolls; Bodleian Library, Ashmole MSS 226354; Roger Prior, ‘Jewish Musicians at the Tudor Court’,Musical Quarterly , vol. lxix, 1983.]
Arthur G Credland
,William (1871–1930), explorer, was the second son and second child in the family of three sons and three daughters of William Colbeck, solicitor, and his wife Martha Haggitt.
He followed a sea-going career against his father's wishes, apparently influenced by the maritime traditions of his mother's family.
Colbeck was apprenticed under sail in 1886 and passed his master's ticket in 1894 with the aid of private tuition from Zebedee Scaping, headmaster of the Trinity House Navigation School.
In 1894 he joined the Wilson Line in Hull as second mate of the SS Draco and three years later a chance meeting with the Norwegian explorer H. Borchgrevink, a passenger in his vessel, the Montebello , led to Colbeck's joining the Southern Cross expedition (1898–1900) as magnetic observer, following an intensive course of instruction at Kew Observatory.
The party was the first to winter in Antarctica.
With Ole Larsen, a Finn, Colbeck reached the furthest south (78° 51'S 50'W) thus far achieved and reconnoitred a route to the Pole later followed by Roald Amundsen, who in 1912 after his triumph sent Colbeck a letter of thanks.
Friction between the Royal Geographical Society and Borchgrevink prevented their efforts from receiving due recognition, though Colbeck received the Murchison grant from the society.
However, he impressed Sir Clements Markham [q.v.], who selected him to command the SY Morning in 1902 to be sent to the relief of the Discovery expedition of Robert Falcon Scott [q.v.].
The crew consisted of Wilson Line men and hand-picked officers, including E. R. G. R. Evans (later first Baron Mountevans, q.v.).
In December new land was discovered which Colbeck called Scott Island and its prominent feature, a stone column, Hagitt's Pillar, was given his mother's maiden name.
Discovery was found, ice-bound, on Christmas day.
Colbeck left coal and provisions before sailing home for further help.
Returning in 1903 with the Morning and Terra Nova ,Discovery was blasted free from the enclosing ice.
In appreciation Colbeck received a magnificent loving cup from the Royal Geographical Society, engraved with the course of the Morning , and was also given the Back grant.
Scott named Cape Colbeck and Colbeck Bay after him.
Colbeck remained as master in the Wilson Line until 1912, when he was appointed marine superintendent in the London office.
He received the Polar medal in 1914.
He was a founder member of the Company of Master Mariners.
In June 1904 he married Elizabeth, daughter of William Robinson, a cotton manufacturer.
They had four sons, the eldest of whom, Captain W. R. Colbeck, RNR, was surveyor with the British, Australian, and New Zealand Antarctic research expedition of 1929–31, for which he received the Polar medal; Sir Douglas Mawson [q.v.]named the Colbeck Archipelago after him.
Colbeck died in Catford 18 October 1930, his exertions in the Antarctic having taken a considerable toll.
[Information from Captain C. M. Colbeck (son); archives of Royal Geographical Society; Town Docks Museum, Hull.]
Ronald M Birse
,Joseph (1803–1883), civil engineer, was born in Forres, Morayshire, 3 November 1803, the eldest of the eight children of John Mitchell, a stonemason, and his wife Margaret Philip.
John Mitchell was employed on the building of the Caledonian canal; his diligence and skill were noticed by Thomas Telford [q.v.]and for the last eighteen years of his life he was principal inspector of the roads and bridges in the Highlands of Scotland.
The family moved to Inverness in about 1810 and Joseph attended the Academy there for three and a half years.
His education was completed by a year of studies in Aberdeen, and it was determined that engineering should be his profession, after an apprenticeship as a mason.
In 1820 he was sent to Fort Augustus, where the locks of the Caledonian canal were under construction, and, as his father was well known to everyone there, he was given the opportunity of learning not only masonry but all the branches of civil and mechanical engineering that were being practised at that time.
Within a year he had so impressed Telford that he was invited to become his assistant in London, where he spent the next three years, until his father's illness in the summer of 1824 prompted Telford to send him back to Inverness; two months later his father died.
After six months' trial the commissioners appointed Mitchell general inspector and superintendent of the Highland roads and bridges, a post he held for almost forty years.
In addition to his responsibilities for roads and bridges, the commissioners employed him to plan and erect forty new churches, mostly in outlying districts and on the islands of the Hebrides.
From 1828 to 1850 he acted as engineer to the Scottish Fisheries Board, in which capacity he built or improved numerous harbours, including Dunbar, Fraserburgh, Inverness, and Wick.
To Mitchell belongs much of the credit for the creation of the railway system in the Highlands and for overcoming the formidable engineering problems of mountainous terrain, fast-flowing rivers, and treacherous peatbogs.
He began in the central Lowlands by surveying the lines for a railway from Edinburgh to Glasgow (1837), and for the Scottish Central Railway (1844).
As early as 1845 he surveyed a line for a railway crossing the Grampian mountains between Perth and Inverness, but the Bill presented to Parliament, requesting permission, was defeated in 1846 on the grounds of impracticality.
The Highland Railway, which linked these two cities in 1863, followed Mitchell's line almost exactly.
Other main railway lines which he surveyed and supervised included Inverness to Keith (1853–8), Inverness to Wick and Thurso (1859–74) which, because of exceptional difficulties, was not completed until after his retirement in 1867, and the Skye line from Inverness to Kyle of Lochalsh (1864–70).
For much of the construction work on these lines he had the assistance of William and Murdoch Paterson, whom he took into partnership in 1862.
In the same year he suffered a stroke, from which he slowly recovered; he was able to resume work until he retired in 1867.
He was elected a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1837, a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1843, a member of the (Smeatonian) Society of Civil Engineers in 1870, and a fellow of the Geological Society (1825).
He published Practical Suggestions for Relieving the Thoroughfares of London (1857),Plan for Lessening the Taxation by an Improved Administration of the Railways (1865),Railway Finance (1867), and A New Mode of Constructing the Surface of the Streets (1870).
The first volume of his Reminiscences of my Life in the Highlands was printed privately in 1883 and caused offence in some quarters by its frankness; the second volume was still in the press when he died, and it was suppressed to avoid threatened lawsuits.
For many years after his father's early death Mitchell supported his mother and her seven younger children.
On 27 January 1841 he married in Inverness Christian, daughter of James Dunsmure, formerly secretary to the Board of Fisheries in Edinburgh.
They had two daughters and one son, who became a minister in the Church of Scotland.
He died in London 26 November 1883.
[Joseph Mitchell,Reminiscences of my Life in the Highlands , 2 vols., 1883, reprinted 1971 with introduction by I. Robertson;Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers , vol. lxxvi, 1884, pp. 362–8;Engineering , vol. xxxvi, 1883, pp. 523–4.]
James Hodge
,John (fl. 1703), the builder of the second Eddystone lighthouse, was one of a large and poor family.
Nothing else is known of his origins, except that he was born in Cornwall, probably near Plymouth.
There he was in the service of a gentleman, who caused him to be educated.
In the early eighteenth century Rudyerd was in business as a silk mercer in Ludgate Hill, London, when he was engaged by Captain John Lovel or Lovet, the lessee, to act as ‘architect and surveyor’ for a lighthouse on the Eddystone reef near Plymouth, to replace the one built by Henry Winstanley [q.v.], which had been swept away by a storm in 1703 after only five years.
Assisted by Norcott and Smith, Woolwich shipwrights, he carried out a tremendous feat of engineering.
Using a shore base at Empacombe, he first anchored his structure to the rocks in a novel and successful way.
Then, using layers of oak balks, between much thicker layers of granite to give mass for stability, he built the tower round a central timber mast, to a height of sixty-one feet.
The whole was encased in heavy oak timbers, caulked and pitch-covered like a ship, to a total height of ninety-two feet.
The light, which had twenty-four candles, was first shown on 28 July 1708, and the lighthouse was completed in 1709.
It stood successfully in this very exposed position until December 1755.
It was then totally destroyed by fire, which started in the lantern roof and, despite the efforts of the keepers, spread down through the timbers, driving the men out upon the rocks, whence they were rescued next day.
John Smeaton [q.v.]expressed the greatest admiration for Rudyerd's work, which greatly benefited him when he built the third Eddystone light.
Rudyerd was the builder of the first successful sea-rock lighthouse in the world.
Nothing more is known of him.
Smeaton presumed that he died soon after completion of the lighthouse.
[John Smeaton,A Narrative of the Building and a Description of the Construction of the Eddystone Lighthouse with Stone , 2nd edn. 1793; D. B. Hague and R. Christie,Lighthouses: their Architecture, History and Archaeology , 1975; collection of drawings and models in Royal Scottish Museum, Edinburgh; James Hodge,Four Cornishmen: their Contribution to Science and Engineering , 2nd Kemp memorial lecture, University of Exeter, 23 March 1988; Thomas Rowett, ‘Notes on Original Models of the Eddystone Lighthouses’,Transactions of the Newcomen Society , vol. v, 1934–5.]
David Marcombe
,John (c. 1498–1579), cleric and cartographer, was born in Yorkshire in about 1498.
In 1515 he entered Clare College, Cambridge, and by 1520 had taken the degrees of BA and MA.
Ordained to the priesthood in 1521, he subsequently became a fellow of St John's College, Cambridge, and graduated BD in 1530.
During the religious changes of the 1530s Rudd initially adopted a clear anti-reformist stance, and in 1534 he was briefly imprisoned on the order of Thomas Cromwell [q.v.].
However, with the ascendancy of the conservative faction in the 1540s, Rudd began to achieve a modest prominence, being nominated clerk of the closet, which brought him into close personal contact with Henry VIII.
Before 1547 he had become vicar of the collegiate church of Norton in Cleveland, and a prebendary of Beverley, Burton-upon-Trent, and St Stephens in Westminster, appointments which (with the exception of Norton) were lost due to the dissolution of the colleges in 1548.
However, Rudd appears to have gained the patronage of John Dudley, Duke of Northumberland [q.v.], and he was compensated with a royal chaplaincy and prebends in the cathedrals of Durham (1550) and Winchester (1551).
In 1551 he demonstrated his increasing devotion to the new doctrines by taking a wife, though this was to ensure deprivation from all his livings under Mary in 1554.
However, after confessing his fault at Paul's Cross he was once more rewarded with three Yorkshire livings, the vicarages of Dewsbury (1554) and Hornsea-cum-Riston (1557) and the rectory of Thornhill (1558).
Elizabeth's accession allowed him to receive back his wife, along with his Durham prebend and the vicarage of Norton, on the resignation of Hornsea.
In 1570 he resigned Dewsbury, having been presented to the wealthy Richmondshire rectory of Romaldkirk in 1569.
It is difficult to penetrate Rudd's religious views with any certainty.
Whether his survival was that of a cynical trimmer or one who had a paramount belief in the idea of the royal supremacy is impossible to determine, but he cannot have been a good parochial pastor because of his persistent plurality.
Rudd's promotions were probably attempts to remunerate a man who was of more value to the Tudor state as a cartographer than as a cleric.
While he was imprisoned in 1534 he was working on a map of the Holy Land which was sent to Cromwell's confidant, Rowland Lee [q.v.], in an attempt to secure his release.
He claimed that it was more accurate than any that had been made before, and there is a strong possibility that it is to be identified with the map which appears in the 1535 English Bible of Miles Coverdale [q.v.].
Released from prison, Rudd travelled around the country, undertaking surveys and checking information at first hand.
In 1561 he received a royal dispensation to be absent from his Durham prebend to finalize a map of England ‘both fairer and more perfect and truer than it hath been hitherto’.
One of his assistants in this task was Christopher Saxton [q.v.], who came from Dunningley near Dewsbury, and who was working as his servant in 1570.
The completed work was possibly the map of the British Isles published by Gerard Mercator in Duisburg in 1564.
Rudd married Isabel Whildon in 1551.
They were known to have had three sons and three daughters.
The eldest son, Edmund, died as a fellow of Clare College, Cambridge, in 1577.
John Rudd died at Durham in 1579 and was buried in the cathedral: his wife died at Durham in 1582, her inventory recording ‘three maps’ and ‘one old map’amongst her possessions.
[D. Marcombe, ‘Saxton's Apprenticeship: John Rudd, a Yorkshire Cartographer’,Yorkshire Archaeological Journal , vol. l, 1978.]
N J Travis
,John (1832–1901), industrialist, was born in Warrington, Lancashire, 11 February 1832, the youngest in the family of five sons and three daughters of Joseph Crosfield and his wife Elizabeth Goad.
he was educated at Quaker schools in Penkelt, Cheshire; Bootham School, York; and Glasgow High School.
In 1847 he followed his elder brothers, George and Morland, into the family soap business founded by their late father at Bank Quay, Warrington.
In 1853 he became a partner in Joseph Crosfield & Son; and after the death of Morland and George's move to London in 1875, he became solely responsible for the firm.
The abolition of excise duty in 1853 heralded a period of growth and prosperity for the soap industry.
Many improvements were made to the Bank Quay works, and Crosfields' products were marketed throughout the world.
In 1883 Crosfields was one of the first factories to install electric light.
In 1874 (Sir) John Brunner and Ludwig Mond [qq.v.]began the production of soda at Winnington, Cheshire, by a new and cheaper process (ammonia-soda) than the traditional Leblanc method.
Crosfield became their largest buyer.
In 1881, when Brunner, Mond & Co. became a public company, he invested in it, became its first chairman, and remained a director until his death.
In 1896 Crosfields became a public company, with Crosfield as chairman, and his two sons, Arthur and Joseph, and Dr Karl Markel (transferred from Brunner, Mond & Co.) as directors.
Markel was a German-educated chemist, who was responsible for significant technical improvements.
Crosfield was an enlightened employer in the paternalistic tradition, deeply influenced by his Quaker upbringing.
Works outings to Llangollen and Blackpool, bowls competitions, and social evenings indicated an industrial harmony far from commonplace at the time.
Crosfield campaigned against intemperance, improvidence, and vice.
He contributed time and money generously to Warrington: he was mayor in 1882, alderman in 1885, and freeman in 1891; he built a working-men's mission, and supported schools, the library, the infirmary, and other institutions.
He was a dedicated Liberal, helping to start the local club and association, and the Liberal newspaper, the Warrington Examiner .
In the general election of July 1886 he was narrowly beaten by the Tory Sir Gilbert Greenhall, head of the local brewing family — a bitter disappointment to a temperance advocate.
He married Eliza Dickson, from an Ulster Protestant family in the cotton trade, in Belfast in 1864; they had five sons and four daughters.
She died in 1882, and in 1890 he married her sister Gertrude, in Jersey; they had no children.
He relinquished control of the company to his three surviving sons, but remained chairman until his death, 26 December 1901, at his home at Walton Lea.
[A. E. Musson,Enterprise in Soap and Chemicals , 1965; D. J. Jeremy (ed.),
Dictionary of Business Biography , vol. ii, 1984;Warrington Examiner , 28 December 1901.]
D C Coleman
, Sir John , baronet (1627–1699), merchant and financier, was baptized at the parish church of All Saints, Maidstone, Kent, 19 August 1627.
He was the eldest in the family of two sons and one daughter of Caleb Banks of Maidstone and his wife Martha Dann of Faversham.
His father was a prosperous woollen-draper and former mayor of Maidstone.
In 1644 John Banks was admitted to Emmanuel College, Cambridge.
By 1652 he had become a member of a syndicate engaged in victualling the navy.
In 1654, building upon his father's connections with the London business world, he married Elizabeth, daughter of John Dethick, a leading London merchant who became lord mayor in 1655 and was knighted by Oliver Cromwell in 1656.
Banks then moved ahead rapidly in trade and finance, becoming a shareholder in the East India Company and a member of the Levant Company.
Despite his earlier links with the parliamentary cause (he was MP for Maidstone 1654–9) he pursued a moderate royalist line at the Restoration and in 1662 was made a baronet.
During the 1660s his trading ventures were overshadowed by involvement in naval finance.
He advanced money, in ever-growing sums, especially during the second and third Anglo-Dutch wars; and showed great skill in securing repayment, in discounting operations, and in profiting from the high rates of interest which the government had to pay for ready cash.
When the stop of the Exchequer was forced upon the government in 1672 he received favourable treatment in the resulting settlement.
He did not resume his role as a major lender until after 1689 but meanwhile he had blossomed into a Kentish landowner and re-entered Parliament.
He invested his business gains in building up an estate, purchasing as a country seat the former Carmelite priory of Aylesford.
He became a director of the East India Company in 1669 and its governor in 1672–4 and again in 1683.
He was also a director of the Royal African Company and its sub-governor in 1674–6.
In the course of the 1670s he bought a town house on the grandest side of Lincoln's Inn Fields, as well as spending lavishly on extensive rebuilding at Aylesford.
His re-election to Parliament came in 1679 in Rochester, for which borough he sat until 1690; thereafter, until 1694, he represented Queenborough and finally Maidstone again in 1695–8.
Of Banks's five children, Martha (1658–75) and John (1668–9) died young.
His eldest surviving daughter, Elizabeth, was married in May 1678, complete with a portion of £10,000, to Heneage Finch [q.v.], who became solicitor-general 1679–86, second son of Heneage Finch (later first Earl of Nottingham, q.v.), the lord chancellor.
Despite this association with one of the central families of the emergent Tory party Banks soon showed himself willing to extend his financial activities to the post-Revolution Whig governments.
Throughout the 1690s he advanced substantial sums through various channels.
His money-lending activities also included loans to members of the Finch family and their political connections.
In 1693 his second daughter, Mary, was married off to John Savile, of Methley, a member of an important Yorkshire Tory family.
The substantial portion of £18,000 doubtless reflected inter alia the disparity of age: Mary Banks was thirty, John Savile twenty-two.
Banks's concern with naval matters led to a friendship with Samuel Pepys [q.v.].
Like Pepys, he had interests wider than finance and administration.
In 1668 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society, becoming thereby one of the very few businessmen in that body.
He served on the society's council in the 1670s; and in 1677, after consulting various fellows of the society, Banks appointed John Locke [q.v.]to act as tutor to his surviving son, Caleb (1659–96) during the latter's stay in France in 1677–8.
Shrewd, methodical, and determined, Banks combined business acumen with political trimming.
Although filling such conventional offices as JP and DL in Kent, he generally preferred profits to power.
His few surviving letters show that he brooked no nonsense from the unbusinesslike; his domestic relationships indicate a generous regard for his family; and his record of successful money-making, from Cromwell to William III, suggests that he learned well the lesson that adaptability is one of the crucial conditions of business survival.
By 1698 Banks's health was failing and he died 19 October 1699.
His meticulously kept accounts reveal a landed income of about £5,000 per annum and total assets at death worth about £180,000, a sum which if translated roughly into modern values would put him into the multimillionaire category.
His wife and his son Caleb having both died in 1696 (the baronetcy became extinct), most of his wealth passed to Elizabeth and Heneage Finch who, in 1714, was created first Earl of Aylesford.
The only remaining visible signs of Banks's life are a set of almshouses in Maidstone, built in accordance with his will, and a massive baroque tomb in Aylesford church.
[D. C. Coleman,Sir John Banks, Baronet and Businessman , 1963; B. D. Henning,The House of Commons 1660–1690 , 1983.]
Elaine Barr
,George (1698–1761), goldsmith, was born in Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, and baptized 7 July 1698, the fifth of the six sons and the eighth of ten children of James Wickes, upholsterer, of Bury St Edmunds, and his wife Dorothy Burton.
No record exists of his education: he may have attended the grammar school at Bury St Edmunds or a charity school in nearby Hawstead maintained by a kinsman, Sir Dudley Cullum, who became his brother-in-law in 1710.
He was apprenticed 2 December 1712 to Samuel Wastell, a London goldsmith, and made free of the Goldsmiths' Company by service on 16 June 1720.
By 3 February 1722, when he registered his first maker's marks at Goldsmiths' Hall, he had set up in Threadneedle Street, a move made possible by his marriage on 9 January 1722 to Alder, wealthy daughter of Samuel Phelpes, gentleman merchant, and Mary Aldworth, descendant of merchant princes linked with the East India Company and the Society of Merchant Adventurers of Bristol.
In the early 1730s he joined John Craig, jeweller, in Norris Street, Haymarket.
The partnership was dissolved in June 1735 when he was appointed goldsmith to Frederick Louis, prince of Wales [q.v.], and moved to Panton Street.
He was made a liveryman of the Goldsmiths' Company on 13 March 1740.
His ledgers, now in the Victoria and Albert Museum, the only eighteenth-century working goldsmith's ledgers extant, date from 1735.
They record purchases by clients, among them Sir Robert Walpole and Robert Butts, bishop of Ely [q.v.], first cousin to Wickes's mother.
This prodigious output engendered a network of sub-contractors.
His own oeuvre , lacking perhaps the soaring inspiration of Paul De Lamerie [q.v.]or Paul Crespin, nevertheless places him in the first rank.
His Bristol ewer and basin of 1736 are two of the most original and historically important pieces of early English rococo silver.
The great Leinster dinner service of 1747 was his swansong: no silver bearing his mark appears thereafter.
That year he was joined by Edward Wakelin, who took charge of the workshop.
He formed no partnership with Wakelin: that the childless Wickes reserved for his protégé, Samuel Netherton, in 1750.
The death of the prince of Wales in March 1751 dashed their hopes of royal preferment.
Wickes retired 11 October 1760 and was succeeded by his former apprentice John Parker in partnership with Edward Wakelin.
Accompanied by his wife and Netherton, he moved to Thurston, Suffolk, where he died 31 August 1761.
He was buried in St Peter's church, Thurston, where there is a memorial stone.
A portrait exists (in a private collection) from his days in Panton Street.
His firm continued to flourish.
Robert Garrard joined it in 1780, followed by three sons: it became known as Garrard, the Crown jewellers.
[Elaine Barr,George Wickes Royal Goldsmith 1698–1761 , 1980; Arthur G. Grimwade,London Goldsmiths 1697–1837: their Marks and Lives , 3rd edn. 1990.]
Alison Kelly
,Eleanor (1733–1821), manufacturer of artificial stone, was born 3 June 1733 in Exeter, the elder daughter (there were no sons) of George Coade, wool merchant, of Exeter, and his wife Eleanor, daughter of Thomas Enchmarch, wool merchant, of Tiverton, Devon.
She was brought up as a Nonconformist.
The family remained in Exeter until about 1760, when they moved to London.
In the mid-1760s Eleanor was in business in the City on her own as a linen-draper.
In 1769 George Coade died, bankrupt, and later in the year Eleanor joined Daniel Pincot, who was already established at Narrow Wall, Lambeth, making a form of artificial stone.
They were there together until 1771, when Eleanor Coade sacked him for representing himself, instead of herself, as the proprietor of the factory.
Shortly afterwards, she appointed John Bacon [q.v.]as supervisor, and his neo-classical models set a very high standard of design.
He designed for the firm until the end of his life in 1799.
Soon Eleanor Coade was working for all the eminent Georgian architects, including Robert Adam, James and Samuel Wyatt, Sir William Chambers, John Nash, and (Sir) John Soane [qq.v.].
A talented modeller, she exhibited at the Society of Artists between 1773 and 1780.
As her mother's name was the same as her own, it has been mistakenly assumed that Mrs Coade, the mother, ran the factory until her death in 1796, but ‘Mrs’ was a courtesy title for any unmarried woman in business at that time, and bills show that Miss Coade was in charge from 1771.
It was widely believed that Eleanor Coade had invented a new process for making artificial stone.
Long thought to be a mystery, Coade stone is now known to be a ceramic body, and the British Museum research laboratory's analysis in 1985 showed that it was a form of stoneware so resistant to the weather that it is as precise today as when it was originally made.
Its versatility allowed it to be used for all architectural details, commemorative and funerary monuments, fonts, statues, busts, coats of arms, chimney-pieces, garden ornaments, and furniture.
Most is neo-classical, but there were also Gothic commissions such as Dalmeny House, Scotland, or Battle Abbey.
Sizes range from the statue of Lord Hill in Shrewsbury (sixteen feet tall) to ornaments one inch long.
Over 650 examples have been traced, all over the British Isles, and in Canada, the United States, Brazil, and the Caribbean.
Pieces were also sent to Russia, Poland, and South Africa.
In 1799 Eleanor Coade took as partner her cousin John Sealy, and the firm became Coade & Sealy.
A showroom was opened at the east end of Westminster bridge.
Eleanor Coade had the royal appointment to George III, for whom she made the Gothic screen at St George's chapel, Windsor, and to the prince of Wales, for whom, successively as prince regent and George IV, she did work at the first Royal Pavilion, Brighton, and Carlton House.
Much work was done in the 1790s at the Royal Naval Hospital, Greenwich, and in 1810 work began on the pediment there, which was forty feet long, designed by Benjamin West [q.v.]and Joseph Panzetta, and made in Coade stone.
Sealy died in 1813, and Eleanor Coade appointed William Croggon as manager.
The firm reverted to being Coade, and continued to flourish.
Eleanor Coade was unmarried.
She died 16 November 1821 in Camberwell, and rated an obituary notice in the Gentleman's Magazine .
Croggon bought the factory and made many thousands of pounds' worth of Coade stone for Buckingham Palace, but in the late 1830s trade declined, and the firm came to an end in about 1840.
[I. C. Freestone, M. Bimson, and M. S. Tite, ‘The Constitution of Coade Stone’, in Ancient Technology to Modern Science , ed.
W. T. Kingery, 1985; John Havill, ‘Eleanor Coade, Artificial Stone Manufacturer’(unpublished monograph), 1986, copies in the library of the Devon and Exeter Institution at Exeter, Guildhall Library, and Library of Congress; Alison Kelly,Mrs. Coade's Stone , 1990.]
James Ogden
,John Langdon Haydon (1828–1896), physician, was born in Torpoint, Cornwall, 18 November 1828, the youngest of the seven children (three daughters and four sons) of Joseph Almond Down, apothecary, and his wife Hanna Haydon; his maternal grandfather was a mathematician, and his eldest sister's great-grandchildren included J. Maynard (later Baron) Keynes and Geoffrey Keynes [qq.v.].
He was educated at local schools, including the Devonport Classical and Mathematical School, and became an apprentice to his father.
In 1847 he went to London as a student at the Pharmaceutical Society, where he helped Michael Faraday [q.v.]with his work on gases.
Some two years later he went home because of ill health.
On the death of his father in 1853 he decided to take up medicine, and became a student at the London Hospital (MRCS and LSA, 1856), where he won many prizes.
In 1858 he took the London MB and became medical superintendent of the Earlswood Asylum for Idiots; and in 1859 he took the MD and the MRCP and was appointed assistant physician to the London Hospital.
For ten years he combined his work at the hospital with a specialist practice in mental deficiency at Earlswood.
In 1868 he became FRCP and established a private home for mentally deficient children at Normansfield, Hampton Wick.
This was successful and at the time of Down's death it could accommodate 200 patients.
In 1884 he was made a JP for London, Westminster, and Middlesex, and in 1889 he became an alderman of Middlesex county council.
Down's handsome appearance, high principles, and genial manner won him a powerful influence over his patients and the real affection of his colleagues.
Down was one of the outstanding medical students of his generation, and his decision to work in the neglected and perhaps despised field of mental deficiency was courageous.
He recalls in On Some of the Mental Affections of Childhood and Youth (1887) that in early life he had seen that ‘children who were afflicted by mental alienation or mental incapacity of any kind’ were categorized as idiots and considered incapable of responding to help.
More enlightened treatment was promised by Dr Guggenbühl's school at Abendberg, Switzerland, but Down had visited it and had been disappointed.
His own treatment of the inmates of Earlswood was humane and effective; the British Medical Journal noted that ‘the faintest gleams of intelligence are encouraged, and the slightest capabilities utilised.’
Down was celebrated for his work on so-called mongol children, a description of which first appeared in a paper, ‘Observations on an Ethnic Classification of Idiots’(London Hospital Reports , vol. iii, 1866, pp. 259–62).
His general idea was that certain types of mental defectives showed the physical features of certain races; hence the term mongol.
His views were modified by his son Reginald, who maintained that the features which suggested Mongolian origins were ‘accidental and superficial’, being associated with others which were in no way characteristic of the Mongol race (Journal of Medical Science , vol. lii, 1906, pp. 188–9).
Such considerations led to the general use of the term Down's Syndrome to describe this association of physical features and mental characteristics.
Langdon-Down (he had changed his name by deed poll) married, 10 October 1860, Mary, daughter of Philip Crellin, outfitter, of London; they had three sons and one daughter.
Down died 7 October 1896 at Normansfield.
The two surviving sons, Reginald and Percival, carried on his work there.
[Obituaries in Lancet and British Medical Journal , both 17 October 1896; G. H. Brown,Lives of the Fellows of the Royal College of Physicians , vol. iv, 1955, pp. 171–2; Walter Russell Brain (first Baron Brain), ‘Chairman's Opening Remarks: Historical Introduction’ in Mongolism , ed.
G. E. W. Wolstenholme and Ruth Porter (Proceedings of CIBA Foundation Study Group no. 25, London, 1967); information from second Baron Brain.]
Colin A Russell
,William (1829–1921), chemist, was born 5 September 1829 in Southwark, the elder child and only son of George Odling, medical practitioner, and his wife Mary Ann Watson.
Destined for his father's career he studied at Guy's Hospital where, in 1850, he became demonstrator in chemistry.
He became MB (1851) and FRCP (1859).
He was appointed lecturer at St Bartholomew's Hospital in 1863, succeeded Michael Faraday [q.v.]as Fullerian professor of chemistry at the Royal Institution five years later, and in 1872 became Waynflete professor of chemistry at Oxford (where he became a fellow of Worcester College), retiring in 1912.
Odling's contributions to chemistry were in two main directions: medical and theoretical.
As the first medical officer of health for Lambeth he gained direct experience of cholera and other water-borne diseases.
For drinking purposes, he concluded that well-water, with possibilities of immediate pollution, was less desirable than river water, with its natural processes for purification.
He served for many years as examiner for the London water supply and held strong views on sewage purification.
It was not long before purely chemical interests supplanted those of medicine.
In 1885 Odling translated the Chemical Method of Auguste Laurent, proponent of the French ‘type theory’ of chemical constitution.
His commitment to this view was reinforced and directed by a year spent in Paris as a student of C. F. Gerhardt, another leader in the field.
In its opposition to structural formulae, and in its reform of atomic weights later continued by Stanislao Cannizzaro, the type theory found a ready British exponent in Odling.
His lectures and writings played a considerable part in shaping fundamental chemical theory, and in several respects laid the foundations for the theory of valency.
He made a marked impression on two of the founders of that theory,(Sir) Edward Frankland [q.v.]and August Kekulé.
Ironically his most famous expression of the type theory, in a formula for bleaching powder, was later found to be wrong.
He gave the correct formula for ozone (1861).
Odling's prowess as a lecturer at the Royal Institution was maintained at Oxford where, however, he regarded it as ‘not etiquette’ to enter the chemical laboratory, having assistants to teach students and doing little experimental research himself.
Among his publications were A Course of Practical Chemistry (1854),A Manual of Chemistry, Descriptive and Theoretical (1861), and Outlines of Chemistry (1870).
In 1859 Odling became FRS.
He served on the Chemical Society's council for sixty-five years, having terms as secretary (1856–69), vice-president (1869–73), and president (1873–5).
He was president of the Institute of Chemistry from 1883 to 1888.
In 1872 he married Elizabeth Mary, daughter of Alfred Smee [q.v.], surgeon and metallurgist.
They had three sons.
He died in Oxford 17 February 1921 after being knocked down by a cyclist.
[Proceedings of the Royal Society , vol. cA, 1921, p. i;Journal of the Chemical Society , vol. cxix, 1921, p. 553; C. C. Gillispie (ed.),
Dictionary of Scientific Biography , vol. x, 1970.]
Janet Gough
,Frances Mary (1827–1894), educator and founding figure in the girls' public day-school movement in England, was born in London 16 August 1827, the eldest of ten children (of whom she and four brothers were survivors) of Robert William Buss, painter and etcher, and his wife Frances Fleetwood.
After her fourteenth birthday she herself began to teach and never afterwards spent her days out of a classroom.
At eighteen she opened a small school in Kentish Town with her mother, who was committed to Pestalozzi's reforming ideas.
Conscious of the deficiencies of her own education, she attended evening classes in French, German, and geography at Queen's College, introduced to these by the Revd David Laing, the honorary secretary of the Governesses' Benevolent Institution and a major influence on her.
She left Queen's in 1850 and it was in that year that she founded the school of which she was to be head for forty years, the North London Collegiate School for Ladies, which opened in the Buss Camden Street house on 4 April 1850 with thirty-five pupils.
The 1850 statement of progress speaks of a curriculum designed to ‘prepare pupils for any position in life which they may be called upon to occupy [and which]can be afforded at the moderate fee of two guineas a quarter’.
In 1875 North London Collegiate School and its lower school (Camden School, opened in 1871) were successful in gaining endowments which secured their financial future, though the struggle for funding was trying and uphill work.
Integral features of the Buss schools, and central to their success, were the presence of trained staff properly remunerated, an emphasis on religious tolerance, social service, health and good order, and a lack of social divisiveness.
Hers was a significant part of the testimony of the schools inquiry (Taunton) commission, whose reports proposed the establishment of schools for girls under public authority, curricular reform, and women's access to higher education.
She was a strong supporter of the pioneering work of S. Emily Davies [q.v.]and links between North London and Girton College, Cambridge, were to become well established.
Like Emily Davies she was in favour of access for girls to competitive examinations.
Although her schools were the centre of her life, her view of public affairs was in no way restricted.
Her vigorous intensity made a virtue of the circumstances which confined her to the classroom.
She was always receptive to new ideas, and more importantly she also ‘scattered them broadcast’.
Her outside interests were extensive: she was a member of the council of several training organizations, including Cheltenham Ladies' College and the Cambridge training college for teachers which she helped to found.
She was a governor of University College London, the London School of Medicine, and a number of girls' schools.
She was honorary secretary of the Schoolmistresses' Association and in 1867 its president.
In 1874 she planned the Association of Headmistresses in order that head teachers should ‘hold conferences occasionally in order to know what we ought to assert and what surrender’.
She was, as these interests indicate, zealously determined to see the growth of a professional spirit among teachers.
A letter of 1871 gives a vivid sense of the convictions which impelled her throughout her life: ‘As I have grown older the terrible sufferings of women of my own class for want of good elementary training have more than ever intensified my earnest desire to lighten ever so little the misery of women brought up ‘to be married and taken care of’ and left alone in the world destitute.
It is impossible for words to express my fixed determination of alleviating this evil — even to the small extent of one neighbourhood only — were it only possible.’
Her work not only made this possible within her own north London neighbourhood, but, more significantly, it acted as a beacon for the extension of such opportunities for women on a national basis.
She was not at all narrowly fixed on a rigidly academic education; her warm and vigorous personality made her excellent at public relations and the promotion of her school in the outside world.
She mixed a capacity for love and sympathy with strong practical intuition and the north London motto she chose, ‘We work in hope’, was entirely characteristic of an indefatigable teacher.
She died in London 24 December 1894.
She was unmarried.
[Annie E. Ridley,Frances Mary Buss and her Work for Education , 1895; Sara Burstall,Frances Mary Buss , 1938; Josephine Kamm,How Different from Us , 1959; Margaret Forster,Significant Sisters , 1984.]
A W McIntosh
,Francis (c. 1583–1658), goldsmith, MP, and regicide, was probably born in London, though nothing is known of his early life.
By the 1640s, when he came to political prominence, he was a leading member of the Goldsmiths' Company and a successful banker and financier.
From 1646 he was a Presbyterian elder of St Dunstan's-in-the-West, Fleet Street, the church of William Strong [q.v.], a prominent Independent; Allen himself could well be described as an Independent in the later stages of his life.
He was elected ‘recruiter’ MP for Cockermouth at a by-election in April 1642, and then was recertified in December 1645.
He became a commissioner of customs for Parliament from 1643 to 1645 and was appointed one of the treasurers-at-war in March 1645, when the civil war was at a critical point, taking an active part in the financial administration of the war and in liaison with the Scottish army.
Allen was nominated as one of the 135 commissioners (MPs and others) to form the high court of justice to conduct the trial of Charles I. The meetings of the court started on 8 January 1649 but Allen did not attend at the Painted Chamber in Whitehall until 17 January.
Thereafter, however, he was in regular attendance, being recorded as present at nine out of twelve private meetings in the Painted Chamber and at all four sessions of the actual trial in Westminster Hall, including the final session on Saturday 29 January, in which the sentence of death was passed by all present (though he did not sign the death warrant).
On 30 January (the day of the king's execution) he was appointed a member of the committee of the high court to arrange payments for the court and prepare its accounts.
Allen became one of the most active members of the Rump Parliament, often in alliance with his fellow London merchant, Richard Salwey [q.v.].
He was by this point a very rich financier; he was elected alderman in 1649 and sheriff in 1651 and 1652.
Throughout most of the history of the Rump he was a close political supporter of Oliver Cromwell, but in 1653 he fell out with him in the complicated debates about the dissolution of the House.
When the Parliament was dissolved by military force, Allen was one of the opponents bitterly attacked by Cromwell, and he was arrested by the army for a short time.
Thereafter he dropped out of active politics, and died 6 September 1658.
An unnamed wife but no children are mentioned in his will.
In the Act of Indemnity passed in August 1660 after the Restoration, the name of Francis Allen appears with those of other deceased regicides exempted from indemnity in respect of‘all rights and properties’.
[A. B. Beaven,The Aldermen of London , 1908; House of Lords MS 3676; David Underdown,Pride's Purge , 1971; Blair Worden,The Rump Parliament , 1974; D. Brunton and D. H. Pennington,Members of the Long Parliament , 1954; George Yule,The Independents in the English Civil War , 1958.]
P W Hammond
,George (1806–1877), analytical chemist, was born in February 1806 (he was baptized 12 July 1807) in Totnes, Devon, the child of James Phillipps, druggist, and his wife Ann.
Nothing is known of his education and early life, but on 17 February 1826 he received his first certificate of suitability for a post in the excise service.
He was appointed ‘expectant of excise’ on 17 April 1827 and to his first post as an assistant on 2 September of the same year.
Phillips's career was orthodox for the next sixteen years.
He served in various parts of the country, reaching the grade of principal officer by 1833.
During this period he became interested in the adulteration of tobacco, an issue of considerable importance in the 1830s and 1840s.
Many non-tobacco substances were being mixed with the leaf, causing loss to the revenue, and an act forbidding this was passed in 1842.
It was now necessary to be able to detect adulterants, and in October 1842 a laboratory (the ancestor of the later Laboratory of the Government Chemist) was set up at the excise department headquarters in Broad Street, London, staffed solely by George Phillips.
Phillips had, he said, taught himself the principles of chemistry solely to enable him to detect adulteration.
His confidence in his ability was borne out in practice and by 1857 the amount of adulteration had been considerably reduced.
In 1844 Phillips gave evidence before the select committee on the tobacco trade.
Despite his obvious scientific expertise, the Board of Excise seems to have had some doubts and in 1845 instructed him and nine other officers to matriculate at University College London and attend classes in general and analytical chemistry.
This early example of government help for education continued until 1858, after which excise officers were trained by Phillips within the laboratory, and examined by outside assessors.
With Thomas Dobson, later secretary to the Inland Revenue Board, Phillips also carried out a number of experiments of importance to the brewing industry (and to the revenue).
They were presented by the Treasury with £1,000 between them for their services.
Other important investigations were carried out by Phillips alone into the determination of alcoholic strength and the use of methyl alcohol to denature ethanol.
Phillips continued to progress in the service, rising to a grade of surveying general examiner of the first class in 1853.
In 1858 the laboratory was reorganized as a separate establishment by the Board of Inland Revenue, into which excise had been merged, and he was appointed ‘principal’ of the by then larger laboratory, testing many different substances.
On his retirement on 8 April 1874, Phillips was granted a pension at the rate of his full salary of £750, for his ‘peculiar and exceptional services’.
He had one daughter, Elizabeth, by his first wife, and married secondly (after 1859) a widow, Hannah White, by whom he had no children.
He died 16 January 1877 at his home in Tufnell Park.
[John St Clair Cholmondeley,The Government Laboratory , 1902; Board of Inland Revenue,Annual Reports , 1857–74; Public Record Office, CUST 116/62.]