

Robert K G Temple
,Peregrine (1602–1650), MP and regicide, was baptized 27 September in Bosham, Sussex, the oldest child of Peregrine and Anne Pelham (her maiden name is unknown) of Wickham, Lincolnshire, and later of Hull.
Pelham's grandfather was Field-Marshal and Lord Justice Sir William Pelham [q.v.].
Pelham was apprenticed to the Hull merchant Thomas Aslaby and afterwards admitted a burgess of Hull 3 August 1626.
He then traded with the Continent, importing French wines and exporting lead, becoming extremely prosperous.
He married first a sister of John Bowes, having a son John, and secondly, after 1630, Dame Jacoba van Lore, widow of Sir Peter van Lore, a wealthy merchant and moneylender.
Pelham was elected chamberlain of Hull 30 September 1630 and sheriff of Hull in 1636, becoming alderman in 1641.
In January 1641 he was elected to the Hull parliamentary seat made vacant by the death of Sir John Lister.
Pelham's experience in trade was recognized speedily in the Commons, for on 7 June 1641 he was named to the committee to regulate trade with Scotland.
As the clouds of imminent civil war gathered, Pelham hastened back to Hull where he later wrote: ‘I kept the King out of Hull when he came in person (although I had not such instructions from the House)— where was a very great magazine in which I suppose I saved the State above £100,000…
I had command of the townsmen both within the town and without.’
To Pelham can go the credit for preventing the Royalists from achieving a major conquest at the very commencement of the civil war, which might have won the war for the king.
Pelham was a deeply conscientious constituency MP, and he has left probably the finest record of such duties of any seventeenth-century politician.
In 1884 a large cache of his letters dating from 1643 to 1648 was discovered, and some have been printed.
This extensive and informative correspondence between an MP and the mayor and burgesses of his constituency seems to be unique amongst surviving documentation of the period.
The letters show Pelham to have been indefatigable and devoted to the parliamentary cause.
The Commons chose Pelham as a compromise candidate for one of the three commanders of the navy 28 April 1645, confirmed 2 May.
Fierce factional fighting had taken place over these offices, and Pelham was accepted, rejected, and then accepted again.
But the Lords finally rejected him.
He antagonized the faction of Sir Philip Stapleton [q.v.], who instigated a parliamentary investigation of ‘words spoken’ by Pelham, for which witnesses were summoned, but with no apparent result.
Pelham was named to the high court of justice to try the king, attended the first meeting on 6 January 1649, commenced sitting on the court on its first day, 20 January, was one of the most zealous and faithful attenders of sittings (absent only once), was present when the sentence was read out, and signed the king's death-warrant.
Pelham was ruined by the civil war.
He died penniless, with over £17,000 owing to him, on 27 December 1650, unable to pay his doctor's bill.
He died intestate and administration of his estate was granted to his son John, 23 December 1651 in London.
The Commons ordered £500 to be paid out for his funeral and to feed his family.
[M. F. Keeler,The Long Parliament, 1640–1641 , 1954; T. T. Wildridge,The Hull Letters , 1886; R. K. G. Temple,Archaeologia Cantiana , vol. xcvii, 1981, pp. 209–20; personal research.]
A C Howe
,John (1803–1876), cotton spinner, was born 31 December 1803 in Lydgate, near Ashton-under-Lyne, the second son in the family of four sons and two daughters of Samson Mayall, clothier, and his wife Betty Andrew of Lees, near Oldham.
At the age of seven Mayall began work in a series of textile factories.
Later he bore the responsibility for maintaining his mother and siblings, after his father, given to drink and radicalism, had migrated to America in the wake of the Peterloo massacre (1819).
In about 1824 he entered into partnership with three fellow cotton spinners before, in 1828, joining his brother George in a rented cotton mill in Mossley.
By 1831 they controlled 7,000 spindles and, adding new mills and steam power, were to employ 510 hands by 1845.
This partnership was dissolved amicably in June 1846, with each brother taking 40,000 spindles.
Improved railway communications and the burgeoning Indian market for coarse yarn stimulated the rapid growth of his firm with a series of new mills built after 1849.
Mayall's mastery of technical detail and innovation optimized productivity, while the variety of mills under his control gave him the advantages of flexible specialization.
He also imported raw cotton from America in his own ships.
Here his success was questionable and he later imported only for his own firm.
For the sale of his products he relied on two Manchester yarn agents, particularly Dilworth & Co.
But it was as a cotton spinner, not a merchant, that Mayall excelled and by 1870 he controlled approximately 319,000 spindles, with c .1,350 hands.
In 1872 David Chadwick, the company promoter, reputedly offered £1.5 million to float his firm.
Mayall had undoubtedly become the largest specialized cotton spinner in England (and the world), but in this period the bell-wethers of cotton industrialization had been the combined spinning and weaving firms.
For this reason, Mayall's dominance was confined to the spinning sector of south-east Lancashire, and his firm never became a conspicuous leader of the cotton industry in the manner of Horrockses of Preston or Rylands of Manchester.
Even in south-east Lancashire his firm was soon eclipsed by the Oldham Limiteds.
The growth of the Pennine town of Mossley was also in large part the by-product of the rise of Mayall's business.
He built a hotel, shops, and numerous houses for his workpeople, paying one-fifth of Mossley's rates.
He also helped shape the community as chairman of the board of surveyors, lighting inspector, poor-law guardian, and justice of the peace.
As a Liberal employer, he supported the Anti-Corn Law League in the 1840s, and as a friend of the working classes provided partial employment throughout the cotton famine of the 1860s.
Although baptized and buried in Anglican churches, his strongest links were with the Abney Congregational church, which he had largely financed.
In 1824 Mayall married Elizabeth Winterbottom of Lees, a piecer he employed.
Both were illiterate at the time.
They had five sons and two daughters.
Mayall's recreations were few: he became literate, read the Bible, and subscribed to Punch .
Prosperity eventually drove him to expenditure, acquiring servants and carriages, and building Highfield House, with its billiard-room, library, ornamental gardens, and lodge.
His change in lifestyle perhaps owed something to his second marriage in 1863 (his first wife had died in 1860) to Mrs Job Lees (née Sarah Mayall, unrelated), from the ranks of the local élite.
There were no children of the second marriage.
The sons of Mayall's first marriage were all initiated into the firm at an early age; a son-in-law (a doctor) acquired a mill as a dowry; and a remaining daughter married a Nonconformist minister.
By his retirement in the early 1870s Mayall had transferred both the firm and his wealth to his sons.
He died 6 March 1876 at Highfield House, Mossley, an example of mobility from operative to captain of industry, spurred on by poverty, aided by good luck, and displaying the full range of Smilesian virtues.
[Mayall family papers, Manchester City Libraries;Ashton Reporter , 11 and 18 March 1876; censuses, 1841–71, Public Record Office, London; D. A. Farnie and S. Yonekawa, ‘The Emergence of the Largest Firms in the Cotton-Spinning Industries of the World, 1883–1938’,Textile History , vol. xix, 1988, pp. 171–210.]
Roy Porter
,Goodwin (1653–1704), MP and autobiographer, was born 8 March 1653, the third and youngest son (there were also four daughters) of Philip, fourth Baron Wharton [q.v.]and his second wife Jane, daughter of Arthur Goodwin of Winchendon, Buckinghamshire.
His mother died when he was five.
After an education in France, Wharton briefly sat as an MP in the Parliament of 1680 as member for East Grinstead, before a hotheaded pro-Exclusionist speech forced him to lie low.
He became involved in business ventures, such as wreck-salvaging and deep-sea diving, though these proved unprofitable.
On his father's death in 1696 he inherited estates in Buckinghamshire.
He had meantime become a JP, and was elected in 1690 MP for Malmesbury, and subsequently knight of the shire for Buckinghamshire, sitting till his death.
Belligerently anti-French and anti-Catholic, he was a vocal supporter of William III, an energetic champion of Whig principles, and a ferret of Jacobite plotters.
Appointed first a lieutenant-colonel, and then a lord commissioner of the Admiralty, he saw active service in the Channel during the French wars, before a stroke in 1698 put a premature end to his military career, and probably hastened his death.
He never married, but had an illegitimate son, Hezekiah Knowles.
Though eclipsed by his elder brother, Thomas (later first Marquis of Wharton, q.v.), and cutting less of a dash than his two other brothers, William (by his father's third marriage), the wit and gallant, slain in a duel, and Henry, the soldier politician who died young while campaigning in Ireland, Goodwin Wharton nevertheless played no small part in post-1688 Whig politics.
If his public life was typical of the Whig grandees of his day, Wharton lived a private life (at least in his head) that was bizarre in the extreme.
An unpublished autobiographical memoir, kept from 1686 till near his death, and running to some half a million words, reveals a florid fantasy life.
He records his fury at being treated ‘like a slave’ and swindled by his family, while enjoying ambiguous sexual relationships with his stepmother, Anne Carr Popham, Lady Wharton, and also with Anne Wharton [q.v.], the wife of his brother, Thomas.
He describes persecution by government agents during the reign of James II.
He relates a lasting erotic liaison with a certain Mary Parish, an astrologer, cunning woman, and medium, with whom he lived in Long Acre, and by whom he claimed to have had progeny numbering 106.
His autobiography tells of expeditions to Houndslow Heath, on the advice of Major John Wildman [q.v.], to dig up buried treasure, of programmes of alchemical experiments, and of meetings with dignitaries from the fairy kingdom of the ‘Lowlanders’(whose Queen, Penelope, he believed he married).
He recounts his illicit amours with Mary of Modena, Queen Mary, and Queen Anne.
Absorbing his father's deep piety, he believed himself to be in direct communication with angels, and with the Lord himself, who had predestined him to be ‘King of Kings and Solar King of the World’, sent to repopulate his nation.
Wharton's autobiography ranks high in the annals of psychopathology.
He died 26 October 1704.
[Goodwin Wharton's autobiography, 2 vols., British Library, Add.
MSS 20006–7; Bodleian Library, Carte MSS; J. K. Clark,Goodwin Wharton , 1984; B. Dale,The Good Lord Wharton: His Family, Life and Bible Charity , 1906; E. R. Wharton,The Whartons of Wharton Hall , 1898.]
Margaret Gibson
(c. 1100–1171), abbot of St Victor and bishop of Avranches, was born in England and educated in France, as we learn from an early collection of Victorine epitaphs —‘Huius oliua domus, Anglorum gloria cleri’— and from another, later epitaph, which begins, ‘Anglia me genuit, docuit me Gallia’(Bonnard, vol. i, p. 204).
He became an Augustinian canon at St Victor probably in the lifetime of Master Hugh (d .
1141), the founder of the school of St Victor.
As one of Hugh's successors in that school, ‘Master Achard’ took part in the theological controversies of the 1150s, emerging as a sharp critic of Peter Lombard.
In 1155 he became abbot of St Victor: several letters and charters attest his financial vigilance and the practical support that he received from the English pope, Hadrian IV [q.v.].
His election (1157) to the see of Séez — which had an Augustinian chapter — was vetoed by Henry II.
But on 27 March 1161 Achard was consecrated bishop of Avranches, and in that capacity was on much better terms with the king.
He assisted at the baptism of Henry's daughter Eleanor in 1161 and at the translations of dukes Richard I and II at Fécamp in 1162 and of Edward the Confessor at Westminster in 1163.
As a diocesan bishop he was on good terms with his learned and active neighbour Arnulf of Lisieux [q.v.].
The later epitaph suggests that he had a good knowledge of canon law: ‘legis /doctorem tenuit illa’(namely Gallia).
Achard was a generous patron of Lucerne (in the diocese of Avranches), the Premonstratensian house in which his tomb and a fine, though damaged, contemporary effigy can still be seen (Châtillon,Théologie , plate II).
Achard's two theological treatises, the De Trinitate and the De Discretione Animae Spiritus et Mentis , probably belong to the 1140s or the early 1150s.
They reflect the debates and use the terminology of contemporary Paris in a way that the work of Master Hugh does not; yet Achard is doctrinally conservative, and essentially unsympathetic to the drift towards organized secular schools and (within his lifetime) the University of Paris.
His doctrinal position is further and usefully clarified in fifteen sermons, which presumably belong to his years as abbot and bishop.
He died 29 March 1171.
[E. Martineau (ed.),
De Trinitate , Saint-Lambert-des-Bois, 1987; N. Häring (ed.),
De Discreptione Animae Spiritus et Mentis ,Mediaeval Studies , vol. xxii, 1960, pp. 148–9 (which wrongly attributes the treatise to Gilbert of Poitiers); J. Châtillon (ed.),
Sermones XV , Paris, 1970; F. Bonnard,Histoire de l'Abbaye Royale et de l'Ordre des Chanoines Réguliers de St-Victor de Paris , 2 vols., Paris, 1907; J. Châtillon, ‘Théologie, Spiritualité et Metaphysique dans l'Oeuvre d'Achard de Saint-Victor’,Études de Philosophie Médiévale , vol. lviii, Paris, 1969.]
A A Warden
,Frank (1863–1936), toy manufacturer, was born at 77 Copperas Hill, Liverpool, 15 May 1863, the only son of the three children of John Hornby, provisions dealer, and his wife Martha Thomlinson.
He was educated at local council schools until he obtained employment as a shipping clerk, working with several companies until he was thirty-eight.
Always interested in mechanical devices, experimenting in his home workshop, he developed the Meccano construction idea by using metal strips perforated with holes at half-inch intervals and assembled with screws and nuts.
Wheels, rods, cranks, and other components were added so that boys (girls were never specified in the advertising), with instruction manuals, could build the illustrated models.
Hornby obtained his first patent in 1901; the following year sets, produced in rented premises and marketed as ‘Mechanics Made Easy’, appeared in Liverpool toy shops.
In 1908 Meccano Limited was registered and, within five years, manufacturing plants were established in Paris, Berlin, Barcelona, and Elizabeth in New Jersey.
The success of Hornby's invention was due largely to the principle of gradation from simple sets to others, larger with more complicated mechanisms.
Over many years Meccano became widely used by designers to demonstrate ideas useful in mechanical research.
In 1914 Meccano Ltd. moved to a purpose-built factory at Binns Road in Liverpool which, by 1928, employed over 1,200 people supplying Meccano sets to agents and distributors all over the world, including the Soviet Union and China.
To publicize Hornby's business,Meccano Magazine was founded in 1916 and continued publication (usually monthly in up to seventeen languages) for over fifty years.
Prior to 1914 clockwork toys had been manufactured mainly in Germany and Hornby shrewdly foresaw that, with the war over, there would be a demand for such toys made in England.
In 1920 Meccano Ltd. produced the first Hornby model trains, replicas of British trains with authentic colours and lettering used by the railway companies of the time.
All kinds of rolling-stock, signal-boxes, stations, level-crossing gates, complementary buildings, and scenery were added to increase the realism of railway modelling.
Clockwork was eventually replaced by low-voltage electric power to drive the engines and automate switching-points on the railway track.
In 1933 ‘Dinky’ was introduced, miniatures of cars, lorries, trucks, motor-cycles, farm machinery, rural animals, and other models.
When Hornby died at the height of his company's success, the annual output of his factories totalled millions of Meccano sets, Hornby trains, and Dinky toys, which had become household names throughout the world.
By then employment at Binns Road was 2,000, made up of management, designers, production workers, and marketing and advertising specialists.
In 1931 Hornby won the House of Commons seat of Everton for the Conservative party.
It was a short and not very effective venture; he resigned before the 1935 general election because of business pressures, declining health, and failing eyesight.
In 1887 he married Clara Walker, daughter of William Godefroy, mariner and customs worker.
They had a daughter who died at fourteen, and two sons who both became directors of Meccano Ltd.
Hornby died 21 September 1936 at the David Lewis Northern Hospital, Liverpool, leaving an estate of £231,536.
[M. P. Gould,Frank Hornby , 1915; Frank Hornby, ‘The Life Story of Meccano’,Meccano Magazine , March 1917 to April 1922;Liverpool Daily Post and Echo , 18 August 1928, 12 September 1935, 21 September and 11 November 1936;The Times , 22 September 1936; B. N. Love,Model Building in Meccano , 1971; Bernard Huntington,Along Hornby Lines , 1976; Peter Randall,The Products of Binns Road , 1981.]
Raymond Firth
,Bronislaw Kasper (1884–1942), social anthropologist, was born 7 April 1884 in Cracow, Poland, the only child of Lucjan Malinowski, professor of Slavonic philology at the Jagiellonian University in Cracow, and his wife Józefa Lącka, of a Polish landowning family.
He was educated at home, and at the King Jan Sobieski Gymnasium in Cracow, then at the Jagiellonian University, where he studied physics, mathematics, and philosophy, gaining his doctorate in the last subject ‘with the highest imperial honours’ in 1908.
He later trained in the social sciences at Leipzig University, and in anthropology at the London School of Economics and Political Science, which he entered in 1910.
Originally a Pole of Austrian nationality, he assumed British nationality in 1931.
A social scientist of great distinction and international reputation, Malinowski was a founder of modern social anthropology.
His contribution lay firstly in his intensive field research, quite novel by the standards of his time.
Between 1914 and 1918 he spent six months among the Mailu and then two years among the people of the Trobriand Islands, both in south-east New Guinea.
His account of the annual Trobriand kula overseas expeditions in sailing canoes, for exchange of highly valued symbolic arm-shells and necklaces, published under the flamboyant title of Argonauts of the Western Pacific (1922), became a model for subsequent research.
Later volumes, including Crime and Custom in Savage Society (1926),The Sexual Life of Savages in North-Western Melanesia (1929), and Coral Gardens and Their Magic (1935) also added much to anthropological theory.
His second great contribution was the functional method in anthropology, which despite its defects was for long a valuable associational mode of approach to the study of human behaviour and social institutions.
The general theory of human culture which he built upon this, for example A Scientific Theory of Culture (posthumous, 1944), was not so successful.
A third important achievement was to stimulate and lead the developing interest of social anthropology in the study of social and cultural change, by the training of students and the organization of research, especially in Africa.
Malinowski's powerful intellect showed itself particularly in his academic teaching.
His seminars at the London School of Economics were famous, attracting a diverse range of students, including Jomo Kenyatta [q.v.](later president of Kenya), to whose book Facing Mount Kenya (1938) Malinowski wrote an introduction.
In 1924 Malinowski joined the London School of Economics as reader in social anthropology.
He became professor of anthropology in the University of London in 1927, and taught there till he went on sabbatical leave to the United States in 1938.
As a visiting professor at Yale, Malinowski later accepted a tenured appointment.
In the United States, as earlier, he threw himself into opposition against Fascism and Nazism.
From there he also did fieldwork in Mexico.
His many academic distinctions included a fellowship in the pre-war Polish Academy of Arts and Sciences, and an honorary doctorate from Harvard University at their tercentenary celebrations in 1936.
Malinowski had a complex character, as illustrated by the posthumous A Diary in the Strict Sense of the Term (1967), written for his private use in Polish in the Trobriands.
He was not at all athletic, but liked long walks, especially in the neighbourhood of his villa in Soprabolzano, northern Italy.
His aesthetic tastes were primarily musical, mainly for nineteenth-century German composers.
He was a superb linguist, speaking fluently in at least six European languages.
He had a great capacity for friendship, though his demands upon it were sometimes heavy.
In 1919 he married Elsie Rosaline, daughter of Sir David Orme Masson [q.v.], professor of chemistry in the University of Melbourne; they had three daughters.
Malinowski's wife died in 1935.
In 1940 he married Anna Valetta Hayman-Joyce, who painted under the name of Valetta Swann.
He died suddenly, of a heart attack, in New Haven, Connecticut, USA, 16 May 1942.
[Roy Ellen (ed.),
Malinowski between Two Worlds: the Polish Roots of an Anthropological Tradition , 1988; private information; personal knowledge.]
Joan C Henderson
, Sir Francis (c. 1534–1608), Cornish landowner and county office-holder, was the elder son of Thomas Godolphin and his first wife Katherine, daughter of Edmund Bonython.
Apart from his brother, he had one sister, one half-brother, and two half-sisters.
The family had lived at Godolphin in the parish of Breage, near Helston, since Norman times, and he was a prominent member of a group of interrelated Cornish gentry: the families of Killigrew, Arundell of Tolverne, and Carew of Antony.
Details of his life are unknown until 1570, when Francis succeeded his father and his uncle, Sir William Godolphin, to large estates, tin and silver mines, the lease and captaincy of the Scilly Isles, and a tradition of service to the sovereign.
Francis was a justice of the peace from c .1575, sheriff in 1579 and 1604, a deputy lieutenant from 1585, a commissioner for piracy by 1587,custos rotulorum in 1597, and recorder of Liskeard by 1604 or 1605.
In the administration of the duchy of Cornwall he was receiver-general from 1586 to 1604.
Knighted in 1580, he sat for Cornwall and Lostwithiel in the Parliaments of 1589 and 1593.
Godolphin held office when England feared Spanish attack.
He dealt with the seizure of ships, enforced the embargo on Spanish trade, and watched for enemy ships.
He organized the recruitment and training of men, the fortification and provisioning of west-country ports, the maintenance of beacons, and the apprehension of recusants.
From 1593, with the help of Robert Adams [q.v.],
Godolphin had a fort constructed in St Mary's in the Scilly Isles.
He offered £500 towards the cost of fortifications at the time of the renewal of his lease, and he secured government support for the maintenance of a garrison there.
In July 1595, when a Spanish force landed and set fire to Mousehole, Paul, Newlyn, and Penzance, Godolphin ‘engaged himself very worthily’, and rallied men for the defence of Penzance and Marazion.
In the later 1590s he raised men for service in Ireland, and dealt with those who returned maimed and unemployed.
His friend, Richard Carew [q.v.], wrote that Godolphin's ‘zeal in religion, uprightness in justice, providence in government, and plentiful housekeeping, have won him a very great and reverent reputation in his country’.
He also praised ‘his labours and inventions in tin matters’, a reflection of the mines which gave Godolphin a large part of his wealth and influence in his county.
In 1552 Godolphin married Margaret, daughter of John Killigrew of Arwennack.
They had three sons and six daughters.
After 1600 he married Alice, daughter of John Skerret of Tavistock, Devon, widow of John Glanville.
He was buried in Breage 23 April 1608.
In his will, dated 4 October 1606, he left bequests to his family, £200 to the poor, £40 towards equipping a local house of correction, should it be set up, and 20 marks to build ‘lodges’ for four tinners.
Four preachers were to receive 13s. 4d. for sermons at Helston church, which suggests he was a strong Protestant.
[F. E. Halliday (ed.),
Richard Carew of Antony: the Survey of Cornwall , 1953; P. W. Hasler,The House of Commons 1558–1603 , 1981; A. L. Rowse,Tudor Cornwall , new edn., 1969.]
Penelope Gouk
,Nicolaus (c. 1620–1687), mathematician and astronomer, was born between 1619 and 1623 (most likely 1620) in Eutin (later in Schleswig-Holstein), the son of Martinus Kauffman, a Lutheran pastor.
The family moved in 1623 to Oldenburg, where Martinus died in 1638.
Nicolaus matriculated in 1632 at the University of Rostock and graduated magister philosophiae in 1641.
The following year he registered for study in philosophy and theology at the University of Leyden and, apart from a brief return to Rostock, remained in The Netherlands until he took up a post at the University of Copenhagen in June 1648.
Mercator (he was now using the Latin version of his name) left Copenhagen in 1654, stayed briefly in London, and then moved to Paris.
He remained there for about two years before returning to England in July 1657 to take up a position as mathematics tutor to Joscelyne Percy, son of Algernon Percy, tenth Earl of Northumberland [q.v.], at Petworth, an appointment which seems to have been due to the influence of the Puritan reformer Samuel Hartlib [q.v.].
From 1658 until 1682 Mercator lived in London, teaching mathematics and engaging in vigorous debate with mathematicians such as William Oughtred, John Pell, and John Collins [qq.v.].
In 1666 Mercator made and presented to Charles II a marine chronometer that ‘showed the inequality of the sun's motion from the apparent motion’(John Aubrey, q.v.).
He was consequently elected a fellow of the Royal Society.
In 1669 he was first approached by the French statesman J. B. Colbert, and in December 1682 he set out for France, having been commissioned by Colbert to plan and construct the fountains at Versailles.
He died there in January or February 1687.
Mercator's career exemplifies the close links which existed between mathematical theorists, teachers, and instrument-makers at this time.
One of Mercator's pedagogical aims was to produce compendia of ‘principles and scientific demonstrations’ of all branches of knowledge.
His best-known work is the Logarithmotechnia (1668), a ‘new, accurate and easy method of constructing logarithms’.
He published a series of elementary textbooks on cosmography, trigonometry, and astronomy (1651), a study on mathematical rationality, a tract on calendrical reform (both in 1653), and two further works on contemporary astronomy (1672 and 1676).
Unpublished works include Latin translations of an astrological text by Benjamin Worsley [q.v.](c .1657) and Kinckhuysen's textbook on algebra (c .1669), and versions of a treatise on music theory in which logarithms are applied to the division of the musical scale (c .1672).
Along with many of his contemporaries, Mercator held the Baconian belief that knowledge should be exploited for utilitarian ends.
His interests encompassed many branches of applied mathematics: astrology, meteorology, the tuning of musical instruments, cartography, fortification, navigation, and optics.
This activity extended to the practicalities of marine chronometry and lens-grinding.
His other interests included alchemy, medical remedies, and universal language schemes.
Mercator's contemporaries seem to have found him brilliant but difficult.
Aubrey describes him as ‘of a prodigious invention, and will be acquainted (familiarly) with nobody’.
He should not be confused with the Mercator of Mercator's projection in map-making (Gerardus Gerhard Kremer, 1512–1594).
[W. Applebaum, ‘A Descriptive Catalogue of the Manuscripts of Nicolaus Mercator, F.R.S.
(1620–1687), in Sheffield University Library’,Notes and Records of the Royal Society , vol. xli, 1986, pp. 27–37; J. E. Hofmann, ‘Nicolaus Mercator (Kauffman), sein Leben und Wirken’,Akademie der Wissenchaften und Literatur in Mainz, Abhandlungen der mathematisch-naturwissenschaftlichen Klasse , vol. iii, 1950, pp. 43–103; P. M. Gouk, ‘Music in the Natural Philosophy of the early Royal Society’, Ph.D.
thesis (1982) for the University of London, pp. 268–83.]
A V Simcock
,John (c. 1668–1728), mathematical instrument-maker, was born in or about 1668 in Lichfield, Staffordshire, the youngest of the three sons (there was also a daughter) of William Rowley (died 1673), sword cutler of Lichfield, and his wife Elizabeth.
He was apprenticed on 20 October 1682 to the London mathematical and optical instrument-maker, Joseph Howe.
He became a freeman of the London Broderers' Company on 26 February 1691, soon afterwards establishing his own business.
His shop was at the sign of the Globe in Fleet Street.
His work quickly gained him a high reputation.
He became the principal supplier of scientific instruments to Charles Boyle, fourth Earl of Orrery [q.v.], who amassed one of the finest collections of the age.
One of Orrery's commissions, about 1712, was for a mechanical model of the Earth–Moon–Sun system, of a type recently constructed by the clock-maker George Graham [q.v.].
Rowley's version was larger and somewhat more sophisticated.
Possibly intending a pun on the word ‘horary’, he named it an ‘orrery’; and this has since been the usual English word for a mechanical planetarium.
In 1715 he was appointed master of mechanics to King George I, and gave up his retail shop to concentrate on public duties and regular corporate customers.
Among these were the Office of Ordnance and Christ's Hospital mathematical school.
He also made pieces for Tsar Peter the Great, and one of his apprentices, Benjamin Scott, later settled in Russia.
Another, Thomas Wright, took on Rowley's more routine business after 1715, and became noted for his ‘grand orreries’.
Rowley was the period's most skilled maker of accurate mathematical instruments and models, whether of brass, silver, or ivory.
Other craftsmen emulated him, and he was praised by scientific writers.
No impression of his personality survives.
His wife's name was Catherine (died 1756), and they had one daughter.
Rowley died in London 14 January 1728.
[Michael A. Crawforth, ‘Instrument Makers in the London Guilds’,Annals of Science , vol. xliv, 1987; Henry C. King and John R. Millburn,Geared to the Stars , 1978; E. G. R. Taylor,The Mathematical Practitioners of Tudor and Stuart England , 1954; E. Wilfred Taylor and J. Simms Wilson,At the Sign of the Orrery , 1950.]
Alan Ruston
,Alexander (1841–1931), Nonconformist historian, was born 9 June 1841 in Coventry, the eldest of the four sons (there were no daughters) of the Revd John Gordon, Unitarian minister of Dudley, Worcestershire, and his second wife, Anna Maria, daughter of Thomas Hodgetts of Bristol.
Educated at King Henry VIII Grammar School in Coventry, the Royal High School in Edinburgh, and the University of Edinburgh, he entered Manchester New College, London, for ministerial training in 1859.
He was Hibbert fellow at Edinburgh University 1863–4, and graduated MA in 1864 in natural philosophy and English.
He was Unitarian minister in Aberdeen 1862–3, Liverpool 1863–72, Norwich 1872–7, and the First Presbyterian church, Belfast, 1877–89.
From 1890 to 1911 Gordon was principal of the Unitarian Home Missionary College, Manchester, and from 1904 to 1911 lecturer in ecclesiastical history at Manchester University.
Gordon was probably the most eminent scholar of Nonconformity of his time, with an encyclopaedic knowledge and memory.
His outstanding contribution was to the Dictionary of National Biography , for which he wrote 778 biographies covering the period from the eleventh to the twentieth centuries.
Through his exhaustive and objective scholarship he significantly influenced subsequent research into English religious dissent.
Gordon's erudition, based on the use of primary sources, extended to Europe, and his acquaintance with minor Protestant groups, such as the Mennonites, Collegiants, Anabaptists, and Familists, was hardly less intimate than his knowledge of tiny English sects, such as the Traskites and the Muggletonians.
He contributed two articles to the ninth edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica (1875–88), for which his father also wrote, and thirty-nine articles to the eleventh edition (1910–11), seven of which were revised for the fourteenth (1929).
Amongst his books,Freedom after Ejection, a Review (1690–1692) of Presbyterian and Congregational Nonconformity in England and Wales (1917), and The Cheshire Classis Minutes 1691–1745 (1919) remained standard works, and his Heads of English Unitarian History (1895) was reissued in 1970.
From 1869 to 1930 articles, reviews, chapel histories, and biographies flowed from his pen, covering every branch of Nonconformity.
His correspondence was as voluminous as his knowledge, which was willingly shared with other scholars.
The depth and catholicity of his detailed learning reflected a complex and singular personality.
Gruff and inordinately self-reliant, Gordon was highly conservative in attitude, theology, and lifestyle.
Though warm and understanding to his students, stories of his sharpness orally and in correspondence abound.
When asked by a pompous college dean, ‘My good man, I do not think I know you?
Who are you?’
Gordon replied, ‘Oh I'm just myself.
Are you anybody?’
His hats were inscribed inside the brim ‘Not Yours’.
Contemptuous of rank or title, he rejected offers of honorary doctorates from Manchester, Edinburgh, and various American universities.
In 1872 he married Clara Maria, daughter of Swinton Boult [q.v.],
Liverpool underwriter.
They had five sons and one daughter.
His wife died in 1902 and for the twenty years of his retirement he lived in hotels.
He died in Belfast 21 February 1931, having outlived nearly all his immediate family.
[H. McLachlan,Alexander Gordon , 1932; obituary by W. H. Burgess,Transactions of the Unitarian Historical Society , vol. v, part 1, October 1931; obituary by H. McLachlan,Inquirer , 28 February 1931, pp. 99–101.]
M E James
,Emanuel , eleventh Baron Scrope and Earl of Sunderland (1584–1630), lord president of the council in the north, was the only child and heir of Thomas, the tenth baron, and his wife Philadelphia, daughter of Henry Carey [q.v.], first Baron Hunsdon, a cousin of Queen Elizabeth I. He was born probably in Hunsdon, Hertfordshire, 1 August 1584, and succeeded his father as eleventh baron, and as steward of the royal honour of Richmondshire in 1609.
The Scropes owned extensive estates in Wensleydale (whose value had been increased in the late sixteenth century by mineral exploitation) and at Langar in Nottinghamshire.
Scrope was much more the courtier than his father had been: a participant in court masques and festivities, and notorious as a gamester, burdened with large gambling debts.
He had Catholic sympathies, however, and came to be regarded in the north as a patron of recusants.
As a result, in January 1619, during one of the pro-Spanish phases of James I's foreign policy, he was appointed lord president of the council in the north, replacing Edmund, third Baron Sheffield (later first Earl of Mulgrave, q.v.), lately a persecutor of Catholics, probably at the prompting of the Spanish ambassador, Gondomar.
Scrope now headed an institution already discredited by the involvement of its late president (Lord Sheffield) and secretary (Sir Arthur Ingram, q.v.) in the hated alum monopoly, regarded as responsible for the depression in the West Riding clothing industry.
Scrope's pro-recusant policies increased the council's unpopularity, particularly amongst the Puritan clothiers, whose formidable leader was the late parliamentary oppositionist, Sir John Savile (later first Baron Savile of Rufford, q.v.).
The lord president tried to attract support by embarking on a reform of the council, particularly by a reduction in its fees; but it could make little progress against the obstructionism of Secretary Ingram, who had the backing at court of the lord treasurer, Lionel Cranfield (later Earl of Middlesex, q.v.).
Scrope relied almost exclusively on George Villiers, first Duke of Buckingham [q.v.], but consequently had to adapt himself to the tergiversations of the latter's policies.
By 1627 Buckingham's pro-Catholic foreign policy had collapsed, and he was bent on a French war; the need now was for the service of men with enough local influence to raise money for this purpose.
Sir John Savile, Scrope's principal opponent, was therefore introduced into the council as its vice-president but effective head, Scrope's presidency retaining only a titular significance.
He was compensated by being raised, on 19 June 1627, to the earldom of Sunderland.
However, this arrangement too collapsed when the assassination of Buckingham in August 1628 led Charles I to call a Parliament.
In this Sir Thomas Wentworth (later first Earl of Strafford, q.v.),
Savile's old Yorkshire enemy and rival, played a leading role in the House of Commons.
There charges of corruption were successfully brought against the vice-president, and in November 1629 his resignation from the office was forced.
Scrope followed suit in December, receiving £3,000 for his office, and Sir Thomas Wentworth succeeded him as lord president.
Irrespective of his merits, the weakness in Scrope's position made success in his office unlikely.
He was hampered by his Catholic sympathies, his inadequate local following, and his lack of independent political weight at court.
He was already in poor health at the time of his resignation, and he did not long survive it, dying 30 May 1630, and being buried at Langar.
He left no children by his wife, Lady Elizabeth Manners, daughter of John, fourth Earl of Rutland.
The barony of Scrope devolved on the representative of his niece Mary but was not taken up; the earldom of Sunderland became extinct.
Scrope left a natural son and three daughters by Martha Jeanes, his servant.
John, the son, became a fellow commoner of Trinity College, Oxford, and died unmarried.
Two of the daughters, Mary and Annabella, eventually inherited the Scrope estates.
A third daughter, Elizabeth, married Thomas Savage, Earl Rivers.
[Calendars of State Papers Domestic ; Historical Manuscripts Commission,Various Collections , vol. vii, 1913 (Temple Newsam MSS), and Hastings MSS , vol. iv, 1947; W. Knowler (ed.),
The Earl of Strafford's Letters and Despatches , 1739; T. D. Whitaker,Life and Letters of George Radcliffe , 1810; R. R. Reid,The King's Council in the North , 1921.]
Peter Leach
,Robert (c. 1773–1855), architect, was born c .1773, the son of Edward Lugar, a carpenter of Colchester.
He established himself in London c .1799, exhibiting at the Royal Academy from that date on, and in due course developed a very widespread practice as a country-house architect, which extended to Scotland and Wales as well as throughout much of England.
He also published a number of books of his designs, which doubtless served to publicize his name.
The first two —Architectural Sketches for Cottages, Rural Dwellings, and Villas (1805, reprinted 1815 and 1823) and The Country Gentleman's Architect;…
Designs for Farm Houses and Farm Yards (1807)— were purely pattern-books, but the subsequent volumes were records of executed projects:Plans and Views of Buildings executed in England and Scotland, in the Castellated and Other Styles (1811, 2nd edn. 1823) and Villa Architecture, a Collection of Views, with Plans, of Buildings executed in England, Scotland…(1828).
The latter of these was dedicated to the south Wales ironmaster, William Crawshay [q.v.], for whom Lugar designed his largest work, Cyfartha Castle, Glamorgan (1825).
Lugar was a practitioner of the Picturesque after the manner of John Nash and Humphry Repton [qq.v.], working in a wide variety of architectural styles including the ‘Grecian’, the Tudor Gothic, and that of the cottage ornée as well as the castellated.
At Gold Hill (later Dunstall Priory), Shoreham, Kent (1806) he produced a notably early example of a villa in the Italianate vernacular style of Nash's Cronkhill, and at Balloch Castle, Dunbarton (1809), he was amongst the first to introduce the picturesquely asymmetrical castle form into Scotland; but he was a designer of only limited ability, frequently reducing the process of picturesque composition to a meagrely detailed routine formula of only marginal asymmetry.
Lugar also served as county surveyor for Essex from 1812 to 1816, and became a freeman of Colchester in 1812.
He died, after many years of retirement, in Pembroke Square, Kensington, 23 June 1855, aged eighty-two.
[H. M. Colvin,A Biographical Dictionary of British Architects 1600–1840 , 1978; W. Papworth (ed.),
An Encyclopaedia of Architecture , 4 edns., 1852–88.]
Sylvia Ayling
,(Estelle) Sylvia (1882–1960), political activist, journalist, and artist, was born in Old Trafford, Manchester, 5 May 1882.
She was the second child and second daughter in the family of one son and three daughters of Dr Richard Marsden Pankhurst, barrister and republican, and his wife Emmeline Pankhurst [q.v.], daughter of Robert Goulden, a prosperous Manchester cotton manufacturer.
Sylvia's elder sister was (Dame) Christabel Pankhurst [q.v.].
She was mainly educated at home by governesses, and at school in Southport and later at the High School for Girls, Manchester.
After studying at Manchester School of Art from 1898 to 1903, she went to the Royal College of Art, before taking a diploma at the Accademia in Venice.
James Keir Hardie [q.v.]was her friend and political mentor until his death in 1915.
Her father died when she was sixteen years old.
His parental maxim, ‘if you do not serve others, you will not have been worth the upbringing’, is reflected in her dedication to a life of service to humanity.
She deserted her artist's studio in Chelsea to work for her mother's Women's Social and Political Union when it transferred from Manchester to London in 1905 and became honorary secretary.
Her chief contributions to suffrage iconography are ‘the embryonic socialist realism of paintings of working class women, and a dilute Pre-Raphaelite allegory derived from Walter Crane’[q.v.]
(Lisa Tickner,The Spectacle of Women , 1987).
Her determined campaigning for votes for women in the East End included the provision of welfare support for women and children.
Already a martyr to the cause of women's rights, having suffered the torture of force-feeding while on hunger strike in Holloway, she additionally refused to drink or sleep.
She co-ordinated her release with public-speaking engagements, making use of the Prisoners' Temporary Discharge for Ill Health Act of 1913 (known as the ‘Cat and Mouse Act’).
Between June 1913 and June 1914 she went on ten hunger and thirst strikes.
Her dedicated persistence finally gave a delegation of East End working women the opportunity of themselves demanding the vote from the prime minister, H. H. Asquith (later first Earl of Oxford and Asquith).
In March 1914 she launched her first weekly newspaper,Women's Dreadnought , organ of her East London Federation of Suffragettes.
A split with the autocratic WSPU and her mother and sister was inevitable.
She was opposed to World War I and the resultant erosion of civil liberties.
Abandoning art after 1914, she established a number of clinics and a day nursery in east London during the war.
By July 1917 her paper was renamed Workers Dreadnought , and in May 1918 her organization changed its name from Workers Suffrage Federation (having taken this name in 1916) to Workers Socialist Federation.
In the wake of the Russian revolution, which she supported passionately, it became the first Communist party in Great Britain.
In 1920 she went to Moscow for the second congress of the Third International.
On her return she was imprisoned for sedition, a charge arising from articles published in her newspaper during her absence.
On her release she refused to hand the paper over to other Communist party members, and was expelled from the party.
Workers Dreadnought continued until 1924.
Sylvia Pankhurst worked with a fellow journalist, Silvio Erasmus Corio, an Italian libertarian socialist, whose growing concern over the rise of Fascism in Italy she shared.
They moved from the East End of London to Woodford Green in Essex, where she concentrated on her writing.
Their only child, Richard Keir Pethick, was born in December 1927.
In 1930 her appeal for a national maternity service,Save the Mothers , was published.
Autobiographical and other works followed.
These included a translation of the Romanian poet Eminescu (1930), and the autobiographical The Suffragette Movement , published in 1931.
In May 1936, believing the emperor of Ethiopia's cause to be a just one, she began a weekly journal,New Times and Ethiopia News , which she edited for twenty years.
She publicized the efforts made by Emperor Haile Selassie to persuade the League of Nations to prevent colonization and threatened genocide.
She helped to raise funds to build and equip a hospital, opposed plans to turn Ethiopia into a de facto British protectorate, agitated against the idea of returning the former Italian colonies to Italy, and supported the idea of the unity of Eritrea with Ethiopia.
She published a number of books on Ethiopia.
Silvio died in 1954.
Miss Pankhurst accepted an earlier invitation from the emperor, and left England with Richard in 1956.
In Ethiopia she helped to found a Social Service Society and edited a monthly periodical, the Ethiopia Observer .
She received the decoration of the Queen of Sheba, first class, from the emperor.
She died in Addis Ababa 27 September 1960.
[Patricia W. Romero,E. Sylvia Pankhurst , 1987; David Mitchell,The Fighting Pankhursts , 1967; Richard Pankhurst,Sylvia Pankhurst, Artist and Crusader, an Intimate Portrait , 1979; Walter Kendall,The Revolutionary Movement in Britain , 1969; primary source material in the International Institute of Social History, Amsterdam.]
Ronald M Birse
,Kirkpatrick (1812–1878), inventor of the pedal bicycle, was born in the parish of Keir near Thornhill, Dumfriesshire, and baptized 18 September 1812.
He was the fifth son (the eldest of whom died aged thirteen) of Robert Macmillan, blacksmith at Courthill Smithy, and his wife Mary Auld.
There were also at least three younger sisters in the family.
Kirkpatrick helped his father at the forge, worked on a neighbouring farm, got a job as a coachman, and at twenty-two became an assistant to the blacksmith of Walter Scott, fifth Duke of Buccleuch [q.v.], at Drumlanrig.
Some time afterwards he chanced to see a hobby-horse being ridden along a nearby road, and was struck with the notion of making one for himself.
This he did, and when he had learned to ride it he realized what a radical improvement it would be if he could propel it without putting his feet on the ground.
At about this time he returned to Courthill to assist his father, and so he was able to use all the resources of the smithy to make the kind of machine that was in his mind.
He completed it about the end of 1839, and quickly mastered the art of riding it on the rough country roads, so that he was soon accustomed to making the fourteen-mile journey to Dumfries in less than an hour.
This first pedal bicycle was propelled by a horizontal reciprocating movement of the rider's feet on the pedals.
This movement was transmitted to cranks on the rear wheel by connecting rods; the machine weighed almost exactly half a hundredweight and the physical effort required to ride it must have been very considerable.
In spite of these disadvantages, Macmillan's next exploit, in June 1842, was to ride the seventy miles into Glasgow, a trip which took him two days and resulted in his being fined the sum of five shillings for causing a slight injury to a small girl who ran across his path.
He never thought of patenting his invention or trying to make any money out of it, but others who saw it were not slow to realize its potential, and soon copies began to appear and were sold for £6 or £7 each.
Gavin Dalzell of Lesmahagow copied his machine in 1846 and passed on the details to so many people that for more than fifty years he was generally regarded as the inventor of the bicycle.
With all these developments Macmillan was quite unconcerned, preferring to enjoy the quiet country life he was used to.
Shortly after the death of his father, in 1854 he married Elizabeth Gordon Goldie (died 1865).
Of their six children only a son and a daughter survived.
After his wife's early death Macmillan's sister Ann became his housekeeper and looked after his two young children.
Macmillan died in Courthill 26 January 1878.
[G. Irving,The Devil on Wheels , 1986; N. G. Clayton, ‘The First Bicycle’,Boneshaker , no. cxiii, spring 1987.]
John Culme
,Paul (1770–1844), manufacturing silversmith, was baptized in St Marylebone, London, 28 October 1770, one of several children of Thomas Storr (died 1803), a silver-chaser who by 1788 had become a victualler, and his wife Sarah.
Paul, who may himself have been trained as a silver-chaser, was apprenticed in 1784 to William Rock of Westminster, another victualler, becoming free of the Vintners' Company in 1791.
Following a short-lived partnership during 1792 with the working silversmith William Frisbee, Storr removed to premises in Church Street, Soho, formerly occupied by Andrew Fogelberg, the Swedish-born silversmith, whose business had flourished there since about 1772.
It is possible that Storr continued the concern, Fogelberg perhaps acting as the sleeping partner.
In 1796 Storr moved to 20 Air Street, Piccadilly, where a successful manufacturing silversmith of the previus generation, Thomas Pitts, had had his workshops.
Supplying the retail trade with special orders and quality goods, Storr built up his business over the next eleven years into one of the most important of its kind in London.
Then in 1807 he entered into an exclusive manufacturing arrangement with Rundell, Bridge & Rundell, the crown jewellers, whereby he installed craftsmen in new jointly-owned workshops in Dean Street, Soho.
This subsidiary of the celebrated retail house on Ludgate Hill was known as Storr & Co., the first partners, besides Storr himself, being Philip Rundell, John Bridge, the sculptor William Theed [qq.v.], and Edmond Waller Rundell.
It is said that Rundell's had to satisfy so many orders at this time that Storr & Co. was obliged to work, in the way of dinner services, centre-pieces, and other ceremonial and domestic plate, some ten thousand ounces of silver a month.
Storr's agreement with Rundell's terminated on 18 February 1819, by which time he had already found suitable workshops in Harrison Street, Gray's Inn Road, where he set up once more as an independent manufacturer.
During 1822 he also went into business as a retail goldsmith and jeweller in Bond Street with John Mortimer (died 1871).
This partnership, which included the silver manufactory, traded under the style of Storr & Mortimer until Storr's retirement on 31 December 1838; subsequently the firm continued as Mortimer & Hunt and then Hunt & Roskell.
The lack of suitable evidence renders Storr's career, like that of so many contemporaries in the smaller industries, difficult to assess.
Of his own personal work in any branch of the goldsmiths' craft there is not a single identifiable item.
Nor is there any other documentary evidence to support the contention, reinforced by the fact of his so-called maker's marks entered at the London Assay Office between 1792 and 1834, that he was an actual worker in the precious metals.
All that may be stated with any certainty is that his knowledge of the craft must have been more than merely adequate and that he was a good businessman.
In short, Storr's latter-day fame rests upon two particulars: first, that he was fortunate in working alongside some of the most talented artists, designers, and craftsmen of his time; and second, that the bulk of Rundell, Bridge & Rundell's productions in silver during the years of their greatest success were made under his (Storr & Co. 's) management and thus bear his mark.
Storr married in 1801 Elizabeth Susanna (1771–1843), youngest daughter of Adam Beyer (1729–1804), who with his brother Lorence traded as a piano and organ builder in Compton Street, Soho, and his wife Ann.
They had ten children.
Storr, who retired to Hill House, Tooting, Surrey, died in Tooting 18 March 1844 leaving an estate valued at £3,000; he and his wife are buried in the churchyard of Tooting parish church.
[N. M. Penzer,Paul Storr , 1954; John Culme,Nineteenth-century Silver , 1977; Arthur G. Grimwade,London Goldsmiths 1697–1837 , 3rd edn., 1990; research by Sarah Tanner published in the Worshipful Company of Goldsmiths' Review , 1985/6, p. 15.]
D A Carpenter
(d. 1265), keeper of the king's works at Westminster, son of Odo the goldsmith, played a central role in King Henry III's rebuilding of Westminster Abbey.
In 1240 Edward succeeded his father as keeper of the king's works at Westminster, which then chiefly concerned the palace.
In the following year he was made responsible for the new shrine which Henry III was beginning for Edward the Confessor.
In 1245, when the king began to rebuild the abbey itself, Edward became keeper of the works, along with the master mason and a representative of the abbot and convent.
While colleagues came and went, he retained this position until his retirement in 1263/4, thus overseeing the building of the eastern chapels, chancel, transepts, chapter house, and a large part of the choir, virtually the whole of King Henry's achievement.
Edward's first  responsibility was for the receipt and expenditure of the money assigned for the operations, a responsibility discharged through a special exchequer set up in 1246, over which he presided.
Edward was far more, however, than a mere passive conduit for funds.
He was actively involved both in obtaining money and materials and in ensuring that work was actually carried out.
In November 1252, for example, the king told him both to seek timber for the new roof of the abbey and to see that a great new bell was hung before the feast of St Edward: he was not to leave London until it was done.
In June 1259 it was to Edward and two colleagues that the writ was addressed which ordered the pulling down of ‘the old fabric of the church of Westminster…as far as the vestry which is by the king's seat…and to have the same church rebuilt…in such a manner as the new fabric there requires’, an order which marked the beginning of work on the choir.
In securing money for the abbey, Edward was helped by his position as a baron of the Exchequer and keeper from 1248 of the Exchequer seal, one of the earliest known chancellors of the Exchequer.
Aside from his work on the abbey, Edward was constantly involved in procuring vestments, jewels, and a range of other precious objects for the king.
He interpreted Henry's wishes to the craftsmen and saw that tight deadlines were met.
That he satisfied so impatient and fastidious a monarch for so long says much for his efficiency and sensitivity.
It is clear, moreover, that Edward's counsel was valued on artistic matters.
In 1245 the king accepted his advice that it would be more splendid to have the leopards, which were planned to go beside the throne at Westminster, made of bronze rather than of marble.
It is not impossible, therefore, that Edward influenced features of the abbey's design.
Certainly his skill as an administrator was a vital factor in ensuring that so much was built so quickly and magnificently.
He died in 1265.
[R. A. Brown et al .
(eds.),
The History of the King's Works , vol. i, 1963; R. K. Lancaster, ‘Artists, Suppliers and Clerks: the Human Factors in the Art Patronage of King Henry III’,Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes , vol. xxxv, 1972;Close Rolls ;Calendar of Patent Rolls ;Calendar of Liberate Rolls .]
Alan Ruston
,Henry (1813–1903), social reformer, was born 17 November 1813 in the City of London, the youngest of the ten children of Isaac Solly, merchant, and his wife Mary, daughter of John Harrison, a London solicitor.
His father was descended from Daniel Neal [q.v.], the historian of the Puritans.
The Sollys were dissenters, closely associated with the Presbyterian meeting-houses at Walthamstow and Hackney.
Henry was educated by the Revd Eliezer Cogan [q.v.]and then in Brighton under Dr John Morell, entering University College London as one of its first students, from 1829 to 1831.
A career in commerce proved uncongenial, so he entered the General Baptist/Unitarian ministry.
From 1840 Solly was successively minister of chapels in Yeovil, Tavistock, Shepton Mallet, Cheltenham, Carter Lane in London, and finally Lancaster.
Solly espoused radical causes in each of his ministries.
His stands alienated the richer members so that his ministries were short and ill paid.
He was a Chartist, one of the two dissenting ministers to serve as a representative (for Yeovil) at the Birmingham conference of 1842.
Solly was a consistent and vocal advocate of the co-operative movement, temperance, the shop early-closing movement, Sunday opening of museums, the Anti-Slavery League, and much else.
He lectured and wrote extensively, his best-known work being the novel,James Woodford, Carpenter and Chartist (1881).
He had a tempestuous joint editorship of the Beehive with George Potter [q.v.]from 1869 to 1870.
He returned to London from Lancaster in 1862 without job or income, sensing that his life so far had been a failure.
The twenty years which followed showed him to be one of the most remarkable social innovators of his time.
‘He was a restless, inventive, constructive spirit, part author of at least three large living movements: charity organization, working men's clubs, and garden cities’(Lord Beveridge, q.v.).
The centres of his concern were the condition of the working classes and fellowship between the classes.
These he expressed in the Working Men's Club and Institute Union, founded chiefly on his initiative on 14 June 1862 in London, becoming its first paid secretary in 1863.
Within a few years clubs appeared all over the country.
An excellent organizer and fund-raiser, the movement he created soon became an established part of British life.
However, his flamboyant style led to his departure, first in 1867 and again in 1873, over arguments about his salary and alcohol being sold in the clubs.
Turning next to the indigent element in society, Solly was chiefly instrumental in creating the Charity Organization Society in 1869, which later became a key body in administering charity and relief in London.
He became secretary and presiding genius, but was soon forced out because of his demands.
Believing that artisans should be well housed, his last initiative was to set up the Society for the Promotion of Industrial Villages in 1884.
It soon failed, but the novel idea has been considered an important precursor of the later work of Sir Ebenezer Howard [q.v.].
Solly was an enthusiast and difficult to deal with except on his own terms.
To the distress of his family he rejected the Unitarian name in later life but not the ministerial title, though others, as he admits, ‘only saw him as a Unitarian minister’.
His grandson, the Revd J. H. Wicksteed, wrote: ‘to him, wrong and suffering were not symptoms of false ideas, but definite evils to be fought with and removed now and on the spot.’
A forgotten figure by 1900, his pioneer work was subsequently widely recognized.
He married Rebecca, daughter of Samuel Shaen, country gentleman and landowner, of Crix, Essex, in 1841.
They had one son and four daughters.
Solly died 27 February 1903 in Childrey, near Wantage.
[Henry Solly,These Eighty Years , 2 vols., 1893; obituaries in Christian Life and Inquirer , 7 March 1903; William Beveridge,Voluntary Action , 1948; Alan Ruston, ‘The Omnibus Radical: Rev. Henry Solly (1813–1903)’,Transactions of the Unitarian Historical Society , vol. xix, no. 2, 1988.]
G S Ritchie
,Alexander Thomas Emeric (1792–1863), hydrographer, was born in 1792, the youngest of the three sons (there was also a daughter) of Emeric Vidal, a naval officer who served as secretary to three distinguished admirals, Sir Robert Kingsmill, Sir John Ross, and Robert Duff [qq.v.], and his wife Jane Essex.
The Vidals came originally from the Basque country.
Vidal entered the Royal Navy as a first-class ‘volunteer’ in 1803, serving on board Illustrious .
On 22 May 1807 he joined the Royal Naval College in Portsmouth for a period of eighteen months after which, as a midshipman, he served in Lavinia in the Mediterranean and north Atlantic for more than three years.
In 1814 he sailed in Conway for the North American Station and later was detached to work under Captain (later vice-admiral) W. F. Owen [q.v.]on a survey of the Canadian Great Lakes.
Here he learnt his trade as a surveyor and was promoted to lieutenant in 1815.
When Captain Owen commissioned Leven , a ship-sloop, and the brig Barracouta in 1821 for his survey of the east coast of Africa, Vidal was appointed first lieutenant in Leven .
When Barracouta 's captain died in 1823 Vidal was placed in command and confirmed in the rank of commander.
Two years later, when Owen brought his ships home, Vidal was advanced to captain.
In the summer of 1830, as a consequence of a number of reports and unsuccessful searches for Aitkin's rock, which was said to lie about seventy miles off the north-west coast of Ireland, two ten-gun brigs were placed under Vidal's orders to make a final search.
In three months the whole area embraced by the several reports was closely examined and this potential danger to shipping erased from the charts.
In December 1835 Captain Vidal sailed in command of Aetna with twelve chronometers to measure the meridian distances from the Cape Verde Islands to a number of places on the west coast of Africa; and thereafter to carry out surveys of that coast.
In 1838 Captain (later vice-admiral) John Washington [q.v.], secretary of the Royal Geographical Society, remarked upon these West African surveys: ‘this tedious undertaking is drawing to a close, and will then be of equal utility to the fair traders, and to the anti-slavery cruisers.
It is fortunately in the hands of such a man as Captain Vidal, R.N., who has steadily devoted himself, during a long period of ill-health, to complete this unpopular work, and to connect with it a minute examination of the Canary Islands.’
From 1841 to 1846 Vidal was occupied in surveying the Azores in Styx , being closely associated with the authorities in Lisbon.
Vidal was a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society and contributed papers on hydrographic matters to its journal.
He became rear-admiral in 1854 and vice-admiral in 1859.
He published a chart of the Salvage Islands, thirteen charts of the Cape Verde islands, a chart of the coast of England, and one of Vidal bank off the north-west coast of England.
In 1839 he married in Canada Sarah Antoinette (died 1843), daughter of Henry Veicht of Madeira; they had two sons, one of whom died at an early age and the other, Beaufort, who became a general in the Canadian army.
He died in Clifton 5 February 1863.
Several features in the different parts of the world he surveyed bear his name, notably Cape Vidal on the east coast of Africa.
[Gentleman's Magazine , March 1863, p. 396; William R. O'Byrne,A Naval Biographical Dictionary , 1849; L. S. Dawson,Memoirs of Hydrography , 1885; Hydrographic Office archives; family letters.]
Mary R S Creese
,Edith Rebecca (1865–1945), botanist and educationist, was born in Brighton 14 October 1865, the daughter of John Saunders, hotel keeper, and his wife Jane Rebecca Whitwell of Islington.
She was educated at Handsworth Ladies College and at Newnham College, Cambridge, where she took both parts of the natural sciences tripos (1887, 1888), obtaining first-class honours.
She held a Bathurst studentship from 1888 to 1889.
She was an Alpine climber as a young woman, and throughout her life an excellent skater.
In 1889 she was appointed demonstrator in botany at Newnham College, and along with her colleague Marion Greenwood she organized the Balfour laboratory, whose direction she took over in 1899.
She taught much of the practical work in the natural sciences for the women students of Newnham and Girton Colleges for more than twenty years, and she was recognized as a stimulating teacher who demanded high-quality work.
Her research was in two areas, plant genetics and floral morphology.
Early in her career she undertook collaborative research with William Bateson [q.v.]on plant-breeding experiments on Biscutella laevigata , the work involving a study of what came to be known as dominant and recessive characters.
The results were published in 1897 and 1902.
The rediscovery in 1900 of Gregor Mendel's work gave special impetus to these investigations, and by 1902 Saunders and Bateson had established the existence of Mendelian inheritance in Lychnis ,Atropa , and Datura .
It is fairly clear that they had rediscovered at least some of Mendel's laws before his work was known to them.
From about 1902 she and Bateson were the leading members of the team which started the modern study of plant genetics in Britain; indeed, she has been called the ‘mother’ of British plant genetics.
Her later research in this area involved a long study of the complex genetic interactions in Matthiola incana , on which she published twenty-two papers.
Her selection as president of section K (botany) of the British Association in 1920 reflected her prominent position in the field.
Starting in the 1920s she became increasingly interested in floral morphology; in a long series of papers in the Annals of Botany and the New Phytologist she recorded her observations on vascular and carpelary structure in a wide range of flowers.
Her results and theories were summarized in her two-volume work,Floral Morphology (1937–9).
The fact that she held to her theory of carpel polymorphism, despite the overwhelming criticism levelled against it, in some measure detracts from the overall impact of her morphological work.
Nevertheless, her life's achievements in floral anatomy are considered the greatest effort since the early pioneering work sixty years previously, and her papers continue to be heavily cited.
She enjoyed travelling, and went with the British Association to Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, China, Japan, and North America.
She was one of the first women to be elected to the fellowship of the Linnean Society (1905).
She later served on its council (1910–15), and was vice-president from 1912 to 1913.
She was president of the Genetical Society in 1936.
The Royal Horticultural Society awarded her the Banksian medal in 1906.
Edith Saunders was a well-known and highly respected figure in Cambridge for many decades.
With the outbreak of World War II she gave up her research and worked in the Cambridge offices of the YMCA and WVS, and also in Addenbrooke's Hospital library (1940–3).
In addition she was honorary treasurer of the WVS Services Club from 1941 to 1945.
She was in the process of resuming her scientific work when she died 6 June 1945 in Cambridge, following a bicycle accident.
Her passing, coming at the time of momentous events after the end of the war in Europe, received unusually little notice for a person of her scientific stature.
She was unmarried.
[G. L. Elles, Ethel Shakespear, J. McL.
Thompson, and J. B. S. Haldane,Nature , vol. clvi, 1945, pp. 198–9, 385; H. Hamshaw Thomas, in Proceedings of the Linnean Society , vol. clviii, 1947, pp. 75–6; H. Godwin, A. R. Clapham, and M. R. Gilson, in New Phytologist , vol. xlv, no. 1, 1946, pp. 1–3; Rudolf Schmid, ‘Edith R. Saunders and Floral Anatomy: Bibliography and Index to Families she Studied’,Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society , vol. lxxiv, February 1977, pp. 179–87.]
George W Carpenter
, Sir (Herbert) Nigel (1876–1941), railway mechanical engineer, was born in Edinburgh 19 June 1876, the fourth and youngest son and youngest of five children of the Revd Nigel Gresley, rector of Netherseale, Leicestershire, and his wife Joanna Beatrice, daughter of John Wilson, and grandson of Sir William Nigel Gresley, ninth baronet.
He was educated at Marlborough College and began his engineering apprenticeship in 1893 under Francis Webb at the Crewe locomotive works of the London and North Western Railway.
Subsequently he was a pupil of (Sir) John Aspinall [q.v.]of the Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway at Horwich and became an assistant manager at their Newton Heath, Manchester, carriage workshops in 1901 and works manager in the following year.
In 1904 he was appointed assistant carriage and wagon superintendent of the Lancashire and Yorkshire and in 1905 transferred to the Great Northern Railway in Doncaster as carriage and wagon superintendent.
In 1911 Gresley succeeded Henry Ivatt as locomotive engineer.
He introduced more powerful general purpose main-line 2–6–0 and 2–8–0 freight locomotives, followed in 1922 by the prototype ‘Pacific’(4–6–2) type for heavy long-distance passenger trains.
In 1920 he was appointed CBE for his direction of war material production at Doncaster works.
In 1923 Gresley became chief mechanical engineer of the London and North Eastern, following the merger of independent companies into groups.
He was responsible for the maintenance and repair of over 7,000 locomotives, 21,000 passenger coaches, and 300,000 goods wagons, as well as for new design and construction, with control of some 30,000 workshop and out-station staff.
The task of integrating the individual railways into the LNER was not easy.
Over the first five years he introduced new locomotive designs and continued the development of the main-line ‘Pacific’ type, incorporating detailed improvements pioneered by George Jackson Churchward [q.v.]of the Great Western, whose work he greatly admired.
This was characteristic of Gresley, who ensured that he and his design team were fully informed on the latest developments abroad and adopted ideas pioneered elsewhere if they were proved relevant to his needs.
Thus from 1928 onwards he collaborated closely with the French engineer André Chapelon, whose rebuilding of existing locomotives enabled their power and efficiency to be greatly increased.
His great technical knowledge and ability were combined with thoroughness; all important engineering drawings were personally approved by him and all new features were tested on prototypes before being put into quantity production.
Whilst he was a commanding personality and very much the ‘chief’ in his department he consulted closely with and was advised by his engineers before taking technical decisions.
He also circulated ‘third copies’ of all technical correspondence to his design staff to ensure that all were fully informed.
His earlier work on improved passenger coaches continued on the LNER and new trains were built with simple but attractive internal decoration and fittings.
They were also new restaurant cars with all-electric cooking to reduce fire risks, improved sleeping-cars, and new types of high-capacity goods wagon.
In 1934 the LNER investigated using high-speed diesel trains, as in Germany, for a London to Newcastle business service.
However, tests showed that a faster schedule could be operated with a train of Gresley's comfortable coaches seating double the number of passengers and hauled by one of his steam ‘Pacific’ type locomotives.
In 1935 the fully streamlined Silver Jubilee train, the first in Britain, went into service, averaging 71 m.p.h. between London and Darlington.
In 1938 one of the streamlined ‘Pacific’ locomotives,Mallard , attained a maximum speed of 126 m.p.h., a world record for steam traction.
Whilst a strong advocate of improving the steam locomotive to the maximum degree possible, Gresley also tested diesel locomotives and railcars and realized that the future for main-line railway operation lay with electric traction when capital resources were available.
In 1936 it was decided to electrify the severely graded cross-Pennine main line from Sheffield to Manchester and he was responsible for the design of electric locomotives for this service.
From 1927 he, later supported by his friend (Sir) William Stanier [q.v.], advocated the building of a national locomotive testing station capable of handling the largest locomotives and in 1937 work on the station was started at Rugby.
Gresley was involved actively for many years with the International Railway Congress Association as a member of its permanent commission and gave a comprehensive report on improvements in steam locomotives at the Madrid Congress in 1930.
He was president of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers in 1936, the Institution of Locomotive Engineers in 1927 and 1934, and the Association of Railway Locomotive Engineers in 1926 and 1927.
He served on a number of government committees, including those on automatic train control and on railway electrification.
In 1936 he was knighted and awarded an honorary D.Sc.
by Manchester University.
He enjoyed a simple life in the country best, being with his grandchildren and his dogs, shooting, and fishing.
In 1901 he married Ethel Frances (died 1929), daughter of W. P. Fullager, solicitor, of St Anne's, Lancashire.
They had two sons and two daughters.
Gresley died at his home, Watton House, Hertford, 5 April 1941.
[H. A. V. Bulleid,Master Builders of Steam , 1963, pp. 44–71; Eric Bannister,Trained by Sir Nigel Gresley , 1984; private information.]
Sandra Raphael
,,, or ,Leonard (c. 1621–1685), gardener and nurseryman, had one of the earliest general nursery gardens in London from the early 1640s, when he moved from Southwark to twelve acres in east London, between Brick Lane and Greatorex Street, north of Old Montagu Street.
During the 1660s and 1670s his nursery was the largest in London, and he was famous as a supplier of fruit trees in particular, though he sold ornamental trees and shrubs and seeds as well .
Leonard Meager [q.v.], in The English Gardener (1670), printed ‘a Catalogue of divers sorts of Fruit, which I had of my very Loving friend Captain Garrle’, containing over 300 varieties, many of them from France.
By 1661 Gurle had raised the hardy nectarine Elruge and given it his own name reversed, with an extra e for euphony.
In 1672 Gurle sold Sir Roger Pratt [q.v.]pear and other fruit trees, cypresses, spruces and other forest trees, jasmine, and honeysuckles, with a box of seeds, for his garden at Ryston Hall, near Downham, Norfolk.
Late in 1674 he supplied fruit trees to Sir Richard Temple [q.v.]at Stowe and William Russell, first Duke of Bedford [q.v.], at Woburn Abbey.
The Woburn order included dwarf plums and cherries, French pears, an Elruge nectarine, and other fruit, with more young trees ‘to make good those that died last year’ in accordance with Gurle's guarantee to supply ‘the best of every sort in case any fail or die’.
After the death of John Rose [q.v.]in 1677, Gurle succeeded him as the king's gardener at St James's, with £320 a year to maintain the garden and another £240 a year as his own salary.
There he had an official residence, but he continued to run his Whitechapel nursery, with another in London Fields.
Gurle died in the spring of 1685, before 2 April, and was buried in Woodham Walter, near Maldon, Essex, which may have been his place of birth.
His widow, Joyce, was his second wife, whom he had married in 1676, and a son, William, was given the power to administer his estate.
Two other sons, Martin and Joseph, were baptized in 1641 and 1644, and three daughters, Rebecca, Margaret, and Jane, survived their father.
The area occupied by the nursery was called Gurle's Ground for some time after Gurle's death; in 1719 part of it was still occupied by a Martin Girle, possibly the nurseryman's eldest son or a grandson.
[John Harvey,Early Nurserymen , 1974, pp. 4–5, 45–6;idem , ‘Leonard Gurle's Nurseries and Some Others’,Garden History , vol. iii, no. 3, 1975, pp. 42–9; G. S. Thomson,Life in a Noble Household 1641–1700 , 1937, pp. 248–51.]
D E Luscombe
,Thomas (fl. 1280–1300), a master in the University of Oxford and Dominican friar, was ordained deacon on 20 September 1274 in Blyth in the York diocese.
He may have been a fellow of Merton College, Oxford,c .1270, and was certainly a member of the Dominican convent in Oxford, perhaps by c .1282.
He had a long career in the university, becoming bachelor and then (c .1284) doctor of theology as well as master c .1290.
He was licensed to hear confessions in the Lincoln diocese on 11 October 1300, and it is likely that he is the Thomas Sutton who preached in Oxford on 23 November 1292, and 1 March and 24 May 1293.
He was perhaps still living in 1315, but the date of his death and the place of his burial are not known.
He was one of the foremost early exponents and defenders at the University of Oxford of the teaching of Thomas Aquinas, the Dominican philosopher and theologian.
Aquinas had incorporated into his philosophy many Aristotelian features, such as the notion that human knowledge starts from sense perception rather than with a divine illumination of the human mind in which ‘seminal reasons’ are implanted.
Also controversial at Oxford at this time was the question whether man, being both body and soul, has both a corporeal and a spiritual form: Aquinas taught that in every corporeal being there is one substantial form.
In 1277 Robert Kilwardby [q.v.], the archbishop of Canterbury, himself a Dominican friar and former master at Oxford University, condemned a range of Aristotelian theses as well as Aquinas's novel doctrine of the unicity of forms.
This condemnation was renewed in 1284 by Archbishop John Peckham [q.v.], a Franciscan friar and former master at Oxford who also excommunicated an English Dominican master, Richard Knapwell [q.v.], in 1286.
At this time and in this climate Thomas Sutton emerged as a keen student and follower of Thomas Aquinas and as a notable thinker among the group of English Dominican Thomists who flourished in the last quarter of the thirteenth century.
The group included Robert de Winchelsea, Simon of Faversham, and Robert Orford [qq.v.].
Thomas Sutton also participated in the quarrels between the Friars Preacher and the Friars Minor over the issue of poverty.
Sutton's writings are difficult to identify and to date, and some have in the past been confused with writings of Thomas Aquinas.
He apparently wrote a continuation of the unfinished commentary of Aquinas on Aristotle's Perihermeneias , as well as a continuation of Aquinas's commentary on Aristotle's De generatione et corruptione .
Another confusion is possibly with a Thomas Anglicus , whose Liber propugnatorius (c .1311) contains an attack upon Duns Scotus [q.v.], the Franciscan master, who taught at Oxford during the 1290s.
Thomas Sutton wrote a work De ente et essentia (in support of Aquinas, and against Henry of Ghent) and probably also Quaestiones super sententias .
He wrote Quodlibeta (between 1291 and 1301), and treatises opposing the doctrine of the plurality of forms.
[A. B. Emden,A Biographical Register of the University of Oxford to A.D. 1500 , 1959; W. Senko (ed.),
‘Un traité inconnu De esse et essentia ’,Archives d'Histoire Doctrinale et Littéraire du Moyen Age , vol. xxvii, 1960; M. Schmaus and M. Gonzalez-Haba (eds.),
Quodlibeta , Bayerische Akademie der Wissenschaften, vol. ii, 1969; F. E. Kelley (ed.),
Expositionis D. Thomae Aquinatis in libros Aristotelis de generatione et corruptione continuatio per Thomam de Sutona , Munich, 1976; O. Lewry, ‘Two continuators of Aquinas: Robertus de Vulgarbia and Thomas Sutton on the Perihermeneias of Aristotle’,Mediaeval Studies , vol. xliii, 1981.]
Trevor I Williams
,Archibald Scott (1831–1892), chemist, was born 31 March 1831 in the Townhead of Kirkintilloch, Dumbartonshire, the only surviving child of Archibald Couper, cotton manufacturer, and his wife Helen Dollar.
Because of poor health he was educated at home before enrolling at Glasgow University to study humanities and classical languages.
He spent the summer of 1851 in Halle to acquire fluency in German.
The following summer he again went to Germany, spending some time at the University of Berlin in desultory study.
Returning to Edinburgh in 1852, he studied logic and metaphysics under Sir William Hamilton [q.v.], who was well versed in German philosophy, then largely ignored in British universities.
After yet another continental tour Couper returned to Berlin in 1855, determined to study chemistry.
Having regard to his earlier interests, the reason is not clear, but his intention was obviously serious.
He studied with K. F. Rammelsberg, professor of inorganic chemistry, and attended F. L. Sonnenschein's lectures on chemical analysis.
In August 1856 he moved on to Paris, engaging in independent research in the laboratory of Charles-Adolphe Wurtz, then one of the few first-rate chemical laboratories outside Germany.
There, in the course of less than eight months, he wrote the three papers which are his main claim to fame.
The first, ‘On Some Derivatives of Benzene’, was a straightforward account of the preparation of two new bromine derivatives of benzene.
The second was of a more theoretical nature, dealing with the constitution of salicylic acid.
This was of interest to the eminent German chemist F. A. Kekulé, but he failed to repeat Couper's experiment: many years later Couper was proved perfectly correct.
The third paper, ‘On a New Chemical Theory’, was of a very different calibre.
In this Couper clearly enunciated a new theory of the linking of carbon atoms which marked a transition from the prevailing Type Theory to the modern Structure Theory.
He deduced that carbon had a combining power (valency) of four or two and a unique capacity for joining itself to other atoms of its own kind, the secret of the existence of millions of organic (carbon) compounds.
All three papers were published in Comptes rendus de l'Académie des Sciences .
Early in 1858 Couper asked C.-A.
Wurtz to have this paper presented to the Académie des Sciences but there was delay because Wurtz was not then an academician: J. B. A. Dumas eventually presented it on 14 June 1858.
Meanwhile Kekulé published a virtually identical theory in the 19 May issue of Liebig's Annalen .
Kekulé stated that his work was more significant and claimed priority.
Bitterly disappointed, Couper complained to Wurtz and was told to leave the laboratory immediately.
He returned to Edinburgh and became laboratory assistant to (Sir) Lyon Playfair (later first Baron Playfair of St Andrews, q.v.), professor of chemistry at Edinburgh University.
He expounded his theory in two further papers but suffered a severe mental breakdown in May 1859.
He was twice confined to an asylum and finally discharged in 1862.
He never recovered, and for the rest of his life was incapable of intellectual work.
He was cared for by his mother, who survived him, and for the remaining thirty years of his life roamed the neighbourhood aimlessly, he and his theory totally forgotten.
He was unmarried.
He died 11 March 1892 in Kirkintilloch.
Kekulé died in 1896, loaded with honours, and Richard Anschütz, his successor as professor of chemistry at the University of Bonn, undertook a comprehensive biography.
He came across Couper's papers and immediately recognized his genius.
He devoted much effort over many years to restoring him to his rightful place in the chemical hierarchy.
A memorial plaque was unveiled on Couper's old home in Kirkintilloch on the centenary of his birth.
[R. Anschütz in Proceedings of the Royal Society of Edinburgh , vol. xxix, pp. 193–273, 1909; James Kendall,Great Discoveries by Young Chemists , 1953, pp. 81–94; O. T. Benfey in E. Farber (ed.),
Great Chemists , 1961, pp. 705–15.]
H B Whittington
,Thomas Mckenny (1832–1917), geologist and speleologist, was born in December 1832, in Aberystwyth, one of the family of three sons and five daughters of the Revd Joshua Hughes, afterwards bishop of St Asaph, and his wife Margaret, widow of Captain Gun and daughter of Sir Thomas McKenny, first baronet, alderman of Dublin.
He was educated at the colleges of Leamington and Llandovery (Carmarthenshire), entered Trinity College, Cambridge, and took his BA degree in 1857 and MA in 1867.
Hughes had a brief career as a diplomat in Rome in 1860–1, first as secretary to the consul, then as acting consul.
When Giuseppe Garibaldi was marching on the city, Hughes acted officially to help the papal officers understand the language of an Irish brigade, a valuable experience in dealing with men.
While at Cambridge Hughes attended the lectures of Professor Adam Sedgwick [q.v.], and he continued his geological interests by fieldwork in Italy.
In 1861 he accepted an invitation from Sir Roderick Murchison [q.v.], then director-general of the Geological Survey of Great Britain, to join the Survey.
In his first years he developed his interests in stratigraphy of the Chalk and in Pleistocene and Recent deposits, before he was transferred to the Lake District.
Here he worked on the home ground of his old master, Adam Sedgwick, and began his long continued interest in Lower Palaeozoic stratigraphy.
After Sedgwick's death in 1873, Hughes succeeded him as Woodwardian professor at Cambridge, remaining in the post until his death.
Hughes gathered about him a staff of distinction, which included the petrologist Alfred Harker, J. E. Marr [qq.v.](who succeeded Hughes in the chair), and the palaeontologists Henry Woods [q.v.],
F. R. C. Reed, and Gertrude L. Elles.
Under this leadership the school of geology at Cambridge spawned a long list of well-known geologists who served in universities, geological surveys, and museums in Britain, India, South Africa, and other countries.
A notable achievement by Hughes was to negotiate by patience and persuasion the completion of the Sedgwick Museum as a memorial to his predecessor, and to move the collections into this building.
Hughes continued fieldwork on Lower Palaeozoic rocks, caves, and drift deposits in Wales, and made many contributions to archaeology.
Hughes was elected to the Royal Society in 1889, awarded the Lyell medal by the Geological Society of London in 1891, and was chevalier of the Italian order of SS Maurice et Lazarus.
Hughes was a popular and gregarious man.
In 1882 he married Mary Caroline (died 1916), daughter of the Revd George Frederick Weston, honorary canon of Carlisle.
His wife was a good linguist and keen geologist, and accompanied her husband on field excursions at home and abroad, as well as working on the Pleistocene deposits of the Cambridge area.
They had three sons: one became clerk to the Goldsmiths’ Company, one an entomologist, and the third was killed in the war of 1914–18.
Hughes died at his home in Cambridge 9 June 1917.
[‘Thomas McKenny Hughes’,Geological Magazine , new series, vol. iii, 1906;Nature , vol. xcix, June 1917, pp. 326–7;The Times , 11 June 1917; private information.]
John Pollock
,Charles Thomas (1860–1931), cricketer and missionary, was born in Spratton, Northamptonshire, 2 December 1860, the third of the six sons (with one daughter) of Edward Studd, indigo planter in India, later of Tedworth House, Wiltshire, and his second wife Dorothy (‘Dora’) Sophia, daughter of John Thomas, Calcutta merchant, of Bledsoe, Bedfordshire; there were four children of the first marriage.
He was educated at Eton and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he took a pass degree and gained a BA in 1883.
Like his elder brothers J. E. Kynaston Studd (later first baronet, q.v.) and G. B. Studd, he played cricket for Eton and Cambridge, captaining both elevens, and for England.
He was a superb all-rounder, applauded by W. G. Grace [q.v.].
By 1884 C. T. Studd was a household name.
The sensation therefore was immense when he abandoned cricket, and a life of wealth and ease, to go as a missionary to China.
In 1877 his father had heard the American evangelist D. L. Moody in London, and had sold his racehorses and devoted himself to personal evangelism.
His three cricketing sons became committed Christians while still at Eton but after his father's death C. T. lost his fervour, until January 1884, after he had believed that G. B. was dying.
C. T. threw himself into Christian activity with the same discipline and dedication he had given to cricket, and determined to join another well-known Cambridge athlete, Stanley Smith the oarsman, in the then little-known China Inland Mission led by J. Hudson Taylor [q.v.].
Five of their friends followed their example and volunteered, making the celebrated ‘Cambridge Seven’, who left for China in 1885.
Studd spent nine years as a pioneer missionary in north China.
In 1887 he gave away his fortune and ‘lived by faith’(and, indeed, on the generosity of his family).
In 1894 he was invalided home and never completely recovered his health.
In 1896–8 he toured North American universities.
Though not a natural speaker his pithy style, backed by his fame and renunciation, strengthened the Student Volunteer Missionary movement.
From 1900 to 1906 the Studds served in India.
In 1908, in Liverpool, C. T. saw a poster: ‘Cannibals want missionaries’, the first step in an extraordinary saga which led him, against medical and family advice, to found the Heart of Africa mission in the Congo.
In 1913 Studd and his daughter Edith's young fiancé Alfred Buxton, a descendant of the emancipator Sir Thomas Fowell Buxton [q.v.], bicycled across East Africa to a populous region untouched by Christianity.
In the next years Studd and a small band of young people overcame difficulties to found a flourishing church, the start of a new pioneer mission, the Worldwide Evangelization Crusade (1919).
In 1888 in China he married another missionary, Priscilla Livingstone (died 1929), daughter of William Stewart, flax merchant, of Lisburn, Ireland.
They had four daughters (two sons died in infancy).
Studd's personality and methods became increasingly controversial; his autocratic leadership caused dismissals and resignations, and his determination to continue despite declining health led to dependence on morphine.
Yet when he died in Ibambi, Belgian Congo, 16 July 1931, two thousand tribesmen attended his funeral in torrential rain.
[Norman Grubb,C. T. Studd, Cricketer and Pioneer , 1933; J. C. Pollock,The Cambridge Seven , 1955; Edith Buxton,Reluctant Missionary , 1968; Eileen Vincent,C. T. Studd and Priscilla , 1988; private information.]
M K Lawson
(d. 1057), son of King Edmund Ironside [q.v.], presumably by his union in 1015 with Ealdgyth, widow of the Danelaw thegn Sigeferth.
The sources on his life are thoroughly unsatisfactory.
The ‘D’ text of the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle says under 1057 that Canute [q.v.]banished him to Hungary to betray him, that he prospered there, married Agatha, a relative of the emperor, and begot a noble family; under 1067, that Agatha was related through her mother to an Emperor Henry.
Twelfth-century chroniclers are more detailed.
Florence of Worcester [q.v.]says Canute sent Edward and his brother Edmund to the Swedish king to be killed, but that he passed them to Hungary, where Edmund died and Edward married Agatha, daughter of the brother of an Emperor Henry.
William of Malmesbury [q.v.]describes Agatha as sister of the Hungarian queen and Ailred of Rievaulx [q.v.]calls her the daughter of the Hungarian king's brother, the Emperor Henry, while Orderic Vitalis [q.v.]says Edward married the Hungarian king's daughter.
The twelfth-century Laws of Edward the Confessor , however, has him fleeing to and marrying in Russia, which was also his destination according to Adam of Bremen, writing c .1070.
In the 1130s the Anglo-Norman poet Gaimar [q.v.]was misnaming him Edgar, and telling a rousing tale of his adventures, complete with dialogue.
Modern historians have had scant success with this material, which inspires little trust.
Agatha was arguably the daughter of King Stephen of Hungary, or of Bruno, brother of the German Emperor Henry II, or of a half-brother of the Emperor Henry III, or of none of them.
Probably Edward was respected in Hungary, which may say much for interest in the English monarchy, but the only certainty is his return thence to England, at his countrymen's request, in 1057, presumably because some hoped he would succeed the childless Edward the Confessor [q.v.].
However, he died 19 April 1057, before seeing the king, and was buried at St Paul's, leaving his wife and three children — Edgar Atheling, St Margaret (later queen of Scotland), and Christina, future nun of Romsey [qq.v.].
[Anglo-Saxon Chronicle , ed.
C. Plummer, 1892–9; Adam,Gesta , ed.
B. Schmeidler, 1917; Florence of Worcester,Chronicon , ed.
B. Thorpe, 1848–9; William of Malmesbury,De Gestis Regum Anglorum , ed.
W. Stubbs, 1887–9; Orderic Vitalis,Ecclesiastical History , ed.
M. Chibnall, 1969–80;Laws of Edward the Confessor , ed.
F. Liebermann, 1898–1916; Gaimar,L'Estoire des Engles , ed.
T. D. Hardy and C. T. Martin, 1888–9; Ailred of Rievaulx,Genealogia Regum Anglorum , ed.
J. P. Migne,Patrologiæ Cursus Completus , vol. xccv; R. L. Graeme Ritchie,The Normans in Scotland , 1954; S. D. Keynes, ‘The Crowland Psalter and the Sons of King Edmund Ironside’,Bodleian Library Record , vol. xi, 1982–5.]
Ian Gow
,Archibald (1790–1847), architect, was born 4 May 1790 in Aberdeen, the fifth of five sons and the youngest of nine children of William Simpson, clothier in Aberdeen, and his wife Barbara, eldest daughter of the Revd Francis Dauney, minister of Banchory Ternan.
He was educated at Aberdeen Grammar School and then briefly at Marischal College in 1803–4.
His maternal uncle, William Dauney, had been an architect in Aberdeen.
He received his initial training in architecture from James Massie (d .
1816), an Aberdeen builder.
In 1810 he moved to London and found employment with Robert Lugar and David Laing [qq.v.], for whom he prepared plans of a house in Aberdeen.
His struggles in London, in spite of letters of introduction, are recorded in two letters to his family.
In 1813 he returned to Aberdeen after a tour of Italy.
It was an opportune moment to return because the citizens of Aberdeen had embarked on a series of ambitious street improvements at the same time as the technology had developed to enable the exploitation of the plentiful local granite for building purposes.
Simpson was to emerge as the leading architect of the city, which he stocked with a fine series of public buildings, distinguished not only by his skill in seizing town-planning initiatives but also by the splendour imparted by their finely jointed and polished granite masonry.
In these works he had to endure the rivalry of the city architect, John Smith (1781–1852), who had the advantage of being longer established in their profession.
Simpson's first public building was the Gothic St Andrew's chapel of 1816.
His skill as a classical designer in the Greek revival style found expression in the Medico-Chirurgical Hall of 1818 and the porticoed County Assembly Rooms of 1820.
These were followed by a wide range of commissions which display his inventive powers, including the Gothic Marischal College of 1837, the New Market of 1840, and in the same year his headquarters of the North of Scotland Bank, with its quadrant corner screen and richly decorated interior incorporating the Parthenon frieze.
In 1843 he designed his celebrated ‘triple kirks’ for three Free Church congregations whose financial constraint is reflected in their brick spires.
Simpson also dominated architecture in the north-east of Scotland.
He added to many existing houses and castles, but his finest design is probably Stracathro House of 1828 with its noble Corinthian portico.
He also designed elegant classical villas such as Park House of 1822.
St Giles's church, with its portico and tower, is a powerful essay in the Greek revival style and provides the focal point at the heart of Elgin.
Simpson was of slight build and ‘shy and retiring’ in character.
He was remembered as ‘a little, active man, always to be seen carrying plans under his arm’.
He loved music and played the violin.
His appearance is recorded in three surviving portraits in Aberdeen by his friend James Giles, the artist, one of which, with the ‘triple kirks’ in the background, was posthumously engraved as a memorial for distribution to subscribers.
Simpson died intestate 23 March 1847 in Aberdeen.
He was unmarried.
[18 articles by G. M. Fraser in Aberdeen Weekly Journal between 5 April and 11 October 1918; H. M. Colvin,A Biographical Dictionary of British Architects 1600–1840 , 1978.]
Charles Sebag-Montefiore
,Robert Stayner (1808–1892), art and plant collector, was born 16 March 1808, the only child of George Peter Holford, master in Chancery, of Westonbirt, Gloucestershire, and his wife Anne, daughter of the Revd Averill Daniel of Lifford, county Donegal.
Holford took a BA from Oriel College, Oxford, in 1829.
In 1838 he inherited a fortune of a million pounds from his uncle, Robert Holford.
His earliest zeal was for landscape gardening.
In 1829 he began the arboretum at Westonbirt, where a tract of sandy loam covering 114 acres allowed the planting and raising of trees from almost any country in the world.
The increasing collection of different species of trees and plants, skilfully grouped by season or by collections of single types of trees, and designed in glades, avenues, and drives caused the eventual expansion of the arboretum to 600 acres.
Holford began to collect works of art in 1839 and became one of the most distinguished collectors of his time, with an enthusiasm for the Italian Renaissance.
A. N. L. Munby [q.v.]described him as ‘a collector with an eye for quality and the means to indulge it without stint’ and, no doubt in tribute to the superb quality of his illuminated manuscripts and early printed books, referred to him as the ‘Ideal Connoisseur’.
Apart from his pictures, manuscripts, and early printed books, Holford collected old-master prints and etchings by Rembrandt, sculpture, Della Robbia ware, bronze portrait busts, majolica, porcelain, furniture, tapestries, and gold and silversmiths' work.
The picture collection, which was made with the help of the dealer William Buchanan, was formed chiefly between 1840 and 1860 from most of the important auctions in London and from Italian collections.
Holford's collection included works by Rubens, Velázquez, Justus Sustermans, Van Dyck, and Rembrandt; French and Italian landscapes by Claude, Gaspard Dughet, Nicolas Poussin, and Salvator Rosa; Dutch landscape and genre painters; the early Flemish school; and English portraits.
In 1849 Holford purchased the freehold of the old Dorchester House, with its 100 yards of frontage to Park Lane: he chose Lewis Vulliamy [q.v.]as his architect to design the Italianate palazzo he planned for the site.
He commissioned much of the interior decoration from Alfred Stevens [q.v.]: there was a special relationship between patron and sculptor, under which Stevens was given a very free hand.
The house, which was completed in 1856, was celebrated for its huge marble staircase and for the splendid series of staterooms on the piano nobile , designed for the reception and display of Holford's collections.
Between 1863 and 1870, he rebuilt Westonbirt, again commissioning Vulliamy, but choosing an Elizabethan design.
In public life, Holford served as Conservative MP for East Gloucestershire from 1854 to 1872 and was a JP, but he took little interest in politics.
He was an original member of the Burlington Fine Arts Club.
In 1854 Holford married Mary Anne, daughter of General James Lindsay, MP, of Balcarres, Fife, and thus became brother-in-law to three collectors, Alexander Crawford (twenty-fifth Earl of Crawford), Robert Lindsay (Baron Wantage)[qq.v.], and Sir Coutts Lindsay.
Holford had three daughters and one son.
He died 22 February 1892 at Dorchester House, London.
[Robert Benson,The Holford Collection , privately printed, 1924; private information.]
Francis Dick
, Sir John Tomlinson , first baronet (1842–1919), chemical manufacturer and politician, was born 8 February 1842 in Everton, Liverpool, the second of the three sons and the fourth of the five children of John Brunner, a Swiss Protestant minister who migrated to Lancashire in 1832 and became a Unitarian and a schoolmaster, and his wife Margaret Curphey, from the Isle of Man.
His mother died in 1847 and in 1851 his father married Nancy Inman, who had run a successful school near Birkenhead.
He was educated at his father's school, St George's House, Everton, until, at the age of fifteen, of his own volition, he decided to pursue a commercial career.
The young Brunner had been greatly influenced by both his father's liberal Unitarian teaching and his affectionate stepmother's businesslike principles of household management.
He spent four years at a Liverpool shipping house and then in 1861 obtained a clerical post at Hutchinson's alkali works in Widnes.
During the next twelve years he rose to the position of general manager, in charge of finance and personnel, and during this time established a reputation in the business community for ability and honest dealing.
Here, about 1862, he first met and befriended Ludwig Mond [q.v.], born at Cassel in 1839, a chemist educated at Heidelberg.
The bond struck between these ambitious men was to endure.
In 1873 they formed a partnership, born of mutual respect and trust, to manufacture soda ash near Northwich in Cheshire.
With little money they required financial backing and Brunner's high business reputation, no less than Mond's scientific eminence, was crucial for their success.
After two years of grinding work they produced a small profit, which was to herald a creation of wealth unsurpassed in the British chemical industry of the nineteenth century.
A managing partner from the start, Brunner was chairman of Brunner, Mond & Co. from 1891 until 1918.
When the company became a founder member of ICI in 1926 the enterprise, launched in 1873 with less than £20,000, had a capitalization of more than £18 million.
In 1885 Brunner became Liberal MP for Northwich and held the seat, with one short break, until he resigned in 1909.
His eldest son, John Fowler Leece, sat with him in the House of Commons from 1906.
In the management of their chemical business Brunner and Mond were ahead of their times in introducing such socially enlightened measures as sickness and injury insurance, apprentice education, shorter working hours, and holidays with pay.
As an MP Brunner could now promote his philanthropic principles through Parliament.
A supporter of home rule, trade unions, and free trade he was an influential back-bencher and a prominent Liberal advocate whose wide business experience informed his sometimes humorous but always cogent participations in debate.
Before 1914 he earned himself obloquy in some quarters by urging a less provocative British stance towards Germany.
He was created baronet in 1895 and a privy councillor in 1906.
He declined several offers of a peerage.
He was a generous benefactor.
In Cheshire alone he provided schools, guildhalls, and social clubs, and he gave Northwich a Free Library.
He endowed three chairs at Liverpool University and funded many scholarships.
But his single largest gift was to finance a hospital in Bülach, the town of his father's birth in Canton Zürich.
In the political field he supplied munificent financial support to the Liberal Party and its numerous causes.
Dubbed by The Times a ‘chemical Croesus’, he rejoiced in using his wealth for philanthropic ends.
In 1864 he married Salome, daughter of James Davies, merchant of Liverpool.
She died in 1874 leaving a family of three sons and three daughters.
In 1875 he next married his children's governess, Ethel Jane (died 1910), daughter of William Sanderson Wyman, a Kettering physician.
They had three daughters.
Brunner died 1 July 1919 at his home, Silverlands, Chertsey.
Of several portraits of Brunner, Augustus John's hangs in the University Art Gallery, Liverpool, and Arthur Hacker's in Manchester College, Oxford.
[Stephen E. Koss,Sir John Brunner, Radical Plutocrat 1842–1919 , 1970; W. F. L. Dick,A Hundred Years of Alkali in Cheshire , 1973: Brunner, Mond archives.]
Michael A Sutton
,Henry (1822–1876), chemist and manufacturer, was born 30 July 1822 in London, the elder son of Henry Deacon, merchant, and his wife and cousin Esther Deacon.
The Deacons belonged to the Sandemanian church, whose most famous member, Michael Faraday [q.v.], took an interest in their son.
Aged fourteen, he was apprenticed to Galloway & Sons, a London engineering firm: when it failed, Faraday arranged for him to join Nasmyth & Gaskell at Patricroft, near Manchester.
They supplied machinery to Pilkington's of St Helens, where Deacon moved after completing his apprenticeship in the early 1840s.
He became manager of the glass-polishing department and their highest paid employee, but left in 1851 to work for John Hutchinson [q.v.], a Widnes alkali manufacturer.
In 1853 Deacon filed his first patent (for an improved sulphuric acid manufacturing process) and established an alkali works in Widnes with William Pilkington.
This unhappy partnership was dissolved in 1855, and Deacon, with his former employer Holbrook Gaskell [q.v.], founded Gaskell, Deacon & Company.
He experimented unsuccessfully with the ammonia-soda process (later perfected by others), but for mass production of alkali he relied on the proven method invented by N. Leblanc, which generated quantities of hydrochloric acid.
C. Dunlop and Walter Weldon [q.v.]had devised methods for converting this noxious waste to chlorine (which could be profitably combined with lime to make bleaching powder) but they were both expensive and wasteful.
About 1867 Deacon, with valuable assistance from Ferdinand Hurter [q.v.], began seeking a better way: in 1870 they claimed success (Chemical News , vol. xxii, 1870, pp. 157–60, and Journal of the Chemical Society , vol. x, 1872, pp. 725–67).
The Deacon process used a cheaper catalyst (copper chloride) and recovered more chlorine; it remained industrially important for five decades, though its adoption was initially delayed owing to its complexity.
He married Emma Wade of Basford, Nottinghamshire, 4 December 1851.
They had two sons and a daughter.
After his first wife's death, Deacon married Caroline Rutt of Islington, Middlesex, 27 November 1866.
Deacon accumulated a fortune of over £100,000, but his health was weakened by overwork and he died of typhoid 23 July 1876 in Widnes.
He was survived by his widow and seven sons and five daughters, some of whom may have been from his previous marriage.
[D. W. F. Hardie,A History of the Chemical Industry in Widnes , 1850; D. W. F. Hardie, ‘Henry Deacon’,Chemical Age , vol. lxxviii, 1957, p. 598.]
D C Witt
,George (1849–1936), electrical engineer and scientist, was born in Edinburgh 5 April 1849, the younger son (there were also three daughters) of James David Forbes [q.v.], professor of natural philosophy at Edinburgh University (later principal of St Andrews University), known for his work on the flow of glaciers, and his wife Alicia Wauchope.
He was educated at Edinburgh Academy.
After studying at the University of St Andrews, he went to Christ's College, Cambridge, in 1867, transferring to St Catharine's in 1870, and received a BA in 1871.
From Cambridge he was appointed professor of natural philosophy at Anderson's College, Glasgow (the nucleus of what later became Strathclyde University), and held that post from 1872 to 1880.
During this period he also led the British expedition to observe the transit of Venus in Hawaii (1874), travelled in Siberia and the Gobi desert, and reported the Russo-Turkish war for The Times in 1877.
Back in Scotland, he made measurements of the velocity of light with James Young [q.v.], but their result came out somewhat higher than was later accepted.
From about 1880 to 1900 he was much involved in the rapid development of electrical power engineering that was then taking place.
He was active in the substantial Niagara Falls hydroelectric scheme, first in a consultant capacity and then staying in Canada to superintend its construction from 1891 to 1895.
He also advised on other schemes.
The growing use of electrical power made some form of metering essential, so that it could be properly charged for, and Forbes was one of several who invented instruments for this purpose, though his was never widely adopted.
But his suggestion that the ‘brushes’ of electrical machines should be made of carbon, rather than the wire or gauze originally used, proved outstandingly successful.
The practice was still almost universal a century later.
He was elected FRS in 1887, and was also FRSE.
He received an honorary LLD from St Andrews and the French Legion of Honour.
In the early years of the twentieth century he made contributions to the techniques of gunnery, for instance, in improving ballistic calculations, designing a range-finder that was used in the Boer war, and a new form of gun-sight for the Navy.
In later life he seems to have returned to his early interest in astronomy (on which he had already been writing papers at the age of eighteen).
He now wrote a number of books on it intended for the general reader, including History of Astronomy (1909) and The Wonder and the Glory of the Stars (1926).
He was described in his obituaries as a man with a ‘stern code of honour’, who ‘thought much of his work and little of his reward’.
Perhaps as a result, he lived in some poverty for a time in old age, though he was eventually rescued by his friends.
He died in Worthing 22 October 1936.
[J. A. Fleming and D'Arcy W. Thompson in Obituary Notices of Fellows of the Royal Society , vol. ii, 1936–8;The Times , 24 October 1936.]
Jon Stallworthy
,Alun (1915–1944), poet and short-story writer, was born 1 July 1915 in Aberdare, south Wales, the eldest in the family of three sons and one daughter of Tom Lewis, a schoolmaster, and his wife Gwyladys Elizabeth, daughter of Melchizedec Evans, a Unitarian minister.
He grew up in a depressed community and would never forget what he saw there: ‘I used to watch the wheel of the pit spin round year after year, after school and Saturdays and Sundays; and then from 1926 on I watched it not turning at all, and I can't ever get that wheel out of my mind.’
From Glynhafod Elementary School, Aberdare, he won a scholarship to Cowbridge Grammar School, Glamorgan, a tough boarding establishment.
He was unhappy there but, determined not to slip back into the pits where his grandfather had wielded a pick, worked hard and won scholarships both to Jesus College, Oxford, and the University College of Aberystwyth.
Having to choose between being ‘poor in Oxford or comfortable in Aber.’, he chose Aberystwyth, where he worked on the university magazine, published his first poems and stories, and dabbled in left-wing politics.
He left Aberystwyth in 1935 with a first-class degree in history, for Manchester, from which he returned a year later, with an MA, to take a teacher-training course at Aberystwyth.
In 1938 Lewis took a job in a Welsh secondary school, but could see the shadow of war approaching and worried over the problem of pacifism: ‘I have a deep sort of fatalist feeling that I'll go.
Partly because I want to experience life in as many phases as I'm capable of — i.e. I'm more a writer than a moralist, I suppose.
But…
I'm not going to kill.
Be killed perhaps, instead.’
He joined up in the spring of 1940 and spent the next two years moving from camp to camp around England with the Royal Engineers.
During this period and against this background he wrote the poems of Raiders Dawn and the short stories of The Last Inspection , both published in 1942.
Poems and stories alike reveal a compassionate concern for the victims of oppression and tyranny: Welsh miners, private soldiers, women, and children.
Lewis never forgot that the military chain of command replicates the social scale, and the issues of the class war meant more to him than those of the fighting war.
In July 1941 he married Gweno Ellis, a sailor's daughter, and in October was commissioned as a reluctant second lieutenant.
A year later, taking leave of his wife with some piercing poems of separation, he set sail for India.
There, troubled by the poverty of the peasants and his own involuntary role as a supporter of the imperial system, he became, he wrote, ‘more and more engrossed with the single poetic theme of Life and Death’.
His Indian writings explore these contrary states in recurrent images of sunlight and darkness.
As in the work of his favourite poet, P. Edward Thomas [q.v.], the darkness is often that of the forest.
One of Lewis's more ambitious poems, ‘The Jungle’, ends with a question —‘does the will's long struggle end /With the last kindness of a foe or friend?’— a question answered on 5 March 1944 when, hours before the start of his first patrol against the Japanese on the north Burma coast, he did himself that kindness with a shot from his own revolver.
He had no children.
[Alun Lewis,Ha!
Ha!
Among the Trumpets: Poems in Transit , 1945,Letters from India , 1946,In the Green Tree , 1948; Ian Hamilton (ed.),
Alun Lewis: Selected Poetry and Prose , 1966; John Pikoulis (ed.),
Alun Lewis, a Miscellany of his Writings , 1982;idem ,Alun Lewis: a Life , 1984.]
P J L Frankl
,William Ernest (1856–1927), Swahili scholar, was born 25 January 1856 in Worcester, the eldest child in the family of at least four sons and two daughters of Samuel Taylor, perfumer, and his wife Harriette Fussell.
From King's School, Worcester, he won a scholarship to Hertford College, Oxford, obtaining a third class in classical honour moderations in 1876.
In July 1880 Taylor was made deacon and in the same month he sailed for East Africa, to the Nyanza mission, under the auspices of the Church Missionary Society.
The greater part of this first tour was spent in or near Mombasa, when the Swahili-speaking people still formed the overwhelming majority of the island's population.
Taylor quickly began to acquire that complete command of the Swahili language and that intimacy with its literature on which his fame rests.
He was fortunate in having as his teachers two of Mombasa's foremost scholars, Mu'allim Sikujua ibn Abdallah al-Batawi and Bwana Hemedi bin Muhammad al-Mambasi.
Just before his second tour Taylor was ordained priest in England in May 1885 by Bishop James Hannington [q.v.].
In 1891 came the publication of African Aphorisms, or Saws from Swahililand , an annotated collection of some 600 proverbs; the work (reissued in 1924) provided an outlet for his immense erudition, and became recognized as a classic in the domain of Swahili studies.
In the same year the British Museum acquired its first Swahili manuscript (MS BL Or.
4534), the vendor being Taylor.
Following his marriage in 1892 he left England on his third and final East African tour.
In 1895 he became examining chaplain to the bishop of Eastern Equatorial Africa, Alfred Tucker [q.v.].
In 1896 the CMS requested Taylor to continue his translation work in Swahili in Cairo, not Mombasa.
After a brief visit to Omdurman in 1900, he returned to England.
In 1903 he was a CMS missionary in Khartoum and acting chaplain to the forces but, on medical grounds, he was compelled to retire to England later that year.
Taylor now held a succession of clerical appointments, the last of which was the benefice of Halton Holgate in Lincolnshire, 1921.
Zaburi za Davidi (1904), the Psalms of David, is probably Taylor's finest Bible translation — it may reasonably be compared with the Coverdale psalter.
In 1910 Taylor's fellow missionary, Alice Burt, published her Swahili Grammar amd Vocabulary ; the standard of Swahili adopted was that set by Taylor.
After eighty years this work remains the unrivalled grammatical introduction to the Swahili of Mombasa.
In 1915 Taylor published the Mombasa version of a much-loved poem al-Inkíshafi ; the poetic rendering which accompanied the recension was the first printed English translation of a major Swahili poem.
Taylor was the first to realize that, on linguistic grounds, Swahili-land should be studied as three regions; he was the first to study in depth the phenomenon of aspiration in Swahili; he was the first and (with the exception of H. E. Lambert) the only European to compose and publish Swahili poetry; he is the only European to have caused a new genre to be introduced to Swahili poetry, ‘mahadhi ya Tela’(Taylor's tune).
With his teachers he salvaged from oblivion many of the Swahili poets, notably the Mombasa poet, Bwana Muyaka.
Only two other Englishmen approached Taylor's achievement — H. E. Lambert (1839–1967) and J. W. T. Allen (1904–1979): all three were amateurs.
In 1892 Taylor married Catherine, daughter of William Tesseyman, a currier, of Hull.
They had five sons and one daughter.
A non-smoker and a teetotaller, Taylor was stockily built and of fair complexion.
He died of a heart attack in Bath 2 October 1927.
He bequeathed his linguistic books and papers to the British Museum, but the bequest was turned down.
Much of his invaluable collection went to the library of the School of Oriental and African Studies in London.
[The Times , 5 October 1927;Bulletin of the School of Oriental Studies , vol. iv, 1926–8; CMS archives; P. J. L. Frankl, ‘Mombasa under the BuSa'idi: a Leaf from the Taylor Papers’,Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft , vol. cxli, 1991.]
John H Appleby
,Humphrey (1717–1801), pioneering chemist, born in 1717, was probably the son of Thomas Jackson of Stockton-on-Tees.
He was apprenticed in 1735 to a Stockton apothecary and surgeon before moving to London, where he set up as a chemist in Upper East Smithfield during 1743.
Reflexions Concerning the Virtues of Tar Water (1744), his first book, cogently argued the case for his product over the well-known medicine of George Berkeley, bishop of Cloyne [q.v.].
His chemical skill was further evidenced by his experimental findings in 1751 in support of the famous fever powder patented by Dr Robert James [q.v.]and by his patent specification of 1753 for a very successful cordial bitter tincture.
Jackson's next work,An Essay on Bread (1758), defended bakers and millers against malpractice charges levelled by Peter Markham [q.v.]and Joseph Manning, and it represents the first reliable book on the chemical detection of food adulteration.
In 1768 he patented a method for hardening and preserving wood, which was effectively applied to several warships and publicized by an eight-page advertisement (1770); it describes thirty-one items tested at his Great Tower Hill works, ranging from brewing implements and wooden pipes for London waterworks to twenty-five gun-carriages treated for the Tower of London garrison.
Jackson obtained another patent in 1760, for manufacturing isinglass from British materials at his own factory, following a journey to Russia.
His unique book,An Essay on British Isinglass (1765), graphically describes his chemical method for producing isinglass from the air-bladders of certain fishes.
The Society of Arts, of which he became a member in 1760, awarded him a premium in 1766 for importing American sturgeon — he informed Benjamin Franklin about a technique for making glue from it.
Elected FRS on 19 November 1772, Jackson contributed a paper to the Philosophical Transactions for 1773, stressing that over forty tons of isinglass had been processed from fish in the Great Lakes resembling those imported expensively from Russia.
Captain James Cook [q.v.], on completing his second global circumnavigation, highly praised Jackson's beer concentrate, which had been used for its antiscorbutic qualities.
Jackson received an MD from Aberdeen University in 1761.
A Freemason, he served as a JP for Kent (1780), Middlesex (1783), and the Tower of London Liberty.
On 27 March 1791 he wrote in this capacity to William Pitt, first minister, detailing improvements in the impress system.
Jackson was married three times: to Elizabeth Savory (died 1748) in 1743; to Mary or Maria (daughter of Benjamin Martin, q.v., optician and instrument-maker), who died at their home on Woolwich Common in 1784; and to Jane (Chamberlain?), a widow.
Nothing is known of any children.
Jackson died in Tottenham 29 June 1801.
[John H. Appleby, ‘Humphrey Jackson, F.R.S., 1717–1801: a Pioneering Chemist’,Notes and Records of the Royal Society of London , vol. xl, 1986, pp. 147–68; John H. Appleby and John R. Millburn, ‘Henry or Humphrey?
The Jacksons, Eighteenth-Century Chemists’,Library , 6th series, vol. x, no. 1, 1988.]
H Blakemore
,John Thomas (1842–1896), engineer and nitrate entrepreneur, was born 30 January 1842 in Holbeck, Leeds, the second child in the family of two sons and one daughter of James North, coal merchant, of Leeds, and his wife Mary Gambles of Batley.
A basic education at a local school was followed, at fifteen, by an engineering apprenticeship at Shaw, North & Watson of Hunslet, millwrights and shipwrights, but in 1865 North joined Fowler & Co. at their well-known steam-plough works in Leeds.
In 1869 they sent him to Peru to supervise running two of their steam ploughs, and there he remained for thirteen years, soon finding scope for his natural business acumen.
Leaving Fowlers, in 1871 North settled in Iquique, then growing rapidly as the trading port in nitrates, the natural fertilizer found in abundance in the desert hinterland, where mining works were springing up, though totally dependent on imported machinery and supplies.
In partnership with Maurice Jewell, another expatriate, North established an import and trading business to supply the mines, the partners also soon becoming local agents for steamship lines.
North himself then moved into water supply, buying in 1875 an old hulk to use as a tanker, and when in 1878 an English group founded the Water Company of Tarapacá in Iquique to bring water from Arica, he rented the carriage business and storage tanks on a service contract and ran it well.
But North's fortune was really made with the war of the Pacific (1879–83) between Chile on the one hand and Peru and Bolivia on the other.
Before the war, in 1875, Peru sought to ‘nationalize’ nitrate fields, issuing bonds payable to bearer to their owners, the fields to become government property when the bonds were redeemed.
They never were, and war in 1879 cut their value, many holders selling them off for a pittance.
The chief buyer was North, together with the British inspector-general of nitrate to Peru, Robert Harvey, and John Dawson, agent of the Chilean Bank of Valparaiso in Iquique.
Harvey gave advice, Dawson advanced funds, and North, then in Lima, bought the bonds, effectively title-deeds to the properties.
Chile acquired Peruvian Tarapacá and Bolivian Antofagasta, rich in nitrates, and returned the industry to private hands, leaving the trio with title to many major deposits.
North returned to England in 1882 to float nitrate companies on the Stock Exchange, selling the bonds to the companies to make capital gains and attracting thousands of investors.
He was a born promoter, with a gift for gaining confidence with his bluff and optimistic manner, but the other factor in his success was his promotion of a public image by cutting a figure in society.
Entertaining lavishly at his vast mansion at Avery Hill, Eltham, Kent, he became an important figure in his adopted county, master of the West Kent Hunt and honorary colonel of the Volunteer Regiment of Tower Hamlets, equipped out of his own pocket.
His sporting interests — in horse-racing (he kept racehorses), greyhound coursing, and boxing — enhanced the regal image of ‘the nitrate king’, his popular sobriquet.
In 1895 he contested West Leeds as a Conservative against Herbert (later Viscount) Gladstone [q.v.]and was defeated by only ninety-six votes.
Yet he did not forget his origins.
In 1888 he bought Kirkstall Abbey near Leeds for £10,000 and presented it as a civic monument, and he gave £5,000 to Leeds Infirmary, as well as other sums for charitable purposes — deeds for which, in 1889, he became the first honorary freeman of Leeds.
In 1865 he married Jane, daughter of John Woodhead of Leeds, a painter and a prominent Conservative alderman.
They had two sons (one of them knighted for military services in 1905) and one daughter.
North died in London 5 May 1896, while presiding at a company meeting at Gracechurch Street.
He was buried at Eltham parish church.
[Harold Blakemore,British Nitrates and Chilean Politics, 1886–189 6: Balmaceda and North , 1974, ‘John Thomas North, the Nitrate King’,History Today , vol. xii, no. 7, July 1962;Vanity Fair , 2 November 1889; Frederic Boase,Modern English Biography , vol. vi, 1921; information from descendants.]
David E Evans
, Sir (Robert) Ashton (1845–1929), industrialist, was born 4 February 1845 in Dursley, Gloucestershire, the third of four sons and the sixth of eight children of George Lister, tanner and wire card-maker of Dursley, by his second wife Louisa Richards, who came from a Dursley family of maltsters.
He was educated at Dursley Agricultural and Commercial Grammar School and then at schools in Banbury, Düsseldorf, and Versailles, before joining his father's business.
He became estranged from his father and in 1867 set up his own as a repairer of farm machinery, thus beginning the firm of R. A. Lister & Company.
Soon he began manufacturing a range of agricultural and dairy equipment, much of which was exported.
Lister travelled widely, promoting trade vigorously, and by 1911 had visited North America fifteen times.
His company was not afraid to diversify.
From 1905 to 1914 it produced Dursley–Pedersen bicycles.
In 1901 production of woodware began, which by 1909 included teak garden seats, and in 1908 came petrol engines, developed in 1929 into the famous range of diesels.
Also in 1908 production began of the equally renowned sheep-shears.
As an employer, Lister was paternalistic, somewhat autocratic but benevolent.
He drove himself hard, expecting his workforce to do the same, but he was quick to provide them with social benefits — housing in 1901 and 1908, a hospital and benefit scheme in 1917, holidays with pay, and a consultative board of directors and workers' representatives in 1927.
The greatest benefit was to the local community as a whole: as Listers grew so the area climbed to prosperity from the depression that followed the collapse of the wool-cloth trade.
Lister's activities extended into the community.
In 1883 he was elected bailiff of Dursley and in 1893 was appointed a JP.
In 1889 he was elected as first county councillor for Dursley, a position he held for thirty years and which was followed by nine years as county alderman.
He supported a great variety of movements both by his presence and financially, including temperance, welfare, council housing, and education.
The mainsprings of his activity were his religious and political convictions.
Brought up by an agnostic father, he was introduced to church life by his wife and by 1899 he was a trustee of Dursley Congregational church and a keen supporter of Nonconformity in general.
In recognition of his public work he was knighted in the 1911 New Year's honours and in 1919 appointed CBE.
Apart from his council work, he found time to address with technical skill and lucidity trade problems such as marketing and exporting agricultural produce, the new techniques of refrigeration and of drying milk, food adulteration, and the wartime rationalization of flour and bread movements to prevent price rises.
Politically he was a Liberal and a strong supporter of free trade and of the social reforms of David Lloyd George (later first Earl Lloyd-George of Dwyfor).
He made three attempts to enter Parliament for Tewkesbury before succeeding in 1918, when he stood for Stroud as a coalition candidate.
He held the seat until 1922.
Lister was a man of large, spare frame, standing six feet tall, with a keen eye and forceful presence.
He had a highly retentive memory and was an accomplished and lively speaker.
He was a good judge of character, hated hypocrisy, and had no time for conceit.
Discussing a sermon with a workman was as pleasurable to him as dining with his friend, the prime minister H. H. Asquith (later first Earl of Oxford and Asquith).
In 1866 he married Frances Ann (died 1911), daughter of John Box of Dursley, watchmaker.
They had four sons (the eldest of whom died in 1895) and by the second, Charles, came the five grandsons who as a team continued the family firm until it was sold in 1965 to the Hawker Siddeley Group.
Lister died in Dursley 6 December 1929.
[David E. Evans,Listers — The First Hundred Years , 1979.]
Giles Barber
,Alphonse James Albert (1900–1941), author, bibliophile, and gastronome, was born 16 August 1900 in Battersea, London, the eldest in the family of four sons and one daughter of Maurice Albert Symons, auctioneer, a Jewish immigrant from eastern Europe, and his wife Minnie Louise Bull.
He was educated at Wix's Lane School, Battersea, leaving at the age of fourteen to take up an apprenticeship to a firm of fur dealers for three years.
Although unfit for military service, he joined the Artists' Rifles Officers' Training Corps and began an active social career.
In 1922, supported initially by William Foyle [q.v.], he started the First Edition Club, a centre for bibliographical information and a dining club, in Bloomsbury.
Symons organized the selection of ‘fifty books of the year’ from 1926 on and, despite the end of his First Edition Club in 1931, became an important influence in the bibliographical world through the foundation, in 1930, of The Book-Collector's Quarterly .
Symons specialized in the authors of the 1890s but in this field his only separate bibliographical publication was a checklist of W. B. Yeats [q.v.](1924).
His Anthology of Nineties Verse (1930) was followed by a life of Sir H. M. Stanley [q.v.](1933).
In 1934 came Symons's best-known work,The Quest for Corvo , a brilliantly evocative account of how he established the facts surrounding the life and literary career of ‘Baron Corvo’(Frederick Rolfe, q.v.), the eccentric homosexual writer.
The book was an immediate success, not only for its sexual interest and its association with the notorious Maundy Gregory [q.v.], but also because it was seen as introducing a new mode of biography.
Symons lived a financially precarious life to the full and, in his own phrase, ‘no one so poor has lived so well.’
He favoured suits of unusual colour and cloth with double-breasted waistcoats, and taught himself calligraphy by copying out passages from the Dictionary of National Biography in a minute Gothic script.
He was associated with André L. Simon in the foundation of the Saintsbury Club in 1931 and, two years later, with that of the Wine and Food Society, the aim of which was ‘to raise standards of cooking throughout the country and to provide practical demonstrations of the arts of the table’.
His many-sided aesthetic interests led him to surround himself with first editions, Bristol glass, mother-of-pearl knick-knacks, and, above all, his notable collection of musical boxes (later given to the Pitt Rivers Museum, Oxford).
In reaction to his family, and possibly to their Jewish background, he sought an escape into social life and literary interests, his sensitivity to his first Christian name leading him later to displace it into Alroy, the name of a character in a novel by Benjamin Disraeli.
His friends commonly called him ‘AJ’.
Despite these neuroses he was also possessed of an aggressive resolve for social success coupled with an interest in (but not a taste for) the psychologically abnormal.
An epitaph referred to ‘kindness and culture, lovely things and mirth’.
In 1924 Symons married Victoria Emily (‘Gladys’) Weeks of Tenterden, Kent.
They were divorced in 1936; they had no children.
Symons died in Colchester 26 August 1941.
[Julian Symons,A. J. A. Symons: his Life and Speculations , 1950;The Times , 29 August 1941; Julian Symonds and V. Holland, ‘A. J. A. Symons 1900–41, Two Personal Notes’,Horizon , vol. iv, no. 22, pp. 258–71;Wine and Food , vol. viii, 1941, pp. 196–202; information from Julian Symons.]
Robert C Stacey
(d. 1186), moneylender, was the greatest Jewish financier in twelfth-century England.
Of his life before 1165 nothing is known.
He was probably born before 1130, and if so, the place of his birth was probably London, with which he also had close associations in the last twenty years of his life.
But the centre of his business enterprises was clearly Lincoln, then the major city in the north and east of England.
A Jewish community was flourishing in Lincoln by 1159, when its existence is first recorded.
A loan to Robert de Chesney [q.v.], bishop of Lincoln from 1148 to 1166, could conceivably push Aaron's residence in the city back to the 1140s; he was clearly well established there by 1165, when King Henry II's repayment of a loan to him marks Aaron's first securely dated appearance in the records.
Aaron lent modest sums to the Crown over the next ten years, but took no part in the London-based consortia of Jewish lenders which lent so heavily and disastrously to the Crown in 1177.
Crown lending was never a major part of Aaron's business, however, and after 1169 he ceased to be a primary Crown lender, concentrating instead on building up his own vast financial network of agents and clients from his Lincoln base.
It was during Aaron's lifetime that Jewish moneylending developed in England on a large scale, an achievement to which Aaron's own extraordinary success must have contributed greatly.
Credit systems in England were already highly developed by the 1160s, as the surviving records of the Christian William Cade [q.v.]attest.
Aaron's operations, however, were much more extensive that those of any previous lender, Christian or Jewish.
By the 1180s his network of financial agents reached into almost every shire in England; his clients ranged from the king of Scotland and the great religious houses to the local parish priests of Lincoln; and his business interests involved not only mortgages, but also the purchase and sale of discounted bonds, pawnbroking, property development, and commodity brokering.
He was also instrumental in establishing a new Jewish community at York.
Upon his death in early April 1186, the king confiscated his entire estate.
Most of his treasure was lost in the Channel on its way to the king in France, but his bonds were sent to the Exchequer, where a special committee, known as the Scaccarium Aaronis , was charged with their collection.
Five years later, when the remaining bonds were transferred to the regular Exchequer rolls for collection, they amounted to £15,000 in face value, owed by more than 430 debtors.
The total value of Aaron's estate on his death is unknown, but it may have amounted to as much as £100,000 in cash, treasure, and bonds.
Aaron had at least three sons, Elijah (Elias), Haim (Vives), and Isaac, and perhaps a fourth son, Abraham.
His brother Baruch (Benedict), his sister's husband, Jacob, and their son, Baruch (Benedict), also participated in Aaron's business dealings, as did his own sons.
All continued to live in Lincoln after 1186 except perhaps Isaac, whose house in London was in the king's hands by 1213.
None, however, approached the eminence of Aaron of Lincoln.
[Joseph Jacobs, ‘Aaron of Lincoln’,Transactions of the Jewish Historical Society of England , vol. iii, 1899; J. M. W. Hill,Medieval Lincoln , 1948; H. G. Richardson,The English Jewry under Angevin Kings , 1960.]
Ronald M Birse
,Asplan (1841–1912), marine engineer, was born in Bluntisham, Huntingdonshire, 5 October 1841, one of a family of eleven children of William Beldam and his wife Mary Peat.
After serving an apprenticeship with Kitson, Thomson & Hewitson, locomotive engineers in Leeds, he turned to marine engineering and from 1864 to 1869 gained experience with several shipbuilding firms on the Thames.
From 1870 to 1873 he was outside manager at G. Forrester & Company's Vauxhall foundry, Liverpool, where he had charge of repairs to vessels and the fitting out of new ships.
By the time he left Liverpool in 1873 he had been appointed consulting and superintending engineer to a number of shipping companies, including the Flower Line, the Castle Line, and the Eastern Telegraph Company.
One particularly notable vessel which he designed was the Stirling Castle , famed for her speed, for example, when in 1882 she brought home a cargo of 6,000 tons of China tea from Hankow in twenty-eight days, beating the previous best time by more than a week.
From 1873 to 1876 he acted as marine superintendent with Hargrove, Fergusson & Jackson, for whom he constructed both ships and machinery, striving always to achieve greater power, efficiency, and economy.
During this time he developed and patented several new types of high-pressure steam boiler as well as making improvements to steam-tight glands, valves for pumps, and anti-clinkering fire bars.
By 1876 the growing interest in his metallic asbestos packing encouraged him to patent it and found the Beldam Packing and Rubber Company, which later became Beldam Crossley.
At the same time he set up in practice as a consulting engineer and naval architect in London, where he remained until his death.
He took a leading part in the formation of the Institute of Marine Engineers and was elected the first president in 1889.
He continued to take a very active interest in its affairs, and he was also a member of the Institutions of Mechanical Engineers and Naval Architects and of the London Chamber of Commerce.
His advice and opinion as an arbitrator were frequently sought, his fair and impartial judgement being held in high esteem.
He married Elizabeth Leonie Knowles, by whom he had eleven children; their two sons both went to Cambridge University before entering the family business, of which they later became directors.
He died suddenly at his residence, Torrens House, Ealing Common, 16 December 1912.
[Transactions of the Institute of Marine Engineers , 1912–13;Engineering , vol. xciv, p. 842; information from Robert Beldam.]
Ceri W Lewis
,William John (1881–1954), writer and academic, was born in Gorffwysfa, Bethel, Caernarfonshire, 14 February 1881, the eldest child in the family of two sons and two daughters of John Griffith, quarryman, and his wife Jane Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Gruffydd.
He received his early education at Bethel Primary School and Caernarfon County School.
From 1899 to 1903 he was an exhibitioner at Jesus College, Oxford, eventually graduating with a third class in classical honour moderations (1901) and a second in English (1903).
He taught for a year in Scarborough and for two years at Beaumaris Grammar School before being appointed in 1906 to an assistant lectureship in the department of Celtic at what became University College, Cardiff.
From 1915 to 1918 he served as an officer in the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve, and by the time he was released he had been appointed professor of Celtic (a title later changed to Welsh) at Cardiff, a post he held until his retirement in 1946.
From 1922 until it ceased publication in 1951 he edited Y Llenor , the highly successful Welsh quarterly journal, to which many of the leading Welsh writers of the period frequently contributed.
The editorial notes, which commented, often with scorching indignation, on many aspects of life in Wales, aroused considerable interest and feeling and contributed greatly to the character and impact of the journal.
From 1943 until the seat was abolished in 1950, he was Liberal MP for the University of Wales.
He rebelled early in his career against the constricting standards of the Victorian era and while still in his teens began to take a passionate interest in Welsh poetry.
In 1900 he published, with R. Silyn Roberts, a book of lyrical verse entitled Telynegion .
His later volumes of verse were Caneuon a Cherddi (1906),Ynys yr Hud a Chaneuon Eraill (1923), and, more especially,Caniadau (1932), a selection which he himself made of his poetry down to 1931.
A subtle and discerning anthologist, he compiled Y Flodeugerdd Newydd (1909),Blodeuglwm o Englynion (1920), and the much-used Y Flodeugerdd Gymraeg (1931).
He wrote two plays,Beddau'r Proffwyddi (1913) and Dyrchafiad Arall i Gymro (1914), and made Welsh translations for broadcasting of Antigone and King Lear , the first of which was published in 1950.
Prose became his main medium of literary expression in his later years and among his more important works are the autobiographical Hen Atgofion (1936), his biography of Owen Morgan Edwards (1937), both of which are classics of Welsh prose literature, and Y Tro Olaf (1939).
His major contributions to Welsh scholarship, however, were the numerous studies he published of the intricate structure of the four branches of the Mabinogi and of aspects of the Arthurian legend, a field in which his interest had been aroused by the work of Sir John Rhŷs [q.v.].
Outstanding among those contributions are his Math Vab Mathonwy (1928) and Rhiannon (1953) which, in spite of some evident shortcomings, particularly a failure on the author's part to make sufficient use of the comparative method, testify to Gruffydd's originality of mind, his general perceptiveness, and his clarity of exposition.
The validity of his basic hypothesis has not been seriously challenged.
His lifelong adherence to the principles of tolerance and freedom of thought, as well as his strong aversion to dogma and to any formalized critical doctrine, stemmed partly from his Nonconformist upbringing and beliefs.
Temperamental, moody, and irascible, he appeared to many of his critics to be culpably inconsistent in the attitudes he took to some of the contentious issues of his day.
His shifting standpoints, however, were invariably based on genuine conviction.
He was elected president of the council of the National Eisteddfod (1945), and was awarded the gold medal of the Honourable Society of Cymmrodorian (1946) and honorary doctorates by the universities of Rennes (1946) and Wales (1947).
In 1909 he married Gwenda, daughter of Thomas Evans, the Calvinistic Methodist minister of Abercarne; they had one son.
He died in Caernarfon 29 September 1954, and was buried at Llanddeiniolen graveyard, not far from the yew tree which is the subject of one of his most celebrated poems.
[Alun Llywelyn-Williams in Gwŷr Llên (ed.
Aneirin Talfan Davies), 1948;Y Llenor (memorial volume), 1955; John Gwilym Jones in Ysgrifau Beirniadol , vol. i (ed.
J. E. Caerwyn Williams), 1965, and in Swyddogaeth Beirniadaeth , 1973; Iorwerth C. Peate,W. J. Gruffydd (pamphlet), 1966; T. J. Morgan,W. J. Gruffydd (Writers of Wales), 1970; personal knowledge.]
Philippe Garner
,William (1783–1861), traveller and topographical artist, engineer, and pioneer photographer, was born 5 April 1783 in Horley, Surrey, the fifth child in the family of seven sons and two daughters of James Constable, miller and country shopkeeper of Horley, and his wife Susanna Jordan.
He had virtually no formal education.
In 1797 he entered the drapery business of Henry Browne, a high constable of Lewes, a keen scientist with a private laboratory and a printing-press, who encouraged his assistant's artistic and scientific interests.
In 1802 he joined his elder brother Daniel in founding a drapery business at 3 North Street, Brighton, where he drew and published ‘A New and Correct Plan of Brighthelmstone’.
In 1806 the two brothers embarked on a journey of exploration to the United States.
They travelled from New York to New Orleans and back, by boat, by mule, or on foot.
Constable kept a detailed record and made water-colour studies which are important early topographical documents.
He was engaged to plan a new town in Big Beaver Creek, Pennsylvania, which he called New Brighton.
On his return to England in 1808 he rebuilt and operated the family water-mill at Horley and pursued a career as an engineer.
He was appointed surveyor to the Turnpike Trustees of the London to Brighton Roads (1818) and was responsible for the construction of a tunnel (1823) and suspension bridge in Reigate.
In 1837 he was appointed engineer and surveyor of a proposed railway in Jamaica, but the project fell through.
In 1841 he embarked on the most important phase of his career, as a pioneer photographer, opening a daguerreotype portrait studio at 57 Marine Parade, Brighton (8 November 1841).
He exchanged ideas and information with other early practitioners and invested much thought in the technical and artistic refinement of his chosen medium.
He was the first to photograph Prince Albert (5 March 1842) and various members of the court, including William Cavendish, sixth Duke of Devonshire [q.v.].
His daguerreotypes are amongst the finest relics of photography's first decade.
His business declined through the 1850s in the face of increasing competition, though his scientific interests continued undiminished.
He was a founder-member of the Brighton and Sussex Natural History Society in 1855.
Surviving daguerreotype self-portraits reveal a slim figure with strongly chiselled features.
His letters confirm a highly inquisitive mind regarding natural and scientific phenomena and suggest a phlegmatic temperament and a dry humour.
Constable displayed an exceptional breadth of curiosity and his career was marked by an evident spirit of adventure and an impressive range of achievements.
He had married Jemima Mott in 1816 but lived as a childless widower from 1829 after the death of his wife.
He died 22 December 1861 at home at Egremont Place, Brighton.
[Brighton Herald , 6 November 1841 and 28 December 1861; Susanna Grece's journal, unpublished, ten pages in Smithsonian Institution, Washington, and remainder in a private collection; correspondence, water-colours, and daguerrotypes in private collections.
(Copies of all the above in the possession of Philippe Garner.)]
Gordon L Herries Davies
,James Murdoch (1839–1915), geologist, was born 23 August 1839 in Edinburgh, the third son and third of eight children of James Stuart Geikie, minor Edinburgh businessman, musician, and music critic, and his wife Isabella Thom, the daughter of a Dunbar sea captain.
His uncle was the artist Walter Geikie [q.v.], and his eldest brother was the geologist Sir Archibald Geikie [q.v.].
He was educated at the Edinburgh High School (1850–3) and as a schoolboy he joined in the geological rambles of his brother Archibald and John Young, the future professor of natural history at Glasgow University.
In 1854 he was apprenticed to the printer and publisher, Thomas Constable [q.v.], but disliked both the work and the indoor confinement.
He renounced his apprenticeship in 1858 and resolved to follow his eldest brother into the ranks of the Geological Survey.
While awaiting a vacancy he joined the natural history class at Edinburgh University under George James Allman [q.v.].
In October 1861 he joined the local branch of the Geological Survey as assistant geologist.
He was promoted geologist in 1867, when the branch was reorganized as the Geological Survey of Scotland with Archibald as its director, and he was promoted district surveyor in 1869.
With the Survey he was in his element.
He loved both the outdoor life and the companionship of genial and talented colleagues.
He was a hardy, enthusiastic, and capable field geologist, the superficial deposits being his chief interest.
For the Survey he mapped in Fife and the Lothians, in the Southern Uplands, and in the Ayrshire and Lanarkshire coalfields, while from 1875 until 1882 his station was at Perth.
He achieved an international reputation as a student of the Quaternary and his book The Great Ice Age (1874) became a classic.
Among his other texts his Outlines of Geology (1886) and his Structural and Field Geology for Students (1905) both appeared in several editions.
In 1882 Archibald Geikie was appointed director-general of the Geological Survey and he moved to London, leaving vacant the directorship of the Scottish survey and the Murchison chair of geology at Edinburgh University, which he had held concurrently with his survey post.
James was his brother's obvious successor in both posts, but Archibald announced first that for the moment he would himself retain control of the Scottish survey and second that he would not sanction the holding of the Murchison chair by any survey geologist.
Forced to choose between the survey and the chair, James chose the latter.
It was a decision which he regretted for some years, although within the university he proved an effective teacher and he was dean of the faculty of science from 1894 until 1913.
He resigned his chair in June 1914.
He was elected FRS in 1875 and was much involved in the affairs of the Royal Society of Edinburgh (president 1913–15) and the Royal Scottish Geographical Society (president 1904–10).
He travelled widely in Europe and he visited North America twice.
On 8 July 1875 he married Mary Simson, daughter of John Somerville Johnston of Crailing Hall, Jedburgh, and they had four sons and one daughter.
He died suddenly in Edinburgh 1 March 1915.
[M. I. Newbigin and J. S. Flett,James Geikie: the Man and the Geologist , 1917; W. E. Marsden, ‘James Geikie’, in Geographers: Biobibliographical Studies , ed.
T. W. Freeman and P. Pinchemel, vol. iii, 1979.]
Charles Sebag-Montefiore
,Hollingworth (1786–1867), merchant and connoisseur of medieval art, was born in Kensington 15 April 1786, the fourth son and seventh child in a family of eight sons and three daughters of Colonel Francis Magniac of Kensington and Denton Court, Kent, and his wife Frances, the daughter of John Attwood.
Francis Magniac was a French Huguenot goldsmith who made clocks and watches for the Chinese market.
He appears to have been in partnership before 1812 with Daniel Beale, who had founded the agency business then known as Beale, Reid & Co.
About 1805 Hollingworth Magniac went to China to join his elder brother Charles in Canton in Beale, Reid & Co.
By 1817 the only partners were himself and Charles, and the business traded as Magniac & Co. until 1832, when its new partners renamed it eponymously as Jardine Matheson & Co.
In 1820 Charles Magniac succeeded Thomas Beale as Prussian consul in Canton, Hollingworth being vice-consul.
The death in 1823 of his father and in 1824 of his brother Charles (who bequeathed his estate to Hollingworth) must have prompted a desire to return to England.
He and his family left China in January 1827.
William Jardine [q.v.]described him as ‘honest and liberal beyond what we generally meet with, or even expect to meet with in the general intercourse of business transactions’.
He pursued his business interests in London by founding the firm of Magniac, Smith, & Co. in partnership with John Abel Smith, Oswald Smith, and Thomas Charles Smith: this was later known as Matheson & Co.
Soon after his return he took a lease of Colworth House, Sharnbrook in north Bedfordshire, from John Fiott-Lee, whose principal seat was at Hartwell House in Buckinghamshire.
Colworth was an Elizabethan house in origin, altered in the 1760s and again about 1810: it became the principal residence of Magniac, who again extended the house, which he acquired outright in 1854.
He played no part in political affairs, although his son Charles later became a local MP and chairman of Bedfordshire county council: he was, however, master of the Oakley Hunt 1847–51.
His London house was at 2 Bolton Row (later Curzon Street).
With his ample fortune, Hollingworth Magniac began to form a collection, which is distinguished as one of the finest nineteenth-century collections of medieval art, accumulated in the tradition of William Beckford [q.v.].
The collection included a series of historical portraits by Jean and François Clouet, Lucas Cranach the elder, and their contemporaries; illuminations and portrait miniatures; ecclesiastical and secular metalwork; Limoges enamels; carvings in ivory and boxwood; majolica; faience of Henri Deux and Bernard Palissy ware; enamelled German, Venetian, and oriental glass; tazze; reliquaries; dishes; caskets; vases; and armour.
Magniac bought many objects at the Strawberry Hill sale of 1842, and was an active buyer from dealers and in the saleroom until the 1850s.
The diaries of Joseph Farington [q.v.](volume v, footnote on page 16) state that Magniac ‘partly inherited and partly collected the remarkable collection’, although no material has come to light to distinguish Hollingworth Magniac's purchases from those of his father or brother.
A considerable part of the collection was exhibited at the Society of Arts exhibition in 1850, and again in 1862 at the South Kensington loan exhibition.
The collection was catalogued by (Sir) J. C. Robinson [q.v.]in 1862 as Notices of the Principal Works of Art in the Collection of Hollingworth Magniac Esq of Colworth .
Magniac's collection was sold by Christie's in an eleven-day sale in July 1892, with 1,554 lots realizing £103,040.
In about 1825 Magniac married Helen, daughter of Peter Sampson of Fitzroy Square, London, and had three sons.
He died 31 March 1867 at 2 Bolton Row, Piccadilly, London.
His son Charles commissioned William Burges [q.v.]to design a magnificent monument and mausoleum at Sharnbrook.
[Archives of Jardine Matheson & Co; Colworth Court catalogue of 1862; James Greig (ed.),
The Farington Diaries , 6 vols., 1922–6; J. Mordaunt Crook,William Burges and the High Victorian Dream , 1981.]
D W Hayton
, Sir Richard , second baronet (c. 1659–1726), parliamentary diarist and controversialist, was born about 1659, the eldest son of Richard Cocks of the Middle Temple and his wife Mary, daughter of Sir Robert Cooke of Highnam, Gloucestershire.
Cocks was only ten years old when his father died, leaving him heir to his paternal grandfather's baronetcy and estate at Dumbleton, Gloucestershire, and the remainder of his upbringing was entrusted to the strict guidance of his elder sister, Dorothy, who regulated the family to her own pattern of godliness.
After a spell at Oriel College, Oxford, where he later claimed to have suffered a worthless and drunken tutor, he came to reside at Dumbleton on his grandmother's death in 1690 and inaugurated a programme of rebuilding and improvement.
His taste for public speaking was indulged as chairman of the quarter sessions, and in 1698, after several unsuccessful attempts to enter Parliament, he secured election as knight of the shire.
A family connection with the lord chancellor, John, Baron Somers [q.v.], drew him to the Whig side in politics, but he was no slavish follower of a party.
Indeed, his stern morality and adherence to the ideals of classical republicanism, as mediated through such writers as Algernon Sidney and his own uncle by marriage, Henry Neville [qq.v.], made him almost an archetypal ‘country’ member, and he was quickly to the forefront in the agitations against a standing army and political corruption in general.
At the same time his pathological detestation of ‘popery’ guaranteed that he would vote with the Whigs over great questions of policy, such as the Hanoverian succession and the war with France.
So deep-rooted were his various obsessions and so pronounced his self-importance that he came to be regarded in some quarters as not merely an individualist but something of a crank.
Out of Parliament in Queen Anne's reign he retired to his study and began to write — fragments of history, religious meditations, political satires, in prose, verse, and even in dramatic form — none of which were published, though some circulated in manuscript among his friends.
From notes and other materials he was also able to construct in retrospect a diary of his parliamentary career, covering in particular detail the sessions of 1701–2, which, surviving in manuscript form, now constitutes his chief claim to fame.
Not until 1717 did he appear in print, with a grand jury charge denouncing Jacobites.
Then in 1721–2 he waded into the paper war over the so-called ‘Bangorian controversy’ initiated by the sermon on church government by Benjamin Hoadly, bishop of Bangor [q.v.].
In rapid succession Cocks produced four pamphlets promoting an Erastian view of ecclesiastical authority and a comprehensive religious settlement designed to include Presbyterians:A Perfect Discovery of Longitude (1721),The Church of England Secured (1722),Over Shoes, Over Boots (1722), and his Farewel Sermon (1722).
Their violently anticlerical tone, occasionally stooping to scurrilous abuse, provoked sharp replies from churchmen, some of whom themselves descended to the level of personal insults, mostly on the score of Cocks's diminutive size and renowned eccentricity.
To Thomas Hearne [q.v.], for example, he was ‘a whimsical, crazed man’; to another high Tory he was a ‘deranged elf’.
Undaunted, Cocks hit back with yet another tract,A True and Impartial Inquiry…into the Late Bloody Execution at Thorn…(1727), though this was no more than a stale reprise of past polemic, and was only published posthumously.
Cocks married in 1688 Frances, daughter of Richard Neville of Billingbear, Berkshire, and within a few months of being widowed, in 1724, took as his second wife Mary, daughter of William Bethell of Swindon.
Neither gave him any children, and the baronetcy and estate passed to his brother Robert, a Church of England clergyman.
Cocks died about 21 October 1726.
[J. V. Somers Cocks,History of the Cocks Family , 1966–7; D. W. Hayton, ‘Sir Richard Cocks’,Albion , vol. xx, 1988; unpublished biography, History of Parliament Trust; Bodleian Library, MS Eng.
hist. b. 209–10; information from J. V. Somers Cocks.]
Stuart S Wilson
,Alexander (1894–1985), aerodynamicist and archaeologist, was born 26 March 1894 in Carradale Mains, Argyllshire, the elder son (there were no daughters) of Archibald Thom, farmer, and his wife Lily Stevenson Strang.
He attended Kilmarnock Academy and studied civil engineering at the Royal Technical College in Glasgow and at the University of Glasgow (B.Sc.
1915), where he won the George Harvey prize.
After working as a structural engineering designer he was a draughtsman with aircraft firms before becoming a lecturer at the University of Glasgow in civil engineering and aeronautics (1922–39).
He built the first wind tunnel in Scotland and obtained his Ph.D.
in 1926 and D.Sc.
in 1929, both for theoretical and experimental studies of flow around cylinders in various configurations.
Thom worked throughout World War II at the Royal Aircraft Establishment, Farnborough, where he commissioned and ran the high-speed tunnel, enabling the study of problems encountered at high subsonic aircraft speeds causing locally supersonic flow.
In 1945 he was elected professor of engineering science at Oxford and a fellow of Brasenose College.
He took over a small department and greatly expanded it, planning a large new building, which ensured further expansion.
Thom's research centred round a method of calculation of flow problems, using a process of continuous approximation to final values of quantities at the intersections of a square grid covering the field of study.
He used a small mechanical calculator to solve each problem, a laborious process later rapidly accomplished by computer.
He supervised several Rhodes scholars, who obtained their doctorates and went on to successful careers.
Thom was an active member of the aeronautical research committee for many years.
In parallel with his academic work Thom spent every summer accurately surveying megalithic sites on the west coast of Scotland, an activity allied to his skill as a skipper and navigator of cruising yachts.
On his retirement in 1961 he returned to his home at Dunlop, Ayrshire, and devoted himself to analysis and further surveys of megalithic sites (‘stone circles’) from the Orkneys as far south as the well-known Carnac site in Brittany, with over 2,000 stones.
The results of these labours over a period of fifty years were many papers and five influential books, the last two of which were completed by his son.
These, particularly Megalithic Sites in Britain (1967), drew attention to the probable astronomical significance of the megalithic remains.
By statistical analysis of his surveys he showed that the megaliths were set out to a common unit of measurement, the megalithic yard of 0.83 m., not in simple circles but in circular arcs centred on right-angled triangles.
Some sites are astronomical calendars, others lunar observatories, showing the scientific abilities of prehistoric man.
Not all Thom's conclusions are fully accepted, but to understand them properly requires a knowledge of mathematics, statistics, surveying, astronomy, and archaeology — not a common combination.
However, he is regarded as the founder of the subject of ‘archaeoastronomy’.
Thom's work was recognized by honorary degrees from the universities of Glasgow (LLD 1960) and Strathclyde (D.Sc.
1976).
He was a member of the British Astronomical Association, and a fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society, the Society of Antiquaries of London, and the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland.
Above all, ‘Sandy’ Thom was esteemed by his colleagues; he was truly egregious but a kind man and a good skipper, whether of a yacht's crew, a survey party, or a department.
In 1917 he married Jeanie Boyd (died 1975), daughter of Allan Kirkwood, farmer.
They had two sons and a daughter.
The younger son, Alan, an aerodynamicist, was killed in a flying accident in 1945; the other, Archibald S. Thom, followed his father as a lecturer in engineering at Glasgow University.
Thom died in Fort William 7 November 1985.
[Information from A. S. Thom (son); personal knowledge.]
A G Bishop
,Winifred (1898–1935), novelist, feminist, and social reformer, was born in Rudstone, Yorkshire, 23 June 1898, the younger daughter (there were no sons) of David Holtby, a prosperous farmer, and his wife Alice Winn of the East Riding.
An independent and precocious child, she was encouraged in her literary ambitions while at Queen Margaret's School, Scarborough.
She went up to Somerville College, Oxford, in 1917, but left a year later to join the Women's Army Auxiliary Corps, and served in France until August 1919 as a hostel forewoman.
Returning to Somerville, she formed a close friendship with a contemporary, Vera Brittain [q.v.].
Holtby — tall, fair, confident, gregarious — was Brittain's ‘opposite’; but they discovered in each other complementary experience, literary ambitions, and social ideals.
They left Oxford in 1921, with seconds in modern history, and shared a flat in London while establishing parallel careers.
Holtby's forceful, witty articles and reviews soon gained her a high reputation as a journalist.
She became a regular contributor (and from 1926 a director) of the feminist journal Time and Tide , and a friend of its founder and editor, Margaret Haig Thomas, Viscountess Rhondda [q.v.].
With Vera Brittain she became an influential feminist and member of Rhondda's Six Point Group.
Both also joined the League of Nations Union, lecturing widely for it on world peace; and in 1922 they toured Europe to investigate postwar conditions.
Both joined the Labour party.
Both published novels in 1923 and 1924.
In 1926 Winifred Holtby visited South Africa for over five months, to speak on behalf of the League of Nations Union.
Appalled by the racism she observed there, she worked energetically against it for the rest of her life, giving extensive financial support to the Black trade union movement.
On her return to London, she was welcomed by Vera Brittain, who was now married, into a household soon further enlivened by two children, to whom Holtby became a beloved ‘aunt’.
They now had a wide circle of acquaintances, mutual or individual, many prominent as writers, feminists, and socialists.
Extremely generous and dutiful, Winifred Holtby sacrificed much of her time and energy to her friends and family (she later likened her life to ‘a clear stream which has simply reflected other people's stories and problems’).
Yet her literary career of less than fifteen years was notably prolific.
Her first two novels —Anderby Wold (1923) and The Crowded Street (1924)— were followed by The Land of Green Ginger (1927),Poor Caroline (1931), and Mandoa, Mandoa!(1933).
Increasingly satirical and ambitious, they are unpretentiously direct and witty in style, imaginative in using her experience, and firmly focused on social and political problems.
Among the other seven books she published are a fine pioneering critical study of Virginia Woolf (1932);The Astonishing Island (1933), a satire; a feminist treatise,Women and a Changing Civilisation (1934);Truth is Not Sober and Other Stories (1934); and a collection of poems,The Frozen Earth (1935).
A play attacking the rise of Fascism,Take Back Your Freedom (1939), was published posthumously, as were a further volume of short stories (1937) and two selections from her lively correspondence (1937 and 1960).
During the last four years of her life, Winifred Holtby fought gallantly against the depredations of a kidney disease.
Her courage and consideration were so remarkable that even close friends did not know until near the end that she was seriously ill.
Equally remarkable were the ambition and determination that pushed to completion her final novel, which is also her masterpiece,South Riding (published posthumously in 1936 and awarded the James Tait Black memorial prize): a rich regional study of social change and local government, it drew to some extent on her mother's experiences as the first woman alderman in the East Riding of Yorkshire.
On her deathbed in a London nursing home, Winifred Holtby was betrothed to the man she loved, Harry Pearson.
She died 29 September 1935.
[Vera Brittain,Testament of Friendship: the Story of Winifred Holtby , 1940; Geoffrey Handley-Taylor,Winifred Holtby: a Concise and Selected Bibliography together with some Letters , 1955; Paul Berry and Alan Bishop (eds.),
Testament of a Generation: the Journalism of Vera Brittain and Winifred Holtby , 1985; Vera Brittain,Diary of the Thirties 1932–1939: Chronicle of Friendship , ed.
Alan Bishop, 1986.]
Trevor Wilson
, Sir Charles Edward Henry , fourth baronet (1862–1941), Liberal politician, was born 30 June 1862 in Dormansland, near Lingfield, Surrey, the only son and third of six children of (Sir) Charles Parry Hobhouse, later third baronet, Wiltshire landowner and former judge in the High Court of Calcutta, and his wife Edith Lucy, daughter of Sir Thomas Turton, second baronet, of Felcourt.
His mother died in 1867 and his father soon remarried, having a further son and four daughters.
Hobhouse was educated at Eton (1875–9) and Christ Church, Oxford, and seemed destined for a military career, attending the Royal Military College, Sandhurst.
He joined the King's Royal Rifle Corps.
He was diverted into politics both by his upbringing in a Liberal tradition and by his marriage in 1890 to Georgina Fleetwood, daughter of George Pargiter Fuller, of Neston Park, a neighbouring squire and Liberal MP.
In 1892 Hobhouse narrowly won Wiltshire East for the Liberals against a formidable Conservative opponent.
In the ensuing Parliament he served as a private secretary at the Colonial Office.
The Liberal set-back in 1895 cost him his seat, and his chronic hay fever directed him to an urban constituency.
He won East Bristol in 1900 and retained it in the general elections of 1906 and 1910.
The Liberals returned to office in 1905, and in 1907 Hobhouse became under-secretary of state for India.
He headed a royal commission into decentralization whose report influenced subsequent Indian legislation.
In April 1908 he became financial secretary to the Treasury, and in October 1911 gained a place in the cabinet as chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster.
His career reached what would prove its peak in February 1914 when he became postmaster-general, an office just then involved in the early developments of wireless telegraphy and the controversies concerning rival telegraphic systems.
He succeeded his father in the baronetcy in 1916.
Hobhouse commanded confidence as a hard-working administrator and straightforward spokesman for his department.
He did not make a great impact beyond his own office.
Nor was he in sympathy with some trends in Liberal affairs.
He stood by traditional causes such as free trade and Irish home rule.
But he believed that David Lloyd George (later first Earl Lloyd-George of Dwyfor), as chancellor of the Exchequer, should restrain spending and not encourage it.
He deplored (Sir) Winston Churchill's big-navy policy, and he opposed quite provocatively the campaign for women's suffrage.
World War I terminated Hobhouse's career.
He lost office when the first coalition was formed in May 1915.
He suffered discredit by opposing, and then capitulating to, the campaign for military conscription.
And as a supporter of H. H. Asquith (later first Earl of Oxford and Asquith) he was crushed in the 1918 election by a Lloyd George Liberal and a Labour candidate.
(He even suffered the indignity of losing his deposit, a provision but recently instituted to discourage ‘freak’ candidates.)
Hobhouse remained active in Liberal affairs after 1918.
Only as the party faded did he turn his attention from politics to his estates.
Hobhouse began keeping a diary during his round-the-world honeymoon in 1893 and continued to do so for five years.
He returned to the practice in 1904 and did not cease until he lost office in 1915.
These documents are of particular interest in a succession of dramatic episodes.
Notwithstanding personal predilections and occasional misunderstanding of events, his diaries provide incisive sketches of key individuals and insights into the course of affairs.
Their value is enhanced by the fact that at the time there were no cabinet records (apart from the prime minister's low-key letter to the king) and few diaries have survived this period.
Of medium height and strong build, Hobhouse (despite his hay fever) was much given to outdoor activities, undertaking long expeditions on his bicycle and riding to hounds with a recklessness that sometimes resulted in personal injury.
His first wife died in 1927.
In 1931 he married Aimée Gladys (died 1965), widow of Benjamin Adams Brendon, of the Indian Civil Service, and daughter of David Charles Ballinger Griffith, of Huntworth, Bedford.
Both marriages were childless.
Hobhouse died in Monkton Farleigh, Wiltshire, 26 June 1941.
He was succeeded in the baronetcy by his half-brother, Reginald Arthur (born 1878).
[Edward David (ed.),
Inside Asquith's Cabinet , 1977;The Times and Manchester Guardian , 27 June 1941; Trevor Wilson (ed.),
The Political Diaries of C. P. Scott 1911–1928 , 1970.]
D A Bellenger
,Robert Edward , ninth Baron Petre (1742–1801), Roman Catholic leader, was born about February 1742 in London, the only son (he had three older sisters) of Robert James Petre, eighth Baron Petre, of Ingatestone, Essex, a botanist and garden designer, and his wife Anna Maria Barbara, daughter of James Radclyffe, third Earl of Derwentwater [q.v.].
He succeeded to his barony as a minor in July 1742 and may have been educated at the English Jesuit College at St Omer in France.
Petre was the principal representative of an enlightened, tolerant, rather tepid English Catholicism shared by the small but powerful grouping of ‘old’ Catholic families.
His wealth made him one of the principal paymasters of the English Catholic community, and in political circles he was generally seen as the leader of Catholic opinion.
He was one of the central figures in the Catholic Committee, a self-appointed body formed in 1778, predominately lay in character and noble in membership, which saw itself as speaking for ‘informed’ Catholic opinion (Petre always protected radicals among the clergy, such as Alexander Geddes, q.v.) and which agitated for the freeing of the English Catholics from civil disabilities.
It had considerable influence in negotiating the Catholic Relief Acts of 1778 and 1791 and in preparing a new oath of allegiance.
The visit of George III to Thorndon in October 1778 gave a royal seal of approval to Petre's efforts.
Not all his co-religionists were so enthusiastic.
Petre paid little attention either to the Irish dimension of Catholic relief or to the changing constituency of English Catholicism.
The Cisalpine Club, formed in 1792 from the leading members of the Catholic Committee, looked very out of date by 1830 when its meetings finished.
Ultramontanism was becoming more vigorous and initiative among the English Catholics was moving away from the old Catholic families to the increasing Catholic population of towns.
It was priests not peers who were now providing leadership in the Church.
Many of the disputes in which the English Catholics were involved during Petre's lifetime were about the place of lay power in an increasingly clericalized church or, as John Milner, bishop of Castabala [q.v.], one of Petre's most bitter critics, put it, ‘whether the nomination of our Pastors shall be with Lord Petre or the successors of St Peter ’.
Petre was elected FSA and FRS in 1780, and was also a leading Freemason and grand master of the English Freemasons 1772–6 (the last Catholic to hold that office).
James Paine [q.v.]designed his new residence at Thorndon Hall, Essex, and Lancelot ‘Capability’ Brown [q.v.]laid out the grounds.
Petre married twice.
In 1762 he married Anne (died 1787), younger daughter and co-heir of Philip Howard, of Buckenham, Norfolk.
They had four sons, two of whom died in infancy, and one daughter.
In 1788 he married Juliana Barbara (died 1833), sister of Bernard Edward Howard, later twelfth Duke of Norfolk [q.v.], and daughter of Henry Howard of Glossop, Derbyshire.
They had one son and two daughters.
Lord Petre died at his home in Park Lane, London, 2 July 1801.
He was succeeded in the barony by his eldest son, Robert Edward (born 1763).
[M. D. Petre,The Ninth Lord Petre or Pioneers of Roman Catholic Emancipation , 1928; B. Ward,The Dawn of the Catholic Revival in England 1781–1803 , 2 vols., 1909; E. Duffy, ‘Ecclesiastical Democracy Detected’,Recusant History , vol. x, 1970.]
J P Ferris
,Giles (1615–1675), politician, was born in Melbury Sampford, Dorset, 3 June 1615, the first surviving son of Sir John Strangways and his wife Grace Trenchard.
Of his six brothers and sisters, only Howard, the wife of Sir Lewis Dyve [q.v.], and James, a colonel of foot in the civil war, lived to maturity.
His ancestors had established themselves in Dorset in the fifteenth century, and between 1529 and 1713 the parliamentary representation of the county could be described as ‘in a manner hereditary in his family’.
His father, who sat in nine Parliaments for Dorset or Weymouth, was prominent as an opponent of the court in the 1620s and as a Royalist in the civil war.
Strangways was educated as founder's kin at Wadham College, Oxford, and Sir Francis Wortley [q.v.]later wrote of him: ‘What study e'er he undertakes, to master it he's able.’
On returning from his travels he married Susanna, daughter of a London mercer, Thomas Edwards, with a portion of £10,000.
Three of their children died young, but three sons survived to sit in Parliament and three daughters to marry into minor gentry families.
Representing Weymouth (with his father) in the Short Parliament (1640) and Bridport in its successor, as a student of mathematics Strangways was chiefly occupied in counting votes for the nascent Royalist party in the Commons.
He left Westminster to raise a cavalry regiment for the king.
Taken prisoner with his brother-in-law at the fall of Sherborne Castle (1645), he spent nearly three years in the Tower with Wortley and other leading Cavaliers until his father paid the maximum delinquency fine of £10,000.
His involvement in Royalist conspiracy during the Interregnum did not exceed the bounds of prudence, however.
From 1661 he sat in the Cavalier Parliament for Dorset, and was in opposition under both the administration of Edward Hyde, Earl of Clarendon [q.v.]and, after 1667, the Cabal, in which his local rival, Anthony Ashley Cooper (later first Earl of Shaftesbury, q.v.), held high office; but his stalwart churchmanship brought him an honorary DCL from his old university in 1665.
He succeeded in 1666 to an estate with the annual value of at least £5,000, which he increased by the purchase of Symondsbury.
Election defeats at the hands of Shaftesbury, now lord chancellor, in 1673 ‘put him into a great rage’ and brought him to the fore in parliamentary debates.
He attacked with equal vigour the indulgence shown to dissenters and Roman Catholics, the French alliance, and the venality of placemen.
Sir William Temple [q.v.]described his principal aims as being to ‘secure the business of religion’ and ‘break the war with Holland’.
After the disruption of the Cabal, he was honoured by the Royal Society with a fellowship (1673) and by admission to Gray's Inn (1674); to him was ascribed the chief credit for the failure to carry the impeachment of Thomas Osborne, first Earl of Danby [q.v.], whose policies at the head of the new administration in 1674, both at home and abroad, harmonized with his own.
Rewarded with a seat on the Privy Council, he held it for less than a month, dying of apoplexy 20 July 1675.
[B. D. Henning,The House of Commons 1660–1690 , 1983; Dorset Record Office, D124 (Ilchester MSS); W. E. Buckley (ed.),
Memoirs of Thomas, Earl of Ailesbury , vol. i, 1890, p. 101; R. Ashton,The English Civil War , 1978, p. 142;Commons Journals .]
Linda Parry
,Mary (‘May’)(1862–1938), designer and embroideress, was born at the Red House, Bexleyheath, Kent, 25 March 1862, the younger daughter (there were no sons) of William Morris [q.v.], the poet, designer, manufacturer, and political activist, and his wife Jane, daughter of Robert Burden, a stable-hand in Oxford, from Stanton Harcourt.
The family moved to London in 1865.
May had little formal education but attended Notting Hill High School from 1874 to 1876.
She inherited her mother's practical skills and her artistic and literary interests from her famous father.
It seems likely that his preoccupation with her promisingly clever older sister, Jenny (Jane Alice), caused unhappiness in May's childhood and further spurred her on to succeed in the practical arts.
Jenny developed epilepsy at the age of fifteen and spent the rest of her life as an invalid.
May showed early artistic promise and between 1880 and 1883 attended the South Kensington School of Design, then one of the foremost art schools in the country.
In 1885 she took over the management of the embroidery section of Morris & Company, her father's firm.
She supervised all embroidery orders (carried out in the drawing-room of her home at 8 Hammersmith Terrace) and from this time was responsible for creating most of the new designs used.
Despite these responsibilities, she soon established a reputation as an artist craftsman in her own right, through private tuition and membership of the Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society.
She frequently exhibited embroideries and jewellery and contributed technical essays for the society's exhibition catalogues of 1889 and 1890.
She wrote a number of articles on historic textiles and her book Decorative Needlework (1893), shows that, like her father, her ideas developed from an interest in traditional techniques.
She can be seen as one of the main exponents of the revivalist style of needlework, one of the most significant manifestations of the British Arts and Crafts Movement.
A talented water-colourist, she also designed wallpapers, jewellery, book bindings, and tapestries.
Her literary endeavours ranged from a play,White Lies (1903), to the mammoth task of editing her father's Collected Works (1910–15) in twenty-four volumes.
She lectured throughout Britain and America and in 1907 helped found the Women's Guild of Arts.
From 1897 till 1907 she taught at the Central School of Arts and Crafts.
Despite a long romantic attachment to George Bernard Shaw [q.v.], in 1890 May married Henry Halliday Sparling, secretary and fellow member of the Socialist League, the son of a farmer at Thorp in Essex.
They were divorced in 1898; they had no children.
Following her mother's death in 1914, May spent most of her time at Kelmscott Manor, the family home in Oxfordshire, living in semi-retirement with her companion, Mary Lobb.
Here she involved herself in village life with all her characteristic energy and enthusiasm until her death 16 October 1938, following influenza, at Kelmscott Manor.
[Linda Parry,William Morris Textiles , 1983, and Textiles of the Arts and Crafts Movement , 1988; Jan Marsh,Jane and May Morris , 1986.]
Janet E Grenier
, Dame Kathleen D'olier (1878–1974), suffragist and campaigner for world peace, was born 11 March 1878 at 1 York Terrace, Gillingham, Kent, the youngest of five daughters and fifth of seven children of Lieutenant (later Major) David Charles Courtney, of the Royal Engineers, and his wife Alice Margaret Mann.
Her parents were Anglo-Irish gentry with military connections on both sides.
She attended the Anglo-French College in Kensington and boarding school at Malvern before spending a year in Dresden studying German.
She went up to Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford, in January 1897 to read modern languages (French and German).
She took her finals in 1900 and was awarded second-class honours in the university examination for women.
Independent means gave her the opportunity to devote her life to social causes and world peace.
After a short period working with a girls' club in Lambeth (an LMH settlement), she became involved in the non-militant suffrage movement.
A constitutionalist, she believed in argument and reason.
After a spell in Manchester (1908–11) as secretary of the North of England Society for Women's Suffrage, she became honorary secretary (1911–15) of the National Union of Women's Suffrage societies, led by (Dame) Millicent Fawcett [q.v.].
Suffrage agitation was suspended with the outbreak of World War I. Kathleen Courtney, along with many other suffragists, took up the cause of peace.
She was one of the founders of the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom.
In 1915 she took part in the famous women's international peace conference in The Hague.
She was chairman of the British section for ten years but left, partly because she believed that the League's pacifism was unrealistic.
During and after World War I, she became associated with the Friends' War Victims Relief Committee.
She worked for the Serbian Relief Fund in Salonika, took charge of a temporary Serbian refugee colony in Bastia, Corsica, and was decorated by the Serbian government.
Those who knew her during this period described her as full of life and fun and an exceptional administrator.
She went on to work for the Friends' Committee in France, Austria, Poland, and Greece.
She was an active officer of the National Council for Adult Suffrage in 1917, lobbying MPs for extension of the franchise until the Act was passed in 1918.
She also became involved in the work of the family endowment committee and, with Eleanor Rathbone [q.v.], introduced the idea of family allowances to the National Union of Societies for Equal Citizenship (as the NUWSS was renamed in 1919).
Active involvement in the League of Nations Union followed World War I. She became a member of its executive in 1928 and vice-chairman in 1939.
An excellent speaker, she spoke at conferences on its behalf all over England and travelled extensively in the USA, Canada, New Zealand, and Australia during the 1930s.
She spent much time in Geneva, working on behalf of the women's disarmament committee, which was preparing a petition for disarmament prior to the Geneva disarmament conference of 1932.
Her knowledge of the USA was of great service to the Ministry of Information during World War II.
She made two hazardous voyages to the USA to plead for a permanent international organization for collective security, disarmament, and positive relief measures.
She was an observer at the San Francisco conference in 1945 and her speeches were influential in persuading Americans of the value of the United Nations.
In 1945 she became deputy chairman of the United Nations Association, and in 1949 chairman of its executive committee and joint president (with Gilbert Murray, q.v.).
She retired from the chairmanship in 1951 but remained active in the association into her nineties.
In 1968 she made a speech in Westminster at the fiftieth anniversary celebrations of the granting of votes to women.
She was a forceful personality who did not suffer fools gladly, but her sternness was accompanied by grace and Victorian courtesy.
She made an admirable chairman, able to cut through confusion and muddle.
She had no personal ambition but was determined to do the best for her causes.
Strikingly beautiful in her youth, she remained handsome and well-dressed in her old age.
She was appointed CBE in 1946 and DBE in 1952.
In 1972 she was awarded the UN peace medal.
She died in London 7 December 1974.
[The Times , 10 December 1974; Fawcett Library archives; E. M. Chilver in The Brown Book (annual record of Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford), December 1975; Margaret Quass, ‘UNA's First Lady’ in New World (Journal of the UNA), March 1968.]
Theo Aronson
,Alice Frederica (1868–1947), mistress of King Edward VII, was born in Woolwich 29 April 1868, the youngest in the family of eight daughters and one son of William Edmonstone, later fourth baronet, of Duntreath Castle, Stirlingshire, and his wife Mary Elizabeth Parsons.
Educated at home, Alice early on showed evidence of the beauty, tact, and vivacity for which she was to become renowned.
In 1891 she married George Keppel, third son of William Coutts Keppel, seventh Earl of Albemarle [q.v.].
There were two children: Violet, born in 1894, who was later to win notoriety for her turbulent love affair with Victoria (‘Vita’) Sackville-West [q.v.], and Sonia, born in 1900.
In 1898 the twenty-nine-year-old Alice met and soon became the mistress of the fifty-six-year-old Albert Edward, Prince of Wales.
His accession to the throne in 1901, as King Edward VII, in no way diminished her role.
For not only did Mrs Keppel maintain her position as maîtresse en titre but she became one of the leading personalities of the Edwardian court.
Throughout the ten years of Edward VII's reign, Alice was an accepted, respected, and highly visible member of the royal entourage.
She remained, in the widely used phrase, ‘La Favorita’.
Her ability to keep the notoriously impatient monarch amused was greatly appreciated in royal circles.
Financially astute, Alice cultivated people like the financier, Sir Ernest Cassel [q.v.], and is said to have realized a considerable sum by the sale of certain rubber shares presented to her by her royal lover.
The widely believed story that as King Edward VII lay dying, his wife Queen Alexandra magnanimously sent for Mrs Keppel to take leave of him, is inaccurate.
Much against the queen's will, Alice Keppel insisted on seeing the dying king; on being asked to leave the death chamber, she made an embarrassing scene and had to be escorted out.
Alice afterwards — in an effort to safeguard her position — claimed that it was the queen who had summoned her and who had promised to look after her in the future.
During World War I Alice divided her time between entertaining in her home in Grosvenor Street and helping her friend, Lady Sarah Wilson, run a hospital for wounded soldiers in Boulogne.
In 1927 the Keppels sold their London house and bought the Villa dell'Ombrellino, above Florence.
Celebrated as the ex-mistress of Edward VII, as an international grande dame , and as a matchless hostess, Alice Keppel reigned like a queen over Florentine society.
During World War II the Keppels established themselves at the Ritz Hotel in London.
At the end of the war they returned to the Villa dell'Ombrellino where, 11 September 1947, at the age of seventy-nine, Alice died.
[Wilfrid Scawen Blunt's unpublished diary, Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge; Sonia Keppel,Edwardian Daughter , 1958; James Lees-Milne,The Enigmatic Edwardian , 1986; Philip Magnus,King Edward VII , 1964; Violet Trefusis,Don't Look Round , 1952.]
Brian Trowell
,John (1422? –1459/60), composer, left a small but distinguished body of work in both secular and sacred music.
Nothing is known for certain about his parentage and birth, but David Fallows has suggested that he may have been the same man as John Boddenham, born in Oxford in 1422, chorister and scholar of Winchester College and later scholar and fellow of New College, Oxford.
Boddenham is not traceable later than 1459; and it is known from the membership list of the confraternity of St Nicholas, the London guild of parish clerks, that Bedingham (already a member in 1449) died between 3 May 1459 and 22 May 1460.
Apart from three mathematically intricate proportional puzzle-motets, Bedyngham's works are almost entirely known from manuscripts compiled abroad on the continent of Europe.
This may suggest that he travelled, but the presence of texts in foreign languages among his songs is by no means conclusive, for in some cases it can be shown that the words are not original.
In 1456–8 he was certainly in England, for he made over all his property to others by letters patent; he was at the time verger to the collegiate chapel of St Stephen, Westminster.
Bedyngham's music survives in a surprising number of different manuscripts, especially his secular songs.
These probably include the famous setting of ‘O rosa bella’ commonly attributed to John Dunstable [q.v.].
The song does not observe the niceties of the ballata form.
It may well be a ‘parody’: the eight songs attributable to Bedyngham are between them supplied with no fewer than twenty-six different texts in four languages; three remain doubtful as to their form, but two are ballades and three rondeaux, forms well known and widely practised in England at the time.
Along with the variety of texts, we find many conflicting attributions.
Expertise in the medium of song may have led Bedyngham to become one of the first composers, along with Walter Frye and Guillermus Dufay, to experiment with the technique of building a Mass cycle not on plainchant, but on a model taken from secular music.
There is a remarkable cycle on Gilles Binchois' ballade ‘Deuil angoisseux’, in which material from all voices of the song informs other voices than the tenor alone.
Two other Masses are of less distinction.
In turn, Bedyngham's own songs served as models on which other composers based Mass cycles, including three on ‘O rosa bella’.
[David Fallows, ‘Bedyngham, Johannes’,The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians , ed.
Stanley Sadie, 1980; A. B. Emden,A Biographical Register of the University of Oxford to A.D. 1500, 1957; D. Fallows, ‘Words and Music in Two English Songs of the Mid-15th Century: Charles d'Orléans and John Lydgate’,Early Music , vol. v, 1977, p. 38.]
Elizabeth Longford
,John (1826–1883), Queen Victoria's Highland servant, was born 8 December 1826 in Crathienaird, Aberdeenshire, on the Balmoral estate, the second of the nine sons of John Brown, crofter, and his wife Margaret Leys, daughter of the local blacksmith.
His story is the apotheosis of the Victorian servant.
He began as stable-lad to Sir Robert Gordon [q.v.].
He embarked on his career of gillie in 1849 as Prince Albert's gillie, and was mentioned in the queen's journal on 11 September 1849 as ‘young J. Brown’ who looked after her on an outing.
In 1858 he became the queen's personal servant in Scotland.
In 1864, three years after the prince consort's death, Brown was brought south to Osborne as her groom to give the secluded widow more riding exercise.
His responsibilities and favours escalated and he was soon her personal attendant and constant companion.
Like all Scots he seemed to her intelligent and well-bred, but uniquely devoted after he saved her from two carriage accidents and two assailants.
His loyalty was spiced with coarseness.
‘Wumman, can ye no hold yerr head up?’ a tourist heard him shout as he pinned her cape, pricking her chin.
Not only was he rude to the queen, but he also behaved badly with visitors at Osborne and Balmoral.
The queen always forgave his disrespectful behaviour, and became increasingly dependent upon him.
Her children denounced ‘the brute’; her household reacted to his familiarities with jealous rows, though her private secretary, Sir Henry Ponsonby [q.v.], called him ‘a child of nature’, arguing that in view of the queen's loneliness, they might have done worse.
The scandal-mongering press represented the unmarried Brown as indeed worse: Victoria's lover, husband, or handsome, kilted medium putting her in touch with Albert.
These fictions had ceased before a whisky-sodden Brown died of erysipelas at Windsor Castle, 27 March 1883.
The queen was grief-stricken at his death.
Mourned with wreaths from statesmen and verses by Alfred, Lord Tennyson [q.v.], he was remembered on his gravestone as Victoria's ‘Beloved Friend’.
In 1884 Queen Victoria published More Leaves from a Journal of our Life in the Highlands , dedicated to John Brown, and planned to publish a memoir, a ‘Life of John Brown’, but the household managed to prevent it.
In her coffin she wore his photograph on her wrist, above Prince Albert's dressing-gown and other treasured souvenirs.
Queen Victoria always needed the support of a dedicated man and for nineteen years she found it in Brown.
A photograph of Brown's bust by (Sir) Edgar Boehm is at Windsor.
[Elizabeth Longford,Victoria R.I. , 1964; Michael Reid,Ask Sir James , 1987; unpublished letters of Sir Henry Ponsonby.]
A R Allan
,William Henry (1805–1863), physician and medical officer of health, was born in Liverpool 27 January 1805, the third son and fifth of the seven children of George Duncan, merchant of Liverpool, and his wife Christian, the youngest daughter of the Revd James Currie, minister of Middlebie and of Kirkpatrick Fleming, Dumfriesshire, and a sister of Dr James Currie, MD, FRS, of Liverpool [q.v.].
He was educated under the supervision of his uncle, the Revd Henry Duncan, DD [q.v.], at Ruthwell manse, his tutors including Robert Mitchell.
In 1825–9 he studied at Edinburgh University, graduating MD in 1829; the dedicatees of his thesis, ‘De Ventris in Reliquum Corpus Potestate’(on the influence of the abdomen over the body in general), included Professors William P. Alison and James Home [qq.v.].
By 1830 Duncan was in medical practice in Liverpool, also serving as a physician at the Central and North Dispensaries.
His published analysis of the cholera cases he attended during the 1832 epidemic drew attention to the correlations between disease and environment (in particular the habitations, principally in cellars and courts, of the poor).
In 1804 Currie had also written on the relationships between health and environment in Liverpool.
Duncan submitted evidence to the inquiry into the corporation of Liverpool (1833), the commission on the condition of the poor in Ireland (1836 report), and the House of Commons' select committee on the health of towns (1840), detailing the deplorable ‘sanitary state of the labouring classes’ in Liverpool, whose population was rapidly increasing, principally by migration from Ireland and elsewhere.
His paper ‘On the Physical Causes of the High Rate of Mortality in Liverpool’(1843) was particularly influential; Liverpool he declared to be ‘the most unhealthy town in England’.
He was a prominent member of the Liverpool branch of the Health of Towns Association, established in 1845.
It was largely due to Duncan's efforts that Liverpool Corporation promoted the Liverpool Sanitary Act 1846, which established a public health service as an essential activity of local government.
Under the Act he was appointed medical officer of health for the borough of Liverpool from 1 January 1847, the first such appointment in England; initially part-time, the post became full-time in 1848 at an annual salary of £750.
A most conscientious man, of generally a quiet and retiring disposition, Duncan, as a pioneer in sanitary reform, faced opposition but robustly defended his actions and publications against criticism.
He enjoyed a good relationship with the corporation and particularly its able engineer, James Newlands, but encountered difficulties with the select vestry (responsible for poor-law institutions), particularly during the years when epidemics of typhus (1847) and cholera (1849, 1854) ravaged the town.
To his influence and actions may be attributed a significant reduction in the population living in cellars and other ‘unhealthy dwellings’ and a general improvement in environmental hygiene.
He ‘established methods of work, and initiated courses of improvement’ under which by 1890 the average general death rate of Liverpool was declared by Sir John Simon [q.v.]to have been reduced by ‘probably at least a fourth part’of the rate which prevailed when he became medical officer of health.
Duncan was a physician at Liverpool's Northern Hospital 1837–8 and at Liverpool Infirmary 1843–8.
He lectured at the Liverpool Royal Institution School of Medicine and Surgery (from 1844 the Liverpool Infirmary Medical School) 1835–48, and was the School's secretary 1844–5.
He helped establish the Liverpool Medical Society (of which he was secretary from 1833 and president 1836–8) and also the Liverpool Medical Institution (becoming in 1840 its first secretary).
He was an active member of the Literary and Philosophical Society of Liverpool from 1837 onwards and served as its treasurer.
Duncan was twice married: in 1848 to Philadelphia (died 1850), eldest daughter of James Rickarby, merchant, of Liverpool; and secondly, in 1853, to Catherine (died 1909), daughter of William Duncan MacAndrew, merchant, of Liverpool.
There were a son and a daughter of the second marriage.
Duncan, whose health had been failing for several years, died in West Park, Elgin, 23 May 1863.
[W. M. Frazer,Duncan of Liverpool , 1947; Eric Midwinter,Old Liverpool , 1971; medical officer of health for Liverpool: reports for 1847–63 and letter books for 1849–63; communication of Lieutenant-Colonel A. L. M. Cook; private information.]
Jeremy Black
, Sir Robert (1671? –1746), diplomat, was probably born in 1671, the elder son of Robert Sutton of Averham, Nottinghamshire, and his wife Katherine, daughter of the Revd William Sherborne of Pembridge, Herefordshire.
He went to Trinity College, Oxford, in 1688 and the Middle Temple in 1691, the year in which he inherited property upon his father's death.
Far from wealthy, he took deacon's orders and became chaplain to his cousin, Robert Sutton, second Baron Lexington [q.v.], the new ambassador to Vienna in 1694.
Sutton abandoned the church on being appointed secretary to the embassy at Vienna in 1697.
As secretary and later resident he was responsible for English representation at Vienna in 1697–1700, although William III placed more reliance on his Dutch counterpart.
Thanks to Lexington's influence, Sutton was appointed ambassador at Constantinople in December 1700.
Knighted in 1701, he reached Constantinople in early 1702 and remained there until 1717.
Sutton served with distinction, his assessment of Turkish policy was usually correct, and he knew Italian and Latin, the crucial languages in Constantinople.
In 1717 he was appointed with Abraham Stanyan [q.v.]joint mediator at the Austro-Turkish peace congress at Passarowitz, a task he discharged ably the following year and for which he was well rewarded.
His last diplomatic posting was as ambassador and plenipotentiary in Paris.
Appointed in April 1720 he had to be threatened with dismissal by James Craggs [q.v.], the secretary of state, before he would go.
He was in Paris from June 1720 until November 1721, but the ministry had little confidence in him and appointed first John, second Baron Carteret (later Earl Granville, q.v.), as ambassador extraordinary in January 1721, a post he did not take up, and secondly Sir Luke Schaub [q.v.]as ambassador the following month.
Schaub had already served in Paris and he acted jointly with Sutton from March 1721 until the latter's departure.
Aside from the fact that he was a very good ombre player, opinions of Sutton varied considerably.
Described to the French government in April 1720 as very gallant, and able in both diplomacy and the sciences, he was nevertheless criticized by one of George I's diplomats, St Saphorin, for being too inclined to sharp practice.
Wealthy as a result of his diplomatic career, Sutton was one of the successful Whig candidates in the very expensive Nottinghamshire election in April 1722, becoming a privy councillor.
He acquired estates in Lincolnshire and Nottinghamshire, worth nearly £5,000 a year, and houses in Grosvenor Square and at Broughton, Lincolnshire.
Appointed KCB in 1725, Sutton moved the address in 1726, the same year he became sub-governor of the Royal African Company.
In 1725 he became a member of the committee of management of the Charitable Corporation.
Active in increasing the authorized capital of this corporation, Sutton made money by insider dealing in its shares and was involved in the scandal following disclosures of extensive frauds in 1732 in which he himself lost severely.
Expelled from the Commons as a result of giving false statements, he was returned unopposed in 1734 for Great Grimsby, a venal borough that had elected other disreputable financiers and in which Sutton owned considerable property.
He remained MP until 1741, and did not stand again.
He played no further part in politics or business, having ceased his connection with the African Company in 1732.
In 1724 he married Judith, daughter of Benjamin Tichborne, and widow of Charles Spencer, third Earl of Sunderland [q.v.].
They had two surviving sons.
Sutton died 13 August 1746.
[R. R. Sedgwick (ed.),
The House of Commons 1715–1754 , vol. ii, 1970; Akdes Nimet Kurat (ed.),
The Despatches of Sir Robert Sutton, Ambassador in Constantinople (1710–1714), 1953; manuscripts in British Library, French Foreign Ministry and National Archives, Public Record Office, and Scottish Record Office.]