

L V Grinsell
,John Robert (1825–1911), archaeologist and geologist, was born 15 June 1825 in Fimber, a wold village in the East Riding of Yorkshire.
He was the eldest of the three children (two sons and a daughter) of James Mortimer, a farmer, and his wife Hannah, daughter of John Welburn, a farmer of Fimber.
He was educated at the village school in Fridaythorpe.
He started a business as a corn merchant in Fimber, and moved to Driffield in 1869.
Here he built up a trade in seeds, corn, manure, and fertilizer, and started a malt kiln in Driffield and a brewery and kilns in Malton.
His scientific interests were kindled by visits to the great exhibition at the Crystal Palace in London in 1851.
At first he collected fossils and flint implements (hence known in his locality as ‘mortimers ‘).
From 1863 onwards he devoted his spare time to opening the barrows with which the Yorkshire wolds were strewn, sometimes with his younger brother Robert.
Entirely self-taught, his work, summed up in his Forty Years’ Researches in British and Saxon Burial Mounds of East Yorkshire (1905), was a masterpiece by any standard.
It recorded the excavation of about 300 barrows (all round except two long ones) and sixteen Iron Age barrows among the ‘Danes’ graves'.
The book included a map showing the positions of the fifteen groups of barrows, plans of each group, and also of each barrow indicating the positions of the interments, their postures, and other details.
The plans of the groups enable them to be identified with those shown on large-scale Ordnance Survey maps, except for those sites subsequently ploughed out, which often survived as ring-ditches.
All the finds (about a thousand) were illustrated from beautiful drawings by his youngest daughter Agnes, then between thirteen and nineteen.
Mortimer's skill is well shown by his excavation of barrow 23 at Garton Slack, containing concentric circles of stake-holes.
He took plaster casts of these holes, which showed that some of them had contained pointed and the others blunted stakes.
Altogether Mortimer was responsible for the excavation of 304 prehistoric barrows in the wolds and over sixty Iron Age barrows in the ‘Danes’ graves' cemetery.
He built a private museum at Driffield to display his collection.
His work was paralleled by that of William Greenwell [q.v.], but whereas Greenwell extended his researches over all the northern English counties and Gloucestershire, Mortimer confined his activities to the region within a few miles of his base at Driffield.
Mortimer's techniques were well in advance of those of Greenwell and there was a good deal of rivalry between them.
In their later years they joined forces, and there is a photograph showing them together excavating one of the ‘Danes’ graves' in 1898.
In 1869 he married Matilda (died 1905), daughter of the Revd Thomas Mitchell, vicar of Sancton and Holme-on-the-Wolds.
They had three sons and two daughters.
Mortimer died 19 August 1911 at his home in Driffield.
[G. W. Lamplugh in Proceedings of the Yorkshire Geological Society , new series, vol. xvii, 1909–11, pp. 258–60, and in Geological Magazine , decade V, vol. viii, 1911, pp. 479–80; T. Sheppard in Naturalist , no. 652, May 1911, pp. 186–91; J. D. Hicks (ed.),
A Victorian Boyhood on the Wolds: the Recollections of J. R. Mortimer , 1978; B. M. Marsden,The Early Barrow-Diggers , 1974; I. M. Stead,The Arras Culture , 1979.]
J S Reynolds
,John (1786–1855), Oxford Evangelical, was born 23 October 1786 in the City of London, the son of John Hill.
A pupil of the Revd Edward Spencer at Winkfield rectory, Wiltshire, he was also influenced by T. T. Biddulph [q.v.]at Bristol.
Hill matriculated from St Edmund Hall, Oxford, in 1806, obtaining a second class in literae humaniores (BA 1809).
He was made assistant tutor, proceeding MA in 1812, when he became sole tutor and vice-principal.
An early pupil, W. H. Havergal [q.v.], ‘often spoke…of his kindness and fitness for his office’.
E. A. Litton, his able successor, looked back on Hill's ‘fine simplicity of character, and benevolence of spirit’.
With entire responsibility for teaching and discipline, Hill had little time for original work; but his edition (1816) of Artis Logicae Compendium by Henry Aldrich [q.v.]proved an acceptable university textbook, reaching a sixth edition in 1850.
Ordained priest in 1810, Hill officiated as curate of Hampton Gay, becoming perpetual curate in 1814, and faithfully served the little parish until 1851.
In 1811 Hill married Sophia, only daughter of George Warriner, linen-draper of New Bond Street, and of Bloxham Grove, Oxfordshire.
Their house in High Street, Oxford (latterly no. 65), a focus for Evangelicals from near and far, became the centre of an affectionate family life, where between 1812 and 1824 four sons (two dying young) and four daughters were born.
In 1825 and 1827 Hill founded, successively, continuing local associations of the Church Missionary Society and of the Society for Promoting Christianity among the Jews, effectively advancing each as its active secretary until he ceased to reside in the university.
J. H. Newman [q.v.]acted as assistant secretary of the former in 1829 (Journal of Ecclesiastical History , vol. xxi, 1970, pp. 65–74).
By this time Hill had become a recognized Evangelical leader in Oxford.
Francis Newman (q.v., brother of J. H.), an undergraduate at Worcester College in 1822–6, recorded that ‘to young Academicians of the Evangelical school, whatever their College, the Revd.
Mr. Hill was an important standard bearer.
He invited me to not a few tea parties and was very gracious and talked most sociably.’
W. E. Gladstone saw Hill's men as extremely Calvinistic; but conclusive evidence that Hill himself was more than a moderate Calvinist is lacking.
Eight of his earlier pupils, including a Bampton lecturer and a Savilian professor, are represented in this Dictionary , with only one (the notorious Charles Voysey) from later.
In 1844 Hill proceeded BD.
The death of his wife in 1849 was probably a decisive factor in Hill's decision to quit.
Late in 1851 he became rector of Wyke Regis, Dorset, but he was appointed also a city lecturer at St Martin's, Carfax, requiring occasional duty in Oxford.
Amid ‘the affectionate esteem of his parishioners’ he died at his rectory in Wyke Regis 22 February 1855.
A mural tablet in Wyke church commemorates his ministry there and at Oxford.
He was buried in the family vault in St Peter's-in-the-East churchyard, Oxford.
His diaries were presented to St Edmund Hall in 1925.
[J. S. Reynolds,The Evangelicals at Oxford , 1953, 2nd edn., 1975; V. H. H. Green,Religion at Oxford and Cambridge , 1964; J. N. D. Kelly,St. Edmund Hall , 1989;Record , 5 March 1855;Oxford Chronicle , 3 March 1855; M. W. Warriner,The Warriner Family , privately reproduced, 1975; Warriner papers, Warwickshire County Record Office (on loan): letters of J. Hill to G. Warriner junior, 1814–23; Bodleian Library (on loan): MS diaries of J. Hill, 1805–8, 1820–55.]
Ronald M Birse
,Edward Alfred (1819–1893), mechanical engineer, was born in London 10 December 1819, the son of Ann Applegath and her husband Professor Edward Cowper [q.v.], head of the department of engineering at King's College, London, who in partnership with his brother-in-law Augustus Applegath [q.v.]developed an improved newspaper printing-press in 1827.
At the age of fourteen he was apprenticed for seven years to John Braithwaite [q.v.], an eminent locomotive and railway engineer, and while in his service he invented in 1837 the detonating railway fog-signal which was first tried on the Croydon line and has ever since been in universal use as a very valuable safety measure.
In 1841 he joined Messrs Fox & Henderson in Smethwick near Birmingham, where for some time he held the post of chief draughtsman and designer.
While in that capacity he devised an ingenious method of casting railway chairs, and also designed the wrought-iron roof of the New Street Station in Birmingham, which with a span of 211 feet was the largest iron roof at the time of its completion.
In 1846–7 he took a leading part in the foundation of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, and in 1848 he was elected a member of council.
In 1880–1 he served as president of the Institution.
He was elected a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1860, and a member of council in 1879.
At the end of 1851 he left Fox & Henderson to practise on his own account in London as a consulting engineer.
One of his first commissions was to undertake the necessary redesign of the Great Exhibition building (the Crystal Palace) prior to its re-erection in Sydenham in 1852–4.
In 1857 he invented the regenerative hot-blast stove known as the Cowper stove, which greatly improved the economy of the hot-blast process in the making of steel.
The first of these stoves was constructed in 1859, and various improvements were effected in the design up to 1887 both by himself and by his son Charles E. Cowper, whom he took into partnership shortly before his death.
He was also greatly interested in the economy of the steam engine, becoming an ardent advocate of compounding and steam-jacketing.
About the year 1858 he introduced the steam-jacketed receiver which was subsequently known in the navy as ‘Cowper's Hot-Pot’.
Among his many other inventions were a wire-spoke suspension wheel with a rubber tyre (practically the modern bicycle wheel) and the writing-telegraph which was an electro-mechanical precursor of modern facsimile equipment.
He published several papers in the Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers , including ‘An Inverted Arch Suspension Bridge’(1847, p. 1), ‘Blast Engines for the East Indian Iron Company’(1855, p. 154), and ‘Regenerative Hot-Blast Stoves working at a Temperature of 1,300° F’(1860, p. 54).
He died of pneumonia at Rastricke, Pine Grove, Weybridge, 9 May 1893.
He was married and had at least one son.
[Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers , vol. cxiv, pp. 369–72;Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers , 1893, pp. 203–5;The Times , 23 May 1893;Engineering , vol. lv, pp. 712–13.]
E H T Hoblyn
,John William (1871–1931), chemical engineer, was born 21 January 1871 in Grantham, the fourth in the family of nine children of John Hinchley, plough fitter, and his wife Eliza Holland, a worker in a lace factory.
His education was hampered by lack of money but, following a move to Lincoln, he attended Lincoln Grammar School on a scholarship.
Between school hours he earned money cleaning and mending clocks and watches for a local clock-maker.
Leaving school, he became an engineering apprentice with Ruston Proctor & Co.
Ltd. of Lincoln, 1887–90.
At this time he attended, with distinction, Lincoln School of Science.
In 1892 he moved to London and graduated in mining in 1896 at the Royal School of Mines.
Graduation was followed by a difficult period in consulting and his appointment as assayist to the Royal Mint of Bangkok in 1903 was a welcome relief.
He was glad to return from Siam in 1907 when he started consulting again, covering topics as diverse as sherardizing and the manufacture of composition billiard balls.
Another consulting activity which lasted until his death concerned the manufacture of pencils.
It was later that Hinchley became a teacher of chemical engineering, starting in 1909 with an evening course of twenty-five lectures and practical work at Battersea Polytechnic.
He moved to Imperial College in 1911, was appointed assistant professor of chemical engineering in 1917, and elevated to the chair in 1926.
There was a ‘down-to-earth’ element in Hinchley's courses.
His earliest students learned the hard way by helping to erect experimental plant and doing the pipe fitting.
Hinchley's thinking was reflected in his teaching and his methods trained men to work well in the chemical industry of the day.
Parallel with his teaching was Hinchley's concern with professional bodies.
His work led to the formation in 1919 of the chemical engineering group of the Society of Chemical Industry.
This was not enough; he pursued with renewed vigour his ideal of a qualifying body and, following many meetings of kindred enthusiasts, the Institution of Chemical Engineers was incorporated on 21 December 1922, with Hinchley as its first honorary secretary.
One who attended these meetings described Hinchley as ‘an enthusiast, obviously highly strung, quick in thought and rapid in speech, as though his overfilled brain could scarcely get rid of the thoughts and ideas quickly enough — sensitive to a hostile audience but quick to respond to a friendly one’.
A characteristic of Hinchley's life was its balance.
He never allowed the professor or the scientist to overpower the man, and his leisure was as full and useful as his working hours.
In later life his love for seeking that which unites rather than that which divides found full scope in his devotion to Freemasonry, which became the ruling factor of his every action.
Hinchley married Edith Mary, an artist, daughter of a widow, Mrs John Mason, in 1903.
He died in London 13 August 1931.
[Edith M. Hinchley,John William Hinchley, Chemical Engineer , 1935; Institution of Chemical Engineers,Professor Hinchley, Memorial Bulletin , 1931; personal knowledge.]
Godfrey Smith
,(Dominic) Bevan (Wyndham)(1891–1969), writer, was born Llewelyn Bevan Wyndham Lewis 9 March 1891 at 63 Seaforth Road, Seaforth, Litherland, the eldest son of David John Lewis, pharmaceutical chemist of Seaforth, and his wife, Cecelia Agnes Mayer.
He was educated at Cardiff Intermediate (later High) School, where he showed his academic paces, winning four distinctions in the senior honours certificate of the Central Welsh Board at seventeen.
His ambition to read law at Oxford, however, was never fulfilled.
He enlisted as a private in the Welsh Regiment on 1 September 1914, and served with the 11th battalion (‘The Cardiff Pals’) in France, where he was shell-shocked twice, and in Macedonia, where he caught malaria.
He was invalided home in 1918, and demobilized, still a private, at the time of the armistice.
In 1919 he was offered a job by R. D. Blumenfeld [q.v.], editor of the Daily Express .
For six months he was a sub-editor, but then began to write a column for the paper called ‘By the Way’.
He signed it Beachcomber.
He thus pioneered in this country the discursive, witty, exuberant, and surrealist style of humour he bequeathed to his close friend J. B. Morton [q.v.], who took the column over in 1924 and developed it through half a century into an art form.
Lewis meanwhile moved on to the Daily Mail , where till 1930 he wrote a column called ‘At the Sign of the Blue Moon’.
His prolific imagination was never more happily displayed.
Lewis lived much in France, and soaked himself in its history and literature.
After his first book,A London Farrago , appeared in 1921, he published almost annually a volume of satire or humour, but he had a parallel career as a biographer, writing vigorous and scholarly lives of writers like Villon (1928), Ronsard (1944), Rabelais (1957), Molière (1959), and Cervantes (1962); studies of Louis XI (King Spider , 1930), and Charles V (Emperor of the West , 1932).
His life of Boswell (The Hooded Hawk , 1946) vividly displayed his power of conjuring up the past.
He was received into the Catholic Church in 1921 (dropping his first name in favour of Dominic).
It must be added that for all their drive and gusto, his books show a strong Catholic bias (he said he loved ‘all things Catholic, especially the lowly poets and saints, dago culture, Celtic peoples, the mendicant orders and Thomism’).
He also wrote skits, burlesques, and film scenarios, and was an inspired anthologist.
The Stuffed Owl (1930), an anthology of bad verse he compiled with Charles Lee, still gives pleasure.
He returned to the Daily Mail from 1933 to 1936, when he joined the News Chronicle as the columnist Timothy Shy.
He also wrote the ‘Mustard and the Cress’ column in the Sunday Referee from 1930 and was a regular contributor to the Tatler from 1933.
He collaborated with the artist Ronald Searle by writing the text for The Terror of St Trinian's (1952).
He published his last book, on Goya, in 1968.
He was made FRSL in 1947.
Lewis was a leading member of an influential group of Catholic writers who flourished between the wars; Hilaire Belloc, G. K. Chesterton, J. B. Morton, Compton Mackenzie, and Evelyn Waugh [qq.v.].
Many of them used to meet regularly at Shirreff's wine bar under Ludgate Circus where, despite a lifelong stammer, Lewis more than held his own; he was indeed described by Belloc as the wittiest man he had ever known.
It was at one such gathering that he described the venerable French cabaret singer Mistinguette as ‘a rose-red cutie, half as old as time’.
He described himself as ‘impulsive, lazy, easily imposed upon, distinctly Celt, full of strong loves and hates’.
Among the former were wine, France, Spain, the Pyrenees, Elgar, and tradition; among the latter financiers, socialists, bluestockings, officials, and novelty.
He suffered with good humour the misfortune of sharing his name with Percy Wyndham Lewis [q.v.], the Canadian artist.
He was a gentle, courteous, convivial, slightly bemused romantic, born out of his time.
He married in 1918 Winifred Mary (‘Jane’), daughter of David Holland, marine surveyor, of Cardiff.
They had one daughter (the actress Angela Wyndham Lewis).
The marriage ended in 1926, and the same year Jane married the writer J. B. Priestley [q.v.].
Lewis married secondly, in 1933, Dorothy Anne Robertson.
They had two sons.
He died in Altea, Spain, 21 November 1969.
[The Times , 24 and 27 November 1969; Matthew Hoehn (ed.),
Catholic Authors, Contemporary Biographical Sketches, 1930–47 , 1948; Stanley J. Kunitz and Herbert Haycraft,Twentieth Century Authors , 1942; Welsh Regiment Museum, Cardiff; Local Studies Library, Cardiff; private information; personal knowledge.]
L E Sutton
,Samuel (1892–1950), chemist, was born 21 February 1892 at 2 Arthington View, Hunslet, Leeds, the eldest son of Samuel Sugden, a master draper of Leeds who was connected with wool-trade journals, and his wife Eliza Jane Broadbent.
He was educated at Batley Grammar School whence he went to the Royal College of Science in London in 1912.
In 1914 he graduated with first-class honours as an associate.
Because of the outbreak of war he abandoned plans to do research and took an industrial job, but in September 1915 he joined the Royal Army Medical Corps as a private soldier and served with the British Expeditionary Force.
In June 1916 he was released to join the research department at the Royal Arsenal, Woolwich, working under (Sir) Robert Robertson [q.v.].
He prospered there, but in April 1919 he was able to resign to become a lecturer at Birkbeck College, London.
In 1924 he published work on the parachor, a function of surface tension which could give information about the structure of molecules.
This attracted much attention and thereafter his advancement was rapid: in 1928 he was appointed reader and in 1932 professor of physical chemistry at Birkbeck.
He was elected FRS in 1934 and in 1937 he was appointed professor of chemistry at University College London.
In World War II he immediately joined the Ministry of Supply and went to the chemical defence experimental station in Porton, near Salisbury.
He became impatient with the pace of work there, and moreover felt that gas warfare was unlikely to be used, and so he obtained a post as a superintendent of explosives research at the Armament Research Department in 1942.
But here, too, there were soon difficulties and in 1943 he resigned to become scientific adviser to the United States 8th Army Air Force in Great Britain.
Later that year he suffered a breakdown of health following a severe attack of influenza.
In September 1944 he was able to return to his academic duties, but soon after the war ended he was stricken by chronic illness and did relatively little research thereafter.
Though he did very useful work on molecular structure by other means, his main contributions came through his ‘parachor’.
This proved to be an additive function of atomic constants with structural constants in addition.
Unfortunately these constants could not be determined theoretically but only empirically, and eventually this proved to be an unsound basis.
Nevertheless, because it came when the powerful modern methods were in a rudimentary state or were non-existent, Sugden's work was very stimulating.
Indeed, it may well have had the indirect, beneficial effect of encouraging the search for better methods.
He published his major book,The Parachor and Valency , in 1930.
In 1926 Sugden married Eleanor, daughter of Thomas Dunlop of Glasgow.
They had no children.
Sugden died 20 October 1950 at his home in Epsom, Surrey.
[L. E. Sutton in Obituary Notices of Fellows of the Royal Society , vol. vii, no. 20, 1951.]
Sybil Oldfield
,Elisabeth Jesser (1789–1866), anti-slavery activist and founder of Bedford College, was born 25 December 1789 in London, the second of two daughters of William Sturch [q.v.], a wealthy Unitarian ironmonger, and his wife Elisabeth.
In 1821 Elisabeth the daughter married Dr John Reid, physician [q.v.], from a Nonconformist family in Leicester; he died thirteen months later, 2 July 1822.
Mrs Reid used her independent income to practise warm-hearted benevolence and was soon well-known for her ardent altruism, supporting, for example, a scheme of Harriet Martineau [q.v.]to enable poor people in the Lake District to buy their own houses.
She befriended many American abolitionists, including, during the World's Anti-Slavery Convention in London in 1840, American women delegates, such as Lucretia Mott, who were denied the floor of the convention.
In 1853 Mrs Reid gave hospitality to Harriet Beecher Stowe, who had come to England to speak about slavery at private gatherings of women, and in 1860 she shared her home with Sarah Redmond, the first black woman to undertake a public lecture tour in Britain on the slavery question, who later studied at Bedford College.
Elisabeth Reid, together with her friends Anna Jameson [q.v.],
Julia Smith (aunt of Florence Nightingale and Barbara Leigh Smith Bodichon, qq.v.), and Harriet Martineau, form ‘the missing link’ in the history of the self-emancipation of Englishwomen between Mary Wollstonecraft [q.v.]and the Langham Place circle of the late 1850s.
A college for women had been Mrs Reid's dream from childhood, and in 1849 she put up the money to found Bedford College, hoping for hundreds of applications but in fact receiving at first only a few dozen, including those of her own friends.
The college was founded as a radical, even visionary institution, being intended to widen women's culture and thus their whole lives, rather than merely provide vocational training for future governesses.
Unlike its contemporary, Queen's College, Bedford later became part of the University of London, and among its first outstanding students were Barbara Bodichon and George Eliot [q.v.].
One of the college's most innovatory features was the composition of its governing body, which, at Mrs Reid's insistence, included three ‘lady visitors’— the first time that any British institution had women sharing officially in its direction.
Mrs Reid's religion was the love of humanity and she found it hard that the first women's college should win so very little understanding or support at its outset, especially from men.
Even her lifelong friend, Henry Crabb Robinson [q.v.], thought she carried ‘radicalism to a romantic excess’ and had ‘bigoted opinions about female education’, but Julia Smith said of her: ‘Her failures are better than other people's successes.’
She played a vital, pioneering role in opening higher education to British women.
She died 30 March 1866 at 21 York Terrace, London.
She had no children.
[Henry Crabb Robinson,Diary , 1869; Edith Morley,The Life and Times of Henry Crabb Robinson , 1935; Margaret Tuke,A History of Bedford College for Women , 1939; Louis Billington and Rosamund Billington, ‘A Burning Zeal for Righteousness: Women in the British Anti-Slavery Movement, 1820–1860’ in Jane Rendall (ed.),
Equal or Different , 1987.]
Trevor I Williams
,(Johann) Peter (1829–1888), industrial chemist, was born 6 September 1829 in Kirchhosbach, Hesse Cassel, Germany, the son of Heinrich Griess, a farmer and the village blacksmith, of Kirchhosbach.
He studied chemistry at Kassel Polytechnic and then at the universities of Jena and Marburg.
He was an unruly student, noted for his eccentricity of dress, and accumulated large debts which his father had to settle by mortgaging some of his properties.
This seems to have sobered him somewhat and he became an assistant in A. W. H. Kolbe's laboratory in Marburg, but his contract was not renewed.
However, Kolbe relented when Griess approached him again in 1856 after working in a tar distillery in Offenbach, and took him back.
For reasons not apparent he had become a reformed character: he worked diligently and spent long hours in the laboratory.
He so impressed Kolbe that when the great German chemist, A. W. von Hofmann, professor at the Royal College of Chemistry in London, visited Marburg in 1858 he recommended Griess for a position in Hofmann's laboratory.
To support his recommendation Kolbe provided Hofmann with the latest (April 1858) edition of Liebig's Annalen der Chemie .
This included a paper by Griess entitled ‘A Preliminary Notice on the Influence of Nitrous Acid on Aminonitro- and Aminodinitrophenol’.
Hofmann realized that he had discovered a new and versatile chemical reaction which could provide a route to a wide range of new compounds.
Griess was duly invited to London (1858) and Hofmann commissioned him to explore the possibilities of his new diazo compounds.
The results of his experiments were published in a series of papers in the Annalen over the years 1860–6, entitled ‘On a New Class of Organic Compounds in which Hydrogen is Replaced by Nitrogen’.
For the latter part of this period Griess was no longer in London.
While with Hofmann he had so successfully completed an investigation for Allsopps & Sons of Burton-on-Trent that they offered him an appointment as chemist at the brewery.
This he accepted in 1862 and remained there for the rest of his life, being left free to pursue his own research.
In 1864 he discovered a further variant of his diazo reaction, known as coupling.
In this the diazo compounds were linked with phenol or an aromatic amine, thereby forming intensely coloured compounds.
Thus were born the azo dyestuffs, perhaps the greatest single discovery in the history of the dyestuffs industry.
Griess played little part in the industrial exploitation of these dyes — his few patents were not lucrative — though he published a further series of papers on ‘New Investigations of the Diazo Compounds’.
In 1884 he lodged a patent for the first direct cotton dye: that is, a dye requiring no mordant.
The originality of his research was recognized by his election as FRS in 1868.
In 1869 he married Louise Ann (died 1886), daughter of William Mason, medical officer of health for Burton-on-Trent.
They had two sons and two daughters.
In the summer of 1888 he took his family on holiday to Bournemouth and there died of a heart attack, 30 August 1888, frustrating his desire to retire to Kirchhosbach when his children's education was complete.
[E. Fischer,Berichte der Deutschen Chemischen Gesellschaft , vol. xxiv, 1891, pp. 1007–78; V. Heines, ‘Peter Griess — Discoverer of Diazo Compounds’,Journal of Chemical Education , vol. xxxv, 1958, pp. 187–91.]
Arthur G Credland
,William (1727–1793), master mariner and merchant, of Kirk Ella, East Riding of Yorkshire, was born in 1727, the son of Anthony Hammond (1696–1759) and his wife Mary Hayes.
He was accepted as a younger brother of the Hull Trinity House in 1749, eventually becoming an elder brother and three times warden, 1779, 1785, and 1792.
As a representative of the house he regularly attended sessions of the House of Commons during the passage of the Spurn Lights Act of 1766.
In November 1771 he sold to the Admiralty two vessels constructed at Whitby which, renamed Resolution and Adventure , were fitted out for the second great voyage of discovery (1772–5) of Commander (later Captain) James Cook [q.v.].
The two men were reputedly friends and these sturdy cat-built vessels were of a type familiar to Cook from his earliest days at sea, apprenticed to a Whitby shipmaster.
Hammond represented Trinity House, in close co-operation with David Hartley [q.v.],
MP for Hull, during the course of the Hull Dock Act of 1774.
As chairman of the Hull Dock Company Hammond superintended the creation of the town's first enclosed dock, which opened for shipping in 1778.
While sheriff of Hull in 1785 he headed a committee set up by the Hull Trinity House to found a navigation school, an establishment which celebrated its bicentenary in 1987.
Hammond married Ann Bean, of York (died 1785).
They had twelve children.
Hammond died 26 June 1793 in Kirk Ella and was buried at Welton near Hull.
His son George [q.v.]was secretary to David Hartley MP and at twenty-eight became the first British resident minister in Washington, USA (1791–5), and was later under-secretary for foreign affairs.
His grandson Edmund [q.v.]became Baron Hammond and was appointed an honorary brother of Hull Trinity House, thus renewing the family link with this institution.
[Arthur Storey,Trinity House of Kingston upon Hull , 2 vols., 1967, 1969; Dennis Thompson,A History of Hull Trinity House School , 1988; archives of the Whitby Museum and Hull Trinity House.]
Brian Harrison
,(Christina) Violet (1884–1982), pioneer of social-work training, was born 25 January 1884 at 14 Norham Gardens, Oxford, the youngest child in the family of one son and three daughters of Arthur Gray Butler [q.v.], first headmaster of Haileybury and fellow of Oriel College, Oxford, and his wife Harriet Jessie, daughter of M. Pakenham Edgeworth, botanist and Indian civil servant, and niece of Maria Edgeworth [q.v.].
With Josephine Butler [q.v.]for an aunt, and with so many relatives in literary, philanthropic, and educational circles, Violet was almost predestined to a life of social service.
Deeply fond of her parents, she was educated at home until aged fourteen.
She then went to Wycombe Abbey, left at seventeen and took a first in modern history from the Society of Home Students (later St Anne's College) in Oxford in 1905.
Equipped with a knowledge of four languages, she was the first woman to get a distinction in the diploma in economics and political science, and then took a teaching diploma at London University.
Social work came naturally to an intelligent unmarried Edwardian middle-class young woman, especially when her mother visited the local workhouse once a week for half a century and when her elder sister Olive was the warden of the Lady Margaret Hall settlement in Lambeth.
Besides, Violet admired the sense of civic duty that inspired seven women who were then prominent in Oxford for their voluntary social work: an older trio consisting of Mrs T. H. Green, Mrs A. H. Johnson, and Mrs A. Toynbee, and a quartet who were Violet's near-contemporaries — Mrs H. A. Prichard, Mrs A. L. Smith, Mrs J. Wells, and her much-loved former tutor in economics, Mrs H. A. L. Fisher.
A lifelong member of the Oxford Cottage Improvement Society, Violet Butler joined the Charity Organization Society's local branch, and her links with the Christian Social Union encouraged in her the unsectarian broad-church outlook that was taken for granted within a family so deeply influenced by Thomas Arnold, T. H. Green, and Henry Scott Holland [qq.v.].
Throughout her life she operated on the fruitful margin that arbitrarily separates the statutory from the voluntary body.
Her Social Conditions in Oxford (1912) grew out of her three earlier local preoccupations: housing reform, getting adolescents into skilled work, and (through the Women's Industrial Council) extending women's job opportunities.
It was one of several provincial surveys (of Norwich and Cambridge, for example) inspired by the work of Benjamin Seebohm Rowntree [q.v.]whose Poverty: a Study of Town Life appeared in 1901.
Family connections gave her an inside view of Oxford's local government, and hers is the best account of it in all the surveys.
Suffused with a sense of history, precise yet pragmatic in mood, the book's readability gains from its author's gentle sense of irony, and exemplifies an Edwardian affinity between literature and ‘social science’ that has since been lost.
It also displays the combination of intellectual curiosity, affectionate interest in human nature, and down-to-earth practicality that the Charity Organization Society so often encouraged.
The book gave her the academic credentials she needed, and from 1914 to 1945 she combined her local social work with acting as tutor in economics at St Anne's and tutor-secretary (1914–19) for women students at Barnett House, Oxford's centre for training in social work.
From 1919 to 1948 she was secretary for social training there, and later published privately a booklet on its history.
Barnett House's union of social thought and social action admirably suited her temperament.
After 1914 she concentrated on teaching, but she found time to compile an attitude survey, the Women's Industrial Council report on Domestic Service (1916), and her pamphlet on Village Survey-Making (1929) encouraged country schools to hunt out information about the past and present of their localities.
Selfless, retiring, and personally somewhat disorganized, she founded her influence on friendships.
Her determination sometimes degenerated into obstinacy, but her gentle wit and bright eyes softened the impact, and she came to seem the embodiment of practical Christianity.
Subtly combining progressive and conservative attitudes, she was cautious in her feminism and rather regretted her college's gradual evolution into an ordinary undergraduate college.
She remained active and intellectually alert until well into her eighties, a much-loved figure who was often seen cycling about in north Oxford on her many errands, still pursuing her Edwardian aim of using friendly personal contact to draw together paid and voluntary welfare worker, town and gown, rich and poor.
She died in Oxford 19 May 1982.
[The Times , 26 May 1982; B. Harrison, ‘Miss Butler's Oxford Survey’, in Traditions of Social Policy: essays in Honour of Violet Butler , 1976 (ed.
A. H. Halsey); private information; personal knowledge.]
Ronald M Birse
, Sir John Audley Frederick (1851–1937), mechanical engineer, was born in Liverpool 25 August 1851, the second of three sons (there was also a daughter) of John Bridge Aspinall, QC, who was latterly the recorder of the city of Liverpool, and his wife Bertha Wyatt, daughter of John Audley Jee, merchant of Mount Vernon, Liverpool, and descendant of the inventor John Wyatt [q.v.].
He was educated at Beaumont College, Berkshire, and in 1868 became a pupil of John Ramsbottom [q.v.]and later F. W. Webb [q.v.]in the locomotive works of the London and North Western Railway at Crewe.
At the end of his pupillage in 1872 he was sent to the United States to study developments in railways and steel-making, and on his return became assistant manager of the steelworks at Crewe.
In 1875 he moved to the Great Southern and Western Railway of Ireland as the works manager and assistant locomotive superintendent at Inchicore near Dublin, where he was responsible for making improvements to the automatic vacuum brake.
In 1886 he was invited to become the chief mechanical engineer of the Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway, for whom he completed, equipped, and organized the engineering workshops in Horwich, widely regarded as a model of their kind, eventually employing over 10,000 men.
In 1899 the company took the unusual step of appointing him general manager, a tribute to his administrative as well as engineering abilities.
He succeeded in reversing the downward trend of the railway's fortunes, countering the advance of electric trams by introducing electric traction on suburban railway lines such as Liverpool to Southport, one of the earliest main-line electrification schemes in the country, completed in 1904.
He also built up the railway's fleet of passenger and cargo ships sailing to Ireland and the Continent from Goole, Fleetwood, and Liverpool; by 1914 it was the largest of any of the British railway companies.
For his work at Horwich in World War I he was knighted in 1917.
He retired from his position as general manager in 1919 and was appointed a director of the company, but resigned later in the same year on his appointment as consulting mechanical engineer to the newly formed Ministry of Transport, a position he held until 1927.
Throughout this time he took a keen personal interest in the education of young engineers, especially in the Horwich Mechanics' Institute, which he founded in 1888.
In 1902 he was appointed associate professor of railway engineering at the University of Liverpool, and from 1908 to 1915 he acted as chairman of the faculty of engineering.
Among many professional distinctions were his presidencies of the Institutions of Mechanical Engineers (1909) and Civil Engineers (1919), and the (Smeatonian) Society of Civil Engineers (1931).
In 1936 he was awarded the James Watt medal of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers for his outstanding contributions to the advance of mechanical engineering.
In 1874 he married Gertrude Helen (died 1921), daughter of Francis B. Schräder of Liverpool.
They had one son and three daughters; their son, John Bridge Aspinall, became a QC, as did his grandfather of the same name, and he was for five years the city remembrancer until his early death in 1932.
Aspinall died in Woking 19 January 1937.
[H. A. V. Bulleid,The Aspinall Era , 1967; John Marshall,A Biographical Dictionary of Railway Engineers , 1978; D. J. Jeremy (ed.),
Dictionary of Business Biography , vol. i, 1985;Engineering , vol. cxliii, p. 116.]
A Sarah Bendall
,Thomas (fl. 1589–1638), land surveyor, was certainly practising by 1589 and possibly a year or two earlier.
He had a brother (Vallence), a sister (who married Thomas Patchet), and a relative of the same name (who was living at the George Yard, Lambeth, in 1638).
He was educated at New College, Oxford, and proceeded to the degree of BCL in 1599, having become MA and studied civil law for three years.
He probably learned his surveying skills from the land surveyor, Thomas Clerke, to whom he was assistant by 1589, and possibly in 1587, and continued as such until Clerke's death in 1602.
Langdon's career as one of the leading land surveyors and map-makers of his time spanned about thirty years, and flourished as landowners were coming to appreciate the value of maps both as tools of estate management and as decorative objects of prestige.
Several Oxford colleges were taking greater interest in their estates and their profitable management, and Langdon surveyed land over all England for them.
He succeeded his former master as surveyor to the estates of All Souls College, Oxford, and continued in the college's employment until 1605.
In 1600–1 he was paid for surveying for New College, while in 1602 he mapped the Cambridgeshire estates of Merton College, and in 1607 he surveyed an estate in Leicestershire for Brasenose College.
Corpus Christi College employed him too, from 1605 to 1607, in 1609, and from 1615 to 1616; in his third period of working for the college he was assisted by a pupil, Henry Wilcocke.
Langdon was employed not only by Oxford colleges but also by private individuals, including Sir Thomas Cecil and Sir John Byron.
His last known employment as a surveyor was by the London Charterhouse, whose estates in Cambridgeshire and Wiltshire he surveyed from 1616 to 1618.
Langdon's maps, drawn of estates in about fifteen counties, are distinctive and their embellishments with Elizabethan strapwork ornamentation show his skills as an artist and draughtsman.
Langdon became curate of Tithby in Nottinghamshire, probably in 1603, and remained there until his death.
Langdon married Joan Sharples on 3 February 1606 in Langar, Nottinghamshire, and she survived him.
By his will, made on 1 March 1638 and proved on 11 October 1638, Langdon left his surveying instruments to his son-in-law, George Darker, who may therefore have been his apprentice or assistant.
Langdon's daughter, Rosamund, married Darker at St Peter's church, Nottingham, on 3 July 1630.
[Peter Eden, ‘Three Elizabethan Estate Surveyors’, in Sarah Tyacke (ed.),
English Map-making 1500–1650 , 1983, pp. 68–84; Peter Eden (ed.),
Dictionary of Land Surveyors and Local Cartographers of Great Britain and Ireland c.1540–1850 , 2nd edn. by A. Sarah Bendall, 1992; J. L. G. Mowat,Sixteen Old Maps of Properties in Oxfordshire (with one in Berkshire), 1888; C. M. Woolgar, ‘Some Draft Estate Maps of the Early Seventeenth Century’,Cartographic Journal , vol. xxii, 1985, pp. 136–43.]
Alan Luff
,John (1826–1893), hymn writer, was born 16 December 1826 in Clerkenwell, London, the elder son (there were no daughters) of George Ellerton, of private means, who came from a Yorkshire family, and his wife Jemima Frances, short-story writer.
His early schooling in London was private.
In 1838 his father inherited a small property in Ulverston in the Furness peninsula, Lancashire, and from there John attended King William's College, Isle of Man.
In 1844 his father and younger brother died: his mother devoted her life thereafter to John and shared his home for twenty years.
After a year's study with the Revd C. Hodgson at Brathay Vicarage, Ambleside, he entered Trinity College, Cambridge in 1845, where he began a lifelong friendship with Henry Bradshaw and Dr Fenton Hort [qq.v.], and came under the influence of the writings of F. D. Maurice [q.v.].
In 1848 he came second in the Chancellor's medal competition with a poem ‘The Death of Baldur’.
Illness prevented him from sitting the honours examinations and he received an aegrotat in 1849, after which he spent a year in Scotland reading for holy orders.
He was ordained deacon in Chichester in 1850 and served his first curacy in Easebourne, where he studied the writings of the Christian Socialist movement, in particular those of Charles Kingsley [q.v.].
He was ordained priest in 1851.
In 1852 Ellerton moved to be senior curate at Brighton parish church, and to hold the evening lectureship at the chapel of ease, St Peter's.
In 1859 he compiled Hymns for Schools and Bible Classes , in which a number of his own hymn texts were published.
In 1860 Ellerton became incumbent of the newly built church of St Michael and All Angels, Crewe Green, and domestic chaplain to Lord Crewe.
He pursued his social concerns through his work at the London and North Western Railway Company's Mechanics' Institution in Crewe.
He wrote many hymns and hymn translations in these years, and in 1863 the headmaster of Shrewsbury School consulted him when compiling Hymnologia Christiana .
In 1871 he joined the group working on Church Hymns with W. Walsham How [q.v.].
In 1872 Ellerton was appointed rector of Hinstock, Shropshire, where he began the research for Notes and Illustrations of Church Hymns (1881) and to compile with W. Walsham How Children's Hymns and School Prayers (1874).
In 1876 he was appointed rector of Barnes, a suburb of London.
He assisted Mrs Carey Brock in the production of her Children's Hymnbook (1881).
In 1878 he joined the tract committee of the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, for which he edited the Manual of Parochial Work (1888, revised edn. 1892).
In 1884 he was co-editor of the London Mission Hymn Book with W. Walsham How and Edward H. Bickersteth, bishop of Exeter [q.v.].
Sickness that year forced his resignation.
After convalescence abroad in 1885 he became incumbent of White Roding, Essex, and was invited to serve as consultant on a supplement to Hymns Ancient and Modern , published in 1889.
The original book had contained thirteen of his hymns: the supplement contained a further thirteen.
In 1888 he published a definitive edition of his own texts in Hymns Original and Translated .
A number of his hymns remain in almost all hymn-books in English.
They are distinguished by a sensitive use of imagery and a firm construction.
The two most widely used are ‘Saviour, again to thy dear name we raise’(1866), and his masterpiece ‘The day thou gavest, Lord, is ended’(1870, revised 1871).
He married in 1860 Charlotte Alicia (died 1896), daughter of William Hart, of Brighton.
They had seven children.
Following a second stroke in 1892 he retired, and he died 15 June 1893 in Torquay.
[Henry Housman,John Ellerton , 1896; John Julian,Dictionary of Hymnology , revised edn., 1907; J. R. Watson, ‘The day thou gavest’,Bulletin of the Hymn Society of Great Britain and Ireland , vol. x, no. 158, 1983, p. 144; B. Braley,Hymnwriters 1 , 1987.]
John Harvey
(fl. 1235–1257), master mason of Lincoln, son of Odo of Newport in Lincoln, was a colleague of Master Gilbert de Burgo at Lincoln Minster c .1235.
In charge of works after the collapse of the central tower in 1237–9 he remained chief master at least until Christmas 1257, described as ‘cementarius magister operis’ and ‘magister fabrice’.
He had died by 1270.
With his wife Thecia he had taken houses in Pottergate, Lincoln, on a repairing lease from c .1245–8, with rights of inheritance.
One daughter, Maud, became a nun of St Michael's in Stamford, leaving her sister Thecia, wife of Laurence of Ingilby, heiress to this property, for which she did fealty in 1293.
Alexander was also concerned with the conveyance of lands at Fillingham, Lincolnshire, to the fabric fund of the cathedral.
Alexander's career as an architect depends largely on stylistic evidence from Lincoln Cathedral itself and also from close links with work at Worcester Cathedral of rather earlier date.
At Worcester also the master mason between 1224 and 1240 was named Alexander, and the new choir of that time shows remarkable similarities to the nave of Lincoln (C. M. Girdlestone in Archaeological Journal , vol. cii, 1945–7, pp. 111 ff.).
Furthermore, the transference from Worcester to Lincoln of the concept of a ten-bayed concentric chapter house took place about 1225.
After the fall of the Lincoln tower, the rebuilding of the crossing and the lower stages of the new tower were directed by Alexander, with the Gothic lateral turrets and upper part of the enlarged west front.
These, with the rebuilt parts of the nave and its vault, the first to employ lierne ribs, were the work of one designer.
The use in these works of an unusual form of surface trellis indicates that Alexander was also the architect of the great parochial towers in Grantham and in Newark-upon-Trent, Outside the circle of architects to the Crown, Alexander was one of the most significant masters of the mid-thirteenth century, and his Lincoln vault (copied at Ely before 1250) was the source of future development.
[J. Harvey,English Mediaeval Architects , 1984.]
J P Ferris
, Sir William (1562–1637), politician, was born 5 March 1562, the only child of Richard Strode, landowner, of Newnham, Devon, where the family were established by the reign of Edward I, and his wife Frances Cromwell.
Educated at the Inner Temple, he became a friend of Sir Francis Drake and Sir Walter Ralegh [qq.v.], and commanded the local stannary regiment during the Armada campaign of 1588.
His family had regularly provided MPs for the adjacent borough of Plympton Erle since 1437; but in 1597 he became the first to represent the county.
Knighted by the queen in the following year, he was appointed surveyor of Crown lands in Devon for life, and sat for local constituencies in the next seven Parliaments.
In 1604 he complained that courtiers and officials in the House were giving information to the king about its proceedings, and he endeavoured to revive the unrepentant Apology of the Commons.
But he later acted as agent for the chief minister, Robert Cecil, first Earl of Salisbury [q.v.], over private bills, and supported the great contract to put government finances on a sounder footing.
A strong Calvinist, he was never a friend to the episcopate, and moved the cessation of business in response to the accusation of seditious speeches made by Bishop Richard Neile [q.v.], once Salisbury's chaplain, against the Commons in 1614.
In 1621 he showed that he could rise above class interests by calling for an abatement of rents during the depression and the exemption of the poor from taxation.
Nor did his investment in the Virginia Company prevent him from advocating a total ban on tobacco imports.
He was conciliatory towards the Lords over jurisdiction and towards the Crown over prerogative.
By 1624 he had probably become a client of George Villiers, first Duke of Buckingham [q.v.], speaking strongly in favour of war with Spain, and in 1625 he was reported ‘never out of my lord duke's chamber and bosom’.
He failed to find a seat at the next general election, but came in for the family borough a few weeks later, and acted as teller against his patron's impeachment.
When Sir Dudley Digges and Sir John Eliot [qq.v.]were arrested for accusing Buckingham of murdering King James, the mildness of Strode's reaction to this breach of privilege terminated his parliamentary career.
Strode married 15 July 1581 Mary, daughter of Thomas Southcote of Shillingford, Devon.
Of their three sons, the eldest, Sir Richard, became a Baptist and married the sister of Sir Walter Erle [q.v.], while the second, William [q.v.], achieved celebrity as a radical politician.
Their seven daughters all married into prominent Devonshire families, two of them to baronets and four to knights.
Strode married a second wife, Dennes, daughter of Stephen Vosper of Liskeard, Cornwall, on 31 March 1624; but she died without issue in 1635.
Strode's last public action was to sign a protest against ship money.
He was buried at Plympton St Mary 28 January 1637.
[P. W. Hasler (ed.),
The House of Commons 1558–1603 , 1981; T. M. Venning, ‘Sir William Strode’(typescript draft for the History of Parliament); R. Lockyer,Buckingham , 1981.]
Peter Leach
,George (1797–1864), architect, was born in Cartmel, Lancashire, 3 May 1797, the second of the three sons and third of the seven children of Francis Webster, mason, builder, and architect of Kendal, Westmorland, and his first wife Janet, daughter of George Slater, yeoman of Kirkby Lonsdale in the same county.
Where he received his training is not known — an apprenticeship in a professional architect's office away from Kendal seems likely — but as he did not attend the Royal Academy Schools it was probably elsewhere in the north rather than in London.
Returning to become a partner in his father's business, he designed his first recorded work, Read Hall near Whalley, Lancashire, in 1818 at the age of twenty-one and quickly appears to have become the principal architect member of the firm, evidently leaving his father to concentrate on the production of marble chimney-pieces and funerary monuments, which were his speciality.
Thereafter during the 1820s and 1830s he greatly expanded the firm's architectural side — following his father's death in 1827 he devoted his time entirely to architecture, leaving the management of the marble works to his younger brother Francis — and established a substantial practice in the north-west and the adjacent parts of Yorkshire.
Most of Webster's early works, including Read Hall, Helme Lodge near Kendal (1824), and the Kendal assembly rooms (later town hall, 1825–7), are in an orthodox neo-classical manner, but his principal contribution was as a pioneer in the scholarly revival of the Jacobean style.
Two of his country houses, Eshton Hall, Yorkshire (1825–7), and Underley Hall near Kirkby Lonsdale (1825–8), are amongst the very earliest examples of this idiom, as well as being notably accomplished productions which were singled out for praise in Specimens of the Details of Elizabethan Architecture (1839), by Henry Shaw [q.v.].
Subsequent examples included Moreton Hall, Whalley (1829, demolished), while a further dimension of his work was the occasional introduction of details of a localized vernacular derivation — as in his unexecuted designs for a house in Rydal, Westmorland, for William Wordsworth [q.v.](1827) which incorporated the cylindrical chimneys characteristic of traditional building in the Lake District.
From the early 1820s onwards he also designed a number of churches in a conventional Gothic style, but in some of his later works, such as his alterations to Broughton Hall, Yorkshire (1838–41) and Flasby Hall, Yorkshire (1840) he experimented with the picturesque Italianate manner.
In 1845 Webster took into partnership his assistant Miles Thompson, who had been with the firm since the 1820s, and shortly after that he virtually retired from active business.
From 1836 he visited Italy on more than one occasion, but these travels appear to have been prompted more by recreational than professional pursuits — he made a collection of Roman coins, medals, and other antiquities — and perhaps also by the state of his health.
In 1829–30, like his father before him, he served as mayor of Kendal, and in addition to the house he had built for himself in the town (c .1823) he had a country property in Lindale, Lancashire, which he inherited from his father, and he later built an occasional residence in nearby Grange-over-Sands.
In 1827 he married Eleanor, daughter of George Lowrey of Ulverston, Lancashire: they had one son and four daughters, of whom one died young.
Webster died 16 April 1864 and was buried in Lindale.
[H. M. Colvin,A Biographical Dictionary of British Architects 1600–1840 , 1978; Rupert Gunnis,Dictionary of British Sculptors 1660–1851 , 1953; J. P. Haworth and A. C. Taylor,The Websters of Kendal , exhibition catalogue, Abbot Hall, Kendal, 1973.]
Christopher Lloyd
,Alfred (1839–1899), painter, was born in Paris 30 October 1839, into a family of Anglo-French descent, the younger son and second of four children of William Sisley, director of a firm manufacturing artificial flowers, and his wife and cousin Felicia Sell, daughter of a saddler from Lydd, Kent.
He was educated in Paris.
Sisley retained the British nationality inherited from his father throughout his life, although he made two unsuccessful attempts in 1888 and 1898 to become a naturalized French citizen.
He lived in France all his life and, apart from three years spent in London (1857–61) training for a business career, only visited Britain for short painting expeditions on three other occasions in 1874, 1881, and 1897.
In 1862 he entered the atelier of Charles Gleyre in Paris.
He then moved out of Paris and lived in villages near the river Seine to the west of Paris — Louveciennes, Marly-le-Roi, and Sèvres — but in 1880 he returned to the area south-east of the forest of Fontainebleau, where he had first painted during the 1860s, and lived in a series of villages near the confluence of the rivers Loing and Seine — Veneux-Nadon, Les Sablons, and Moret-sur-Loing.
These movements are significant for an understanding of Sisley's work.
Sisley was an Impressionist painter and exhibited in five of the eight Impressionist exhibitions held at irregular intervals between 1874 and 1886.
Neither during his lifetime nor subsequently did Sisley's paintings achieve the popularity of those of Monet, Renoir, or even Camille Pissarro, with all of whom he helped to forge the Impressionist style.
Consequently, he experienced considerable financial hardship which was exacerbated towards the end of his life by illness.
For sales he relied upon dealers in Paris like Paul Durand-Ruel, Georges Petit, and Goupil Boussod-Valadon, as well as upon a small group of patrons such as Félix François Depeaux of Rouen, but financial success eluded him.
Sisley was principally a landscape painter and there are very few still lifes or portraits in an oeuvre that amounts to some 900 pictures.
Drawings and prints by his hand are limited in number, although he was an able practitioner in pastel, which he began to use during the 1880s and 1890s.
Several of Sisley's early paintings dating from the second half of the 1860s were accepted for display in the official Salon, but during the 1870s he began to paint in a fully fledged Impressionist style characterized by pure colours applied with broken brush strokes and bright light.
Several of his finest works date from these years.
Like many of the Impressionists, Sisley experienced stylistic difficulties towards the end of the 1870s, but he remained faithful to the technique of Impressionism.
His landscapes are notable for the broad, low horizons, expansive skies, fugitive effects of light, vibrant colours (blue, violet, yellow, red), and rhythmical brushwork.
Sisley often painted motifs in series, notably the church at Moret-sur-Loing in 1893 and 1894, inspired by Monet's views of the façade of Rouen cathedral.
During the last two decades of his life Sisley remained independent, although not unaware, of developments in Paris.
His work retained a pronounced individuality and originality that has yet to be properly acknowledged.
In 1866 Sisley married Marie Lescouezec.
They had one son and one daughter.
Sisley died of cancer of the throat in Moret-sur-Loing 29 January 1899.
[C. Sisley, ‘The Ancestry of Alfred Sisley’,Burlington Magazine , vol. xci, 1949; F. Daulte,Alfred Sisley.
Catalogue raisonné de l'oeuvre peint , 1959; J. Rewald,The History of Impressionism , 4th revised edn., 1973; R. Shone,Sisley , 1979; J. Lassaigne and S. Gache-Patin,Alfred Sisley , 1983.]
G E Aylmer
, Sir Robert (1585–1662), politician and revenue official, was the second of the five sons of William Pye of the Mynde, Herefordshire, near the famous Romanesque church of Kilpeck.
(For Pye's elder brother, Sir Walter, and his own son and heir, Sir Robert, qq.v.).
He did not go to university but entered the Middle Temple in 1607.
At some date between 1615 and 1618, together with his brother, he joined the service of George Villiers (later first Duke of Buckingham, q.v.).
In March 1617 he was granted the profit on the extra import duty levied on the goods of foreign merchants entering the country (a kind of revenue farm), in place of Lionel Cranfield (later Earl of Middlesex, q.v.), who was moving on to higher things.
Their paths were to cross and recross in the years ahead.
In April 1618 Pye became co-grantee of a minor but potentially profitable office in Chancery — presumably granted by the lord chancellor, Francis Bacon (later Viscount St Albans, q.v.), to gratify Buckingham.
But the decisive advance in Pye's prospects came with the disgrace and dismissal in 1619 of the lord treasurer Thomas Howard, first Earl of Suffolk [q.v.]and his henchman Sir John Bingley.
He succeeded the latter as auditor of the exchequer of receipt and writer of tallies.
Successive holders of this post and of the clerkship of the pells, which had overlapping duties, had been at odds during the previous reign.
Their relative importance was partly a matter of administrative procedures, but perhaps even more of the personality and political connections of their respective holders.
In any case the auditorship was a lucrative office.
Pye was knighted in 1621.
By the early 1620s he was able to acquire an estate at Faringdon in Berkshire, the manor house then comprising the castle.
The potential conflict between his financial responsibilities as a royal office-holder and his obligations as a servant or client of the Villiers interest emerged openly in the Parliaments of 1624–6.
In the last Parliament of King James's reign, the second in which Pye was a member, he turned against his old colleague and now chief, Lord Treasurer Middlesex (as Cranfield had become), who was the victim of the new alliance between Buckingham and the Commons' majority in favour of war against Spain.
The auditor appeared as one of the witnesses in the lord treasurer's impeachment.
In the first two Parliaments of Charles I Pye defended his master, as in turn relations worsened between the Commons and Buckingham, although in 1627 Sir James Whitelocke [q.v.]privately praised Pye's conduct in connection with his disapproval of the then lord treasurer.
In 1628, when his colleague, the senior revenue auditor of the Upper Exchequer, was savagely attacked, expelled from the House, and committed to the Tower, Pye's defence of Buckingham was limited to assuring the Commons that it was the favourite's mother and not his wife who was a recusant Catholic.
Otherwise he spoke more on financial technicalities.
He was, however, to be extremely active in his capacity as an executor after Buckingham's assassination.
Indeed, as late as 1638 the lord deputy, Sir Thomas Wentworth (later first Earl of Strafford, q.v.), was strongly critical of him for putting the interests of the Villiers family before those of the Crown, in connection with the Irish customs revenues.
As against this, Pye seems to have worked hard, or got others to do so, in preparing the revenue and expenditure balances and averages of 1635 (covering the years from 1631) and of 1636–9; and he appears to have set about the same process for the reconstructed administration of 1641.
Pye's very lukewarm support for the parliamentarian side in the civil war may seem to have owed more to his determination to retain his office than to any principled convictions.
More than once only his connections by marriage with John Hampden [q.v.]saved him from very serious trouble.
None the less the king did summon the officers of the Exchequer to join him in Oxford; Pye's colleague, who was also his ‘comptroller’ and administrative rival, the clerk of the pells, obeyed this call.
So there were two lower exchequers of receipt, in Westminster and in Oxford, during the years 1643–6, although a large proportion of Parliament's revenues came in through various ad hoc treasuries in the City of London, bypassing the Exchequer altogether.
Pye's own estate lay in disputed territory which changed hands at least twice.
Having been captured by the Cavaliers, Faringdon Castle was virtually destroyed in a siege by Pye's own party.
More positive evidence for his religious commitment is found in his membership (with his boyhood Herefordshire neighbour, Sir Robert Harley, q.v.) of a small committee to oversee the destruction of crucifixes and images in the captured royal regalia.
Not surprisingly, Pye was among the members secluded at Pride's Purge (December 1648).
His record as an MP, especially in the Long Parliament (1640–8) suggests someone extremely active, and useful to the House, but not of major political importance.
He seems to have taken no part in public life under the Commonwealth, but when the Exchequer was re-established under the Protectorate he failed to regain his old post as auditor, having to wait for this until the Restoration, when he protested, perhaps predictably, that he had never really been a parliamentarian at all.
His career epitomizes the interactions between the obligations of patron and client and the public service under the old administrative system.
Pye married Mary, second daughter and co-heir of John Croker Esq.
of Baltisford, Gloucestershire.
They had four daughters and three sons, one of whom, Robert, was created a baronet in 1664–5.
Pye's will suggests considerable affluence but not vast wealth; he died in Westminster 20 May 1662.
[G. E. Aylmer,The King's Servants , 1961 and 1974;idem , ‘The Officers of the Exchequer, 1625–1642’, in F. J. Fisher (ed.),
Essays in the Economic and Social History of Tudor and Stuart England, presented to R. H. Tawney , 1961;idem ,The State's Servants , 1973; History of Parliament Trust, work in progress on 1604–29 and 1640–60.]
Clive Wainwright
,George (1782/3–1818), sculptor, designer, and cabinet-maker, was born in 1782 or 1783, the son of Elizabeth Bullock, the owner of a travelling waxworks.
His brother William Bullock [q.v.]became an artist, naturalist, explorer, and museum proprietor.
Nothing is known of his early life, but by March 1797 ‘Mrs Bullock and Son’ were conducting modelling and drawing lessons at their ‘Modelling and Statuary Warehouse’, 29 Bull Street, Birmingham.
On 16 September 1799 Bullock advertised as a ‘modeller in rice paste’ at 12 Ann Street, Birmingham.
He remained in Birmingham until 1801.
His brother William, who had started a ‘cabinet of curiosities’ in Birmingham in 1800, moved to Liverpool in 1801 and opened a museum.
George moved to Liverpool and produced his first documented work, a wax portrait relief of Henry Blundell [q.v.]of Ince, the connoisseur and sculpture collector.
This is signed ‘G. Bullock 1801’.
Bullock worked as a sculptor, showing six busts at the Royal Academy in London in 1804.
In 1804–5 he was in partnership with William Stoakes as general furnishers and marble workers and in 1809–10 with the architect J. M. Gandy [q.v.]as ‘architects, modellers, sculptors, marble masons, cabinet-makers and upholsterers’.
By 1806 he had purchased ‘some marble quarries containing two beds of rocks, the one resembling, in colour and effect, the Oriental porphyry, and the other the verd antique ’.
This was on the isle of Anglesey and Bullock, using the ancient Welsh name as a clever marketing ploy, began to sell his ‘Mona marble’.
At this time of war continental marbles were hard to obtain and his chimney pieces and marble tops for furniture sold very well.
Capitalizing on this patriotic British theme he soon manufactured furniture made of native woods and decorated with elaborate brass inlay based upon native plants, depicting hops, for instance, instead of grapes.
He provided the furniture and marble fittings for a number of houses, including Cholmondeley Castle in Cheshire, Storrs Hall in Westmorland, and Hafod in Wales.
In 1809 William Bullock moved to London and in 1812 George sold up and joined him at the Egyptian Hall in Piccadilly.
In 1813 he formed a partnership with Charles Fraser, a colonel in the East India Company's service, as ‘upholder, cabinet-maker and marble mason’.
This probably brought the injection of capital needed to establish extensive cabinet-making and marble-working workshops.
They leased a grand house at 4 Tenterden Street, just off Hanover Square, the garden of which ran north and contained the workshops which fronted on to Oxford Street.
The furniture which Bullock manufactured (and unusually for a cabinet-maker also largely designed) was stylistically in advance of any then being made.
His firm expanded, supplying Sir Walter Scott [q.v.],
Sir Geoffrey Webster, the dukes of Atholl and Buccleuch, and the marquess of Abercorn.
His most famous commission was to supply all the furniture and furnishings for the house constructed for Napoleon on St Helena.
Strikingly handsome with an artistic and very engaging personality, Bullock entertained fashionable London at Tenterden Street.
He was perhaps married twice for on 29 March 1799 a George Bullock was married to Elizabeth Mansell, a pawnbroker's widow in Birmingham.
At his death he had been married for at least nine years to a wife called Margaret.
He died at home in Tenterden Street 1 May 1818, being buried at St George's, Hanover Square, where the burial register notes that he was aged thirty-five.
[Introduction by Clive Wainwright to George Bullock, Cabinet-Maker , 1988; Martin Levy, ‘George Bullock's Partnership with Charles Fraser, 1813–18, and the Stock-in-Trade Sale 1819’,Furniture History , vol. xxv, 1989, pp. 145–213.]
Peter Leach
,Stephen (d. 1780), architect, may have been born in Oxburgh, Norfolk, to the poor of which village he left £20 in his will, and he appears to have begun his professional life as a clerk or assistant to William Kent [q.v.].
He was probably the ‘Stephen’ referred to in letters from Kent to Richard Boyle, third Earl of Burlington [q.v.], in 1738–9; he received a legacy of £50 under Kent's will, dated 1748; and the following year he was in possession of some of Kent's drawings.
In 1746 he was appointed to a post in the Office of Works, as clerk of the works at Hampton Court, presumably through the influence of Burlington; and his subsequent career was based on that institution and the patronage of one leading public figure, Thomas Pelham-Holles, first Duke of Newcastle [q.v.].
How and when his link with Newcastle was established is not clear — it might have been through his employment to complete the London house which Kent had designed for the duke's brother, Henry Pelham [q.v.], after Kent's death in 1748 — but there is plentiful evidence of the connection.
In 1758, four years after he had added the clerkship of Richmond New Park Lodge to that he held at Hampton Court, when the comptroller of the works, Thomas Ripley [q.v.], was dying, he wrote to Newcastle to apply for his post; and although in the event the preferment went to Henry Flitcroft [q.v.], it was by Newcastle's ‘immediate appointment’ that Wright was promoted to the posts of master mason and deputy surveyor vacated by the latter.
Equally, the greater part of the work in his small private practice came from the duke and his successor.
Newcastle employed him at Claremont, Surrey (1752), and as chancellor of Cambridge University secured his employment to design the university library (1754–8); while for the second duke he worked at Clumber House, Nottinghamshire (1768–78, demolished), and designed the bridge in Newark in the same county (1775).
The Cambridge library, his most important work, is an accomplished Palladian composition in the manner of William Kent, while in his additions to Milton Hall, Berkshire (1764–72), he provided some attractive interiors in the Kentian Gothic style.
‘An honest and worthy man’, in the words of his Office of Works colleague Kenton Couse [q.v.], he died after ‘a lingering tho’ not very painful illness', 28 September 1780.
He was buried in the churchyard at Hampton, Middlesex.
[H. M. Colvin,A Biographical Dictionary of British Architects 1600–1840 , 1978; W. Papworth,An Encyclopaedia of Architecture , 4 edns., 1852–88; H. M. Colvin (ed.),
The History of the King's Works , vol. v, 1976.]
Michael S Moss
,William (1847–1887), shipbuilder and naval architect, was born in Dumbarton 25 May 1847, the eldest son in the family of eight sons and seven daughters of Peter Denny and his wife Helen, the daughter of James Leslie of Greenfield, Dumbarton.
His father was a partner in the family shipbuilding business at Dumbarton on the lower Clyde, renamed William Denny & Bros. in 1849.
Peter Denny opened an engine works in 1850 under the name Tulloch & Denny and became effective senior partner of William Denny & Bros. the following year.
An ardent member of the Free Church of Scotland, he developed a close personal and business relationship with the Hendersons, a Glasgow shipowning family and also members of the Free Church.
Peter Denny, like his father before him, intended that his son should follow him into the business.
After education at St Helier's School in Jersey and the Royal High School in Edinburgh Denny was apprenticed to the family firm in 1864, and became a partner on reaching his majority in 1868.
He continued his general education by reading widely, particularly on theological subjects.
He came to dislike the repressive Calvinism of the Free Church.
His father, a commercial man and knowledgeable financier, quickly left the management of the shipyard to his eldest son.
Two years later William Denny began to experiment with piece-work for the iron trades in the yard to improve productivity; this was eventually extended to all the firm's trades.
At the same time he introduced progressive speed trials over the measured mile for all vessels built at the yard.
This led him to an interest in hull forms and contact with the well-known naval architect William Froude [q.v.].
Denny published many papers on this subject, and on techniques of construction.
He designed revolutionary shallow-draught craft for the navigation of the treacherous Irrawaddy river in Burma, where the family operated the Flotilla Company in 1874.
He pioneered mild-steel shipbuilding in 1878, constructing the first ocean-going steel ship Rotomahana .
To enhance even further the quality and efficiency of the yard's hull shapes, he persuaded his father to build the first commercial test tank in the world in 1881, with assistance from Froude's son, superintendent of the Admiralty test tank in Torquay.
Critical of Lloyd's rules for the construction of iron steamships, he was appointed a member of the Board of Trade load-line committee in 1884.
In an attempt to repeat their success on the Irrawaddy, the Denny and Henderson families took a large stake in the La Platense Flotilla Co. in 1882 to operate river services in Argentina and Uruguay.
William Denny was appointed as the director to represent the family's interests.
In 1882 his residence at Bellfield with its valuable library burned down.
Repeatedly troubled by bouts of ill health put down to overwork, he was taken seriously ill with typhoid in 1883 and developed a morbid fascination with the philosophy of James Hinton [q.v.].
He had already left the Free Church of Scotland in 1873 and joined the more liberal United Presbyterians.
The La Platense venture never lived up to its promise and was taken over in its entirety by the Dennys and Hendersons in 1885–6.
In the face of severe local competition, matters went from bad to worse.
William Denny recommended that the local opposition should be bought out at the huge cost of £720,000.
This decision proved ill advised.
Deeply troubled by this experience, he sailed for Latin America in the late summer of 1886 in an attempt to save the firm.
Conscience-stricken by the scale of the commercial catastrophe, he committed suicide in Buenos Aires 17 March 1887.
In 1874 he married Lelia, eldest daughter of Leon Serena of Venice.
They had a son and three daughters.
[A. Slaven and S. Checkland (eds.),
Dictionary of Scottish Business Biography , vol. i, 1986; A. B. Bruce,The Life of William Denny, Ship-builder , 1888; N. J. Morgan and Michael S. Moss, ‘Wealthy and Titled Persons — the Accumulation of Riches in Victorian Britain: the Case of Peter Denny’,Business History , vol. xxxi, July 1989.]
Peter Leach
,Thomas Farnolls (1723–1777), architect, was baptized 11 May 1723 at St Julian's church, Shrewsbury, the eldest in the family of four sons and one daughter of John Pritchard, a joiner of Shrewsbury, and his wife Hannah Farnolls.
His own background was also as a joiner, but from the late 1740s onwards he developed a quite extensive professional practice in both Shropshire and the neighbouring counties.
A speciality of his was the supply of chimney-pieces and other elements of interior decoration, and of funerary monuments; and an album of his designs of this type, later acquired by the library of the American Institute of Architects in Washington, indicates that he employed a number of carvers on a regular basis — the two principal names are Alexander van der Hagen and John Nelson of Shrewsbury [qq.v.]— to execute them.
Overall, his churches and houses are no more than pleasant provincial work — examples are the rebuilding of St Julian's church in Shrewsbury (1749–50) and Hatton Grange, Shropshire (1764–8)— but his decorative and funerary designs reveal him as a highly competent exponent of both the rococo style and the Gothic manner of Batty Langley [q.v.].
Examples of his interior decoration are at Croft Castle, Herefordshire (1765), Gaines in Whitbourne, Herefordshire (c .1765), and Shipton Hall, Shropshire: of his monuments, in the Gothic and rococo modes respectively, those to Sir Whitmore Acton in Acton Round church, Shropshire (1763), and to Mary Morhall (d .
1765) in St Mary's, Shrewsbury.
Pritchard's chief claim to fame, however, lies in his role in connection with a structure of a quite different type which he did not live to see executed — the famous Iron Bridge across the river Severn in Coalbrookdale, Shropshire.
His involvement with bridge building started in 1767, when he was appointed surveyor to direct the widening of the English bridge in Shrewsbury to a design by Robert Mylne [q.v.]and then, when that project was abandoned, submitted a design for the new bridge which was rejected in favour of that by John Gwynn [q.v.].
Then in 1773–4 he made two designs for a bridge to cross the Severn in Stourport, Worcestershire, the first to be of timber with stone abutments and the second a single arch of brick but resting on a cast-iron centre.
Neither of these was adopted — the executed bridge was a conventional masonry structure of three arches — but in his design for the Coalbrookdale bridge, made in 1775, he adapted some of the principles of the timber proposal to a structure wholly of cast iron; and it was a modified version of this design which was executed by the Coalbrookdale Ironworks in 1777–9 — the first iron bridge in the world.
In 1751 Pritchard married Eleanor Russell (died 1768): three of their children died young but their surviving daughter married the surveyor John White, whose son, John White junior, published an illustrated account of Pritchard's bridge designs in a pamphlet entitled On Cementitious Architecture as Applicable to the Construction of Bridges (1832).
In his later years Pritchard lived in a house called Eyton Turret in Eyton-on-Severn, Shropshire, which he had formed from one of a pair of Jacobean garden buildings in the former grounds of a demolished mansion.
He died 23 December 1777 and was buried at St Julian's, Shrewsbury.
[H. M. Colvin,A Biographical Dictionary of Architects 1600–1840 , 1978; Rupert Gunnis,Dictionary of British Sculptors 1660–1851 , 1953; John Frederick Harris, ‘Pritchard Redivivus’,Architectural History , vol. xi, 1968, and Catalogue of British Drawings for Architecture…in American Collections , 1971; Ted Ruddock,Arch Bridges and their Builders 1735–1835 , 1979.]
R F V Heuston
,Geoffrey , third Baron Trevethin and first Baron Oaksey (1880–1971), lawyer, was born in London 2 December 1880, the youngest in the family of three sons and one daughter of (Sir) Alfred Tristram Lawrence (later first Baron Trevethin, q.v.), lord chief justice of England in 1921–2, and his first cousin, Jessie Elizabeth, daughter of George Lawrence.
After Haileybury, where he was senior to C. R. (later first Earl) Attlee [q.v.],
Lawrence went to New College, Oxford.
He received a third class in literae humaniores in 1903.
Lawrence was called to the bar at the Inner Temple in 1906 (bencher 1932, treasurer 1955), and had a steady unspectacular career with such positions as counsel to the Jockey Club, chairman of Wiltshire quarter sessions, and recorder of Oxford.
From 1928 to 1932 he was attorney-general to the prince of Wales.
In 1925 he took silk, and in April 1932 he was appointed a judge of the King's Bench division, being appointed a lord justice of appeal in 1944.
He was sworn of the Privy Council in 1944, and was elected an honorary fellow of New College in the same year.
In April 1947 he was appointed a lord of appeal in ordinary, having already been granted in January a hereditary peerage in recognition of his work at the international tribunal at Nuremberg (1945–6).
In 1947 Oxford awarded him an honorary DCL.
His work at Nuremberg was of an international significance which surpassed anything Lawrence had done as a puisne judge or was to do as a law lord.
The twenty-one defendants were accused of enormous wrongdoing before and during World War II in an indictment which took two days to read and 218 days to try before a tribunal composed of two judges from each of the four victorious countries.
The documentation was vast, and the prosecuting teams of unequal strength, the British under Sir David Maxwell Fyfe (later first Earl of Kilmuir, q.v.) being the strongest.
Lawrence was elected British president, and discharged his difficult task with a calmness, courtesy, and firmness which won universal approval, even from the defendants, the soldiers among whom thought that their problems were appreciated by one who had gained the DSO as a gunner officer in World War I. Praise was also given by the British alternate judge, Sir Norman (later first Baron) Birkett [q.v.], who was secretly resentful that he had not been chosen for the post.
He was not passed over because of Attlee's undisguised preference for products of Haileybury, but because the Foreign Office insisted on a more senior judge.
After Nuremberg Oaksey found it difficult to adjust to the work of a law lord.
His brief judgments were conscientiously prepared, but his heart did not seem to be in the job.
In appearance Oaksey was a sturdy figure, slightly below middle height, prematurely bald, with the fresh complexion and unhurried manner of an English gentleman who was interested in country life.
He could sometimes be induced to talk about his presidency of the Guernsey Cattle Society, but never about his presidency of the international tribunal.
After exactly twenty-five years on the bench Oaksey retired in April 1957.
In 1959 he inherited from a brother his father's barony of Trevethin, but he continued to be styled Oaksey.
In 1921 he married Marjorie Frances Alice, youngest daughter of Commander Charles Napier Robinson, RN.
They had one son and three daughters.
Oaksey died in Oaksey 28 August 1971 and was succeeded in both baronies by his son, John Geoffrey Tristram (born 1929).
[Private information; personal knowledge.]
P D Trevor-Roper
,William (c. 1768–1851), geologist, petrologist, and palaeontologist, was born in Scotland c .1768.
As the inventor of the ‘Nicol prism’, his name will continue to be remembered well beyond the world of optical physics, but details of his early life are hard to discover.
He was established as a lecturer in natural philosophy at Edinburgh University for many years, but it was not until the age of fifty-eight that his first publication is recorded, when his work on the structure of crystals culminated in his report ‘on a method of so far increasing the divergence of the two rays in a calcareous spar that only one image may be seen at a time’(Edinburgh New Philosophical Journal , vol. vi, 1829).
In this he described how, by splitting a parallelepiped of calcite spar along its shorter diagonal, and then cementing the halves together with Canada balsam (having a refractive index intermediate between those of the doubly refracting calcite spar), he was able to separate the two emergent beams so widely that they could be used independently.
Such a device was quickly appreciated as the most practical way of producing polarized light — of great value in physical optics and in petrography.
The true theory of the Nicol prism was not clearly understood even by its inventor, but in a neglected paper by Edward Sang the mathematical theory is given completely for the first time; this also contains a suggestion, made forty-seven years later by M. E. Bertrand in the Comptes Rendus , that a polarizer might be constructed of two glass prisms separated by a suitably placed thin layer of Iceland spar.
This ‘Investigation of the Action of Nicol's Polarising Prism’(1837) was subsequently published in full (Proceedings of the Royal Society of Edinburgh , vol. xviii, 1891).
His work in geology was of equal importance, since he developed a technique for viewing slivers of rock directly through a microscope (by cementing the mineral to a glass plate and grinding it to an extreme thinness), thus allowing its structure to be visualized by direct microscopy, rather than through use of reflected light, which revealed only its surface qualities.
It seems that the potential of this new method was not realized in petrology for another forty years, for the first printed account did not appear until 1831, in H. T. M. Witham's Observations on Fossil Vegetables , when he published an account of how he prepared the many thin slices of fossil wood of which a microscopical description is furnished in the text.
Nicol explained (Edinburgh New Philosophical Journal , vol. xvi, 1834) that the preparation of thin slices of fossil wood was nothing new, for Sanderson, an Edinburgh lapidary, had already obtained transparent sections by a difficult and uncertain process.
What was new about Nicol's slicing was the method, and this led immediately to important advances in palaeontology, and eventually to the opening up of a new world of discovery for petrology.
He published a number of articles on optics, petrology, and palaeontology, largely in the Edinburgh New Philosophical Journal ; and, although his many innovations did not receive the recognition they deserved, his eponymous prism ensured that his name was not forgotten.
Nicol died in Edinburgh 2 September 1851.
[C. C. Gillispie (ed.),
Dictionary of Scientific Biography , vol. x, 1970.]
Gillian Avery
,Frances (1816–1879), writer, was born 16 January 1816 in Stranorlar, county Donegal, the seventh of twelve children of Samuel Brown, the village postmaster.
She lost her sight following smallpox at the age of eighteen months.
The family were Presbyterians, and her conscious effort to acquire an education began at the age of six, when she heard a sermon she could not understand, and from that time she adopted a plan for acquiring information through asking the meaning of every new word she heard.
She also learned by listening to her siblings repeating their lessons.
She had a thirst for facts and a tenacious memory, and bribed members of her family to read ‘the drier, but more instructive books’ which she latterly preferred, though in rural Ireland books of any kind were hard to come by.
Three early poems were published in the Irish Penny Journal , and this volume was the first book she ever possessed.
Encouraged, in 1841 she sent poems to the Athenaeum , and later to Hood's Magazine and to Marguerite, Countess of Blessington [q.v.], for Keepsake .
A volume of poems,The Star of Attéghei , was published in 1844.
With her literary earnings she paid for the education of a young sister, who became her amanuensis and moved to Edinburgh with her in 1847.
In 1852 they moved to London.
She made what would seem to have been a precarious living through writing, contributing to the Leisure Hour and Sunday at Home , and early in her career was helped by a generous gift of money from Henry Petty-Fitzmaurice, third Marquis of Lansdowne [q.v.].
She was granted a small civil list pension in 1863.
She wrote three three-volume novels:My Share of the World (1861),The Castleford Case (1862), and The Hidden Sun (1866).
All were set in a wide range of localities, were powerful and dramatic, but lack organization.
The handful of stories that she wrote for children were remarkable for their strong sense of place and feeling for landscapes she had never seen.
The Eriksons (1852), for instance, described Norwegian life in great detail; ‘Our Uncle's Story’(Our Uncle the Traveller's Stories , 1859) was set in the Black Forest, two others in the Lincolnshire fens and in South Africa respectively.
None of her books was reprinted in her lifetime, not even Granny's Wonderful Chair (1857), a collection of seven fairy tales within a frame story, owing something to Grimm.
It is for this book, her only attempt at fantasy, that she is remembered.
Although it achieved classic status, it did not become generally known until the late Victorian period, when Frances Hodgson Burnett [q.v.], who had read the book as a child, retold part of it from memory in St Nicholas in 1887, and the proper text was ‘rediscovered’.
Frances Browne died from apoplexy at 19 St John's Grove, Richmond, Surrey, 21 August 1879.
She was unmarried.
[Biographical preface by Dollie Radford to Everyman edition of Granny's Wonderful Chair , 1906; memoir of her early life in Frances Browne,The Star of Attéghei , 1844.]
Ronald M Birse
,Henry (1833–1919), electrical engineer and inventor, was born in Manchester in 1833.
He may be the Henry Wilde who was the son of Horatio Wilde and his wife Hannah, and who was christened 17 February 1833.
At the age of sixteen he was left without parents in charge of a younger brother and sister.
After being educated in private schools he was apprenticed to a mechanical engineer, and before the age of twenty-one had attained a position of responsibility in the works.
At this time he was already experimenting with voltaic cells, electrical machines and kites, and the electro-deposition of metals.
In 1856 he established a business in Manchester as an electric-telegraph and lightning-conductor engineer, and spent some years on the development of a magneto-electric alphabetic telegraph, which was demonstrated at the international exhibition in London in 1862.
In December 1863 he patented a combination of an electromagnetic generator with a magneto-electric exciter, and these machines were made in some numbers by Wilde & Company, but in use they had the disadvantage of becoming very hot.
He avoided this problem by inventing and patenting in 1867 an entirely different type of multipolar machine, which was used for electro-deposition and arc lighting.
He subsequently took out a number of patents in these two fields, the most valuable being in 1875 for the making of copper rollers for calico printing.
In 1865 several experimenters were on the brink of discovering the important principle of self-excitation, and early in 1866 he presented a paper to the Royal Society on ‘A New and Powerful Generator of Dynamic Electricity’, but failed to realize that practical self-excitation was within his grasp.
As a result, the actual discovery was made more or less simultaneously by others.
In 1898, having since 1871 styled himself ‘electrical engineer’, he was elected an honorary member of the Institution of Electrical Engineers, and the following year contributed the sum of £1,500 to a benevolent fund for the benefit of their members.
At the same time he thought it desirable to submit to them a brief record of his work (Journal of the Institution of Electrical Engineers , 1899, pp. 3–11), in view of what were in his opinion the less than adequate references to it in the 1899 James Forrest lecture on ‘Magnetism’ by J. A. Ewing [q.v.], in the Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers (vol. cxxxviii, pp. 289–311).
He published many other papers in the Proceedings of the Royal Society and elsewhere, especially after his retirement in 1884, on a wide variety of subjects, including the magnetization of iron, atomic weights, the spectrum of thallium, the moving force of celestial bodies, aerial locomotion, and the velocity with which air rushes into a vacuum.
He was one of the first to produce high-intensity electric light from arc lamps taking current from dynamos (1865), which he developed into searchlights for the Royal Navy (1874); after the Titanic disaster in 1912 he strongly urged that mercantile vessels should be fitted with searchlights.
He invented the magnetarium for reproducing the phenomena of terrestrial magnetism and the secular variation of the mariner's compass (1890).
He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1866, and was awarded the Albert gold medal of the Royal Society of Arts in 1900.
He had an honorary D.Sc.
from the Victoria University of Manchester (1900), and a DCL from Oxford (1903).
He was a liberal benefactor to many public institutions, and bequeathed some of his estate to the University of Oxford.
He died at his residence, ‘The Hurst’, Alderley Edge, Cheshire, 28 March 1919.
He had been a widower for twenty-six years, and had no children.
[Nature , vol. ciii, 17 April 1919, pp. 129–30;Journal of the Institution of Electrical Engineers , 1919, pp. 625–6.]
P J Waller
,George (1886–1936), founder of the poppy factory, was born 7 September 1886 at the rectory in Overton, Flintshire, the youngest in the family of four sons (the eldest of whom died in infancy) and one daughter of George John Howson, rector of Overton and later archdeacon of Liverpool, and his wife Ethel, daughter of Thomas Dealtry, vicar of Maidstone.
His paternal grandfather was dean of Chester (John Saul Howson, q.v.), and his maternal great-grandfather was bishop of Madras (Thomas Dealtry, q.v.).
Educated at Loretto and at Heriot Watt Engineering College, Howson was assistant manager at the Melalap rubber estate in British North Borneo from 1909.
In 1914 Howson was in England on sick leave when World War I started.
In September he joined the 11th Service battalion of the Hampshire Regiment and served on the western front throughout the war, being awarded the MC.
By the end of the war he was a major.
After the war he founded the Disabled Society, lobbying the government to improve the quality of artificial limbs.
Howson's engineering expertise was invaluable; so was his recognition that the disabled faced demoralization as well as hardship unless they secured employment.
Armistice day 1921 saw the first poppy day appeal, sponsored by the British Legion.
The poppies were made in France by war victims' families.
British demand outstripped French supply, and Howson persuaded the Legion to contract the Disabled Society to supply the 1922 Armistice day appeal.
Howson started production in a former collar factory off the Old Kent Road with a workforce of five disabled men.
He had not only to acquire knowledge of the artificial-flower trade but to compete, while paying full male wages, against most manufacturers, who employed low-waged girls.
His practical genius for ergonomics allowed him to succeed in adapting tasks to suit a disabled workforce.
Over forty disabled ex-servicemen were employed within a month, and they produced their first million poppies within two months.
By November 1924, 185 persons were employed, and twenty-seven million poppies were produced.
In 1925 the Disabled Society merged with the British Legion.
The factory became a limited company, with Howson as its chairman, moving to Richmond and becoming the British Legion poppy factory.
The indications are that throughout his time as chairman Howson put into the factory a good deal of family money (his wife was wealthy by inheritance).
In 1930 the British Legion stated that on the annual poppy day collection depended their ability to assist all ex-servicemen.
In 1928 Howson devised the field of remembrance service at Westminster Abbey.
Howson was never a well man after Borneo.
He was a straightforward patriot, and, most of all, a man of action, who was at the same time a man of natural sensitivity towards suffering.
He never patronized the disabled but restored in them a zest for life and work.
In 1918 Howson married Jessie, daughter of William Gibson, of Melbourne, a Scottish-Australian department-store magnate.
They had one son and three daughters.
Howson died 28 November 1936 at 5 The Boltons, South Kensington, London, of cancer of the pancreas.
At his christening his mother gave him a second forename, ‘Arthur’, which he did not like and never used.
[Royal British Legion poppy factory archives; family information.]
Robert Bernard Martin
,Digby Augustus Stewart Mackworth (1848–1867), poet, was born 8 February 1848 in Guernsey, the youngest in the family of one daughter and three sons of William Harcourt Isham Mackworth [Dolben]and his wife Frances Dolben, a distant cousin, who was joint heiress of the manor of Finedon, Northamptonshire, an estate they rebuilt extensively.
William Mackworth added his wife's surname to his own, and they assumed their place in the foothills of county aristocracy.
The literary interest of the family is indicated by their relationship to the poets Robert Bridges, Arthur Hugh Clough, and Winthrop Mackworth Praed [qq.v.].
Both Digby's parents were deeply religious and almost violently anti-Catholic.
He was first sent to a strictly Protestant preparatory school in Cheam, then entered Eton in January 1862, where his house was chosen for the ‘staunch Protestant bias’ of the cleric in charge.
He became fag to his cousin, Robert Bridges, whom he had not previously met.
Dolben early developed his twin interests in extreme High Church religion and poetry, both of which were marked with strong eroticism.
He was sent down from Eton in 1863 for a few months for having made a forbidden visit to a Jesuit house.
Early in 1864, before he was sixteen, he became a lay member of an irregular order of English Benedictines under the leadership of ‘Father Ignatius’(Joseph Leycester Lyne, q.v.), and loved to wear a monk's habit and cowl with bare feet.
At the end of that year he left Eton finally, to study with private tutors before taking entrance examinations for Balliol College, Oxford.
In February 1865 he made a brief visit to Oxford, where he was introduced to Gerard Manley Hopkins [q.v.], their only meeting in person.
Hopkins was completely taken with Dolben, who was nearly four years his junior, and his private journal for confession the following year proves how absorbed he was in imperfectly suppressed erotic thoughts of him.
Although Dolben was probably not interested sentimentally in Hopkins, he admired him and his poetry, and the two young men deeply influenced each other in both their verse and their intentions of becoming Roman Catholic converts, an ambition Dolben had not fulfilled at his death.
He was an unusually charming and humorous young man who loved to shock both contemporaries and elders by emotional and religious excess; his poetry reflects his flamboyant interests.
He had enormous fluency and ease, often in High Church devotional poems in which the physical urgency of a boy in his teens spills over into sexual imagery in describing his love of Christ.
Bridges, who edited his poetry in 1911, said dryly that reading it ‘makes one see why schoolmasters wish their boys to play games’.
Bridges regarded his work as equal to ‘anything that was ever written by any English poet at his age’, and it was much admired by Henry James [q.v.].
As it stands, it is among the best of the poetry of the Oxford Movement, and probably a longer life would have produced the mastery foreseen by Bridges and James.
After two years of preparing with tutors, Dolben fainted during his examinations for Balliol in the spring of 1867 and failed.
On 28 June 1867 he was drowned in the river Welland near Luffenham, probably of a stroke, trying to save the life of his tutor's young son.
He was nineteen years old, and it was the end of a life of exceptional poetic promise.
[Robert Bridges (ed.),
The Poems of Digby Mackworth Dolben (with a memoir), 1911; Martin Cohen (ed.),
The Poems and Letters of Digby Mackworth Dolben, 1848–1867 , 1981; Dolben (Finedon) collection, Northamptonshire County Record Office.]
E A Reid
, Sir John , first baronet (1603–1701), MP, was born in October 1603 in Ashwellthorpe, Norfolk, the first son of Sir Thomas Holland of Quidenham, by his first wife Mary Knyvett.
Educated at Christ's College, Cambridge, and the Middle Temple, Holland succeeded his father in 1626 and was created a baronet three years later.
Despite his earnest Protestantism he married, by licence, on 3 August 1630 a Catholic heiress, Alathea, daughter of John Panton of Bryncunallt, Denbighshire, widow of William Sandys, fourth Baron Sandys.
Holland represented Norfolk in the Short Parliament of 1640, but, wounded by attacks on the sincerity of his religious beliefs by some of his countrymen, he chose to sit for Castle Rising in the Long Parliament, having inherited a family loyalty to the Howards.
Despite his zealous advocacy of Norfolk interests and his popularity with the people, Holland never again represented the county.
Much in demand as a conciliator, he believed that the redress of grievances should proceed ‘with all temper and due moderation’.
Although he took Parliament's side at the beginning of the civil war he attempted to arrange a neutrality pact with the Norfolk Royalists, and was soon advocating peace.
Attacked in the House for his failure to take part in the business of sequestration, Holland obtained permission to join his family in the Netherlands.
On his return to Westminster in December 1645 he supported an Erastian church settlement.
Convinced by his period of residence with the king at Holdenby as a parliamentary commissioner in 1647 that Charles ‘was a prince under whose government we may yet be happy’, Holland returned to the Continent after the failure of further peace moves.
He later declared that in his experience long intermissions of Parliament were less mischievous than long sessions.
He was elected a councillor of state on the return of the secluded members to the Long Parliament in February 1660, and on re-election to the Convention Parliament (April 1660) was included in the delegation to attend the king in Holland.
Holland represented Aldeburgh in the Cavalier Parliament (from 1661).
By now a moderate Anglican, he distinguished peaceful Nonconformists from potential rebels.
He was disgusted by the proceedings against Edward Hyde, first Earl of Clarendon [q.v.], although personally on good terms with Henry Bennet, first Earl of Arlington [q.v.].
His criticism of the prodigality of government in October 1675 was very ill-received at court, and when a pension to his son failed to secure his support, the king wrote him off among those people ‘who will never be obliged’.
Holland declined to stand for Norfolk in 1679, although he voted for the exclusionists, and stood unsuccessfully in 1685 as a trimmer.
He opposed the abolition of the penal laws, and accepted the Revolution of 1688.
Described by Bulstrode Whitelocke [q.v.]as ‘a gentleman of excellent parts as well as person’, Holland died 19 January 1701, the last surviving member of the Long Parliament, and was buried in Quidenham.
He was survived by three sons and five daughters.
His private papers, which include a diary of the first year of the Long Parliament and copies of his speeches, are contained among the Tanner manuscripts.
[B. D. Henning,The House of Commons 1660–1690 , 1983; Bodleian Library, Tanner MSS 239, 321; C. S. Durrant,A Link Between Flemish Mystics and English Martyrs , 1925; C. Holmes,The Eastern Association in the English Civil War , 1975; R. W. Ketton-Cremer,Norfolk in the Civil War , 1969.]
Roger J Suthren
,Tempest (1846–1913), ophthalmic surgeon and scientist, was born 7 December 1846 at 17 Stonegate, York, the elder son and eldest of the three children of William Charles Anderson, surgeon of York, and his wife Sarah Ellen Hall.
Educated at St Peter's School, York, and at University College London, he gained his MD in 1873, and was subsequently elected a fellow of the college.
In 1904 he was awarded an honorary D.Sc.
by the University of Leeds.
Anderson specialized in eye diseases, becoming consulting ophthalmic surgeon at York County Hospital.
He successfully combined his career with worldwide travel and scientific study, often applying the resulting experience to benefit his native city.
He contributed much to the life of York, and was held in high regard there.
He took an active interest in the waterworks, town planning, housing problems, and in the preservation of the city's green spaces and ancient monuments.
A JP, he was appointed sheriff of York in 1894.
He took a great interest in the dissemination of science to the public.
A leading member and benefactor of the Yorkshire Philosophical Society, he was secretary and president.
Nationally, he served on the councils of the Royal Geographical Society, the Geological Society of London, the Linnean Society, and the British Association (vice-president in 1906).
In 1910 he was elected president of the Museums Association.
His main amateur interests were geology (particularly vulcanology), photography, and mountaineering, pursuits which he combined successfully.
He was a distinguished and active member of the Alpine Club (elected 1893).
He made his own cameras and lenses, including a panoramic camera, and promoted the use of photography in geology.
He served on a British Association committee which arranged the collection and documentation of several thousand geological photographs.
The Royal Institution appointed him Tyndall lecturer on volcanoes, and he won awards for photographic studies of mountains and glaciers.
Much of his collection of glass negatives and lantern slides is preserved in the Yorkshire Museum.
From 1883 he spent much time abroad, especially in areas of active volcanoes.
He kept two bags always packed, one for hot climes and one for cold, so that immediately he heard of an eruption he could board the next available ship.
In spite of the limitations of travel, he visited most major volcanic areas of the world.
In 1902, with (Sir) John S. Flett [q.v.]of the Geological Survey, he was commissioned by the Royal Society to investigate the catastrophic eruptions on the islands of Martinique and St Vincent (Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society , 1903 and 1908).
Detailed observations, at considerable personal risk, and comparisons with his studies of Alpine avalanches, led to a better understanding of pyroclastic flows — fast-moving, destructive avalanches of hot gas and rock particles.
This was Anderson's most important contribution to vulcanology.
His photographs and descriptions convey concern for the human suffering resulting from natural disasters.
He appreciated the importance of careful, systematic observation, referring to this as a ‘clinical or bedside study’.
He excelled in conveying information in a palatable, humorous, and exciting form to a general audience.
Good examples are found in his book of photographs Volcanic Studies in Many Lands (1903; second, posthumous, volume 1917).
A bachelor, he had a reputation as an honest, likeable, and generous man, with a gift for forming lasting friendships.
His last expedition was to the volcanoes of Indonesia and the Philippines.
On the return voyage he became ill with heat apoplexy or enteric fever, and died 26 August 1913 on the Red Sea.
He was buried at Suez.
[Obituaries in Annual Report of the Yorkshire Philosophical Society, 1913;Peterite , 1913;Proceedings of the Geological Society , vol. lxx, April 1914; and Geological Magazine , vol. l, 1913.]
John Culme
,John (1755–1834), jeweller, was born in Piddletrenthide, Dorset, 21 January 1755, the eldest son of Thomas Bridge (d .
1792) and his wife Mary (d .
1779).
Following in the footsteps of his future partner, Philip Rundell [q.v.], he was apprenticed in 1769 to the jeweller, William Rogers of Bath.
His apprenticeship over, Bridge migrated to London about 1776, where he was employed as a shopman by Pickett & Rundell, goldsmiths and jewellers, at the Golden Salmon, Ludgate Hill.
William Pickett, the senior partner, retired from business in February 1786, and Philip Rundell, by then in sole control, invited Bridge in December 1787 to join him in a partnership; thereafter the firm continued as Rundell & Bridge.
The two partners, so different in character that they were respectively known by their employees as ‘Oil’(Bridge) and ‘Vinegar’, worked tirelessly to place the business at the forefront of their trade.
By 1805, when the firm had become Rundell, Bridge, & Rundell, Joseph Nightingale [q.v.]wrote that it exceeded ‘all others in the British Empire, if not in the whole world, for the value of its contents’.
John Bridge was described as ‘mild and affable in his deportment, possessing great equality of temper, and a very engaging suavity of manners’.
It is said that in 1789 he was introduced to George III by a wealthy cousin, also called John Bridge, who shared the monarch's interest in farming.
The jeweller so pleased the king and other members of the royal family that Rundell & Bridge received many fresh orders.
Their growing success was now assured.
John Bridge remained a partner in the firm until his death.
He never married.
Towards the end of his life he bought Wood House with its estate at Wood Lane, Shepherd's Bush, where he lived with two cousins, Amelia and Maria Bridge.
He died 9 April 1834 at the Manor House, Piddletrenthide, and was buried in the family vault in the local churchyard.
In the aisle of the church a carved stone tablet centred by a portrait profile of John Bridge in marble was erected ‘by his surviving relatives in testimony of their grateful and affectionate remembrance’.
His will, dated 27 November 1833, was proved on 22 May 1834 with effects valued at £400,000.
[Memoirs of the late Philip Rundell, Esq…by a gentleman many years connected with the firm , 1827; Shirley Bury, ‘The Lengthening Shadow of Rundell's’,Connoisseur , 1966; John Culme,Nineteenth-century Silver , 1977; Arthur G. Grimwade,London Goldsmiths 1697–1837 , 3rd edn. 1990, pp. 448–9, 738; Andrew Pike,Piddletrenthide: the Village and the Church , 1977; MS account of the firm by George Fox, mid-1840s, Baker Library of Graduate School of Business Administration, Harvard University.]
G H L Le May
,Abraham (‘Bram’)(1847–1912), civil servant, theatre manager, barrister, and writer, was born in Dublin 8 November 1847, the third child and second son in the family of five sons and two daughters of Abraham Stoker, a clerk in Dublin Castle, and his wife Charlotte, daughter of Lieutenant Thomas Thornley of the 43rd Regiment.
He went to the Revd W. Woods's private day-school and then to Trinity College, Dublin, where he was a distinguished athlete.
He graduated with honours in science in 1870, and followed his father into the Civil Service, first as a clerk and then in the legal department.
His first book, published in 1879, was The Duties of Clerks of Petty Sessions in Ireland .
His interest in the theatre began when he saw (Sir) Henry Irving [q.v.]act in The Rivals .
Stoker then volunteered as unpaid dramatic critic of the Dublin Mail , for which he wrote for five years while retaining his clerkship.
In 1878 he married Frances Anne Lemon, daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel James Balcombe, an army officer.
They were to have one son.
The honeymoon was cut short when Irving, who had acquired the Lyceum theatre in London, asked him to be his manager.
For the next twenty years he managed the Lyceum, organizing eight tours of the United States and Canada.
He resumed his legal studies, and was called to the bar in 1890, as a member of the Inner Temple, though he never practised.
He also wrote a string of novels and short stories.
In 1897 he published Dracula , the book upon which his reputation principally rests.
The idea of the vampire count, he said, came to him in a nightmare following a dinner of dressed crab.
Part of the book's appeal came from the contrast between Count Dracula's wolf-haunted castle in the Carpathians and the supernatural activities in the familiar locations of Whitby and Hampstead.
Such association as there was between Stoker's vampire and the historical Vlad IV of Wallachia (1431–76), known as Vlad Dracula or Vlad the Impaler, may have been suggested by his friend Arminius Vambery, a Hungarian professor learned in Transylvanian folklore.
Subsequent investigators have attempted to read deep, allegorical, psychological, and even transcendental meanings into the book; it is more likely that Stoker merely intended to write a popular horror story by taking an ancient legend, placing it in a contemporary setting, and garnishing his tale with blood, thunder, and damsels in distress.
It was after Stoker's death that Count Dracula achieved international fame as part of the horror entertainment industry, becoming a household name comparable with Dr Frankenstein's monster created by Mary Shelley [q.v.].
In 1898 Irving's fortunes began to fail, and the consequent collapse of Stoker's theatrical career left him dependent on his writings.
A regular flow of books and short stories followed, among them:The Mystery of the Sea (1902);The Jewel of Seven Stars (1903), a tale of Egyptian reincarnation;The Man (1905), a melodrama;Personal Reminiscences of Henry Irving , in two volumes (1906);Lady Athlyne (1908), a romance;Snowbound (1908), a collection of short stories;The Lady of the Shroud (1909), which reached its twentieth edition in 1934;Famous Imposters (1910), which included the story of the Bisley Boy, believed by some to have been substituted for the future Queen Elizabeth in childhood; and finally The Lair of the White Worm (1911), in which he revived the legend of a gigantic serpent capable of assuming human form.
The book sold well, and was republished many times in the following decades.
Stoker died of Bright's disease and syphilis 20 April 1912.
In 1924 his widow sold the dramatic rights of Dracula to Hamilton Deane, who adapted it for the stage; in 1930 the rights were bought by the Universal Pictures Corporation of Hollywood for $40,000.
It is estimated that the tally of films, over the world, exceeds 400.
Stoker was over six feet in height, with a red beard that contrasted with a full head of brown hair.
While in middle age he won the bronze medal of the Royal Society for his attempted rescue of a drowning man from the Thames.
The artist Goldsborough Anderson took Stoker as his model for William II in a panel depicting the building of the Tower of London, painted for the Royal Exchange.
[Harry Ludlam,A Biography of Dracula: the Life Story of Bram Stoker , 1962; Daniel Farson,The Man Who Wrote Dracula : a Biography of Bram Stoker , 1975.]
Margaret A Clennett
,John (1825–1910), dental surgeon, was born in Edinburgh 24 February 1825, the son of John Smith, a dentist in Hyndford's Close, Edinburgh.
He was educated at the Edinburgh Institution, then studied medicine at the University of Edinburgh, where he graduated MD and LRCS in 1847.
After graduating he travelled to Paris, and was there during the 1848 rising.
On his father's death in 1851 John took over his dental practice at 12 Dundas Street, although he did not entirely forgo his medical interests, since in 1859 he proposed the foundation of what was to become the Royal Edinburgh Hospital for Sick Children.
In 1856 he delivered a comprehensive course of lectures on the teeth at the Edinburgh medical school, the first such lectures to be held in Scotland.
He was appointed surgeon dentist to the Royal Public dispensary (1857), but resigned two years later to establish an institution devoted to dental treatment, the Edinburgh Dental Dispensary, which opened in 1860.
Following his representations the dispensary was recognized as a training centre for the diploma in dental surgery of the Royal College of Surgeons in England in 1865.
The Dispensary merged into the Edinburgh Dental Hospital and school in 1879, with Smith, regarded as the school's creator, as consulting surgeon dentist.
In 1871 he was appointed surgeon dentist in Scotland to Queen Victoria, a post he held until her death in 1901.
An advocate of dental education and the advance of the profession, Smith was a member of the dental reform committee, inaugurated in 1876 to promote the regulation and professional education of dentists in Britain.
Elected to the representative board (1879) which was to be responsible for the foundation of the British Dental Association, he was subsequently appointed to the first editorial committee of the Journal of the BDA, and was BDA president in 1884.
As well as numerous articles, he published a Handbook of Dental Anatomy and Surgery in 1864 (revised 1871).
He was elected a fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh in 1861, and held the office of president in 1883–4.
For many years he was a member of the president's committee, and was an examiner for the triple qualification and the fellowship.
He was enrolled as a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1871, and served as president of the Odontochirurgical Society of Scotland 1881–3.
He was awarded an LLD by Edinburgh University in 1884.
Smith had an amiable, courteous, and considerate personality, and was gifted in various fields other than dentistry.
He wrote numerous songs, many of a medical nature, dramatized Waverley by (Sir) Walter Scott [q.v.], and wrote three successful pantomimes which were produced at the Edinburgh Theatre Royal.
He was a talented painter, and enjoyed angling and shooting.
He was a Conservative, and a staunch adherent of the Church of Scotland.
In 1853 he married Elizabeth Marjory, daughter of Dr Peters of Arbroath; they had three sons and two daughters.
He died in Edinburgh 15 April 1910.
[Obituaries in Journal of the British Dental Association , vol. xxxi, 1910, pp. 388–93, and British Journal of Dental Science , vol. liii, 1910, pp. 430–1; J. M. Campbell, ‘John Smith’,British Dental Journal , vol. ci, 1956, pp. 33–40.]
David Rubinstein
,Frederick (1846–1915), bookbinder and Labour pioneer, was born 27 April 1846 in Gower's Walk, Whitechapel, east London, the eldest in the family of four sons (one of whom died in infancy) and two daughters of Frederick Rogers, sailor, draper's assistant, labourer, and painter, and his wife Susan Barltrop.
Rogers left school at ten or earlier and became an errand boy.
He was plagued by ill health in his youth but recovered to enter the vellum bookbinding trade, with which he was associated in a variety of capacities for nearly forty years.
Outside his work, his principal interests lay in education, religion, and trade unionism.
He was an outstanding example of a working-class autodidact, and, with Alfred (later Viscount) Milner [q.v.], was co-secretary of the university extension movement in east London from 1877.
An Oxford lecture which he delivered in 1883 influenced the subsequent founding of Toynbee Hall, the east London settlement in whose affairs Rogers was long active.
He contributed to many newspapers and magazines, one of them the Weekly Dispatch , in whose pages he was in 1885–6 an early advocate of the formation of an independent Labour party.
Originally a Nonconformist, Rogers was later converted to Anglo-Catholicism by the ritualist curate Arthur Henry Stanton [q.v.].
His religious beliefs marked him deeply and inspired a number of publications, including short books on The Seven Deadly Sins (1907) and The Church in the Modern State (1914).
After helping to lead an unsuccessful strike by the Vellum Binders' Society in 1891–2 for the eight-hour day, he became the union's president.
He failed in three attempts to secure election to the Trades Union Congress's parliamentary committee, but he represented the vellum binders at the foundation conference of the labour representation committee in February 1900, and was elected to its executive.
He served for three years, originally as chairman, and it is as the first chairman of the future Labour party that he achieved his principal prominence in labour history.
In later years he drifted away from his original Liberalism and his later Labour ties, and in 1910–11 served as a Conservative nominee as alderman on the London county council.
Rogers's principal political achievement was his work for the National Committee of Organized Labour, a body established in 1899 to work for universal old-age pensions.
It was a lengthy and difficult task, marked by the indifference and even antagonism of the movement in whose name he nominally acted, but his speaking, organizing, and writing skills (which included the production of fifteen pamphlets and a co-authored book) and tireless travelling until victory was achieved in 1908, made him the ‘ideal secretary’ described by F. H. Stead, the warden of the Browning Hall settlement and his collaborator in the pension struggle.
It is notable that despite Rogers's High Anglicanism he worked harmoniously with the Congregationalist Stead and was actively involved with the interdenominational Browning Hall.
His most important literary work was his autobiography,Labour, Life and Literature (1913).
Towards the end of his life he was an enthusiastic supporter of British involvement in the war of 1914–18, for which he made recruiting speeches.
Rogers was somewhat reserved and shy in private life and an obituary notice by his old acquaintance, Canon Henry Scott Holland [q.v.], described him as suggesting ‘something strange and blurred’(Commonwealth , December 1915).
Holland, Stead, and others wrote warmly of him, but in a wider circle he was more respected than loved.
His educational achievements, lack of a major trade-union base, and personal idiosyncrasies inhibited his effectiveness as a labour leader, but did not prevent him from making significant contributions to his class and time.
He died 16 November 1915 at his home in New Cross, south London, to which he had moved from Whitechapel in 1901, and he was buried in Nunhead cemetery.
He was unmarried.
[Frederick Rogers,Labour, Life and Literature , 1913 (new edn. with introduction by David Rubinstein, 1973); F. H. Stead,How Old Age Pensions Began to Be , 1909; Labour party archives, National Museum of Labour History, Manchester; J. M. Bellamy and J. Saville (eds.),
Dictionary of Labour Biography , vol. i, 1972.]
Anthony Allfrey
, Sir Basil (1849–1936), arms merchant, banker, and philanthropist, was born Zacharias Basilius Zacharoff in Mughla, Anatolia, 6 October 1849, the only son and eldest of four children of Basilius Zacharoff (formerly Zachariadis), notary and commodity dealer, of Constantinople, and his wife Helena Antonides.
Little is known of his formal education.
Entrusted with commissions in London, he there (under the name Gortzacoff) married Emily Ann, daughter of John Burrows, a Bristol builder, on 14 October 1872.
Arrested and charged with embezzlement, he was tried at the Old Bailey but was released on his own recognizance of £100, after making an offer of compensation.
He fled to Cyprus without his wife and set up as a storekeeper and contractor.
Although he was operating under another name, rumours of his past caught up with him, and he escaped to America in the early 1880s.
Exposed after a bigamous marriage in New York in 1885, he changed his name to its final form and enlisted with Thorsten Nordenfelt, the London-based Swedish inventor of a quick-firing gun and an unseaworthy submarine.
In 1888 he engineered a merger with their rival,(Sir) Hiram Maxim [q.v.].
When in 1897 the Vickers steel company acquired the Maxim–Nordenfelt Guns & Ammunition Co., as well as the Naval Construction & Armaments Co. of Barrow, Zaharoff was retained as principal overseas agent.
His favoured fiefs were Spain, Russia, and South America.
He had for sale (on commission) the Nordenfelt and Maxim guns in their various versions, the Holland submarine, a range of the most powerful naval surface ships, the Whitehead torpedo, and, later, a fighter aircraft.
He settled in Paris in style and took French citizenship in 1908.
He was a major shareholder in the Banque de France and in S. Japhet & Co., London.
In 1915 the British government accepted his offer to bully neutral Greece into joining the Allies.
Having succeeded in that, he undertook to disengage Turkey from Germany.
Under the direction of David Lloyd George (later Earl Lloyd-George of Dwyfor) he negotiated peace terms with the Turkish war leader, Enver Pasha, in Switzerland.
In 1920, with Lloyd George's complicity, he encouraged the Greeks in their dream of empire in Asia Minor at Turkey's expense.
It was his role in this disastrous adventure which first earned him his sinister reputation and the description ‘merchant of death’.
His philanthropy as much as his fortune was the subject of speculation.
A lasting and original contribution was the foundation of chairs of aviation at the University of Paris (1909) and the Imperial College of Science and Technology in London (1919); he also established the Marshal Foch chair of French literature at Oxford.
For his wartime services he was rewarded with the GBE in March 1918 and the GCB in the following January.
He received also the grand cross of the Legion of Honour and a honorary DCL from Oxford.
He was a man of commanding presence and curious contrasts.
Guileful and ruthless, he was a generous and steadfast friend.
His extravagance and ostentation were balanced by a natural dignity and reserve.
On 22 September 1924, he regularized a long-time liaison by marrying the recently widowed Duchess of Marchena, created Duchess of Villafranca de los Caballeros in her own right.
On her death, 25 February 1926, he adopted her two married daughters.
He had no children of his own.
Zaharoff died 27 November 1936 in Monte Carlo.
[Anthony Allfrey,Man of Arms: the Life and Legend of Sir Basil Zaharoff , 1989; Bank of England ledgers; William Shaw papers, Columbia University; Lloyd George papers, House of Lords Record Office; Vickers archives, Cambridge University Library; private information.]
Laurence Worms
,Effingham (1785–1868), bookseller and publisher, was born 28 September 1785 in Kirkby Ravensworth in Yorkshire, the son of Joseph Wilson and his wife Jane Hutchinson.
His father, the son of a Yorkshire grazier, had at one time been a journeyman packer in London.
Wilson, named from some connection with the Earl of Effingham, had at least four brothers, three older, one also a bookseller.
Originally intended for medicine, Wilson was in part brought up by his uncle, the phrenologist Dr Thomas Hutchinson of Knaresborough.
Once in London, he worked with James Asperne, of the European Magazine , Thomas Hurst, of Longman's, and perhaps Thomas Tegg [q.v.], who witnessed Wilson's admission to the Clothworkers' Company 7 February 1810.
In business for himself, first near St Paul's, but by 1812 firmly established at the Royal Exchange in Cornhill (where he remained for the rest of his career, apart from an enforced absence during the rebuilding of 1838–44), Wilson became the determined champion of a free press —‘It is like the air we breathe; if we have it not, we die.’
Soon a familiar figure in radical circles, he assisted his fellow bookseller, William Hone [q.v.], in preparing the famous defence to the triple libel trial of 1817.
He published the notorious Church-of-Englandism (1818) and the ‘unpublishable’The Elements of the Art of Packing (1821), both by Jeremy Bentham [q.v.].
He brought out T. Perronet Thompson's assaults on the corn laws, the ‘revolting heresies’ of William Godwin, and the social visions of Robert Owen [qq.v.].
His edition of the Extraordinary Black Book (1831) by John Wade [q.v.], the ‘Reformers’ Bible', presaged the passing of the Great Reform Act of 1832, for his services to which cause Wilson was granted a testimonial.
Aside from politics, he built a business that lasted until the 1920s as a specialist publisher of works on finance and economics.
His list was none the less wide-ranging enough to include some handsome illustrated books, as well as the first regular publications of both Alfred, Lord Tennyson [q.v.]
(Poems, Chiefly Lyrical , 1830) and Robert Browning [q.v.]
(Paracelsus , 1835).
An advocate of progress in all forms, Wilson was the first in his area to illuminate his premises with gaslight.
He was on the first train into London and founded the earliest Railway Magazine in 1835.
He was also closely involved with George Birkbeck [q.v.]and the popular education movement, contending for each child to ‘have that given to it which nobody can take away’.
A fit and powerful man, a sportsman who also published The Young Cricketer's Tutor (1833) by John Nyren [q.v.], the first cricketing classic, he boasted sixty years in London without a headache.
Publicly a man who ‘shrank instinctively from compromise’, his private life was one of kindliness, friendship, and moving generosity.
He was married twice, to Martha Hunt in 1804 and to Maria James in 1822.
His tenderness towards his many children (perhaps fifteen in all, of whom a son and five daughters of the first marriage, and two sons and two daughters of the second marriage are certainly known) was a notable characteristic.
He died at 38 Mildmay Park, Islington, 9 June 1868.
His obituary in the City Press claimed that his was ‘the longest career, and, we believe, the most independent, public-spirited and fearless career, of any publisher of his time’.
[Bookseller , 1 July 1868;City Press , 18 July 1868; archives of the Clothworkers' Company; parish registers of Kirkby Ravensworth, St Bartholomew the Less, and St George Bloomsbury.]
J R Maddicott
,Bartholomew (c. 1275–1322), servant of the Crown, was the son and heir of Guncelin Badlesmere (died 1301), of Badlesmere, Kent, and his wife Joan, daughter of Ralph FitzBernard of Kingsdown, Kent.
Like his father, who was a royal banneret and justice of Chester from 1274 to 1281, Badlesmere made his way in the world through service to the Crown.
First summoned to serve in Gascony in 1294, he accompanied Edward I to Flanders in 1297, fought at Falkirk in 1298, and by 1299 was one of the king's household knights.
His representing Kent in the Carlisle parliament of 1307 was a mark of corresponding importance in his own pays .
Edward II's accession later that year accelerated his rise.
He was made constable of Bristol Castle in August 1307 and began to receive numerous royal grants.
Only during the prolonged crisis caused by the opposition of the reforming Ordainers to the king's favourite, Piers Gaveston [q.v.], in 1310–12 did his loyalties waver.
He was among those barons who petitioned Edward for reform in March 1310, and in 1312 he was ordered to surrender Bristol Castle, probably the sign of a more open opposition.
But after Gaveston's execution in June 1312 he returned to a more comfortable position at the king's side.
By this time he had a firm place in baronial society.
His early connections had been with Henry de Lacy.
third Earl of Lincoln [q.v.], whose retainer he was by October 1300, and with Robert de Clifford, first Baron of Westmoreland [q.v.], the northern magnate, with whom he served in Edward I's later Scottish campaigns.
He had a closer association with Gilbert de Clare, ninth Earl of Gloucester [q.v.], perhaps resulting from his marriage, before 30 June 1308 (Cal.
Pat.
Rolls, 1307–13 , p. 83), to Margaret de Clare, Gloucester's cousin.
As Gloucester's knight he earned an ignominious name at Bannockburn in 1314 by leaving his lord to his death in the mêlée.
Badlesmere was by now one of the king's chief councillors and lieutenants.
Together with Aymer de Valence, Earl of Pembroke [q.v.](often his partner in these years), he led an expedition to the north in 1315; in 1316 he took a major role in the suppression of the Welsh rising of Llywelyn ab Rhys (Llewelyn Bren)[q.v.]and of the revolt at Bristol; and in the same year he was among the committee of bishops and magnates appointed to reform the royal household.
In September 1316 Edward retained him for a very large fee in return for the promise of his service with a commensurately large retinue; and shortly afterwards he and Pembroke set off for the papal curia on a mission which had the repeal of the Ordinances as one of its objectives.
All these activities point to Badlesmere's standing at Edward's court.
He was, however, on the court's moderate wing.
In 1317 he and Pembroke combined to restrain the most avaricious of the courtiers, Roger Damory [q.v.], in order to placate the court's leading opponent, Thomas, Earl of Lancaster [q.v.]; and he went on to play a part in the negotiations with Lancaster which culminated in the treaty of Leake in 1318.
But his appointment as steward of the royal household in November 1318 was both a snub to Lancaster, who claimed the right of appointment, and a mark of his growing association with Hugh le Despenser the younger [q.v.], the chamberlain of the household and the rising star at court.
He remained very close to Edward, particularly as the king's negotiator with the Scots, until June 1321, when, at Sherburn in Yorkshire, he deserted to the baronial party which was forming against the two Despensers.
Resentment at the younger Despenser's dominance at court, and his own links with the marchers who formed the core of the opposition — his daughter Elizabeth married the son and heir of Roger Mortimer, eighth Baron of Wigmore [q.v.], in 1316 — may account for this dramatic change of sides.
It did him no good.
Lancaster, the opposition's leader, refused to receive him and Badlesmere returned to Kent.
There, his wife's exclusion of Queen Isabella [q.v.]from Leeds Castle in October 1321 inaugurated the short and violent civil war which ended with Lancaster's defeat at Boroughbridge in March 1322.
Badlesmere fought with the rebels at Boroughbridge, but escaped, only to be captured and subsequently hanged and decapitated in Canterbury 14 April 1322.
Badlesmere left one son, Giles (1314–38), and four daughters.
Through the favour of the king and of the Earl of Gloucester he built up a large estate in Kent and elsewhere: a royal grant of 1315 enumerates lands in forty-six places spread through eight counties.
To judge by his employment, he was an able man, who owed his promotion to both his diplomatic and military skills and his energetic acquisitiveness.
That such a natural loyalist should have met a traitor's end reflects all Edward II's failings as a political manager.
[J. C. Davies,The Baronial Opposition to Edward II , 1918; C. Moor,Knights of Edward I , vol. i, 1929; J. R. Maddicott,Thomas of Lancaster, 1307–22 , 1970; J. R. S. Phillips,Aymer de Valence, Earl of Pembroke , 1972; N. Fryde,The Tyranny and Fall of Edward II, 1321–26 , 1979.]
H F Oxbury
,Percival Christopher (1875–1941), novelist, was born Percy Wren 1 November 1875 in Deptford, the son of John Wilkins Wren, schoolmaster, and his wife Ellen Sasbury.
Books of reference that state that he was born in 1885 in Devon are mistaken, as they are about some other features of his career.
He was educated at West Kent School and at the Delegacy of Non-Collegiate Students (later St Catherine's College), Oxford.
He was awarded his BA in 1898, and during the years between that date and 1903 he worked as a schoolmaster and tried a number of other jobs.
In 1903 he was recruited to the Indian Educational Service and appointed headmaster of Karachi High School; in 1904–6 he was also educational inspector, Sind, in addition to his duties as headmaster.
In 1910 he became assistant to the director of public instruction, Bombay.
From 1 December 1914 to 31 October 1915 he held the rank of captain in the Indian Army Reserve of Officers, Infantry Branch; he was on sick leave from 17 February 1915 to 18 October 1915, when he was appointed principal of Elphinstone High School, Bombay.
After further sick leave for nine months during 1917 he retired from the IES in November of that year.
During the years 1910 to 1912 Wren published four textbooks, including one on the teaching of English, one as a guide to the theory and practice of education, and one on Indian School Organization (1911).
These books throw little light on his personal career but do reveal at last one aspect of his character.
He was certainly not lacking in self-assurance.
For example, in the preface to Indian School Organization he explained: ‘It is hoped that this book may be found useful…by teachers in general and headmasters in particular and may prove suggestive to Indian educationalists whose experience happens to be less varied than that of the author.’
In 1911 Wren had been working in India for less than eight years.
When he took his BA at Oxford Wren's forename was Percy; during his years in the IES he changed this to Percival, and it was only when he became an author that he added Christopher.
His first novel,Dew and Mildew , which had an Indian setting, was published in 1912.
Between that year and 1941 he published over thirty other novels, the first to be based on the French Foreign Legion,The Wages of Virtue , appearing in 1916.
His first notable success came in 1924 with Beau Geste , another story based on the French Foreign Legion, which, but for its clever opening, soon became outmoded.
While travelling from Kano to Lagos an officer of the French army recounts to a British member of the Nigerian Civil Service the mysterious circumstances in which, going to the relief of a desert fort manned by legionnaires, surrounded by rebel Tuaregs, he reaches his objective only to find no sign of a battle or siege, but a fort defended by corpses.
This novel was filmed three times, in 1926, 1929, and 1966.
Two other novels,Beau Sabreur (1926) and Beau Ideal (1928), were filmed in 1928 and 1931 respectively.
Wren's last novel,Odd — But Even So , was published in 1941, the year of his death in Amberley, near Stroud, 22 November 1940.
He left a widow and had at least one son.
[The Times , 24 November 1941; India Office Library records.]
Ralph Freeman
, Sir (Charles) Douglas (1840–1921), civil engineer, was born near Smethwick 14 May 1840, the eldest in the family of three sons and one daughter of (Sir) Charles Fox [q.v.], engineer, and his wife Mary, daughter of Joseph Brookhouse, clock-maker, of Derby.
He attended Highgate School (1851–4), King's College School (1854–5), and King's College, London (1855–7), of which he became an honorary fellow in 1887.
Fox was to have gone to Trinity College, Cambridge, but that plan foundered with the sudden financial collapse in early 1857 of his father's erstwhile flourishing business.
Instead, he was articled to his father who, later in 1857, had begun to practise as a consulting engineer in London.
In 1863 Fox joined his father in partnership.
The latter had already built an international reputation in railway and allied engineering.
By 1865 the new practice was involved in major projects in Britain, the USA, Canada, South Africa, India, Australia, and South America.
Douglas Fox's potential was well exercised when, from 1863 to 1866, the firm, still just father and son, masterminded the complex system of viaducts and bridges in Battersea, separating the lines from the east and south to Victoria from those from the south-west to Waterloo, including the widening of the Grosvenor bridge over the Thames from two to seven tracks.
Sir Charles Fox died in 1874.
His second son Francis had joined the partnership, which the two brothers now carried on together.
Work continued to pour in, especially from South Africa and South America, but also at home.
In 1886 Douglas Fox and James Brunlees [q.v.]were knighted on completion of the first tunnel under the Mersey which, along with the railway linking Birkenhead with Liverpool, they had jointly engineered.
Among the many projects for which the firm was responsible during Fox's later years were the Liverpool Overhead Railway (the first electric elevated city railway in the world), the extension from Rugby to London of the Great Central Railway, including its Marylebone terminal, the Great Northern and City tube (with large tunnels to accommodate standard rolling stock), and the ‘Hampstead tube’ linking Charing Cross with Golders Green and Highgate; and, abroad, much of the Cape Government Railways in South Africa, the whole Rhodesia Railways system, including the 500-feet span Victoria Falls arch bridge over the Zambesi river, the Benguela Railway in Angola, and several railways and other works in South America.
Fox was president of the Institution of Civil Engineers (1899–1900).
He was a JP for many years.
Like his father, he was of an urbane and generous disposition.
Inheriting his mother's religious principles, he was strict in his observances.
Not only at home, but also at his office, prayers began each day for all present.
In 1863 he married Mary (died 1920), daughter of Francis Wright of Osmaston Manor, Derby.
They had one son and four daughters.
Fox died 13 November 1921 at the Kensington home of one of his daughters.
[Information from family and from Institution of Civil Engineers;The Times , 15 November 1921;Engineer , 18 November 1921; archives of Acer Group Ltd.]
Clyde de L Ryals
,John (1765–1845), flax-spinner, was born 27 July 1765, the only surviving child of Jeremiah Marshall, linen-draper of Leeds, and his wife Mary Cowper of Rawdon.
He attended schools in Yorkshire and Derbyshire, and at the age of seventeen entered his father's successful business.
When his father died, Marshall ventured with two partners into yarn manufacture by the new process of spinning flax by machinery.
This partnership was dissolved in 1793, and soon two wealthier partners were enlisted.
The business grew as new plants were built at Leeds and elsewhere, and soon became the biggest spinning firm.
Marshall, however, was restive in the partnership and in 1804–6 bought out his associates' shares in mills in Leeds and Shropshire.
By 1815, with the help of junior partners in Marshall and Co., he had amassed a fortune and gained fame as an astute businessman.
Marshall and his wife moved into increasingly larger houses near Leeds, but regarded their summer residence, Hallsteads, on Ullswater, where they were intimate with Dorothy and William Wordsworth [qq.v.]and the local gentry, as their real home, Marshall becoming high sheriff of Cumberland in 1821.
In 1821 Marshall began lengthy visits to London, where he met the leading Utilitarians, supported their causes, and became a member of the council of the new university there.
In Leeds meanwhile he interested himself in educational ventures and became widely known for public service.
A Liberal, he served as MP for Yorkshire from 1826 to 1830.
Thereafter Marshall divided his time mostly between his various residences, where he entertained such notables as Thomas Carlyle [q.v.].
In 1795 Marshall married Jane (1770–1847), daughter of William Pollard, a merchant of Halifax.
They had twelve children, one dying in childhood.
Marshall died at Hallsteads 6 June 1845.
[R. V. Taylor,The Biographia Leodiensis , 1865; W. G. Rimmer,Marshalls of Leeds: Flax-Spinners 1788–1886 , 1960.]
Ronald M Birse
,Aeneas (c. 1780–1852), exciseman and inventor of the Coffey still, was born about 1780, probably in Dublin (though one source gives his birthplace as Calais), the son of Andrew Coffey, the city engineer of Dublin, who was employed in the Dublin City Waterworks from 1774 to 1832.
He is thought to have attended classes at Trinity College, Dublin, but there is no record of his having graduated from there.
He entered the service of the excise in 1800 as a waiter, gauger, and searcher.
He was appointed surveyor of excise for the city of Dublin in 1809 and in the following year was transferred to county Donegal, where he was put in charge of operations against illicit distilling.
The excise laws were widely regarded by the Irish as unnecessarily strict, and they certainly resulted in harsh repressive measures being taken by excise officers, often in conjunction with military forces, although there is ample evidence that both sides resorted to violence at times.
The Revd Edward Chichester published a pamphlet in 1818 entitled Oppressions and Cruelties of Irish Revenue Officers , in which he described how, in 1810, a detachment of the army led by Coffey was set upon and disarmed by the country people near Culdaff in Inishowen, and he himself was beaten ‘until he was supposed to be dead’.
Also in 1818 Coffey, by then acting inspector-general of excise, published his Observations on Chichester's pamphlet, in which he restated the official policy but did not produce any very convincing arguments or evidence in its justification.
Shortly after this, in 1821, he began a series of experiments at Carrickfergus distillery on the design of a new type of still, with the twofold objective of allowing the distiller to check the strength of the spirit without requiring to have access to it, and securing the various parts of the still against any abstraction of the contents.
His patent application for ‘Apparatus for Brewing and Distilling’(no. 5,974) is dated 1830, and he was granted a patent for Ireland for only fourteen years from 1831.
Although it had been conceived originally as a means of reducing illegal practices during the process of distillation, the ‘Coffey still’ had obvious commercial advantages, but his efforts to introduce it in Ireland met with little success, and it was in Scotland that it first became popular in the 1840s.
In the meantime he had resigned from the excise and moved with his family to London, where the firm of Aeneas Coffey & Sons was established in 1835 for the manufacture of the new still.
Improved versions of what became more generally known as the patent still are widely used in the making of grain whisky, gin, and other potable and industrial spirits.
Aeneas Coffey married Sussana Logie in 1808 and their four sons all entered the business, three of them after studying at Trinity College, Dublin.
Coffey died in Bromley, Middlesex, 26 November 1852, his eldest son Aeneas having died a few months earlier.
[E. J. Rothery, ‘Aeneas Coffey (1780–1852)’,Annals of Science , vol. xxiv, 1968, pp. 53–71.]
D R Nicoll
,John Hessell (1894–1982), soldier, cipher-breaker, and cryptographer, was born in Bloomsbury, London, 25 May 1894, the youngest in the family of one daughter and two sons of Alfred Hessell Tiltman, FRIBA, architect, and his wife Sarah Ann Jane Kerr.
Tiltman was educated at Charterhouse School, where at the age of thirteen he was offered a place at Oxford University which the family was unable to take up.
On leaving school, between 1912 and 1914 he taught at three schools, the last of them Northcliffe House School, Bognor.
At the outbreak of World War I he enlisted and was commissioned in the King's Own Scottish Borderers, and from 1915 to 1917 he served in France, where he won the MC and was severely wounded on the Somme.
In August 1920, almost by chance, he was attached for a year to the small peacetime signal intelligence organization in London, and was then posted to Simla in India, where for eight years he performed cipher-breaking duties with remarkable success.
Having become a War Office civilian in 1925, he was recalled to the colours as a lieutenant-colonel in September 1939 to command No.
IV Intelligence School.
Before that he had helped to earmark dons and outstanding undergraduates for signal intelligence work in the event of war.
Many wartime recruits came under his influence through the Bedford training courses, which he organized and supervised.
During the 1930s he led the team which successfully decrypted all Comintern radio traffic with England, and by 1939 he was head of the military section at the Government Code and Cypher School.
During the course of the war he was promoted colonel and brigadier, and was made chief cryptographer at GC and CS at Bletchley.
The unrivalled versatility of ‘The Brig’ was shown by the contributions he made to the solution of a number of machine ciphers during World War II.
For example, he broke the German Railway Enigma in February 1941, which revealed in detail German preparations to attack Greece and the USSR.
His work was crucial to the initial break into the German enciphered teleprinter systems used for the highest level of German services communications.
As a solver of non-machine systems he was pre-eminent, through intuition, experience, and dogged persistence producing answers to problems of the most difficult and complex kind and constantly improving the speed and elegance of the methods used.
He continued as a civilian in GCHQ after the war and retired at assistant secretary level in 1954.
Tiltman was every inch a soldier but of unassuming modesty.
He believed that the success of his work depended upon personal anonymity and public non-disclosure.
From his work against Soviet agent and Comintern systems before the war, he knew how governmental revelations could nullify success.
His wide-ranging contribution to Allied security during World War II was recognized by the USA with the award of the US Legion of Merit in 1946.
He was appointed OBE (1930), CBE (1944), and CMG (1954).
In 1926 Tiltman married in Simla Tempe Monica, daughter of Major-General Oliver Robinson of the Army Medical Service.
They had one daughter.
Tiltman moved to Washington DC after his retirement, and was employed as a consultant by the US National Security Agency.
He died 10 August 1982 in Hawaii.
[R. Lewin in The Times , 24 September 1982; Christopher Andrew,Secret Service: the Making of the British Intelligence Community , 1985; F. H. Hinsley et al .,
British Intelligence in the Second World War , vol. iii, part 1, 1984; private information; personal knowledge.]
Helen Miller
, Sir William (c. 1510–1571), London merchant, was born c .1510 in the parish of St Magnus the Martyr near London Bridge, the son of John Garrard, a London grocer.
He became a haberdasher and Merchant Adventurer, growing rich on the cloth export trade to Antwerp.
He bought the manor of Dorney, Buckinghamshire, in 1542, but continued to live mainly in London and remained an active merchant all his life.
When the Antwerp market began to contract, he diversified into more risky ventures.
In 1552 he exported linen and woollen cloth, coral, amber, and jet to the Barbary coast in return for sugar, dates, almonds, and molasses.
He was involved in a number of voyages to Guinea in the 1550s and 1560s, shared in two of the slaving expeditions of Sir John Hawkins [q.v.], and was a leading promoter of the expedition of Richard Chancellor [q.v.]to Russia in 1553.
Garrard was named a consul of the Muscovy Company when it was founded in 1555, and from 1561 until his death was almost continuously either sole or joint governor of the company.
He was also a governor of the Mineral and Battery Works founded in 1568.
An alderman by 1547, Garrard was elected sheriff of the city of London in 1552, mayor in 1555 — being knighted during his term of office — and one of London's MPs in the last Parliament of Mary I's reign.
But his major contribution to the corporate life of the city was his work for the relief of the poor.
In 1545 he was one of those appointed to devise new means of tackling the problem and in the 1550s he took a leading part in drawing up constitutions for the city's new or refounded hospitals.
He was a governor of Christ's Hospital in 1553–4, of Bridewell in 1558–9, and of St Bartholomew's from 1559 until his death, surveyor of all the city's hospitals in 1566–7 and their comptroller general from 1568.
He maintained his interest until the end, bequeathing to Christ's Hospital £20 ‘which they owe me that I lent them’, with an additional £6 13s. 4d., besides £20 each to St Bartholomew's and St Thomas's.
He also left money for prisoners in the city's prisons and the Gate House at Westminster and for poor householders in his ward and in two London parishes — St Magnus and St Christopher le Stocks, where he was then living — and in the parishes of Dorney and Burnham in Buckinghamshire and Sittingbourne in Kent, where he owned property.
Garrard died 27 September 1571 and was buried, as he had requested, in the church of St Magnus the Martyr.
He was survived by his wife Isabel, daughter of Julian Nethermill, a Coventry draper, and their four sons and one daughter.
The eldest son inherited Dorney and became a country gentleman, but John, the third son, followed his father as a city merchant and, in 1601, lord mayor.
Sir Samuel Garrard [q.v.], lord mayor in 1709, was a descendant of this son, providing a rare example of continuity in the mercantile élite of London.
[S. T. Bindoff,The House of Commons 1509–1558 , 1982; T. S. Willan,The Muscovy Merchants of 1555 , 1953; R. Hakluyt,The Principal Navigations , 1903; will proved in Prerogative Court of Canterbury (PCC 3 Daper).]
N M Sutherland
,William (d. 1589?), political agent and envoy, was persona grata at the court of Elizabeth I by 1560.
Though described as a gentleman, and obviously well educated, his birth, parentage, and schooling all remain obscure.
William Cecil, Baron Burghley [q.v.], was his principal master and patron and his exceptional utility to the government lay in his linguistic achievements.
Herle spoke Latin, Flemish, and Italian; probably also French and Spanish.
He was a specialist on the Netherlands and studied the affairs of France and Spain.
He must have been radical in religion and he favoured English support for the cause of the Netherlands, possibly being used by Sir Francis Walsingham [q.v.]and Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester [q.v.], to urge this policy on Burghley.
Herle served on various missions, as envoy to Hamburg, the Netherlands, Cologne, Emden, and Utrecht.
Normally, however, he was resident in London, operating as an undercover agent there.
To gather intelligence he interrogated Catholics, suspects, and prisoners, and even requested employment as ‘surveyor of foreigners’.
It seems that Herle was rather exploited than gainfully employed.
He had to support a sister and her children — the only relatives we know of — and his whole career was blighted by impecuniosity.
At one time he engaged in privateering and Burghley recommended marriage to any rich widow.
In 1580 he obtained, and sold, the office of ragler (sheriff) in Cardiganshire.
In 1582 and 1586 he served Leicester in the Netherlands and later in 1586 he was returned to Parliament for Callington, Cornwall.
Eventually he obtained an annuity from the Exchequer of £66 13s. 4d., but he was already close to death.
Little is known of Herle's character and qualities and comments tend to be coloured by financial altercations.
Burghley commended his learning and wisdom, and his correspondence demonstrates his ability.
Apparently Herle never married, whether rich widow or otherwise.
He began to fail about the middle of 1588 and probably died in January 1589.
[P. W. Hasler (ed.).
The House of Commons 1558–1603 , 1981.]
Peter M Wilkinson
, Sir Alfred Bray (1849–1922), ecclesiastical lawyer, mathematician, and treasurer of the Royal Society, was born 6 July 1849 in Kensington, the third of four sons and the fourth of five children of the Revd John Edward Kempe, rector of St James, Piccadilly, and his wife Harriet, daughter of the Revd Robert Serrell Wood.
He was educated at St Paul's School and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he was twenty-second wrangler in 1872.
Called to the bar (Inner Temple) in 1873, he practised on the Western circuit.
At the request of Archbishop A. C. Tait [q.v.]in 1881, he became secretary of the royal commission on the ecclesiastical courts and compiled its report (1883).
In 1886 he was appointed to Newcastle, the first of his six diocesan chancellorships.
Despite the demands of his profession, he kept up mathematical work.
In 1877 he published his best-known work,How to Draw a Straight Line .
But his greatest achievement was in the study of mathematics and logic with his paper,The Relation between the Logical Theory of Classes and the Geometrical Theory of Points (1890), which anticipated and even extended arguments later propounded by Bertrand (third Earl) Russell [q.v.]in The Principles of Mathematics (1903).
Kempe was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1881 and its treasurer in 1898.
He played a major part in the administration of the national Antarctic expedition of 1901–4 led by R. F. Scott [q.v.], and Mount Kempe in South Victoria Land was named in recognition of this.
He was active in one of the Society's most important projects, the founding of the National Physical Laboratory in 1902 and its eventual transfer to the government in 1918.
In many previous cases the government's encouragement to the Society to organize research projects had not been matched by funding; Kempe strove to remedy this.
He received an honorary DCL (Durham) in 1908, was elected a bencher of the Middle Temple in 1909, was knighted for his Royal Society work in 1912, and was appointed to the premier diocesan chancellorship, London, in the same year.
But at this high point in his career his health began to fail under the heavy pressures, and in 1917 he suffered a major breakdown.
He gave up the treasureship in 1918.
Almost the last of the gifted amateurs to hold their own among scientific professionals, his considerable intellect also allowed him to provide clear analysis of administrative problems, which he tackled in conciliatory style.
He married first in 1877, Mary, daughter of (Sir) William Bowman [q.v.], oculist.
They had no children.
She died in 1893 and in 1897 he married Ida, daughter of Judge Meadows White.
They had two sons and one daughter.
Kempe died in London 21 April 1922.
[Obituary by A. Geikie in Proceedings of the Royal Society , vol. cii, 1923; Kempe family papers, West Sussex Record Office.]
Watkins Shaw
,John (c. 1662–1752), virtuoso trumpeter and inventor of the tuning-fork, was born in London c .1662, the son of Matthias Shore, trumpeter (d .
1700), one of a family of three celebrated trumpeters at the court of the late Stuart and early Hanoverian sovereigns.
Already one of the trumpeters-in-ordinary from 30 March 1688, he seems to have joined the court band as a musician-in-ordinary in 1695; he became serjeant-trumpeter in 1707 on the death of William Shore, his uncle or, less probably, brother, and he lived to serve George II.
He was also appointed lutenist of the chapel royal in 1715.
Shore significantly developed a style of playing by which the trumpet escaped from the restrictions of a purely military style and took its place in England as an orchestral instrument, so giving valuable stimulus to Henry Purcell [q.v.]and making it possible for English trumpeters to meet the requirements of the music of G. F. Handel [q.v.].
He is said to have produced ‘a tone as sweet as that of a hautboy’.
In view of the technical advance implied it is thought that it was probably he who was the ‘Mr Showers’ who was complimented in 1692 for having played in hitherto impossible keys and ‘with all the softness imaginable’; but at that date the reference might conceivably be to his father or, less probably, his kinsman William.
Be that as it may, his playing attracted the attention of Purcell before 1694.
He was a minor composer for the instrument.
It was Sir John Hawkins [q.v.], writing in 1776, who stated that John Shore devised the tuning-fork, which he used in preference to the pitch-pipe when tuning his lute.
The precise form of the appliance is not stated.
Shore died in London 20 November 1752.
[Gentleman's Journal , January 1692; Charles Burney,A General History of Music , vol. iii, 1789, p. 499; John Hawkins,A General History…of Music , 2nd edn., 1853, p. 752; E. F. Rimbault,The Old Cheque-Book…of the Chapel Royal , Camden Society, 1872, pp. 28, 229; Andrew Ashbee,Records of English Court Music , 2 vols., 1986–7.]
Ronald M Birse
,James Henry (1844–1896), civil engineer and inventor of the Greathead tunnelling shield, was born in Grahamstown, Cape Colony, 6 August 1844, the son of James Henry Greathead of Grahamstown, member of the legislative council of Cape Colony 1859–60.
He was educated at St Andrew's College, Grahamstown.
He went to England in 1859 to complete his education at Westbourne Collegiate School, London.
In 1864 he began a three-year pupillage with P. W. Barlow [q.v.], followed by a year on the construction of the Midland Railway extension from Bedford to London, under W. H. Barlow [q.v.]and C. B. Baker.
At about this time Peter Barlow was promoting the idea of a network of underground railways as the solution to London's street-traffic problems.
It was agreed that a pedestrian tunnel, the Tower subway, should be driven under the Thames ‘as a sample of the system’, but the memory of the extreme difficulties of Isambard K. Brunel [q.v.]in completing the Thames tunnel resulted in none of the contractors approached by Barlow being willing to tender for the work.
In 1868, however, Greathead made an offer to build the tunnel for the sum of £9,400 and Barlow recommended that it be accepted.
Work began the following year, using a shield which, though similar to one patented by Barlow in 1868, was designed by Greathead; it was forced forward by powerful screw-jacks as excavation proceeded, and the 1,350 ft. long tunnel was completed in less than a year.
Greathead set up his own practice as a consulting engineer in 1870 and continued to devise improvements to his tunnelling shield while being employed mainly on surface railway schemes.
In 1886, however, work began on the long-delayed City and Southwark subway, the beginning of a line that became the City and South London Railway, the world's first underground electric railway.
For the excavation of the twin tunnels through water-bearing strata compressed air had to be used in conjunction with a much-improved design of the Greathead shield, which enabled the first of the tunnels under the Thames to be completed in only fifteen weeks.
Greathead was involved in the early 1890s with several other deep tunnel railway schemes, including the Blackwall tunnel under the Thames, and as a complete contrast he was also associated with (Sir) C. Douglas Fox [q.v.]in the construction of the Liverpool overhead electric railway, opened in 1893.
He was much sought after as an expert witness in arbitrations and parliamentary inquiries, where his engineering expertise and powers of logical exposition carried much weight.
He was elected a member of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers in 1879, and the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1881, serving as a member of the council of the latter in 1894.
He retained close connections with South Africa as consulting engineer to the Durban Tramways.
In 1884 he married Blanche, daughter of Selby Coryndon of Kimberley.
They had one son and two daughters.
He died suddenly at his house in Streatham 21 October 1896.
The many underground railway schemes on which he was engaged at the time of his death had to be completed by others, but the Greathead shield is his lasting memorial.
[Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers , vol. cxxvii, 1896, pp. 365–9; D. J. Jeremy (ed.),
Dictionary of Business Biography , 1985;Transactions of the Newcomen Society , vol. xliii, 1970–1, pp. 41–51; A. A. Jackson and D. F. Croome,Rails through the Clay: a History of London's Tube Railways , 1962.]
Brian Dietz
or ,Thomas (1522–1591), merchant, financier, and entrepreneur, was the second son of John Smith, clothier and small landowner of Corsham, Wiltshire, and his wife Joan, daughter of Robert Brouncker of Melksham.
Supported by a small inheritance from his father, who died in 1538, Smith gained his freedom of the Haberdashers' Company and subsequently of the Skinners', the company of Sir Andrew Judde [q.v.], a wealthy City merchant and Kent landowner, whose daughter, Alice, he married about 1555.
Secure in business and society — he was a Merchant Adventurer, Muscovy merchant, and MP at the time of his marriage — Smith abandoned a conventional career in commerce when he took up the collectorship of the subsidy on imports at the port of London in 1558.
Through his association with the customs, which earned him the title of ‘customer’, Smith entered the realms of government finance and court patronage and politics.
The move was highly profitable, particularly after the negotiation of his first lease of the duties on imported goods at London in 1570.
Over eighteen years it is estimated that the farm yielded around £50,000 net profit.
Throughout this period Smith enjoyed the confidence of the lord treasurer, William Cecil, Baron Burghley, and Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester [qq.v.], from whom Smith subleased the farm of the duties on the import of sweet wines after 1573.
The relationships were indeed so close that suspicions arose that Burghley, who helped Smith to clear a substantial profit on an alum deal in 1578, and Leicester, who referred in his will to his ‘great love’ of the ‘customer’, shared in the profits of the farm.
Sir Walter Raleigh [q.v.]was not alone in believing that they were, in his words, ‘pensioners to Customer Smith’.
Some of the profits of the farm were put into land in Kent, where he added substantially to properties acquired through marriage, and in Wiltshire, where he built a fine house at Corsham.
Smith also invested in industrial and overseas enterprises.
He was particularly active in the affairs of the Societies of the Mines Royal and of the Mineral and Battery Works, either as manager or as lessee of their rights.
By comparison his interest in overseas enterprise was slight.
Shares were bought in the venture of Sir Humphrey Gilbert [q.v.]in 1578 and in the ‘troublesome voyage’ of Edward Fenton [q.v.]in 1582, but the ‘Thomas Smith’[q.v.]who was associated with the Roanoke voyages and with the Levant Company was almost certainly his son and namesake.
Mr Customer Smith did however acquire a dubious reputation for dealing in prize goods.
Smith died a wealthy man 7 June 1591.
He was survived by Alice and their six sons and six daughters.
The eldest son, John, was ancestor of the Lords Strangford; Thomas, the second son, was eminent in commerce and colonization.
According to the monument erected by John in Ashford parish church his father had cherished ‘the professors of true religion’ and promoted literature.
The mathematician Thomas Hood [q.v.]was one who acknowledged a debt to Smith.
Mention is also made of his lease of the customs and the way ‘he presided over them with singular liberality towards those of higher rank’.
Of several portraits the finest is in the possession of Queens' College, Cambridge.
[S. T. Bindoff,The House of Commons 1509–1558 , vol. iii, 1982; P. W. Hasler,The House of Commons 1558–1603 , vol. iii, 1981; J. F. Wadmore, ‘Thomas Smythe of Westenhanger, Commonly Called Customer Smythe’,Archaeologia Cantiana , vol. xvii, 1887, pp. 193–208.]
Alan Hobson
, Sir Robert (c. 1633–1689), republican MP and plotter, was born c .1633, the fourth son of Henry Peyton, examiner in Chancery 1632–54, of Chancery Lane, Middlesex.
Peyton was admitted to Lincoln's Inn in 1655, having also succeeded his father as an examiner in Chancery in 1654.
He was knighted in 1670, served as deputy lieutenant for Middlesex from 1670 to 1676 and again in 1689, as JP from 1672 to 1676, and as MP for Middlesex in the Parliament of spring 1679 and autumn 1680.
Despite holding these positions of responsibility in the 1670s, Peyton was a leading member of the opposition to Charles II.
He was a political associate of both the opposition leaders, George Villiers, second Duke of Buckingham, and Anthony Ashley Cooper, first Earl of Shaftesbury [qq.v.].
By the mid-1670s Peyton had become the leader of a republican group, ‘Peyton's Gang’, and it has been argued that this group had a hand in the murder of the JP Sir Edmund Berry Godfrey [q.v.]in 1678, which provoked widespread belief in the bogus ‘Popish Plot’.
Godfrey was a member of Peyton's Gang but after receiving, in his capacity as a JP, the Popish Plot depositions of the false informer Titus Oates [q.v.],
Godfrey promptly warned one of the accused Catholics and the court itself.
Peyton may have decided to have Godfrey killed both because of his ‘betrayal’ and to stir up hatred against the Catholics, on whom suspicion would inevitably fall.
Peyton was one of the most active members in the spring Parliament of 1679.
In the same year he became the chairman of the radical Green Ribbon Club, but he briefly and secretly came over to the court interest.
He was discovered and bitterly attacked by his former friends in the next parliamentary session.
Peyton did move back into some degree of opposition (now called Whig) contact, and he was involved on the peripheries of the 1682–3 Rye House plot.
In 1685 he planned to raise London for James Scott, Duke of Monmouth [q.v.], during the Monmouth rebellion.
Peyton, however, vacillated, being unsure of support, and Monmouth was defeated in the west whilst Peyton was still holding meetings.
Peyton's plotting was discovered, and, charged with high treason, he fled abroad to Holland.
In 1686 the English envoy to the States General, Bevil Skelton [q.v.], and some of James II's army officers attempted to kidnap Peyton and bring him back to England, but failed, and the affair caused a diplomatic incident.
Two years later, Peyton commanded a regiment in William of Orange's invasion force against James II.
However, Peyton died in London less than a year later, 3 May 1689.
Peyton had a violent character, behaving viciously in the frequent private quarrels in which he became embroiled.
He may well, though, have had a magnetic side to his personality, to be able to rise to such a high position in opposition circles.
He married Jane (died 1684), daughter of Lionel Robinson of Yorkshire.
They had at least one son and one daughter.
[State Papers, Public Record Office;Calendars of State Papers Domestic 1675–1678 ; Stephen Knight,The Killing of Justice Godfrey , 1984; John Miller, review of Knight in Times Literary Supplement , 18 January 1985; B. D. Henning,The House of Commons 1660–1690 , 1983.]
Alan J Cooper
, Sir Alfred Seale (1844–1927), engineer and politician, was born 27 October 1844 in Derby, the fourth of the five sons and the fourth of the eight children of William Haslam, ironmaster of Derby, and his wife Ann, daughter of Joseph Smith of Branstone, Staffordshire.
He was educated privately in Derby and was taken into apprenticeship with the Midland Railway Company.
Once qualified, he joined the firm of Sir William G. Armstrong (later Baron Armstrong of Cragside, q.v.) in London as a hydraulic engineer.
In 1868, in partnership with his father and financed by his uncle Joseph Smith, he purchased the old Union Foundry in Derby.
He started the Haslam engineering works with a staff of twenty and by 1871 he was able to repay the loan from his uncle and later dissolve the partnership with his father, leaving himself in sole charge.
By 1876 the company had become limited.
He was a perceptive developer of the promising research of others, having that rare combination of commercial acumen and technical expertise, making him one of the great engineers.
He could see that refrigeration would bring about a complete change in people's lifestyles and in 1880 he took over the patents of the Bell–Coleman cold-air machine and developed what was known as the dry air refrigerator.
The excellence of this machine eventually gave him a monopoly in refrigerated shipping.
His equipment on board ship and on land enabled British people to enjoy meat, fruits, and other perishable products from countries overseas.
On 5 October 1881 the SS Orient docked at Plymouth with 150 tons of frozen Australian meat on board, an event described vividly by many newspapers (for example ,Daily News , 5 October).
By 1900 the dry air refrigerator had lost its place to chemical machines using CO 2 or ammonia.
Haslam produced equipment using these refrigerants for most purposes where cold was required, such as meat freezing stations, meat cargoes on board ship, cold stores of all kinds for perishable food, ice factories, chemical works, dye works, and works for the manufacture and storage of explosives and ammunition on land and on warships.
Haslam also played a busy role in public life.
In 1879 he became a Derby town councillor and in 1886 was made a JP for the borough.
In 1890 he was elected mayor of Derby and in 1891 became JP for the county.
His biggest achievement in his year of office was the replacement of the old William Strutt Infirmary.
He invited Queen Victoria to lay the foundation stone for the new Derbyshire Royal Infirmary and at the end of her visit she knighted Haslam (1891).
Politically Haslam was prominent in the Liberal Unionist cause.
In 1892 he unsuccessfully contested Derby, but he entered Parliament in 1900 as a representative of Newcastle under Lyme, retaining his seat until the election of 1906.
He was a generous benefactor — for example, he presented bronze statues of Queen Victoria to Newcastle under Lyme, Derby, and London.
His fellowships and honours were numerous and included membership of the Iron and Steel Institute, the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, the Royal Institution, and the Institute of Refrigeration, of which he was president in 1914–15.
He was a liveryman of the City of London and in 1905 was presented with the freedom of Newcastle under Lyme, having occupied the chair of mayor for three consecutive years (1901–4).
In 1875 he married Annie (died 1924), the daughter of Thomas Tatam, farmer, of Little Eaton, Derbyshire.
They had three sons, one of whom was killed in World War I, and three daughters.
Another son and the youngest daughter predeceased Haslam, who died at the St Pancras Hotel, London, 13 January 1927 whilst on a business trip.
He was buried in Morley churchyard.
[British Journal of Commerce , 11 June 1892; Edgar W. Webbe,Oddfellows Companion and Guide to Derby , 1892;Derbyshire Advertiser , 14 January 1927; family information.]
Geoffrey Bill
,Claude (1877–1959), scholar, claimed to have been born 26 May 1877 (his birth certificate counter-claimed 24 May) in Handsworth, Staffordshire, the eldest son of Oswald Jenkins, cashier and later land agent, and his wife Sarah, daughter of William Palmer.
He was a foundation scholar at King Edward's School, Birmingham, and was elected to a classical exhibition at New College, Oxford, in 1896.
He obtained second classes in classical honour moderations (1898),literae humaniores (1900), and theology (1901), and was awarded a Liddon exhibition in 1900 and a Denyer and Johnson scholarship in 1902.
After studying palaeography with Robinson Ellis [q.v.], he assisted C. H. Turner [q.v.]with a projected edition of Eusebius; his research in France and Italy yielded his edition of catena fragments of Origen (Journal of Theological Studies , vol. ix, 1908).
For a year he taught at Magdalen College School, and after ordination in 1903 became curate of St Martin-in-the-Fields and assistant chaplain at Charing Cross Hospital.
His abilities impressed A. C. Headlam [q.v.], principal of King's College, London, who secured lectureships in ecclesiastical history (1905–11) and patristics (1911–18) for him and made him sub-editor (1903–18) and later joint editor (1921–7) of the Church Quarterly Review .
In 1910, with Headlam's support, he became librarian of Lambeth Palace Library, where he extended the foundations of his immense erudition.
Constitutionally disinclined to surrender preferment, being, as he once observed, ‘of a modest if not of a retiring disposition’, he remained librarian until 1952.
He was chaplain to Archbishop Randall Davidson (later Baron Davidson of Lambeth, q.v.) from 1911 and helped to revise the coronation service, but was not closely involved in church affairs.
In 1918 he became professor of ecclesiastical history at King's, where he wished to integrate historical studies with the collections at Lambeth, and in 1931 professor of ecclesiastical history in London University.
He was canon of Canterbury from 1929 to 1934, when he was appointed regius professor of ecclesiastical history and canon of Christ Church, Oxford.
Jenkins published little except a few articles and reviews, notably his devastating critique of A. S. Barnes's Bishop Barlow and Anglican Orders (1922)(JTS , vol. xxiv, 1923).
His learning, which was perhaps too diffuse, was that of the antiquarian rather than the historian.
At Christ Church his eccentricities, which became celebrated, recalled an earlier generation.
With his low-crowned hat and antiquated clerical costume, his broad scholarship and unenthusiastic divinity, his uncompromising insistence on ancient rights (especially in chapter), his belief that land and ‘the funds’ were the only proper investment for the college and industrial shares a new form of the South Sea Bubble, he seemed to have stepped out of the eighteenth century.
In term he usually lectured continuously three mornings a week, often to an audience of one, an ancient alarm clock reminding him to change the subject, perhaps from the Paston letters to the Puritans or from Greek epigraphy to the Oxford Movement.
He was very discursive: his lectures on Augustine, the date of whose birth he was still discussing at the end of term, contrived to include a list of books on the law of tort.
Similarly his sermons were memorable less for their theology than for digressions ranging from the price of second-hand books to a dramatic reading from Macbeth.
In the late 1950s the congregation was startled to be apostrophized with the words, ‘Those of you who remember the siege of Mafeking’.
His only luxury was the purchase of books, which filled his canonical lodgings almost to the point of impenetrability — even the bath contained the files of the Church Quarterly Review — but his library was unsystematic and lacked bibliographical distinction.
Often exasperating to colleagues, he was always courteous and never bore personal rancour.
He delighted in the young and was assiduous in attendance at the Oxford Union, where he was senior librarian.
In private life he was very generous, and gave a large sum anonymously to St Edmund Hall, the first £10,000 characteristically arriving in a dirty used envelope.
He led a remarkably frugal existence but his idiosyncrasies, which embraced the recycling of cigar butts, were from preference rather than parsimony.
Said to have an equal aversion to women and cats, he left most of his library to a women's college, St Anne's.
To Christ Church senior common room he bequeathed a fund for the purchase of snuff, of which he was inordinately fond.
He died in Tunbridge Wells 17 January 1959 when on holiday.
[Information from Lord Blake, Eric W. Kemp, J. N. D. Kelly, J. F. A. Mason, B. J. Wigan; personal knowledge.]
Rosemary Horrox
, Sir Edward (c. 1440–1508), soldier, merchant, and adventurer, also known as Duarte Brandão, was born in Lisbon c .1440, reputedly the illegitimate son of Rui Barba by the wife of a Jewish blacksmith.
About 1468 he travelled to England and converted to Christianity.
As was usual in such cases, the king of England stood godfather.
Brampton may have fought for Edward IV during the political upheavals of 1469–71.
In 1472 he was given joint command of an armed force sent to sea to resist the king's enemies.
In October that year he was made denizen and rewarded ‘for his good service to the king in many battles’ with property in London.
In the following year he was commissioned to raise mariners for service against the king's enemies.
He is probably the namesake ‘of the king's household’ who entered Lincoln's Inn in 1475.
He was certainly in the household, as a gentleman usher, by 1479.
In the following year he received a major grant of land in Northamptonshire formerly held by Isabel Peche (died 1479).
In 1481 Brampton served under John Howard, later first Duke of Norfolk [q.v.], on the naval expedition against the Scots, commanding a Portuguese carvel.
By 1482 he had become an esquire of the king's body and was made captain and governor of Guernsey.
He remained in the royal household under Richard III, who knighted him and gave him further land in Northamptonshire and London in 1484.
In March 1485 he was sent to Portugal to pursue negotiations for a bride for the recently widowed king, and he was thus out of England when Richard III was killed at Bosworth.
From the mid-1470s Brampton maintained extensive business interests.
He was master of the Drapers' Company of London in 1477–8 and in the latter year appears buying goods abroad for the royal wardrobe.
He lent money to both Yorkist kings, repayment generally being made from the customs due on goods shipped by him.
He also developed trading interests in Portugal.
In return for financial help to King Afonso V he was renaturalized as a Portuguese subject in August 1479 and given trading privileges.
After Bosworth Brampton did not return to the English court.
His grants were cancelled by the new regime and he pursued his career elsewhere, settling initially in Bruges and returning to Portugal in 1487.
It was during this period that he took into his service Perkin Warbeck [q.v.], who later claimed to be Edward IV's son, Richard, Duke of York [q.v.].
Warbeck's knowledge of the Yorkist court, which impressed contemporaries, probably came largely from Brampton, although there is nothing to associate him with the conspiracy itself.
Brampton was finally pardoned by Henry VII in 1489.
There is no evidence that he returned to England, although his son was knighted by Henry VII in 1500.
Brampton's land grant of 1480 describes Isabel Peche as his late wife.
She was the daughter of William Vaux of Northampton, and the widow of William Tresham (q.v., died 1450).
On Tresham's death she married William Peche of Lullingstone, Kent, who outlived her.
At her death, Isabel is elsewhere described as Peche's wife and the nature of her liaison with Brampton is thus uncertain.
By 1487 Brampton had remarried; his wife is named variously as Catherine de Bahamonde and Margaret Boemond.
His only known child is Henrique Brandão (died 1515).
Edward Brampton died in Lisbon 11 November 1508.
[Cecil Roth, ‘Perkin Warbeck and his Jewish Master’,Transactions of the Jewish Historical Society of England , vol. ix, 1918–20;idem , ‘Sir Edward Brampton, alias Duarte Brandão: Governor of Guernsey, 1482–1485’,La Société Guernesiaise, Transactions , vol. xvi, 1955–9.]
Irvine Loudon
,Alexander (1752–1799), medical practitioner, was born 20 May 1752 in the parish of Peterculter in Aberdeenshire.
He, and his twin brother James, who became a successful farmer in Logie in Aberdeenshire, were the second and third of the five children of Alexander Gordon, tenant farmer of Miltown of Drum.
After a general education he attended Marischal College in Aberdeen, graduating AM in 1775.
He then studied medicine in Aberdeen, Edinburgh, and probably Leiden.
In 1780 he entered the Royal Navy as surgeon's mate, becoming full surgeon in 1782.
He left the navy on half-pay in 1785 to spend nine months in London developing his special interest in midwifery.
He was resident pupil at the Lying-in Hospital in Store Street, received clinical instruction from two of the leading obstetricians of the day, Thomas Denman and William Osborne [qq.v], and attended the Middlesex Lying-in Dispensary.
When he returned to Aberdeen towards the end of 1785, he was appointed physician to the Aberdeen Dispensary.
In 1786 he published his Observations of the Efficacy of Cold-bathing in the Prevention and Cure of Diseases , a treatise of no great originality on a fashionable subject.
Two years later he was awarded the degree of MD by Marischal College.
Were it not for a severe epidemic of puerperal fever (‘childbed fever’) in Aberdeen, which lasted from December 1789 to March 1792, Gordon might well have been forgotten.
Puerperal fever was previously unknown in Aberdeen and the epidemic was thought to be no more than the common ephemeral fever known as the ‘Weed’, which was rarely fatal.
Gordon, however, had seen many cases of puerperal fever in London.
Recognizing that the epidemic was due to this deadly disease, he kept careful notes of every case.
From these he was able to make the crucial observation that the disease tended to be confined to the practice of a small minority of midwives.
Indeed, he was able to forecast accurately which women would develop the disease merely by knowing which midwife had been in attendance.
He also realized that he had himself unwittingly carried the disease from one midwifery patient to another.
Gordon was the first to provide irrefutable evidence of what had been until then no more than a faint suspicion: that puerperal fever was a contagious disease that could be carried from patient to patient by doctors and midwives.
He also showed that it was closely connected with erysipelas.
These observations were made some fifty years before the well-known work of Oliver Wendell Holmes and Ignaz Semmelweis, which overshadowed Gordon's early but brilliant contribution to the understanding of puerperal fever.
After more than a century of relative obscurity, Gordon's A Treatise on the Epidemic Puerperal Fever of Aberdeen (1795) was recognized for what it is, a masterpiece of early epidemiology based on astute clinical observation and written with exceptional clarity.
Sadly, his treatise damaged his professional reputation.
As Dispensary physician almost the whole burden of the epidemic fell on his shoulders and the women of Aberdeen turned against him, holding him responsible for the facts he revealed, and disputing his fervent belief in the efficacy of purging and heavy bleeding which were ‘repugnant to popular opinion’.
Hurt by ‘the ungenerous treatment which I met with from that very sex whose sufferings I was at so much pains to relieve’, he was glad to leave Aberdeen when recalled to active duty in the Royal Navy.
Soon, however, he developed pulmonary tuberculosis and was invalided out.
An ill man, he returned to his brother James's farm, where he died at the early age of forty-seven, 19 October 1799.
In 1783 he had married Elizabeth Harvey, who survived until 1843.
They had two daughters.
[Ian A. Porter,Alexander Gordon, M.D., of Aberdeen 1752–1799 , 1958; G. P. Milne, ‘The History of Midwifery in Aberdeen’,Aberdeen University Review , vol. xlvii, 1978; C. J. Cullingworth,Oliver Wendell Holmes and the Contagiousness of Puerperal Fever , 1906.]
A F Thompson
,George (1797–1874), leader of the ‘Tolpuddle martyrs’, was born in Tolpuddle, Dorset, the seventh of the ten surviving children of Thomas Loveless, a labourer, and his wife Dinah.
From boyhood he worked on local farms and became an itinerant Methodist preacher.
During the suppression of the agrarian unrest of 1830 he attempted, unsuccessfully, to improve the wages of labourers around Dorchester.
Concluding that ‘it would be vain to seek redress either of employers, magistrates or parsons,’ he formed a Friendly Society of Agricultural Labourers in Tolpuddle in October 1833.
Its modest objectives were to be pursued peacefully, and the Society would ‘not countenance any violation of the laws’.
The repeal of the Combination Acts in 1824–5 had given trade unions a precarious legality, and Loveless's initiative was apparently protected.
However, a resurgence of working-class agitation during 1833–4 alarmed the Whig government and the propertied classes in general.
The home secretary, William Lamb, second Viscount Melbourne, and many other landowners were anxious to stifle any revival of agrarian disorder, and the men of Tolpuddle became their first victims.
On 21 February 1834 the Dorchester magistrates, having consulted Melbourne, declared that membership of the tiny Society was a crime, and Loveless was arrested and accused of administering oaths illegal under largely forgotten statutes of 1797 and 1819.
This charge, designed to circumvent the repeal of the Combination Acts, was technically defensible in that most trade unions, oblivious of the possible consequences, still imposed such oaths.
The subsequent trial was a travesty, and, as a deterrent, an inexperienced judge sentenced Loveless and his five associates to seven years' transportation.
Within weeks they were sent to Australia, where they suffered many privations.
What Sidney and Beatrice Webb [qq.v.]saw as ‘a scandalous perversion of the law’ led to an outcry that coincided with the dramatic emergence of the short-lived Grand National Consolidated Trades Union founded by Robert Owen [q.v.], which organized a massive protest in London on 21 April 1834.
Loveless's cause was also taken up by defenders ranging from William Cobbett and Edward Bulwer Lytton (later first Baron Lytton) to Joseph Hume and Daniel O'Connell [qq.v.].
With their support, the London Dorchester Committee, under the future Chartist William Lovett [q.v.], persuaded the home secretary, Lord John Russell, to pardon the ‘martyrs’ in March 1836.
Loveless returned to England in June 1837 and the Committee, financed by working-class subscriptions, leased an Essex farm for his family.
He then wrote two dignified pamphlets,The Victims of Whiggery (1837) and The Church Shown Up (1838), which revealed his commitment to a moderate, anti-Anglican radicalism.
In 1824 Loveless married Elizabeth Snook Sprachlen of Dewlish, Dorset.
They had five children.
In 1846 they emigrated to Canada, settling near London, Ontario, where Loveless died 6 May 1874, ‘in very prosperous circumstances’.
For a generation he and his fellow ‘martyrs’ were forgotten men, but by the end of the century their brief celebrity had become a hallowed memory.
Loveless, imposing and eloquent, critical of landlords and farmers, lay and ecclesiastical, was enshrined as a working-class hero, his cause célèbre revered as an emotive moment in the development of trade unionism.
[Loveless's pamphlets; Sidney and Beatrice Webb,The History of Trades Unionism , 1894; E. Selley,Village Trade Unions in Two Centuries , 1919; Joyce Marlow,The Tolpuddle Martyrs , 1971.]
D J Mabberley
,Ernest Henry (1876–1930), plant collector, was born 15 February 1876 in Chipping Campden, Gloucestershire, the eldest son of Henry Wilson, gardener, and his wife Annie Curtis.
He was educated locally and was apprenticed at the Solihull nurseries of Messrs Hewitt.
In 1892 he took up a post under W. B. Latham in the Birmingham Botanic Gardens, studying at the technical school in Birmingham, where he won the Queen's prize in botany.
In 1897 he obtained a post at the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, and planned to enter Imperial College, London, with a studentship in 1898, intending to become a botany teacher.
But instead he was chosen to be a collector to bring back seed of the dove-tree,Davidia involucrata , and worked at the Coombe Wood nursery of (Sir) Harry Veitch [q.v.], before leaving for China in 1899.
Wilson first went to Yunan, to meet the collector Augustine Henry for details of Davidia localities, then up to Ichang, which became his headquarters, and he collected Davidia material in Hupeh.
From 1903 to 1904 he was in China again to collect the yellow poppy,Meconopsis integrifolia .
In 1906 he was appointed botanical assistant at the Imperial Institute.
Wilson's success as a collector led to his being invited by C. S. Sargent of the Arnold Arboretum at Harvard University to make another visit to China, in 1907–9.
During his last Chinese expedition in 1910 he broke his leg when his palanquin was swept over in a landslide, and he was lamed for life.
In 1911 he returned to the Arboretum, helping in the preparation of Plantae Wilsonianae , which was edited in three volumes by Sargent (1911–17) but partly written by A. Rehder and other specialists.
During World War I Sargent sent Wilson to Japan, principally to collect flowering cherries.
He was shown the Kurume azaleas, which he later did much to popularize, and collected in Korea and Taiwan.
He was appointed assistant director of the Arnold Arboretum in 1919 and in 1920 travelled to Australia, New Zealand, India, and tropical and South Africa, returning in 1922.
After Sargent's death, Wilson was appointed keeper of the Arnold Arboretum in 1927.
Wilson wrote a large number of botanical and horticultural articles and books, his experiences in China being contained in A Naturalist in Western China (1913) and Plant Hunting (2 vols., 1927).
Many of his books were illustrated with his own photographs: he always carried a plate camera and portable darkroom on his travels.
Wilson's chief contribution to botany and horticulture was in the exploration of China.
A born collector, with good health, strong physique, great will-power, and a deep love of plants, he probably brought more first-class woody plants into cultivation than has any other individual collector.
He introduced more than 1,000 species previously unknown in horticulture and collected some 16,000 herbarium specimens, the top set of which was preserved at Harvard.
Besides bringing the Davidia into cultivation, his greatest introduction was perhaps Lilium regale , the most widely cultivated lily in the USA, nearly 7000 bulbs of which he arranged to have imported in 1910.
Many other familiar garden plants were his introductions too, including Artemisia lactiflora ,Clematis armandii ,Kolkwitzia amabilis (beauty bush),Lonicera nitida (the common hedge-plant),Malus hupehensis ,Rubus tricolor , and Sinacalia (Senecio )tangutica , and numerous cherries, lilacs, and species of Berberis ,Primula ,Rhododendron , and Viburnum , as well as the Chinese gooseberry (or kiwi fruit),Actinidia deliciosa , later a major fruit crop.
Wilson's major misfortune was that the firm of Veitch declined rapidly before 1914, when the stock was sold off before many of his new plants had been propagated or distributed: the Arnold Arboretum had fewer difficulties with his later collections.
Apparently never close to the Chinese (he never learned the language and travelled with a large retinue of porters in some style), he wrote little about the people and rather drily on the landscape and plants.
Besides several gold medals for his services to horticulture, notably the Veitch memorial medal (1906) and the Victoria medal of honour (1916) of the Royal Horticultural Society, Wilson received an honorary MA from Harvard (1916) and a D.Sc.
from Trinity College, Hartford, Connecticut (1930); he was elected a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.
A genus of trees,Sinowilsonia , is named after him, and about sixty species and varieties of plants also bear his name, notably Magnolia wilsonii .
In 1984 the Wilson garden was set up in Chipping Campden as a memorial to him.
In 1902 he married Nellie, daughter of Edwin Ganderton, gardener, of Edgbaston, Warwickshire.
They had one daughter.
Wilson and his wife died 15 October 1930 in a motor accident near Worcester, Massachusetts.
[E. H. M. Cox,Plant-Hunting in China , 1945; R. A. Howard,Arnoldia , vol. xl, 1980, pp. 102–38, 154–93; A. Rehder in Journal of the Arnold Arboretum , vol. xi, 1930, pp. 180–92; archives of Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew.]
D C Freshwater
,George Edward (1850–1907), chemical engineer and publisher, was born in Eton 27 July 1850, the elder son (there were no daughters) of George Davis, bookseller, and his wife Lucy Smith.
Nothing is known of his early schooling but he attended Slough Mechanics' Institute in the late 1860s and the Royal School of Mines, where he trained as a chemist.
He worked at the gasworks in Windsor and Eton and then in the chemical industry before going into private practice in the early 1870s.
This was the period when the Alkali and Chemical Works Acts were being implemented and the chief alkali inspector, Angus Smith, persuaded Davis to join the team that he was forming to administer the Act.
Although reluctant, Davis accepted the appointment and worked for the inspectorate from 1878 to 1884.
It was an experience which was to alter his life.
The inspectors, appointed by the Crown in order to avoid governmental interference, had right of access to virtually any chemical company.
Thus Davis very quickly gained a vast amount of information about the many chemical operations of his day.
This experience, acquired in an age when the chemist was regarded as an expert only in a special field, turned Davis into a generalist and made him realize that the enormous variety of industrial chemical processes could be reduced to a relatively small number of operations, and that the study of these in the abstract would enable general principles to be discovered which could be applied to any process operation — the keystone of chemical engineering.
Davis wanted to share his concept and proselytize his ideas.
He returned to private practice with his brother and developed his notions sufficiently to present at the Manchester Technical College in 1887 a series of lectures on the completely new subject of chemical engineering.
These were published in a condensed form in the Chemical Trade Journal , a technical magazine founded by Davis and his brother Alfred the following year.
They were the basis of the first textbook on chemical engineering which Davis published in 1901.
The introduction outlines clearly his philosophy, explaining that the subject is not to be confused with either applied chemistry or chemical technology.
Davis went on to say, ‘Chemical Engineering deals with the construction of plants…for the utilization of chemical reactions on the large scale without in any way specifying the industry in which such plants are to be used.’
This was a revolutionary idea which was not accepted in Britain until the 1950s although it had been rediscovered in the USA and applied there successfully much earlier.
Davis was a founder-member of the Society of Chemical Industry in 1881 and its first secretary.
He wanted it to be called the Chemical Engineering Society but this proved to be too avant-garde, and a great opportunity to be first was lost.
According to his pupil, Norman Swindin [q.v.], he was inclined to be irascible at times but had a dry sense of humour and the ability to recognize and laugh at his own mistakes.
Davis was awarded fifty-seven patents and published over 100 papers, plus two editions of his handbook.
He undoubtedly made a major contribution, not only to the profession of chemical engineering but to technology and technological education generally.
He was married and had one child, a son.
He died in Dulwich 20 April 1907.
[D. C. Freshwater in W. E. Fulter (ed.),
‘George E. Davis, Norman Swindin and the Empirical Tradition in Chemical Engineering’,History of Chemical Engineering ;Advances in Chemistry , series no. 190, ACS Washington, 1980.]
Alan G Hill
,Dorothy (1771–1855), writer, was born 25 December 1771 in Cockermouth, Cumberland, the third of the five children and only daughter of John Wordsworth, attorney, of Cockermouth, and his wife Anne, daughter of William Cookson, linen-draper, of Penrith.
She was the sister of William, who was a year older, and Christopher, who was three years' younger [qq.v.].
She was educated at a boarding-school in Hipperholme, near Halifax.
Her life was comparatively uneventful and she never married, finding her true self in devotion to others and in the ‘appropriate form’ of her Journals and letters.
No other observer was so close to Wordsworth and Samuel Taylor Coleridge [q.v.]during their most productive years together at Alfoxden and Grasmere; and no one else had such an eye for the landscapes which inspired them, or could provide them with living materials for poetry out of her own observations.
As Coleridge is reported to have said, they were ‘three persons, but one soul’.
Circumstances helped her find her true métier .
Her mother died in 1778 and her father in 1783.
She grew up, happily or otherwise, with a succession of relatives in Halifax, Penrith, and Forncett St Peter, Norfolk, until she was reunited with William (1794).
Thereafter her life was devoted to ministering to him, reviving his poetic powers and love of nature after his withdrawal from the French revolution.
With the help of a legacy from Raisley Calvert [q.v.], they set up house together at Racedown, Dorset (1795).
Two years later they moved to Alfoxden, Somerset, in order to be near Coleridge at Nether Stowey, and there she met Charles Lamb and William Hazlitt [qq.v.].
Her eye for the natural scene is revealed for the first time in her ‘Alfoxden Journal’(1798), the first fruit of the creative partnership between brother and sister which is celebrated at the climax of Wordsworth's ‘Tintern Abbey’.
Her hopes for their return to the Lake District were finally realized ‘home at Grasmere’, in the workaday setting of Dove Cottage (1799), where they were soon joined by the Coleridges and Robert Southey [q.v.]and his wife from Keswick, and later by Thomas De Quincey [q.v.].
She remained an indispensable member of William's household after his marriage (1802), sharing the vicissitudes of the family circle, and proving that the role of housekeeper and copyist was not incompatible with her own creative life.
The ‘Grasmere Journal’(1800–3), which mingles the sublime with the matter-of-fact, reveals her intense response to the seasonal appearances of nature and human life on the open road.
Her sympathies and pursuits remained largely unchanged when the family moved to Rydal Mount (1813).
She cultivated lasting friendships through her correspondence, which mirrors the everyday circumstances in which the Lake poets worked, and she shared her brother's widening circle of friends and visitors.
Her Journals describe many of her travels.
A winter in Germany (1798–9), an excursion to France during the peace of Amiens (1802), and a continental tour (1820) after the Napoleonic wars comprised her journeys abroad with William.
She visited Scotland twice (1803 and 1822), the first time in his and Coleridge's company, and her ‘Recollections’ of the tour form her most ambitious piece of writing.
But she was happiest amongst relatives in the Welsh border country; at Coleorton, the estate of Sir George Beaumont [q.v.]in Leicestershire (1806–7), where she returned to keep house for her nephew John Wordsworth at Whitwick rectory (1828–9); or at Cambridge with Christopher.
Her tastes were easily satisfied, and a lakeland walk or a coach ride by moonlight would furnish her mind with unforgettable impressions.
Dorothy Wordsworth found fulfilment in ways that elude precise analysis.
Onlookers were impressed by her vivid presence, but she had few views or wishes of her own, being content to follow her brother's lead in literary, political, and religious matters.
In her Journals , unpublished in her lifetime, she found a unique outlet for her genius without competing with the writers who surrounded her.
In 1835 she succumbed to a form of pre-senile dementia and for the last two decades of her life was confined to the house and terrace of Rydal Mount.
She died 25 January 1855 in the care of her sister-in-law, surviving William by five years.
[E. de Selincourt (ed.),
Journals of Dorothy Wordsworth , 2 vols., 1941; Alan G. Hill (ed.),
Letters of William and Dorothy Wordsworth , 2nd edn., 1967–88; Thomas De Quincey,Literary Reminiscences , 1834–40; R. Gittings and J. Manton,Dorothy Wordsworth , 1985; Dove Cottage archives.]
Sheridan Morley
,Emma (1838–1912), evangelist, philanthropist, and manager of the Old Vic in the years before it was taken over by her niece Lilian Baylis [q.v.], was born in London into a lower middle-class Anglo-German family.
She was the second daughter and fourth child in the family of two sons and five daughters of Frederick Cons, a maker of pianoforte cases for Broadwood's, and his wife Esther Goodair, the daughter of a Stockport mill-owner.
She was educated at the Art School in Gower Street and then at Mrs Hill's School, where she met Octavia Hill, John Ruskin, Charles Kingsley, and F. D. Maurice [qq.v.].
Emma started work at the age of fourteen for the London Ladies' Co-operative Guild, a group of professional women who designed and decorated glass tables.
She also restored illuminated manuscripts for Ruskin.
Renowned for her ‘tomboyish tastes’(she would, even in evening dress, always carry a knife and some string about her person), Emma went on to the School for Ornamental Art and began to support early Victorian feminist causes, making an initial living as a restorer of stained-glass windows notably in the chapel of Merton College, Oxford, where she worked for two years in the early 1860s.
Returning to London, and influenced by Ruskin and Octavia Hill, she went to work as a volunteer at a number of slum-housing projects around Marylebone, where her contributions ranged from carpentry to moral tutoring and advising the poor of the district on careers, and attempting to lead them away from the evils of alcohol.
By 1870 she had become the manager of the Central London Dwellings Improvement Company, and was about to launch a ‘coffee tavern’ scheme to provide residents of slum dwellings with cheap, non-alcoholic refreshment and light entertainment.
Over the next ten years, financed by such wealthy aristocrats as the first Duke of Westminster and the first Baron Mount-Temple [qq.v.],
Emma Cons was a pioneer and primary manager of the scheme, which spread to fifty locations around London offering hot refreshments, recreation rooms, and sometimes even beds for the deprived of various neighbourhoods.
Eventually she settled on one property at the junction of the Lambeth and Kennington roads, where she built ‘model dwellings for working folk’ and maintained an office, home, and headquarters until her death thirty years later, never marrying but working constantly with her sisters Ellen and Eliza on local improvement schemes.
It was at a meeting in February 1880 of Emma's co-workers and tenants in south London that it was decided to take over the Victoria Theatre (familiarly known as the Old Vic) in the Waterloo Road, a hitherto dirty and drunken home for melodrama, and turn it into a coffee music hall for purified and teetotal entertainment.
She leased the theatre (which she called the Royal Victoria Coffee Music Hall) for eighteen years at a rental of £1,000 p.a., raised from her own charitable supporters, but faced an immediate financial crisis as local audiences, deprived of drink or blue jokes, withdrew their patronage.
The theatre closed, only to reopen a year later, by which time Emma Cons had raised further funds and launched an ambitious season of concerts, plays, and scientific lectures.
But once again the money ran out before sufficient audiences could be attracted to the new policies of temperance and self-improvement, and in 1884 it was the millionaire textile manufacturer and Liberal MP, Samuel Morley [q.v.], who came to the rescue of Emma and her theatre with interim funding, which led eventually to support from the charity commissioners and other private sponsorship with which, in 1891, Emma Cons was able to buy the freehold of the theatre and dedicate it to musical and other entertainments of an uplifting or educational nature.
But by the end of the 1890s, although her work had long been recognized and she had been made a founder-councillor of the London county council in 1899, Emma Cons was approaching a breakdown caused by overwork, not only at the theatre but in all her other housing and philanthropic efforts (she was also vice-president of the London Society for Women's Suffrage, an executive member of the Women's Liberal Foundations, and a founder of the Women's Horticultural College at Swanley).
Accordingly she wrote to her favourite niece Lilian Baylis, then in South Africa, requesting that she should return home to take over the management of the theatre.
Emma Cons lived on for another twelve years, continuing to work at her housing projects: but a new chapter had opened in the history of what was to become the Old Vic, as Lilian Baylis began to programme it for early films and then light opera and later Shakespeare.
Emma Cons died 24 July 1912 in Hever, Kent.
[Richard Findlater (K. B. F. Bain),Lilian Baylis, the Lady of the Old Vic , 1975; British Theatre Museum.]
Irvine Loudon
,Geoffrey Wingfield (1913–1971), anatomist, physiologist, and endocrinologist, was born 4 June 1913 in Acton, London, the elder child and only son of Thomas Harris, scientist, from Oxfordshire, who worked at University College London and the ballistics department, Woolwich Arsenal, and his wife Winifred Irene Stiles of Buckinghamshire.
He was educated at Dulwich College.
Following a few months at University College London, in 1932 he went to Emmanuel College, Cambridge, where he received a double first in the natural sciences tripos, 1934 and 1935.
He did his medical training at St Mary's Hospital (1936–40).
He gained the Cambridge degrees of MB in 1939, MD in 1944, and Sc.D. in 1950.
As an undergraduate he had already developed ideas on the possible mechanisms for the transmission of stimuli from the brain to the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland which led ultimately to possibly his best-known work,Neural Control of the Pituitary Gland (1955), and thus to the establishment of neuroendocrinology as a new discipline.
From 1940 to 1947 he was university demonstrator in anatomy, from 1947 to 1948 lecturer in anatomy, and from 1947 to 1952 lecturer in physiology at Cambridge University.
In 1952 he became head of the laboratory of experimental neuroendocrinology at the Maudsley Hospital, and in 1953 professor of physiology at the University of London.
From 1962 until his death he was Dr Lee's professor of anatomy in Oxford and honorary director of the Medical Research Council's neuroendocrinology unit in the university.
He was also an honorary consultant in psychiatry at the Littlemore Hospital, Oxford.
In Oxford he played an important part in establishing the new physiological sciences final honours school, in which endocrinology was one of the options.
His work included investigations into the effect of gonadal hormones on sexual differentiation of the brain during neonatal life, and into the isolation of hypothalamic releasing factors.
Harris was a large man, energetic, powerfully built, and a keen boxer and rugby player in his youth.
An excellent teacher and a generous and helpful colleague, his outstanding success in research was based on the combination of an excellent operative technique, a continual bubbling flow of new ideas, and a huge capacity for work.
He received the Dale medal in 1971 and his publications included chapters in more than twenty texts, and over 100 original papers in scientific periodicals.
He was appointed CBE in 1965 and was elected FRS in 1953.
He received an Oxford DM in 1962.
In 1936 he married Georgina Mary Birnie, daughter of a Scottish engineer.
They had one son.
Following their divorce in 1951 he married in the same year Margaret, daughter of Dr Michael John O'Kane, general practitioner, of Cushendall.
They had two daughters.
Harris died in Oxford 29 November 1971.
[Martha Vogt in Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal Society , vol. xviii, 1972; obituary notices in British Medical Journal , vol. iv, December 1971, p. 628, and Lancet , vol. ii, 1971, pp. 1328–9; private information.]
A H M Kirk-Greene
, Sir John Stuart (1898–1971), colonial governor and civil servant, was born 25 August 1898 in Edinburgh, the elder son of James Peterkin Macpherson, JP of Edinburgh, hotel manager, and his wife Annabelle Yvill Anderson.
He was educated at George Watson's College and Edinburgh University (MA, 1921).
In 1917 he was commissioned into the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders.
A wound resulted in his having to wear a steel corset for the rest of his life (an extra discomfort in the tropics) and also in total deafness in one ear.
Few ever became aware of these constraints.
Passing the Eastern Cadetships competitive examination, Macpherson was posted in 1921 to the Federated Malay States.
He quickly made his mark as a district administrator.
In 1933 this promise of a distinguished career in the Colonial Service was acknowledged by secondment to the Colonial Office.
Hardly had he returned to Malaya in 1935 than he was again on the upward ladder: in 1937 in the conventional testing ground of an African secretariat, Lagos, followed in 1939 by promotion to the difficult post of chief secretary of troubled Palestine.
The relationship between the youthful Macpherson and his high commissioner, Sir Harold MacMichael [q.v.], was an instance of affectionate respect between two colonial servants as well as an inspiration to the Palestine Service.
Years later he was to repeat the closeness of a working relationship with his chief under Alan Lennox-Boyd (later first Viscount Boyd of Merton, q.v.) at the Colonial Office.
In 1943 Macpherson's career moved westwards, first as head of the wartime British Colonies Supply Mission in Washington, DC, and then in the dual capacity of comptroller for development and welfare in the West Indies and joint British chairman of the Anglo-American Caribbean commission.
His appointment to the governorship of Nigeria in 1948 looked like the triumph of his career.
He was, along with(Sir) Charles Arden-Clarke and Edward (later Baron) Twining [qq.v.], one of the ‘young guard’ of governors, carefully picked by the Colonial Office to replace an older generation like Arthur Richards (first Baron Milverton) and Sir Philip Mitchell [qq.v.]who, in the eyes of such architects of decolonization as (Sir) Andrew Cohen [q.v.]and his master, Arthur Creech Jones [q.v.], were too rooted in pre-war attitudes to adapt enthusiastically to the new spirit of social engineering and transfer of power.
The appointment was all the more surprising within the Colonial Service where, contrary to common precedent, Macpherson had never been tried out as ‘officer administering the government’(OAG); but those who had known him in Lagos a decade earlier at once recognized that they were getting the outstanding man of the Service.
Macpherson's first task was to restore confidence in that Service while equally repairing relations between Government House and the nationalist leadership.
Above all, he had to speed up the protracted constitutional timetable of his predecessor.
He inaugurated nationwide consultation, down to the grass-roots level.
An incipient federation was the outcome, accompanied by his personal initiative for the accelerated Africanization of the public service.
On retiring from Nigeria in 1955 (constitutional changes meant that in 1954 he reassumed the title of governor-general, dormant since 1919), Macpherson was chairman of the 1956 UN visiting mission to the trust territories of the Pacific.
By his appointment as permanent under-secretary of state for the colonies in 1956, he became one of the few overseas service officers to assume the top post.
It was clearly a short-term appointment, arguably calculated to reassure members of the renamed Overseas Civil Service that, at a time when morale might falter as career opportunities shrank with the imminence of independence, at least one of them and not ‘a Whitehall warrior’ was at the helm.
Retiring in 1959 after a year's extension, Macpherson continued to be active in public life, as chairman of Cable and Wireless Ltd. (1962–7), deputy and then chairman of the Basildon Development Corporation (1960–7), vice-president of the Royal Commonwealth and the Royal African Societies, and, from 1962, vice-chairman of the advisory committee on distinction awards for consultants.
Admired for his ability, diligence, and determination by those who knew him and looked on with affection by all who met him, the ready reference to ‘Jock’ was a happy recognition of his easy combination of public popularity, private modesty, and unfailing personal courtesy.
Macpherson was appointed CMG in 1941, KCMG in 1945, and GCMG in 1951.
He became KStJ in 1952.
In 1957 he received an honorary LLD from Edinburgh University.
In 1928 he married Joan, elder daughter of Dr W. E. Fry, CStJ.
They had one son.
Macpherson died 5 November 1971 at Marsham Court, Westminster.
[Colonial Office List ; A. H. M. Kirk-Greene,A Biographical Dictionary of the British Colonial Governor , 1980;The Times , 9 November 1971; interview (tape), Oxford Colonial Records Project, 27 March 1968; private information; personal knowledge.]
Richard Milward
,Edith (1846–1934), artist, was born 1 September 1846 at Bocking, Braintree, Essex, the younger child and only daughter of John Minton Courtauld, junior partner in Samuel Courtauld & Company, silk and crêpe manufacturers, and his wife Sarah Bromley.
Educated at home, her first ambition was to become an artist.
In 1866, after a term at the National Art Training School in South Kensington, she was invited to use a small studio in St John's Wood, owned by her uncle, George Hering, a landscape artist.
There she met John Rogers Herbert [q.v.], a leading Royal Academician, who gave her valuable advice.
In the years following 1868 she had several landscapes and religious pictures exhibited at the Royal Academy.
‘Memories of the First Palm Sunday’ was bought by the National Art Gallery, Melbourne, Australia.
In 1872, on a visit to Egypt, she met Lieutenant Soøren Adolph Arendrup, a thirty-eight-year-old widower and Danish officer, who was serving as artillery adviser to the Egyptian army.
They married in 1873 and settled in Cairo.
There two children were born, a daughter, Agnes, who soon died, and a son, Axel.
In 1875 Edith Arendrup's marriage came to a tragic end.
She had already lost her mother, killed in a riding accident, and her only brother Julien, who had died suddenly in 1870.
Now her husband was killed, leading a small Egyptian army into Ethiopia.
Left a widow at the age of twenty-nine, she returned to England in 1876 and settled with her son and two stepdaughters in the developing suburb of Wimbledon.
There she learned of the sudden death of her father in Switzerland.
She survived ‘these wounds inflicted by fate’ thanks to her deep religious faith.
She had been brought up a Unitarian, but about the time of her brother's death she decided to become a Roman Catholic.
Her conversion changed her life.
With the fervour of a convert, she determined to spread her new faith in strongly Protestant Wimbledon.
In 1877 she opened a small chapel in her house in Cottenham Park.
Then, as the congregation grew, she bought land off Edge Hill and had a fine new church built in 1887.
In 1896 her son died of typhoid.
With no further family responsibilities, she sold her house and joined a religious order, the Daughters of Mary.
For the next thirty years she worked among the poor in Wapping, Rotherhithe, and Dublin, retiring in 1925, at the age of seventy-nine, to her old home in Braintree, now a convent run by Franciscan nuns as an old people's home.
Early in 1934 she suffered a stroke and died 10 January peacefully in her sleep.
Shortly after her death, a friend wrote of her: ‘She was notable in many ways.
She had great artistic talents; she was a skilled horsewoman.
But most notable of all were her qualities of disposition and character.
With absolute unselfishness, she devoted her life and resources to the building of the church on Edge Hill and later to rescue work in the East End.
Her deep and tender sympathy for all who were suffering and afflicted expressed itself in a manner of impressive graciousness and dignity.’
[S. Courtauld,The Huguenot Family of Courtauld , vol. iii, 1967; Ellen C. Clayton,English Female Artists , vol. ii, 1876; private information.]
Philip Williamson
,William Clive , first Viscount Bridgeman (1864–1935), politician, was born in London 31 December 1864, the only child of the Revd John Robert Orlando Bridgeman, third son of the second Earl of Bradford and rector of Weston-under-Lizard, Staffordshire, and his wife (Marianne) Caroline, only child of the Ven.
William Clive, archdeacon of Montgomery.
Bridgeman was educated at Eton (1877–84), becoming captain of Oppidans, and at Trinity College, Cambridge, entering with an open classical scholarship in 1884 and graduating with a second class (division I) in part i of classical tripos in 1887.
He was a lifelong Etonian: that his three sons each succeeded him there as captain of Oppidans, and that he himself was elected an Eton fellow, were sources of great personal satisfaction.
Another early and enduring involvement was in cricket: a member of his school and university XIs, he became a considerable ‘gentleman’ cricketer, playing for county sides, I Zingari, and the MCC, and later an assiduous spectator of big matches at Lords.
An MCC committee member, he was elected president in 1931.
Bridgeman established himself as a country gentleman on a Clive family estate at Leigh, near Minsterley, Shropshire, but his principal interest was in politics, where he maintained his family's Conservative attachment.
He was assistant private secretary to the first Viscount Knutsford [q.v.], 1889–92, and to Sir Michael Hicks Beach (later Earl St Aldwyn, q.v.), 1895–7.
He became MP for the Northern (Oswestry) division of Shropshire, 1906–29.
Adhering to the ‘Disraelian’ tradition of social reform and to Unionism and closer imperial unity, Bridgeman first became prominent in support of the tariff-reform campaign led by Joseph Chamberlain [q.v.].
A junior opposition whip (1911–15) and from 1915 a government whip in H. H. Asquith's coalition government, during 1916 he was also assistant director of the war trade department.
In David Lloyd George's coalition government he was successively parliamentary secretary at the newly created Ministry of Labour (1916–19) and the Board of Trade (1919–20), and first secretary of the mines department (1920–2), acquiring experience of industrial relations which was again called upon during the renewed industrial unrest of 1925–6.
A participant in the 1922 Conservative under-secretaries' revolt against the coalition government, he became home secretary in the Conservative government of 1922–4.
As first lord of the Admiralty (1924–9) he resolutely upheld naval effectiveness and morale, ordering resumed construction of the Singapore base and countering attempts by the chancellor of the Exchequer,(Sir) Winston Churchill, to impose excessive cuts in warship construction, especially in the 1925 cruiser crisis.
As leader of the British delegation at the 1927 Geneva naval disarmament conference, he resisted American claims to ‘parity’ which in reality threatened British naval inferiority.
Bridgeman was admired for his common sense, honesty, plain-speaking, tenacity, and fair-mindedness.
In the 1920s he was the closest political friend of the prime minister, Stanley Baldwin, supporting him in leadership crises in 1923 and 1929–31, and contributing much to the tone of Baldwinite Conservatism — an emphasis upon moral seriousness and social responsibility, a concern to soothe class feelings, and deep distrust of Lloyd George.
Retiring from the House of Commons in 1929, Bridgeman was created a viscount that year.
In 1932 he chaired a committee of enquiry on the Post Office and was appointed to the BBC board of governors, and in 1935 he became BBC chairman.
From a clerical family background, he also became a leading lay Anglican churchman.
Prominent before 1918 in resisting Welsh church disestablishment and defending church schools, he became a vice-president of the National Society (which administered Church of England schools) in 1931.
He was a member of the archbishops' committee on industrial problems (1917–18), and in 1927 was the two archbishops' choice to introduce the revised prayer-book measure in the House of Commons.
In 1895 Bridgeman married Caroline, elder daughter of Cecil Parker, land agent to the first Duke of Westminster, and second son of Thomas Wolstenholme, sixth Earl of Macclesfield.
A strong force behind her husband's career, she was the first woman chairman of the National Union of Conservative and Unionist Associations in 1926, a member of the Church Assembly's house of laity from 1925 and of the archbishop's commission on church and state (1930–5), and succeeded her husband as a BBC governor.
She was appointed DBE in 1924.
The Bridgemans had a daughter who lived one day and three sons.
Robert,(born 1896), the second viscount, had a distinguished army career and became lord lieutenant of Shropshire, Geoffrey was a leading eye surgeon, and Maurice a senior civil servant and later chairman of British Petroleum.
Bridgeman was a Shropshire JP and deputy lieutenant, a privy councillor (1920), an elder brother of Trinity House (1928), honorary LLD of Cambridge University (1930), and chairman of the governors of Shrewsbury School.
He died at Leigh Manor 14 August 1935.
[The Times , 15 August 1935; Philip Williamson (ed.),
The Modernisation of Conservative Politics: the Diaries and Letters of William Bridgeman, 1904–1935 , 1988; private information.]
John Orbell
,John , second Baron Revelstoke (1863–1929), merchant banker, was born 7 September 1863 in Kingston upon Thames, the eldest in the family of five sons and three daughters (another two sons, one of them older than John, died in infancy) of Edward Charles Baring, later first Baron Revelstoke, of London and Membland, Devon, and his wife, Louisa Emily Charlotte, daughter of John Crocker Bulteel of Lyneham, Devon.
He was educated at Eton and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he did not sit for a degree.
John Baring's father had been from 1882 senior partner in the merchant bank of Baring Brothers, and he himself joined the firm on leaving Cambridge, served his apprenticeship as a clerk, travelled widely in North and South America, and was made a full partner early in 1890.
The year 1890 was that of the Baring crisis, when the partners of Barings, largely through mismanagement of a major transaction in Argentina, found themselves in difficulties from which they had to be rescued by a group of City banks and financial houses organized by the Bank of England.
The partnership was successfully liquidated over a period of years and it was left to John Baring to rebuild the business in the form of a limited company.
Considering his age and lack of experience, he accomplished a remarkable feat in restoring the name of Barings to something like its former eminence within a decade.
John Baring succeeded to the Revelstoke title in 1897, on the death of his father in July.
From a restored base at Barings, where he exercised autocratic leadership and took almost 50 per cent of the distributed profits (amassing thereby a considerable personal fortune), Revelstoke exercised great influence in the City and Whitehall, though always remaining in the background of public affairs.
The routine business of Barings was its financing of foreign trade, but larger rewards and wider recognition came from arranging finance, mostly by bond issues, for sovereign states and industrial empires.
Here Revelstoke was in his element; acute intelligence and charm, capacity for meticulous work, presence and eloquence, fluency in French and Spanish, and, above all, financial acumen made him a match for the wiliest of South American presidents, North American railway barons, European finance ministers, and the members of the British cabinet with all of whom he had to deal at one time or another.
He was handsome and dignified, and especially distinguished by his meticulous dress.
In the 1890s he participated in the reorganization of Argentina's external debt and in the 1900s restored Argentina's credit in London.
During the Russo-Japanese war, out of sight, he played a key role in raising huge sums to finance Japan's war effort.
In World War I he was a crucial mediator between the Russian and British governments when the former borrowed huge amounts of sterling for munition purchases and support of the rouble.
In the 1920s, working closely with the Bank of England, he introduced bonds of fledgling central European republics to the international capital markets.
In 1898 he was appointed to the Bank of England's court, and joined its influential committee of treasury in 1915.
As such he must have played an important role in the bank's transformation into a fully-fledged central bank in the 1920s.
For Whitehall he was a ‘handy City man’ when it came to international finance, especially prior to 1914 when Britain practised imperialism in competition with other great powers.
He advised the committee on imperial defence, was sent out to Petrograd as deputy to Viscount Milner [q.v.]at the Allied conference in 1917, and in 1929 he went to Versailles for the committee of experts reviewing the Dawes plan for German reparations.
His close friendship with George V and Queen Mary, and long service as an innovative receiver-general of the Duchy of Cornwall from 1908 to 1929, gave him a close connection with another centre of influence.
He was sworn of the Privy Council in 1902, appointed GCVO in 1911, and in 1926 was created by George V his lord lieutenant of Middlesex.
In 1924 he became a commander of the Legion of Honour.
He never married.
He died at his Paris flat 19 April 1929 and was succeeded in the barony by his brother, Cecil (born 1864).
He left unsettled estate of over £2.5 million, of which almost £200,000 was bequeathed for the benefit of London hospitals, and a year's salary to each member of the staff of Barings.
[‘The Late Lord Revelstoke: an Appreciation’,Bankers' Magazine , 20 April 1929; Philip Ziegler,The Sixth Great Power: Barings 1762–1929 , 1988; John Orbell, ‘John Baring, 2nd Lord Revelstoke’, David Jeremy (ed.),
Dictionary of Business Biography , vol. i, 1984.]
Richard Greene
,Anne Batten (b. 1769), poet, was baptized 7 December 1769 in Penzance, the eldest child in the family of four sons and two daughters of Joseph Alexander Cristall of Arbroath in Scotland, a mariner and later sail-, mast-, and block-maker, and his wife Elizabeth, the daughter of John Batten, a Penzance merchant.
Apparently Joseph Cristall had a jealous disposition and his time ashore was usually unpleasant for his family.
The family moved from Penzance to Rotherhithe when Anne was a young child.
She was very attached to her brother Joshua Cristall [q.v.], who later became an eminent water-colourist: ‘They studied together as children, and hand in hand did they daily walk to London for their schooling when the family lived at Rotherhithe’(J. L. Roget).
The family later moved to Blackheath and remained there for twenty-one years.
Anne Cristall evidently became a schoolteacher.
By the late 1880s she had become a friend of Mary Wollstonecraft [q.v.], who wrote to Joshua on 9 December 1790: ‘I fear her situation is still very uncomfortable.
I wish she could obtain a little more strength of mind.
I am afraid she gives way to her feelings more than she ought to do.’
Presumably this refers to domestic difficulties.
Anne may have been financially dependent on Joshua, who had not yet settled in his career and was never wealthy.
Their father was paralysed by a stroke in the early 1790s, following which some part of his business failed.
Her Poetical Sketches , published by Joseph Johnson [q.v.]in 1795, contained a number of accomplished if melancholic pieces, often dwelling on ‘the virtues of the feeling mind’.
The poet George Dyer [q.v.]took a personal interest in Cristall and in 1797 introduced her to Robert Southey [q.v.].
In 1802 Joseph Cristall died.
After this, evidence about Anne Batten Cristall's life is very sparse.
She is named in the Biographical Dictionary of Living Authors in 1816.
Her brother Joshua moved to Herefordshire in 1822 and remained there until 1841, when he returned to London, where he remained until his death in 1847.
His household in London consisted of two young servants and ‘two lady wards, between whom and himself there existed a strong attachment’(Memorials of F. O. Finch ).
Presumably these were his sisters.
Elizabeth was known to be alive in 1851, aged about eighty.
There is no indication of the date of Anne Batten Cristall's death.
She was unmarried.
[R. Southey,Life and Correspondence , ed.
C. C. Southey, vol. i, 1849, pp. 305–6, vol. ii, 1849, p. 16; E. Finch,Memorials of F. O. Finch , 1865, pp. 67–75; J. L. Roget,A History of the Old Water-Colour Society , vol. i, 1891, pp. 178–91; A. F. Wedd (ed.),
The Love-Letters of Mary Hays , 1925, pp. 238–9; W. G. S. Dyer,Joshua Cristall , 1959; revised edn. 1962; Basil Taylor,Joshua Cristall (1768–1847), 1975, pp. 11–30; M. Wollstonecraft,Collected Letters , ed.
R. M. Wardle, 1979; Roger Lonsdale (ed.),
Eighteenth Century Women Poets: an Oxford Anthology , 1989.]
Jacob M Price
,Abel (1717–1788), banker and merchant, was baptized 14 March 1717, the third son of Abel Smith and his wife Jane, daughter of George Beaumont of Chapelthorpe, Yorkshire.
To a local mercer's business in Nottingham his grandfather, Thomas Smith, had added some banking activities, including remittances for the excise.
This banking activity was considerably expanded by Abel Smith I and his brothers, but Abel I's own eldest son (Sir George Smith, baronet) used his inheritance to become a country gentleman.
Abel II, a younger son, was placed at fifteen as an apprentice in a Hull merchant firm trading to the Baltic.
At the conclusion of his apprenticeship he became a partner in this firm, thereafter Wilberforce & Smith.
In 1745 he married Mary, daughter of Thomas Bird of Barton on the Heath, Warwickshire, a wealthy silk manufacturer; her sister Elizabeth was to marry his partner Robert Wilberforce, establishing close family ties between the Nottingham and Hull families.
Abel Smith II also became a partner in his family's bank in Nottingham, whose management he took over on his father's death in 1757.
For the firm's expanded volume of government and other remittances, close London connections were indispensable.
To gain them, in 1758 Smith entered into a partnership with John Payne, a London linen-draper, to form the bank of Smith & Payne with offices in London and Nottingham.
Abel II was already well connected in London through cousins and through his older brother John, a London merchant and director of both the East India and the South Sea Companies.
As John Payne was then chairman of the East India Company and his brother Edward a director of the Bank of England, Smith & Payne, almost from its commencement, was a prestigious house that could attract the correspondence of other country banks and desirable town and country business.
(The Paynes' connections were also to prove useful in obtaining for Smith & Payne extraordinary re-discount facilities at the Bank of England.)
Abel Smith led in creating additional affiliated banks in Lincoln (1775) and Hull (1784).
Despite the difficulties of wars, these precociously integrated firms experienced significant growth during the last decades of the century.
The Nottingham bank attracted the business of neighbouring nobility and gentry as well as that of local hosiery manufacturers and traders.
Through his close association with Henry Clinton, second Duke of Newcastle [q.v.],
Abel Smith II was returned as MP for Aldborough (1774–8), and later sat for St Ives (1780–4) through the interest of Humphrey Mackworth Praed.
He shared in a government victualling contract during the American war, but broke with Lord North on being excluded from the underwriting of government wartime loans.
He then supported William Pitt the younger, on whose recommendation he was returned by Edward (later Baron) Eliot [q.v.]as member for St Germans (1784–8).
At his death, 12 July 1788, in addition to his partnerships in the several Smith banks, in Wilberforce & Smith, and in several other firms, Abel Smith II left extensive land holdings, particularly in Nottinghamshire and Lincolnshire, a sugar estate in Jamaica, and £59,953.
Five of his six sons (he had no daughters) became MPs.
His son Robert Smith [q.v.]was created first Baron Carrington in 1796.
Four of his sons became partners in the Smith banks.
These firms survived and prospered until 1902, when they merged with the Union Bank which in turn was absorbed by the National Provincial Bank.
[L. Namier and J. Brooke,The House of Commons 1754–1790 , vol. iii, 1964; J. A. S. L. Leighton-Boyce,Smiths the Bankers 1658–1958 , 1958; L. S. Pressnell,Country Banking in the Industrial Revolution , 1956.]
Ronald Hutton
, Sir Charles , Earl of Falmouth (1630–1665), courtier, was born at Bruton Abbey, Somerset, and baptized 11 January 1630, the second son of Sir Charles Berkeley of Bruton and his wife Penelope Godolphin of Godolphin.
He was tutored by Hugh Cressy [q.v.], the former chaplain of Thomas Wentworth, Earl of Strafford [q.v.], and Lucius Cary, second Viscount Falkland [q.v.].
During the civil war his family was strongly Royalist, and after it he was sent to serve the exiled Stuart court.
In 1652 his uncle, Sir John (later first Baron) Berkeley [q.v.], used his influence as governor to James, Duke of York, to secure the youth a commission as a cavalry officer under the command of that prince.
He remained in York's employment until the Restoration, first in the French and then in the Spanish armies, and became his groom of the Stole and one of his closest friends.
In 1660 he returned to England with his master, who ensured him several honours from the newly restored Charles II.
These included a knighthood, the post of lieutenant-governor of Portsmouth, and the receipts from mooring fees levied on the Thames below London bridge.
The latter provided him with the income needed to purchase a house beside the bowling green at Whitehall, and York also secured his election as MP for New Romney in 1661.
At court he became associated with the faction led by George Digby, second Earl of Bristol, and Henry Bennett, first Earl of Arlington [qq.v.], and friendly with the king's mistress, Barbara Villiers, Countess of Castlemaine [q.v.].
In 1662 that faction became an important part of the government, and Berkeley received Bennett's post of keeper of the Privy Purse when the latter was promoted.
But it was during the next year that observers noticed that King Charles himself had become so fond of Berkeley that he was now one of the principal royal favourites, and perhaps the greatest.
In July he was given an Irish peerage as Viscount Fitzhardinge, and would have received an English title had the king not been conscious of hostility to his courtiers in the English House of Commons.
But that title, of Earl of Falmouth, was granted in March 1665 as part of the honours bestowed when war was declared against the Dutch.
The newly created earl volunteered for service in the royal fleet, and was killed by a cannon shot in the first battle, off Lowestoft on 3 June.
He was given a hero's funeral in Westminster Abbey.
The king was more distressed by his death than by that of any other person except his own sister, and it seems certain that Berkeley would have received further advancement had he lived.
Even so, it may be doubted that he would have made a greater impact upon the course of history.
No known portrait of him survives, and his character is almost as faintly recorded.
He had no outstanding gifts, of intelligence, learning, or good looks, and was never employed for any important administrative, political, or diplomatic office.
Instead he managed the Privy Purse, retained his post at Portsmouth, sat upon the committee for Tangier, and was sent upon polite diplomatic errands.
He performed these minor tasks diligently, although he hated writing letters.
He had no political aims and did not lead a faction, although he sought lesser posts for a few clients.
If he had one trait of potential consequence it was his fondness for France, which led him to encourage efforts to ally with that country, but the international situation made these futile during his lifetime.
His popularity with the royal brothers derived, indeed, from the fact that he was a devoted servant and affable companion who was content to further their wishes.
His unpopularity with the more high-principled of the English derived from the same qualities, for he indulged or encouraged what they considered to be the king's lechery and laziness.
Berkeley himself does seem to have been physically brave, gracious, modest, generous (especially to his family), even-tempered, and usually honest.
His most nefarious recorded act was to defame York's new wife Anne Hyde [q.v.], in the hope of dissolving the marriage, which many considered to be a disaster.
He could be coarse in his conversation, but he married for love, as his own bride came from an impoverished Royalist family.
She was a famous beauty, Mary, daughter of Colonel Hervey Bagot of Pipe Hayes, Warwickshire.
Their union, in 1664, had only produced one daughter before he was killed; the earldom became extinct.
He had no celebrated quarrels, and although he disliked Edward Hyde, Earl of Clarendon [q.v.], and Prince Rupert [q.v.]he had this in common with many of the court.
His prominence in his time and his lack of consequence for it both derive ultimately from his pleasant mediocrity.
[C. H. Hartmann,The King's Friend , 1951; French Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Quai d'Orsay, Paris, Correspondance Politique (Angleterre); Samuel Pepys,Diary ; Kent Archives Office, Sackville MSS; State Papers Domestic Series 29.]
M R D Foot
,Richard (1878–1967), naturalist and intelligence officer, was born 3 March 1878 in Rutland Gate, Knightsbridge, the second son and third child in the family of four sons and five daughters of Daniel Meinertzhagen, London merchant banker, whose Danish family had long settled in Bremen, and his wife Georgina, an elder sister of Beatrice Webb [q.v.], the daughter of Richard Potter, railway and industrial magnate.
Though registered as Oliver, he was christened Richard, and called Dick by his intimates.
He was at two preparatory schools, Aysgarth, where he learnt self-reliance, and Fonthill, where he was sadistically beaten by a master — till he hit back.
Much of his childhood he spent at Mottisfont Abbey, on the Test above Romsey; there he began his lifelong study of birds.
He was educated at Harrow, from where he went for a few months into his father's City office, which he hated; and he spent a term in Göttingen, learning German.
A subaltern's commission in the Hampshire Yeomanry in 1897–8 gave him a liking for army life, and in January 1899 he was commissioned into the Royal Fusiliers.
He missed the South African war, as he was serving in south Asia.
In 1902–6 he had four adventurous years' attachment to the King's African Rifles, serving up-country in Kenya, where he discovered a new species (Hylochaeros meinertzhageni , the giant forest hog).
He was wounded, mentioned in dispatches, and promoted captain; he saved most of his pay.
His regiment released him again to pass the Staff College in Quetta, and at the start of World War I in 1914 he was made intelligence officer to the Tanga expeditionary force.
In 1916 he was appointed to the DSO for exceptionally valuable work with this force.
He then became chief intelligence officer to the Egyptian expeditionary force that advanced into Palestine.
In October 1917 the Turks held an entrenched front from Gaza to Beersheba.
Sir E. H. H. Allenby (later first Viscount Allenby of Megiddo, q.v.) misled them as to which flank he was about to attack, in part through a bloodstained haversack full of papers dropped by Meinertzhagen on reconnaissance: a classic of practical deception.
He had already killed dozens of men on duty; he slipped ashore during a skirmish at Haifa, disguised as a Coldstream private, and shot several more.
After a brief spell at the War Office, Meinertzhagen was next posted to the intelligence branch of the GHQ in France, commanded by Sir Douglas (later first Earl) Haig [q.v.].
Never one to sit behind a desk if he could help it, he tried to see the battle front for himself, and was severely wounded.
He recovered in time to join, as a colonel, the staff of 400 that A. J. Balfour (later first Earl of Balfour) took to the Paris peace conference, where he watched politicians disputing over Levantine problems.
After a short spell as chief political officer in Palestine and Syria, he spent 1921–4 as military adviser to the colonial office, sharing a room there with his friend T. E. Lawrence [q.v.].
By now he had become a convinced Zionist.
This conviction did not sit well either with regimental soldiering or with Whitehall.
In 1925 he resigned from the army, and spent most of the rest of his long life travelling — mainly in western and central Asia — and studying birds, partly as cover for observing international politics.
He returned to the War Office in the winter of 1939–40, and was wounded again off Dunkirk in June 1940, when he took a small boat across to join the rescue.
For the rest of the war he was in the Home Guard.
After it, he rejoiced in the creation of the state of Israel in 1948; he was an active eyewitness.
He was a lifelong diarist, and published some of the results:Kenya Diary 1902–1906 (1957),Middle East Diary 1917–1956 (1959),Army Diary 1899–1926 (1960), and Diary of a Black Sheep (1964).
Apart from many articles in Ibis , he wrote Nicholl's Birds of Egypt (2 vols., 1930),Birds of Arabia (1954), and Pirates and Predators (1959).
In 1951 he received the Godman Salvin medal of the British Ornithologists' Union, and in 1957 was appointed CBE for services to ornithology.
He was twice married: in 1911 to Armorel, daughter of Colonel Herman le Roy-Lewis of Westbury House, Petersfield; and in 1921 to Anne Constance (died 1928), daughter of Major Bandle Jackson of Swordale, Easter Ross.
By his second wife he had a daughter and two sons; his elder son was killed aged nineteen in the Guards Armoured division on the Dutch-German border in 1944.
Of him he wrote a memoir,The Life of a Boy (1947).
He died in Kensington, London, 17 June 1967.
[John Lord,Duty, Honour, Empire: the Life and Times of Colonel R. Meinertzhagen , 1971;The Times , 19 June 1967; works cited above.]
John Barrett
,Charlotte (‘Lottie’)(1871–1960), sportswoman, was born 24 September 1871 in Lower Bebington, Cheshire, the fourth and youngest child in the family of two daughters and two sons of James Dod, a wealthy retired cotton-broker, and his wife Margaret Aspinall.
‘Lottie’ was educated by various tutors at the family home, Edgeworth.
Her sister and two brothers taught her to play lawn tennis at the age of nine on the two courts, one grass and one shale, at Edgeworth.
Lottie Dod loved competing and with her sister Ann entered tournaments in the Manchester and Liverpool areas from the age of eleven.
She could wear shorter dresses than her older rivals, an advantage in court coverage.
In 1883 she and Ann won the consolation doubles at the Northern Championships in Manchester.
At the Waterloo tournament in 1885 Lottie Dod, still only thirteen and called the ‘Little Wonder’, won all three open events.
At the Northern Championships the same year she won the doubles and reached the singles final, in which she extended Maud Watson, the reigning Wimbledon champion, to 8–6 7–5.
Lawn tennis was still in its infancy.
Women played in hats and long-sleeved day dresses.
Lottie Dod always wore a white cricket cap, and usually a light beige long-sleeved blouse, white or dark blue skirt over black stockings, and black shoes.
In 1886 Lottie Dod, aged fourteen, beat Maud Watson for the first time in the final at the Bath tournament to win the West of England title.
Her game was now well established.
She had a powerful forehand, excellent volley, accurate smash, and a good length underarm serve.
At her first Wimbledon in 1887, now an athletic figure of middle height with jet-black hair, she successfully challenged the holder, Blanche Bingley, to win the title at the age of fifteen years and ten months.
She defended successfully in 1888, did not compete in 1889 and 1890, but returned to challenge successfully in 1891 and retained the title for the next two years.
Altogether, over a span of eleven years, Lottie Dod lost only five times in open singles as she collected five Wimbledon, five Northern, and three West of England titles, as well as one in Ireland and one at Waterloo.
After her five Wimbledon singles wins, she retired from lawn tennis at the age of twenty-one, and, turning her talents to golf, she became a semi-finalist at the Open Championship in 1898 and 1899 and won the British Women's Golf Championship in 1904 at Troon.
She also became an expert hockey player and was selected to represent England against Ireland in 1899 and 1900.
She excelled at archery and won an Olympic silver medal at the London Games in 1908.
At St Moritz she became an expert skater and passed both the men's and women's tests.
She was later appointed a skating judge.
A naturally gifted sportswoman, she became a proficient sculler, horsewoman, and mountaineer, and even mastered billiards.
Lottie Dod was also an accomplished pianist and sang with the London Oriana Madrigal Society.
During World War I she became a home nurse and was awarded the Red Cross gold medal.
Later she helped to run a girls' club in Whitechapel.
Never married, Lottie Dod lived for many years in London before moving to Milford-on-Sea.
Although she once said ‘I've always thought that it was a mistake to think too much about games or sports,’ she died, 27 June 1960, in a nursing home in Sway, Hampshire, arguably the greatest all-round sportswoman England has ever produced.
[Alan Little,Lottie Dod , 1983; Lottie Dod scrapbook (Kenneth Ritchie Wimbledon Library).]
George W Carpenter
,John George (1856–1943), mechanical engineer, was born 30 July 1856 in Bristol, the younger son and second of three children of Matthew Robinson, divisional locomotive, carriage, and wagon superintendent of the Great Western Railway, and his wife Jane Armstrong.
His elder brother James Armstrong Robinson became works manager and divisional locomotive superintendent of the Great Western at Wolverhampton.
He was educated at Chester Grammar School and in 1872 became a pupil of Joseph Armstrong, locomotive superintendent of the Great Western.
He trained at the Swindon works, and in Chester and Bristol.
In 1878 he became assistant to his father in Bristol.
He was appointed in 1884 assistant locomotive, carriage, and wagon superintendent of the Waterford, Limerick and Western Railway of Ireland and became superintendent in the following year.
He introduced several new locomotive types on this Irish cross-country railway.
In 1900 Robinson was appointed locomotive and marine superintendent of the Great Central and two years later also took control of the carriage and wagon department, with the title of chief mechanical engineer.
The Great Central, formerly a cross-country line, was the last main-line railway to enter London in 1899, and within two years Robinson had introduced new and more powerful locomotives for this service.
In the following twenty years he was responsible for the design and building of many new types of main-line and suburban passenger and freight locomotives of large dimensions, which gave excellent service and whose elegance and symmetry of outline were greatly admired.
In 1910 carriage building was transferred from the locomotive works at Gorton, Manchester, to a new works at Dukinfield, where main-line and suburban carriages (which were amongst the most comfortable in Britain) were produced and from 1915 onwards fitted with Robinson's anti-collision buffers and fenders, which gave improved protection from accidents.
He also patented a new design of locomotive superheater and automatic train-stop system to prevent overrunning of signals, and carried out extensive trials with locomotives burning oil and pulverized coal with a view to reducing fuel costs.
During the war of 1914–18 Robinson was a member of the railway workshops manufacturing committee.
He was responsible for producing large numbers of gun carriages and mountings at Gorton and for the design and building of ambulance trains at Dukinfield for overseas and home service.
In 1917 his 2–8–0 locomotive design was ordered in large numbers — over 500 were built — for military supply and troop-train service in France.
After the war large numbers were purchased by the LNER, Great Western, and LMS, while others went to railways in China and Australia.
In the war of 1939–45 nearly 100 were sent for service in the Middle East.
Robinson was an able engineer and administrator who took a keen interest in his men and their working conditions, especially those of locomotive footplate staff, whose spartan conditions he improved considerably.
In 1922, prior to the incorporation of the Great Central into the London and North Eastern Railway group, he was invited to become chief mechanical engineer.
However, he preferred to retire and recommended (Sir) H. Nigel Gresley [q.v.]of the Great Northern, who was twenty years younger.
Robinson was appointed CBE in 1920.
He was a member of the Institutions of Civil (1902) and Mechanical (1891) Engineers.
In 1884 he married Mary Ann (died 1938), daughter of Richard Hillyard Dalton of Helston, Cornwall.
They had three daughters and one son, Matthew, who followed his father's profession and was for many years superintendent of the LNER locomotive depot at Neasden, London.
Robinson died in Bournemouth 7 December 1943.
[Engineering , vol. clvi, 17 December 1943; George Dow,Great Central , vol. iii, 1965.]