

8
ONCE WHEN SHE WAS ABOUT five she had been separated from her mother in a department store.
Someone had eventually taken her through the bustling, towering giant world of the shop to where her mother waited.
The impression lingered that her mother had not come to find her, and that her mother had not been pleased to have her returned, for Rachaela was instantly slapped.
‘How did you know,’ she said, ‘I'd come here?’
‘You like old buildings.
Sanctuary.’
‘How long have you been searching for me?’
‘Not long.’
‘And in the daylight too,’ she said archly.
He wore a black leather coat, too young for him if he had looked his age.
But he did not.
He wore no sunglasses.
They would be in his pocket, ready for the day.
Glad of the overcast?
But the sun had come out now.
‘I don't like the light,’ he said.
‘I can cope with
‘And it was imperative that you found me.’
‘You were lost.’
His words fitted so exactly her own approximation of her state.
‘No I wasn't lost,’ she said.
‘I meant to get to London.’
‘That's rather complicated from here, I seem to recall.’
‘One train a week and they told me the wrong day.
Or I'd have been gone .’
‘Then I should have had to wait until you came back.’
‘I would never have come near you.’
‘You think not.’
‘I know not.
You can't make me go back with you.
If you touch me I'll start to scream.’
‘That would be noisy.’
‘I mean it, Adamus.’
‘How medieval that sounds in your mouth.
Interesting.
Anna only makes it sound Victorian.’
‘I won't play any more games.
I'm going to a hotel.
I'll catch the train on — when it comes.’
‘All right,’ he said.
‘If you want.’
‘So you've chased after me for nothing.’
‘Except the pleasure of seeing you again.’
He sat down beside her in the pew.
His blackness shut off the blue window, the blessing hands of the Virgin.
It would.
She should edge along to the pew's other end and get out, but she was excruciatingly tired.
She had nowhere to go.
He would follow her.
Walk up and down at her side, perhaps politely take her arm.
How much grey sunlight could he really stand?
She could only rely on that, his wearying before she did.
And she suspected he would not weary.
‘You must let me go,’ she said.
‘Why?’
‘You've no right to try to stop me.
I'll go to the police if I have to.’
She thought of the helpful policeman who had told her the wrong day for the train.
‘I'm not going to drag you away,’ he said, ‘kicking and screaming, by the hair.
If I hurt you, it would be in other ways.’
The inside of her body pulsed and moved, leaving the outside a thin cold integument, stranded.
‘Shut up,’ she said.
‘Don't talk to me.’
He sat in silence, calm, every aspect larger, towering, almost as in the uncontrolled moments in the upper room.
Not quite.
She said, ‘I really am going to leave.
Do you hear me.’
‘I'm allowed to speak?’
‘I can't stop you.’
‘No, you can't really.
If you leave, you leave.
Where are you staying?’
‘as if I'd tell you.’
‘You've checked out of one hotel and have yet to find another.’
‘You — were following me?’
‘No, Rachaela.
It's obvious, isn't it?
You checked out, or even ran away without paying your bill for all I know, in order to take the train.
But the train didn't materialize.
And here you are sitting in the church with two bags.’
‘If you come after me I'll do something to prevent you.’
‘That might be entertaining.
It's all right.
I won't come after you.
I'll sit here and let you get away.
I'll stay an hour, you look as if you can only move at a crawl.’
‘Another game.
Hide your eyes, and then try to find me.
You won't.’
‘I won't try.
After all, I need only find out the day of the proper train and waylay you again on the platform.’
‘Do it.
See what happens.’
‘Nothing would happen.
I'd kiss your cheek and you'd wave me goodbye through the window.
Brief Encounter .’
Rachaela tried to slow her breathing.
She was desperately excited.
She wanted to strike at him.
‘You're saying then that when I walk out of the church I'm on my own.’
‘Completely.’
‘Free of the Scarabae.’
‘No, you'll never be free of the Scarabae.
You're one of us.
That goes with you.
And that will bring you back.’
‘Live in that hope.’
‘I know from my own self.
I got away.
I came back.
You're already tainted.
It's too late.’
‘So you think I'd prefer to be walled up in that mausoleum — that grave of a house.’
‘What is so preferable to it?’
Before she could circumnavigate, the whole of her future jolted before her.
The trains, the city, her search for some grubbing, nasty ill-paid job, a room somewhere, the noise of neighbours, the teeming streets, the overt viciousness of the capital.
She saw too the length of days, the black-bullet chambers of the nights.
She saw her aloneness, now loneliness, and she saw the vista of age, which she had never contemplated before.
She was shiftless, had made no provision.
She had lived as if awaiting rescue, her mother's money, the arrival of the Scarabae.
‘It will be my life.’
‘It's yours, wherever you are.’
This was fundamentally a fact.
She would have to get up and leave the church.
The longer she stayed here the more power he had over her.
It wove like a web.
But she was so tired and her heart beat so quickly.
She did not want to go.
She was glad he was here, his strength beside her on the bench, keeping her safe with his darkness from the blue sanctity of the Virgin.
The red window was a dark rose.
The sun had gone in again.
‘How did you come to the town?’ she asked, to prevaricate.
‘I hired a car.
How else?
Do you think I'd walk all the way, like poor Carlo?’
‘How did you call the car?’
‘That was Carlo.
Or Cheta.
Someone in the village I imagine gave them use of a phone.’
‘The car didn't come to the house.’
‘As you know, the road doesn't go so far.’
‘Why did you come and not the others?’
‘I'm the young one, remember.
And I'm the nearest to you in blood.’
‘In blood,’ she said.
‘The blood of the tribe.’
‘Your blood and mine are different.’
‘How?’ she said again.
There was a long interval.
She felt him gather himself like a beast on the powerful springs of its limbs.
He said at last, ‘Come back and see.’
She said, ‘You want to sleep with me.
That's what it is.
You say I'm your daughter, you believe it, but you want to fuck me.’
From the comer of her eye she saw his face turning towards her.
as if moved by a key, her own head turned until she confronted him.
His face was like a blow.
She could hardly breathe.
‘Yes, I want to fuck you.
Come back and be fucked by me.’
‘Now you're speaking the truth, you bastard.’
‘Now I'm speaking the truth.
What's the problem?
The family will be thrilled.
They'll revel in it.
It's happened over and over, mother with son, father with daughter.
Brother and sister.
Two thirds of them are inbreedings of one kind or another, several twice over.
A charming little intimate orgy has been going on for centuries.
Secret pleasures of the house.
And what other values hold you back?
The criterion of the church, of morality and the world?
It's nothing to you.
Come to me and let me give you what you want.’
‘I don't want that.’
He put out one hand, long-fingered, bone-pale, feathered lightly with dark hair.
The hand moved in slow motion.
So slow there was all the time on earth to avoid it, and she was not quick enough, and the hand caught her, behind her neck, the fingers in her hair.
A liquid electricity ran down her spine.
Her stomach turned to ice and her skull to fire.
She could do nothing.
‘Let,’ she said, ‘let me
The shadow flung forward and fell upon her with a slow, deep violence.
The eyes had become a jet-black bar that flamed.
She tasted his skin, his mouth, cool and unknown.
Her eyes shut.
She was blind, whirled down and under, turning.
Only the pressure of his hand behind her head anchored her in the rushing of the storm.
She had rarely been kissed.
Never kissed on the mouth.
Never invaded and possessed.
His mouth moved in hers.
Her head sank backwards.
She let him drown her in the deep water, too weak even to raise her hands to cling to him.
Falling and falling through measureless ocean.
When he lifted his mouth, he held her still with his hand.
At first she could not open her eyes.
When she did so the church was a blur of colours and streakings of light.
The white faces of saints had grown insane and bloated, their purity profaned.
His face was calm still, only the mouth gave evidence of change, the lips parted.
She turned towards him on the pew and put her hands up and caught his collar.
‘Kiss me again.’
‘Again?’
And he laughed at her like a boy.
He was laughing as he possessed her once more, and the laugh died on the point of a knife.
Her whole body now flowed and spun.
She gripped his clothing to hold her up, and plunged fathoms deep, mindless, soaring.
She pressed herself to him, dissolving into his flesh, the hardness of him, lost, she was lost.
‘Don't stop.’
‘Not here,’ he said.
‘Where then?’
‘Where do you think Rachaela?’
‘I don't care,’ she said.
‘I'll go with you.’
The car was waiting in a side street.
They went to it and got in.
The driver, oblivious to them, started the engine.
Adamus had not put on sunglasses.
He sat with his arm about her.
The arm, without its pressure, dislodged her  reason.
She wanted the car to stop.
She wanted, as the strands of trees drew out, to be beneath him in the bare and leafless brown of a wood.
She had never felt such things, only the vaguest intimations.
Daydreams.
She longed to laugh at the stupidity of the driver, not knowing.
Excluded.
It did not matter that they were going back to the house of the Scarabae.
What could it matter?
Nothing was important but to give in again to the onrush of his mouth.
The landscape ribboned past.
The journey was so long.
But they reached the house, or rather the road below, and when Adamus had paid the driver-no account was mentioned — they walked up the crumbling slope in the shadowed midday light, and came out among the wet green oaks, and the house appeared.
And Rachaela sobered.
There were the roofs, the ranks of windows, the cone of the tower.
‘I'm here again,’ she said.
‘You agreed to it,’ he said.
He did not attempt now to touch her.
‘Yes, I agreed.’
Her body was forgetting his.
The warmth, the freezing and the vertigo of sudden want had drawn away.
She observed them, anxious.
They reached the porch and the double door.
Adamus used a key, something so ordinary.
They went into the chequered hall.
It was silent and deserted.
She seemed to see it too from far away.
‘Don't go,’ she said.
‘You must be patient,’ he said, ‘and so must I. The one rule.
Night-time.’
‘There are no rules.
You told me.’
‘Yes.’
Ridiculous as a bride on her clichéd honeymoon, she must wait until the accepted hour.
She did not credit this.
This was some cruelty or other test of his.
‘I may change my mind.’
He stood looking at her, and she was drawn towards him, pulled by chains.
She kept still by an effort.
‘Don't,’ he said.
‘I find this silly and insulting.’
‘I'm sorry.’
‘I hate this house,’ she said.
‘No.
Go up to the bolt hole of your pretty green — and-blue room.
Go up and wait for me.’
‘You're a tease,’ she said acidly.
He grinned at her.
A boy's grin, like the laughter.
Did an elderly man grin and laugh like that still?
Perhaps normally it was only hidden and distorted by the combered flesh, the yellowed eyes and teeth.
‘You want me so much now,’ he said.
‘I'm glad.’
‘It will pass,’ she said.
‘I hope not.
Trust me.
Tonight.’
She turned and walked away up the stairs, bemused.
Here she was, back again.
Her room was just the same.
The bed made, the surfaces dusted.
In her wardrobe were her clothes, on the dressing-table her radio.
She looked at them with pacific surprise.
She was dazed.
What had happened to her in the church — and in a church — and with him.
Camillo had told her she would run away, and come back.
But she should have got as far as London.
This was absurd.
She sat down in a chair by the hearth.
The fire at least had not been lit.
They had not been positive.
She lay back in the chair and he went out of her like alcohol.
It was like the brief tipsiness from the glass of vinegary wine.
It had lasted longer, but then she had still been touching him.
She had truly made a fool of herself.
She had been seduced back into the house, and now everything was to do again.
Again….
Kiss me again.
She had said that .
A burning blush poured up from the pit of her loins into her breast, throat and face.
She was abashed at herself, her triteness.
But also so tired.
She had slept so badly in the small hotel.
She got up and switched on her radio.
An easement of music rose into the room.
How she had missed it.
She lay on the bed and pulled the coverlet up over herself and the golden Satan shone behind her closed eyes.
She was comfortable, and warm.
She fell asleep.
That evening she bathed, put on her skirt and the new jumper, and went down to the dining room.
She did not know what she expected, but only Anna and Stephan were there.
‘Welcome,’ said Anna.
‘We're so glad to see you are here again.’
‘You missed me,’ said Rachaela.
‘Yes, of course.
Everyone missed you.’
‘Apart from Sylvian.’
‘Ah yes.
Apart from him.’
‘I ran away,’ said Rachaela.
‘To buy this jumper.’
‘You should have told us you were so eager to go to the town.’
‘I was eager to go to London.’
‘Such a long way.
Can't your business be done by post-Cheta will take a letter to the village.’
‘It was an escape,’ said Rachaela.
‘As you realize.’
‘Perhaps.’
‘I ran off like Adamus, and Adamus brought me back.
Persuaded me with a fatherly kiss.’
Anna smiled and lowered her eyes.
Stephan hummed a little tune and stirred his soup.
It was sure: they knew.
‘I don't,’ said Rachaela, ‘understand you all.’
‘So long as you're becoming comfortable among us.’
The town had been horrible.
Its throng of people, the misdirections and falsehoods.
Like a nightmare.
The house was safe.
It made its own crazy sense.
No.
The house was a madness.
Only the outside world was real.
After the soup there was a vegetable casserole with toasted cheese.
A gooseberry cream to follow.
Rachaela ate hungrily.
The food was tasty and good.
She was indoctrinated.
She sat by the drawing-room fire with them.
Alice and Unice came in and gave her little nods, and sat down and knitted.
Eric wandered through, he of the seagull, with a book.
Jack and Dorian appeared and disappeared.
There were other slight to-ings and fro-ings, flutters on the edge of the eye that were doubtless Miriam and Sasha, Anita, Teresa, Miranda and Livia, George, Peter.
Carlo came in once with logs.
Maria, Cheta and Michael had served the meal.
‘Oh, Michael, a fire must be laid in Miss Rachaela's room.’
‘It's already seen to, Miss Anna.’
A fire.
The luxury, the cosiness.
She did not want him now.
She wanted to be a little girl in the safe balmy house, with the dear old grannies and grandfathers, and the big pussy-cat, and the doll's house beds and all the lovely windows.
Keep away , she thought.
Nothing must smash this cloud-cuckoo world.
Nothing so absolute as sex.
It was strange, she thought, as Unice knitted and Anna sewed and Alice consulted her pattern, and the good old granddaddy Stephan watched the fire, strange she had never properly felt sex before.
It was as if she had been cordoned off from it.
It had not been for her.
She would not think of kissing and being kissed before the white eyes of the Virgin.
‘Michael,’ she said, ‘I'd like another glass of wine.’
All the old grandparents in the room beamed on her.
A favourite child.
She was to uphold the family tradition.
She was to lie with her own father.
She stripped her body naked and got under the covers.
It was almost one by the tower clock, about ten-thirty.
Early to bed.
The coy bride on the bridal night.
She had locked the door.
It was a token.
A needful token.
He had, after all, a key to all the doors.
Perhaps he would make her wait until midnight.
She tried not to think what would happen.
She guessed at it, alternately disconcerted, aroused, angry.
Even amused.
She had seen his face when he made love to the piano.
The radio had a play.
She had switched it off.
Other dramas could not engage her.
An hour passed.
The single lamp burned on the mantel.
She heard the breathing of the sea.
No one had gone by in the corridor.
The house muttered and shifted its joists, the windows crisped in their leading.
Of course.
He would not arrive at the door.
The night would come and go without him.
Rachaela made a sound, her throat, her body, a protest that her mind had not ordered or allowed.
And the handle of the door turned.
The door opened.
Outside was darkness, and as usual the dark came in with him on hair and clothes.
He shut the door, locked it again.
He stood looking at her.
There was nothing in his face that she could interpret as affection or even as desire.
It was the face of a high priest at the moment of offering.
And she — she must be the altar, for he came towards her spontaneously.
‘Rachaela,’ he said, ‘do you want the light, or not
‘I want the light.’
He had come in barefoot.
Now he lifted the pullover off over his head, unbuttoned the shirt and dropped it, the trousers and underpants sloughed gracefully and quickly, as if he were very practised in this.
His body in the lamp and hearth light was tawny as an icon, the white changed to gold, long and thin and leanly muscled, the belly nearly concave, the ribs evident as carving.
The legs were long and strong, like those of  a runner, the shoulders wider than they had seemed when concealed.
The hair at his groin was blue-black, and there the serpent lay, which she knew of only from literature, a rape, and the daft little things of little boys in childhood.
Like amber, the snake, soft still and quiescent; the thought of her, then, the sight of her under the covers, had not yet woken it.
Only when he was naked did he take the edge of the covers and draw them gently off her body.
She believed she lay before him as golden-white as he, the amber budded on her breasts, the fleece of her groin indigo-black, dosed and secretive as his was not.
He looked at her, and she saw him come erect, the magical mechanism of the male penis, lifting and filling out to a great rod the colour of a dull sunset.
She slithered to one side of the bed, and he moved through the gilded air, angling his body down to hers.
He lay beside her and she knew a primal terror, old as hills — older far than the Scarabae.
‘I'm afraid.’
‘Yes.’
Supporting himself on one elbow he leaned over her.
His face was grave, composed.
A dual creature, the rod of appetite and the priest's face.
He touched her lips with one finger, then bent his head and put his mouth against hers.
With the other hand as he kissed her this chaste cool kiss, he reached back and shook free something from behind his neck.
A shower of black rain.
His hair, coming unbound, washed over her, over her breasts, like a deluge of rough silk.
‘Your hair,’ she said, ‘your hair,’and reached up and took sliding handfuls of it, and the kiss changed, became the kiss of before.
The terror flared up and engulfed her.
It was not terror.
His mouth left hers.
She turned after it and a line of his hair, flavoured with night, ran across her lips.
She bit at it as his mouth strayed down across her throat and found her breasts.
His tongue tattooed them with circles of heat.
He took their centres in his mouth and sweet tremors ran through her body.
A harp string plucked in her loins, chains of stars running in highways of feathers and lights from the points of her breasts into her centre, her groin, the soles of her feet, her brain.
He moved down her, the hard smooth flesh of his body, the velvet rasp of the hard penis as it rubbed against her belly, her thigh….
His hands were on her breasts where his mouth had been.
The music was fiercer, glissandi of fires.
He kneeled in prayer between her thighs, his face cruel as an angel's.
His head was lowered.
A rhythm began like breathing.
The core of her body was in a moment melted.
Long waves of pure ecstasy washed through and through her.
She groaned and threshed on the bed in an anguish of pleasure, redness behind her eyes, her ears singing, sea in a shell.
His tongue described valleys and hillsides, the coil of rivers.
Waves poured in like the ocean.
She was carried up and flung outward.
She heard herself cry aloud, as if she had left her body, expelled by the spasm which shook it.
He lay beside her again, looking at her, quietly stroking her ribs and stomach.
She watched him, not wanting to speak.
The movement of his hand was soothing now.
She calmed under it.
It was as if she had let go of a great burden.
She heard the sea under the cliff, low and ceaseless.
He took her hand, drew it across his body to the hardness of his sex.
She touched this totem carefully, gaining confidence as it quivered and tautened.
She played with him as he had played with, played her.
He lay back and she stretched her body over his, leaning to his mouth and parting his lips with her tongue.
Where their flesh touched she became one thing with him.
She gave, herself to his body and her own, and to her instinct.
His hair was spread behind him like a black raiment.
She slipped her hands through the strands of it, and along his sides.
He gripped her and swung her over, reversing himself along her body.
The black cloak of hair streamed now over her hips and legs.
She felt again the dagger dart of his tongue, like a flame lapping at her core.
She kissed and mouthed his belly, the firm cavity of the navel.
Her own tongue moved on him in sympathetic sorcery.
She found the burning rod and tasted its length, the swarthy towerhead, like a smooth-skinned fruit swollen with juice.
She was lost in him, the textures, tastes of his flesh, the exquisite torture of what he did to her with mouth and fingers.
Everything else forgotten.
She was solely feeling when he turned again and leaned above her.
His golden shadow fell on her from the lamp.
He spread her thighs with a tender ruthlessness.
She was no longer afraid, but opened herself for his invasion.
Nevertheless she was rammed, split.
She had only known one man, a moronic battle in neon light.
That had torn her, now she was torn afresh.
She did not care.
She forced her body wide and pressed up the length of him.
Red pain lanced through the sweetness, and a deeper pain like thunder.
She moaned and lay beneath him, quite taken, filled to her brim, impaled.
He kissed her mouth and breasts.
Shallows of the sweetness flooded her.
When he moved again the pain flared into a glorious friction.
Again she pressed herself to meet it, was wounded, rose again.
She grasped his body, his hair, clinging to him on the brink of chaos.
His face above hers was also shadow, but she saw the savagery of it, to match her own.
Then he lay down on her, his weight sinking her in the bed as if in sand.
She worked and leapt to meet his onslaught.
The pain was gone in an agony of ascent.
His mouth was on hers, at the line of her jaw, blazing on her neck.
In the tumult, rushing, she felt the second invasion, the sharp bite of two merciless teeth, and tried to cry out his name, but she was choked and vanquished.
She experienced the pull of her blood into his mouth like threads of silk drawn up from her vein.
He ravished her like a lion, thrusting into her, his lips drawing out her life.
She felt herself unravel from her flesh.
To the first pleasure this was a cataclysm.
Rachaela screamed.
She was flung up into madness, as she rode the whirlwind.
Panes of light and darkness shattered before her.
She was crucified, obliterated.
And as she fell she sensed him plunge to meet her like a meteor on fire, heard the sound he made against her sundered throat.
‘The lamp's dying,’ she said.
‘Cheta didn't put in enough oil.’
‘Lie still,’ he said.
He was touching her even now, smoothing out her body, caressing her breasts, brushing back her hair.
A tiny flower of blood, like the one Anna had embroidered, lay on the pillow.
‘Like virginity,’ she said.
‘The first time, I bled for a week.’
‘You can't compare that to this.’
‘He didn't drink my blood.’
Adamus lifted himself.
He put his lips softly to her neck and mouthed the little wound.
Delicious, the sensation, another melting.
‘Do you need it?’
He raised his head.
‘No.’
‘But it pleases you.’
‘Very much.’
‘How long…?’
‘Your mother was the last.’
‘Something else she never told me.’
He drew again on her vein.
The stars lit through her body, following the pressure of his mouth.
She tensed and shivered and his hand slipped between her thighs, the fingers daintily probing after the sparks of delight.
She climaxed instantly, startlingly.
‘Do it for me,’ he said.
He licked at her throat  hungrily , closing his eyes.
She snared the tower of him, once more erect and satin-hard, rubbing, tickling, feeling the tremors of its second almost separate life.
She felt his urgency as he moved against her and his breathing caught against her neck.
The flaming juices of him burst into her hand.
He kissed her.
She tasted salt, the spice of her own blood.
‘What will happen?’ she whispered.
‘Nothing.
A love bite.’
A faint noise, beyond the dark world of the room, in the corridor.
‘Is it the cat, looking for you?’
‘The cat never looks for me.
He comes and goes.’
‘Would they be voyeurs?’
‘The family?
No, they've seen it all.
Done most of it.’
Rachaela eased herself up from the bed of sheets and pillows, skin and hair.
‘Don't,’ he said.
‘I want to see.’
She lit a candle from a bedside match, went to the door and unlocked it.
Outside, something lay.
‘One of Camillo's gifts,’ she said.
She bent down.
It was a peculiar, twisted heart, made of driftwood.
Camillo was the wicked one.
She reached to take the heart and it crumbled, fell to bits.
‘Oh.’
She came back into the room and shut and locked the door.
‘What had he left you?
A cat turd in foil?
He's been known to do that.’
‘A broken heart.’
‘I see.
Not just a comment on our morals.’
She set the candle down.
Its wavering light lit his long body, ice-white now on the lake of hair.
He looked like a prince from an uncensored story, a Beardsley illustration of male perfection.
Even to the sleeping phallus, which doubtless Beardsley would have fashioned upright.
‘Why a heart which breaks?’ she said.
‘He's a romantic.
Did he tell you about his flight by night from a besieged city?’
‘No,’ she said.
‘He's like an old baby.
Mischievous and clever.
He cares about nothing.’
‘Maybe he cares about you.’
‘It's my heart, then.
The breakage.’
‘Come here,’ he said.
She went to him slowly.
He drew her down and again she lay the length of him, over him.
She was accustomed to it now, the torrent of feeling.
‘Tomorrow,’ she said, ‘I will be ashamed.’
‘Tomorrow it will be too late.’
‘Yes.’
He circled her with his arms.
She rested her head in the curve of his neck.
She mouthed him, as he had done to her before the bite of his lust.
‘You've made love to me five times,’ she said.
‘You're counting.’
‘We haven't slept.’
‘Sleep tomorrow,’ he said, ‘when you're ashamed.’
He rolled their bodies over and pinned her beneath him.
‘I can't any more,’ she said.
‘Once more, for old time's sake.’
Beyond his shadow, she saw the dim shapes of the window of the temptation.
‘It's getting light.’
‘That happens.’
She did not want the day, the day of shame and confusion.
He pierced her without prologue.
Used to him now, her open body received him easily.
He moved in her slowly to the rhythm of the distant sea.
The deep melodious ache began in her.
She could not ignore it.
They rose and fell on the beach of silence.
Behind him the window merged through silver into a dusk of green and chrysanthemum.
The red blood drops of the apples appeared.
‘I want to see you,’ he said.
He drew out of her and she groaned at her deprivation of him.
He stood back, blew out the candle, watched her as the body of Lucifer was spread out over her own.
‘The apple lies on your groin.
Appropriate.’
‘They will have placed the bed so that it would.
Come back to me,’ she said, ‘quickly, quickly.’
He lay down on her and penetrated her again so that she gave a cry of relief.
She danced beneath him, writhing on a spindle of galvanic motion.
‘Go faster.’
‘Not yet.’
He held her in waiting between earth and heaven as the window bloomed into its insanity of dyes.
The surf pounded in her head.
His mouth came gently to her neck and she gave herself again to the lion.
She could not even scream now.
The window boiled.
She had forgotten everything, past, future.
And outside, tiny creatures ran from the driftwood heart.
9
‘How many miles to Babylon?
Three score and ten.
Can I get there by candlelight?
Yes, and back again.’
A thrush or some brown bird answered from a thicket.
Rachaela watched it, and walked on.
The bird sang a few more notes and flew away.
‘How many miles, how many miles?’
Where had she heard the rhyme?
Not from her mother.
It came now because it was applicable.
She had been to Babylon, and come back.
How canny of her to have chosen a new sweater with a roll neck.
This and a little piece of elastoplast denied the most outrageous element of the visit to Babylon.
The blood had stopped, had been dry when she woke up.
He was gone.
But her whole body, strained and bruised as if he had beaten her, that was the monument to his reality.
She was not ashamed.
Not embarrassed.
Not angry or bewildered or happy.
She was nothing.
Vacant.
He had scoured her out.
He must have removed the remains of the heart from  the carpet, or Michael or Maria had cleared it up, like the mouse.
What do I feel?
Surely she must feel something.
But he had drunk up her feeling with her blood.
The heath was rinsed by fitful sun.
Sometimes it clouded over with rays of darkness.
‘Yes, and back again.’
She sat down on a rock.
From here she could see to the house, the standing stone between like a lightning.
No rabbits today.
She began to cry, silently.
Some feeling after all then.
The sea boomed.
The heath took no notice of her.
Rain fell for days and nights.
It washed away the markers, the clawings of the cat in the earth, the tenuous little flowers beside the path, the webs upon the outside of the windows.
It dissolved memory.
For this was what the immediate past had become.
He had come in at the door, he had lain down with her, he had been her lover.
And before that he had brought her back from the world, home again into the enclave of the Scarabae.
The doors to the tower were locked.
She had tried them after two days.
She had knocked.
She knew intuitively Babylon had been only for one night.
He had wanted her only for one night.
If he had even profoundly wanted her at all.
It was the act the house drove him to, a completion.
Even her blood was not enough to entice him.
If it was true, he had gone without, a monk, for thirty years.
She did not want to leave the house now.
In misery she clutched at it.
The cheerful fireplaces, the masks of the windows.
She could hide here, burrow, and be safe.
No worries, no living to earn, no people to deal with.
How dangerous the house was, a great stone cradle lagged with cotton-wool to wrap her.
She existed with the firelight and the radio, and most nights she went down to ‘dine’ with Stephan and Anna, and now and then others appeared.
She knew them all now.
She had never gone back to the beach.
But the rain washed the beach, too.
They were all there, at the dinner table, all of them but Camillo, who had never come.
Sixteen Scarabae, and the four who served.
Wine was brought with the fish.
From this, if she had not guessed, she saw it was a celebration.
Her blood turned to ice.
And they all smiled at her from time to time.
Little biting smiles of their old strong teeth.
Then she felt the trap again.
It was not a cradle she was in.
Upstairs she had another hot bath, too hot, it almost made her sick.
She performed the set of exercises she had taken to, on the carpet by the bed.
She should have drunk more of the wine.
In the bed she lay and imagined that she had never come here, that her life went on, between the shop of Mr Gerard and the flat.
There would be monetary compensation for the loss of the flat.
She had heard nothing, but how could she, here?
She waited, for the door to open.
Of course it did not.
Five by the tower clock at the bedside — three-thirty in the morning.
The rain, the restless sea.
The rain had ended, and only Anna had come to dinner.
This seemed if anything as purposeful as the gathering of the clan on the previous night.
She was meant to confide in Anna.
‘I was thinking,’ said Rachaela, ‘I may need to get away to London for a while, after all.’
‘How should that be?’
Anna did not look astonished or even feral.
She was bland.
‘Some money matters I should have sorted out.’
‘Surely, a letter would do.’
‘No mail comes to the house.’
‘The van brings it.
Cheta-’
‘I really think I'll need to attend to it personally.’
‘Well, if you must.’
No refusal then.
And nothing to assist.
Rachaela looked into the fire.
She saw no pictures there, not even of Sylvian's funeral pyre.
‘As you know,’ Rachaela said, ‘I've slept with him.’
‘Oh, my dear,’ said Anna.
Obviously there had been a breach of etiquette.
‘It was what you all wanted and anticipated.
I thought you'd like to be certain.’
Anna did not say anything.
‘I've seen nothing of him, since then.’
Rachaela had not meant to say this.
‘Adamus is very secretive,’ said Anna.
‘You must allow him time.’
‘I was the innocent, not he.
What does he need time for?
He's had thirty years.’
‘He doesn't communicate easily,’ said Anna, indulgently.
‘I myself haven't seen him, except briefly, for  a great while.
You must be patient.’
‘So you said before.
Why must I be patient?’
‘What else can you do?’ said Anna simply.
‘Yes, I see.
Plainly nothing.
How long do you think he'll hide from me?
Two months, three?’
‘I don't know, Rachaela.’
‘Or perhaps this is now a permanent state.
Maybe I should get Michael or Cheta to take me into the tower with them when they deliver meals.’
‘That would never do.
You can't force yourself upon him.’
‘He forced himself on me.
You all forced him on me.’
‘No, Rachaela.
There was some measure of acceptance on your part.’
‘This is a game,’ said Rachaela, ‘as I suspected.’
‘Not at all.
More…more a dance, Rachaela.
A changing of partners through time.’
‘Left alone on the dance floor,’ said Rachaela, ‘and the band's gone home.
When the last little star has left the sky,’ she added, quoting with banality, ‘and not still together.’
‘He is as he is.’
‘I see that.
Where am I?’
‘You are quite secure, Rachaela.
You have all of us.’
Rachaela quailed.
‘But you're all mad.’
Anna smiled her smile.
‘What can I say to that.’
Rachaela saw a picture in the fire.
It was Camillo riding on the back of the great black cat.
‘Well, I'll go to London.’
Anna said, ‘Wait a while.’
‘For what?’
‘Perhaps something will happen.’
‘But it has.
I told you.’
She thought,Has anything happened?
Another dream .
She thought:London, have I the strength to try again ?
She knew the days now, she had retained a careful count of them.
On a Saturday she went up to the attic.
It was two weeks and a day, since he had brought her back, since their episode on the green-and-blue bed.
The doors into the tower had stayed locked.
She had been busy, walking and walking, sometimes in the fountains of the rain, doing her exercises.
Some nights she drank three glasses of wine.
She did not talk to Anna, only responded mildly when Anna spoke to her.
Camillo was not in the attic.
It seemed he had lost all interest in that too.
The rocking-horse stood still as a rock, she tipped its back to make it move.
Three bottles had exploded off their tops and there were wine stains on the walls.
Rachaela sampled the wine.
It was sour, as the old women had told her.
Sour, but potent.
She might try this brew, in preference to the civilized wine Michael dished up.
She searched the attic, and found a hammer lying between a sewing machine and a stuffed bird.
as if in readiness.
She opened the clear window and climbed out.
The sky was blue, muddied with vast banks of cloud like cumulus from a volcano.
She walked across the two roofs and came to the tower and its window.
No sound.
The piano was not being played.
How quiet he was.
Was he even there?
Where did he go to when he disappeared?
She had seen, he would brave the daylight.
Was it only their affectation, to be afraid of it, as if it was expected of them.
She knocked courteously with the hammer's hilt.
Was he there, and only dissembling.
Burrowed in the tower, safe from her.
Nothing.
Only the noises of the sea.
Rachaela rested against the tower wall.
She longed to be elsewhere, to be another person.
Anyone would do.
Some spotty check-out girl, some sock-washing wife.
Anything, anything rather than this.
She swung the hammer lightly.
At her first swipe the glass cracked in the lion's head.
She lashed again.
Pieces of yellow crystal dropped out on to the roof like strange sweets.
But she had not breached the tower.
There was more glass, or some other thicker substance, behind the jagged hole she had made.
She smashed down hard against it with the hammer, and the window shook, tiny cracks appeared like earthquake faults.
The substance beyond and between the glass did not give.
She might have guessed.
The stone-slinging mob had taught them.
The glass was provisioned against attack.
She left the broken shards lying and took the hammer back into the attic and set it down neatly by a bird of paradise in lime and cherry feathers.
A useless aggression.
She had been shown.
They were impervious to her.
And she was not a vandal, it was not natural to her to destroy things.
She went back to her room.
In biro, she wrote on a piece of paper taken from an ancient stack in a bureau of the morning room.
Adamus, it is unfair of you to shut me out.
I want to speak to you.
This isn't some idle whim.
How long are you going to hide yourself, or can you ?
Then she tore up this letter, and the two or three which followed it, and burned them in the fire.
Adamus was the Prince of Darkness.
He would not answer at her call.
A capricious and malevolent spirit, thing of shadows.
He had imposed his will, or the will of the Scarabae on her.
Now she must loosen their shackles.
She must.
She could.
It was simple.
In fear she sat and thought of everything before her.
She had been an imbecile and deserved nothing more kind.
She had better find the strength.
She had better.
At about four in the morning, by the light of one candle, she thrust two more books into the new black bag, tested its weight, and did it up.
This time she had squashed some of her clothes inside, and several of the lighter books, the paperbacks.
Into her everyday bag went make-up and toiletries.
She could not take the radio, but as before she had acknowledged that.
The quantities of books she must leave behind.
It was Tuesday, she had kept careful count.
The day of the van, perhaps, but that was not relevant.
The van could not be used again.
Surely Carlo and Cheta would prevent it, now.
She put on her coat and hauled the new bag up on to her back like a knapsack.
It was heavy but tolerable.
She would have to endure.
The lesser bag she slung on to her shoulder.
Rachaela opened the door on the usual night-time blackness.
She gripped the candle firmly.
The carvings swung, and up there an owl of wood stared at her among the leaves.
There was something wrong.
She knew it before she had reached the landing.
A light burned in the hall, the red lamp.
She came out at the head of the stairs and looked down.
They were all there.
All the Scarabae.
She looked them over one by one, Unice and Alice, Peter and Dorian, Jack and George and Eric, Stephan was there and Anna, standing to one side, Teresa, Miranda, Anita, Sasha, Livia and Miriam.
And Uncle Camillo in his armour with the lamp shining on the breastplate and helmet, and the vizor down so you could not see if he were laughing.
Rachaela had halted in her tracks.
She confronted them, waiting for one or all of them to speak.
How had they known?
Even, there, near the passage, the four servants, big Carlo among them.
Ready to seize and stay?
‘I'm going,’ Rachaela said loudly.
‘I won't be stopped.’
She held up the candle and began to descend the stairs.
A little ripple went over them, and she braced herself, but otherwise they did not move.
She was strong and they were old.
How would old Carlo react to a kick on the ankle, her teeth in his wrist.
The candle might be used as a weapon.
She got down into the hall.
They were a wall in front of her, between her and all the doors.
She moved towards the drawing room and walked right at them.
She thought of striking them, the matchstick sounds of the breakage of old bones.
She would do it if she had to —
Eric and Stephan stepped aside.
They let her pass.
She went into the unlighted room, the candle bursting on the ridges of furniture.
The door to the conservatory veered at her, half-open as it always was by night.
They were coming after, creeping forward with a susurrus of materials and soft shoes.
Creeping after her as if they stalked her.
But would they spring?
She pushed wide the door and edged through the lanes between the great plants, black and white and grey.
They brushed her like strengthless and accusing hands.
Rachaela thrust them off, and the stems broke, the petals showered like confetti.
She gained the door on to the night and pushed it and stepped over the sill.
She walked across the garden, over Carlo's weeded lawn, under the girders of the cedar.
Only the little gate now.
She put down the candle and left it burning there.
She glanced back as she shut the gate behind her.
All the Scarabae — all but one — were crowded in the garden.
They watched her.
Their grim old faces gave away nothing.
Like elderly kiddies at a play they did not understand yet knew to be important, they regarded her as she stood behind the gate.
Goodbye , she thought.
Goodbye for ever .
With a feeling of great cold, almost of terror, she turned away from them, brushing a spray of their petals from her coat.
Who would believe this flight by night.
She thought of all their eyes glittering in the candleshine.
Eyes like beetles caught on the bushes.
She resisted the temptation to look back a second time.
Rachaela walked along the path, in among the pine trees with the sullen roar of the sea to her right.
When  the trees broke, she came out on the uncut lawn of the heath.
The sea lashed between the bulkheads of the cliff.
The standing stone rose white in the darkness.
There was a thin moon, a wrack of cloud.
The night was noisy with its own nocturnal sounds.
Now she must remember the way that Cheta and Carlo took.
She needed to find the village in the dark.
She moved along the heath, and from a tuft of darkness something came out and stood in her way.
Last of them all, it was the cat.
Rachaela slowed her pace but did not stop.
The cat eyed her.
It was sleek, its ears raised not flattened.
Did it know her still or would it turn on her now she was an outcast?
Was it some supernatural sentinel of the Scarabae?
She came level with the cat, stretched out her hand, and the cat sniffed her.
She smoothed its great barbaric head.
‘You're a beautiful monster,’ she said, ‘are you going to let me by?’
The cat withdrew from her like a sooty ghost and stole away along the slope towards the standing stone.
From a distance of thirty feet she heard it clawing the earth.
It was not concerned with her.
She was through all the ordeals now, and had only the journey to accomplish.
There was a kind of separate fear on her as she walked.
The vast heath was full of stillness and life.
Noises were continuous, chirrups of unimaginable creatures, the sudden flush of something in a bush, the beating of wings.
Once three night birds rose into the blue-black of the sky.
She disturbed the pattern of the nocturne.
There were stars, brilliant and manufactured, so many of them, ridiculous to believe that they were suns and planets.
The cloud formed the shape of a skull beneath the moon, huge eyeholes of sky glaring down.
Anything might come out of the sky.
Or off the ground.
Rachaela walked stolidly, the weight on her back like the sins of the pilgrim in some religious tale.
What were her sins?
Incest, for one.
But the word meant nothing.
Do what you like so long as you don't get caught .
But there —
Perhaps the long hard walk would help her.
Shake loose the sin.
Silly to hope for that.
She had acted unthinkingly and was punished.
Was it a sin to leave the Scarabae?
Were they still standing like statues in the garden?
Had Anna and Stephan led them in?
She must forget the Scarabae.
Forget Adamus.
Her mother had never managed it.
She would have to be different.
It was not difficult to recollect the route Carlo and Cheta had taken.
Certain landmarks had been unconsciously remembered.
She had turned inland at the right spot she was sure.
Yet where was the road now?
Out of a stand of pine a slim grey beast emerged.
It checked and looked at her.
The markings about its eyes made it savage, wolf-like, but it was only a fox, more discomposed than she at the meeting.
It trotted briskly away.
Beyond the pine trees the road ran, desolate and haunted black.
Rachaela did not like the look of it by night.
She  walked carefully to one side.
Some colossal thing might come from the dark, storming down on her.
The gutted farmhouse appeared, silvered by the moon.
Uncanny lights could have blazed in the windows, but they did not.
A black rook or crow sat in the hedge, as if to challenge her.
She saw the glitter of its eye.
All things here were Scarabae.
But the rook paid her no attention, did not fly at her crying in a human voice Go back !
How the night worked on her imagination.
The village might be gone, or dead, or all the inhabitants turned to stone like the houses.
No, the village was only that.
It obeyed the laws of normal things.
There were telephones, and they would answer if she knocked loudly enough.
She had only to follow the road now.
Nothing walked or ebbed behind her.
The moon was setting, the cloud like streaming hair or bubbling steam.
She did not recall that wood there by the road.
Could she somehow have taken a wrong turning on the straight, unbranching surface?
Had part of the land been lifted up and spirited away?
But there, she remembered that derelict wall.
Beyond that rise, the village would be.
Probably.
She achieved the crest of the road and saw it spill over, and the village in the bottom of the valley, silent as if drowned a hundred years beneath a lake.
The door to the pub called The Armitage was of thick wood, lacking a bell or knocker.
A side door was streakily painted and had two sorry pots of weeds beside it, and a bell and letterbox.
The sky was higher and the stars had lost their  clockwork effulgence.
Dawn was near.
Wakey wakey.
She rang the bell brutishly, keeping her hand on it, and flapped the lid of the letterbox.
After a long while muffled sounds came from above.
A window lighted.
As she had supposed, it had been best to take them by surprise.
The window went up.
A bald but tousled head poked out.
‘Is that you, Sandy?’
Rachaela cleared her throat.
‘No.
I need your help.
An emergency.
Your telephone.’
‘There's a telephone up the way,’ said the aggrieved being above.
‘Vandalized,’ said Rachaela.
as if the bastard doesn't know .
‘Please.
It's urgent.
I'll pay you for the use.’
‘This time of night,’ said the man.
‘Please,’ said Rachaela.
‘Are you from the farm?’
‘No.’
Just wait there.’
The sky was bluish-grey, vast films of darkness seeping out of it.
From outposts of the dirty village, wild birds began to sing their lawless aubade.
She pictured the man stamping down through his pub, irate and duty-bound.
Who was ‘Sandy’?
Another who knocked them up before daylight.
The door was unlocked and scraped open.
‘Now what is it you want?’
‘Your telephone.’
‘I don't know.
Who are you?’
‘It's very urgent.
I must call a car.’
‘A car?
What do you want with a car?’
The man, she had noticed, had a London accent, like the van people.
Another outsider.
‘It's an emergency,’ Rachaela repeated.
‘All right.
You'd better come in.’
Rachaela moved through.
The hallway smelled beery and unclean.
‘I need the number of a hire car,’ said Rachaela.
‘Wants the phone and wants a bloody number an’ all.’
‘I'm sure you have some numbers.’
‘Maybe, in the bar.
I'll have to go through.
Wait there.’
The man went off in his brown dressing-gown.
From above, a woman called plaintively, ‘What is it, Harry?’
Rachaela stood in the dark and threadbare hall.
She gazed at the telephone.
She felt drunk.
Perhaps it was the smell.
The man came back and thrust a card at her.
‘That'll do.
I'll ask you two pounds for the call.
Don't be more than five minutes.’
Rachaela took the card, opened her bag, and put down the money on the smeary table.
The man scooped it up at once.
‘Harry!’ called the woman.
‘What the hell is it?’
‘What's happening, Harry?’
‘Some girl here wants the phone,’ he shouted.
‘Get up and make us some tea.
You women,’ he said to Rachaela in disgust.
She picked up the telephone receiver, disbelievingly, and dialled the number of the card.
Quickies .
It rang.
It rang and rang.
Twenty-four-hour service said the card.
Perhaps they had gone to make tea also, or to the lavatory.
‘Quickies Cars.’
Rachaela caught her breath.
‘I need a car to get to the town station.’
‘And where from?’
Where from .
Rachaela said, just a moment.’
She said to the man, ‘What's the name of this place?’
‘What, here?’
‘Yes, the village.’
‘You don't know?’
‘No, I don't.’
‘Bidgely,’ he said.
She thought he said.
‘Bidgely,’ she enunciated cautiously into the phone.
‘I'm sorry,’ said the man on the line.
‘Bidgely.
Can you spell it for me?’ she asked the pub owner.
He spelled the word.
It was ‘P-i-t-c-h-l c y’.
‘Don't think I know that one,’ said the car-hire man.
Rachaela said firmly to the impatient pub man, ‘Would you be very kind and give him directions?’
‘Well you've got a bleeding cheek I must say.
Getting me out of bed at this hour, wanting me to give directions.’
Rachaela handed him the phone.
To her relief he took it and did as he was bid.
The advice sounded incomprehensible to her but when he handed her the phone receiver back, the car man said, ‘OK, I've got that.
Be about an hour.
That's the soonest I can make it.’
‘All right.
Thank you.’
‘What number is the pick up?’
‘By The Armitage public house.’
‘Right-oh.’
Quickies clicked into the void.
‘There you are then,’ said the man.
His woman was coming down the stairs in a blue candlewick dressing-gown and her hair in curlers.
They watched Rachaela off the premises and slammed and locked the door.
An hour, and an hour perhaps to get back into the town — still plenty of time, as she had judged it, to catch the ten-forty-five for Bleasham.
Suppose it was not Tuesday that the train ran.
It was.
It was and she would be in time.
Somewhere someone had to tell the truth.
She was determined now.
She would make it happen.
Rachaela sat on the ground, on the slope of unbuilt land up the street, where the van came when the van came.
She watched for the car.
The village started half-alive about her, lights went on in some windows, then off again as the daylight strengthened.
A woman came out of her house and apparently poured a pot of tea around the base of a bush.
Another one put washing on to a line, gaudy bedclothes and sombre shirts.
A car or two, the wrong ones, took off down the street in the direction of the town.
A dog barked.
The village was, as she had thought, a dump, where time was whittled away in some vintage manner.
Tainted by Scarabae.
But the car would come.
The car was late.
It was half past nine and the car had not arrived.
Rachaela stood up.
Was the driver lost?
The driver would not be lost.
An old green Ford Zodiac materialized on the road, driving down into the village.
It went past Rachaela, and pulled up outside the pub.
Rachaela ran.
‘I have to catch the ten forty-five at the town station.’
‘I doubt if you'll do it, miss,’ said the driver sadly.
‘You're late.’
‘It's the traffic, you see.
Should have ordered the car sooner, miss.’
‘I did.’
She got in.
‘Will you try?’
‘The Poorly connection is it you want?’
‘Poorly, yes.
For London.’
‘Your best bet is if I drive straight over to Poorly.
Cost you a bit more, but you'll get the eleven-fifteen London train for sure.’
‘All right.
Do that then,’ she said recklessly.
‘You understand, I'm trying to help you out.’
‘Drive to Poorly.’
‘Don't want you to think I'm just angling for extra fare.’
‘It doesn't matter.
So long as I get the train.’
The village reversed, took off and poured away.
After all, this was the moment of severance.
The car raced up the road.
Rachaela felt a flare of mad joy.
as if she could leave all her troubles behind.
But they were only just beginning.
The driver was talkative.
She let him go on, offering the proper monosyllable here and there.
He wanted to tell her his life-story, not hear her own.
Perhaps he had lied about missing the town connection.
He had four children, two parents, and a weak-willed sister.
The colour of the car, grey-green, the country rushed by.
They passed houses and fields and a  number of prettified pubs, all showing that the influence of the Scarabae had been left behind.
Churches rose in meadows, picturesque, with leaning gravestones.
Faint blossom was on some trees like wispy bridal veils.
Spring began here too.
She had lost the months as well.
Was it March?
They turned through lanes, and joined a motorway and left it.
It was ten thirty-five.
Certainly too late for the town train now.
A sign said Porlea 6 miles .
Rachaela almost laughed.
Perhaps everything would change like the names once she was out of their net.
Nobody stood on the platform for the despised means to London, but in the ticket office the man had assured her that all was well, or at least, sane.
The station was bright with lots of red plastic, but cartons lay in the litter bins and a discarded magazine loitered on one of the seats.
Birds sewed back and forth over the line.
Then the train came, massive, filthy and real.
An announcement informed the vacant platform and Rachaela that this train was the London via somewhere, calling at something and elsewhere and who cared at all?
In an ecstasy of selfishness she got into the magic train.
It was quite crowded but in her pleasure Rachaela did not mind.
She found a seat and placed her bags at her feet.
Thank God.
Oh thank God.
With a gliding forward-thrust the train achieved its truth.
It was bearing her away.
Everything would be all right.
The woman with the shopping basket cuddled on her lap made her fifth attempt upon Rachaela.
‘Don't you find these long journeys are a nuisance?
It's the motion.
I can't settle to anything.
I brought my knitting.
Do you knit?
But I drop stitches, I find.
Knitting a cardy for my granddaughter.
Very fancy pattern.
I can show you my grandchild.
I always carry a photo.
Such a bonny child.
Not like my daughter at all.
More like my mother's side.
Such lovely hair.
A proper blonde.
Of course it will darken.
I never let my daughter do anything to her hair.
You leave it the way God intended it.’
Have it cut , said Rachaela's mother,and a nice set.
Easier for you to manage .
The photo was produced and given to Rachaela.
A fat, pale child with yellow hair, smiling, jam on its upper lip, unless it had also a red moustache.
‘Yes,’ said Rachaela.
‘Do you have any children?’
‘No,’ said Rachaela.
‘A pity, I always think, not to have them while you're young.
It's the best time.
I had my Janet when I was eighteen.
And then John and Kieran.
I love children, don't you?’
Rachaela did not answer.
Fields and pylons passed.
Distant houses with crimson roofs.
A far-away Aver with a castle on its bank.
Oh, to be there.
To have some destination.
There was only London.
And until then this woman.
‘Hurry up and give me a grandchild, I said to her.
Oh Mum, she says, I'm only twenty.
I had you when I was eighteen, I said.
I expect you're waiting for Mr Right,’ said the woman to Rachaela.
‘We've been together, my  Martin and me, twenty-four years.
A perfect match my sister used to say.
I just wish, she used to say, I'd had your Martin, and your lovely children.
What do you think you'll like, dear, a boy or a girl, for your first?
A girl's best.
Keep the boys in order.
Like a second mum my Janet was.’
Rachaela stood up.
The woman was not affronted.
Her universe contained only one, the rest were bit players, successful or not.
Rachaela dodged her way to the lavatory.
The lock was whimsical.
She got it shut, and leaning with difficulty to the jolting bowl, she vomited colourless fluids from her empty stomach.
Was this the truth after all, even so early, the proving of the facts?
Not the train, not London, but this?
As her head cleared, Rachaela propped herself against the wall.
She voided the lavatory, and ran cold water in the basin, laving her face, hands, wrists.
Too soon surely to panic.
It was only fear.
10
A POSTER ON THE WALL showed a bleeding rose.
Tetanus: it doesn't have to be a rusty nail , the caption read.
Beneath, a handwritten notice pleaded: ‘If you or your child feel sick, please tell tell the receptionist.’
The surgery was crowded, a plague ward.
Children sneezed and cried and ran about in a fever.
Men and women coughed and evacuated their noses, blue germs puffing from their mouths in the chilly room.
The chairs were hard and the magazines few.
You were not encouraged to come.
The buzzer went angrily.
Who would dare to be next.
‘Miss Day?
Go through please.’
Rachaela walked through into the doctor's room, which was quite large, with netted windows over a garden.
The man wore a suit and tie.
He was slim and fit with well-brushed thinning hair.
He gave Rachaela a neat and ironed smile.
‘What can I do for you?’
Rachaela sat down on the chair he indicated.
‘I need an abortion.’
The doctor put his smile away and raised his brows.
‘Let's not put the cart before the horse, shall we?
So you think you may be pregnant.
What leads you to believe this?’
‘My periods have stopped.
I've been sick several times.’
‘How many periods have you missed?’
‘Two.’
‘Have you brought a sample of your urine taken first thing in the morning?’
‘I did a Predictor test.’
‘I see.
Well as you're here, we'd better take a look at you.’
He pressed at the intercom.
‘Mrs Beatty, come through please.’
He said, just slip off your, under-things behind that screen.
Keep your slip on.’
Rachaela did as she was told, and came out to the examining table, very white with something on it like a large paper towel.
Fat Mrs Beatty entered and sat down in a corner beyond the screen.
‘Knees up, please, ankles together.
Just relax.’
The last time a man had touched her it had been a pleasure, a miracle of sensation.
This one was rough, knowing how tough the female body had to be, how much it could take.
‘Yes,’ he said, ‘um.’
And he poked and prodded at her vagina and her belly.
He stared in behind a light, like a miner.
‘All right.
You can put on your things now.’
He washed his hands, soiled by her, at a sink, and Mrs Beatty slunk back out of the room.
‘Well, Miss — ah, Miss Day.
I'd say you're definitely pregnant.’
‘I know.’
‘Everything,’ he said, ‘seems very healthy.
Let's have a look at your blood pressure.’
He attended to this, checking his gauge.
They waited in silence.
‘That's excellent.
You're a very healthy young woman.’
His congratulations did not thrill her.
‘I want an abortion.’
‘There's absolutely no reason that you should.
You're what-’ he consulted her statement before him, ‘twenty-nine?
That's not too late.
There are tests that can be run if you're worried the baby-’
It's not a baby.
It's a thing, a parasite, lodged in me.
‘I don't want it.’
‘But, Miss Day.
It's not as simple as that.
You have a responsibility.
The child has been conceived.
A life; Miss Day, which you are carrying.’
‘It was an accident.’
Could she say that?
She had not taken any precautions, nothing had been further from her mind.
The gate left open, and the fertile Scarabae seed, better at inbreeding, sown in one of five vortices of ecstasy.
Yes, she was responsible.
‘I'm afraid, accident or not, the child is a fact.’
He ran his eye over her.
He smelled of disinfectant and aftershave.
‘Do you have any family?’
‘No.’
‘And I take it your boyfriend isn't interested.’
Boyfriend.
‘I left him.’
I see.
An awkward situation.
But people come through worse.
You must be brave.
In this day and age things are made quite easy for a young mother, a single parent.
I see you have an address in quite a  nice area.’
She had just gained the small flat via the proceeds of the compensation for the other.
It had taken weeks to sort things out.
Thus her delay in coming to this man.
This man who believed in the sanctity of life,its life, not hers.
Hers was immaterial.
‘My address doesn't matter.
I don't have any money-’
‘There are means of support for women in your situation.’
‘But I tell you, I don't want it.
It — it was forced on me.
‘Surely not.’
He allowed himself to show a measure of distaste.
‘I can't — I can't have it, care for it.’
‘You can decide all that when the baby is born.
And you'll change your mind.
Children are wonderful things.
Special.’
‘Not to me.’
‘Well, Miss Day, I'm sorry but I see no excuse to recommend you should opt for a termination.
Of course we need to go into your history.
But judging by what I've seen and what you've told me, I see no reason why you shouldn't square up to this and assume your responsibility.
Think of all those women who long to bear a child and are unable.’
I don't care about that.
I care about my own body.
I want my freedom.’
‘Then I'm sorry, Miss Day.
I can't help you.’
‘Then where do I go?’
‘You'll have to find that out for yourself.
I'm not here in the position of a butcher.
Life's important to me.’
‘I'm desperate,’ she said.
He flushed.
He said, ‘You people make me sick.’
He rose.
Rachaela got up too.
She struck him violently across the left side of his face dislodging all expression.
He gawped at her, his left eye watering, and the imprint of her hand bright-pink across his clean-shaven, aftershaved cheek.
So he would have to confront the next patient.
Heavy as lead, she walked from the room.
The main chamber was ten feet by fourteen.
The walls and ceiling were white with a hint of peach, and the carpet dove-grey.
She had known all this before she moved into it, from the estate agents' sheet.
The bathroom was boxed off, giving a tiny entrance lobby as you entered the flat.
The suite in the bathroom was white and the floor black-and-white tiles.
There was a frosted window.
The kitchen area also opened off the room, without a door.
It had a black floor, white cupboards, and a stainless-steel sink and drainer.
The one window in the kitchen and the two in the main room were on the same end wall.
They looked across the lines of houses and the blocks of flats towards a distant handkerchief of park with tall bare trees.
In summer they would be green, as the agent had cunningly pointed out.
Rachaela had expensively rescued her furniture from store.
She spread the bed with a blue and crimson Indian blanket, put up lampshades, hung blue curtains.
The flat was not unpleasant.
For one.
It was only for one.
The radio stood on the kitchen work-top.
She turned it on.
Haydn, clipped and safe, with only the passion of melody.
She had been so frightened.
It had taken all her strength to go to the man who thought children were special.
Why were they special?
They were unformed dough, unfinished things, due to be warped into the general useless and dangerous mass of human adults.
Rachaela touched her stomach and took her hand quickly away.
It was in there.
A growth, busily feeding on her, swelling second by second.
It would take so much courage to find another doctor, and she would surely have to go to a hospital to do so.
She feared hospitals.
She distrusted the uniform of the white coat.
And then she might meet another one like the one today.
Could she do something herself?
She had tried all the sane home remedies she had ever heard of to dislodge it.
Gin and hot baths, exercises.
She could not bring herself to fall down the house stairs.
The commotion, and people running out, a broken leg.
She was afraid, too, of the abortion.
To have the thing scraped or vacuumed out of her womb, the very thought of it last night had sent her to the bathroom, heaving over the modern white lavatory.
But she must find someone.
Someone kind who would put her first.
As she had told herself she must not, she saw the Scarabae reaching out, their agents in the surgery, the doctor listening, nodding.
This was not a plot.
It was simple bad luck.
The tradition of the family.
Continuance.
No wonder he had left her.
He had seen to her as he had seen to her mother.
He had been more certain with Rachaela.
She sat down in her chair and threw its new blue cushion to the carpet.
How pretty the flat was.
She could live here, surely, at peace, alone.
And she would need to work.
There was the cafeteria in Lyle and Robbins.
Old-fashioned, not too demanding, and no drunks.
Then again the Pizza Eater on Beaumont Street was a better bet for tips.
No bookshops.
Computerized tills.
These things could be sorted out and surmounted.
But not this.
She lay back in the chair.
She was so tired.
The clear windows showed the roofs of London, the redundant chimneys and the crop of TV aerials, the spring sky.
An aeroplane.
She recalled no aeroplanes flying over the heath.
Out of time and place, that spot.
Perhaps something will happen .
Anna had said that.
She had meant the pregnancy.
Was it wrong to kill it?
It was a monster.
In the blustery dark descending the well-lit centre of the house, Rachaela found a woman had stepped out from a doorway, a neighbour from the floor below.
‘Oh, Miss Day.
I picked this up by mistake.
I'm afraid I think it's only junk mail, but it's addressed to you.’
Rachaela took the glossy envelope.
‘Thank you.’
‘You can never tell these days.
It might be something you want.’
The woman was conciliatory in warm fawn.
Her  hair was a greying fair, thick and shaggily cut.
She had a square face and large brown eyes, smiling.
She wanted to be friends.
‘How are you finding the flat?’ she asked.
‘It's fine.’
‘I find it's so small,’ said the woman.
‘But then, I've had all these years to accumulate rubbish.’
Rachaela waited, her heart drumming and her stomach rife, for the challenge of the street and the night.
‘Well I mustn't keep you.
Take care,’ she added kindly, ‘it's a nasty old night.’
Rachaela went on down the stairs, stowing the piece of junk mail in her bag.
She forgot the woman outside.
The wind struck at her, the sky was choked with dark blue churning cloud.
Rachaela walked down the street and caught a bus at the corner.
It twisted and turned and bore her into an ominous and derelict suburb, stark in the orange street lights.
Where she got off, the buildings had been knocked down, great rattling walls of corrugated iron, striped with bills, separated her from yawning cavities.
She walked past the rowdy pub which had been described and up a hill of council houses fish boned with fake shutters, gardens spattered by gnomes, and windmills that whirled with weather.
The street ended in waste ground.
Some youths in leather and day-glo socks were holding a meeting on the gloomy grass.
One shouted at Rachaela, a ritual of menace.
She walked on and came to a one-story building surrounded by a cordon of wire fencing.
Through the gate and over the lumpy ground, and she opened the door and went into a long drill hall with a clacking wooden floor.
The air was hot and sour, the room crowded, the lines of wooden seats around the walls filled by women of all apparent ages between the virgin and the crone.
It was a place of women, a mocking slightly sordid club.
And from a yellow door issued a man in a white coat, and the eyes of his harem of suppliants went to him, the click of knitting needles hesitated and pages of rustling magazines halted.
He joked briefly with a woman in a lilac cardigan at a desk.
Then he was gone, like the god.
Rachaela went to the desk.
‘I've got an appointment for seven.’
‘Oh yes.
Miss Day is it?
That's right.
If I could just take your address.’
The woman entered details and nearby the nearer women listened.
A pallid girl with round frog eyes watched Rachaela, popping a boiled sweet into her rosy, fatty mouth.
‘I'm afraid we're a bit behind tonight.
It may be a bit of a wait.’
‘All right.’
Rachaela went from the woman and found a chair at the end of the line.
About thirty in front of her.
Surely some of them were together.
It was ten to seven now.
The frog princess was the nearest to the yellow door.
Presumably when one went in, they all moved up a chair, into the heat of the previous sitter, intimately.
We are all women.
We are bound to protect ourselves.
The cap and the pill, the scrape of the spatula taking our smear, to save us from semen and from cancer.
We are the responsible ones.
But there were children with the women here and there, subdued children eating chips or drawing on pieces of paper on the floor.
Fourteen-year-olds with kids and thick mascara, slim with strange fat faces that had not lived, but had overseen, screaming and crying, the birth of offspring from the trunk below.
Certainly, none of them looked afraid.
They were all quite comfortable in their evening club, the Family Planning Clinic.
I'm afraid I haven't planned.
Heavy with child I come to ask for an extraction.
Would this one listen?
Was it to be the man from behind the yellow door?
She had hoped it would be a woman on this visit.
A woman's touch would be less horrible, perhaps.
But these were all women.
Look at them.
The needles of that one clocking like Madame Defarge, her soiled yellow hair piled up on her head and red lipstick like a gaping wound.
And there one writing, probably a letter, holding the paper sideways and chewing her nails.
The hall smelled of women, too.
Cheap scent and costlier scent like fly spray, sticky underarm deodorant, hair lacquer, babies and washing-up hands.
Rachaela felt sick.
If that happened, where was the lavatory?
There must be one.
She should have asked.
She could feel it , pressing against her belly from beneath, like solid indigestion.
Try not to think of it.
She took slow breaths of the nauseating air.
A girl in a purple suit began to talk to her friend beside her.
‘I don't like this waiting.
Gets on me nerves.’
‘Yeah.’
Yes , thought Rachaela.
‘Don't know what he'll say this time.
I reckon he fancies me.’
‘Don't be daft.’
‘Well why not?’
‘It's more'n his job's worth.’
The purple girl toyed with a packet of cigarettes beneath the ‘No Smoking’ sign, playing with them like a toy.
If she could not consume them at least she could hold them.
‘He keeps on, give it up.
I've tried ain't I?
I started with all that worry.’
‘Yeah.’
‘All them counsellors and psychiatrics.
Was I sure? 'Cause I'm bleeding sure.
Can't have another kid can I?
Can't afford it and he'll leave me.’
‘Oh Lyn.’
‘Well he would have.
We was in a fix as it was.
An' I took the bloody pill.
I did.
Regular.
And then I goes up the  shute .
That would have been number three.’
‘Lyn, you always go on.’
‘It's this place.
It reminds me.
All them psychiatrics at the hospital.
I had to see four of them.
Like a bloody judge and jury, trying to persuade me to have it.
I can't have it.
I've got two already.’
Rachaela listened, her eyes on the wooden floor.
To one who had travelled before her.
‘Well, you got rid of it, Lyn,’ said the unfriendly friend.
‘It was a struggle.
And then the way they treat you.
And the pain.
Christ, I thought it would be all  right.
I've never been right since.
You know I ain't.
I couldn't bear him near me after.’
‘That was psychological.
They told you it was.’
‘No it weren't.
They done something to me, the clumsy buggers.
They treat you like shit when you go in for it.’
The yellow door opened and a slim, fat-faced young girl came out, looking satisfied.
The god emerged again and went to the desk.
He gave instructions and vanished once more.
‘Miss Garland,’ sang out the woman in lilac, and the frog princess, sucking her sweet without fear, went forward and inside the door.
The Defarge woman dropped a stitch and cursed.
‘I'm going outside for a fag,’ said the purple girl, She got up and left the hall.
A new picture.
Probes for the body and others probing at the mind.
The team of psychiatrists, trying to delve the reasons of the would-be terminator.
Would it be enough to be afraid?
No.
The dream she had had, lying on the beach and the sea coming in, split open and fire running out of her guts, that would not be enough.
Of course, they would not make it simple.
It must not be easy.
She bore a life.
She could not merely flush her body like a toilet bowl.
The girl next up from Lyn's friend was discussing food.
‘A nice cut of steak and fry it up with onions.
I could give him that every night.
It's no good me saying, Tony, it's bad for you.
You'll get a heart attack.
And try giving him salad.
Chips with everything.
Our ceiling's black from frying chips.
Running with grease.
He makes me sick.’
She had done the favour for Rachaela.
Rachaela rose and walked quickly out of the hall.
Outside the night came thankfully cold, a smell of external houses and open street.
The glare of the nauseous streetlights which made the world faceless and colourless.
The purple girl, now in black, stood by the fence smoking greedily.
She glanced at Rachaela and away.
It was not possible to ask her questions.
In any case, everything was now revealed.
A difficult business.
A humiliating struggling business.
Ending in harsh treatment and pain, and a lingering scar.
She could hear the adjacent streetlight sizzling like a radioactive isotope.
The earth was alive with poisons, and surrounded by the threat of outer space.
What use was anything.
The abortioned girl stared after Rachaela as she walked out of the gate and back along the street.
There was a faint affront on the girl's face, as if she knew Rachaela had denied herself a similar vileness and suffering, the secrets of the female club.
Over the Beethoven concerto, the door was knocked upon.
Rachaela lay in the chair, listening to the echo.
Why should she go?
It was no one.
Some mistake.
When she had been here three days a man had trailed up the stairs, let in by another tenant, hammering on her door.
‘Do the Chambers live here?’
She had told him they did not.
He was disbelieving and finally she shut the door in his face.
The door was knocked upon again.
A muffled woman's voice.
‘It's only me.
Downstairs, Flat Five.’
Rachaela lifted herself from the chair.
Was this too some part of the Scarabae plot?
For yes, there was a plot.
Of course there was.
She opened the door.
It was the fair, greying woman from below.
‘Sorry to disturb you.
An absolutely ridiculous request.
You couldn't let me have a little milk?
I've been so chilled all day, made myself cup after cup of coffee and tea, and I've run out.
The milkman delivers tomorrow.
I can let you have it back quite quickly.’
Rachaela said, ‘There's only carton milk.’
‘Oh that's perfect, if you can spare it.’
Rachaela went into the kitchen and opened the fridge.
She took out her three-quarters-full carton.
The woman stood on the grey carpet.
‘How attractive you've made it,’ she said, ‘and no clutter.
I truly admire that.
I'm afraid mine's a cross between a library and a curiosity shop.’
Rachaela thought of all her books left behind.
The Beethoven played on, oblivious.
‘Can you spare all this?’
‘Yes.’
‘Well, thank you so much.
As I say-’
‘Don't bother.
I've another carton,’ Rachaela lied.
‘But I must.’
The woman paused.
‘That's Number Three isn't it?
I'm a fan of Beethoven.
I love his fury.
Why shouldn't the poor thing get angry, going deaf as he did?’
‘Yes.’
‘I'd better introduce myself.’
Rachaela only looked at her.
Undaunted, apparently, the woman said, ‘Emma Watt.
Mrs. Not that that counts any more.
My poor old love died two years ago.
I sold the house and took the flat.
Tried to squeeze myself really small.
We all have our own funny ways of trying to deal with pain.’
And the pain.
Christ….
‘Anyway,’ said Mrs Emma Watt quickly after all, ‘I expect you're busy.
Thanks again for the milk.
I'll pop up and put a bottle outside your door tomorrow.’
‘There's no need.’
‘But I must.’
She went into the hall and brightly down the stairs with a brave self-sufficient smile, for Rachaela's benefit.
What would it be like to be Emma Watt, fifty years old, sad and alone and brightly squeezed into her too-small flat?
What would it be like to be the purple girl, frigid from anxiety, and child-bearing behind her?
There was no escape.
She was Rachaela, here and now.
In her belly the thing lay, embedded, coiled.
The Pizza Eater took on Rachaela, gave her a red dress and a pale green apron, and asked her to put up her hair.
She plaited it, which seemed to satisfy them.
She worked from ten in the morning until six, or from three until eleven-thirty.
Some of the late customers were drunk, but normally well-behaved.
Often, delayed by the cleaning up, she did not leave the premises until midnight.
In addition to serving the wood-plastic tables, she cut sandwiches, grilled steaks, scooped out ice-cream, piled pizzas in boxes for a take-away service, and now and then washed up.
She grew accustomed, as she had before, to her feet hurting and burning, to the rudeness and tiplessness  of many customers, and the matey chatter of her fellow workers of both sexes.
She received lunch or dinner free from the restaurant, but the food did not really appeal to her.
Sometimes she managed a rare steak or else ate salad and ice-cream.
It saved her efforts at the flat.
She came to terms with the computerized till, which often she had to deal with.
One afternoon she gave a pound short on the change which had showed up in emerald numerals before her face.
The customer did not notice; and by the time she realized, he had gone.
On her own at the till, Rachaela removed the extra pound and kept it.
The Pizza Eater was only twenty minutes walk away from the flat.
For the first seven weeks she was meticulously on time.
Then, when she was late, it was never more than ten or fifteen minutes, which the other employees frequently bettered, coming in half an hour over the odds due to tube delays or traffic jams.
Rachaela thought of the job as temporary.
Something more soothing would present itself.
Meanwhile the money was not bad, and forgetting the occasional pound in change proved a useful means of saving.
Only once had the customer checked his money and informed her she had short-changed him.
Rachaela looked flustered, apologized, and fished the extra note out of the till.
‘That's all right,’ he said blithely.
‘Anyone can make a mistake.’
The other mistake she ignored.
At the time when most women, so a solitary book from the library had informed her, began to experience sickness, Rachaela stopped.
She had no symptoms, except that no monthly showing of blood  took place.
Her waist widened a little, her hips.
She took care of that by moving the buttons on her skirts, then buying a larger size.
She bought loose T-shirts.
So far the red dress, always too large, fitted.
The weather verged through a blustery spring into a rainy May.
The trees in the distance of the windows flowered into mop-heads of shining green.
The grey and stormy skies made them if anything greener.
Chickweed pushed through the pavements.
The city was all cracks and crevices wetly fruiting, burgeoning.
The weather lied.
It was nearly summer.
She did not think about the thing inside her now.
She put it out of her mind.
as if to compound her plan, it gave no real evidence that it was there.
Perhaps her greatest defiance, the extravagant music centre she had ordered from the junk mail, arrived when she was out at the restaurant.
Arriving home at half past twelve at night, Rachaela found it in the downstairs hall, another tenant had obviously taken it in.
Rachaela proceeded to lug the boxes upstairs three flights.
On her last journey, as she was passing Number Five, the door opened and Emma Watt looked out.
‘Good heavens, I thought it was the broker's men!
Oh goodness, you shouldn't be carrying that, let me help you.
No I insist.’
And so, aided by Emma Watt, Rachaela carried the last box up to her flat.
‘Do you mean you brought all those up too?
And some of them look quite heavy.
These firms nowadays, they're so bad.
Couldn't the man have  brought them up?
In your condition — oh, I'm sorry,’ said Emma Watt, blushing.
‘That sounds so nosy.
I mean you hardly show, but I couldn't help seeing, you're so slight- and well, I had three myself, and I've seen my daughters through it.
I hope you don't mind that I said anything.’
‘No.’
‘You must be careful,’ said Emma Watt.
‘I'm sure it's all right this time, but you shouldn't carry anything heavier than a handbag — that's what my old love used to say.
He used to add that my handbags would make a strong man blench.’
Rachaela, as if by suggestion, felt suddenly weak.
She sat on the bed.
‘There you see.
You've overdone it.
Can I make you’ a cup of tea?’
‘I'm quite all right.’
‘I will any way.
Don't worry, I won't stop, just a quick cup of tea.
Your kitchen's through here, isn't it, like mine?
You just relax.
Put your feet up.’
From the kitchen the sound of water and a surprised, ‘You don't have a pot — just use the bag then.
They're so convenient, aren't they.’
Rachaela stared at the boxes.
Would she ever have the strength to undo them.
‘What's in those?’ asked Emma, coming back out.
Is it a music centre?
Can you put it together yourself?
I'm hopeless at anything like that.
If you have any trouble try the little man in Horsley Street, the electricals place.
He's splendid.
He wired all my lamps for me and fixed my washing machine.’
I'll remember.’
‘Kettle won't be a moment.
Oh you must be so tired.
You work late, don't you.
I often hear you  come in — please don't think you disturb me, you're very quiet, and I'm always up till one or two.
Terrible sleeper.
I've got some pills but they make me feel like a rag in the mornings.
And I love the mornings.
I get up at seven.
Always have.
Oh, please don't think I'm prying, but I'd love to know.
When is your baby due?’
Rachaela reeled off a book-established fact.
‘December.’
‘A Capricorn.
They're lovely.
But good lord, you're in your fourth month.
You're very small.
My middle daughter was like that, tall and slim and you could hardly tell.
It used to annoy her the way everybody took no notice.
She said she wanted to ‘sail upon the land’ like Titania's handmaiden.
My oldest daughter, poor girl, swelled up like an elephant.
What does your chap say at the hospital?’
Rachaela said, ‘Apparently everything's the way it should be.’
‘Yes, of course.
And you're so young too.
It's exactly the right age.’
Emma Watt blushed again.
‘All the same, it's rotten for you, having to manage on your own.’
‘That was my decision.’
‘Yes, but it's courageous of you.
And so wise to go ahead and have the baby, if you want it.’
I didn't,’ Rachaela said, ‘I don't.’
And wished she had not spoken.
Emma Watt did not look shocked, but only tremendously sad.
‘But that's terrible.
Why-’
I went to the wrong doctor.’
‘You poor girl.
But couldn't you — no, I suppose not.
And you're resigned to it now.
I still think it's  best.
When your baby's born — they're so rewarding.
I loved it.
When they're little, watching them grow.
And I love them, I love my children.
It's such a pity they're so far away.
I hardly ever see them.
They phone me up, of course, but it isn't much good.
They're always so scared I can't cope after their father died.
I have to keep proving to them that I can.’
Emma smiled valorously, proud of her facade.
Her eyes were moist.
‘I've missed all the grandchildren, too.
It's awful.
I just love babies, children.
They fascinate me.
These tiny helpless little things that just come to life day by day, until they're people.
Oh, I'm sure you'll be glad.’
She raised her head.
‘There's the kettle.’
She went to make Rachaela the unwanted tea.
She made none for herself, but left Rachaela at once with the mug in her hand.
The room darkened oddly, perhaps a trick of the electricity.
The summer came at the beginning of August.
The city baked, the trees turned coppery.
Ochre dust rose from the blazing pavements.
A blue sky of cobalt made a lid for every stink and fume.
Everything smelled and tasted of asphalt, petrol, car exhaust and sweet ice-cream.
Rachaela's back ached continually.
She could put this down to her job.
The red dress was firm but the apron hid it.
One of the girls made a crack that Rachaela had put on weight due to the food.
One day she amassed ten pounds from those careless customers who did not count their change.
The man from Horsley Road had fixed the music centre.
The radio was not very good but the tape and record players were excellent.
She bought books and lined the shelves of her bookcase.
Emma found excuses to appear, but not very often.
Emma still did not know her first name.
September was a tawny month, tanned, cooked skin on the streets, brown crispness on the leaves.
October yellowed, banana sunsets cut with gilt, lemon first-light as Rachaela, cramped and sleepless, saw the dawn begin, and the trees in the park like topaz flags.
Storms at night.
Downpours of hot rain.
Sibelius, Mozart, Shostakovich.
No need to think.
So sluggish.
She would have to give up the Pizza Eater.
Her back shrieked, and when she bent to serve the late-night customers with their breath of beer and Cinzano, her head swam.
Nobody had noticed she was pregnant.
They thought she had got fat, a good advert, on the succulent nosh.
The summer ended on the first night of October.
Hail thrashed the roofs and glass windows.
Rachaela had called in sick and sat at her window and watched it, her back packed with cushions and pillows.
She had an hallucination of a tall dark man on the street, striding through the hail.
Adamus in a cloak of thunder, come to claim her again for the Scarabae.
But all that was over.
It was a dream.
She had conceived immaculately and here she was, the slave of this molten tumour in her womb, and it was real.
11
FROM THE LARGER STORES ALONG the high street, carols wailed and jingle bells jingled, compulsory joy.
It rained heavily.
There was a lot of flu about.
Rachaela had given in her notice at the Pizza Eater and left just as the free balloons began to be given out and Christmas pudding appeared on the menu.
Children had knocked over the tree of green and red glitz, and everyone was picking it up; that was her last image of the restaurant.
Emma Watt came out of her door like a cuckoo from a clock.
‘I've bought a bottle of really nice sherry, and some wine.
Will you come down and have a drink with me?
To toast my little tree.
I always have one.
One must.
Christmas is so important, it's important to salute it, even if, well even if you're on your own.
Are you going anywhere for Christmas?’
‘No.’
Just quiet by yourself.
Yes, you must get all the rest you can.
Anyway, do pop down.
About six?’
‘All right,’ said Rachaela, to shut her up.
Rachaela had never bothered with Christmas.
It had only meant one more day of privacy.
She heard distant bells ringing and the strange silence of the streets.
The radio had Christmas music which often she did not like, huge oratorios and quasi-religious peculiar plays.
Once she had listened to a Christmas service out of curiosity.
She knew the hymns from school days, the tunes at least.
Her mother had believed in celebrating Christmas too.
There had been a dinner cooked, turkey or chicken with sausages, roast potatoes and stuffing.
It had entailed much the same fuss and anger as the now-and-then Sunday dinners: Rachaela recruited to peel vegetables, make crosses on the thousands of sprouts.
One Christmas her mother had scalded herself on the turkey fat.
Neighbours would come in for a drink and boxes of chocolates and handkerchiefs would be exchanged.
After the neighbours and the dinner and the Queen's speech, depression would set in from the rich food and the gins and tonics.
Her mother gave Rachaela sensible presents, a new blouse or shoes that pinched.
Once there had been a fairy costume from a neighbour.
Rachaela had played in it for hours, she was six, it had been oddly magical.
But somehow the wings got torn, like a symbol.
Her mother scolded her and made her ashamed.
Rachaela did not mean to go down to toast Emma Watt's tree.
So far she had avoided the interior of Emma Watt's flat.
Rachaela sat in comfortable misery before her electric fire, her back wedged with cushions, sipping a glass  of her own wine.
Her back was excruciating and she had also taken three paracetamol.
Despite the pain she began to go to sleep.
She was woken by bright little squirrel knocks on the door: Emma Watt.
‘Damn her.’
Best go to the door and tell her she was not feeling well, could not come down, an early night and so on.
Left unanswered, Emma Watt grew anxious and knocked and called; it had happened before.
As Rachaela got up something seemed to tear inside her all the way down, between her spine and stomach.
In puzzlement she stood there, waiting for some sequel, but nothing happened.
She reached the door and opened it.
‘Are you all right?’ asked Emma Watt.
‘Oh my dear, you look dreadful.’
‘Yes.
I'd better not come down,’ said Rachaela.
A pain like the worst toothache clutched her vitals.
She felt herself wither.
‘What is it?’ said Emma.
Just a pain.’
‘What sort of a pain?’
Dazed, Rachaela told her.
She had to hold the frame of the door.
For the first time in months she felt very sick again.
‘Excuse me, I have to go to the bathroom.’
She made it.
Her body emptied itself in all its chambers.
She came out shaking, and Emma Watt was still there of course, standing in the middle of the room.
‘My dear,’ she said, ‘I think you've started.’
‘Started what?’
‘Your baby's coming.
Oh don't be frightened.
This will soon be over, and then the marvellous part begins.
Rachaela sat down.
The pain came again, griping her hollow guts, twisting her body like a cloth.
‘Must you be so stupid?’ she said.
Emma brushed this aside.
‘Say anything you like,’ she said, ‘call me names.
I know this bit isn't particularly nice.
I'll phone for you.
The hospital — is it St Mary's?
What's your doctor's name?’
‘Oh, that,’ said Rachaela.
‘No doctor, no hospital.’
‘What?’
‘I haven't been seeing anyone.
That was just your happy little fantasy, Emma.
Nobody knows.’
‘But my God, my God,’ said Emma.
Panic took her all apart, and then she gripped herself together again.
‘Never mind.
I'll get an ambulance.’
Rachaela watched her, smiling.
She took a mouthful of wine, but it came straight back up.
This time she did not make the bathroom.
‘Don't drink that,’ said Emma through a white blur.
‘Take my hand.
That's it.
They won't be long.’
The pain came and crushed her away.
‘My God,’ said Emma, ‘they'd better be quick.
Just hold on.
Hold on, darling.
It's going to be all right.’
‘Now push,’ said someone, some mad woman.
‘That's it.
Push .
Good girl.’
Were they speaking to her, these lunatics?
She lay on a scarlet beach and Uncle Camillo bent over her.
He hauled the crimson obstacle from her womb.
She felt it go as if her body had been disembowelled.
So this was the abortion.
The pain was terrible.
Much worse than that girl had said.
‘One last try.
Push.’
She could not push.
What did it mean?
A fearful rhythm like galloping horses — stopped.
It was so quiet.
There was so much light, but growing darker.
‘You can rest now.’
Who were these people, so many of them, crowding round her in a white hedge.
Had she fallen in the street?
The pain had ended.
There was another pain, but it was different, slow and dosing.
Something cried like a savage animal in the wilderness.
It was alive.
The thing had been got out of her, and it lived.
It made noises, horrible and unhuman.
In a sort of aperture she saw a white baby hanging upside down from a nail of light.
A single, blood-red ribbon marked its back, shining.
‘A girl.
You see?
She's quite perfect.’
Emma Watt sat by the bed.
She was bright-eyed and faintly flushed.
She had brought pink roses and a bottle of apple-juice, and grapes, and sweets in coloured wrappings.
‘You're not to worry about a thing, Rachaela,’ she must have found the name out from a nurse.
‘I've seen to it all.
Everything.
We can sort the money side out later, but I don't want you to worry about that either.
It really doesn't matter.
I have more than enough, my old love saw to it I was comfortable.
And I know, well — let's not talk about it now.
The baby clothes are pink, of course.
That's one good thing about not getting anything until we knew.’
Emma hesitated.
‘They'll be along soon, won't they.’
‘Yes.’
‘I can't wait to see her again.
Oh, Rachaela, don't you feel clever?
A gorgeous little girl.’
‘I don't feel anything.’
‘Well that can happen.
Have you told them how you feel?’
‘It isn't any of their business.’
‘But Rachaela, it is.
They can help you to feel better.’
‘I feel all right.’
‘But you said-’
‘Emma, I told you.
I didn't want this — baby.’
‘But she's here now.
And she's yours.’
‘Yes.’
‘Are you wishing,’ said Emma cautiously, ‘that he —
‘No.
He wouldn't be any more interested than I am.’
Emma looked away.
After a moment she said, ‘Have you been luckier in feeding her.’
‘Luckier?
Do you mean can I breast-feed her yet?
No I can't.
Apparently I haven't got much milk.’
Rachaela fought down her disgust.
‘I find it repulsive.
It's bad enough with the bottle.’
‘I'm so sorry,’ said Emma.
‘Emma, you've been more than kind, but you don't understand.’
‘No.
I'm sorry about that too.’
‘It's all right.
I can't do anything about it.
I accept that I can't.’
All those months swelling up, the pain and weight, and pretending it did not exist.
But it had arrived and  was actual.
The pain had taken on a form, which cried, and dribbled from every orifice.
A white hospitalized package smelling of faeces, urine and sick.
Something she was expected to love.
Aliens might have placed it in her, it might have burst out of her body rending her — it had done so.
It had enslaved and damaged her.
Now it was to rule her life.
Why should she love it, this demon?
The nurses were coming with their Father Christmas sacks of snivelling and screaming babies.
‘Here you are, Emma.
Your moment.’
And Emma's unhappy face had freshened.
She was not however indiscriminate.
She rose and took Rachaela's child from the nurse with a gliding ‘May I?’, a sort of sleight of hand.
Emma held the baby, exactly as it should be held.
‘Hallo, precious.
Hallo, my sweet.’
Emma loved it.
But dutifully she passed the bundle down into Rachaela's cold white arms.
Rachaela peered into the gnomic face.
It had lived in her, used her, but it was not hers.
It was theirs.
The Scarabae.
She could even see it in this thing, the pallor of it, the fine dust of jet black fur.
The eyes were dark already, not yet focused, but questing.
No teeth yet.
Not yet.
Rachaela glanced about her.
The ward was full of fulfilled and cow-like women waiting to give their udders to their young.
In the wings waited the proud husbands, boyfriends and parents.
The nurses on the ward were strict but applauding.
The room rocked with the howls of babies now being put to the breast, stilled.
Rachaela had seen.
The small mouths avid, the hands punching and grabbing.
Tiny vampires, all of them.
But this  one, this monster, would have to make do with a bottle.
‘You don't like it, do you?’ she said to the monster as it sucked.
‘Bottle or go without.’
She hated it.
When it cried she stared on it remotely.
She who had been its suitcase.
The room had altered.
There was a cot.
She could put the baby into this miniature prison and it crawled there in the trap.
Sometimes she had to lift it out, feed it, and change its nappies, thick with excrement.
The room stank.
She kept the window open and the fire on.
As the weather eased she left the fire off.
Emma came in and out.
She arranged the feeds, trying the temperature of the milk.
She took the baby out of the pen, and played with it.
She had bought it blue and pink fluffy toys.
The baby watched the toys with increasingly beady eyes.
‘Isn't she pretty?’ said Emma, perhaps to encourage.
The baby was not pretty.
It was a baby.
Primeval and unfinished, crawling about like a busy white slug.
All night the baby cried.
Rachaela got up and fed the baby.
She rocked it roughly, loathing it, and the baby grew hysterical.
It was strong.
With every day its voice got louder, its punches and kicks more hefty.
Rachaela touched it as little as possible.
In the end she left it to cry.
It screamed for hours, probably waking the entire house.
Near morning it burned itself out.
Rachaela got up and looked at it.
Its bluish-black eyes seemed to focus on her for the first time.
It had learnt something.
They took the baby for rides in the pram, to the shops, and up to the tiny park with its three or four flowerbeds and margin of trees.
Cold winds knifed at them but the baby was snug in its portable bed, the blue and pink rabbits bobbling between its face and the real world.
‘Lucky she wasn't born on Christmas day,’ said Emma.
‘She'll still miss out on presents, poor little sweetheart.’
The baby now had a name.
It was called ‘Ruth’.
‘Rachaela and Ruth,’ said Emma, and to the baby, ‘Whither though goest, I will go.’
Emma had actually named the baby, reeling off name after name, pausing to assess their merits, recommending, persuading, until at last to stop her,’ Rachaela assented.
It sounded like a Scarabae name.
It was unavoidable, Biblical.
Ruth, daughter of Adamus.
‘You must be getting awful cabin-fever stuck in all day,’ said Emma, as they pushed through the lancing wind.
‘I know what it's like.
My oldest nearly went mad with Richard.
She used to ring me up, just to hear an adult voice that could talk.’
Rachaela thrust the pram between the bare trees.
‘So if you want to go off on your own for a bit, and you'll trust me,’ said Emma, ‘I can look after Ruth.’
‘Thank you,’ said Rachaela.
‘But what I really need is to get a job.
The money's run out fast.’
‘But you can get assistance, Rachaela, and you must.’
‘Yes.’
‘It's foolish to try and manage on your own.’
Rachaela had not repaid Emma for the plethora of pink clothes, the blankets and toys, the pram and cot.
Emma had told her several times she did not wish to be repaid.
Ruth was payment enough.
Her ‘share’ of Ruth.
They connived together: Emma taking a little more of Ruth at intervals; Rachaela gladly giving a little more.
‘I need space to think,’ said Rachaela.
‘Let me have her, then.
As I say, if you can trust me….
I'll look after her if you want to go back to work.
Only if you're sure….’
‘Yes.
I'm no good with — her.
You're marvellous,’ she added stonily, a meaningless accolade.
But Emma flowered in the winter park.
‘Well, I've had three.
And I did see a little of Pauline, when she was small, just enough to remind me.
She's lovely, Rachaela.
You know I'll take care of her.’
She had already seen the new bookshop.
It had opened in the high street.
‘Isis Books’.
Feminist tracts and slim novels lined the windows.
It already had a tatty, dusty look that reminded her of Mr Gerard on Lizard Street.
She went in and bought a novel set in India, whose prose appealed to her, and the heat and dust and cinnamon smells of somewhere else.
A soft fuzzy girl was at the till.
‘I'm looking for work.
I used to work in a bookshop before I had my baby.’
‘Oh a baby,’ said the assistant.
Women were the mothers, protected of Isis.
‘I'm wondering if you need an extra person.’
There had been three girls and a woman at first, now there was only this one.
‘What, part-time?’
‘No, full-time.’
‘Well, with your baby.’
‘A friend looks after her.’
‘Oh is it a girl?
How nice.
’ The fuzzy one gave Rachaela her change, correctly.
The till was not computerized.
‘You need to see Jonquil.
She's not in today.
She'll be here tomorrow morning.
Why don't you drop by and have a word with her.’
In the morning Rachaela returned, leaving Ruth in her pen in Emma's crowded flat.
Jonquil came from the back.
She was about thirty-seven, tall and spare, with spiky grey-streaked hair.
She wore jeans and a large jumper, cowboy boots, one stainless steel earring.
‘OK, I can certainly give you a job.
Denise is here to all hours.
We don't pay top rates, can't afford to.’
Her eyes were a pale, thin grey, her face weather-beaten.
‘This is about women.
If it helps, then that's good.
We don't employ men.’
The wages were indeed low.
But it was money.
And Emma would take care of the child.
The child would spend all day with Emma.
Emma was already expertly weaning the child.
At night the child would sleep in the same room as Rachaela, that was all.
Some nights Emma would keep the child.
Jonquil showed Rachaela round the bookshop.
Every book was by a woman.
‘And you've got a baby?
Swine left you, I suppose.
Never mind.
She's a girl.
She might have a chance, things are changing.’
Sometimes men in mackintoshes stared in at the bookshop windows as if building up to a flash.
Usually nobody came in.
Rachaela sat by the counter and read, making herself coffee.
At lunch-time she closed the shop for an hour or longer, and shut up at five-thirty.
Jonquil came in every few days.
On Thursday and Saturday, Denise joined Rachaela.
Denise was fallen.
She had a live-in boyfriend to whom she devoted most of her time and energy.
She confessed she could not wear red as Keith did not like it on her.
‘You want to tell Keith to take a running jump,’ said Jonquil.
Both thought they knew Rachaela's life and so did not ask many questions.
When Rachaela was late in the mornings to open up, no one was there to see.
One morning Jonquil had got there first.
‘Baby hung you up,’ said Jonquil.
‘No sweat.’
‘She can walk,’ said Emma, rosy as if tight.
‘She really did it.
I know you've only just got in, but come and see.
I'll make some tea.
It ought to be champagne.’
Emma's flat was chaos.
To the fat  chintz chairs and divan, the second divan which changed into a bed, the clocks and ornaments, old dolls, and skeins of photographs, fresh flowers and coloured-glass paperweights, was added now the parked pram and the pen, the fluffy toys scattered, a great teddy-bear, the baby.
The baby would not walk for Rachaela.
She flatly refused.
Her smooth black eyes were vague and innocent.
She sat on the floor.
‘Oh, you naughty thing.’
Emma picked her up and dandled her.
‘You bad sausage.
Not to show Mummy.
’ And Ruth laughed, as with Emma she often did.
‘I'm sorry.
It really happened.
I didn't imagine it.’
‘Well, I suppose she will eventually.
Walk, I mean.
And say words.’
‘She should be saying things now.
Oh, I don't mean anything's wrong.
Pauline was slow.
It's just how their temperament goes.’
‘She doesn't speak because she doesn't need to,’ said Rachaela.
‘Telepathically you anticipate all her demands.’
‘Do I?
Do I, sausage?’
Emma asked the chortling baby.
When its face screwed up with laughter it looked very old.
Scarabae-old.
Rachaela put on the kettle and made tea for Emma and coffee for herself.
She was used to Emma's flat by now.
‘You ought,’ said Emma softly, ‘to spend more time with her.
Oh, Rachaela.
You're missing all the best parts.’
‘Is she a nuisance?
Do you want me to take her off your hands?’
‘Rachaela, you know she isn't.
I love her.’
Emma held Ruth close, protectively, possessively.
‘I only meant —
‘It doesn't interest me.’
‘Oh Rachaela — you don't know.
You haven't tried.’
‘I had to carry her.
I had to birth her.
That was enough.’
‘If only I could make you see how wonderful it is.’
Rachaela said, ‘If I could see that, Emma, I'd cling on to her the way you do.
You wouldn't get a look in.
We wouldn't be here now.’
Emma went white.
Her face crumpled, straightened itself out with difficulty.
She swallowed.
‘Yes.
You're absolutely right, of course.’
‘If I loved babies.’
‘If you loved Ruth I wouldn't have been able to — I wouldn't have looked after Ruth as I have.’
‘And you do love her.’
‘Yes I do.’
‘So it's lucky,’ Rachaela ended pitilessly.
‘Lucky for me, and lucky for you.’
‘Yes,’ said Emma.
She sat down and put Ruth on to the floor with her toys and the soft blanket.
Emma sat looking at Ruth.
Rachaela drank her coffee, and presently left Emma and Ruth alone together, for Emma to give Ruth her revolting gooey tea.
On Sunday they went up to the common, a performance; lifting the pram, Emma still insisted on for the sake of Ruth's spine, into and off the tube, the escalators.
Rachaela did not know why she had participated.
The trees were umbrellas of leaves and brilliant poppies dotted the grass.
Where had the year gone?
It was as if she had spent it underground, the hibernatory flat, dusty Isis Books.
‘She's enjoying it,’ said Emma.
‘Look, Ruth.
Tree.
Doggy.
Say ‘doggy’, Ruth.’
Ruth stared from her eldritch eyes, Anna-eyes and Uncle-Camillo-eyes.
Not the eyes of Adamus.
Too old.
They wheeled the pram up the paths.
The sun was hot and the common flooded by people.
Dogs charged about grinning, plunging into the green pond, emerging to shake off volleys of water.
At the cafe on the common they had coffee.
There were red horses in a field.
‘Look, Ruth.
Horsey.’
‘I don't think she cares,’ said Rachaela.
‘Of course she does.
It's all bewildering and new.’
Rachaela thought they must look a very normal family group: Emma the fond grandmother; Rachaela the mother with her black-haired baby.
She wondered how many of the other normal-looking groups were also fakes: that man perhaps with the glasses, a wife-and-child-beater; the two lovers with their shared ice cream, brother and sister.
But it was crazy to expect oddness from the day to match her own.
Her child should wear a notice round its neck:Conceived from my father while he drank my blood, suspected of being a demon .
Obviously Ruth was not a demon.
Emma did not think so.
There was no need to trouble about it anyway.
Emma had taken charge.
They wheeled the pram over the golf course.
When Rachaela had control of it, the child's black eyes went to Emma for reassurance.
Who was this stranger moving her along?
Emma encouraged Rachaela with little inanities.
‘She knows it's you.’
‘She doesn't like me,’ said Rachaela.
‘Why should she?
I was just an envelope.’
An intense golden light blared from the sky.
It was five o'clock and they began the trek homeward.
The tube was full of tanned and excitable travellers going home or en route to inner London.
A sort of pollinated bloom was on them of dust and sun.
The air smelled of deodorant and skin.
A man in a bowler hat helped Emma with the pram.
When they returned to the house, they went into Emma's flat.
Emma took the baby out.
‘My goodness, aren't you hot, you poor little thing.
You shall have a nice cool bath.’
While Emma bathed Ruth, Rachaela sat on the chintz sofa looking at the Chinese statuettes and blue glass animals.
In pride of place above the electric fire was a paperweight of a giraffe on which inappropriate snow fell when you shook it.
Pauline had sent this last Christmas.
The splashing from the bath ended.
‘She really is very hot,’ said Emma.
‘I think she's a bit feverish.
They get these little things.
It's nothing to worry about.’
‘Better not move her, then,’ said Rachaela.
‘No, I'll keep her down with me for the night.’
The child kicked off her sheet fractiously.
Her usually pale face was red.
Perhaps she had caught the sun.
Upstairs Rachaela put on a tape of Brahms and laid out some leaves of lettuce and slices of tomato, a cold chicken leg from the deli.
She ate without hunger, absorbing instead the music.
Later she sat and watched the golden sky turn to ruby over the roofs, the distant trees of the park blacken and fade.
This is my life then .
It amused her.
She did not let herself think of the Scarabae.
She had become adept at avoiding them.
Avoiding him.
She would pick up the thought and put it outside her mind.
When it came back, she removed it again.
She turned on the radio and listened to a Greek play which she did not understand but liked.
At about ten-thirty when she was running a long bath, Emma knocked on the door.
‘Please don't be worried,’ she said at once, ‘but I think I'd better phone the doctor.
He won't be there, of course, but they'll have someone.
She's terrifically hot and she keeps crying.
You know she never cries.
I'm sure it's nothing, but I want to be sure.’
‘All right,’ said Rachaela.
‘Do you want to bring her up here?’
‘No, no.
And I can phone from downstairs.
I'll come back and tell you what they say.’
‘Yes.’
When Emma was gone, Rachaela got into the bath.
She shaved her legs and underarms, and shampooed her hair.
Emma knocked again.
Rachaela went to the door in a towel, and with a second towel wrapped round her head.
‘Someone's coming out.
They said about an hour.’
‘I see.’
‘You'll come down, won't you,’ said Emma.
If you think I should.’
‘Yes you must, Rachaela.
She's your child.’
Emma looked pale and distraught.
Rachaela said nothing and Emma went away.
Rachaela rinsed her hair and wrapped it up in another towel.
She dressed and put on her shoes and went down to Emma's flat.
Emma held Ruth in her arms.
She sat down and fanned the baby gently with a Japanese fan.
Ruth looked like a radish, as if her blood were slowly boiling.
She snivelled weakly, on and on.
They said nothing, but sat facing each other.
The rest of the hour ticked by.
‘It's Doctor Chatterjee,’ said Emma at last.
‘I've never had to call him out, I don't know what he's like.
Poor man, he must dread these late calls.
Doctors have a very  rough time of it.’
She fanned Ruth.
‘You should have taken her to the clinic, Rachaela,’ she said, without accusation.
‘You never did.’
‘No.’
‘She would have had regular checks, and any shots.
They give them so much protection nowadays.
But Ruth hasn't had any of it.’
‘She's strong,’ said Rachaela.
It was instinct which made her say it.
‘Of course, of course she is.
Silly old Emma getting in a state about nothing.
Poor sausage, poor pretty.’
The baby was feebly sick on herself and Emma's cardigan.
Emma rose without flurry or distress to clean this up.
She spoke to Ruth, explaining what they were doing.
Rachaela sat on the chintz chair, and asked herself if she felt anything, any pang.
but nothing was there in her.
It was as if Ruth were truly Emma's child and for some reason Rachaela had had to come down and witness this scene.
The baby's sickness turned her stomach, affronted her.
Ruth had frequently sicked up her bottle milk, as if on purpose, like the endless stinking miasmas of the wet nappies.
While Emma and Ruth were still in the bathroom, the door sounded.
Rachaela got up and answered the phone, pressed the button and let in Doctor Chatterjee, who presently arrived in the flat.
He was a small, fat Indian with a fussy manner and clever eyes.
Emma brought him Ruth and he examined the baby carefully.
‘Yes, you did right to call me,’ he said, to Rachaela.
‘This is a very sick child.
I am recommending that we take her to the hospital immediately.’
Emma exclaimed in horror.
Doctor Chatterjee looked from one woman to the other.
‘You are the mother, yes?’ he said to Rachaela.
‘Yes.’
‘To save time we will go in my car.’
‘Thank you,’ said Emma humbly.
She wrapped Ruth up too thoroughly in her fear, and the doctor loosened the blanket a little.
Rachaela took her damp hair out of the towel.
Emma brought two of Ruth's favourite fluffy toys.
Outside the night was hot and compressed, waiting for a storm.
Chip papers strewed the pavement and a buckled can of Sprite lay by the back wheel of the doctor's Sierra.
They drove fast but wisely to St Mary's, the great brick facade like that of a prison, the chimney of the incinerator.
As Ruth was admitted, Emma's eyes disgorged two tears.
She controlled herself sternly, forcing her face into a puffy obstinate shape.
They sat for a long time on brown plastic seats in a white corridor.
Nurses busily went up and down, sometimes pausing to exchange words and careless laughter.
A trolley was wheeled past by two brutish-looking orderlies chewing gum.
This was a disconcerting contrast to the chambers of sickness all about, the bodies lying in white bleached wards with pieces of themselves cut away for ever, the hidden grey figures struggling in the last embrace of life.
Rachaela cringed at the hospital.
She had never liked them, perhaps taught by her mother's obsessive fear.
People did not go to a hospital to be cured but to be killed or maimed.
She wished she might go home, leaving Emma to watch and wait.
But this would be beyond all bounds.
It was not possible.
She, Rachaela, was the frantic mother.
She must stay and try to play her part.
What did she feel?
Nothing, nothing.
It was like Ruth, to bring her to a place she hated and loathed, and make her sit here for hours with wet hair.
The Scarabae were never ill.
Was Ruth then not true Scarabae after all?
The sister came in her evening blue.
‘Hallo, Mrs Day?
We're doing all we can, but she's a very ill little girl I'm afraid.’
She hesitated for Rachaela to scream, weep or swoon.
Emma obliged by bursting into tears.
‘There.
Please try not to be too upset.
We've got a good chance.’
‘I'm sorry,’ Emma apologized, as if her tears put them all in jeopardy.
‘I'm being silly.’
‘I expect you'd like a cup of tea.
We'll see what we can do.’
‘Thankyou, that would be lovely,’ said Emma.
When the sister had gone she said, ‘They're all so kind.
These people are saints.
I'm sure it will be all right.’
Later, they let Rachaela, alone, go to look in on her baby.
The room was full of apparatus, empty of doctors.
Then one came in, looking harassed.
‘You're Ruth's mother?
That's right.
Well I'm going to be honest with you.
We're rather concerned.
We're going to try some further measures to get the temperature down and they may have to be a little drastic.’
‘I see,’ said Rachaela.
Probably he took her nothingness for the numbness of shock.
She hoped so.
She did not want the hostility of these people in their robes of snow.
He told her some more, including complex words she could not follow and which she was sure she was not meant to.
In the hall of the magicians she was supposed to remain a novice.
Afterwards she went back to Emma and gave her an expurgated version.
Emma was ashen.
She had not been able to drink the tea, although she had tried, so as not to be ungrateful.
They waited through the night in the white corridor.
At five am, the harassed doctor appeared and came towards them slowly.
Emma stood up and reached convulsively for Rachaela's hand.
The doctor frowned.
He said that the latest measures had been a success, that Ruth's temperature had dropped and her breathing loosened.
In half an hour Rachaela would be able to go and sit with her.
Emma cried again.
She thanked the doctor so earnestly his mundane face lit up with the impatient awareness of a saviour.
Rachaela was shepherded into the room to sit with her pale, saved child.
She sat down.
She had wanted and hoped that Ruth would die.
There was no reason to lie to herself.
Is this what her own mother had wanted?
Had she looked at the living Rachaela as now Rachaela looked at Ruth?
12
THE CHILD IN THE SNOW:
It lay around her like a Christmas card.
The street was transformed by whiteness, fluffy and fresh on the buildings.
Already there were, trampled paths of icy black.
The child walked along one of these, towards the house.
She was thin, a small seven-year-old, with two thick plaits of raven black caught in blue toggles.
She wore a red woolly hat and scarf and gloves, which Emma had bought her, and a dark belted mac.
Her feet were in little red boots that matched the hat, also Emma's idea.
She had a satchel.
Just another home-going child from the primary school.
Rachaela watched her from the kitchen window of the flat.
It was a coincidence she was here at the moment the child turned on to the street.
At first Emma had taken Ruth to the school twice a day, and fetched her home at midday and at night.
But most of the other children came and went alone.
There were no main roads to cross, for a child it was a quarter-of-an-hour walk.
Ruth would almost certainly not come up to the  flat.
She would not expect Rachaela to be home in any case and always had her lunch and tea with Emma.
Today Jonquil had suggested that Isis Books be shut at three o'clock, due to the snow.
The pipes had frozen and the tiny electric fire did not do much good.
A male plumber would have to see to the pipes.
This had annoyed Jonquil and set her steel earring swinging with temper.
Rachaela saw Ruth come to the door of the flats and disappear.
She had a key.
Rachaela made her coffee and came out of the kitchen.
She looked at her flat as she always did, her flat, and Ruth's area.
Generally Ruth slept up here, although now and then she would come politely to ask Rachaela if she could stay the night on Emma's sofa.
It was Emma who insisted Ruth always ask.
Rachaela and Ruth knew it did not mean anything.
The moment of asking was one of their few times of agreement and understanding.
Ruth's area had been Emma's idea also.
The child's bed, draped in midnight blue, stood behind a wicker screen with a crimson shawl cast over it.
Bells hung on the inside which occasionally Ruth, when in residence, would strike.
Behind the screen too was a chest of drawers, whose top was used as a table for Ruth's treasures, her paintbox, and her teetering tower of books.
Emma had taught her to read before school, and now the chest was piled with golden and rose fairy books,Winnie the Pooh, Alice in Wonderland , and other things which perhaps Ruth did not yet grasp or should not yet be reading:Lord of the Flies, The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe, Cleopatra .
Rachaela  did not oversee the books and Emma believed in stretching a child's mind.
Any homework Ruth saw to at Emma's flat, or sitting on the dark-blue bed.
She had also had a pot plant on the chest called David.
The plant, robbed of light, did not do well, and eventually David was moved down to Emma's windows.
Half an hour after Rachaela had seen Ruth into the house, Emma's knock sounded on the door.
Rachaela let her in.
Emma looked uneasy and at the same time glowing.
Perhaps Ruth had done something especially stunning, as when she had been made chief maid of honour to the school's May Queen.
Emma had insisted Rachaela go with her, and they had stood, outside the railings, in the biting May breeze, watching little girls in pink frocks and shivery legs strewing paper petals, while Ruth, in the red party dress Emma had bought her, crowned a pretty smirking child with tinsel.
‘Ruth's eating her tea,’ said Emma, ‘I got those sausages she likes, and tomatoes.’
‘Thank you,’ said Rachaela automatically.
‘There's been rather a development,’ said Emma.
‘What's she done?’
There had been the time, too, when Ruth made a painting of a dragon devouring a knight which had apparently scared another child.
Someone had come from the school and seen Emma, who had laughed them to scorn.
‘Done?
Oh, it's not Ruth.
I'm afraid it's me.’
‘What have you done?’
‘I don't know where to start.
It's thrown me completely.
Out of the blue.’
Emma sat down in the chair, near to Ruth's area.
‘It's Liz,’ she said.
Rachaela had to wrack her brains.
Liz was one of the daughters, the eldest.
‘Liz,’ she prompted.
‘She's sent me an extraordinary letter.
She hardly ever writes, and now this.
It's wonderful, but she's got herself into a state.
She's found she's pregnant again.
Not planned — she's thirty-six.
She wants to go ahead but she's afraid she can't manage.
And apparently Brian has suggested I move in with them.
There's a large room with en-suite bath I can have, and Brian says he'll fix me up a kitchenette.
It's a lovely house.
I haven't seen it for years, of course, but they built a big extension.
The garden's marvellous, like something from a show place….
It's just bowled me over.
Cheltenham!
She says she needs me.
I remember the last time, she got so big.
And of course she'll have to have these wretched tests to be sure the baby's all right.’
Rachaela took in Emma's sprinting words belatedly, hearing each sentence over again in her head.
‘But haven't they neglected you?’ she said.
‘No .
Never.
They've got their own lives to lead.
And I can cope beautifully.
My independent streak.’
Emma shone.
‘But she's my daughter.
I can't leave her in the lurch.’
Rachaela stood in the window, the white snow behind her, feeling the weighted floor falling out of everything in slow motion.
‘So you'll go.’
‘I must.’
‘And how long will you be gone?’
‘Well, I rather think it's a permanent arrangement.
After all, once the baby's born, a baby-sitter is going to be useful.
They've got to be able to have a break.
And as Brian points out, well, at my age a little security might be reassuring.
It's a fabulous chance.
I can't sit back and let Liz get on with it.’
Liz has let you get on with it.
Pointless to voice the selfishness of others, it was her own selfishness which was about to suffer.
Rachaela said, ‘Have you told Ruth?’
Emma looked crestfallen through her shine.
‘No.
I haven't had the courage.
And I wanted to tell you first.
She's amazing for her age.
I'm sure she'll understand.
She's fond of me, she'll be glad for me.’
‘She loves you,’ said Rachaela.
Emma squared her shoulders.
‘It's probably the best thing, Rachaela.
You and she need to spend more time together.’
‘Well, we'll certainly have to do that.’
‘Oh, dear,’ said Emma.
‘I don't know what to do.’
For once her tone was insincere.
She knew quite well.
Compared to her own flesh and blood, what was Ruth?
Only a substitute.
Now here was the real thing.
Swept aside.
Rachaela felt a bitter pity for her daughter, this blow about to fall like an axe.
Ruth would not be glad for Emma.
Ruth also was self-centred and selfish, with all the ego-life of a child.
‘Hallo Mummy,’ said Ruth's clear pale voice from the doorway.
And then, familiarly, ‘Emma, I finished, and I put the plate in the sink like you said.’
‘Thank you, Ruth.’
‘Why are you up here?’ asked Ruth.
Here was obviously somewhere one did not go unless one must.
‘I had to see your mummy.’
‘Are you coming back down now?’
‘In a minute, darling.’
Rather than leave, Ruth crossed the threshold into the room and went inside the screen to her own area.
The bells jangled and Emma jumped.
She looked at Rachaela appealingly.
‘Why not tell her now?’ said Rachaela, shrinking and cruel at once.
‘Do you think-?
Oh lord, I suppose I should.’
Emma stood at a loss.
And Ruth came back from behind the screen with a white paper in her hand, brightly painted green and mauve.
‘Here's my seahorse, Emma.
I forgot to show you.
Have I done the tail right?’
‘Oh yes.
He's perfect, Ruth.
Shall we put him up with the others?’
‘I want to put in some shells and seaweed first.’
‘All right, you do that, and then we'll pin him up.
It's becoming quite an art gallery.
Would you like to go to a real gallery, Ruth, to look at some paintings?’
‘Will you have time?’ said Rachaela.
A hopeless anger, a kind of fear roiled in her.
She wanted it to be over.
She wished Emma would take the child downstairs, do it there.
It would be nicer to behead her with a carving knife.
Would Ruth scream?
They had said at the school she had had a screaming session.
Nobody knew why.
Emma suspected some of the other children had harassed her, but even to Emma, Ruth had been close-mouthed.
Emma had picked the school, Rachaela only signed on the relevant line.
The first day Emma had escorted Ruth to the gates and come back with a red nose.
But all that was behind them now.
‘Ruth, lovey, I've got something to tell you.’
‘What is it?’
Pleased, the child looked up into Emma's shadowed glow.
Ruth was not pretty, no Queen of the May.
Her skin was ice-white and flawless, her eyes large and luminously black, fringed by reed-thick lashes.
Her features were well-shaped even so early, and the jaw placed finely on the white neck with its blue flush of springing hair.
Ruth's hair was straight as falling black water.
Something of her father after all.
It was hard to be sure why she was such an unattractive child.
Taken piece by piece, the face was lovely, almost ethereal, but taken all in all it was far from beauty.
And in a rage — when some painting eluded her, when she was frustrated or puzzled — it was an ugly, bestial little face.
Soon it would be ugly.
‘You see,’ Emma was saying gamely, ‘my own daughter Liz, you remember Liz?
Liz is going to have a baby.’
‘Yes,’ said Ruth, seriously, interested.
‘And Liz wants me to go and look after her.
And Liz lives in Cheltenham, which is a long way away.’
Ruth nodded.
She understood.
She said, business-like, ‘When are we going?’
‘Oh darling,’ cried Emma.
‘Oh darling.’
And could not manage any more.
Rachaela said, ‘You won't be going, Ruth.
Emma has to go.
Her daughter needs her.
You'll have to stay  here.’
‘No,’ said Ruth, reasonably, I'll go with Emma.’
Emma said, ‘Darling, I'm afraid — you can't.
You can't come with me.
I wish you could.’
Liar , Rachaela thought.
Ruth looked blank.
She held the seahorse out and gazed at it, as if searching its curves for an answer.
‘You must stay here,’ said Emma, ‘and look after Mummy.’
‘No,’ said Ruth, quietly.
‘Yes , Ruth.
That's how it's meant to be.
I've just been borrowing you.
It's been so lovely.
And we'll stay good friends.
I'll write to you every week.
I promise.
I'll tell you all about Cheltenham.’
‘No,’ said Ruth.
She had not screamed.
‘And I expect I'll come and see you,’ said Emma.
‘I'll bring you wonderful presents.’
‘No,’ said Ruth.
‘And maybe one day you can visit me.
Rachaela can bring you on the train.’
‘No,’ said Ruth.
‘Oh dear,’ said Emma, ‘darling you must try to understand.
It's very hard I know.
I'll miss you dreadfully.
But poor Liz, I have to go.
She's my daughter.’
Ruth said nothing.
She took her picture back with her behind the screen.
The bells did not ring.
Emma looked at Rachaela.
I'd better leave,’ said Emma.
She rubbed her forehead.
Plainly she had a headache.
‘If she wants any of her things….’
‘When will you go?’ asked Rachaela.
Ruth must be listening behind the screen.
‘She did say as quickly as possible — Brian will pick me up at the station.
Then he said he'd arrange to get my stuff moved out.
Liz is pretty desperate.’
Desperate.
‘A month?’
‘More — more like a fortnight,’ Emma faltered.
‘Oh, dear,’ she said again, and went out.
She had not cried.
Naturally.
What had she to cry about?
Ruth had not cried either.
Perhaps the outburst would come.
Rachaela looked out at the dusk on the snow street, and the snow piled up against the walls, the pedestrians slipping and sidling along the ice.
The silence in the room was deafening.
The child no longer came home at lunch-time.
She' took sandwiches and ate them at the school.
This was an extra task for Rachaela, the making of sandwiches for the child.
Sometimes Emma had given Ruth breakfast too, but breakfast was fairly easy, cornflakes or toast.
The evening tea was more irksome.
The child required and was used to cooked food.
She would let herself into the flat and be waiting for Rachaela behind her screen.
She would never speak first.
‘Hallo, Ruth.’
‘Hallo, Mummy.’
Rachaela hated cooking Ruth's teas.
Usually they were not things she herself wanted and so two meals had to be arranged.
Rachaela tried to give Ruth what she had had with Emma, things she liked or which would be good for her: sausages and chips, chicken and broccoli, real carrots, grilled fish with cheese and baked beans.
Ruth was used to a dessert too, and Rachaela bought her fruit pies and ice cream, but Emma had made plum tarts and custards, crumbles and baked apples.
Rachaela stocked a large blue bowl with apples, oranges, pears and bananas for the child to eat, as Emma had done.
There had to be orange juice, Lucozade and Pepsi in the fridge.
The fridge was crowded.
It was costly, feeding the child.
Luckily the washing machine coped as adequately with Ruth's clothes as it had been doing for the past six years.
Emma had ironed Ruth's blouses.
Rachaela bought new ones which did not need ironing.
After the evening meal, Ruth would retire to her area.
She would do her slight homework if she had' been given any, or paint wild garish pictures, forests of lions and castles on fire, duels in deserts, ships in tempests.
Her imagination was obviously being fed by the school and by the books.
Twice a week she went to the library, usually on her own.
She caused, apart from the expensive, awkward food and the constant renewal of clothing, very little trouble.
She slept noiselessly.
In the night it was difficult to know that she was there, but for the wall of the screen.
Emma's flat stood empty for six months before anyone else moved in.
They were unfortunate arrivals: two young men who played loud pop music during the evening and sometimes had noisy rows — including the landing in their sphere of operations.
Ruth did not react to this alien influx.
She had never cried over Emma.
At first, Emma's notes, on brightly coloured paper, had come on every ninth or tenth day.
Ruth would retire behind her screen to read them and stored them in one of her drawers.
She never made any comment on the notes, seemed neither upset nor glad to receive them.
After a couple of months, the notes dwindled.
Neither had Ruth ever answered them.
‘If you want to write to Emma,’ said Rachaela, ‘just take some paper and an envelope from the cabinet.’
She had got them in specially.
‘There are plenty of stamps.’
Ruth said yes, she knew about the paper and the stamps.
She did not use any.
After four months, Rachaela herself got a letter from Emma.
Emma was in heaven, full of news of Liz, but she asked after Ruth.
‘Children are so bad at letter-writing.
I remember I used to be a horror.’
Rachaela answered the letter after a week.
Ruth and she were well, nothing had happened, Ruth had a lot of homework just now.
Ruth sent her love.
Rachaela had not asked Ruth if she wished to send Emma her love.
Probably Ruth did not.
Emma was over.
This trite communication put an end to Emma's overtures and she began to fade from their lives.
One day Rachaela found all the coloured letters from Emma to Ruth in the waste-bin under the sink.
In the very beginning she had sat down with Ruth at the small table.
‘I'm sorry about Emma having to go.
It's hard for you.
But we'll just have to do the best we can.’
Ruth had not replied, nor looked at her.
She was making a drawing of a tall woman in flowing sleeves.
‘You know I can't give you as much time as Emma.
I'm at work.
But if there are any problems, you'll have  to tell me, because Emma won't be here.
Do you understand?’
‘Yes,’ said Ruth after a gap.
Rachaela did not say she would leave the child alone as much as possible and that she in turn would expect to be left alone.
It was tacitly agreed between them from long experience.
Rachaela thought that the mistake her own mother had made was in her brainwashed attempts to care for and become involved with a child she did not want.
Ruth and she had instead a disarmed neutrality.
They would never be friends, but by keeping a great distance, they might not become enemies.
Rachaela no longer hated Ruth.
Ruth was now a sentient being, that could visit the lavatory alone, wash, feed and clothe itself, amuse itself without recourse to her.
Since Ruth had not cried, there had been no onus on Rachaela to extend a prosthesis of sympathy and warmth she could not feel.
For her part, Rachaela tried not to curb the child, but let her go her own wild, silent way.
Ruth never showed Rachaela anything — her art work, her homework or a book — but Rachaela gave her the use of the bookcase, overloaded now, and once or twice when money had been freer had bought Ruth books of fantastic art, Kay Nielsen, Vali Myers.
Ruth took these gifts politely, but she pored over them in her burrow.
Emma had left her two glass paperweights and a blue glass cat.
For her eighth birthday Rachaela bought Ruth something from the local Sunday market, with misgiving and a knowledge of unassailable  rightness.
It was a mirror inset with purple iris flowers, peacocks' feathers, shells of pink opaque glass.
‘Oh,’ said Ruth when she saw it.
She thanked Rachaela coolly and bore the glass into her cubby.
The plant, David, had died although Rachaela had put it in a window.
Now Ruth began to collect, with saved-up pocket money, false flowers of enamel, and finally a birdcage with a painted wooden linnet.
Glimpsing into her daughter's area — the strip of wall now hung with strange prints in clip frames and Ruth's own latest exotic work, the mirror, the bells and shawls, flowers and cage and even, just above the chest, the white face of a dock which did not go Rachaela saw Scarabae.
Perhaps she had encouraged it, or not.
Ruth was a living plant which put out stained-glass flowers.
You could not snap them off, as perhaps Rachaela's own mother had tried to do.
For how much of the shadowy Scarabae had she seen in her daughter, and tried to poison with her haircuts and crosses on the sprouts?
Beyond the windows, out in the streets, the coloured glass of the seasons came and went.
The distant park was like a calendar.
Green, yellow and brown the pages fell from its trees, black spider-web bareness and another ice age of pure snow.
Emma was never mentioned.
The school took Ruth to museums, art galleries and gardens; the seaside.
At night and the weekends, they sat in silence but for the music centre and the thump-thump from the flat below.
It was easy yet impossible to forget the child was there.
Jonquil was in the shop when the young woman came in.
She was about twenty-two or three, with glasses and a washed young face.
She walked up to Rachaela.
‘Mrs Day?’
‘Yes,’ said Rachaela.
‘Ms,’ said Jonquil, ‘Mzzz Day.’
‘Oh, well,’ said the young woman.
‘I'm Miss Barrett, from Ruth's school.’
‘What's happened?’ asked Jonquil.
‘Oh, nothing — well, something.
But I mean Ruth's quite all right.
I'm sorry to bother you at work, Mrs Day.
But I wanted a word with you when the child wasn't there.’
Jonquil swung her boots off the counter.
‘Go through to the back, Rachaela.
Take Mzzz’ Barrett with you.
I'll see to those magazines.’
They went into the back room.
It was crammed with boxes and piled by books.
Letters overspilled a tray and the old typewriter squatted among the coffee things.
Over a radiator hung three pairs of Denise's tights, long dry.
‘As I say, I'm sorry about seeking you out, Mrs Day, but I felt it would be best to talk to you without Ruth.
If you prefer I can come to your flat at a convenient time.’
‘When I'm there, Ruth is always there.
What's the matter?’
‘Well, I don't want to alarm you.
It's probably nothing, children get these strange little fancies.
One shouldn't make too much of them, but then again, they need watching.
I wonder if you've noticed anything like it.’
‘Like what exactly?’
‘It was play-time, and I saw a huddle of children near the sheds.
I left it a while but they didn't break up, so I went over to see what was going on.
There was a ring of children, they were giggling, but some of them looked a bit frightened.
Sitting on the ground was Terry Porter who'd apparently fallen over and cut his knee quite badly.
Instead of coming up for medical attention he was just sitting there, looking white, and Ruth was sitting next to him.
As I got there she put her hand on the cut and actually squeezed it, so the blood ran out quite violently, all down his leg.
She said, ‘Make it bleed again, Terry’.’
Rachaela felt a strange delayed horror, moving so deep in her she scarcely knew what it was.
She said nothing.
Miss Barrett, having waited for her, said, ‘Has Ruth’ ever done anything like that at home?’
‘No,’ said Rachaela.
‘Perhaps it's never come up.
Ruth's had the usual odd spills and scrapes herself, but never anything very bloody.
Sometimes children do get fascinated by blood.’
‘Yes.’
‘Maybe you should have a word.
Or perhaps you've been telling her about when her periods will be due.
Sometimes that sparks it off.’
‘No.’
‘Well it is a bit early.’
‘What happened?’ asked Rachaela.
‘I mean with the boy?’
‘Oh, Terry.
Well, I just told Ruth not to be a silly girl and got him off to Nurse.
Ruth is sometimes a bit, well, a bit unusual.
The things she draws.
And if we ask them to tell stories or act out little plays, Ruth's  are always rather gruesome.
I sometimes wonder where she gets her ideas from.’
Miss Barrett looked at Rachaela with keen glasses.
‘I don't censor her reading,’ said Rachaela.
‘No.
Well, maybe you should be a little more strict.
We're very careful what we let them have.’
Rachaela remembered a drawing pinned up in Emma's flat.
‘But you tell them about the crucifixion of Jesus Christ.’
‘Well of course.
That's Religious Knowledge.’
‘It's also a very grim subject and Ruth painted it.’
‘Well I have to admit,’ said Miss Barrett, trying not to look at Denise's tights, ‘I know they're all fairly bloodthirsty little savages.
They go on and on about the nails.’
She cheered up, having reassured herself.
‘That's all it was, really.
I thought you should know and keep an eye on her.’
‘Thank you.’
‘Don't mention it,’ said Miss Barrett.
‘Typical woman,’ said Jonquil disapprovingly, when Miss Barrett had gone.
Ruth was drawing behind her screen when Rachaela came in.
Rachaela took off her coat, and washed her hands, and began to arrange Ruth's tea automatically.
‘How did it go today at school?’
Rachaela asked.
A pause, perhaps of astonishment.
‘It was all right.’
‘What about yesterday?’
‘That was all right too.’
Rachaela thought of her mother, so many lectures over the table.
Meals should not be interrogations.
She turned the steaks slowly.
Tonight they would eat together.
Steak for both; mashed potatoes, tomatoes and peas for Ruth; lettuce and avocado for Rachaela.
When the food was ready she called Ruth to the table.
They ate in silence, the drawing dividing them, to which, between mouthfuls, Ruth added a stroke or two.
Upside-down, the drawing looked ominous, some bleak landscape under a cloudy sky, some beast coming from a lair.
‘What would you like now, pie or ice-cream?’
‘Both, please.’
Ruth was always polite.
She was also a greedy child.
Even when Emma had gone her appetite had not slackened.
She stayed wand-slim, yet, in past weeks, Rachaela had begun to note the point of little breasts.
She was only nine.
Everything would need buying again, including a tiny bra.
Would Ruth be embarrassed?
Rachaela never saw her in the bath.
When the meal was finished, Rachaela washed up and made coffee, and Ruth retired behind her screen.
‘Do you have any homework tonight?’
Again the perhaps-astonished pause.
‘No.’
‘Will you come out, Ruth, for a minute.
I want to talk to you about something.’
What would Emma have done?
Emma, with all her experience, might not have cared.
‘It's a phase they all go through.
Don't you remember it in yourself?
Don't draw attention to it.
She'll work it out.’
Ruth emerged, with her drawing.
She sat down again at the table and worked on steadily.
Rachaela said, ‘Tell me about Terry Porter.’
Silence.
Eventually Ruth said, ‘I don't like him.’
‘Why not?’
‘He shouts things at me.’
‘What sort of things?’
‘That I didn't have a dad.
That I came out of an egg.’
‘Of course you had a father.
He doesn't live with us, that's all.
Emma told you about that.’
Emma's name was ignored.
How nastily inventive of Terry Porter to say Ruth came from an egg.
Perhaps he had heard mention of the reproductive cycle.
‘So you were glad,’ said Rachaela, ‘when Terry Porter cut himself.’
Ruth said nothing.
‘Why did you make the cut worse?
To scare him?’
Ruth drew on.
The landscape, like all deserts, had a familiar look, ‘Please say something, Ruth.’
Ruth said, ‘It bled.’
‘Is that what interested you?’
‘It was very red.’
‘You've seen blood before,’ said Rachaela.
Had she?
She must have done, she had been born in it.
‘It was very red blood.’
Was there relish in the statement?
Was there, more to the point, thirst and incipient sexuality?
Ruth shaded in an area of her beast.
‘Why doesn't my dad live with us?’
‘He didn't want to.’
‘I don't have a nanny or a grandpa, either.’
‘No.
I'm sorry.
There's just us.’
‘Didn't they want me too?’
The inquiry was not plaintive.
It was brutally matter-of-fact.
I didn't want you.
Don't want you.
You are a little animal, muddling up my life, that expects to be fed and clothed, that has to have schools and presents.
That has  to be thought about.
Not loveable, like a cat.
Skin and hair and voice.
But the Scarabae had wanted Ruth.
Oh yes.
Lie about it now?
She tried not to lie to the child, as she had been lied to.
‘I expect they did want you, but it wasn't their choice.’
‘Do I have a nanny?’
‘Maybe.’
Had Anna been Adamus's mother, as Rachaela suspected?
‘But they're a long way away.’
‘Like Emma,’ said Ruth, surprisingly.
‘Much further than Emma.’
‘They don't write to me.’
‘No.’
‘I don't expect they want me,’ said Ruth.
She had successfully sidetracked Rachaela from the subject of the blood.
Rachaela said, ‘About Terry Porter.
You mustn't do anything like that again.’
Ruth did not ask why.
‘You understand that, don't you?
You must be careful not to give people bad ideas about you.
Don't trust anyone.
Don't give yourself away.
Try to behave like other people.’
Ruth nibbled at her coloured pencil.
Impelled by instinct, Rachaela took the drawing up and stared at it.
Ruth had drawn the heath, the Scarabae heath, the dragon parts, and the dragon coming forth to kill its knight.
On a slope was a weirdly shaped rock — the standing stone?
‘What gave you the notion for this?’
Rachaela said.
‘Don't know.’
Ruth was looking at her at last with sharp, bright black eyes.
Her unlined milk-white face was ancient.
‘It's a very good drawing.’
‘Thank you.’
Rachaela handed back the heath and the dragon.
Through that place she had walked, Ruth a thing coiled inside her.
How else had the child seen?
‘Mummy,’ said Ruth, ‘can we have a cat?’
‘No, I don't think so.
I'm sorry, but there's no garden and we're out all day.’
She did not want Ruth to have a cat.
She did not know why.
Surely Ruth would not hurt the cat, for she stroked them on walls.
Rachaela had seen her.
It was something else.
Ruth did not whine or try to get her way.
She took the heath and went back behind her screen.
A storm raged over the house.
Rachaela dreamed of Adamus bending over her, his hair a black cowl.
The lightning caught him, faded.
She opened her eyes.
Ruth was seated at a window watching the storm.
A blue flash like an incendiary, the child did not start, but leaned closer to the pane.
Ruth had watched storms since she was three or four.
The thunder bombarded the capital.
Rachaela got up, and in the light of the street lamps through the uncurtained windows, padded into the kitchen.
‘Do you want a drink? milk?
Coffee?’
‘No thank you.’
Rachaela did not turn on the light.
She filled the kettle and set it to boil.
The saffron-azure of the gas  flame starred the orange dark.
The lightning came again.
As she drank the coffee something made her walk about the room.
The child ignored her.
Reaching Ruth's area, she saw the beads and bells, clock and paintings, sear in another flash.
So much that glimmered.
And there the mirror she had given Ruth.
The mirror had changed.
Not entering, Rachaela craned to see.
‘What have you done to your mirror?’
‘I painted it.’
Another blast of blue.
All the glass was covered, fields and meadows, flowers and clouds, and distant mountains in a mist.
13
SHE HAD BOUGHT THE BATHROOM mirror soon after moving into the flat.
It hung the length of the wall.
As the bath ran, a fog of steam began to cling to its surface.
Rachaela wiped it away.
Through the frosted window blazed the cold light of winter morning; sidelight, the most harsh.
Rachaela examined her face and body.
She was forty.
She did not look it.
She looked the same as when she had been twenty-nine, before the birth of the child.
Even that had not touched her.
No stretch marks, no cellulite, the belly and thighs firm and white and smooth, the breasts full and yet high, the nipples small and rosy.
The neck was unlined, the face unlined, the brow and cheeks.
The chin was firm.
No pouches about the mouth or under the eyes.
The face and body of a young, young woman.
And in the black hair, the black hair of the groin, not a single silver coil.
It did not please her.
She tried not to let it unnerve her.
She was used to it, saw it every day.
She accepted such remarks as Jonquil's, ‘But you're only a kid.’
Even Denise had aged a little, got heavy and puffy in her  thirties, from the big cooked dinners she made for hungry Keith.
Jonquil had not herself changed very much, her skin had only grown harder and more obdurate, she had swapped the steel earring for an earring of bone, and all her hair was grey.
Probably I'll age suddenly.
That might happen.
It happened in books.
People did not notice youngness when they saw you constantly, the same as the alteration into age went largely unobserved.
only picked out in sudden revelations.
‘What are you, you must be about twenty-eight now,’ Jonquil had said last year, not bothering with an answer.
The child had changed, of course.
Ruth grew out of all her clothes with punctilious regularity.
She had breasts and two small brassieres that must be hand-washed.
Rachaela had explained to Ruth about her periods, sitting at the table with her while Ruth drew, asking if she understood.
Rachaela's mother had not told her anything but had given her a rather serious book.
The blood had come in the middle of the night and she had still been appalled.
She had had to wake her mother up to ask for sanitary pads, and her mother had grumbled.
Rachaela put pads into Ruth's drawer, among her underclothes, in front of her.
Ruth showed no resentment, no excitement.
‘I heard about it at school.’
‘From the teachers?’
‘From a girl.’
‘Tell me when you start,’ Rachaela felt bound to say.
‘All right.’
What did Ruth look like, unclothed?
Rachaela never saw her.
She would go nightly into the bathroom in her skirt and blouse and come out in a cotton nightshirt.
Rachaela slept in a nightshirt, too.
Ruth's decorum had somehow imposed it on her.
The bath was full.
Rachaela let the mirror veil itself in steam and stepped into the water.
‘Hi, you're late,’ said Jonquil airily as Rachaela entered the shop.
‘That kid of yours mess you up?
Is she at her secondary yet?’
‘Next year, when she's eleven.’
‘I suppose you've got that all mapped out.’
‘It will depend on some test,’ said Rachaela vaguely.
She was used to answering occasional questions about the child, who perhaps Jonquil did not really think existed after all.
‘I see,’ said Jonquil.
‘Used to be the old eleven-plus, but that's all different now.
You wouldn't remember.’
Rachaela made coffee, and tea for Jonquil with one of her herbal tea bags.
Jonquil fussed round her.
When they sat down, Jonquil stood up again.
‘You've been here a long while, haven't you, Raech?
What is it — five years?’
‘A little longer.’
‘Denise too.
Poor old Denise.
That bloody awful feller she's with.
I hoped he'd leave her in peace but he knows when he's on to a good thing.’
Jonquil drank some tea and sighed gustily.
‘I'm afraid we're going to have to shut up shop.’
Rachaela looked at her.
This had been on the cards from the very beginning.
She was only surprised Isis had lasted so long.
‘I'm sorry,’ she said.
‘Yeah.
It's a shame.
But there's never been much interest around here.
Dozy hole.
I've got a chance to go in with a women's group up Manchester way.
So I'm all right.
But it means curtains for Denise and you.
Will you be OK?’
‘Oh, I'll find something else.’
‘Some skivvy's job.
Or running round after some bloody male in an office.’
‘Probably.’
‘I wish I could do something.’
‘How long?’ said Rachaela.
‘End of this month.
It's rotten timing.
It'll be Christmas next.
But it will give you a bit more time with the kid.’
‘Yes.’
Relieved by unloading her bombshell, Jonquil began to move about the forlorn little shop, examining books.
The hot water pipes gurgled as they had done for ten years.
It was not the end of the world.
Thanks to Emma's years of extreme beneficence, Rachaela had managed to save a little, and now there was some interest which would tide her over, perhaps until the new year.
The child was an expense, of course, but she seemed up to date with her garments, her school trips.
Lyle and Robbins were advertising for staff again.
Perhaps that would do.
Or there was the antique shop in Beaumont Street, only one flummoxed woman who was always shutting for ‘ten minutes’.
Not a problem.
Rachaela remembered how Mr Gerard had fired her, and how relevant and ominous it had been.
Things were different now.
Or she was.
On Thursday, her half-day off from the shop, as Rachaela was sitting in her chair listening to Tchaikovsky ballet music, the door sounded.
‘Yes?’
‘Oh Mrs Day.
It's Miss Barrett.
Perhaps you remember me?’
‘No, I'm afraid not.’
‘From Ruth's school.’
‘Yes?’
‘I need to see you about something.’
Rachaela recalled Miss Barrett, just over a year ago, the scrubbed dean face and essential glasses.
Terry Porter and his knee.
‘You'd better come up.’
Miss Barrett entered the flat in a strawberry-red coat with a white fur collar, a yellow wool hat and brown fur gloves without fingers.
She carried a pink umbrella.
‘Oh, Mrs Day.
So glad to catch you in.’
‘Please sit down.’
Miss Barrett sat in the chair, and Rachaela sat down on one of the hard chairs by the table.
Miss Barrett shed her gloves and hat.
‘What a nasty day.
I shouldn't be surprised if we were in for some more snow.’
‘What has Ruth done now?’ said Rachaela.
‘Oh dear.
It's always such a worry, this sort of thing,’ said Miss Barrett.
‘Mr Walker thought, as I'd come to see you before, it would be best if I came again.
We don't like to make too much of it.
Unless it goes on, of course.’
‘What has Ruth done?’
‘It's really what she hasn't done.
She hasn't been coming to school, Mrs Day.
I take it you haven't been keeping her at home and just not sent a note?
We must always have a note, you see.
There's a lot of colds about, I know.’
‘Ruth never gets colds.’
‘No.
Well then I take it she isn't here.’
‘She isn't.’
‘Mrs Walker thinks that she saw Ruth in Woolworth's.’
What a mundane place for the escapee to be.
Why Woolworth's?
Sometimes when Rachaela shopped in the Saturday lunch-hour, Ruth went with her, and into Woolworth's too, never showing a symptom of interest in the toys, sweets or loudly drumming music section.
‘Mrs Walker thinks that Ruth was trying on makeup,’ said powderless Miss Barrett, her unpainted eyes and lips wide with shock.
‘Perhaps she was,’ said Rachaela, for a moment almost intrigued.
She herself had done something similar when she had played truant, but then she was thirteen or fourteen.
‘The thing is, Mrs Day, this is very serious.
You must speak to Ruth and impress upon her that she has to come to school.
She's been absent several days this month.
She has an important test next year, and she needs to pay attention.
She's very much a dreamer.
A lot of talent in art, though some of her paintings, well.
But she needs to pull her socks up.
She must attend.’
‘I'll speak to her.’
‘Ruth must come to school.
If she doesn't, Mr Walker will have to take further steps.’
‘I see.’
Miss Barrett was rouged after all by indignation.
‘Throwing her chances away,’ she said.
School was very important, a life jacket in chaos.
She looked actually frightened.
Rachaela had not offered her anything to drink, and let her go to the door unaided, pulling on her ridiculous gloves, until she looked like a parody of a bear.
‘And if she has to stay away,’ said Miss Barrett, ‘we really must have a note.’
Rachaela ate tomatoes on toast for lunch, and pictured Ruth eating her sandwiches on some wall or in a park.
She must finally have become bored with school.
Rachaela knew she could read well but was virtually innumerate.
This had been so in Emma's day, and was so still, for once or twice Ruth had asked Rachaela some arithmetical question which Rachaela also found impossible to answer.
Ruth had trouble even in adding up.
‘How many apples are there left?’
Rachaela had recently asked her.
Ruth studied the bowl.
‘I don't know, Mummy.’
There were seven.
The child paid for things in shops by giving always a large coin, or a note.
She would bring her loose change to Rachaela for translation into fifty-pence pieces and pounds.
Perhaps it was wrong to feel empathy with Ruth simply because she too had played truant.
Yet Rachaela saw the brief daylight ebb with a slight amusement, waiting for Ruth to appear punctually, as if just coming home from school.
The child manifested in the cold street.
Rachaela thought of the day she had seen her in the snow, the day Emma had bowed out from their lives with urgent smiles.
Poor useful Emma.
How different, now, was Ruth.
Her hair was no longer confined in plaits, but hung down her back to the base of her spine.
It was thick and almost crudely black, with a shine on it like molasses.
No hat any more, or gloves, the white long-fingered pianist's hands playing with the buttons of her dark-blue coat.
The satchel still there, incongruous.
Despite this school bag of deceit, the white knee socks and little-girl shoes, Ruth was like a tiny woman on the street: a midget, quick rather than graceful, and with that strange white face of an elf.
When the flat door opened, Rachaela was sitting at the table.
‘Hallo, Ruth.’
‘Hallo, Mummy.’
‘Put your bag down, take off your coat, and come and sit here.’
‘What's for tea?’
‘I haven't thought about it.’
‘Can I have chips?’
‘You had chips yesterday.’
Ruth came to the table in her charcoal skirt, blue jumper and scarlet blouse.
Rachaela allowed her to choose her own colours.
She had, certainly, better dress-sense than Miss Barrett.
‘You haven't been to school,’ said Rachaela.
Ruth looked at her, assessingly.
She did not attempt to lie.
‘No.’
‘Why not?’
‘I don't like it.’
‘Did you like it before?’
‘It was all right.’
‘And now it isn't.’
Ruth said nothing.
‘Are the other children,’ said Rachaela, ‘bothering you?’
‘No.’
‘A woman came here today from the school.
A Miss Barrett.’
‘Batty Barrett,’ said Ruth.
‘You were seen in Woolworth's.’
‘Oh,’ said Ruth.
‘Why Woolworth's?’
‘It was raining.’
‘What do you do when it doesn't rain?’
‘I walk about,’ said Ruth.
She paused, then said, ‘I go in the big graveyard and look at the stones.
’ She added, ‘Sometimes I take a bus.
I get lost.
I always make sure I get back in time for tea.’
‘Yes I know.’
‘Are you going to say I have to go?’ said Ruth.
She looked blank.
She did not suspect Rachaela of complicity with the authorities, recognizing her as a fellow, though alien, outsider.
‘It depends what you want,’ said Rachaela.
‘I don't want anything,’ said Ruth.
‘You'll never get a smart job,’ said Rachaela.
‘I expect they've already told you about those.’
‘They said what did we want to be.’
‘What did you say?’
‘I said a library lady.’
‘Is that what you want?’
‘No.’
‘If you really don't care,’ said Rachaela, ‘I'm not going to force you.’
She recollected her mother's furious wobbling face:‘You've got to pull yourself together.
You'll end up in the gutter.
You go to school, do you hear me?
I won't be disgraced like that again, you bloody little beast .’
‘But we have to work something out,’ Rachaela said.
‘You'll have to go in some of the time.
When you want a day off tell me, I'll write you a note.’
Ruth considered.
Her privacy had been penetrated, but she seemed to accept the inevitability of this.
‘Will you?’
‘Yes.’
‘All right,’ said Ruth.
‘Thank you,’ she said.
Rachaela sat looking at her eldritch elfin child.
Was Ruth also like her?
‘Will spaghetti on toast do for tea?’
‘With cheese.’
‘With cheese.’
Rachaela got up and went to set out tins on the work-top in the kitchen.
Ruth followed her and stood in the doorway.
‘What would my dad say about me not going to school?’
Rachaela checked.
‘I don't think he'd give a damn.’
Ruth said, ‘Will I ever see him?’
Rachaela made herself look back at the white face of her child.
‘No.’
‘Why not?’
‘He wouldn't be interested, Ruth.
I'm sorry.’
‘How do you know?’
‘Because I knew him.
He wasn't interested in me, either.’
‘But the grandfather and granny,’ said Ruth.
Your grandfather is also your father.
‘There isn't any grandfather or granny.
It's just a big shapeless family of old people.
You wouldn't like them.’
But how could she be sure?
Ruth was in their image.
Ruth had done what they did.
She must not try to picture Ruth in that house.
The house which had faded to a ghost with the years, but still lingered there, a lump of fog, on the edge of her mind.
The mirrors, the windows.
Ruth said, ‘I might like them.
I don't mind old people.’
‘They're very far away.’
‘Couldn't I go?’
‘No, Ruth.’
‘But I want to.’
How had the conversation veered into this?
Rachaela put down the can opener and emptied the spaghetti into the saucepan.
‘No , Ruth.’
‘I dream about them,’ said Ruth.
Rachaela stopped what she was doing.
‘What do you mean?’
‘I dream of them in a big house.
And I walk down a corridor and I go in a door, and they're there.’
Obviously, through the years, Rachaela had let things slip.
She must have done.
The child had her fantasies, like any child.
‘I don't want to talk about it, Ruth.
I don't want you anywhere near them, and that's that.’
Keep away from the Scarabae.
Rachaela saw again her mother's congested face.
Ruth said, ‘Why can't I?
Why not?’
Rachaela said, ‘They're mad.
They're mad people.
And they're a sort of vampire.
Or they think they are.’
Don't say any more .
‘Vampire,’ said Ruth.
‘Like Dracula?’
‘Not like Dracula.
They're bad people.’
She stirred the saucepan, waiting for the next assault, which did not come.
When she looked back, Ruth had retreated again, behind the screen.
I shouldn't have said that.
Too late.
She had a vision of Adamus walking up the wall of the house in the black of the moon, his pale face lifted and a trickle of blood running from the corner of his mouth.
A sexual pang shot through her core, amazing her.
After so long, after so much that was base and stupid, after Ruth .
She put the bread under the grill, and her hands shook.
From a decade of cobwebs and dyed glass she felt old leaf-like hands reach out and brush her.
The shop was bare, the books packed in boxes or sent away.
Denise was crying softly and fuzzily.
‘Come on, come on,’ said Jonquil.
‘Have some more wine.’
They sat drinking, perched on the wonky stools, as outside the non-customers, now excluded for ever, stalked past on the wet, dark pavement.
‘Do you remember that old lady who kept coming in for Roald Dahl, saying he was a woman?’ sobbed Denise.
‘What about that man who kept buying copies of Fight the Good Fight by Angela Truebridge?’
‘And the Angela Carter fiend?’
‘And that girl who never knew the author?’
They nodded reminiscently.
‘It's been a funny old job,’ said Denise, and blew her nose.
‘I start at the Co-op next Monday, just till Christmas.
Keith's furious.
He'll have to get his own breakfast.’
‘Lazy sod,’ said Jonquil, ‘do him good.’
‘But he'll make such a mess,’ wailed Denise.
‘And he never washes up.’
‘You want to get shot of him.’
‘Well, I met this really lovely bloke on the bus last week.
I see him every night.’
‘Out of the frying pan,’ said Jonquil.
‘You never learn.
‘What are you going to do, Rachaela?’
‘I haven't decided yet.’
‘If you want to come up to Manchester,’ said Jonquil, ‘just drop me a line.
You can doss on one of the girls’ floors till you find somewhere.’
Outside two young men peered in at the lighted women with their bottles and Jonquil's cans of Carlsberg.
They leered and made signs until Jonquil strode towards the door.
‘Rubbish,’ said Jonquil, as they fled.
‘There ought to be some sort of dustbin for them.’
‘I'll have to go,’ said Rachaela, slipping down from her stool.
‘I have to get Ruth's meal.
I told her I'd be late but it's already seven.’
‘Yes, OK, Raech.
You whizz off.’
Denise embraced Rachaela, wetting her with fresh tears.
‘Drop in at the Co-op.
I'll get you a discount.’
Jonquil shook Rachaela's hand.
Her pale grey eyes were resigned.
‘If ever you're Manchester way, look us up.
They saw her off into the splashed black and rainy yellow night.
Spears of light, long aprons of neon reflected in the pavements.
Beyond the block of shops the street-lamps spread like broken egg in the puddles.
The rain was dense, trying to turn to snow.
The wind flurried.
Lit windows in the flats, the houses made into flats.
How often she had passed them, in rain and shine, on the summer evenings in the dust and diesel, on the white snow where every step portended a snapped ankle.
Already one or two trees with garlands of coloured bulbs.
There in that blue window the same old ‘Merry Xmas’ which appeared doggedly year after year.
Soon a birthday present for Ruth, and then a Christmas present.
Jonquil had pressed some books on Rachaela, unsuitable for anyone.
Oxfam could have those.
Someone behind her.
Nothing in that.
One night a drunken man had staggered after her the length of Rosamunde Street.
He had taken her arm and she had thrust him off.
‘What's the rush, darling?’ he had said, and she had pushed him hard.
He lost his balance and fell against some railings.
‘Bloody tart!
Fucking whore!’ he had warbled, but no more than that.
There were generally people about, harmless people, perhaps concealing lives of molten depravity but offering no threat to the single woman on her way home.
A man with a dog now, coming up the road.
Cars zoomed by in wings of water.
The one behind her did not fall back, or pass her.
His step was very soft.
Somehow she knew the step — not its author, but its meaning.
Her stomach tightened.
She was being silly.
The man with the dog drew level and went by.
Ahead, the traffic lights at the end of Beaumont Street were in sight.
Green, amber, red.
Black snow drifted over her face.
It was like before.
It was like the time when she had been hunted.
No, that was absurd.
How could they find her now?
She reached the lights, had to wait.
The shops showed a blaze of colours.
She could turn, look up the dark road, and see who had come after her.
There he was.
A man standing about forty feet away.
Hesitating, as if trying to make out the numbers on the house fronts, which were perfectly clear.
Her heart tumbled down a stairway.
A short man in a dark overcoat and wooden hat.
It was frighteningly stupid.
For people did not keep on wearing the same garments, not for eleven, twelve years.
People did not stay the same.
She had.
The mirror had told her.
She had not changed.
She thought of the green before the flats and the sudden figure.
‘You must go, you know .’
‘Go away,’ she said.
But later he had come back and handed her the letter, the letter Adamus had typed, from the Scarabae.
He was too far off to be sure, the foreign face which maybe had not aged by another line, the gelid eyes, invisible.
She needed to see him more closely, to be sure.
And even then, could she trust her memory?
It was impossible they could have found her this time.
Even if they had been trying all the years between.
She refused it.
The lights changed and the cars grudgingly screeched to a halt.
Rachaela crossed over the road.
She looked back and saw the man stop dithering before the houses, and cross further up the street, just before the cars took over again.
He came on, walking in the same direction as Rachaela, the dilute snow sparkling in his hat like sequins.
Rachaela walked along Beaumont Street.
The garish front of the Pizza Eater blossomed.
Should she go in for a drink?
No, they would not serve only a drink, she should recall that.
Where then?
Somewhere to halt, to see what he would do.
It was a coincidence.
He was some stray who had reminded her of the Scarabae agent.
That was all.
The launderette was open, lit dead-white and empty.
Rachaela pushed open the door and went in.
She sat down on one of the seats, and waited for the man in the woollen hat to come up, see her, and check.
A woman emerged from the insides of the launderette.
‘Do you need any help?’
‘I'm just waiting for a friend.’
The woman looked at her suspiciously.
‘Not doing any washing then?’
‘No.’
‘Well I suppose you know what you're doing.’
She began to fiddle with some clothes from an open machine, dropping pairs of briefs and socks on to the floor.
The man appeared.
He went by the window, without a glance, and moved on into the night.
The light from the launderette had shone upon him like an arc lamp.
He was the man she had seen all those years before.
She was sure of it.
Sure .
Rachaela got up.
‘Off now then?’ chirped the woman, dropping another sock.
Rachaela went out in to the shiny black, the confusion of slanting lit rain, streetlights, headlights.
Where was he?
He had vanished.
She had imagined the likeness.
He was just some man.
The Scarabae had been preying on her mind, as in patches they always did, and so she had conjured up the memory to fit a stranger.
For they could not have gone on haunting her.
They could not still want her now.
She trod cautiously along the street.
Knots of people scurried in the snowy rain.
Rachaela turned left and walked more briskly.
She was borne away from the lights, and on the stretch of darker pavement, she stopped and looked all round.
But no one was there save for a woman with an umbrella, a cyclist going wearily along by the kerb.
Overhead a red window concealed some ordinary pleasure or wretchedness.
She too began to hurry home.
When she opened the door the flat was in darkness, but sometimes Ruth, alone, would sit in the dark.
Rachaela crossed to one of the windows.
It was open, the curtain wet and blowing.
Rachaela shut the window.
She stood in the darkness, gazing out at the street.
Traffic went by now and then.
A man passed, but not the man she had seen.
No one, so far as she could tell, hugged the doorways, folded into the shadows.
No one was there, watching, ready.
She turned and switched on a lamp.
A sort of sleepy stirring came from behind Ruth's screen.
‘Hallo, Ruth.’
Ruth came out.
Rachaela was startled; wholly, disconcertingly unnerved.
Ruth was draped in the blue and green shawl, leaving her legs, her snow-white shoulders bare.
through eyelets of the shawl, white flesh stared.
Beneath this thin covering she was naked.
Her hair poured round her, strands sticky with electricity.
Her face was made-up, not inexpertly as one would expect, but like a painted doll.
Coal-black lids, mascara sooty-thick, the lips exactly shaped and red as holly berries.
She looked drowsy, as if she had been asleep.
Yet a kind of current emanated from her, she was like a live wire.
She had not been sleeping.
Rachaela found her voice.
‘Is that the make-up from Woolworth's?’
‘Yes.’
Ruth's own voice was mild.
She was neither embarrassed nor uneasy.
‘You've done it very carefully.’
‘Yes.’
‘What were you doing?’
‘Waiting,’ said Ruth.
Of course she had been waiting.
Rachaela delayed at the shop, later than she had intended.
But did Ruth mean that?
Waiting for her mother?
‘Why was the window open?’
Ruth said, ‘To let in the night.’
Perhaps it was a line from a book.
Ruth did not lie to Rachaela, neither was she speaking all the truth.
Yet the truth was somehow self-evident.
Vampire.
Ruth had made herself up like a vampire from a horror film she had perhaps contrived to see, or some illustration in a library book.
She looked the part.
And then she had lain down in the dark, naked but for her flimsy shawl, the window open to let in the night, and waited.
Rachaela had, again, the image of a man in a black cloak walking up the house wall.
This time no sexual clenching moved in her loins, she went cold.
Was this Ruth's fantasy?
Dracula walking up the brickwork to claim her?
She switched on the electric fire, the room was freezing as if hung with icicles.
She went into the kitchen, washed her hands, and began to put bacon on to the grill.
Ruth went silently back behind her screen.
When she emerged she was wearing her nightdress and dressing-gown.
She walked into the bathroom and Rachaela heard the clink of the pot of cold cream.
When Ruth came out, she was wiped clean of all colours but her own black and white.
‘You could have kept it on,’ Rachaela said.
‘I was finished with it.’
Rachaela fried an egg for Ruth.
‘I'm home from the bookshop now,’ said Rachaela.
‘Can I have a day off tomorrow?’
‘Yes, if you want.
You can have another bilious attack.’
‘Thank you,’ said Ruth.
She sat at the table, eating bread and butter.
Rachaela served the food and they ate it.
Outside snow began to fall in large fat flakes.
When they had finished, Rachaela got up and walked to one of the windows.
She drew back the curtain with her hand and looked both ways along the deserted street.
‘When you're out and about,’ Rachaela said, ‘you know you mustn't talk to anyone.
I remember Emma telling you about that.
It still matters.’
‘I sometimes ask the way.’
‘That's all right.
But don't get into conversations.
Always speak to women, not men.’
‘Yes, Mummy.’
Rachaela closed the curtain.
She looked at Ruth drinking a mug of tea at the table.
She seemed like an average child, a little unusual, wonderful hair, very composed.
‘Never,’ said Rachaela, ‘speak to men.’
Christmas came.
They did not celebrate it, although with Emma they always had.
Rachaela gave Ruth three books and some multi-coloured paints.
Ruth gave Rachaela one of her Ruth-type presents, this time a long candle shaded through vermilion to orange, and this they burnt as their one festive token.
For Ruth's eleventh birthday, a week or so before, Rachaela had given Ruth a dress she wanted, scarlet and apple green, and Ruth wore it on Christmas Day.
They ate chicken, peas and chips, apple Danish and cream.
Outside the rain, which had taken over again from the snow, fell in grey torrents.
The day was otherwise normal.
Rachaela played music, Ruth painted.
There was a play on the radio about the Three Wise Men lost on the Ml.
On Christmas night Ruth went for her nightly bath and came out in her nightdress.
‘Mummy.’
‘What is it?’
‘You said I was to tell you.’
‘What?’
‘I've started.’
Rachaela took a moment to catch up.
Then she said, ‘You've got a period?’
‘Yes, Mummy.’
‘Did you manage all right?’
‘Yes, thank you.’
‘Does it hurt?
Do you want a paracetamol?’
‘No, it doesn't hurt.’
‘That's good.’
Ruth stood looking at her.
Rachaela could imagine Emma would have been all congratulations and the joys of womanhood.
Ruth had begun early as she, Rachaela, had done.
She thought, inadvertently,Bleeding .
‘I'm different now,’ said Ruth.
‘Yes.’
Rachaela could think of nothing more to say.
Ruth walked behind her screen and was gone.
14
BY THE END OF JANUARY, Rachaela was working for Mrs Mantini at the antiques shop in Beaumont Street.
Mrs Mantini only wanted her in the afternoons and all day Saturday.
They did a surprisingly brisk trade, although mostly on the little things, the ewers and basins, china dogs, trays of ancient photographs.
Certain of these reminded Rachaela of the Scarabae albums, the upright waxwork figures posed before palm trees — yet these people might once have been alive, the Scarabae had looked frozen dead for ever.
Mrs Mantini did not like Rachaela to sit and read in the shop.
She wished her to dust the furniture, burnish the coal scuttle, and clean the windows.
In spare moments she gave Rachaela boxes of jewellery or coins to sort, unvaluable items often to be highly priced.
The pay was not wonderful, but the job was fairly convenient.
Spring came early.
Ruth had a phase of bringing home flowers obtained during her days of truancy: daffodils and tulips perhaps picked from the park or swiped off graves.
‘Don't steal things, you'll get caught,’ Rachaela admonished her.
The flower phase died a natural death.
As the days lengthened, Ruth came home later and later.
Often she was not home when Rachaela arrived from the shop.
Sometimes, too, Ruth had eaten in a snack bar, having saved up her pocket money for a beefburger.
The school sent Rachaela a letter saying that Ruth's frequent absences were causing her work to suffer.
Rachaela dropped it in the bin.
‘A man spoke to me in the graveyard,’ Ruth announced, as they ate at the table.
‘What did you do?’
‘Nothing.
He said I was Ruth Scaraby and I said No, I was Ruth Day.’
‘You shouldn't have answered him.’
‘But he was wrong.’
‘All right.
Then what happened?’
‘He said he knew my father's family and had I ever seen them.
I didn't say anything and he said he didn't think I had.’
‘What then?’
‘He said he'd buy me a Pepsi and I said you said I mustn't talk to strangers, and I came away.’
‘Did he come after you?’
‘No.
He just stood there.’
Rachaela said, ‘Did he have a dark coat and a woollen hat?’
‘Yes.
I expect he was hot.’
Rachaela tried to order herself.
She had begun to  tremble with a sort of frightened and frustrated fury.
How had he found them?
How had he followed Ruth?
How dare he speak.
Weeks since, she had tested the evening pavements for pursuit, looked from windows for watchers in the shadow.
And all the while he had been creeping up on them, unseen.
Of course, it was not Rachaela who interested them now.
Their craving for continuance the child —
‘You must never —never — have anything to do with that man, Ruth.’
‘Why?’
‘He's bad.’
‘He just looked like a man.’
‘He works for the Scarabae.’
‘Is that for my dad?’
‘No.
For the family.
I told you, they're mad and dangerous.’
It was like hurling stones into water.
After a moment the impact vanished, leaving no trace.
Rachaela had the feeling that, rather than warning Ruth away from the Scarabae, she was intriguing her further with them.
What on earth was to be done?
‘I think you'd better stop roaming about.
Either you must go to school or stay indoors here.’
Lock her in, keep her close.
‘Mummy I don't want to.’
‘You'll have to.
I don't want him getting at you.’
Could she go to the police?
This man is molesting my eleven-year-old daughter…. questions asked.
This man is the agent of your daughter's father, his family.
Your daughter's father has rights to your daughter.
It could become complex, more perilous.
Keep the child in.
For how long?
She must confront  the man, drive him off.
But now he never showed himself when Rachaela was there.
‘You'll have to go to school.
I'll take you.’
‘I don't want to.’
‘I know.
I'm sorry.
But this is serious.’
‘He only said he'd buy me a Pepsi.
I didn't go.’
‘He might — I don't know.’
‘I won't talk to him again.’
‘Ruth, you must do as I tell you.’
Do as I tell you .
Her mother's voice, angry, at its wits' end.
Ruth finished her food and left the table.
She went behind the screen and Rachaela heard the familiar rasp of pencil on paper.
Rachaela got up and went to the edge of Ruth's sanctum.
‘Ruth, if ever he catches you alone I want you to scream — scream as loudly as you can — and run away.
Will you do that?’
‘Scream and run away,’ said Ruth.
She gave Rachaela a cool and adult glance full of irony.
‘I mean it,’ said Rachaela.
‘There was a radio programme we heard at school,’ said Ruth.
‘This man said daughters take after their fathers.
If I'm like my dad, I must be nasty too.’
Rachaela stared at her.
Why was she trying to protect this creature?
Had she forgotten the way it was, the way it had grown?
Now she was acting out the ill-fitting role of a protective mother, and protective of what?
All about Ruth, in her grotto, hung weird pictures, bits of stained glass, bells and draperies.
It was a crock of shadow and dull rich colour, and Ruth crouched there like a white spider in her web, her beautiful ugly little  face pierced by the blackness of the Scarabae eyes.
Rachaela swallowed.
She wanted to say to Ruth, Do what you want.
Talk to the man.
Find out what you like.
Ruth knew it all already in her eleven-year-old bones.
‘You're not like your father.
Your father doesn't want you.
The family is nosy and possessive.
You don't owe them anything.
Do as I say.’
‘Yes, Mummy,’ said Ruth, and bowed her head to her drawing of a witch.
Rachaela could only take Ruth to the school in the mornings; at least she saw her to the gates.
In the afternoon she had to trust Ruth on the way home.
Sometimes still Ruth was late.
‘Where have you been?’
Ruth had been to the shops or round at the flat of some girl child never previously mentioned.
Probably it was true, for Ruth did not lie, she only evaded.
‘Has that man been near you?’
‘I haven't seen him.’
‘Tell me if you do.’
Rachaela tired of the stupid wardership to school.
She sent Ruth off alone and followed her.
No one other than herself pursued or accosted Ruth.
A sense of apathy overcame Rachaela.
The man would probably persist, he had done so before, but there were always people about.
He could not abduct Ruth, even assuming he had instructions to do so, which seemed unlikely.
Rachaela did not care.
I do not care .
It was up to Ruth.
For Ruth was still a burden.
She must still be fed and clothed, and soon a decision must be made  about a secondary school, with its uniform and other details.
Ruth would become more of a problem as she grew older.
For how long would Rachaela have to go on sharing her life with this being?
She had got used to Ruth, that was all.
It was not satisfactory.
On the street.
Walk quietly and listen.
Who was this coming from a doorway?
Only an old man with a bag.
Turning the comer, oversee each gap in the walls.
Was anyone there?
Upstairs, Ruth not home.
Go to the window in the dark, and see.
What was that?
Only a man in an anorak.
Where was Ruth?
Round at this Lucile's?
There she was on the stairs now.
Key in the door.
Mrs Mantini said, ‘You do more looking out of that window than cleaning it.’
Who was that standing across from the shop, black overcoat, perhaps a woollen hat.
‘This customer wants serving, Rachaela.’
He had gone now.
But he would not be following or watching her.
‘This necklace is fifteen pounds.’
There was a frost of green on the trees.
Still some light in the sky.
Ruth sat at the table eating bread and jam.
‘Why didn't you wait?
You'll be having dinner in twenty minutes.’
‘I was hungry.
Tea's always late now.’
‘You're usually late.’
‘I go to Lucile's.’
Rachaela faced Ruth.
‘Have you seen that man again?’
‘Yes.’
‘I told you to tell me.’
‘He didn't do anything.
He didn't speak to me.’
‘Where was he?’
‘Outside the gates.’
‘The school gates?’
‘Yes.
He just stood there, and I came out and he didn't move.
Lucile thought he was funny.’
‘Don't tell Lucile who he is.’
‘I didn't tell Lucile anything.
She said look at that funny old man.’
If she was with Lucile, he would not approach her — was that it?
Perhaps the liaison with Lucile was a good thing.
Rachaela, at the window, scanned the street.
He was there.
Across the road, beneath a lamp just now turning candy red.
There to be seen, showing himself.
‘Stay here,’ she said to Ruth.
She ran down through the house and dashed out into the street.
The Scarabae agent was gone.
Above, Ruth's white face looked down on her from the window.
Impartially.
Mrs Mantini picked nail varnish off her nails.
‘I've been meaning to speak to you, Rachaela,’ she said, ‘about the way you keep being late.
You were late by half an hour this afternoon.
It puts me all at sixes and sevens.’
‘Yes,’ said Rachaela.
‘I must ask you not to let it happen again.’
Rachaela reduced the fifteen-pound necklace to the prescribed fourteen pounds and carefully replaced it with the price tag face down.
Mrs Mantini ran her finger over the dustless surface of a Victorian overmantel.
‘This mirror could do with a clean.’
Presently Mrs Mantini went out, to be gone for her usual two hours before closing-time.
A Japanese man came in and asked about the china ducks.
When he had left, Rachaela cleaned the mirror with the glass spray which left smears, then returned to re-pricing the case of jewellery.
At a quarter to four Mrs Mantini unexpectedly reappeared.
‘You'll have to dose up, Rachaela.
I have to drive to Brighton.’
After Mrs Mantini had gone again, the late afternoon trade began to come in, and at four-thirty, an hour early, Rachaela shut the shop in the faces of two eager customers.
Rachaela felt a sense of freedom as she walked home.
She imagined Mrs Mantini in heavy traffic on the motorway.
It was as if a cloud had lifted.
She had given up concerning herself with the agent of the Scarabae.
He could do nothing, and neither could she.
She reached the house and went up the three flights.
It was an overcast day, the dark was coming.
She opened the door.
There was a strange noise.
It sounded like a child crying.
She knew at once it could not be Ruth.
She went around the lobby formed by the bathroom and stared at the dusk flat.
Then she turned and looked into Ruth's area.
Ruth, who was kneeling on the floor, turned also to look at her.
Her eyes were black as voids, heightened by the black eyeshadow and mascara with which she had augmented them.
She was draped in a kind of Greek fashion by two of her coloured shawls and she wore round her neck Rachaela's green glass beads.
Her mouth was dark red with lipstick, and smudged.
It looked at first as if she had been drinking blood.
On Ruth's bed lay a brown-haired whimpering female child, also draped in a shawl and with dabs of make-up less hectically or successfully applied to its face.
On the neck of this child was a terrific black bruise.
The child sat up.
‘Ooh, Mrs Day,’ said the child, crying and snotty now, ‘she was biting my neck.’
‘For Christ's sake what have you been doing?’
Rachaela seized Ruth and pulled her upright.
‘Nothing.
We were dressing up.’
‘What were you doing to her?’
‘She was biting me,’ said the other child, hysterical, and began to scream.
Rachaela dropped Ruth.
She grabbed the other child to shake her.
The child flung herself at Rachaela, burying her snot and make-up smeared face in Rachaela's jumper.
‘It was a game,’ said Ruth, reasonably.
‘Did you make this mark on her neck?’
‘I suppose so.’
‘I told her to stop,’ squealed the other child, who was probably the mysterious Lucile.
‘She wouldn't.
She kept on and on.
Am I bleeding?’
‘No, you're all right.
You're all right .
Come over to the lamp and let me see.’
She dragged the howling Lucile towards the lamp, and lit it.
The mark was a bruise, purple and ripe, like a lover's kiss but worse.
It looked awful.
‘Nothing to worry about,’ said Rachaela.
‘I'll get some TCP and a plaster.’
‘My mummy won't let me play with her again,’ said Lucile, a note of righteousness creeping into her terror.
‘I think that would be very wise.’
Surprised, perhaps, Lucile's torrent weakened to a snivel.
She allowed Rachaela to dab her with antiseptic and to apply the plaster.
With luck ‘Mummy’ might disbelieve the dire tale, especially if the bruise went down a little before she saw it.
One could not tell the child to lie to its mother.
Lucile was obviously bursting to reveal all.
‘You're all right now, and I think you'd better go home,’ said Rachaela.
‘Do you know your way?’
‘Yes, Mrs Day.’
‘Go and wash your face first.’
Lucile went docile to the bathroom.
Ruth said over the splash of water: ‘I didn't really bite her.
I could have.
I didn't.’
‘You're mad.’
Rachaela's mother had said this to Rachaela over more trivial offences.
‘What possessed you?’
A foolish question.
Obvious what had possessed her.
‘It was a game,’ said Ruth again.
‘No it wasn't,’ said Rachaela, ‘I know what it was.’
Ruth looked at her, every inch a small vampire with her white face, reddened lips, black eyes and  streaming hair.
She did not look alarmed or bewildered or even scared.
She looked — complacent.
Lucile emerged from the bathroom.
She tore off Ruth's shawl and flung-it on the bed.
‘My mummy will be angry.’
‘I expect she will.
Well, go home now.’
The Lucile child left, blotchy and aggrieved.
Rachaela had not behaved the way  Mummies behaved.
Another failure.
The windows were blue against the lamp's gold.
Was he out there, on the street?
Ruth sat on her bed and drew towards her the unfinished drawing of lions apparently devouring people — Christians probably, from the school's Religious Knowledge.
Rachaela felt the violent urge to laugh.
It was her own hysteria.
‘Put that down.’
Ruth released the picture.
‘You've done something incredibly stupid, Ruth.
You've behaved in a way that will cause a lot of trouble.
You expect me to protect you.
Why should I?’
Ruth looked at the windows, the coming night.
She did not seem at a loss, only waiting for some boring and pointless noise to end.
Rachaela felt fury then.
It was a fearful rage, in which everything became abruptly mixed, the aversions and angers of twelve years.
‘What are you, you horrible little beast?’
Rachaela shouted.
Ruth looked at her after all.
The white, black, red face was surprised, just for a moment, then it settled into a closed mask.
Rachaela remembered this from long ago.
She had seen this  expression, this lack of expression, this closing in and down, on the face of the demon baby Ruth had once been.
‘It wasn't a game,’ said Rachaela.
‘It was something disgusting that came out of your foul head.’
‘Lucile will be all right,’ said Ruth, flatly.
‘I don't care about Lucile, that revolting little fool.
I don't care about you, either.
If you want to act out this sickness you've got then I suppose you must.
But why bring it here?
Why involve me in it, you bloody filthy little beast!’
Ruth wriggled, like a child embarrassed in class.
Then she was entirely still, passive again, almost inanimate.
‘Look at me,’ said Rachaela.
And Ruth fixed her eyes on her mother.
For a second there was a peculiar juxtaposition.
It seemed Ruth's eyes were scarlet and her mouth black.
‘Have your bath and go to bed,’ Rachaela said.
‘If you're hungry you can make yourself a sandwich.
I don't want anything to do with you.
I don't want to see you.’
‘Yes, Mummy,’ said Ruth.
And picking up her nightshirt from under the pillow, she went into the bathroom.
In the morning Rachaela left Ruth to get her own breakfast.
Ruth poured cornflakes and milk, and ate them sitting at the table where Rachaela drank her coffee.
Ruth did not attempt to speak to Rachaela.
She took up her satchel and went without a word.
Getting to her feet, Rachaela saw her from the window, dawdling off along the road towards school.
At twenty past nine the telephone rang.
Usually there were no calls save the occasional wrong number.
This was not a wrong number.
‘I'm Mrs Keating, Lucile's mother.’
‘Yes?’
‘I suppose you know why I'm phoning.’
Rachaela did not reply.
She heard Mrs Keating bridle at the other end of the line.
‘Your child attacked Lucile yesterday.
I wondered what you had to say about it.’
‘Nothing, really.
Lucile wasn't hurt.’
‘If you call that awful black bruise on her neck not being hurt — what is your child, some sort of monster?’
Yes, how clever of you , Rachaela thought.
She said nothing.
Frustrated Mrs Keating resumed: I've never seen anything like it.
It's hard to believe another child could do such a thing.
I think you should take her to see a doctor.
A psychiatrist probably.’
Still Rachaela did not respond to Mrs Keating's red rag.
Mrs Keating shouted, ‘I think you'd better know, I intend to write to the school about this.’
‘If you like.’
‘Like ?
You've got a funny way of going on, I must say.
Just you get your horrible child seen to, Mrs Day, that's the only advice I can give you.’
‘Thank you,’ said Rachaela.
Mrs Keating swore at her and hung up.
Rachaela switched on the radio.
She did not want to think any more about Ruth.
She would not need to see her until tonight.
A Rachmaninov piano concerto swept through the flat, making the problem of Ruth trivial and vague.
At one o'clock Rachaela ate lunch, and at five past two, half an hour too late, she got up and left for the antiques shop.
Mrs Mantini did not upbraid her, but she pursed her tangerine lips and made a great thing of getting ready to go out in a hurry.
The afternoon was not eventful.
A girl came in and tried to haggle over a nineteenth-century vase, but Rachaela told her Mrs Mantini fixed the prices fairly and never reduced items.
A handsome young man and a rather glamorous middle-aged woman, perhaps his mother, looked round the shop and finally bought a small brass rocking horse.
At a quarter to five Mrs Mantini came back.
‘Oh Rachaela.
I hoped you'd have unloaded that crate.’
The crate was full of heavy objects that really needed the attention of a strong man.
Rachaela had ignored it.
‘We'll do it now,’ said Mrs Mantini with much irritation.
They began to unload the crate, Mrs Mantini puffing and blowing.
At five-thirty they were still engaged on the crate.
Mrs Mantini shut the shop.
She said to Rachaela, ‘You can stay and help with this.
It will make up for the thirty-five minutes you were late.’
Rachaela did not argue, and they went on unpacking the crate until a quarter past six.
Mrs Mantini straightened up and puffed out a last breath of her garlic-and-onion lunch.
‘Actually, Rachaela, I want a word with you about this lateness.’
Rachaela was putting on her coat.
Mrs Mantini stood hard-yellow amid brazen fire irons and fire screens.
I spoke to you yesterday about it, but you don't seem to have heard me.
I don't pay you to be late, I pay you to be on time.’
‘But you don't pay very much, do your said Rachaela.
‘If you don't like the wages, miss, you can go elsewhere.’
‘Very well,’ said Rachaela.
She buttoned her coat.
‘Give me what you owe me up until today.’
Mrs Mantini glowered, her eyes roasting.
‘I certainly won't.
You can come in on Saturday and I'll give it you then.’
‘No,’ said Rachaela.
I'd like it now.’
She stood and looked at Mrs Mantini, and gradually Mrs Mantini broke down like an overheated fire.
Cursing Rachaela as Mrs Keating had done, but in more vivid words, Mrs Mantini opened the till and counted out the abbreviated wage.
She flung it on the counter before Rachaela.
‘Now get out, you little bitch.’
Rachaela walked out on to the street.
Her legs were trembling.
She felt a wave of uncertainty and relief.
This did not matter.
It was Ruth's fault anyway.
And at the flat, there would be Ruth to see.
To go on with the utter silence or to break the silence, pretending nothing had happened.
What did silence count for, in any case?
When did they speak?
Only when there was trouble.
The sky was soft and muddy, losing the light.
Stars faded against the waking red eyes of the streetlamps.
Rachaela felt footloose, nearly rattling.
No job.
She would have to look around.
That would take up her time, make her forget Ruth.
When she reached her front door, inside the house, she felt Ruth's absence, and going in, the flat was empty.
Rachaela took off her coat.
She made herself coffee and switched on the lamps.
She washed up the lunch things and looked into the fridge.
Ruth was due to have chicken tonight.
She might as well have it.
Rachaela put the portions into a dish and upended a can of Heinz tomato soup over them to make a casserole.
She set the chicken in the oven.
The radio offered opera or politics.
She turned it off and put on a tape of Stravinsky.
The sky changed to the orange-black of city night.
People came and went along the street.
At eight-thirty Ruth had not come back.
Rachaela turned the chicken on to a very low light.
At nine-thirty the soup had all evaporated.
Rachaela turned the chicken out.
She sat in the flat in the silence that was not Ruth's silence.
Ruth had never been as late as this.
Where could she be?
Some burger bar, the Pizza Eater?
At ten thirty-five, Rachaela switched on the main light and walked behind the screen into Ruth's area.
Everything looked at first glance the same.
Rachaela examined the area carefully.
The bed was made, Ruth's way, lumpy under the dark-blue coverlet.
The old bear Emma had given her sat in his corner, accorded dignity, but no longer attention.
The books piled up in cranky stairways.
On the wall, the painted mirror and the pictures.
The green paperweight and the blue glass cat were missing from the chest-top.
Rachaela walked into the area and squeezed up to the chest.
She opened drawers.
Comb and brush were not there.
The vampire make-up was gone.
The blue jumper and the scarlet blouse were gone.
Some pants and socks, tights, the second bra, the new packet of sanitary pads.
In the bathroom Ruth's toothbrush and her little stick of deodorant were missing.
Rachaela came out and sat down.
What did she feel?
As once before, nothing.
She was not astounded.
Of course she had known what Ruth would do.
Just as the man, the Scarabae agent, had known what she would do eventually.
He had only to offer himself and wait.
Rachaela had turned on Ruth, not just the habitual cold shoulder, but with a firework of dislike and alienation.
And Ruth had packed her satchel quietly in the night, gone out and gone to him.
And he would have taken her, or directed her.
To the Scarabae.
What should she do?
Nothing.
There was nothing to do.
Ruth was no more.
The twelve years of idiocy were over.
After four days, Rachaela cleaned the flat.
She dusted behind the books, dusted the books, scoured the cooker and did out the kitchen cupboards.
She emptied the Lucozade, Pepsi and Sprite down the drain.
When she reached Ruth's area, she moved the screen out into the room and took off the shawls, flowers and bells.
She stripped the bed and put Ruth's treasures, carefully wrapping the glass, her  books and the bear into two cardboard boxes from the supermarket, and stowed them in the bottom of the wardrobe.
Ruth might send for her things.
Ruth's clothes, which she would soon have grown out of, she put into bags for Oxfam.
The Scarabae would have to clothe Ruth from now on.
Rachaela did not like the screen, but as with Ruth's bed it was too large to dispose of easily.
She folded it and stood it in the comer behind the music centre.
The bed itself she redraped in its midnight cover, and added a couple of red-and-blue cushions.
The denuded chest she pushed against a wall.
The room looked much bigger, airier.
It was possible to see into all its parts freely.
She did not look for the man.
He would be gone by now.
On the sixth day, she walked up to Lyle and Robbins and inquired after work, but they had no vacancies.
The Pizza Eater looked over-staffed, and the girls and boys seemed extremely young and noisy.
There were no advertisements for staff.
She would have to look at the local papers.
On the seventeenth day a letter came from the school.
Rachaela put it aside.
Rachaela sat in her chair, listening to music.
It was going to be a lot cheaper, without Ruth.
Maybe she could coast for a little while.
Outside were the familiar roofs and flats, the chimneys and aerials.
In the distance the park was transparently, avidly green.
It began to be hot, and the smells of petrol, geraniums and baked pavements filled the flat from the open windows.
After the twenty-seventh day, Rachaela dreamed of Ruth at the house of the Scarabae.
She seemed to be wearing Anna's evening dress, long and black and trailing on the floor, winking with spangles.
Her long hair fluttered behind her as she moved about.
The Scarabae clasped their hands, pleased.
Ruth was in the garden.
There were red and white roses.
Uncle Camillo popped up from behind a bush.
He rode the rocking-horse, which moved over the lawn without effort.
He handed Ruth a letter.
Rachaela could only read the words Come to me .
She walked into the house.
It was night, and only the ruby lamp burned in the hall.
The door to the tower was ajar.
As she stood there, Adamus came out of the tower.
She had forgotten or erased his face, and so she saw it through a blur, but his body was naked, exactly as she had remembered it, golden-white, muscular and slender, the black mass at the groin and out of it the penis rising dark amber-red.
His black hair fell around him.
‘It's you,’ he said.
‘Yes.
You mustn't,’ she said quickly, wringing her hands in a strange melodramatic gesture.
‘But I must.’
‘Adamus — she's only a child.’
‘No,’ he said.
‘Eleven years old,’ Rachaela pleaded.
‘A woman.’
And out of the dark Ruth stole in, enveloped in her long, black glittering gown.
She wore her make-up, but impeccably, the black eyelids blended and subtle, the red-lipstick lips softened.
Her hair was like his.
She was not a child.
She had begun to menstruate, she had high full breasts.
She moved towards him as though Rachaela were not there.
She put her thin white hand into his.
Adamus stooped and kissed Ruth's scarlet mouth.
He leaned and picked her up, and carried her across his body, up into the breathing unlit tower.
Rachaela followed them.
They came into the upper room.
A fire glowed on the hearth.
By its light Rachaela saw Adamus lie Ruth on her back on top of the piano.
Somehow he climbed up after her.
He kneeled above Ruth and undid the black dress slowly.
‘I'm afraid,’ said Ruth.
She giggled, as she had done when she was a child with Emma.
Adamus bowed to Ruth's perfect breasts and mouthed and tongued them.
Ruth held his head to her body.
He parted her thighs and travelled down her, skin and material, and thrust the dress away, and began his second kiss.
Flames leaped in Rachaela.
She longed to scream.
She was invisible and unhearable, a ghost.
Ruth groaned.
She pulled on Adamus.
He left her ebony mound, stroking it with his fingers.
He put the burning phallus there, and drove it in.
Ruth shrieked.
‘You hurt me,’ said Ruth, ‘hurt me again.’
Unable to move, Rachaela watched them rise and fall together, their bodies mounted on a black wild horse of pleasure, galloping.
Ruth screamed.
She screamed and kicked and caged him in her long white legs.
Rachaela spasmed in long aching waves and woke in the bed in the flat, staring into darkness.
It was not possible.
Father and grandfather.
He could not.
But why should anything stop him?
Rachaela's day was over, she had served her purpose.
Now Ruth might be the year queen.
Continuance.
The mad people treasured it, and Adamus was their instrument.
Don't be a fool.
If it must, let it happen.
She tried to remember his face, but as in the dream it had grown blurred and distant.
Rachaela sat up and switched on the light.
Outside some drunks were shouting in the street.
She was glad of them.
She got out of bed and went to make tea.
That had been Emma's remedy for everything.
Tea or a drop of sherry.
What would Emma have made of this?
‘You can't let them get hold of her, Rachaela.
From what you say, they're terrible people.
Crazy, awful.
Your own child.
You have to get her back out of their clutches.’
‘Yes, Emma,’ Rachaela said.
The boiling water splashed into the mug, and the drunks sang on the street in rejoicing.
15
DRIVER NUMBER THREE WAS QUITE confident.
‘Pitchley.
I know Pitchley.
Where the new estate is.
It'll cost a bit.’
‘Yes.’
‘That's OK then.
Jump in.’
Seeing the line of taxis at the station in Porlea she had not been optimistic, but time had narrowed the spaces of the countryside.
The territory of the Scarabae had been breached.
She recollected the way, even backwards and in the early summer greenness.
She recognized the broad motorway, churches and pubs.
Only the normality was unnerving.
She did not recognize the village.
A small supermarket had been built, there was a post office and a greengrocer, a new bold pub with a rainbow sign The Carpenters.
Up on the hill the new estate, chocolate brown, with gabled roofs, satellite dishes, wheels of washing and model cherry trees in gardens.
Somewhere in the middle lay the depression of grey stone houses.
The derelict fields had gone to lawns.
‘Here you are,’ said the driver.
‘Where do you want me to drop you?’
‘At the top of the hill.’
‘The estate.’
He drove her almost on to the drive of the last brown doll's house.
She paid him and got out.
She watched him drive away.
The crows had gone.
Where did crows go to?
It was all so different.
But it was still the place.
The starting point for the long walk over the heath to the house.
Her bag was light now, only packed with the bare essentials.
She had better be careful of the road.
There might be more traffic.
Rachaela was correct in this assumption.
Three cars went by her in her first half-hour on the road.
The sun westered as she passed the gutted farm that had now been pulled down.
She saw where the crows had gone.
There was a delegation here.
She remembered the rook or crow sitting in the hedge the night she had come away for ever.
For ever, after all, had not been so long.
The heath, when she came up on it, was alive with colours.
Brown and gold among the green, purple flowers, the gorse in sunny dumps.
Birds flew and circled, calling.
It was right it should look different, coming back.
In her memory it was too bleak, too desolate, and that had given it an added power.
She was moving now towards the sea.
She felt it, like a void before her.
After she had walked for another half hour she was  tired to the bone.
She sat down on a rock.
The sky was thickening.
Would the daylight last?
She must not rest too long.
Such parts as these Ruth had drawn, and peopled them with dragons.
A gull cried spitefully in the sky.
Presently she got up and went on.
She did not have the stamina of years ago, but she would have to make it.
She did not want to be marooned on the heath when darkness came.
Not now.
The sound was like her tiredness at first, a long thrumming in the ear.
Then she knew it for what it was.
The rock jutted through the thin pelt of flowers and grass, and all at once the horizon concertinaed.
She was looking out into the vault of air above the sea.
She came to it and stood and looked down into the dragon's mouth.
The waves clashed along the bastions of the cliffs.
She might have been here yesterday.
Darkness seeped up from the earth.
The sun was setting as she walked by the brink of the ocean.
Like a mirage she saw the blackness of the pines, and all at once, the house, small in the distance like a toy.
Flawless.
Its banks and slopes.
One blazing emerald window.
She stopped in wonder.
In wonder at herself.
For she had come back.
After sunset the doors would be opened.
It was the right time as she came around to the front of the house.
She paused again to see its silhouette against the dimming sky.
The stars were there, slightly altered, for it was a different season and a later year.
She saw  the tower.
She felt a strange sinking in her stomach.
No, she must remember, the peculiarity of the house had also to do with her perception.
She must, this time, be rational.
The doors gave, just as before.
As before she entered into the huge open hall or lobby, with its chessboard floor of russet-and-black marble.
It was as wide as she recalled, rationality did not make it smaller.
And there the shadows massed, the crouching bears that might be anything, and through the high windows dropped the occluded violet-yellow dregs of light.
The red lamp was burning on the mahogany table, catching above the chandelier with its drops of blood.
The smell of the house was the same.
A church of damp and incense, old woods and musty closets, polish, oil, and sweet decay.
This time she did not turn to shut the door.
She glanced at the tower in the shadow, and dismissed it.
No one to greet her, now.
That was proper.
She was superfluous and perhaps not welcome.
Could she find her way in the dark?
She walked to the stairs.
The nymph guarded the newel post, holding up her blind light.
A new spider had woven from her shoulder to her upraised arm, a film-set touch that was too apposite.
Rachaela put her foot on the red Persian carpet and started up, out of the scarlet ambience of the lamp.
Twenty-two steps.
On the landing a soft light shone into the dark from the corridor, as in memory.
The second lamp was lit, as it had been then.
She recollected it falling on the face and sightless seeing eyes of Michael, the first of the Scarabae household she had ever beheld.
She entered the lit passage and there was the window in the elbow of it, dark now as then, a crowd of pictures on the walls, paintings beneath paintings.
And there the door.
How familiar it was.
As known to her as the door of the flat.
Would this room be locked?
The doorknob turned easily, and the door opened on the blue-and-green room.
It shocked her, for it was just the same, as if memory had now been lifted from her head and unfolded in front of her.
The green fireplace, with the black clock with angels, the dressing-table and figured mirror, the four-poster bed.
The covers of the bed had been drawn back a little, the action of an hotel, to show the dean pillowcases and the white sheet.
There was no fire on the summer hearth.
A fire screen of embroidered blue roses stood there.
Mrs Mantini would have had an eye for that.
Rachaela tossed her bag on to the bed.
Her radio stood where she had left it, on the table.
She lifted it up and saw that long ago the batteries had leaked and burnt the wood.
She crossed to the wardrobe and opened it and saw her abandoned clothes hanging in a neat row.
A faintly powdery smell hung with them, but they were not moth-eaten, would still fit her despite twelve years and the bearing of a child.
The night window loomed at the room's back.
Its picture was quite evident to her, even in blackness, the leaded tree and standing figures, the apples and the unicorn.
Rachaela left the room and walked into the bathroom.
Mrs Mantini would have been busy here, too.
Indeed the whole house would have been a paradise to Mrs Mantini.
There were fresh soaps and clean towels.
Rachaela had been expected.
Why?
They would think her maternal instinct outraged at the extraction of her child?
Burning hot with zeal, the anguished mother rushing after.
For what did they know of her half-hearted attempts at abortion, the years' endurance.
Had Ruth described anything of Rachaela's brand of motherhood?
Rachaela took the oatmeal-coloured dress out of the wardrobe and hung it up.
There was no doubt it would fit her.
She went back into the bathroom and ran a bath.
As she lay in the water, she heard the soft brisk heels of a female Scarabae pass along the corridor outside.
Unice?
Miriam?
The sound was so usual to her.
Perhaps she had missed it in the flat, these passagings.
Only the loud bad music below and the arguments on the landing.
She thought:I am a few walls', stairways', rooms' distance from him .
Until now she had hardly thought of Adamus.
He had formed her life, as for the last twelve years she had lived it, formed her every day by the acts of one extraordinary night.
Through the years she had sometimes half dreamed of it.
She had never permitted herself to conjure it up.
And over it had meshed a concrete slab, which now the lever of the house was painfully and irresistibly easing up.
She had known she must face Adamus, or the idea of Adamus, if she came back.
He was her reason, after all; Adamus with Ruth.
She got out of the bath and towelled herself dry.
Going into the bedroom again she put on the oatmeal dress which might have been bought yesterday for fit.
Its faded quality did not displease her, or the soft odour of destruction.
She must camouflage and arm herself.
She powdered her face in her mirror and reaffirmed the dark pencil around her eyes.
Would Camillo leave her another gift-wrapped mouse?
But when she opened the door, nothing and no one was outside.
Only the burning lamp conveyed the half-life of the house.
Did the Scarabae still dine, or had customs changed?
She would have to see.
Rachaela walked into the corridor and along to the landing, and descending the stairs she saw the lamps were lit in the drawing room as on that first night years before.
In the drawing room Michael and Maria stood like cut-out figures in their dark servile clothes.
‘Michael, Maria,’ she said.
They gave her stiff little bows, what she would have expected.
Michael said, ‘Miss Rachaela, please go straight through into the dining room.’
‘I'd like a drink first, Michael.’
‘Miss Anna told me to ask you to go straight in.’
Rachaela shrugged.
Something twisted in her belly, a phantom Ruth-baby.
She went towards the second door, and Michael  hurried ahead to open it for her.
She walked into the dining room, and stopped, not surprised, perturbed only by what she had suddenly anticipated.
For they were all there, as on the memorable occasions in the past.
Their known, nearly identical faces, slid by in a wave of tawdry dinner jackets, sequinned old lace.
Could she still name them?
Yes.
Alice, Peter, Jack, Livia….
Not Camillo, never Camillo.
She saw and registered all this in parenthesis.
For at the table's head sat the most bizarre Scarabae of all.
In an exactly similar perhaps resewn dress of dark green voile and net, a necklace that was a heart of green cut-glass, and jade ear pendants, her black hair flowing from tortoiseshell combs, her face smoothly powdered, lids black, lips crimson: Ruth.
Ruth sat among the Scarabae like a living plant among ancient statues.
She had bloomed from their support.
Across the room she smiled at Rachaela her straight white teeth that had never needed a dentist.
‘Hallo, Mummy.’
Almost the first time ever she had volunteered a greeting.
But then, she was at home here, not Rachaela's unwanted guest.
Rachaela did not answer.
To Ruth's right, Anna stood up.
‘Come and sit down with us, Rachaela.
We're so very glad that you came.
We hoped that you would.’
‘I had to,’ Rachaela said.
She said blankly, ‘You stole my child.’
‘Oh, no, Rachaela.
Not stealing.
Not that.’
Ruth said, piping up like a bright and confident pupil, ‘I asked the man.
He knew the way.
I came by train on my own.
I liked it.
They sent a car to the station.’
‘And you walked up the hill through the trees,’ said Rachaela.
‘Michael was there.
He showed me the way.’
She was not afraid to speak to Rachaela.
Not reluctant.
It was as if it had all been planned.
Rachaela looked at the weird miniature woman her daughter had become.
She did not look like a child dressing up, more like the daughter of a medieval family, dressed always as a smaller version of the adults, a woman at eleven or twelve.
‘Come and sit down,’ Anna said again.
Her dress blinked its myriad eyes and all the dresses, Ruth's included, did the same.
Rachaela went to the table.
A place had been laid at the foot, opposite across the long surface, to Ruth's place.
as if they had known to the minute the time of Rachaela's arrival.
Probably everything had been kept ready for weeks, prepared as soon as Ruth got here.
Rachaela sat down, and Cheta came to serve her.
It was a rabbit casserole.
Rachaela ate cautiously, not sure now she could stomach such food.
Ruth ate neatly and voraciously, like a starling.
There was wine, a deep coal-red.
Cheta poured a glass for Rachaela.
Ruth too had wine which she drank in greedy little sips.
None of them had changed.
This family did not.
Ruth sparkled in the midst of them like a jewel in cobwebs.
The family was pleased.
It had an aura of well-being.
They had got what they wanted.
All of them basked, the Scarabae, Ruth.
Only Camillo was absent.
And Adamus.
Rachaela left her food unfinished.
‘A few days ago,’ said Ruth, ‘we had seagull.
Jack found it.’
Rachaela said, ‘The cat used to hunt them.’
‘The cat is very old now,’ said Anna.
‘It sleeps all day and most of the night.’
Something had altered.
The cat had altered.
Maria brought a strawberry tart.
Rachaela watched Ruth spoon the tart into her red mouth.
She had a second helping, as she had done of the casserole.
Real home-cooked fare, such as Emma had provided.
Rachaela got up.
‘Excuse me.’
She took her glass of wine across the room, and watched the table from there.
It was obscene to pretend to be part of it.
If she, Rachaela, had been abducted as a child or teenager, would she have responded to the Scarabae as Ruth did?
Who could tell, now.
The meal was finally finished with the cheeseboard and a dish of fruit.
Ruth ate from these too.
The Scarabae rose and went like some collective creature, some sort of amoeba with Ruth its glowing heart, into the drawing room.
Here the old men and women deposited themselves about the room.
They took up knitting and sewing, books and chess games.
A mild muttering came from them like settling insects.
Maria and Cheta served tea.
Ruth stood before the screened fireplace in her duchess gown, drinking her tea, the focus for all  the eyes which constantly rose and came to her, and the old smiles which lifted up the lips over the discoloured, sharp old teeth.
Ruth set down her cup and saucer by the stopped golden clock.
‘Shall I go up now?’
‘Yes,’ said Anna from a couch.
‘Go up.’
Rachaela observed her child swirl delicately from the fireplace and hurry with the well-known, swift fox-like movement from the room.
Her acknowledgements to Rachaela were over.
Ruth did not even glance at her.
‘Where is she going, Anna?’
Rachaela asked steadily.
‘Into the tower.’
‘Adamus's tower.’
‘Adamus is teaching her the piano, Rachaela.’
A heartbeat interrupted Rachaela's breathing.
She cleared her throat and said, ‘How logical.’
‘Yes.
It seems she has a natural aptitude.’
‘No doubt.
Anna,’ Rachaela hesitated.
‘I want to talk to you.’
Anna got up like a faultless, tactful hostess.
‘Perhaps you'd like to see Ruth's room?’
‘All right.’
Nobody watched them go out in turn.
The Scarabae were not concerned with Rachaela now.
Her day was over.
They travelled by a short stairway from the morning room, up into a narrow corridor carved with horses' heads.
Rachaela could not recall coming this way in the past, but she must have done, for she had surely explored all the house.
At a turn in the corridor she saw a picture she remembered, a ship at sea, and  under the waves a chariot racing from a previous painting.
There was an annexe beyond the corridor with two windows — blackened, impossible to decipher- and then a single door.
Anna opened the door and motioned Rachaela forward.
‘It's only ethical.
You're her mother.’
Rachaela entered a room of blood.
It was blood-red.
The walls of embossed paper, with here and there a darkened bruise of damp, the fiery carpet, the four poster draped and covered in the colour of Ruth's velvet mouth.
Rachaela stood speechless.
Red.
The blood of menstruation and the torn maidenhead.
The red of the womb which bore the child.
The red of the blood drunk at a feast.
Which was it, or was it all of them combined?
The room had its window, too.
Rachaela gazed hard at it.
She made out a Nativity, but it was wrong.
A ray from the lamp beside the bed showed that the Virgin's dress was also crimson, while the Three Kings had the heads of beasts: a horse, a lizard and a cat.
Nearby, almost missed, was an ass with the bearded head of a man.
‘Your symbolism,’ Rachaela said, ‘is always curious.’
‘We have our own ways, Rachaela.
This has always been the child's room, the girl-child.
She is our saviour, you see.’
‘Because a girl can make babies.’
‘Exactly,’ said Anna undisturbed.
Rachaela said, ‘She's too young.’
‘Not technically, of course,’ said Anna, ‘but I agree.
A few more years should be allowed to elapse.’
‘When she's fourteen, fifteen?’
‘Something like that.’
‘It's not legal in this country, Anna.’
‘Oh, this country.’
Anna smiled.
‘We're our own country.
All our countries and none.’
‘And who is the prospective male?’ said Rachaela.
She was sweating in the hot colour of the room.
‘You know, of course,’ said Anna.
‘I know, of course.
Grandfather and father and lover.
That should be incestuous enough even for you.’
Anna lowered her eyes decorously.
‘This is the best way, for us.’
‘And does Ruth know what you have in mind?’
‘Ruth knows and accepts she is important to us.
Luckily, this time, we have been able to welcome her in her youth.
She'll grow towards us, and towards her father.
He already fascinates her, which is not surprising.
In the end, it will seem natural to her.
There is a little ceremony that will take place.
This will help Ruth, as she grows older, to understand.’
‘No, Anna,’ said Rachaela.
‘It's out of your hands,’ said Anna simply.
‘It isn't out of my hands.
I'll take her away.’
‘Even if you could make her go,’ said Anna, ‘Ruth would return to us as quickly as she could.
Ruth has no trouble in identifying with the Scarabae.’
‘It's disgusting, Anna.
What happened before was bad enough, was foul enough.
But this-’
‘How jealous you are, Rachaela.
I'm sorry for you.
If you had stayed, the role of wife would have been yours.
But you chose not to.
We have had to wait in patience all these years.’
Jealous.
Yes, that must be it.
It was not the unliked  child she struggled to shield, but the man's flesh she would not see mingled with another's.
Anna had not changed either.
Of them all, she was most like the Anna of the first meetings.
But now too she was a true adversary.
They did not want or need Rachaela any more.
She would be allowed in as an adjunct, and kept from doing further harm.
They owed her only the debt of Ruth.
‘No, Anna, it's filthy and I won't allow it.’
Anna lifted her hands and let them fall.
‘You fight against the tide, always.’
‘She's a child.
Am I to let you do this to her?’
‘She will be agreeable.
What alternative do you offer her?
You've had your freedom, Rachaela, and what have you done with it?
Yours is only a sleeping life.’
‘It's mine.’
‘Then live it, and allow Ruth to live hers.’
‘We won't agree on this, Anna.’
‘No.
I expect not.’
Rachaela felt utter helplessness, as she was meant to feel, and as she guessed that Anna saw.
‘Then I'm to be a spectator,’ she said.
‘If you wish.’
Around them the blood-red bedroom pulsed and smouldered.
Rachaela imagined Ruth asleep here.
Waited on by servants, her bed made, possessions carefully dusted.
There on that table a box of paints and drawing pad; by the bed another box, of jewels, pearls and faceted glass.
Everything had been catered for.
Here Ruth could live: a pampered being, a fairytale princess, safe in the castle at last.
And with a fairytale prince provided.
‘It's all too exact,’ said Rachaela.
‘Something will happen.
You don't know Ruth.’
‘Oh yes.
Ruth is like us.
You were the rogue flowering, Rachaela.’
Rachaela lay in her green-and-blue bed and listened to the house shifting, and the breath of the sea.
She must make some scheme for herself, the best thing to do.
Once or twice, soft stark footfalls went along the corridor.
The tower clock by the bed told her it was five-fifteen, almost three then, if she remembered the time interval correctly.
Or unless the clock had changed its pattern.
But surely the clock was like the rest, changeless.
Had Adamus changed?
Did he look old now.
He would be over seventy, if it could be true — foolish to reiterate any doubt.
It was true, must be so.
But Ruth would not be drawn to an old man.
The thirty he had looked would seem old enough to a child of eleven.
But Ruth was not a child.
Rachaela saw Ruth again as she had appeared.
An eldritch maiden.
A mask in a dress.
She would have to speak to Ruth.
For the first time, properly speak to her.
The sea sounded louder as it claimed the beaches.
The power of water.
Was Sylvian still out there, floating with the galleons and flotsam?
In the morning Rachaela bathed and dressed, and tugged on the bell-pull so that Cheta miraculously appeared.
Everything was superficially as before.
Toast and tea.
Rachaela recalled her former hypnotized aimlessness, and went out quickly.
She took the correct corridor, found the Salome annexe and climbed up to the attic.
The attic was not as it had been.
The rocking-horse was gone.
Webs of dust made a cat's cradle about the space.
On the chests the brown bottles of Uncle Camillo's wine, many minus their corks, were wreathed and veiled.
Camillo had not been in the attic for months and perhaps for years.
The dust from the old house gathered everywhere, the powders of its grinding bones.
A cherry-and-green stuffed bird turned slowly to an icicle of dust.
She had laid the hammer there, after she had tried to break the tower window.
A useless moment of violence.
Let her recall and beware.
The hammer was no longer where she had dropped it.
Rachaela left the attic.
She began to move through the house as she had done before, opening doors, now trying to force doors which would not open.
She found Alice knitting in a pale sitting room whose window was a gigantic cloudburst of primrose and grey.
At the window's foot, cities burned and Alice performed complicated clicks and twiddles on her steel needles.
Had she located Alice in this room before?
She had come on no other Scarabae beyond Cheta, who had brought her breakfast.
Two of the doors she had forced had turned out to open the other way, and to be cupboards containing piles of bedclothes, folded.
‘Alice, where is Camillo?’
Alice knitted.
‘I don't know, Rachaela.
Perhaps you should try the library.’
‘That was Sylvian.’
‘Uncle Camillo goes there now.
Oh, such a lot of books we used to have.
Rooms and rooms of them.
I can remember Uncle Camillo playing with us, popping out from behind the chairs.’
Rachaela left Alice and wove her way through the house to the library.
No one was there, but on the table stood the mutilated globe, the ink and ruler.
Rachaela looked at the ruler.
It was plain ebony.
She had seen Camillo scratch a skeleton on the ruler, but it was gone.
She tried the books.
She looked at the lines ruled through the sentences.
She found one book with single words left unruled.
After much effort, she put the sentence together which the book now consisted of:We have fled before them .
On one wall, the north, the books were readable.
No one had taken up Sylvian's work, despite the ominous ruler and ink.
Rachaela left the house and went to the steps which led down to the beach.
The sea was in, turquoise green, foaming.
She turned back to the house and resumed searching.
He was the oldest of them.
He had the roots of things secreted in his mind.
She could not go to Adamus.
What was Ruth doing?
Perhaps asleep in bed.
She had liked to lie in on Saturdays and Sundays.
Sometimes sitting up to draw.
Rachaela lost herself in the house as if it were essential that she must.
She found another door that would not open and knocked loudly on it.
When she  tried again the door gave suddenly as if it had decided of itself to let her in.
There was, inside the tall yellow bed, an old man, tucked up to the chin.
Between the bed and the door, a splash of red and white on the room's ochre.
The rocking-horse.
‘Camillo?’
The pane of the old face turned, the long white hair fanning out on the pillow.
One must be careful, too, of intentions among the Scarabae.
She had meant to find him, and she had.
‘I've been looking for you,’ said Rachaela.
She advanced slowly.
Had he come to this after all in the twelve years, the couch of age and decrepitude?
There was no smell of the invalid in the room.
‘Camillo,’ she said again.
He looked at her.
His eyes were sharp as knives.
‘One night,’ he said, ‘the mob came.
They shouted round the house and the servants ran to my mother, they were so frightened.
My father picked me up.
‘Get dressed, n he said, ‘put on your warmest things.
’ Outside the sleigh was ready and the horse to pull it.
They had taken off the bells.
My father used the whip.
We started at such a speed.
I remember the white snow splashing up like a wave.’
‘I don't want to hear this,’ Rachaela said quietly.
‘The crowd had been misled,’ said Camillo.
‘They ran after us and stones thudded round the sleigh.
My mother was weeping.
She had on all her jewellery and a great fur cloak over her nightdress.
We drove from the outskirts of the town.
There were men running with torches but the horse bolted past them.
I was excited, too young to understand everything had been left behind.
Out into the white woods we ran.
Great  spumes of snow roared up and the trees were like huge white candles, glowing under the moon.
I sobered, thinking of sagas I had heard of wolves, but my father hushed me.
My father said, ‘Men are to be feared, not wolves.’
Then the forests closed about us and there was no more light.’
‘Camillo.’
‘The sleigh ran all night.
Once on a hilltop the trees broke, and we looked back and saw a vast red light on the horizon.
My mother cried out.
She said that they were burning our people.
My father said the town itself was burning.
Then the trees swallowed us again.’
‘And in the morning,’ said Rachaela, ‘the light came, and you hid your head and wept.’
Camillo grinned.
‘Good, good.
I don't have to finish it.’
‘Why did you tell me?’
‘You're here.’
‘Who were they, the ones that died?’
‘Scarabae,’ said Camillo.
‘Always Scarabae.’
‘Superstition, which they themselves fostered, killed them.’
‘Twinkle, twinkle little star,’ said Camillo, ‘how I wonder what you are.’
‘You were afraid of the light because you'd been taught to be afraid of it,’ said Rachaela.
‘You believed you were vampires because someone told you that too.’
‘What is this creature,’ said Camillo, ‘a mouse?
An elephant?’
‘How can I take Ruth away from them?’
‘Ruth,’ said Camillo, ‘that nasty child.’
Rachaela stared at Camillo.
‘You don't like her.’
‘A viper in the bosom.’
‘Then help me get her away, Camillo.
Tell me how?’
‘There's no hope of it,’ said Camillo from the yellow box of bed.
‘She is their bud now.
And you are grass cuttings, the bush that won't flower.
Go away.’
‘Camillo —’
‘One night,’ said Camillo, ‘the mob came.
They shouted round the house…’
Rachaela saw the old face close again like a crab upon its story.
She went to the door and he recited the words until she had gone out and shut the door behind her.
Then there was silence in the room again.