

17
Oliver sprawled on the couch.
Rain was tense, perched on the edge of a hard chair.
‘It's not a mistake, Oliver.
It was definitely Tim's voice on the yacht that night.’
‘Yet you didn't recognize him until you heard him speaking French to the pedlar.’
‘Shouting in French.
It was the same, threatening somebody in a rage.
If you'd heard those two scenes you'd be convinced, too.’
Oliver yawned.
‘But Barbara Coleman lured you all the way to Nice today to insist Joseph killed Sabine Jourdain.’
‘Yes.’
‘And you'd already decided the Josephs knew something about the murder.’
‘Yes.’
Another yawn.
‘This morning you discovered they hadn't been with Peter Leary as they'd told us.
Of course, we don't know that they gave the police the same alibi, do we?’
‘All I know for certain is that Sabine Jourdain had a row with a man on board the Jonquil before she was taken dead from the water, and that man was Tarquin Poulteney-Crosse.’
Oliver sat up.
‘Shall I make some coffee?’
He didn't wait for her answer.
She knew she would not be able to sleep with so much tantalizing information spinning in her mind.
While Oliver was out of the room she abandoned her chair for the couch, kicked off her shoes and curled up.
When she had handed Tim his wallet, she said nothing about the pedlar.
Tim was lying on the sand, looking in the direction the man had gone.
He could not know she had been on the beach long enough to see what had happened.
His voice, as he thanked her, was low, his manner subdued.
Just for a second she could have believed she was mistaken about him.
Oliver brought her coffee.
‘I don't think you should tell Foucard about Tim, even if you're sure yourself that he was with Sabine Jourdain.
Foucard hasn't believed your story of the row, has he?’
‘He hasn't believed much of what I've told him, but is that a good reason not to tell him I've recognized the man?
If Joseph wanted Sabine Jourdain dead, as Barbara Coleman says, then he probably got someone else to do it.
And the man who was on the boat with her must be suspect.’
‘It's up to Foucard and his superiors to decide who the suspects are…’
‘If I tell him about Tim at least he'll have a sensible line of enquiry.’
There was a lengthy pause while she wondered how far she was justified in interfering.
Merely showing an interest was often enough to move events in one direction rather than another.
If Tim were guilty and told her so, he would not be the first person who had admitted a crime to a journalist.
If he later denied it to the police, that would not be unusual, either.
What was it she had said to him about the missing family silver?
‘I'm not about to make a citizen's arrest.’
A journalist would rarely turn you in whatever you claimed you had done.
People boasted to journalists, it might not be at all difficult to get Tim to say exactly what had happened on the Jonquil the night Sabine Jourdain was killed.
Oliver broke into her thoughts.
‘You're not seriously thinking of telling Foucard?’
‘No, but I'm thinking of asking Tim for the truth.’
In the morning they decided Oliver was to lure Tim to the flat with offers of breakfast and a shower.
Rain, meanwhile, would pack and telephone Holly Chase with a diary item about Tim.
Over breakfast Rain would steer the conversation around to asking Tim what he was arguing about with Sabine Jourdain.
It would be the perfect private situation in which  Tim might be ready to explain himself, and Oliver would be there to witness any confession he might make.
Rain packed half her things and then picked up the telephone.
Holly's number was unobtainable.
Sighing, Rain remembered the story of the gas board digging up the cable at Spinney Green.
She went back to the packing.
Sun streaked the room, beckoning her to the balcony.
She leaned against the rail.
It was going to be a clear day, perhaps the hottest of the year so far.
Windows had been flung open in the close-packed buildings for fresh air to reach the stuffiest corner.
In a nearby building a woman darted on to her balcony and closed shutters, anticipating the heat.
Rain caught herself smiling Oliver's wistful smile, thinking his irresponsible thoughts.
It would be fantastic to shy here.
Maybe in the old town itself where the centuries had come and gone and left no trace.
Maybe on Cap d'Antibes among the pines and the roses.
Perhaps she could fade away in a faded villa like the Villa Fiesole where the Durance coterie had faded to nothing.
Or perhaps she could be like Merlyn Joseph and find herself a rich man who would install her in a yacht.
A key in the door, and Oliver was letting himself and Tim into the flat.
Rain reflected that, even for Antibes, she would draw the line at sleeping on the beach.
She laid the table, sun falling across it, and each item she placed — cups, sugar bowl, plates, a basket of fruit, croissants — added their shadows to the room.
She found herself rearranging things slightly, to perfect the pattern of shadows.
Tim and Oliver were on the balcony, their voices coming to her across the warm stillness.
She heard Tim asking how much longer Oliver and Rain would be there, and Oliver fudging the answer.
‘I don't want to go back at all.
I think you've made the right choice; sun and sand and…’
Coffee was made and she called them, setting down the pot to complete her shadow picture.
Oliver gave the table a puzzled look.
He began to straighten things.
Shadows overlapped each other, forms became indistinct.
He said, with a laugh: ‘What on earth have you done?’
She saw it as he saw it, a crazy thing which made no sense.
As he shuffled things into proper places, the shadows made none.
She gave an embarrassed smile.
‘It was a piece of domestic art, a still life with shadows.
You've spoiled it.’
Oliver pretended to apologize for her.
‘She's not always as odd as this.’
He invited Tim to help himself, and Tim stretched out a hand and carried away a croissant so that the arrangement she had constructed lost its pinnacle.
‘Do you paint?’
Tim asked Rain.
The knife he slid towards her and into the butter had a menacingly long shadow blade.
Rain watched the shadow.
The telephone rang.
Rain was nearest.
They heard her say in a bright voice: ‘Good morning, James.
Yes, I'm still here.
I don't know exactly, not much longer.
By the way, I've found what I was looking for.
Do you remember me asking if you'd heard of…
That's right.’
There was a gap while Cobalt was talking and all they heard was Rain's murmur of interest.
Finally she said: ‘I'll call you before we fly out if I have anything for you.’
She rang off.
Tim and Oliver had finished eating.
Their conversation halted as she rejoined them.
She was afraid of running out of time before she got to the point.
She said to Tim: ‘We were talking about art, I think.
How well did you know Sabine Jourdain?’
‘How did you know I knew her?’
He was guarded.
‘I heard something.’
‘I didn't know her well.
We met a few times.
She was almost a distant relation, did you know that, too?’
Holly Chase had said so.
She nodded.
‘You looked her up?’
Tim's fingers moved through his hair.
He shoved his chair back from the table.
‘I know this is going to sound a bit silly, but in a way it was because of her that I came here.’
‘Not silly, intriguing.’
Encouraged, he said: ‘Well, you remember what we were saying last night, about Scott Fitzgerald…’
‘Yes,’ said Rain firmly as she tore a piece off a croissant.
She did not want any more of Scott Fitzgerald if she could help it.
‘Well, it all came together in my mind, you know the way  things do sometimes?
I'd been studying Fitzgerald, reading, seeing the film and the television series and thinking all along what a wonderful life he'd led in the South of France…’
‘Yes,’ said Rain even more firmly.
‘At the same time, in the back of my mind, there was the thought that, actually, I had a distant connection who was doing just the same thing.’
Rain could not think what it was Fitzgerald had done that Sabine Jourdain later copied, but regardless of that she spurred him on: ‘Yes.’
Tim said: ‘Then one day, there it was.
Just like that.
The realization that I'd been hankering all along to come here, and be part of it.’
‘I see,’ said Oliver, who did not, but thought it time he said something.
Rain ripped another piece of croissant.
‘But Sabine Jourdain — and Fitzgerald, for that matter — weren't ever sleeping on the beach.
As far as I know, that is.’
She thought it best to defer to Tim's superior knowledge.
Tim laughed, as she had expected.
‘No, I haven't read anything to suggest that.
But I didn't know I was going to sleep there, either.’
‘You hadn't realized it was the freest way of life and so forth?’
Oliver again showed he was attending.
‘What's free?’ asked Tim, and for a horrible moment Rain and Oliver feared they had struck his philosophical vein and ‘what is life?’could not be far behind.
But they were being pessimistic.
‘Nothing's free, as far as I can see,’ said Tim.
‘You can't just rent a villa or a flat overlooking the Med and install yourself for a peppercorn rent like people used to.
The beach is all I can afford.’
He gave Oliver a sidelong glance.
‘Because, whatever you think, I did not steal the family silver.’
Oliver raised his hands in a gesture of surrender.
Rain said: ‘Where did you intend to stay?’
‘I hoped Sabine would find space for me.
When I got here I discovered she didn't live in the town any longer.
The famous Durance coterie had come to an end and all that was  left was Sabine painting in the hills and another old woman living in a neglected villa in Antibes.’
Rain asked whether he had been to Sabine Jourdain's home.
He said: ‘She didn't want anyone to go there.
The woman at the villa, Barbara Coleman, wouldn't tell me where it was and so I went to Durance and he was equally determined about it.
Even when I said I was family — well, yes, I know it wasn't true but it seemed near enough the truth to use to persuade them neither of them would give her away.’
Rain noticed that he had not provided an answer to her question.
She let him get away with it.
She said: ‘Did you meet her in Antibes?’
‘At the villa.
Barbara Coleman mentioned Sabine was going to visit her so I went, too.’
‘Was it a good meeting?’
She was seeing it from Sabine Jourdain's point of view: a young foreigner pursuing her and intending to latch on to her.
He shrugged.
‘Actually, I didn't think I made much impression on her.
She seemed a bit preoccupied.
And then I thought maybe I'd been expecting too much.
I'd looked forward to it for ages, there'd been a build-up but it was quite different for her.’
While Rain finished her breakfast, Tim told her how he had decided to see her again and how he found out from Barbara Coleman when the next visit to the villa would be.
Both women had been surprised when he turned up a second time.
Oliver asked: ‘What did you talk about?’
It was a fair question, given the circumstances of Tim's visits.
‘Oh, you know,’ said Tim vaguely.
Rain covered a smile as he went on.
‘Scott Fitzgerald, Durance, that sort of thing.’
Rain saw his eyes go to the clock.
She said: ‘You got to know Benedict Joseph as well, did you?’
Tim frowned.
‘Benedict Joseph?’
Rain waited, unsure whether this was an act.
Tim's face cleared.
‘Oh, you mean the American.
The dealer?
No, I don't know him.’
Rain said: ‘But you've been on his yacht, haven't you?’
Rain saw him weighing up how to respond.
She went on: ‘We've both been there.
Once we were there at the same time.
On the night Sabine Jourdain died.’
Tim squirmed, reminding Rain of a schoolboy caught doing something naughty.
She let him suffer a bit longer, then said: ‘You and Sabine had a row, I heard it.
What was it about?’
Tim flared, as when he had denied stealing the silver.
‘I didn't kill her.
You're not to say I killed her.’
‘I haven't said that, but I'd like to know why you quarrelled.’
Tim inspected Oliver and saw the same accusation.
He said: ‘This is why you invited me here, isn't it?
So you could test your theory that I killed the old woman.’
Rain said: ‘I want to know what you were quarrelling about.
It wasn't a mild disagreement, it was…’
Tim swivelled away from her.
‘All right, all right !
We had a row, but telling the police we had a row isn't going to bring her back to life and it isn't going to find out who killed her, because I didn't.’
Rain kept silent.
He spoke again: ‘Why should I kill her?
What possible reason could there be?
I hardly knew the woman.’
Oliver said: ‘You knew her well enough to be on that boat with her.’
‘I wanted to talk to her.
I saw her walking through the harbour and I followed.
She went on board.
I hung around deciding what to do and then some people came off the boat.
They got into a big car and drove away.
Benedict Joseph and his wife — I know now that's who they must have been.
I thought I'd go on board and talk to Sabine.
She told me to go away and stop pestering her.’
His face grew bitter, he was thin-lipped.
He said: ‘She got very angry.
I got angry, too.
You know how it is: one minute you're talking, the next there's a blazing row.
I went.
I left her standing there.’
Outside a dog barked.
A new pattern of shadow lay across the table.
A motorbike screamed along the coast road.
Tim stood up.
He said: ‘I won't stay for a shower, I'll go for a swim instead.’
He tossed back his hair and glared down at Rain.
She sensed him wanting to release a far greater fury than he dared.
She believed he sometimes dared.
To defuse the  moment she said, conversationally: ‘You'll go straight back to the beach, will you?’
He said: ‘You've no reason to suspect me of killing Sabine.’
She stroked back her errant curl.
Her voice was very soft.
‘Except that I heard you threaten to.’
18
‘That was not one of your greatest successes,’ Oliver West said to Rain Morgan as the door slammed and Tarquin Poulteney-Crosse ran downstairs.
She poured coffee, saying: ‘He didn't pretend I was wrong about him being on the yacht that evening.’
Oliver spooned sugar.
‘They couldn't, surely, have been arguing about him repeatedly popping up and wanting to talk to her.
There must have been something else.’
‘Yes, I'm sure of that.
She probably did tell him to go away and stop following her around, but that wouldn't be a reason for him screaming he'd kill her.’
She looked at the clock.
It was time to ring Holly Chase at the office with a brief story about the faintly ducal connection roughing it on the beach.
‘Hi!’ said Holly.
‘How's the suntan?’
‘I've been far too busy to look for one of those,’ Rain said.
‘I tried you at home earlier — hasn't anyone mended your cable yet?’
‘Oh, sure.
Normal service was resumed yesterday morning.
Then the water board came and dug the cable up.’
Peals of laughter.
Rain gave Holly a couple of paragraphs.
Holly sounded disappointed.
‘Is that all?’
‘No, but it's all that's fit to print.’
She left Holly to wonder about that, and rang off.
Oliver said: ‘What did Cobalt want?’
‘Someone's tipped him off that Sabine Jourdain was painting Durance's pictures.
He wanted to know whether that was as wild as it seemed.’
‘Fancy him asking you.
Why didn't he keep it to himself?’
‘I was the quickest way of checking it.
He wouldn't want to waste his time chasing that story if I'd already done it, and I can get a story into print more quickly than the British magazines he supplies.
Even so…’
Oliver nodded.
‘Even so, you didn't help him.
You didn't confirm it.’
‘I need to know a bit more.
With Tim here I couldn't ask him.’
She began to dial a Nice number.
While it rang she said: ‘There was something else, too.
He's found Barbara Coleman.’
Oliver rolled his eyes.
He was weary of Barbara Coleman and her elusive behaviour.
After a minute or two Rain replaced the receiver.
‘No answer.
He must have gone out.’
‘Good,’ said Oliver.
‘Then we can finish packing and go to the airport.
If you want to phone Cobalt you can do it easily enough from London.’
‘You wanted a day in Nice.
I can offer you half a day and then we can take the later flight.’
Then: ‘Better still, let's dash off to Nice now and have one more night here.’
He was willing to be persuaded.
‘But supposing Cobalt isn't at his flat?’
‘I know where I can find him around lunchtime.’
Minutes later they were on their way in high good humour, Oliver thumbing a guidebook and choosing the things he wanted to see.
‘If you can find Cobalt quickly and finish with him equally quickly, then you'll be able to come along,’ he offered.
‘I'll probably have to pump him, he refused to be explicit on the phone so I don't think he's keen to tell me everything.
If you want to do all the things on your list you'll have to do some alone.’
Oliver made a disgruntled sound.
However quick she was he always thought her work took too long and prevented them doing the more pleasurable things he had in mind.
But he was not going to quibble about it this time.
The excellent weather had brought out more sun-seekers and it was harder than before to find a parking space in Nice.
In the end Rain had to leave the car some way from the rue de  Rivoli.
Oliver was not displeased.
The walk meant he would be able to claim in future that he had promenaded on the Promenade des Anglais.
Cobalt was not home.
Rain and Oliver went back down the badly lit stairs.
Out of doors it was too bright to see, the sun brilliant in contrast to the interior.
A woman with a toy poodle grumbled as Oliver trod on it.
They left her complaining volubly about foreigners, the dog yapping his agreement.
Rain's memory guided her to the cafe where she had sat with Cobalt.
He was there, straight red hair pale in sunlight, blue eyes masked by dark glasses.
He was in shirtsleeves, his jacket crumpled on a chair beside him.
On the table was a nearly empty glass.
The waiter watched it, ready for his cue to bring another drink.
‘I came instead of phoning,’ Rain explained and introduced Oliver.
The waiter swooped.
Rain ordered a citronnade.
She said: ‘I couldn't talk when you called, James, because Tarquin Poulteney-Crosse — better known as Tim — was with us.
But I'd love to hear what you know about Sabine Jourdain and where Barbara Coleman is.’
The sun was so strong, it cast the colour of her mauve blouse on to her skin.
Cobalt's mouth curved in his mischievous smile although she could only see her reflection in his lenses.
‘In exchange I'd love to hear what you know about Sabine Jourdain painting for Durance.
You didn't sound amazed on the phone, therefore I'm led to believe you knew.’
‘I don't know nearly enough.
Enough to put together a good story but not enough to rush into print with it.’
Cobalt nodded, indicating this was what he had suspected.
He said: ‘Are we going to work together on this?’
She hesitated.
She did not know how good his contacts were, whether he had sufficient grasp of the art world to interpret the information he might uncover.
She trusted him to look after the Post's interests before he sold the story to any other outlets, but she did not know whether she could trust him with the story.
Oliver filled the gap.
‘If you two are working together you've only got today to do it.
We're flying home tomorrow.’
Rain demurred.
‘That's the latest plan,’ she said to Cobalt.
‘I'd stayed to look for the aristocratic drop-out.
Now he's found, but if there's a hope of getting to the truth about Sabine Jourdain in the next day or two I could linger.’
Out of the corner of her eye she saw Oliver move irritably.
Then he beckoned the waiter and ordered more drinks.
Cobalt said to her: ‘I should think the Post could afford to pay to keep you here a few more days.’
‘It's costing next to nothing,’ she said, and explained where they were staying.
Oliver said: ‘We call it Operation Shoestring.’
Cobalt gave a short laugh which became a nagging cough.
When he recovered he had decided to stop fencing.
‘There's a man I know — his name is Georges — who has a job at the Hotel Negresco.
He phones me from time to time when he has heard something he thinks will be of use to me.
It's generally rubbish, but every so often there's a story, so I always listen to him.’
Cobalt took a sip from his glass, then resumed: ‘Yesterday he rang with a yarn about some trouble at the hotel.
Apparently one of the reception clerks, a man called Edouard, turned up at work with a black eye and other signs of having been in a good fight.
Edouard was sent back home, they couldn't have him at work looking like that.’
He turned away to greet a man slouching by.
Then: ‘Georges said Edouard told his colleagues he'd been attacked in the street the night before by some youths he didn't know.
A plausible story, but then Edouard spoiled it by resisting going home.’
Oliver said: ‘Perhaps he wasn't going to get paid if he didn't work.’
‘That wasn't the reason.
He was afraid to go home.
He passed the day skulking around cafes, and when Georges met him by chance later on he confessed he'd been beaten up in his flat because he'd agreed to do a favour for someone and it had gone wrong.
Edouard said he'd been obliged to keep an elderly English woman there for a few days, but she'd been slipping out.’
‘Barbara Coleman!’
Rain was alarmed at this proof of what the woman had told her.
‘I went to the flat and found Barbara Coleman.’
‘Was she all right?’
Rain asked.
‘She hadn't been harmed, but she said Edouard was attacked while she was there and it had been done as a warning to her.
She didn't see the men who did it.
She believes she must stay out of sight or something similar will happen to her.’
Rain groaned.
‘I met her.
I let her go back to that flat.’
Oliver came to her defence.
‘Yes, but you didn't entirely believe her story, did you?’
She said: ‘Don't you think that makes it worse?’
Cobalt coughed again.
They waited.
He told them what Barbara Coleman had said about Sabine Jourdain and Durance.
It was the same as she had told Rain.
‘You mustn't go to her, Rain,’ said Oliver.
‘Unless you can be certain she'll come away with you, you mustn't go.
Somebody could be hurt.’
‘She won't leave,’ said Cobalt.
‘Don't you think I tried to make her come with me?
She refused.
She was sure it would get Edouard and his wife into trouble, and she kept saying it was only for another day or two.’
Rain said: ‘I think that means until I leave for London.’
‘There you are,’ said Oliver, triumphant.
‘The sooner we go the better for everyone.’
There was an uncomfortable pause during which he wondered what had caused it.
Eventually Rain said: ‘Barbara Coleman has been threatened, Edouard has been beaten up and Sabine Jourdain has been murdered — and all because no one is to know she was the painter and not Durance.’
Cobalt's freckled forehead creased.
‘Is there so much money in it that people would go to those lengths?
I don't know much about art but it seems so…extreme.’
It was an echo of Rain's own words to Barbara Coleman but she said: ‘The art world can be extreme, and Durance hasn't declined as many old artists decline.
There's always been a market.’
Cobalt fingered his empty glass.
‘Would anyone actually kill to keep those prices high?’
‘I'm sure someone already has,’ Rain said, and thought of Tim and Joseph and wondered how they were linked in murder.
Cobalt said: ‘There was nothing in the papers about Sabine Jourdain's death being connected with the paintings.
My police contacts say it's thought she was the victim of a random attack by a thief.’
Rain told him she had heard nothing to suggest the police were suspicious about the provenance of the paintings.
She mentioned Foucard's visits.
Between them Rain and Oliver told Cobalt almost all they knew about the night of the murder and about the paintings.
Oliver asked Cobalt whether Barbara Coleman had not told him she suspected Joseph of murder.
Rain had decided to keep that to herself a while longer.
Cobalt said: ‘She didn't give me a name, but she said her friend was killed by ‘the Americans’.
I couldn't get her to say more.
I'd told her I worked for the Post and she said she'd already told Rain all about it.’
He fumbled in his jacket pocket, took out a notebook and wrote a few lines on a page which he tore out and gave to Rain.
‘That's where she is, if you change your mind about calling on her.’
A man stopped to speak to Cobalt.
He broke into the discussion for so long that Rain grew impatient.
She hoped that when he left she and Cobalt could decide how to divide the work on the story.
There were several strands to pursue.
The one which was uppermost in her mind was Maurin.
Barbara Coleman had said Maurin was responsible for keeping her hidden, and therefore the men who attacked Edouard could have been acting for him.
The deduction sickened Rain.
What Cobalt reported confirmed the man had a dangerous side.
Rain could not leave the Maurin strand to Cobalt.
She must tackle him herself, although there was someone else she wanted to see first.
To her annoyance Oliver and Cobalt appeared settled for an afternoon's drinking.
Neither of them showed any inclination to do other than sit outside the café in the sunshine, and Oliver had shifted the conversation far away from the Durances and murder.
‘If you stay here much longer you won't have time for all that sightseeing,’ she warned Oliver.
But it was a waste of breath.
‘You carry on,’ he said.
‘We'll be here for a while yet.’
She could see that.
She asked, a shade tartly, where she might expect to meet them again.
Cobalt was heading for a renewal of the morning's hangover, Oliver would expect to head for Antibes with her later.
Oliver attempted some arrangements.
Cobalt suggested they meet up at his flat in the early evening.
Rain accepted that.
When she left them she walked to the Hotel Negresco.
She saw her man straight away.
One of the clerks wore dark glasses and she could guess why.
She caught his attention, asked whether he was Edouard and lived at the address Cobalt had given her.
‘It's all right,’ she said, hoping it was.
She told him her name, what she wanted.
He shook his head.
‘No, I didn't recognize the men who came to my flat.’
‘Do you know who sent them?’
He made an empty gesture.
She said: ‘I understand Philippe Maurin arranged for Barbara Coleman to stay at your flat.
Don't you think he could have sent them?’
‘Perhaps he did, perhaps not.’
‘What reason did Maurin give for asking you to take in Barbara Coleman?’
Edouard shook his head, he began to back away.
Rain raised her voice a fraction.
He did not want her to do that, to draw the attention of his colleagues.
She said: ‘He must have given you a reason.’
The clerk came closer, his voice lower than before.
‘It was a favour, a private arrangement.
I was asked to be discreet.
I knew what that meant.
I would be paid well but I had to keep my mouth shut.’
‘Did you know him before this?’
‘Slightly.
My wife used to work at his house.
Look, I'm trying to do what he said.
It was supposed to be for just a day, or maybe two, but it has already been a week…’
‘…and you kept your mouth shut but you were beaten up  and threatened with worse.
Why shield people who've treated you like that?’
His colleagues were watching, pretending not to.
‘Look,’ he said, ‘I'm trying to protect my wife and myself.
I'm not interested in protecting anybody else.
I wish I'd never taken Maurin's money, but all I can do now is keep quiet and wait for it to end.’
‘If you've got the money and it was for a favour lasting a day or two, then why don't you just tell him the arrangement is ended and let Barbara Coleman leave?’
He smiled at her naivety.
‘I've got half, I get paid the rest when it's over.
That's one answer.
The other is that I don't wish any harm to come to Miss Coleman and she may be safer where she is until they say she's free to go.’
‘They?
I thought we were talking about one man, Philippe Maurin?’
‘Surely he isn't doing this on his own?
Why is he hiding the old woman?
He told me before she came that she was asking for somewhere secret to stay for a short time.
Now I know that's a lie, and she only stays because she's afraid for me and my wife.
My wife is sure Maurin's not the type of man to be violent and that the men who came weren't sent by him.’
‘By whom, then?’
Another empty gesture with his hands.
Rain said: ‘Can you describe the men?’
But all she got were what Foucard would have called stereotype Frenchmen, and Denis was not there to laugh.
Rain took a sheet of paper from the reception desk and wrote on it her name and phone number in Antibes.
‘I'm staying here, at least until tomorrow.
If you remember anything you can tell me, please ring.’
He folded the paper and tucked it into his pocket.
Some tourists were booking in, she could not detain Edouard longer.
She stood in the foyer for a few minutes, jotting into her notebook the things he had told her.
Then she went out into the heat.
She had taken a very few steps when she heard someone running up behind her.
She tingled with apprehension but when she looked back it was Edouard.
‘There is this for you,’ he said, thrusting out an envelope.
‘I am sorry, I didn't remember it while we were talking.’
He hurried back to the hotel, trying to rush but also to keep up the appearance of quiet dignity his employers would expect of him.
The envelope was typed with Rain's initial and surname.
On the sheet of paper inside she read the baldest message.
‘Chagall.
4.00.
B.C.’
She was so pleased to learn that Barbara Coleman was eager to talk to her again, and that she had been given the perfect reason for spending part of her day revelling in Chagall's colour, that she smiled as she cut inland towards Maurin's gallery.
19
Through the window of the gallery in the rue de France Rain Morgan saw Maurin had company.
An expensive-looking man in a black coat with a velvet collar was appraising a painting.
Maurin was absorbed in his client and did not see Rain enter.
It was a full half minute before he turned his head to see who his next potential customer might be.
He did not show disappointment that it was a mere journalist and one who was more interested in a dead artist whose work he had never handled.
He inclined his head gracefully.
She returned the greeting with a sweet smile.
She hoped it would throw Maurin off guard, persuade him she had come for a little of his flirtatious conversation at the least, a few more questions about Durance and Sabine Jourdain at the most.
He would not be prepared when she asked him why he had sent two men to beat up a pathetic hotel clerk and frighten a vulnerable old woman.
He was not.
He came as near to gaping as he would allow himself.
His rich client had barely left the salon before Rain lobbed him her questions and waited for his painful answers.
He floundered, recovered and said: ‘Rain, you have misunderstood something.
You must let me explain.’
She folded her arms, leaned against a table.
‘By all means, please do.’
She tried not to sound triumphant.
She had tripped him and she enjoyed the feeling, but she must not be triumphant.
She had been taken in by the man, accepting him as charming company when they first met, playing along with his flattering nonsense.
If Oliver had not come to France  with her the playing might have gone further.
It embarrassed her to remember the way Maurin had attracted her but she must not let that embarrassment colour the way she acted now.
He smiled his disarming smile.
She declined to be disarmed.
He said: ‘Barbara Coleman is what you English call a chatterbox.
If she is not prevented from chattering she could cause herself much trouble.’
‘You mean her chattering could cause someone else much trouble and he doesn't want to risk that.’
He gave the perfect Gallic shrug.
She almost wished Oliver were there to see how it should be done.
He said: ‘I am trying to explain.
You came here once before asking questions and perhaps I did not give you the best answers.’
She was confident that was true.
She said: ‘I was asking you then about the changes — the developments, as you called them — in Durance's work.
Now I believe Durance didn't paint those pictures.
Perhaps he did some of the work on them, but I don't believe he did everything sold under his name.’
He was indignant.
‘You are accusing me of selling fakes?’
‘Not that.
Not exactly.
But I think Sabine Jourdain did most of the work on the paintings and I think you knew it.’
Maurin made an elaborate gesture, flinging a hand to his brow.
Rain was reminded of amateur opera companies, of Madeleine Corley.
She said: ‘If there's another explanation I'd love to hear it.’
Maurin looked at his slim gold wrist watch.
‘Perhaps we should go somewhere and talk quietly and sensibly about this.’
She knew it would not be sensible to go anywhere quiet with him.
She said: ‘Where do you suggest?’ hoping the answer would be somewhere public and safe.
He said they should go upstairs to the room above the gallery, and she could think of no way of refusing.
He locked the front door and up they went.
The first floor was cool, the light low.
When he threw open shutters to let in air and light, pictures sprang at her from the walls.
Maurin brought an already opened bottle of wine.
It  was chilled, enticing.
She drank sparingly.
He said: ‘Now, let me try to explain.’
And tried.
He said that Sabine Jourdain had always worked on the paintings with her maître and that over the years the amount she did varied.
The ideas were always Durance's, he always initiated the paintings and when his hands permitted he carried out the work, but as he had become increasingly crippled the execution had been left more and more to his protégée.
He treated Rain to another of his smiles.
‘I do not need to explain to you that this is often how artists work.
You will already know that Henry Moore does not himself chip away at his piece of stone…’
It was a seductive argument.
Rain made an effort and said it was a specious one.
‘Sabine Jourdain decided to call a halt to this arrangement, didn't she?
She intended to bring the matter into the open.’
Maurin almost laughed.
‘You may believe that if you wish.
I certainly cannot stop you and she is not here to ask.’
‘She was murdered before she could talk about it.’
He said: ‘Sabine Jourdain had years to talk about it if she wished to do so.
No, Sabine Jourdain fell among thieves while she was walking through the harbour.
She was there because you had not kept your appointment with her and so she had to make her own way home in the dark.’
He had scored a point and she knew he knew it.
He had always known how to handle her: the right flattering remark, the careful timing of the smiles.
Before she could think how to respond without sounding defensive he was saying: ‘You are angry with yourself, remorseful because if you had not been late this thing would never have happened.
I understand that.
If it were me I should want to…’
He made a gesture indicating helplessness.
‘But it is not fair that your remorse should be turned in the direction of seeking someone else to blame.’
She felt her skin burn, it was intolerable to have to listen to this.
A telephone rang.
Maurin stood, elegant near the window, and listened to his caller.
His words gave no clue what the call was about.
He rang off.
Then he said to Rain: ‘You could say I have been trying to help Barbara Coleman, helping her to keep out of trouble.
Soon she will be back at home and all this will be forgotten.’
Rain's discomfort gave way to anger.
‘'All this will be forgotten!’
Aren't you forgetting something?
That her friend is dead?’
‘Certainly I cannot forget that.
You have indicated to me yourself that since she is dead there will be no more Durances for me to sell.
None of the same calibre, I mean.
Durance himself may manage something once in a while, but there is no one who can help him achieve those masterpieces in the way that Jourdain did.
No one else was of the same mind as he.
He was able to feed his ideas through her as other artists use a brush or a pencil.’
‘She was a tool.
She was used by him.
Is it any wonder she was ready to say so and make an end of it?’
Maurin said with energy: ‘You can prove nothing.
You may believe what you choose but I ask you to accept that you are wrong on that point.
Sabine Jourdain would never have betrayed Marius Durance.’
‘How can you be so sure?’
She was interested in his change of tone.
It was as sharp as Tim's had been when Oliver accused him of stealing.
‘Rain, you must know how I could know.
I was as close to those two as anyone.’
‘Except Barbara Coleman, perhaps.’
He agreed with a bow of the head.
‘That brings us back to Miss Coleman.
You will want to know when she can go home.’
‘First I would like to know why it was necessary to send two men to the flat to attack the hotel clerk.’
He assumed an expression of utmost sincerity.
She fought against believing in it.
‘I have heard nothing of this until you came into my gallery a quarter of an hour ago and accused me.
Why should I be organizing the beating up of hotel clerks?
Or the intimidation of old ladies?
Do you really think I am a man to do such things?’
She could not choose an answer.
At that moment it was easier to be persuaded of his innocence, his scathing rejection  of violence.
But she knew other things about him.
She said: ‘Edouard was beaten up on someone's orders.
He is walking about Nice with dark glasses and bruises.
Barbara Coleman is at his flat and not allowed home…’
‘I have told you, she is there for her protection.
Perhaps I made a miscalculation.
Perhaps that was not the ideal place to lodge her.
At the time I had to find somewhere quickly and Edouard agreed to it.
I have told you, Rain, I was trying to put her somewhere safe and secret for her own safety.
She is a painter, she is a friend of Sabine Jourdain and of Durance.
I have known Barbara Coleman for years.
Why is it odd that I should try to help her when she is in difficulties?’
Put like that it was plausible.
Rain returned to an earlier approach.
‘You haven't said whom you are protecting her from.’
He parried with a familiar answer.
‘From herself, of course.’
The conversation had come full circle.
Rain wanted to persist but she had an appointment to keep.
Maurin would be at the gallery any other time she wanted him.
Barbara Coleman might not be at the museum again.
Reluctantly Rain left and drove to Cimiez and the museum.
On the way she thought about Maurin.
He had not told her all he knew, she was sure of that, but he had confirmed her deduction about the provenance of the Durance paintings although he had stressed she could prove nothing.
She thought about Barbara Coleman and her ill-treatment at Maurin's hands.
She had been physically hurt when she was dragged from the villa and she had been held captive ever since.
How did this balance against Maurin's tenderness with Durance?
And if it was true that Sabine Jourdain would never have betrayed Durance, why was she killed?
Was it possible the police version (which Cobalt had heard and Maurin had repeated) was correct and the killing was a random attack by a thief on a passer-by?
Rain could try and get some answers from Barbara Coleman when they held their whispered conversation before Chagall's windows, but she must make up her own mind about Maurin's character.
She could put him into the  scale alongside Joseph and Tarquin Poulteney-Crosse whom she believed culpable of murder, or she could give him the benefit of the doubt.
Guiltily, she knew she wanted to exonerate him, and that her reasons were unworthy.
If he were not attractive, if he had not attracted her, she might be less eager to acquit him.
She tried to picture him looking like a French version of Cobalt, for whom she felt no physical attraction at all, and then she tried to calculate whether, in that guise, he was not a more likely murderer.
She reached the Chagall Museum before she had her answer.
The museum was more crowded than on her previous visit, alive with the subdued noise of a lot of people trying to make no sound.
She went to the suffused blue light of the room with the stained glass windows.
Rain took the seat she had sat in before, in the deepest shadow the room afforded.
But this time it would be different, this time she was not going to obey any silly rules.
She was going to insist on driving the woman away from Nice, because Barbara Coleman must be taken out of the clutches of Maurin and anybody else who interfered with her liberty.
Rain had no clear idea what to do with her, apart from taking her to the Villa Fiesole, and she was already seeing the warped logic of Edouard's argument: Barbara Coleman might be safer where she was.
But on the other hand, she might not.
There was a reasonable case to be made out for keeping her away from Nice.
Rain wondered whether she had the cheek to install her in the Antibes flat borrowed from her newspaper colleague.
People came and went as she sat thinking about this.
They made shadowy forms that lowered themselves into seats, sat transfixed for a while and then rose and glided.away.
Four o'clock had passed, Barbara Coleman had not arrived.
Patiently Rain concentrated on the windows, instead of being alert to every sound.
And then there was a commotion: raucous voices, the tramping of many feet, and a deep German voice addressing a party of tourists.
The noise was some way off, it rose and fell as the guide led his troop through the rooms of paintings.
Eventually they  must reach the windows.
Rain comforted herself that however disruptive they were, they would not be in there long because they were dealing with everything else with extraordinary speed.
She let the light and colour soothe her.
Even when the German guide ushered his party into the room for his top-of-the-voice lecture, the spell was unbroken.
Following his instruction, his party hastened to the windows.
There were twenty of them, creating a hubbub, looking for the prosaic detail of construction rather than letting themselves be beguiled by the beauty of the creation.
And as their noise surged, discordant as the first squall of wind on a calm day, Rain Morgan sensed a figure in the row behind her.
Before she could turn she felt something about her throat.
Chagall's blue intensity faded to darkness.
She lost consciousness.
20
She was lying on a hard surface.
There was the pain of light in her eyes and far off voices whose words were incomprehensible.
She did not know where she was or what had happened.
She shut her eyes and breathed painfully.
People were all around her but she felt distant.
Someone was pulling at her clothes, a hand shook her shoulder, and then a thumb rolled back her eyelid.
She did not understand why they should be doing this and her failure to understand reminded her of something.
She snatched at the memory but it was too obscure.
All she had was the image of a woman lying on the ground and people desperate to help her.
The woman had not responded.
She had lain unmoving in the midst of their activity.
The light hurt Rain's eyes.
She dragged her head away.
There was an angry moan as she did so and a pain in her chest, which made her wonder whether the moan had not been her own.
The thumb left her eye and the lid snapped shut against the light.
The voices changed key.
She heard the fear in them subside.
She wanted to be left alone just as she was, wherever she was, but the people would not leave her alone.
They were speaking words she could not grasp but now they were speaking them to her rather than to each other and their tone was sympathetic, cajoling.
Through them there cut another, familiar, voice.
She opened her eyes again and saw, hazily at first, Oliver.
‘She's all right,’ he was saying.
‘But don't crowd her, she needs air.’
No one took any notice of him.
He stroked her face.
‘You are all right, aren't you?’
He needed her confirmation.
She managed the slightest nod.
She tried to frame a question.
Oliver said: ‘Don't worry about it yet.
I'll tell you what happened once we get out of here.
Do you think you can sit up?
It might encourage some of them to lose interest and go away.’
She grunted and let him help her sit.
Someone had fetched a glass of water, the worldwide response to apparent catastrophe.
Oliver held the glass as she drank.
There were murmurs of approval from the onlookers.
Her mind cleared rapidly.
She felt her strength returning, but there was pain in her eyes, chest and throat.
She knew now why the voices had been unintelligible: they were speaking in French.
Her mind was still too lazy to concentrate on what they were saying.
She recognized a couple of the museum staff but the rest who stared were strangers.
She clung to Oliver's hand.
‘I think I can stand now.’
He helped her up.
Her legs were weak but she could walk.
He said: ‘We'll go out to the car, if you think you can walk that far.’
‘I'm fine.’
She sounded far from it.
She smiled a faint smile for the people who hung around waiting for more drama.
Oliver said: ‘You don't have to say anything.
I haven't told them you speak French and they've discovered I don't.’
As they started to move off a woman touched Oliver's arm and handed him Rain's shoulder bag.
Faces followed them as they went slowly towards the museum exit and out into the sunlight.
It was exceedingly hot inside the car.
They sat there with the door open to let the temperature drop before driving off.
Oliver looked around.
There was no one else about.
‘Now,’ he said, ‘tell me what the hell happened in there.’
She shook her head, wished she had not because it hurt.
‘I can't remember.’
‘I can tell you this much: someone tried to garotte you and almost succeeded.’
There was silence while she absorbed that.
She received random bits of memory, tried them in different patterns, hoping to make sense.
She said: ‘I remember looking at the windows, and German tourists coming in and then…’
But she did not know what came next.
Oliver said: ‘I hope you are all right.
There was a man who spoke a bit of English and he said they were going to send for a doctor, but I told them you suffered from fits and you'd be all right.’
‘You told them what!’
Even for one of Oliver's expedient fictions it was extreme.
‘I had to say something.
It was all a bit of a shock.’
She put a hand to her aching throat.
‘Yes,’ she said with irony.
‘If it had been anything else then a doctor would have been a sensible idea, but once somebody stops strangling you, you recover, don't you?’
‘I don't know.
I've never been throttled before.’
‘Well, you do.
Once the air passages are freed you must recover.’
‘How did you know someone had been strangling me if everyone else in there was willing to believe I'd had a fit?’
Oliver dangled a piece of cord in front of her.
There was a small loop at one end.
‘Because when I found you I took this from around your throat.’
She shuddered and turned away.
He said: ‘You're not going to be sick, are you?’
‘I haven't got the energy.’
Then: ‘Could you put that thing away?
I'd rather not think about it yet.’
‘Sorry.
I thought it might surprise your memory.’
‘Oh, it surprised me, but I haven't seen it before.’
He changed direction.
‘Why were you at the gallery?’
‘Perhaps I wanted to see the windows again.
You know I did, I was entranced by them the other day.
But how did you find me here?’
‘That’, said Oliver, ‘is a curious tale.
I was sightseeing after leaving Cobalt at the café.
He said he was going to go back to his flat.
Do you remember we all said we'd meet there?’
‘Yes.
It's not time yet, is it?’
‘Not yet.
Well, I was wandering around looking for a rococo palace…’
‘The Palais Lascari.’
‘That's the one.
I didn't find it, but instead I found Maurin.
He came rushing out of an alleyway just ahead of me but he didn't see me.
He was making for a taxi, which might well have been waiting for him.
He wrenched open the door and gave some instructions to the driver.
All I understood was one word: Chagall.’
‘You came out of curiosity?’
‘I'd wanted to see it of course, but I also wondered why he was so desperate to get here.
It's not as though he's a tourist with only a few hours.
Maurin can visit the museum any time he likes.’
‘Did you see him when you got here?’
She wanted to hear Oliver say no, for it all to be a mistake.
‘No,’ he said.
‘But Maurin had gone roaring off in a taxi and I'd had to find the bus stop and so I didn't seriously expect to.
Instead, I found your car outside.
I went straight to the stained glass windows thinking I'd be sure to find you there.
I'd hardly gone into the room when there was a cry as a woman found you slumped in a seat.’
‘Didn't she see the cord around my neck?’
‘Apparently not.
She couldn't lift you so she stepped back for me to do it.
I saw the cord and took it off and put it in my pocket.
It was just a reflex — I knew it had to come off and I didn't want them all fussing about it.
Some of the men carried you out into the light in the gallery.’
Rain said she found it very hard to believe Maurin responsible.
Oliver said: ‘He's involved in the deception over the Durances and he's abducted Barbara Coleman to keep her quiet about it.
Perhaps he's found out how much you know.’
‘I told him myself.’
‘Well, there you are.
He's protecting the secret of the Durances.
He tried to kill you and that makes it look very much as though he's the person who killed Sabine Jourdain.’
People were coming from the museum, some looking with open curiosity at Rain and Oliver.
Oliver said: ‘We have a  small problem.
It's not much after what you've just been through, but I'd hate to end up in a French jail and, as I forgot my licence, I'm not insured to move this car.’
She smiled.
However big the disasters, the small problems always turned up, too.
‘I'll manage.’
‘We could get a bus or a taxi into Nice…’
But she was thinking about something else.
‘Oliver, how did you get into this car?
You didn't take the keys from my bag, did you?’
‘The car was unlocked, you must have left it unlocked.’
She demurred.
It would be breaking the habit of a lifetime.
She opened her bag and sifted the contents, trying to discover whether it had been searched.
Her notebook was there, the piece of paper Cobalt had given her with Barbara Coleman's Nice address was there, everything she could recall was there except the keys.
Checking her skirt pockets, she came up with the car keys.
She found something else, too: an envelope with her name on it.
Another piece of memory slotted into position.
‘This is why I came here this afternoon.’
He read out: ‘'Chagall. 4.00.
B.C.’ Where did this come from?’
She gave a rueful smile.
‘When I was given it I believed it came from Barbara Coleman.
Now it's clear it didn't.’
She told him about her easy acceptance that there was a repeated message from Barbara Coleman.
‘I was so keen to meet her again I didn't challenge this at all.
I didn't wonder why she'd taken to using a typewriter when her last messages to me were handwritten, and I didn't ask myself how Edouard could have talked to me all that time without mentioning there was an envelope for me.’
‘You think he tapped this out as soon as you left the desk and then ran after you with it?’
‘Yes.
He must have read her note to me the other day, because this is just a truncated version of it.
Of course he was the messenger who took the note to the hotel.
Who likelier?
She's living in his flat and he's working at the hotel.
She must have told him I kept the appointment.’
‘I thought he was supposed to be incarcerating her, not arranging her social life.’
Rain agreed it was very puzzling.
Oliver went on: ‘He doesn't need to be a linguist to concoct this.
It's a bilingual message, isn't it?’
Rain started the car.
She said: ‘We ought to go straight to meet Cobalt but there are other things I want first.’
‘Such as?’
‘A steadying drink, and to know who tried to kill me.’
‘The first,’ said Oliver, ‘should be easy.’
With uncharacteristic slowness Rain drove into Nice.
She kept away from the rue de Rivoli and they went into a café near the port.
Rain fingered her throat.
‘There's sure to be some bruising, isn't there?’
‘We'll get you a scarf.’
He looked at her with concern, seeing how strained she was.
It would not do to ask her to drive back to Antibes that evening.
She needed rest and time to get over the shock.
Rain said: ‘I don't want to tell Cobalt about this.
Does that sound absurd?’
‘No.
If you'd prefer, we don't even have to see him.
We could phone and say we've changed our plans.
Rain, let's book into a hotel in Nice for tonight.’
He saw her relief.
‘I don't relish the drive, but we could get back by train.’
‘And then we'd have to come here tomorrow to deal with the car.
It's not worth the effort.
We'll just find a hotel and have a quiet meal somewhere and then you can get to bed early.
You'll be much fitter by the morning.’
But she was shaking her head.
‘No, I want to see Cobalt as we arranged.
After that we can go to a hotel and so on, but I think I should see him.’
‘But why?’
‘Because…’
She could not explain.
It was only partly that she disliked breaking arrangements, more that she wanted to let Cobalt see she was alive and well.
‘If he hears rumours about what happened at the museum I want him to know that nothing terrible happened after all.’
‘We'll see him and not mention anything about it.’
‘Yes.
I don't think we need say we went there, do you?’
‘What if he asks where we were?’
She altered her plan.
‘Why don't you say you went to the Chagall museum?
I can mention that I spoke to Maurin at his gallery.’
There was something wrong about her scheme but she could not clarify what it was.
She tried, saying: ‘On the other hand, perhaps he ought to be told.
Warned, if you like.’
‘Warned?
You think the same thing could happen to him if he pursues the story?’
‘Yes.’
But that was not quite what she meant.
Deep down she did not believe Cobalt needed to be warned about things.
She was still trying to cope with the matter when Oliver said they ought to leave if they were to meet him as planned.
On the way they stopped for Rain to buy a silk scarf which complemented her blouse.
No one would have guessed she was wearing it for any other reason.
Once more they mounted the dark steps of the building in the rue de Rivoli and once more the lift was motionless and the stairway light failed at the most inconvenient moments.
Cobalt showed them into his sitting room.
Rain recognized the stale smell, and her glance went to the half-open shutters.
She wanted to throw them wide and let in as much air as possible, as Cobalt had done on her earlier visit.
But the room was not well lit and she thought it wiser to live in the shadows as she did not want to explain why she looked ill.
‘Find yourselves somewhere to sit,’ said Cobalt with a wave towards the clutter that obscured most of the furniture.
‘What'll you have to drink?
Wine?’
‘Thanks,’ Oliver called after him as Cobalt headed for the kitchen.
Rain gave Oliver a warning look.
She could not face a repetition of the morning session.
Oliver assumed an expression of extreme penitence.
Rain looked at the litter of newspapers, discarded clothes, sheets of paper covered with Cobalt's messy typing.
The Great Novel was still on the table, but had made no progress since she last saw it.
Involuntarily she found herself going  out on to the balcony for air, rather than clearing a space to sit.
She gripped the rail and looked down the street.
‘A sea view?’ asked Oliver, joking.
‘Actually there is.
Come and be convinced.’
He followed her out and stared where she pointed.
In the background there was the sound of Cobalt's doorbell but there was too much noise from the street below for them to hear any more.
After a few minutes a young woman came out of the street door below them and walked away.
Possibly Cobalt's caller had gone.
Rain went back into the sitting room expecting to see Cobalt there.
The room was empty.
She wandered around it for a minute until she realized it was odd there were no sounds from him.
She called his name.
‘James?’
But he did not answer.
Oliver came in from the balcony.
‘Where's he got to?’
They went into the passage.
There were four other doors off it.
Rain looked into the kitchen.
A bottle of wine stood open, half-used, on the table, three glasses beside it.
She put her head into the next room, an untidy and empty bathroom which looked as though the washbasin had not been cleaned for months.
Oliver and Rain exchanged troubled glances.
He pushed open the bedroom door.
An empty bottle stood beside the bed.
A pair of trousers flopped from a chair.
The bed was unmade.
Face down on the floor beside it, his light hair darkening with blood, lay Cobalt.
21
Oliver dragged Cobalt on to his back.
Cobalt groaned and mumbled and made it clear he was alive if far from well.
Rain felt her legs weaken and sank on to the edge of the bed.
‘This is terrible,’ she said.
Her voice was faint.
Rather more robustly Cobalt asked: ‘What hit me?’
It was a question Rain would have doubted if she had not been there to hear it.
Oliver picked up the empty bottle.
‘This, I should think.’
He peered at the end of it, wondering about bloodstains.
Cobalt sat up, swore and rubbed his head.
He inspected the blood that came off on his hand and swore again.
Oliver said: ‘Who hit you, James?’
Cobalt was struggling to his feet, muttering.
It sounded more like anger than injury.
He lurched out of the room.
From the bathroom they heard running water.
When he reappeared his hair was soaked, he had taken off his shirt and was carrying a large square of sticking plaster.
He held this out to Rain.
‘Let's see what your nursing is like.
Can you find the hole and plug it with this?’
‘I might if I could reach.
Sit down.’
They were back in the sitting room.
He cast around for a chair, shoved some papers aside with a foot and perched on the edge of an armchair.
Rain dabbed at the blood with a wad of paper handkerchiefs.
She was relieved the cut was small and not very deep although it was bleeding steadily.
She did her best with the sticking plaster.
‘You ought to get this looked at by a doctor if it doesn't stop bleeding soon.’
‘It'll be all right.’
‘But what happened?’
She was almost angry that he was taking it so calmly.
He actually laughed at her.
She stood there, the blood-soaked tissues in her hand, and he laughed at her.
Irritated she swept away, flushed the tissues down the lavatory and returned to hear Oliver pursuing her question.
Cobalt got up from his chair as though nothing had happened to put him off his stroke.
‘Let's have that wine, shall we?’
‘But, James…’
He met her in the doorway.
She was effectively barring his way.
He smiled that exasperating smile again.
‘You know how it is, Rain.
Occupational hazard.’
Gently he pushed her aside and went to fetch the wine.
When he carried the tray back he had already poured his own glass and drunk half of it.
He topped it up, then gestured to Oliver and said: ‘Help yourselves.’
Oliver poured glasses for himself and Rain.
Cobalt was ready for a refill.
Rain caught Oliver's eye.
She said to Cobalt: ‘How's the head?’
‘The wound is fine.
It hardly penetrated the hangover.’
He laughed loudly.
Oliver said: ‘Look, you don't want to treat a thing like this too lightly.
You were knocked out cold, and a head wound coupled with alcohol can be serious.’
‘Yes,’ said Cobalt and took another gulp.
‘Oh yes, I've covered inquests in my time, too.’
He adopted a stilted voice as though he were giving evidence.
‘The deceased was a well-nourished man in his mid-forties.
There was some evidence of organic degeneration caused by over-use of alcohol.
The fatal injury was a blow to the head, not a very heavy blow but the deceased had taken a substantial amount of alcohol in the hours before he suffered the injury, and the effect of alcohol is to increase the flow of blood to the brain so that, et cetera , et cetera , et cetera .
Therefore I give the cause of death as cerebral haemorrhage.’
He shot Rain a mischievous smile.
‘How am I doing?
Have I passed the memory test?
Would you like me to totter along a white line?
Would I be fit to cover World War Three for the Daily Post if it broke out right now?’
‘Oh yes,’ she conceded.
‘All of that, but you're drunk and you seem to have forgotten who came here just now and hit you.’
He reached for the bottle but Oliver got there first and pretended to be reading the label.
He said: ‘Who was it, James?’
‘I'll give you a description.
It was a short dark Frenchman.
I didn't see any more because there's no light in my passage and the light on the stairs was out.
And no, before either of you start making up theories, I didn't take him into the bedroom.
I don't know how I got in there.
So that ruins your idea that I was hit with the bottle standing beside the bed.
He couldn't have rushed passed me into the bedroom, seized the bottle as a convenient weapon — he couldn't have known it was there, anyway — and then dashed back out to hit me before dragging me…do you see what I'm saying?’
Oliver felt he was being ridiculed and tried not to look offended.
‘All right, so it wasn't the bottle by the bed.
What was it, then?’
Cobalt shook his head, which might have meant he didn't know or might have been admonishment for Oliver who was still holding the bottle of wine.
Cobalt leaned forward and took it from him.
Rain finished her glass.
‘If you're sure you're all right, James, we ought to be on our way.’
They had not told him they were not going back to Antibes and she saw no point in trying to talk to him about Maurin or Sabine Jourdain or Barbara Coleman while he was in this state.
‘I'm sure.’
He tipped the bottle up so that the last of the liquid flowed into his glass.
They stood to leave and as an afterthought Cobalt got up, too, and saw them to the door.
Rain wanted to say she would phone in the morning, or later that evening perhaps, to check that he was all right, but she guessed he would reject her concern.
The door closed between them.
Rain and Oliver began down the stairs.
The place felt more sinister than it had ever done before.
When the light went out, Rain had the suspicion they were not alone on the stairs, that someone was watching them, perhaps they actually passed close to a figure pressed into the shadows.
She found herself listening for breathing and when there was a shout from below her heart pounded, foolishly, because it was only the whoop of a homecoming child racing his brother into the building.
Rain and Oliver crossed the rue de Rivoli and looked up at Cobalt's flat.
Rain said: ‘I don't know whether to admire him or despise him.
Fancy being able to dismiss an incident like that!’
Oliver said he guessed it was partly because Cobalt had led the sort of life where being thumped over the head with a bottle was not a unique experience.
‘What's the other part?’
‘Sheer relief.
He was relieved to have got off so lightly.
When he opened the door and saw who'd come for him he didn't expect to be waking up at all.
A drop of blood and a headache would be sheer relief after that.’
Rain asked whether he had told Oliver much about his Fleet Street days, and Oliver could name some of the papers Cobalt had worked for.
‘I'd like to know a bit more,’ Rain said.
‘When we get home.’
‘Yes, of course.’
They booked into a hotel and Oliver suggested they eat at one of the restaurants in the old town.
It was quite close.
Rain rallied although she would have been happy to stay where she was, lying on the bed.
She wanted above all else to sleep and blot out the terrifying events of the day.
She adjusted the scarf to cover the bruises forming on her neck.
It was best, she decided, not to dwell on the thought that this evening was one she was not meant to see.
If there were to be nightmares, she could not control that; but she would not waste her waking time frightening herself with a terror which was past.
Many of the buildings in the old town were six storeys high and the lanes so narrow that all but pedestrians were banned.
Built for defence and coolness in a hot climate, the old town was a compact and charming maze for the modern tourist.
The restaurant was popular, with a good atmosphere.
At other times they might have drawn the evening out.
Instead they left early and began the walk to the hotel.
And then they spotted the Tunisian pedlar.
He came out of a restaurant, his bags bobbing on his arm as usual, and spoke to two men in a darkened doorway.
As Rain and Oliver approached the three shrank back, but when Rain looked round she saw the pedlar peering after her.
She clung to Oliver's arm.
‘He's watching us.’
‘So what?
We were watching him.
I expect he's trying to think where he saw us before.’
A few yards on they turned a corner and when she next looked back Rain saw the Tunisian again.
He was gaining on them.
She whispered: ‘I'm sure he's following us.
Let's hurry.’
But hurrying did no good.
Whenever she looked round the tall, robed figure was getting closer.
Oliver said he felt foolish running away and it would be best to slow and let the man pass.
Rain could not bring herself to put this to the test.
Oliver said: ‘We'll go into a bar until he's gone.’
The bar was crowded but they found a table in the centre, amidst noisy tourists.
Rain sat facing the door, and did not relax until she had seen the pedlar walk by.
She sighed.
‘Thank goodness, he's gone.’
Oliver patted her hand.
‘Of course he has, he wasn't really interested in us.
Why should he be?’
When the waiter came he ordered coffee.
‘I've no idea, but no idea either why he hit Tim two nights ago.
I've no idea why a lot of things have happened.’
Oliver squeezed her hand.
He thought she was overwrought and the best way of dealing with that was a good night's sleep.
He hoped it would not be too long before she was brave enough to leave the bar.
When the coffee came he started to talk about a detail at the restaurant they had just left.
Suddenly he stiffened.
Rain spun round and saw what he had seen.
The pedlar was behind her.
The bar had an entrance from another street and he had come in that way, threading between the tables, offering his goods, but with most of his attention on her.
She did not wait to see what he would do when he reached her.
With a gasp she was on her feet and pushing her way to the door.
Oliver dropped some cash on the table and rushed after her.
He caught her up outside and snatched at her arm.
‘Rain!’
‘He's coming!’ she said frantically.
‘No, he's not.
He's going around the tables with his bags, like he always does.’
‘Then why not the other bars?
Why the one we went into?’
‘You're being hysterical.
Why should he?’
His question trailed away as the pedlar burst out of the bar, saw them and ran forward.
Now Oliver was running, pulling Rain along.
Somewhere behind him the huge figure loped.
Oliver cast the occasional glance back.
The intensity on the man's face was all the persuasion he needed to increase his speed.
Oliver was convinced the man was closing the gap, he refused to think what might happen when he caught up with them.
The slap, slap, slap of the pedlar's sandals grew louder.
A group of Dutch tourists swarmed out of a restaurant behind Rain and Oliver and the pedlar lost ground.
‘Quick!’
Rain said, unnecessarily.
‘Down here.’
They took an alley which doubled back the way they had come and then they branched off it.
They slowed to give themselves a respite but realized in the succeeding moment that they had run into a dead end.
There were no bars to slip into, nothing but shuttered shops and a blank wall six storeys high.
There was no choice but to backtrack.
As they regained the other alley, they saw the pedlar pounding towards them.
They ran away, although this was taking them further into the old town when they had hoped to escape from it.
Again the gap between them was closing, again they used the cover of straggling tourists to disguise the direction they took.
They had a choice of alleys.
Rain said, exasperated, that each route led to the same point and that meant back to the Tunisian.
‘Then how the hell do we get out of this?’
Oliver demanded.
She knew he was feeling ridiculous to be running away  and cross not to have achieved it.
She made a helpless gesture.
And then a dreadful noise began.
Oliver leapt.
‘What's that?’
It was a cacophony of metallic sounds, a rattling, rumbling, roaring, high-pitched noise and it was growing even louder.
Oliver said: ‘It must be a vehicle.
I thought none were allowed in here.’
Rain hushed him.
She was working out where the sound was coming from.
‘This way.’
Oliver was close behind as she ran towards the pedlar, then cut off to the side.
Trundling along the lane they entered was a line of galvanized garbage trucks, empty and snaking on their rounds to collect the day's debris.
Rain raced down the lane to meet it, thrust herself into a doorway to let the head of the column pass, and drew Oliver in beside her.
She clambered over the side of the last truck and crouched down out of sight.
Oliver followed, his face a mixture of disgust, relief and amusement.
They were rattled and bounced as the tail of the column swung about, but they were safe.
In the end, they were safe.
When the trucks paused while negotiating a particularly tricky turn, and Rain recognized where they were and that it was a good place to be, they climbed out and took a short route out of the old town and back to the hotel.
By the time they reached their room they were laughing uncontrollably.
‘I thought you were exaggerating,’ Oliver admitted, ‘until I saw the menace in that fellow's eyes.’
‘I remember the moment when you decided to believe me.
It was when you began running faster than I was.’
She stretched out on the bed.
‘Why didn't you tell me you were going to jump into a refuse truck?’
‘Because you might have stopped me.
I knew if I got in you'd come too.
There wasn't time to argue about it.’
Oliver looked with distaste at his clothes.
‘Well, I'm never doing it again, just remember that, will you?’
‘You won't have to.
And don't make a fuss, you were lucky the trucks were empty.
Even if they'd been half full it would have been our only escape route.’
Oliver looked hard at her to see whether she could possibly be serious, but she had closed her eyes.
He was still wondering when he realized she had fallen asleep.
He sat quietly, thinking the thoughts he could not while she was awake.
He was reliving the harrowing moment when he discovered her unconscious, her neck in a ligature.
It seemed impossible that it had happened, but from his pocket he unwound the cord and let it dangle from his hand.
It was such a simple thing, but once the straight end was threaded through the loop to make a noose it became a murderous weapon.
The cord was the sort anybody might have.
What would it normally be used for?
Hanging a picture, he thought.
It would be ideal for that.
Rain stirred.
He wound the cord tightly and buried it in the bottom of his trouser pocket.
He did not feel he ought to throw it away but it must be kept from her sight.
He went to her, gently persuaded her to wake sufficiently to undress and get under the covers.
He helped her out of her things and put them on hangers so they would be less creased by morning.
Drawing the sheet up over her shoulders he saw how the bruising on her neck was developing.
He caught himself repeatedly checking that the door to the room was locked, the key in the lock so that another could not be inserted from outside.
He even checked the window.
But he did not feel silly about being so careful.
Sabine Jourdain had been shot, Barbara Coleman had been abducted, someone had tried to strangle Rain, the reception clerk and Cobalt had been beaten up, and Rain and he had been chased through a maze by a man with a ferocious determination on his face.
He lay awake for a long time looking for possible connections between the incidents and listening to Rain breathing.
22
They woke very early next day, sent down for coffee and sat talking in their room.
Rain appeared quite recovered, apart from the deepening bruises on her neck.
She sat in front of the mirror and wound the scarf to conceal them.
‘That,’ said Oliver, ‘was the work of a bungling amateur.’
She shot him an alarmed look.
‘Well, don't let's criticize him, it could have been fatal.’
‘I've been thinking about it.
A professional would have done the job properly.
You wouldn't have had a chance.’
‘Perhaps he was interrupted.
He could have panicked and run off.
People were wandering in and out of that room the whole time, he might have been seen.’
‘No one suggested it when you were found.
The man who spoke English didn't relay that to me.
No, I don't think your attacker was seen.
I think he was an amateur who either thought he'd succeeded or else was so nervous about what he was doing that he left knowing there hadn't been time to kill you.’
Rain felt sick as she listened to him.
Oliver said: ‘A real professional would probably have used a finer cord.
He'd have to pull it very tight and hold it there for about three minutes to make sure.
He could quite easily accomplish it in a public place of that sort because everyone's attention is drawn away from the area where you were sitting.
When one turns from gazing at those windows, it isn't very easy to see.’
‘What sort of string is it?’
‘Picture cord, I think.’
‘Have you still got it?’
‘Yes, but…’
‘It's all right.
I don't mind seeing it now.’
She was not convinced that was true.
He brought it out of his trouser pocket, held the straight end and let it uncoil in front of her until the loop swung down.
She swallowed hard, then stretched out her hand and took it.
She said: ‘Would it have been strong enough?’
‘The man who used it must have thought so.’
She fingered the cord, was reminded of the horrifying moment when she felt a constriction around her throat and the colours of the room receded.
She made an effort to sound relaxed.
‘It's new, isn't it?
The ends are cleanly cut, they haven't frayed and they haven't got dirty.
It looks as though somebody cut a length of it and set out to kill me with it.’
‘I doubt whether it would be much use as evidence if you went to the police.
Their forensic tests could probably prove it had been around your neck and in my pocket, but it's been badly mistreated as a piece of evidence.’
She smiled.
‘It would probably indicate to the police that you did it.
No, I don't see any purpose in reporting this.
All I want to do is collect our stuff from the flat and head for the airport.’
She returned the cord.
Oliver coiled it slowly in the palm of his hand.
He said: ‘Maurin asked the taxi driver to take him to the museum yesterday.
He'd have picture cord, wouldn't he?’
Rain refilled their cups.
‘He would, but so would countless other people in Nice.
If Maurin wanted to kill me, surely he wouldn't attempt it in a public place where he might be recognized.’
She was shocked how easy it was becoming to imagine the people around her guilty of murder: Joseph, Tim, and now Maurin.
Oliver said: ‘If Joseph got Tim — or anyone else — to kill Sabine Jourdain, Maurin probably knows it.
He's involved in the deception about the Durances and he admits abducting Barbara Coleman.
For all we know he could be involved in the murder.
Once he knew you'd found out about the paintings, he might have thought you'd go on to discover the truth about the murder.
He could have a very good reason to kill you.’
She shook her head.
‘I don't really think Maurin had  anything to do with it, not that nightmare in the Chagall museum and not the murder.’
They left soon after, driving around the bay on a deserted road.
Holidaymakers were dawdling over hotel breakfasts and asking themselves whether today would bring a repeat of yesterday's sunshine.
Local people were busy among the shops and markets inland or thinking about starting their working day.
No one at all was on the beach.
Rain sped along the wide empty road between the blue sea and the high mountains where ochre patches were precarious villages.
Far ahead the outline of a fort signalled Antibes, beyond it the Cap ran out to sea.
She had no regrets about going home.
She would complete the packing, telephone her office to say she was on her way, ring Cobalt and ask him to look after the murder case and the inquiry into the provenance of the Durances.
But when she got to the flat she found it ransacked.
She suspected something had happened because the door to the flat was open and light fell across the landing.
Oliver had gone to a shop and she was on her own.
She stood with her hand on the door jamb and surveyed the wreckage.
All the internal doors were open and she could make out the tumbled travel bags she had left half-packed and which now spilled their contents across the room.
The cupboards and drawers in the kitchen were emptied on to the floor.
Cushions in the sitting room were flung about, minus their covers.
There was a step behind her and she whirled round to meet the knowing look of a woman from another flat.
‘I am so sorry,’ the woman began without a trace of sorrow in her eyes.
Rain heard her out.
There had been a noise in the night.
This morning they had noticed the door open, seen the mess.
Oh yes, they had called the police.
It would be best if Rain called them also.
Oliver bounded upstairs, and slowed when he saw the figures on the landing.
‘Oh no!
Not now.’
The woman repeated that she was sorry.
She still did not look it.
Rain thanked her, ushered Oliver into the flat and shut the door.
She rang the police.
‘I suppose we shouldn't touch anything until they get here,’ said Oliver.
‘I hope they hurry, there's a lot of clearing up to do before we can leave.’
‘What's been stolen?’
‘Everything seems to be here.
I think it was a search rather than a robbery.’
‘What on earth could anyone be searching for?’
‘Something small, which might have been hidden almost anywhere.
Look at the way the pots of herbs have been tipped out.
And why else should the cushion covers have been ripped off?
Or the kitchen clock taken off the wall?’
They sat on the balcony in the sun, depressed at both the break-in and the delay it would cause.
Rain said she would make some coffee, surely the police couldn't object to that much interference with whatever evidence the mess offered them?
She opened the fridge and Oliver heard her give an exclamation.
‘What's wrong?’
‘I hadn't expected all the containers in here to be emptied out, too!’
She slammed the door on the mess.
He opened it, unwilling to believe in so detailed a search.
There was a deep plastic salad tray and the milk and orange juice had been tipped from their cartons into it.
Everything which had been kept hygienically wrapped was ripped open and thrown into the tray.
Oliver said: ‘This is crazy.
Whoever would do a thing like that?
What are we supposed to be keeping in there?’
Rain had no explanation.
She picked up an emptied canister from the kitchen floor.
‘Unless you want to scoop it off the floor, there's no coffee.’
Oliver plucked a bottle of white wine from the rack in the fridge door.
‘Presumably our visitor didn't have to pour this out to see there was nothing else in the bottle.
This is all we have to drink.’
He rummaged for a knife to cut the seal.
They had settled on the balcony again when the doorbell rang.
To their surprise the police who stood there were Foucard and Denis.
Rain thought a burglary beneath the notice of men with an unsolved murder on their hands.
She did not say so.
Foucard did.
‘You see, we have to take an interest in everything which hinges on the strange case of Sabine Jourdain.’
He took a glass from a shelf in an opened cupboard and advanced on the bottle of wine.
Denis hung back, unsure whether he dared emulate his superior.
He did not.
Oliver took pity, offered a glass which Denis had no problem accepting.
‘It's truly all we have,’ said Oliver.
‘Take a look in the fridge.’
The men looked blankly at him.
Rain saw they were still to go on pretending Foucard and Denis understood no English.
She chose not to let them know she had proof this was a deception.
She translated Oliver's remark.
Denis whisked open the fridge and sucked on his teeth.
Foucard said: ‘They were very thorough, your friends, but did they find what they were looking for?’
Rain said: ‘Hardly friends, Monsieur Foucard.
And I've no idea what they came for or what they took.’
‘This flat belongs to your colleague in London, I believe?
Tell me about this colleague.’
Rain said he was a very ordinary middle-aged journalist, a staid sort of man who wrote about local government matters.
Foucard said: ‘You make it sound as though he is the most boring man in the world.’
‘I had never thought of him like that before.’
It was a short hop for Foucard to suggest that as her colleague was such a dull man it was unlikely the flat had been searched for something belonging to him, more likely that the hunt was for something belonging to Rain or Oliver.
Rain laughed.
‘I'm interesting enough to have my flat broken into, am I?’
Foucard made a little gesture with his head.
‘But of course.
You are interesting to me because of the events of the night of Sabine Jourdain's murder.
Have you remembered more, perhaps, about that night?
Or are you still going to tell me that you were alone, alone all evening except for a half hour in a café?’
Rain turned away impatiently.
‘I've told you all I can about that.’
‘All you can?
Or all you care to?’
She stood looking towards the balcony and beyond it the sea.
He was right, she did know more.
She knew who the man on the boat with Sabine Jourdain was.
But she had not known when Foucard last spoke to her and he could not know she had found out.
She decided not to shift her position.
Telling him would mean more questions and delay her departure.
Tim would almost certainly deny having been on board and there was already no one to corroborate her story about the disturbance in the lounge.
Foucard would reject her fresh information as he had rejected the old.
There was a curious silence.
She looked round.
Foucard's eyes were bright, a strange expression in them.
Then she felt something on her arm and discovered her scarf had come undone.
As she had turned from him it had slipped down.
Casually she lifted it to her neck and retied it.
She picked her way over the scattered things and went on to the balcony.
Foucard followed.
He said softly as he looked up at a gull wheeling above coral roofs: ‘Perhaps you would care to tell me instead where you have been since yesterday morning, and what has happened to you?’
‘Is that interesting, too?’
‘If you do not wish people to become interested, you must tie your scarf more securely.
I have seen such bruising before.’
He waited for her.
The gull screamed.
He said: ‘Tell me, Miss Morgan, who attempted to kill you and why should anyone have done so?’
Rain gripped the iron rail of the balcony.
It seemed a long time since she had stood there watching the boats and noticing how brief lack of caution led to trouble.
She had never heard Foucard speak so soothingly, so encouragingly.
His abrasiveness, the challenge he always presented her, was gone.
It would be very simple to tell him everything and leave him to unscramble the truth contained in the confusion.
But she brought herself up sharply.
It would not be simple at all, because nothing she had told him so far had been trusted.
She ignored the lure.
‘We went to Nice and stayed overnight at a hotel.
Oliver wanted to do some sightseeing and we felt too tired to drive back afterwards.’
She named the  hotel and the restaurant where they had eaten.
Foucard concealed his disappointment.
Rain asked whether there was any progress in the murder inquiry.
It was difficult not to achieve the overtones of saying: ‘Haven't you solved that yet?’
She decided she had failed because he grew hard again, talking about lack of cooperation.
He said: ‘But this case will be solved, all of us on the investigating team feel certain of that.
We shall have our answer.
We have certain leads and each one will be painstakingly pursued.’
From inside they heard Denis and Oliver.
Oliver was trying to find out, in very slow English, when they could tidy up the flat and leave Antibes.
He still had hopes of the lunchtime flight.
Rain translated.
Foucard said: ‘One of our officers will come and look for fingerprints later today.
You may clear up after that.’
Foucard spoke rapidly to Denis and they made movements to leave.
Foucard said to Rain: ‘I shall see you again, Miss Morgan.
Providing, of course, that you take care to stay alive.’
23
Rain and Oliver heard Foucard and Denis rattle downstairs and then cobblestones rang beneath their feet.
Sun struck across the room, bounced fiercely up from the shiny surfaces of containers littering the floor and tossed shadows from the drawers and furniture which had been hurled about.
A gull floated down to the balcony rail, his shadow an enormous presence beating about the room.
A car engine throbbed, people called greetings, there was the creak of shutters opening in one flat and the sound of a radio in another.
Oliver took Rain's hand.
‘Come on, let's get out of here.
We can't stand around waiting for the fingerprints man, he could be hours.’
‘I'll leave the key with the neighbour we spoke to.
She looks the type who'd enjoy letting the police in.’
The woman confirmed she would be pleased to help and this time looked as though she meant what she said.
Rain and Oliver went out into the sun.
Oliver suggested a bar, then the beach.
Rain said: ‘My conscience dictates that I drive down the Cap and interview Peter Leary.
Would you like to come and take some photographs?’
‘No, but I will.
I don't think you should go alone.’
The flowers climbing the walls of the villa bobbed in a gentle breeze, inside the house a man was singing.
He broke off at the ring of the doorbell.
Peter Leary welcomed Rain with a warm smile.
She explained who Oliver was, and the smile was switched to him.
‘Coffee?’ asked Leary, showing them into a cool kitchen.
‘I refuse to think about alcohol before lunchtime.
The day slips away too easily, I have to be rather disciplined.’
The pan of  water was boiled, he poured a spoonful through a filter over a ceramic coffee pot on an old fashioned stove.
‘I'm here for the light, not the cheap alcohol.’
The coffee grounds were moistened, compacted.
He filled the filter.
Then he said: ‘If it sounds as though I've said that before, you're right.
I have to remind myself.
There are too many distractions here, too many excuses for looking and thinking and seeing people and delaying painting.’
‘How long have you been here?’
‘I came out in November and took this place for six months.
It's what I've always promised myself and thought I'd never manage.’
He refilled the filter.
‘Unfortunately my wife couldn't come because she teaches, but I expect that has curtailed my sightseeing and increased my output.’
Rain asked whether it had been an especially productive period.
He said the studio was full of things to show her.
‘I'm rather pleased with some of that stuff.’
Rain asked: ‘Did Benedict Joseph like it?’
‘Ben loved it.
He's talking about an exhibition in New York.’
He laughed.
‘I must remember to be cautiously optimistic about that, there's nothing definite.’
Rain understood his caution.
Leary belonged to that second string of artists, very good but never thrust into the public consciousness.
Every few years he was rediscovered by an enthusiastic critic or gallery owner, although the success never gelled.
It happened to lots of people in all walks of life, and always looked like a pity.
She questioned whether what they lacked was not ruthless ambition.
If Joseph gave him an exhibition it could make a huge difference to Leary's reputation, yet she wondered how likely it was that Joseph would help him.
They had started off friends but Joseph's first wife had left him for Leary.
Oliver, thinking along the same lines, asked: ‘Has Joseph previously taken your work?’
‘In the early days he was keen, but…’
Rain and Oliver thought they understood the ‘but’.
Leary went on: ‘…he branched out, he got more choice.
We lost touch.’
‘Did you know he was going to be here?’
Oliver asked with what Rain feared sounded like suspicion.
Leary topped up the filter.
‘No, I'd no idea he comes to Antibes or in what style he lives when he's here.’
Oliver said that chartering the Jonquil was style indeed.
‘Have you been on board?’
There was an embarrassed smile as Leary said: ‘Oh no, I heard he was there so I walked through the harbour and took a look at it.
I was astonished.’
‘The interior is even more astonishing,’ Rain promised him and mentioned the opulent chinoiserie.
Leary poured coffee into wide china cups and they sat around the rough wooden kitchen table and drank.
He said: ‘It was rather curious the way things happened.
I wanted to meet Marius Durance — I've always especially admired his work and it seemed crazy to be so close and not come face to face with him.
One day, when I felt bold enough I presented myself at his studio.
It was locked but he has a flat on the ground floor of the same building.
Have you been there?’
Rain said she had been into the studio but not the flat.
Leary said: ‘My French is only adequate and he doesn't speak English but we managed a conversation about the things that matter to us.
I was very disappointed he didn't have anything of his to show me.
Maybe it was locked away in the studio or maybe it was true he had nothing there.
I'm afraid I usually have stuff unsold, I find it hard to imagine a studio without a few finished paintings lying around.’
Oliver asked: ‘Did you meet him again?’
‘Yes, I went to the flat a few times.
He appeared to enjoy talking to me and invited me to call in whenever I was passing.
I took some work to show him and he was very generous about it.’
‘Did you always find him in the flat?’
Oliver asked.
‘Yes.
If he was home at all he was in the flat.
Then one day a couple of months ago he returned, just as I was leaving assuming I'd missed him.
He said he'd been to see Ben who was living on the Jonquil.
I told him I knew Ben and when I left Durance I went down to the harbour.
I don't know  whether I ever meant to call on Ben or not — it's been such a long time — but I was interested to see the boat.
Durance had said it was big, but that was an understatement.’
Rain asked: ‘How did you and Ben meet up again?’
‘Durance told him I was living here.
I didn't know that until Ben phoned this week and asked whether he could come over.’
Rain could see things from his perspective.
Leary had been diffident about approaching Joseph although it might have advanced his career, but Durance appeared to have done it for him.
Joseph had subsequently been to the villa on the Cap and talked about a show in New York.
But her own perspective was different: Durance had told Joseph that Leary was living nearby but Joseph had done nothing about contacting his old friend until he needed an alibi for the night of the murder.
They went through to the studio.
Leary's new paintings were vibrant studies making full play of the Mediterranean light.
He deserved a much higher reputation and Rain wished she could trust Joseph to help him acquire one.
Leary talked about his work with eloquence and intelligence.
Oliver photographed him.
The paper would run a worthwhile feature.
If Leary got nothing else, Rain would see to it that he got that.
For herself, she wished she could have bought one of the paintings, she knew she had the ideal space for it on one of the walls of her long white sitting room in Kington Square.
They ate lunch in a shady restaurant and then Leary went back to his flower-hung villa.
Rain and Oliver called at the flat but the fingerprints man had still not been.
Oliver wanted to go to the beach.
His friends were already there.
Someone handed him a can of beer and Rain knew he intended to stay some time.
She decided to be touristy and go and buy souvenirs.
But as she walked from the archway which linked the beach and the harbour, she saw Merlyn and Benedict Joseph driving away.
On impulse she hung back until they had gone.
Then she darted to the Jonquil…
There were no sounds aboard as she crossed the gangway.
Ahead of her the doors to the lounge were open.
She went straight in.
The room was immaculate.
Rain called out, asking if anyone was about.
She heard only the slap of water against the harbour wall, the occasional cry of a gull.
Then the door at the far end of the room opened and the steward, Ross, was with her.
‘Mr and Mrs Joseph are not here,’ he said in a formal tone.
‘Would you like to leave a message for them?’
‘I haven't come to see them.
I've come to talk to you.’
He wore the slightest frown.
‘How can I help you?’
‘You can tell me where you and the rest of the crew were on the evening Sabine Jourdain was killed.
And you can tell me who tidied up this room.’
‘I don't understand.’
Implacable.
‘It's very easy to understand.
Unless I get answers to my questions then you and the rest of the crew will find yourselves explaining to the police instead.
Which would you prefer?’
He was too well schooled to betray emotion.
‘The police have already asked us about this.
I told them we knew nothing.’
‘Quite.
You lied to them.
They won't like that.’
There was a pause while she feared the ploy had failed.
Then he said: ‘What do you propose to do with this information?’
‘Nothing.
Your neglect of duty is a matter between you and your employer.
I'm not interested in that.
I simply need to know where you all were.’
She heard herself sounding very pompous but Ross didn't bridle.
He was probably used to being spoken to by pompous individuals.
He said in a quiet voice: ‘You'll give me your word that what I tell you will not get back to the Josephs?
If they were to report it to the company the whole crew could lose their jobs.’
‘Exactly.
And if the police question the crew thoroughly then the company is certain to be informed, one way or another.’
Ross stepped forward and spoke even more softly.
‘Very well.
I'll trust you not to tell the Josephs, but why should you want to know?’
‘Because it will help information about more important matters drop into place.
Now, where were you?’
‘On the Mésalliance.
There was a party and some of us were invited.
The people who'd chartered her had flown to Paris for the weekend and her crew had a party.
There were a lot of people there, from a number of boats.’
‘Did the entire crew of the Jonquil go to this party?’
‘No.
A few were off duty that evening.
Some who were working intended to slip away for an hour or so.
But Mr and Mrs Joseph went out during the evening and, in the end, everyone on duty went to the party.
The plan was to go in relays and not to leave the Jonquil unattended, but there was a muddle.
I suddenly realized that unless one of the off duty staff had returned very early, there could be no one on board.’
‘What about Sabine Jourdain?
She was waiting here for me, wasn't she?
She was expecting some supper.
Surely you didn't all disappear and leave her alone?’
‘You were late and so she ate.
She said she always ate early and perhaps you wouldn't be able to come after all, so she'd eat.’
‘Even so, you left her here alone afterwards.’
‘When I went ashore she was in the study speaking to someone.
I don't know who it was.’
‘Did you think it was me?’
He frowned again.
‘No, I knew it wasn't you.’
Then his face brightened.
‘Yes, of course.
The reason I knew it wasn't you was that I could hear a man's voice.
I went up to the door, meaning to look in on her before going, but there seemed to be an argument going on and I decided not to interrupt.’
‘Who was the first of the crew to return?’
‘I was.
When I realized the boat could be unattended I ran straight back here.’
‘And what did you find?’
‘The lights were off.
I went straight to the shade deck and checked the study and bar but there was no sign of the old woman or anybody else.
Then I came down here, switched the light on and saw the room in disarray.’
Rain wanted him to be careful not to gloss.
‘Don't tell me you tidied it all by yourself.’
‘I wasn't going to.
I did what I could.
I cleared the pieces of smashed vase and flowers, I used towels to dry the water from the carpet, I rearranged the furniture.
Then one of the others came and he helped me rehang the curtain and move the damaged screen.’
‘What did you do with the screen?’
‘We swapped it.
There are six identical screens on board so that different room arrangements can be made.
Only two are in use and the others are in a cabin used as a store.
We exchanged the broken vase for a similar one from a guest cabin that isn't in use at present and we swapped the screen.’
‘But the damage will be discovered eventually.’
‘It could be years.
When somebody decides to redo the rooms and wants all the screens they'll find out but probably not until then.’
‘Show me the screen,’ Rain said abruptly.
He looked taken aback.
She said: ‘I want to see the damage.’
‘All right.’
They moved along passages and down to the cabin deck.
Rain could hear sounds of activity as the crew went about their business.
The boat was just as it should have been on the night of the murder and had not been.
Ross fetched the key to the storeroom.
When he returned she asked: ‘Do you know where the Josephs went that evening?’
‘No.’
He slid the key into the lock and pushed open the door.
Rain saw the spare furnishings as he had described.
Four heavy screens, one behind the other, were held in a recess behind a locking bar.
The front screen was unmarked, but she had anticipated that.
The one she insisted on inspecting was at the back.
Ross unlocked the bar and let it swing down.
Then he began to shift the first screen and leaned it against an adjoining stretch of wall.
When he got to the fourth screen he stood it up for her to inspect.
The fracture in the panel was hideous.
Rain imagined the force with which the bronze bird must have been thrown.
Seeing the screen confirmed for her everything she remembered  about that evening, and proved Ross's story.
She nodded.
‘Thank you for showing me.’
As he folded the screen she stepped forward to look closely at the adjacent panel.
She did not want Ross to know what had caught her eye.
She asked him to hold the screen just where it was and she went round the back of it, out of his sight.
Then she knelt down and ran her finger over a bullet hole.
24
She met Oliver on her way to the rue du Bateau.
He was returning from the beach, face flushed by the sun.
‘Have you bought all your souvenirs?’ he asked.
‘Not so much as a stick of rock.’
She told him where she had been, what she had seen.
‘Are you sure it was a bullet hole?’
‘As certain as I can be.’
‘But you had to squat down to look at it.
Why should someone have fired so low?’
‘I don't know.’
‘What became of this putative bullet when it passed through the screen?’
‘I checked, on the pretext of comparing the reverse sides of the screens.
Behind the one in the lounge there's a hole through the wooden panelling.’
Oliver said: ‘There's nothing to say the shot that damaged the screen and wall was fired on the night of the murder, is there?’
‘No, and if it was the shot that killed Sabine Jourdain there'd have been blood in the lounge.
I can't imagine Ross tidying away signs of murder.
I didn't find blood and I don't believe he did.’
‘The police think she was killed by a stranger while walking through the harbour, and dumped in the water.
But if they were to examine that bullet hole and find it was caused by the same sort of gun that killed her…’
‘I can't suggest they do that.’
She told him about her promise to Ross.
‘That's all very well, but we're talking about murder.’
‘I know, but we're not talking about positive proof.
You said yourself, that hole could have been made at any time.
If it was definitely linked to her death I might have to break a promise — which I'd hate doing because the repercussions for the crew could be very serious — but it's too vague to go to Foucard and run risks with other people's livelihoods.’
They reached the flat.
The fingerprints man had still not been.
Rain telephoned the police and spoke to an officer who was unconcerned whether she cleared up or not.
He had no idea when the fingerprints expert might be free to call.
Oliver hung the clock back on the kitchen wall.
‘What's the right time?’
She told him.
The afternoon was wearing away.
Oliver corrected the clock and set it in motion.
He looked round.
She was standing quite still, fingering the ends of her scarf.
‘Rain?’
‘Sorry.
I was thinking about our intruder.
What he was looking for was something very small if he was prepared to tip out tiny containers.
I can only think of two things small enough and valuable enough: precious stones or drugs.’
‘Unless he wanted to sniff the nutmeg he was out of luck.’
Oliver put his arm around her.
‘Look, let's forget it.
There's no damage done, there's no theft.
Let's just shove everything back into the cupboards, clean the floor and go.
We could be on the last flight.’
The telephone rang.
Oliver passed the receiver to Rain.
Cobalt went straight to the point.
‘I've heard a funny story and I'm ringing to ask you if there's any truth in it.
Has someone tried to harm you?’
‘Where did you get that story from?’
‘Just a contact.
As I said before, people tell me things all the time.
They're often rubbish, sometimes they're true, but I always have to listen.’
‘Of course.’
She wondered how much he had drunk to be explaining the trials of the journalist to her.
She said: ‘I want to know who gave you that information.’
‘It wouldn't be fair to say.
You know how a contact can be lost.’
He broke off and she heard him coughing.
She said: ‘Tell me what the story is and I'll tell you whether your contact is any good.’
‘He says you were tricked into going to the Chagall museum on the pretext that Barbara Coleman would be there again.
Instead, someone was sent to kill you.
1 gather he failed.’
‘By a whisker.
I have the bruises to prove it.’
Cobalt swore.
‘I'd hoped it was an exaggeration.
You mean they really tried to…’
‘Yes.
Oliver says it was an amateur job, but I promise you it was a good try.’
She waited.
Cobalt said nothing.
She said: ‘Come on, James.
Let's hear his name.’
He ignored that.
‘When did this happen?’
‘Yesterday afternoon.
Please, his name.’
‘Before you came to my place?’
‘Yes.’
He swore again.
She said: ‘Let me guess.
Your contact also knew you were attacked yesterday.
He knows so much about these things that he must be involved in some way, but he lets you have bits and pieces of information because you pay him.’
‘He'd heard someone hit me, but that doesn't mean he was involved.’
‘Did he refresh your memory about your attacker?’
She hoped she did not sound too sarcastic, she did not want him to ring off.
‘All right, I knew all along who came to the flat and thumped me.
But I've no reason to tell you.’
‘That's true, but neither have you got a reason to shield the person who tried to kill me.’
He did not respond.
She went on: ‘I'll make another guess and you can tell me whether I'm right or way off target.
You believe we were attacked for the same reason and probably by the same person.
It's all to do with Barbara Coleman and the provenance of the Durances, isn't it?
You were being frightened off because you'd started asking questions, but I was to be killed because I'd found some answers.’
Cobalt said irritably: ‘I haven't been aiming to get you killed and I haven't discussed with anyone what you've found out.’
‘But am I way off target?’
‘Not way off.
The contact is Georges, the man I mentioned earlier, who told me Edouard had been beaten up.
Yes, I pay him for information.
And yes, he knew I'd been hit.’
‘Who hit you?’
Cobalt groaned, weary of her persistence.
‘A smalltime crook who got caught in the crossfire when I was working on a story a couple of years ago.
He ended up behind bars and made threats when he got out.
Until yesterday it was all talk.
When I saw him in the doorway I thought he'd come to settle that score.
Today, when I heard what happened to you, I realized it wasn't that.
I already knew he and his brother were responsible for beating up Edouard.’
‘There's something I don't understand.
Edouard invented that fake message about the museum but why did he send your crook up there after me?
I can appreciate Edouard would rather have me wasting my time at the museum instead of going round to his flat and trying to persuade Barbara Coleman to leave, but sending someone to kill me was rather an over-reaction.’
‘Rain, Edouard didn't send anyone to kill you.
He just reported that you were asking questions, and explained how he'd dealt with it.
He probably thought he'd been rather smart but today he discovered you were supposed to be dead.’
As they spoke the sky clouded, the brilliantly lit room darkened.
A chill wind came through the open doors to the balcony.
Rain shivered.
There was going to be a storm.
She heard Cobalt's voice down the line.
‘Rain?
Are you still there?’
Her voice was faint.
He did not hear her the first time, she had to repeat what she said.
‘I think I was with Maurin when Edouard rang him.’
Oliver closed the balcony doors.
Through the glass they could see the sea streaked with shades of grey.
The mountains that had given the scene its depth and colour were now vague grey shapes, like the background of a Japanese print.
Rain ended the phone call.
‘You were right,’ she said to Oliver.
‘Everything points to Maurin.’
She was appalled at being forced to accept this.
Sabine Jourdain had been killed because of what she was prepared to say, Barbara Coleman had been kept out of the way because of what she knew and Rain was to be killed before she could publish the story.
No wonder Maurin told her she could believe what she liked as she could prove nothing.
He knew by then that he would kill her, because when his telephone rang Edouard said she would be at the museum.
It presented a far better opportunity for an unsolved murder than killing her on his own premises.
Oliver was happy to be vindicated.
‘Well, I never liked him.
I always said so.’
He was slapping about with a dustpan and brush, getting up the worst of the spilled coffee and other foods.
Rain was assembling the vacuum cleaner ready to finish the job.
It was an unsuitably domestic scene for two people labelling someone a murderer.
The conversation ended when the vacuum cleaner started up.
While Rain used it Oliver did a few more chores in preparation for leaving the flat, finishing by packing their bags.
The sky was gun-metal but the deluge had not come when they set out for a cafe.
They tried to talk of other things than murder and violence but there were too many reminders.
Rain worried how long she would bear the bruises, whether it would still be cold enough in London for her to wear high-necked sweaters when she got back.
The fromagiers and sellers of glistening fish and plump fruits and vegetables had cleared their stalls from the market hours ago and left the place to scavenging pigeons.
Now the pigeons were leaving, confused by the premature darkness into believing night had fallen.
Lights were on in the shops and houses as Rain and Oliver approached the Bar de la Marine.
Oliver wanted to go there because it had a sheltered terrace where they could sit outside, but it was too full of memories: it was the place where Rain had sat on her own while Sabine Jourdain was fighting for her life on board the Jonquil, where Tim had left behind his wallet, where Rain had first seen the pedlar.
She felt exhausted and defeated.
The Great Idea had become a major disaster, she had been lucky to escape with her life.
Some words of Foucard's churned in her mind: ‘I shall see you again, Miss Morgan.
Providing, of course, that you take care to stay alive.’
Oliver reached across and squeezed her hand.
It was odd to have to think of him as someone who had saved her life.
He was so much better at getting her into scrapes.
But he had been there at the right time, he had acted swiftly and effectively and she was alive.
He said: ‘Would you like another drink, or shall we go and get some souvenirs?
We've got time before the last flight.’
‘I'll take the drink, please.
I'm not sure I need reminding of this trip.’
He signalled to the waitress, then said: ‘If you change your mind we might be able to get something at the airport.’
She shook her head.
‘I don't want anything.
That piece of cord will be quite sufficient to bring every detail flooding back.’
25
Wind flurried through the streets.
Pigeons found sheltered ledges, dogs that were normally unconcerned snarled as their owners tugged them on leashes.
People were edgy, too.
‘This looks like the end of the world,’ said Oliver who had ordered a beer.
Rain never knew how it was that a man who spoke no word of a foreign language could master the intricacies of ordering a favourite type of beer in any country on earth.
Plane trees tossed in the wind.
Petals from somebody's pot plant dusted across the street.
Arms reached out of high windows to haul in washing.
Oliver's beach friends straggled into the café, grumbling at the abrupt change of weather.
They chattered like starlings denied a roost, but the red-haired girl sat silent, as though her mind was far away.
She took no interest in Rain but this time she did not care about Oliver either, or anyone else.
The others talked around her and across her, as she sat looking down at her glass.
She was not bothering to drink.
Another woman asked where Tim was.
Tim, she was told, had turned back as they neared the café, saying he would come later.
His friends Jock and Tony were there.
Altogether the beach group occupied three tables close to Rain and Oliver.
One of the men, bearded, with roughly patched jeans and a loud laugh, leaned on the back of Rain's chair, his head close to hers, and talked to Oliver as though she were not there.
After a spell of this, during which he gave no hint of moving, Rain decided to escape.
She rose, the chair tipped with the man's weight.
She told Oliver she had changed her mind about the souvenirs.
‘Shall I see you back here?’ he asked.
‘No, come to the flat.’
That was a more reliable plan if they meant to catch the next flight.
The man slid into her chair, still talking, apparently unaware she had ever been there.
She walked towards the lanes of shops, the wind fluttering the ends of her scarf.
She supposed it made her look jaunty, yet she felt anything but that.
She tried to remember why a gathering storm upset people.
There were sensible, scientific explanations about the effect of the changes in air pressure.
The result was a feeling of anxiety.
Faces around her were shut in, people failed to concentrate on what they were doing and there would be more driving accidents.
Every task, every decision was an unusual effort.
Children were bickering, mothers scolded.
Rain passed them, looking in shop windows where she had previously admired goods.
The colours which had appealed were now crude, robbed of the sunlight.
She felt cross with herself for her inability to choose.
Pressed against a window, she bullied herself to reach a decision.
Wind rattled an awning above her head.
The shopkeeper locked his door against her.
She moved away, uncertain where to go, then ran down an alleyway and across the Place Nationale.
Waiters were folding sunshades, removing tables and chairs.
A handful of figures scurried away, otherwise the square was empty.
There were no shadows.
Around a corner, next to the shop where the key had been cut, she reached a gallery with an exhibition of ceramics.
A black-haired woman with a long, sad face was inside.
She made a show of welcoming Rain, her words lost in the shrieks of two girls as their skirts blew high.
‘You would like something special?
For a present, perhaps?’
‘Yes,’ said Rain.
It was going to be a present for herself, a comfort after the bad things she had endured.
She would take home something special and beautiful so that she would not remember the Côte d'Azur only for the bad things.
The gallery was showing the work of several good craftsmen  potters, some local and some not.
Against the plain walls and fittings, the form, glaze and colour of the pottery were shown to advantage.
Rain narrowed her choice to three pieces.
There was a tiny bowl, wafer-thin and coloured with flowing shapes in grey and ochre.
She held it, enjoying its matt texture and its feather weight.
There was a shallow bowl with handles that looked like twisted ropes and a clever glaze which was sometimes green, sometimes silver.
And there was a vase, a sensuous white form.
The woman put the three pieces on a table for Rain to compare more easily.
Rain lifted each and saw how the dark blobs of their shadows stretched to magnified shapes as she held and turned them.
She pictured a corner of her flat, a table lamp illuminating the soft sheen of the vase, side-lighting sending a wavy shadow along a white wall.
She bought the vase.
She knew Oliver would say what was the use of a vase whose line would be ruined if you stuck flowers in it.
She knew she had better not tell him how much it had cost.
She did not care.
She had her beautiful souvenir.
As she had said the pot was a present she did not stop the woman gift-wrapping it in lavish style.
A few minutes later she was hurrying through the sombre squares and lanes.
Oliver, she decided, would have to wait until London before he saw the pot.
It would be a shame to undo the wrapping before they travelled.
She tucked the parcel under her arm and ran.
She climbed the dark, stepped alley from the market place to the rue du Bateau and emerged opposite her car parked on the cobbles.
Oliver had not loaded their things into it, but she still hoped he was in the flat rather than the café.
She looked up, but there were no clues.
It struck her how tatty many of the buildings appeared now the lack of sun had robbed them of their charm.
She opened the street door with just the slightest qualm, remembering the night Foucard and Denis had stepped out of its darkness.
As she mounted the stairs she heard a radio playing in one  flat, a woman's voice in another.
Then she was twisting the handle and discovering Oliver was not home.
He was easily waylaid by anyone who asked him to stay and drink.
She went inside, the door clicked behind her.
It was not until she was in the sitting room, leaning forward to put her precious parcel on a table, that she realized with a flash of panic that she was not alone.
She stopped instantly, the pot in her outstretched hands.
She did not waste time thinking it could be Oliver whose quiet movement she had sensed in the bedroom.
If it were Oliver he would have called out to her, come to meet her as soon as he heard the key in the lock.
Gradually she straightened, gathered the parcel to her as though her instinct to protect it somehow protected her too.
Her eyes were wide, fixed on the partly open door of the bedroom.
There was no sound, but the fear along her spine insisted that someone was there.
Foucard had once gone to that door, thrown it wide, given the room an all-embracing glance, satisfied his curiosity.
She entirely lacked the courage to approach it.
Without even realizing it, she had begun to back away.
It was foolish to cling to the pot, she knew that, but was unable to persuade herself to part with it.
She ought to put it down.
She could put it beside the wooden table lamp on the cupboard by the door.
Or she could set it down on a shelf alongside an empty flower jug.
She ought to put it down, anywhere, and take up a weapon.
But what?
To reach the things most useful to defend herself she would have to go near the bedroom and she was still, uncontrollably, backing off.
She had no doubt her entry had been heard, that the soft sound she had only just noticed was of someone ducking out of sight.
It was no comfort to think he might be as frightened as she was.
She prayed for Oliver to come crashing into the flat and take control.
But she had been lucky once, it was too much to hope for another equally timely arrival.
She must get to the door and run away.
Yet in the time it would take her to reach the café, tell  Oliver and return with him, the flat would be empty and she would never know who her intruder was.
There were no signs of a search this time.
Whoever had come last night had been determined to find something but must have left without doing so.
It was more probable he had returned than that someone else had come.
Rain felt the cool surface of a cupboard behind her.
She was only feet away from escape.
Moving backwards, she negotiated her way silently to the door.
She had a plan.
She insisted on knowing who her intruder was, and so she would wait down by the car to see who emerged from the building.
She moved a few more inches and made another plan.
If she went out into the rue du Bateau her suspicions might latch on to an innocent person coming from one of the other flats.
She would wait on the landing instead.
The door handle was against her back.
She turned round so she could twist it and run.
Her hand was slippery with sweat and the handle slid from her grasp.
It shot back to its resting position.
The sound startled her.
She snatched at the handle and as she did so the parcel slipped.
She grabbed it, then wrenched the handle.
The door opened six inches and she saw a sliver of dark landing, stairs coiling away to the street.
Behind her she felt the vibration of feet.
Escape was blocked as a hand reached over her shoulder and slammed the door.
Then her shoulder was in a fierce grip and she was spun into the room.
She held the precious pot safely to her as she thudded against the wall of the sitting room.
And as she hit the wall, the breath knocked out of her, she saw the intruder for the first time.
Tarquin Poulteney-Crosse stood facing her, his colour high, his hands clenched.
He was breathing noisily, a hand clawed through his hair.
Rain made an effort to control herself, control the situation.
She found her coldest voice: ‘Tim, what do you think you are doing?’
The headmistressy tone should have reduced him to an ill-behaved schoolboy.
He did not react.
She said: ‘Why are you in here?’
His hands were restless, clenching and unclenching.
He did not move away, nor take his eyes off her.
He said between gasps: ‘I was looking for something.’
‘Drugs?’
‘If you know, why ask?’
She removed one hand from her parcel.
The movement was a mistake.
He tensed again.
She leaned back against the wall and said wearily: ‘If you think I'm going to attack you, forget it.
You're bigger than me, you're stronger than me and you've just proved you're more violent than me.
Why don't we sit down?’
She did not think it wise to add she had suffered so many traumatic incidents in a few days that this was a minor one, nor that her knees had turned to water and refused to hold her up any longer.
He said nothing and she went, with smooth, unflustered movements, to the couch and dropped on to the yielding cushions and prayed for Oliver to come and quickly.
Sabine Jourdain had faced Tim in a rage and Sabine Jourdain was dead.
He was still standing there, behind her now, and she was acutely aware of the significance of that.
The person who had nearly strangled her had come at her from behind.
She was desperate to turn and watch him, to find out what he was doing, defend herself if need be.
But she dared not turn and admit her fear.
Her game was to pretend a confidence she did not feel.
She must not let a nervous glance betray her.
If she did, he would feel obliged to tell her nothing.
While she claimed to have the upper hand he might well explain much.
‘Well now,’ she said, astonished by the calmness of her voice.
‘Let's talk about drugs and why you thought you might find some here.’
She heard him stir, move towards her.
Her scalp prickled but she forced herself to keep still, maintain the charade that she was not afraid.
He came nearer.
She thought fleetingly of the weapon he might have picked up to strike her over the head as she sat at his mercy.
Several things could have come to his hand.
The flower jug?
The lamp with the heavy  wooden base?
Or did he carry a length of picture cord in his pocket?
She had released the parcel containing the pot.
It lay on the couch.
Her hands rested beside her, poised to spring to her protection, but the lightly curled fingers tightened until the nails forced into her flesh.
He came nearer still.
Her nerve snapped and she turned rising as she did so, her hands coming up in defence.
It was a momentary gesture, missed by Tim as he brushed past the end of the couch on her other side and went to an armchair.
‘The drugs,’ Rain demanded in a voice which revealed nothing but composure.
‘I thought you'd got hold of some.’
‘Why did you think that?’
‘Because of Rosie.’
‘Who's Rosie?’
‘You know Rosie — that ginger-haired girl that Oliver was…’
‘I know the girl you mean.’
She made sense of Rosie's odd behaviour.
‘Rosie takes drugs, does she?’
‘Not only Rosie, a lot of people.’
He was including himself.
‘Quite.
But why did that lead you to imagine you could find drugs here?’
‘I thought Oliver was getting them for Rosie.’
She tried not to look amazed.
‘Go on.’
‘Rosie didn't have any money and the man who supplies the stuff wouldn't let her have any more.
Then Rosie met Oliver and suddenly she had what she wanted.’
Rain suspected this was rather flimsy evidence on which to accuse Oliver of trafficking in drugs.
She decided to be tactful rather than derisive, which might have roused Tim again.
‘If you wanted drugs and you thought Oliver had some, why didn't you ask him instead of breaking in here?’
He gave her a withering look.
‘And have you writing in the newspaper that I was a drug addict?
Papers always get it wrong.
There are addicts and there are people who just use the stuff occasionally.’
‘I see.’
She recognized the argument: addicts were other people until it was too late.
She said: ‘It was you who broke in here last night, was it?’
‘I came to tell you something, but no one was here so I got in and took a look.’
‘And before you left, did you take a look at the mess you'd created?’
She could not resist the sarcasm.
‘I was in a hurry.’
‘You were thorough, I'll grant you that.
You left no corner undisturbed, no pot untipped.’
It was difficult to believe this, her work and Oliver's had been equally thorough.
‘I told you, I was in a hurry.’
‘You had been meticulous, why did you come back today?’
‘Because you'd been to Nice.
The man who sells the stuff here gets his supplies in Nice.
I thought you might have brought something back with you.
I saw you and Oliver in the café when we all came up from the beach.
It was an opportunity to try again.’
Rain brushed hair from her forehead.
It was damp.
‘Perhaps I'm being obtuse, but why should our visit to Nice suggest we were shopping for drugs?
And how did you know we'd been to Nice?’
He shifted uneasily in his chair.
Then: ‘You were seen in Nice, by somebody who knows the drugs scene.’
‘Who?’
But it was too much to hope.
Tim had no intention of telling her that.
She tried another line.
‘All right.
What was it you came to tell me yesterday?’
‘I've got some information about Sabine Jourdain.
I thought you might pay me for it.
It's a very good story.’
‘You'll have to tell me before I can judge that.
What's it about?’
‘Supposing I tell you and you refuse to pay?’
‘That's a risk you'll have to take.
You're in a buyer's market.’
She had no doubt it would be worthless but, like Cobalt, she always had to listen.
‘I could give it to another paper instead, couldn't I ?’
‘Naturally, but you'd still have to say what the story was before you were offered anything for it.’
He got up, impatient, and walked about flexing his fingers.
He repeated: ‘It's a very good story.’
‘Give me a clue.’
He was growing agitated.
She said: ‘Is it to do with the murder?’
‘No.
You're not to think I killed her.
I didn't do it,’ he said furiously.
‘Well, if it's not about her death, what is it about?’
She wished he would stop pacing about.
He paced and said nothing.
She tried to guess what he might have found out about Sabine Jourdain that did not hinge on her death.
She hoped that if he said he had discovered she met Scott Fitzgerald she would be able to treat the suggestion with the seriousness Tim would think it deserved.
But he said: ‘It's about Durance's paintings.
She was doing them for him.’
He looked triumphant, as if to say: ‘There, don't you think that's a good story?’
Rain said: ‘Tim, it's a good story but it's not worth anything to me because I already know about it.’
She felt sorry when she saw his triumph wrecked.
He sighed and flung himself down on the chair.
He had not merely failed to interest her in a story, he had found the only thing he had to sell was worthless and he urgently needed money.
Rain said: ‘I found out during the last few days.
How did you?’
He was not looking at her.
He was leaning forward, the sweep of his fair hair obscuring his face.
‘I went to the old house where she lived and I saw the paintings.
I knew immediately what they were, she couldn't very well deny it.’
‘When was this?’
He sat up, pushed his hair back.
‘Soon after I came here.
I wanted to find out where she lived.
I worked it out, from things Barbara Coleman told me, and I hitched a lift in a car going up the valley and walked the last mile or two.
There was a crazy woman in a cottage.
She ran out and tried to send me away but I pretended Sabine was expecting me, so she took me to the studio.
She was really odd, she showed me the way but she kept saying she wouldn't come in because she wasn't allowed to set foot in there.’
Rain could picture the scene well enough.
Madame Alègre would make an impression on anyone.
‘Did you ever tell anybody else about this?’
‘No, I promised Sabine I wouldn't.
But now she's dead, that's the end of the promise, isn't it?’
‘You didn't even say anything to Barbara Coleman?’
‘No.
If I had she'd have told Sabine and then Sabine wouldn't have…’
His sentence trailed into silence.
‘Wouldn't have what?’
‘Sabine and I had an arrangement.’
‘Blackmail?’
‘I suppose you'd call it that but I didn't look at it that way.
She wanted the secret kept, I wanted money.’
‘How many times did you ask her for money?’
‘She gave it to me three times, then she got difficult.’
‘Is this why you were following her around?
Why you went on board the Jonquil that evening?’
‘Yes.
She'd paid up before so I couldn't see why she was refusing to do it again.
That's what we had the row about.’
‘What exactly happened on the Jonquil that evening?’
‘I saw her go on board.
I thought she might not be there long and when she left I could stop her and try to persuade her.
That American and his wife left the boat and drove away, later some of the crew came ashore too.
I walked about the harbour, making up my mind what to do.
Then I thought I might as well go and look for Sabine.’
‘Did you see anyone else on board?’
‘No crew, no one.
There weren't many lights on, either, and I began to think she'd left.
Then I heard her voice in a room.
She came out, saw me in the passage and hurried me into the lounge.
She told me to stop pestering her.
She said there would be no more money.
I was really annoyed but she kept refusing.
She said I'd been given all I'd get and I said it wasn't enough.’
‘Not enough for what?’
‘To pay off the man who supplies the drugs.
You see, it starts off very cheap.
You're amazed how little it costs to get the stuff and then suddenly the price shoots right up.’
‘Once you're hooked.’
All that amazed her was that he had not expected that.
‘You heard me losing my temper and yelling at her.
I was threatening to give the game away about the Durances…’
‘I didn't hear anything about pictures, I only heard you threatening to kill her.’
‘I don't remember what I said, but I'm sure I never meant to do that.
I might have said it.’
‘You definitely did.
And didn't you throw that bronze bird at her?’
‘I'm a rotten shot.
It missed her by miles and hit one of those screens.’
‘She must have been terrified, an old woman like that…’
‘If you'd seen her you wouldn't say that.
She came at me with a stool in her hand — who do you think was terrified then?
She wasn't young but she was very strong.
Anyway, I was the one who ran.
The last I saw of her she was standing in the lounge aiming a stool at me.
I slammed the doors on her and ran.
She was very much alive then.’
Rain said: ‘Was that the last time you saw that room?’
‘No.
When I ran away I was going to the beach, but as I got near it I recognized someone I was avoiding.
I turned back to the harbour to wait for him to go away.
By then I felt really bad about what had happened.
I wanted to see Sabine was all right and say I was sorry.
I went on board very quietly this time because I thought if she wasn't on her own I could retreat.
I couldn't find her but I had the feeling I wasn't alone.
Do you know that creepy feeling when you're sure someone's there but you can't see or hear anything?’
‘Yes,’ said Rain, who had come to know it well.
‘Well, I'd been on the boat a few minutes when I heard someone pounding along the gangway and going ashore, so I knew I'd been right.’
‘Did you see who it was?’
‘No, I stayed hidden and gave them time to get away.
After that I waited at the harbour until it was safe to go back to the beach without seeing the person I was dodging.’
Rain said: ‘You're being very discreet, Tim, but the person you were avoiding was that pedlar, wasn't it?’
He looked surprised.
‘How did you know?’
‘I've noticed you're not on very good terms with him.
Why don't you admit he's peddling rather more than leather bags?’
‘Somebody's already told you,’ he accused.
She denied it but did not tell him she had seen him fighting with the pedlar or that the man had chased her and Oliver in Nice.
She said: ‘Why did you tell him Oliver and I were involved in drugs?’
‘I wanted him to leave me alone.
I didn't care what I said to him.
What does it matter?
You're going home soon, but he doesn't know that.
Rosie's got the stuff again and she didn't get it from him, so I told him Oliver had supplied her.
He stopped bothering me, I'd given him something more important to worry about.
I know he believed me because when I told him you went to Nice yesterday to buy more, he said he'd seen you there.
I wonder he didn't warn you off!’
‘You let him believe Oliver and I were moving into his territory?’
She wanted to say that not only was that ridiculous but it was dangerous, she wanted to tell him about the frightening minutes in the maze of old Nice.
But she knew it would be a waste of breath.
He was careless of his own safety and showed wanton disregard for everyone else.
Down below the street door banged and footsteps tramped upstairs.
Oliver knocked on the door of the flat.
Rain let him in.
Before she could speak he said: ‘Sorry, I've lost the key you gave me.’
He started to say a cheerful hello to Tim when he became aware of the tension.
Rain said: ‘Tim's our intruder.
Last night's mess and a more tidy visit this afternoon when he came to see whether we'd stocked up with illegal drugs on our trip to Nice.’
Oliver heard the rest with amusement, a reaction which disappointed Rain but calmed Tim.
Rain knew Oliver was picturing himself back in the wine bar in Chelsea telling everyone how he'd been mistaken for a drug dealer and nearly done to death in a Mediterranean backstreet by an underworld rival.
In the future it would earn a lot of laughs, but Rain did not think it deserved any yet.
Oliver put his head into the bedroom.
‘Oh, I see,’ he said.
‘You've only tipped out our travel bags this time.’
Tim said, in a matter of fact way: ‘I checked everything else yesterday, but those weren't packed then.’
‘Well, be a good chap and pack them again, will you?’ said Oliver.
Tim was startled but saw that the determination in Oliver's eye belied his friendly tone.
Meekly, Tim repacked the bags as Oliver stood over him.
When it was done, Tim drew a key from his pocket.
‘This dropped out of your pocket on the beach.’
Oliver took it.
‘So this is how you got in here without damaging the door.’
Tim stood there like a schoolboy waiting to be dismissed from the headmaster's study.
‘I might as well go,’ he suggested.
‘Certainly,’ said Oliver.
‘And be careful never to come back.’
Tim hesitated.
‘I don't suppose you could…’
‘No!’ said Rain and Oliver together.
Tim said: ‘It would have been easier if I had stolen the family silver, wouldn't it?’
‘Perhaps you could find someone else to pay you for your story,’ suggested Oliver as he ushered Tim out on to the stairs.
He imagined Tim, with his very good French, having no difficulty in getting local journalists to listen to him.
At the time it sounded like an innocent idea.
26
On his way out of the building Tim passed Cobalt running upstairs.
Cobalt was accompanied by a slim, white-haired woman who moved just as briskly.
‘This is Barbara Coleman,’ Cobalt said when Rain opened the door.
Rain looked from one face to the other, uncertain how to respond.
Cobalt's face was grim but Barbara Coleman wore a sweet smile.
‘I just knew we'd meet properly, my dear, after all that nonsense in the Chagall museum.
Very cloak and dagger, wasn't I?
But I was so confused, I do hope you understand…’
Cobalt interrupted her.
‘Rain, after I rang you this morning I made a few more enquiries and then went and told Barbara she was to come with me.’
‘He was quite decided about it, rather bossy actually…’ said Barbara Coleman.
Rain looked at Oliver.
He read her mind and drew the woman away, leading her down the room to a comfortable chair.
Rain heard her flow of talk about the journey from Nice break off as she noticed the view from the window, an oppressive sky, a turbulent sea.
‘Such a shame about the weather, and you haven't long to enjoy our Mediterranean climes, have you, my dear?’
Oliver could be heard beginning a suitable reply before the woman babbled on about something else.
Rain asked Cobalt: ‘What were your enquiries about?’
‘Not the Durance paintings.
I wasn't ever convinced we were attacked because of that business.
I intercepted Edouard on his way to work at the hotel and got the truth  out of him.
His wife's a drug addict.’
He grimaced.
‘No doubt Barbara was too delicate to mention that to you.’
‘Not a word of it.
Presumably Maurin knew when he asked the couple to take her in.’
‘He knew all right.
The wife used to work as a domestic at his house.
She had to give it up when she became too sick.
He knew they needed any extra money they could get and would let Barbara stay in their spare room without asking questions.’
‘Did Edouard lie to me and to your contact at the hotel Georges, wasn't it?— because he was covering up his wife's condition?’
‘He admits it now.
The brothers who beat him up are involved in the drugs racket.
I knew that much because drugs featured in the court case which sent one of them to prison a couple of years ago.
There never was any threat from them to Barbara — they didn't know she was at the flat because she was in her room when they burst in.
But Edouard lied to her about the reason for the attack.’
‘That was terrible.
It made her feel she had to stay there or else he'd be in worse trouble.’
Cobalt said: ‘He didn't mind her staying longer because it meant he was to be paid more.
It suited him to have her believe she had an obligation to stay.’
‘How does Maurin come into this?’
Cobalt shrugged.
‘Edouard thinks Maurin knew nothing about the brothers going to the flat until someone told him.’
‘That was probably me.’
‘He says he phoned Maurin after you'd been to the hotel because he wanted to report that you were asking questions about Barbara.
He told Maurin he'd pretended she wanted to meet you at the museum.
Half an hour later Maurin rang back and demanded to know if there was any truth in a story that he'd been hurt and Barbara threatened.
Edouard admitted he'd been attacked but denied it was anything to do with Barbara being there.’
Rain asked whether Edouard had told Maurin about her first appointment at the museum.
Cobalt said: ‘He says not.
He found out himself because he read the note Barbara asked  him to deliver to you.
It sounds as though Maurin was paying him to keep Barbara there and she was paying him to run errands — deliver the note to you and the photograph to Nice Matin — and to turn a blind eye when she went out.’
‘All for the usual reason — he needed the money.’
Cobalt said wryly: ‘Yes, and he only told me about it because I paid him.’
Down the room Barbara Coleman was still chattering, Oliver putting in the occasional word.
Rain whispered: ‘Does she always…’
‘She hasn't stopped since I collected her.
I was seriously thinking of taking her back.’
‘Has she said anything useful?
Did she mention the Durances?’
‘She talked mostly about Sabine Jourdain.
She's still convinced Joseph killed her and she means to go to the police and say so.’
They stopped speaking as Barbara Coleman came up to them.
‘Now, my dear,’ she said to Cobalt, ‘you promised to take me home.
I'd rather like that.
Do you think we could go to the villa now?’
‘Certainly, Barbara,’ said Cobalt.
‘Why don't we all go over there and see you home?’
He looked enquiringly at Rain who nodded.
Oliver wore a look of weary resignation as he followed them.
They all went in Cobalt's car.
He and Rain intended to talk about the murder case once they had left Barbara Coleman there.
Until then it would be virtually impossible to discuss anything.
Rain was reminded of Maurin's remark.
‘She is what the English call a chatterbox, I believe.’
She was.
Cobalt joined the coast road and they roared along the ramparts of the ancient town.
The excitable Miss Coleman countermanded Rain's directions with inaccurate and unhelpful ones.
Eventually they pulled into the lane behind the house.
The door in the high wall was open and they went into the garden.
The bright tangle of plants had become a funereal monochrome, and there was a dullness where there had previously been a dazzling glimpse of the Mediterranean.
Barbara Coleman was saying something about the former beauty of the garden and its decline, but wondering aloud whether it was fair to say decline because what was happening was that the garden was returning to nature, and further wondering whether it was really and truly nature because some of the plants were not native to the region and did not entirely belong there, and then wondering whether that was not a strange remark to come from one who had made Provence her home for so long that she felt quite a part of the landscape.
They approached the steps and Rain fastidiously avoided touching the rail as she descended.
Barbara Coleman had no such inhibitions.
Her blood was there, but she had apparently forgotten about it.
Cobalt, who did not know, gripped the rail.
They stood outside the back door while Barbara Coleman sorted through her handbag.
‘I'm sure I had the key.
In spite of the abruptness of my departure, I'm convinced I had the key.
It's always kept in here, you see, unless it's in the lock, but if I'm out of doors you can be sure it's in my bag.’
Her fluffy white head was bent over the bag.
The bag gaped black, her hand was a grey shape jabbing into it.
Rain and Cobalt exchanged looks.
Oliver grunted and strode about the paved veranda impatiently.
They would all be relieved when the key was found, when the storm broke.
‘When we get inside…’
Cobalt began to Rain and Oliver in a whisper.
Barbara Coleman interrupted with a cry of joy.
She had found her key.
They filed indoors.
The old woman went along a short passage, passed a scullery and continued on a few yards.
She gave an exclamation and hurried forward.
‘Oh look, the light is on in here.’
She thrust open a door to a small sitting room.
‘What can this mean?’ she asked, eyes wide, appealing to them all.
They crowded behind her in the doorway.
Cobalt had resumed his grim expression.
Rain was thinking that Barbara Coleman was not only a chatterbox but inclined to be dramatic, too.
Oliver, looking bored, brought up the rear.
Barbara Coleman gave an exaggerated shudder.
‘Do you suppose there is someone already here?’
Oliver said: ‘No, that's been burning ever since you went away.
We saw it on the night Sabine…’
Everyone except Barbara Coleman wished he had not mentioned it.
She said: ‘Since the night Sabine was murdered?
Really?
That's most interesting, don't you think?’
Rain said: ‘You must have left it on.’
‘Oh, but I'm sure I wouldn't have done any such thing.
I hardly ever come into this room, and I am most particular.
Whenever I go out of a room I am certain to switch off the light.
After all, why should one leave it on?’
She came out of the room, leaving the light on.
Oliver leaned forward and switched it off.
They all followed Barbara Coleman down the passage.
Rain was close behind her.
She sensed Cobalt and Oliver fall back, and heard Cobalt say: ‘I'm going to take a look around.
I'd like you to come with me.’
Rain bridled.
That meant she was to be left with Barbara Coleman and Barbara Coleman was tiresome company.
They came to a kitchen with a spacious drawing room beyond at the front of the house.
‘Here we are,’ said Barbara Coleman, padding into the centre of the room.
‘The best room for company, do they still do that in England?’
Oliver stared at her in bewilderment.
Cobalt looked thoroughly annoyed.
Rain took in the old expensive furniture, the floor length windows which, beyond their bolted shutters, would have coastal views.
She also noted the depth of dust over everything.
She said: ‘This is very grand, Barbara, but shouldn't we just go to the rooms that you use?’
The woman looked perturbed then said: ‘Oh, they aren't very impressive.
But come, if you must.’
She went into the hall, down a narrow passage and into a large room with long, shuttered windows and again, Rain guessed, a sea view.
Barbara Coleman hurried to the windows and began to fold back shutters.
Oliver took over and the room sprang into focus.
There was an easy chair and a television set, but the room was dominated by a table covered in paints and an easel with a  partly finished painting on it.
All over the place there were her completed paintings.
They hung on walls, they leaned against each other in piles by the walls, they were stacked in corners.
‘In the day,’ said Barbara Coleman, ‘I can see as far as the Esterel…
Oh, I'm forgetting, this is the day, isn't it?
It's just that it's so dark.
I'm not accustomed to that.
Usually, you see, we have wonderful light.
That's what artists crave, wonderful light!
We have it here.
All the time.
But not today, alas, not today…’
‘Yesterday was wonderful,’ Rain said soothingly, hearing the rising panic in the woman's voice.
‘Yesterday?
Oh yes, that was very good.
Wonderful, you might say.’
Cobalt said: ‘You work in here, do you, Barbara?
Spend most of your time here?’
The fluffy white head bobbed in agreement.
‘Oh yes…’
He said: ‘Well, we'll just check the rest of the house before we leave you.’
Rain understood he meant that he and Oliver would go, but Barbara Coleman said: ‘Oh yes.
Yes, of course.
That's most kind.’
She went for the doorway, her speed catching them unprepared.
Rain remembered her story about dashing away from Maurin, racing from the car and into the garden.
It had seemed a little exaggerated that an elderly woman could move so rapidly and catch a younger man off guard.
Now she did not doubt it.
She wondered whether Barbara Coleman painted as fast, whether that accounted for all the unsold work around the room.
But she knew there was no need to believe that.
Barbara Coleman did not sell much work and that was all there was to it.
Rain hung back and looked at some of the paintings on the wall near the door.
They were small and neat and many were flower studies.
The scale of the work varied but they were generally scenes from nature, the type of thing popularly believed to be the easiest to sell but not necessarily the easiest to paint.
Barbara Coleman was proficient but being a full-time artist required more than that and Rain judged that she had no more to give.
She tried to picture how the woman had fitted into the Durance coterie.
She was not a good artist and she was wearing company, but she must have some redeeming qualities, although Madeleine Corley and her companions at Tourettes sur Loup had not hinted at any.
‘Rain?
Come on.’
Oliver was impatient.
She hurried out.
‘Sorry, I was looking at her paintings.’
He made a thumbs down sign.
Cobalt and the white-haired woman were halfway up a flight of stairs.
Rain and Oliver ran to catch them up.
Barbara Coleman's bedroom was another high and handsome room, cluttered with paintings.
The bed was untidy, as though she had merely pulled up the covers.
A nightdress was thrown over a chair and on the bedside table were an assortment of pill bottles.
She went to the table, closed her hand around a bottle and slid it into her skirt pocket.
‘There you are,’ she said, and flung her arms wide.
‘Now I've shown you even my sleeping quarters.
Everything is just as it was left.’
They trooped downstairs after her.
She was offering them cups of tea and it was churlish to refuse.
Cobalt touched Rain's arm.
‘Oliver and I are going to look around.
Will you keep the old girl talking?’
He did not notice how silly his request was.
‘What are you looking for?’
Cobalt checked the woman wasn't watching, then mouthed: ‘Drugs.’
‘Here?’
Barbara Coleman heard her and looked up.
‘What's the matter, my dear?’
Rain reassured her, the woman turned back to her tea caddy.
She was telling a story about buying it in Sunningdale before she first came to France, because there was a rumour that one could not buy decent tea the other side of the English Channel.
Rain whispered to Cobalt: ‘Why here?’
He gave her his maddening smile and when he replied he aped Barbara Coleman's speech.
‘The perfect place, don't you think, my dear?’
‘Whose drugs?’
Cobalt shook his head, refusing to answer any more questions.
He tapped Oliver's arm and signalled him to follow.
With a heavy heart Rain watched Barbara Coleman, who was still reminiscing about the shopkeeper who had sold her the caddy, set out four cups and saucers and round up four teaspoons from a drawer.
Shortly Rain was going to have to explain to her that two of her guests had sneaked off.
‘There!’ said Barbara Coleman and turned round.
‘Now all we must wait for is the kettle.
I won't look.
A watched pot, you know.’
Her smile drooped.
‘Where are James and Oliver?’
‘They'll be back, I shouldn't think they've gone far.’
‘But, my dear, where have they gone?’
Rain was no more vague than she had reason to be.
‘I think they're just taking a look around.’
The woman's sweet smile reappeared.
‘Oh, aren't they kind?
So very kind.
James has been kindness itself all day.
And now Oliver, too.
They say unpleasant things about young people today, but I find them so helpful.
Isn't it good of them spending all this time to be sure I shall be quite safe here?’
Rain made appropriate noises.
No more was required.
With barely a prompt, Barbara Coleman talked on.
She had forgotten about her tea caddy and the friendly shopkeeper in Sunningdale and she had soon forgotten about the kindness of young people and was reminiscing about the days when she was not alone at the villa but shared it with seven others.
She said: ‘There was Marius Durance, naturally, and Sabine, of course and…but you wouldn't know of the others.
They've moved on.
Some of the dear girls took a studio together in Tourettes sur Loup, I believe it's quite a fashionable place for artists these days.’
She took a quick peep at the kettle, then went on: ‘Some of our group even went to America, that's supposed to be the important place to be.
Did you know that?
The Americans say it's the centre of the art world, but quite where in America I wouldn't understand.
If I went there I shouldn't know which bit to aim for.
Suppose one went to Boston and found one ought to be in Chicago?
Or one picked Washington  when the better place was Los Angeles?
With France one always knew.
It was either Paris or it was the Côte d'Azur.
One couldn't get it wrong.’
Rain supposed not.
She thought she knew what it would be like to find yourself in Boston when you ought to be in Chicago.
It would be like finding yourself in the kitchen with Barbara Coleman when you would rather be with Oliver and James Cobalt searching for drugs.
The kettle boiled and tea was made.
There was a little discussion about the length of time a perfectly made cup of tea ought to be brewed and a little anguish because there was no milk to offer the guests.
Then a wizened lemon was discovered and so lemon tea saved the day.
‘Are you still convinced Joseph killed Sabine Jourdain?’
Rain asked as she watched the tea poured.
Barbara Coleman stopped pouring and fixed her with a very severe look.
‘Totally.’
For several minutes she had nothing more to say.
Then Rain said: ‘Are you going to tell the police that?’
‘Yes, I've quite made up my mind.
One cannot keep that sort of information to oneself.’
‘When will you tell them?’
‘Tomorrow.
It's rather late today, don't you think?
You're not going to try and talk me out of it, I hope.’
Rain had not been thinking of doing that.
She had been worrying what might happen to Barbara Coleman if she continued to make known her opinion that Joseph was a murderer.
From somewhere in the house she heard a sound and to cover it spoke again.
‘How do you think Joseph did it?’
‘She was pushed into the harbour and left to drown, wasn't she?
She could never swim.
Not like the rest of us.
We all used to go swimming from the beach here but Sabine was never a swimmer.
I expect Joseph knew that and took advantage of it.’
‘Who told you she drowned?’
Barbara Coleman took a sip of scalding tea.
‘It was in the paper that she'd been taken from the harbour.
I knew she couldn't swim so it was obvious she drowned.’
There was a distant thud.
Rain spoke louder.
‘Are you suggesting Joseph pushed her into the water as she walked through the harbour?’
‘It would be easy enough, wouldn't it, my dear?
Even if she saw him she wouldn't expect anything evil to happen.
It would all be over before she could call out.
And even if she had cried out, who takes any notice of anyone shouting, even screaming?
You know what happens — people hear but they don't want to become involved in case it's all a game and they are made to feel foolish.’
She sipped again then said: ‘James and Oliver are missing their tea.
Perhaps we ought to fetch them.’
‘I'll go.’
Rain did not want the woman upset by finding them behaving oddly.
She did not know what sort of oddness to imagine, but they had been a long time and there had been peculiar noises.
Rain went to the main hall.
She cocked her head to try and make out sounds but there were none.
Upstairs, she thought.
She was almost sure the earlier sounds had come from upstairs.
At the foot of the stairs she paused.
It was black above.
Most of the shutters were still closed and she would have welcomed light.
She had never liked being in the dark, especially being in unfamiliar places in the dark.
Surely Oliver and Cobalt would have put the stair lights on if they had gone upstairs?
Or had they been afraid to do so in case it drew attention to what they were up to?
She could not find the light switch and stood, her hand on the newel post, deciding whether to go up in the dark.
Then there was a noise from the rear of the house, the scrape of a door being opened.
They had been on the ground floor all along.
Rain sped towards the sound.
When she saw them she was going to tell them about the tea and in the same breath demand to know what they had found and why Cobalt had anticipated finding anything in the Villa Fiesole.
But as she rounded a comer the questions dried on her lips.
She was face to face with Benedict and Merlyn Joseph.
27
For a split second Joseph looked as agitated as he had been on the Jonquil the day after the murder.
Then the great smile came.
‘Rain!’
Merlyn, behind his shoulder, said nothing.
None of them knew how to go on.
Then Joseph said: ‘This is a strange place for us to meet.’
They were all standing in the near dark.
Rain felt her palms damp with nervousness.
Joseph said: ‘Were you looking for something?’
Despite the smile his voice was weaker than usual.
Rain was worried for Barbara Coleman.
It shocked Rain to realize the Josephs might already have heard of her accusations.
If Maurin had told them she had gone home, the woman's wagging tongue might already have put her in danger.
Rain gathered her wits and said she had come to see the villa, the last place the Durance coterie had settled before disbanding.
She hoped he would go away before meeting Barbara Coleman, before discovering what Oliver and Cobalt were doing.
Merlyn said, irritably: ‘Well, come on, Ben, we can't stand in this passage for ever.’
‘No.’
He took a step forward.
Rain had to choose whether to let him pass or lead him into the house and try to steer him away from the kitchen.
At that moment she heard rapid footsteps.
Barbara Coleman came into the passage.
‘Rain?’ she called.
‘Now you've vanished.
What is going on?’
Rain went to meet her.
She heard the Josephs' astonishment and their feet close after her.
‘Who's that?’ the old woman asked, peering into the gloom.
Rain wished somebody would switch the lights on.
There must be lights.
Why wouldn't anybody find a switch?
Merlyn did.
Suddenly there was the flare of electric light above them.
Barbara Coleman made a little jump backwards, a shaking hand went to her lips but not fast enough to cut off her cry of fear.
Rain took her arm.
Barbara Coleman was trembling.
The Josephs did not appear much happier.
Merlyn recovered first.
‘You've come home, Barbara?’
She made it sound as though this were something illegal.
The old woman attempted to regain some dignity.
Up went her chin.
‘It was time I came,’ she said.
‘This is my home.’
‘Well, yes…’ began Joseph.
Merlyn said: ‘That depends, doesn't it?
We own this place.’
Barbara said: ‘Durance would never forgive you if you turned me out.
This is the only home I have.’
Rain appealed to them: ‘Is there any question of her having to leave?’
‘That's up to you, isn't it, Barbara?’
Joseph said, as though there were a secret bargain struck between them.
The woman was defiant.
She drew her arm away, saying to Rain: ‘We should finish our tea, don't you think, my dear?’
She walked off.
Rain and Joseph faced each other a moment longer until Rain, too, went to the kitchen.
She was afraid the Josephs would follow and find the extra cups and ask who else was in the house.
She had no doubt it would be a very bad idea for them to go in search of Oliver and Cobalt.
Barbara Coleman raised her cup and took a sip.
Rain wished for her sake that the cup had not rattled in the saucer.
She lifted her own cup, her eyes on the doorway through which the Josephs might come.
She could hear them whispering in the passage.
Barbara Coleman gave a snort of disgust.
She said something under her breath, something Rain could not catch.
Rain asked her what it was.
‘Americans!’ repeated Barbara Coleman with utter disdain.
Just then the Americans arrived in the doorway.
Joseph  had resumed his smile, Merlyn was less threatening.
‘We've poured you some tea,’ Rain lied.
They came in but did not look at the cups.
‘Why have you come?’
Barbara Coleman demanded.
‘I am here because I live here, but why are you here?’
‘Now look here, Barbara,’ said Joseph in a rather sharp tone.
His hand went forward as he spoke.
Rain believed he was reaching towards one of the cups on the table, but Barbara Coleman stood across the table from him and she recoiled.
‘Don't come near me!’
‘Barbara, what do you think I'm going to do to you?’
He looked perplexed.
Merlyn said: ‘She's a fool, Ben.
I don't know why you let her stay.’
Her words were partly lost in Barbara Coleman's wild cry.
‘I know what you did, you can't stop me saying so.’
Her control had snapped.
Her arm swooped and the cup of tea was dashed in Joseph's face.
He yelped.
Merlyn darted at Barbara Coleman rather than help her husband dab at his scalded face and stained shirt.
‘You mad creature!’ she shouted.
Rain dragged Barbara Coleman away, with an urgency that took them both off balance.
Merlyn seethed, but the old woman was beyond her reach.
To strike her now she would have to attack Rain first.
There was a hubbub.
Barbara Coleman was making incoherent accusations, Merlyn was shouting about the state of the woman's mind, Joseph was swearing about being in terrible pain.
When she could make herself heard Rain begged the Josephs: ‘Surely it would be best if you could do what you came for and leave?’
Barbara Coleman squirmed from her grasp.
‘You killed Sabine,’ she shrieked at Joseph.
There was a horrified silence.
Merlyn was quickest to break it.
‘How dare you say such a wicked thing.’
‘You knew about it, Merlyn,’ said Barbara Coleman, nodding her fluffy head in confirmation, ‘and he did it.’
Rain said: ‘Barbara, please, don't say any more.’
She touched her but the woman jerked away.
Joseph said: ‘No, don't stop her, Rain.
I want to hear what she's got to say.’
Rain said: ‘But…’
He snarled at the old woman.
‘Come on, let's see how you justify that accusation.
You can't go around calling people murderers, you know.’
‘I know what you did and I know how it was done.
You were both in it.
You two and Philippe Maurin pretended to be her friends, but look what happened to her.’
Rain renewed her grip on the woman.
She wanted to put an arm around her and steer her away.
Barbara Coleman struggled against her, shouted: ‘Leave me alone, Rain.
Even you can't bear to hear the truth.
That's been the trouble all along, hasn't it?
That's what went wrong with the Durance coterie, no one could tolerate the truth.
They all wanted flattery and nonsense and if they did anything that wasn't right they expected people to cover up for them.
It's not loyalty, that kind of covering up.
People make a virtue of loyalty but it's not always a good thing.
Look what loyalty did for Sabine!
She was killed because of it…’
She ended with a high-pitched wail as Merlyn reached her and shook her.
The white hair flopped back and forth and the wispy figure crumpled.
Merlyn was savage, saying through gritted teeth that she was never, never, never to repeat such evil nonsense.
Barbara Coleman, battling to free herself, shouted: ‘You killed her.
The two of you killed her.
It was murder.’
The last word contorted to a scream as Merlyn let her go with a thrust that sent her rocking unbalanced in Rain's direction.
Rain caught her in both arms, held her tight, and knew it was only her grasp which kept the woman upright.
The Josephs were squabbling about whether Merlyn should have done what she had just done, whether Barbara Coleman had not truly deserved it.
Rain was trying to soothe the old woman.
But through it all Barbara Coleman kept up a hysterical chant of ‘Murder!
Murder!
Murder!’
Rain murmured to her an unconvincing: ‘It's all right.’
Joseph retorted: ‘It's not all right if she's going around saying that.’
Rain glared at him over Barbara Coleman's head.
‘Somebody killed her friend.’
He said: ‘And I suppose she's been trying to convince you it was me.’
Rain met his gaze.
She felt again the fear she had known when she walked into him in the dark passage.
He said sarcastically: ‘Oh, that's just fine.
She's convinced you, has she?’
Merlyn said: ‘What possible reason could Ben have for wanting Sabine dead?’
Rain said: ‘If Sabine Jourdain planned to reveal how much of Durance's work she'd been doing for him, a lot of people would have preferred she didn't.’
Beneath Rain's chin Barbara Coleman's white head quivered and a broken voice chanted: ‘Murder!
Murder!
Murder!’
‘Yes,’ said Rain.
‘Sabine Jourdain was murdered and it looks as though it was to prevent her from talking.’
Merlyn handed her husband a tea towel and he scrubbed at his shirt with it.
Joseph said to Rain: ‘Do you really believe I killed her?’
Rain noticed he had not argued about Sabine Jourdain's role in painting the Durances.
‘No,’ she said, ‘actually I don't think you did.’
Merlyn said: ‘Who, then?’
Joseph flashed her a look which she ignored.
Rain thought of Maurin and his clients like the Contessa Mantero.
She rejected Cobalt's story about Edouard and the drug dealers.
In her mind the murder and the attack at the Chagall museum were inextricably bound up with the secret of the Durances.
She said: ‘Someone else who would stand to lose as much as you would if the truth came out.’
For an instant the Josephs' eyes met.
Rain saw in that glance all the confirmation she needed that the Josephs were covering up for their friend.
28
The skies had opened.
The town was awash, the sea like hammered pewter.
Indoors electric light flickered.
For a few seconds the lights at the Villa Fiesole failed entirely, and in those few seconds there was the sound of the back door being opened and footsteps in the passage.
Maurin appeared in the kitchen doorway.
Rain felt her protective grip on Barbara Coleman tighten, but the woman was relieved to see him.
She did not know about the incident at the Chagall museum, she knew nothing but her conviction that Joseph was a murderer.
‘Philippe!’
Her cry was one of welcome.
Maurin was puzzled she was not alone.
‘I guessed you'd be here, Barbara.
I thought we should have a little talk.’
‘Yes, we can talk, Philippe, but I'm not going back to Nice.
It was an unpleasant flat and the woman was ill.
I'm going to stay here, this is my home.’
He raised his hands in acquiescence.
‘Very well, you are here and you may as well stay.’
Merlyn said: ‘We can't have her going around saying what she has just been saying.
She thinks Ben killed Sabine.’
‘I know it,’ Barbara Coleman shouted, but Rain hushed her.
‘You tell her, Philippe,’ Joseph said.
‘She won't even listen to us deny it.’
Rain saw the guarded looks between Maurin and the Josephs.
She thought it probably suited Maurin to have Barbara Coleman believe Joseph guilty.
Joseph would be going back to the United States soon and would be beyond her gossip, but if Maurin convinced her of Joseph's innocence, then how long would it be before she realized that he, too, had a strong financial motive for wanting the truth about the Durances kept secret?
Maurin said: ‘I am surprised you brought Barbara home, Ben, if you are worried about what she might say.’
‘We didn't,’ said Joseph.
‘We couldn't have, you didn't even tell us where we could find her,’ said Merlyn.
Maurin looked at Rain and raised an eyebrow.
‘So?
It was you, was it?’
She could have sworn his eyes lingered on the scarf about her neck.
She saw no reason to give him any information he did not already have.
Joseph said: ‘We didn't know they were here.
There wasn't a car we recognized in the lane, we were as surprised to find them as you are to find us.’
Maurin made a graceful gesture with one hand.
He looked slightly amused as he said: ‘I am not owed any explanations, this is your house.’
All the same, Merlyn said: ‘We came over to fetch some things we store here.’
Barbara Coleman freed herself from Rain's hold.
She was still trembling but wore her defiant look again.
‘Philippe, I'm sure they came after me.
They knew I would guess they killed Sabine.’
‘That's rubbish,’ said Joseph.
He flung the damp tea towel on to the table.
Barbara Coleman ignored him, she said to Maurin: ‘Sabine admitted to me she was painting the pictures for Durance.
Later she told me she was frightened of him.’
She jabbed a finger at Joseph.
‘She was afraid of what he might do when she told him she wasn't going to keep up the pretence any longer and everything she did in future was to be sold as her own work.’
‘This isn't true!’ said Joseph.
‘Oh yes, it is.
I remember her very words.
She said: ‘I have been used for too long, I must do things for myself now.
Durance is an artist, he will understand.
But I am afraid of what Benedict Joseph might do.’’
Merlyn rushed forward, saying: ‘This is crazy.
She's making this up.
Philippe, you're not going to believe this, are you?’
Maurin shrugged.
‘What does it matter what Barbara says?
Sabine is not here to confirm or deny their conversation, and neither can she confirm or deny how much of her work went into the Durances.
The only person who knows about the paintings is Durance himself and he will dismiss Barbara's story as unfounded speculation.’
He looked at Rain.
‘No one can offer anything but unfounded speculation.’
Barbara Coleman was livid.
‘But it's not unfounded, it's true!
She'd been doing more and more of his work for him.
There was a conspiracy to stop your buyers knowing, that's all it was.’
‘No,’ said Maurin.
‘Sabine and Durance were not interested in buyers.
They were interested in creating beautiful things together.
If Sabine had wanted to break away and work on her own she could have done so at any time.
She preferred to work with Durance.’
‘In the end she wanted to get away, and see what happened.
Because of the conspiracy she wasn't allowed to.
He killed her!’
Joseph clapped both hands to his greying head.
‘If I hear that one more time I shall begin to believe it myself!’
Merlyn said: ‘For heaven's sake, Philippe, tell her Ben didn't do any such thing.’
There was a fractional hesitation before Maurin said: ‘Will you accept it, Barbara, if I tell you that?’
The white head shook.
‘You're quite willing to cover up for him.
You're colleagues, friends — why shouldn't you hide the truth of what he did?’
Maurin sounded as though his patience were being strained.
He said: ‘Barbara, we should have that little talk I mentioned.’
Rain was afraid for her.
She said: ‘Barbara is very upset.
She's had a distressing time.
I think she ought to be left alone.’
Maurin took no notice.
He said to Barbara Coleman: ‘Have you taken your pills?’
She looked sheepish.
He said: ‘Where are they?
I'll fetch them for you, if you like.’
She drew the bottle from her skirt pocket.
Maurin said: ‘Stay there.’
He poured her a glass of water, took it across and stood near while she swallowed a couple of pills.
He said to Rain: ‘She left them behind when I took her to Nice.
I had to buy some more for her to take while she was there.
No doubt she forgot those when she came here.’
Barbara Coleman handed back the glass.
‘Thank you, Philippe.’
Rain was seeing again the solicitous side of Maurin, the man who could talk kindly to Durance when the man was devastated at the death of his friend.
Maurin could bustle Barbara Coleman off to Nice against her will, but he would also go shopping for tablets to replace the forgotten ones.
Maurin said to Rain: ‘Barbara will be calmer presently.
Then I must talk to her.’
Joseph said: ‘Well, just make sure you impress on her that I had nothing to do with any murder and she is not to suggest it.’
Barbara Coleman scowled at him.
There was a long, uncomfortable silence.
The electric light flickered and dimmed.
Then she said: ‘I'm going to my room now.
I want to sit down.’
With one of her fast movements she went into the passage.
Joseph and Merlyn went after her.
Rain tried to follow but Maurin blocked her way.
‘Rain, there is something I must say to you, too.’
She drew away from him, feeling the cold sap of fear.
She was alone with the man she believed had killed once and tried to kill a second time.
‘What is it?’
‘Barbara must not be permitted to tell these stories.’
‘About Joseph killing Sabine?’
‘That, of course, but also about the Durances.’
She mocked him with a smile.
‘I would expect you to say that.
Your problem is that much of what Barbara says is true.
Sabine Jourdain was doing most of Durance's work, Benedict Joseph did have a motive to kill her.’
‘Don't overlook that Barbara has a strong motive to dislike Ben.
She blames him for the break-up of the coterie.
It had been disintegrating for years, mainly because Durance had tired of that sort of pressure.
He wanted a more solitary, peaceful life.
It no longer amused him to be surrounded by a band of admirers.
Admirers can be very exhausting and he is an old man.’
‘If Sabine Jourdain could have broken away from him any time she chose, it must be equally true that Durance could have torn himself from those admirers.’
‘Perhaps.
But Barbara believes Ben was the person who engineered everything.
She believes he bought this property from Durance with the sole purpose of turning out the others.
The truth is that it is in a dreadful state of disrepair and would have been difficult to sell unless it went to a builder who would demolish it and redevelop the site.
Durance was saved a lot of difficulty by selling to Ben and being able to buy a small flat and studio in the town.
The move was Durance's plan, Ben only helped.
Barbara knows all this, but nothing will deter her from blaming Ben for everything she does not like.’
‘Why did she stay on here if she dislikes him so much?’
‘She says she has nowhere else to go.
She refused to be driven out, as she put it.
I'm not sure she doesn't have a funny idea that if she waits long enough people will drift back again, perhaps even Durance.
Anyway, Ben let her stay.
But if she persists in what she is saying about him now, he will have no choice but to insist she goes.
This is what I want to impress on her.
In her own interests she must keep quiet.’
Rain said drily: ‘I don't think she's easily impressed.’
‘Rain, I am perfectly sure Ben did not kill Sabine.
And I am certain there can be no proof one way or the other about her work on the Durances.’
She said: ‘Barbara Coleman is not the only source for the story that Sabine Jourdain painted the Durances.
Someone else I know went to the Villa Souleiado while she was working there and she didn't deny her role.’
Maurin was startled.
‘Who was this?’
‘I'm sure you'll understand if I don't tell you.
She wanted the secret kept and paid him to keep it.
He says he didn't speak about it until her death.’
‘Again there is no proof, is there?
The word of a blackmailer?’
‘Yes, all you and the Josephs have to fear are the prejudiced conclusions of Barbara Coleman and the word of a blackmailer.
Oh, I almost forgot.
You have to consider me, too, don't you?’
His eyes narrowed.
She waited, but he did not speak.
She said bitterly: ‘You didn't forget me, though, did you?
You tried to prevent me publishing what I'd found out.’
She ripped away her scarf and he saw in the uncertain light the marks about her throat.
‘You believe I did that!’
‘Didn't you?’
‘No!
How can you think it?’
She stood there, in front of him, swinging the scarf in her right hand, accusing him of having failed to strangle her.
Maurin floundered, made indignant noises in French, switched to English.
‘I know nothing of this.’
Very calmly she assured him she knew that could not be true.
He blustered that he was a dealer in pictures, not a criminal.
He said he had no idea she had been assaulted.
He saw from her eyes that she could not, would not believe him.
Rain said: ‘You were told by Edouard that I had been tricked into going to the museum.
Are you going to deny you went there, too?’
‘Yes.’
‘Perhaps the taxi driver will remember taking you.’
A hand shaded his eyes.
He said: ‘I thought I had been in time.’
‘You timed it rather well, although perhaps you were in too much of a hurry to get away, because I lived to tell the tale.’
‘No!
No, you have got the wrong tale.’
He advanced on her, pleading she should believe what he had to say.
She backed off.
She said: ‘You knew I'd be there.
You took a taxi and I was discovered with a length of picture cord around my neck…’
‘It is still the wrong tale.
Listen, I will tell you what happened.’
She swung the scarf, a taunting rhythm as he spoke.
He said: ‘Edouard phoned me…’
‘…while I was in your gallery and had just told you I knew about the Durances.’
‘Yes.
He called while you were there.
He said he had fooled you into going to the museum.
No doubt I ought to have told you it was a trick, but he had made the plan to stop you going to his flat.
I knew it would keep you out of the way at a time when you might be spreading your theory about the Durances.’
‘You mean I could have been discussing it with some of your clients, like the Contessa Mantero?’
‘Think what would happen if she were to become doubtful about her collection.
Not only would I lose a valued client but her collection might come on to the market, her reasons for selling would become known, Durances all over the world would become suspect and lose their value and dealers would suffer.
Rather than let you go to the contessa I thought it wise to let you waste an hour or two at the museum.’
‘Why did you follow me?’
‘After you left me I telephoned Barbara to see that she was all right.
She confirmed what you had told me about Edouard being beaten up and said she was afraid it was all because of her.
Of course it was not, but she is intractable once she has an idea.’
‘And then?’
‘I tried to think who might have been to Edouard's flat.
I could guess why he might have had trouble with the sort of people Barbara described: she said she had watched what happened but the men had not spotted her.
So I asked around, a word here and there in the sort of places where people hear things.
During the afternoon I was given my answer.
It was not an astonishing one, in the context of a small-time drugs network.
Then, as I was leaving, my informant added what he thought was a rather amusing story.
He said the brothers who had hurt Edouard had turned to culture, they had gone that afternoon to the Chagall museum.’
Rain did not think this was enough to suggest the brothers went to look for her and said so.
‘On its own, perhaps not, but I'd also been told that day  that people believed you and an English journalist who lives here, James Cobalt, were making enquiries about drug trafficking.
Put together, it appeared the brothers were going to harm you.’
Rain felt herself wavering.
Maurin's story was credible.
The only flaw was that he got hold of information so easily, but maybe it was no more easily than Cobalt had done.
She decided to let Maurin think she had swallowed his tale.
She said: ‘They did harm me, and where were you when it happened?’
‘I do not know.
I took a taxi, as you say.
I was a little later than the time Edouard mentioned.
I made a quick tour of the museum but recognized no one.
So I left, in the same taxi.’
The lights went out.
In the darkness he said: ‘I know nothing more than I have told you, but I blame myself for what happened.
If only I had told you straight away the appointment was a hoax…’
The lights reappeared.
Rain said: ‘Perhaps it would have happened anyway.
’ She thought of the pedlar who had chased her and Oliver later that same day.
‘If the museum hadn't offered an opportunity, they would have looked for another.’
Maurin was eager to agree, diminishing his responsibility.
Rain began to replace her scarf, and wished her hands were not clumsy and nervous.
She was a long way from believing him.
She said: ‘You must tell me who these brothers are.’
He faltered.
She said: ‘Why not?
Because I might find them or because I might not be able to?
Do they really exist?’
‘Certainly they exist!
But I shall not tell you their names.
If you were to tell the police, or if you were to go after them yourself, there could be difficulties.
You have escaped with your life, it is far better that you ask no more questions and go home and forget.’
‘Why are you shielding these men?’
‘Because they will be in Nice long after you have gone away.
If there is trouble for them they will find a way of paying me back for revealing their names.
They would eventually find out that I did so.’
‘But you had no difficulty in finding out who they were?
Not everyone is as afraid of them as you're pretending to be.’
‘I assure you, Rain, I am not pretending.
These people are inconsequential, but they are gadflies.
I do not want my family harmed or my gallery burned down, so I shall not say who they are.
The man who told me about them is not afraid because he can do more harm to them than they can inflict on him.’
‘Oh yes?’
She sounded disbelieving.
‘Yes, because he is a police officer.
Now do you see?’
‘You're not going to give me his name, either, no doubt, because he told you something he shouldn't have done and he probably did it because you paid him for it.’
He inclined his head in agreement.
He said: ‘I have told you all I can about the attack on you.
I am sorry it took place but I promise you it would be wisest to go home and forget it.’
‘Sabine Jourdain was killed — would it be wise to pretend that never happened, either?’
‘You have accused me of attacking you, are you also going to suspect me of killing her?’
She could not tell whether this was mere sarcasm.
Rain fingered an end of her scarf.
Outside there was the noise of water rushing along gutters inadequate to their task.
Maurin had challenged her, and she was afraid to meet that challenge.
29
The lights went out.
Rain saw Maurin's eyes glittering in the dark, coming closer.
She flung herself out of the kitchen and along the passage.
She groped for a door, discovered the handle, rushed into the room.
‘Is that you, Rain?’
Barbara Coleman's voice, from across the room.
‘Yes, it's me.’
She fought to sound normal.
Barbara Coleman believed herself to be with her friend's killer, Rain was convinced she herself had just left him.
Behind her the door moved again.
He was in the room with them.
She made out Barbara Coleman's white hair, low down as she sat in an armchair.
Merlyn was a dark column near a window, apparently looking out of it although the torrent obscured the view.
Joseph was near the easel.
Rain wondered what they had spoken about, how long the conversation had lapsed before she joined them.
She waited to see if they would resume, if Maurin would mention anything of their own talk in the kitchen.
He did not, but she did not know whether he was silent about the assault on her because it would upset Barbara Coleman to hear of it, or because he did not want the Josephs to know.
She tried to calculate the effect of telling them all.
The old woman might become hysterical again and renew her accusations about Joseph, or she might follow Rain's own reasoning and link Maurin with the attack at the museum and Sabine Jourdain's murder.
But how would the Josephs react?
Would they be shocked or would they appear to know of it?
Joseph said to Merlyn: ‘We'll go just as soon as this  weather lets up.
We can come back another time.’
Merlyn murmured agreement.
Rain crossed to where Barbara Coleman sat, and asked her: ‘Are you feeling better now?’
The woman squeezed her arm.
‘I'll be fine, my dear.
Philippe was quite correct, I hadn't taken my pills and it was one of the days when I did rather need them.’
The lights came back on and then a thud overhead made them all jump.
Merlyn whirled round from the window to look at her husband.
Joseph made a discreet calming gesture with a hand.
Maurin was gazing at the ceiling.
Barbara Coleman and Rain swapped conspiratorial glances.
‘Is somebody else in the house?’
Maurin asked.
Joseph stared at Barbara Coleman, then Rain, waiting for their answers.
There were sounds on the stairs.
Joseph set off for the door but Rain got there first.
Coming down the passage towards her was Cobalt.
Oliver was not to be seen.
‘Success!’
Cobalt called in the most enthusiastic tone she had ever heard from him.
He did his imitation of Barbara Coleman's voice again: ‘Just as I thought.
It's the perfect place, my dear.’
‘James, don't say any more…’
But Cobalt was calling over his shoulder.
‘Come on!
Where's the rest of the drugs squad?’
As Oliver's distant voice answered him, Cobalt entered the room and discovered the Josephs and Maurin.
His cheery smile vanished.
He stood there, the others making a semicircle in the room, and he looked like a criminal before his accusers.
Barbara Coleman gave a histrionic gasp: ‘Drugs?
Did I hear you say drugs?’
Cobalt's liquid blue eyes went to her.
His red hair was flame in the lamplight, but there was no colour in his face.
Joseph demanded of her: ‘Who is this?
Who have you let into the house?’
She said: ‘This is Mr Cobalt.’
Maurin sounded astonished.
‘And he is looking for drugs?’
Barbara Coleman said: ‘You heard what he said, Philippe.
It appears he's found them.’
Maurin asked Cobalt: ‘What sort of drugs?’
He said, with a shot at casual humour: ‘Oh you know, the usual sort which people hide away.
Illegal ones.’
Joseph cleared his throat.
‘Now look here, Mr…er…’
‘Cobalt.’
‘Mr Cobalt.
Would you mind explaining yourself?
Are you saying you found illegal drugs on this property?’
‘That's right.’
Cobalt was feeling his way.
Merlyn said: ‘Are you sure that's what you've found?’
Cobalt decided humour was still the best policy.
‘The box isn't actually labelled ‘Illegal Drugs’ but I'm in no doubt that's what it contains.’
More footsteps in the passage and in came Oliver.
Maurin and the Josephs gaped at him, then revised some ideas.
Merlyn said: ‘You're a friend of Oliver West then, Mr Cobalt?
You're not a police officer.’
‘Police?
Good heavens no,’ said Oliver, laughing rather too loudly.
Merlyn was tight-lipped.
‘I see.’
‘Well, I'm damned if I do,’ said Joseph to Cobalt.
‘What right have you got to go searching people's houses for drugs or anything else?’
Barbara Coleman began: ‘But…’
Joseph rounded on her.
‘You're supposed to look after this place.
It's the only reason you've been allowed to stay on.
Well, this is the finish.
You can pack your bags and get out.
Now.
Right away.
What's the use of keeping you here if you let anyone who chooses have a free run of the place?’
The woman half rose, clapped hands to her reddened face.
Rain touched her shoulder, pressed her back into the chair for fear of a repetition of the scenes in the kitchen.
Merlyn said: ‘Ben, that's just a little hasty, we don't know…’
‘I don't want to know any more.
I know enough already.
She's going around calling me a murderer and she's invited this Cobalt in to turn over the place looking for drugs.’
He shook a finger at the crying figure in the chair.
‘You're out.
Do you understand that?’
Rain hoped Maurin would come to the woman's rescue.
Instead he spoke to Cobalt: ‘What have you found?’
‘Heroin.
Quite a lot of it.’
Maurin glanced at the ceiling.
‘In the room above this?’
‘Yes.’
Barbara Coleman's voice was tremulous.
‘That was Durance's studio when he lived here.
He would never, never have…’
Rain said: ‘Assuming it's true that it's heroin…’
Oliver interrupted with: ‘No one would go to that trouble to hide a box of talcum powder.’
‘…who could have put it there?’
Nobody answered her.
Then Joseph snapped: ‘God knows who she's been letting into this house.’
Rain asked where precisely the box had been found.
Cobalt said: ‘There's a low platform on wheels in the room.’
‘That's the throne,’ Barbara Coleman explained.
‘It's what artists use when they have models to pose.
They make an arrangement of things on the throne and then set the pose…’
Cobalt ignored her.
‘It was below the platform.’
‘Just lying there?’ enquired Maurin.
‘No, beneath the platform there's a short length of floorboard.
We raised it and there was the box.’
Maurin said to the Josephs: ‘This looks very bad, very bad indeed.’
Joseph snarled back: ‘You can't believe I have anything to do with this?’
Merlyn said: ‘None of us really know whether it's heroin or not.
We must take the box to the police station and ask them to check it out.’
Cobalt said: ‘I don't think it should be moved.’
Merlyn said: ‘It's not a dead body we're discussing, Mr Cobalt, it's a box of powder.
If I take it to the police the matter will be dealt with much sooner than if we leave it where it is and wait for them to call here.
You know how long they can keep people hanging around.’
An argument broke out about the wisdom of delivering the box to the police.
The Josephs were in favour of taking it, Maurin and Barbara Coleman backed them up.
Cobalt, Rain and Oliver were less confident it was the best course.
Rain said: ‘Wouldn't it be destroying part of the evidence?’
She  thought there would be no proof it had been beneath the platform.
‘Damn their evidence,’ said Joseph.
‘I just want that stuff out of my house.’
‘We can resolve this very easily,’ Rain said.
‘We can telephone the police and ask them what they want us to do.’
There was a lull in the conversation.
They heard water cascading from broken gutters outside and the insistent drip, drip, drip where it had found its way in around a window.
Merlyn stepped forward.
‘I'll do it.
I'll use the phone in the hall.’
She was almost at the door when Rain said: ‘I'll come with you.
You'll find it very difficult to explain everything when you don't speak French.’
Merlyn froze, then turned to lean with her back against the door.
Rain thought she was trying for a dramatic effect, but she was a poor actress and the result was that she looked petulant.
Before Merlyn could speak her husband said: ‘Look, I really don't want the police coming over here.
They've already been to the Jonquil because of Sabine's death.
I have to consider my reputation, you know.’
‘So must I,’ said Maurin.
‘If you want the police here then I ask that you do not contact them until I have left.
There is no point in involving me in this regrettable matter.’
Barbara Coleman dragged herself up out of her chair.
‘As I'm no longer to live here I would also be pleased not to be troubled by the police.’
She marched to the door.
Merlyn stepped aside with a supercilious look which the older woman pretended not to see.
‘I'm not going to steal your heroin, Merlyn,’ she said.
‘I'm going to pack.’
They heard her go down the passage, then the disagreement about telephoning the police was renewed.
The case for protecting reputations emerged as the strongest.
Rain fought against it.
She thought murder and a cache of death-dealing drugs were too serious to be subject to petty considerations like that, but the Josephs and Maurin were not listening.
It was Oliver who noticed Barbara Coleman's exit from the  house.
He glimpsed the short white-haired figure heading for the back gate but did not say so until much later when Merlyn asked where she had got to.
Maurin was concerned for her.
‘Was she carrying her luggage?’
‘No, nothing heavy,’ said Oliver.
Merlyn demanded to know why he had not reported her departure at the time.
He told her it had not been easy to get a word in.
Rain said: ‘Where can she have gone?’
And Maurin replied that it was easy to guess.
He said: ‘I had better see everything is all right.’
‘Merlyn and I will come,’ said Joseph.
‘We do not want a crowd,’ objected Maurin.
But Rain felt she ought to go, too.
She and Oliver ran through the downpour to Cobalt's car and then had to wait in the inadequate shelter of the wall until he arrived.
Cobalt was speaking to Maurin as they came through the garden together.
Oliver said: ‘I'm uneasy about Cobalt.’
‘Why?’
She wanted to see whether his doubts reflected her own.
‘I think he and Maurin know each other.’
‘They appear to know some of the same people.’
She told Oliver about Maurin's explanation for the attack on her.
‘Drugs, again,’ said Oliver.
‘Cobalt is able to get information about criminal activity linked to drugs and so is Maurin.
Then Cobalt gets a hint about drugs hidden in the Villa Fiesole and Maurin also turns up here.’
They broke off as Cobalt joined them, unlocked the car.
Rain gave him directions.
They looked out for Barbara Coleman on the way, but there were taxis about and no one doubted she would have called one.
For the last few hundred yards they trundled slowly behind a cab.
It pulled up exactly where they intended to and out got a drenched Barbara Coleman who scuffled through the nearest doorway.
Cobalt looked in his rear view mirror and reported that the Josephs' car and Maurin's were not far behind.
Oliver asked whether they should go after Barbara Coleman or wait for the others.
Rain said: ‘I'm not sure why I'm here, except that Barbara is very frightened and might need someone on her side.’
‘How very noble,’ Oliver said ironically as he opened the car door and stepped down into a puddle.
Rain joined him in the doorway but there was no time to speak before Cobalt splashed through the puddle to them.
Barbara Coleman was in the lobby, banging on a door.
She was calling, her voice high with frustration.
Another door opened and the caretaker looked out.
At that moment Joseph ran into the lobby, reassured her with his affable smile.
Her door closed.
Rain was sure she was listening on the other side of it.
Joseph asked Barbara Coleman: ‘What do you think you were doing, running off like that into the storm?
Couldn't you even wait to tell us you were going?’
She shrieked that he was to take his hands off her.
He protested that he was attempting to unlock the door.
Rain motioned to Oliver that she was going upstairs.
She paused halfway up the second flight to hear whether anyone was following, but all she heard was the sound of a door below opening and the voices of Joseph, Maurin and Barbara Coleman going into the flat.
She imagined Merlyn watching with her cruel eyes and Oliver being silently attentive and Cobalt quietly playing whatever game he was playing.
Rain ran up the rest of the stairs.
The double brown doors were ajar.
There were two people in the room, two male figures against the poor light from the window.
Instinctively her hand reached for a light switch.
When she found it the scene was stark.
Marius Durance had his back to the table where his paints grew dusty.
His body was arched as though he had been forced to retreat.
Facing him was Tarquin Poulteney-Crosse.
Tim was taller and broader and he leaned towards the old man like a creature caught in the instant of springing on its quarry.
Rain saw them like that for a second, then Tim twisted round and glared at her.
Durance recognized her with relief: ‘Rain Morgan?
You're here in time to forestall my assailant.’
Tim snorted.
‘I wasn't going to hit you.’
‘Can you be so sure?’
Rain asked.
‘Perhaps you were going  to lose control as you did when you attacked Sabine Jourdain?’
Tim's hand clutched at his fair hair.
Rain wished she knew what he was thinking.
With Durance it was easy to tell.
His hands relaxed, the tension went out of his body.
He moved away from the youth.
His question was for Rain: ‘What had he to do with Sabine?’
‘They had a row, on the night she died.’
Durance studied Tim with disgust.
Then he said to Rain: ‘He attacked me only with words.’
Tim told her: ‘You know why I came here.’
At first she did not, then she remembered Oliver's parting words to Tim in the rue du Bateau and understood how they had been interpreted.
She said: ‘You came as a blackmailer, to try and extort money to support your drug addiction.’
Tim said: ‘I'm not an addict, I told you…’
Durance said with quiet disdain: ‘He made mad accusations, they were so mad no one would believe him.’
Rain nodded.
‘I've heard his story.’
Tim grew restless.
‘It's true.’
His hands were clenching and unclenching.
Durance roared: ‘No, it's mad.
You'll never be believed.
I won't buy your silence because it's worth nothing.
You are worth nothing.’
Tim thrust out an arm and shouted to Rain: ‘Here's the evidence if anyone wants it!’
Along the wall behind her were ranked paintings.
Among them was the one she had seen on the Jonquil.
She felt it was subtly different now but there was no time to study it.
‘You see?’
Tim cried.
‘These are what I saw at her studio.’
Durance went to him shouting: ‘How dare you accuse me…’
The doors were pushed wide and Maurin came in with Joseph, then Cobalt and Oliver.
Joseph was at his most agitated.
Maurin called out: ‘Say nothing, Durance.
Nothing at all.’
He translated for Joseph.
Joseph's mouth set in a thin line.
Durance and Maurin spoke rapid French.
Tim plunged into the discussion, justifying himself.
Joseph said: ‘Please, Philippe, what is all this about?’
Maurin explained about Tim's blackmail attempt.
Joseph groaned and said: ‘At least Barbara Coleman wasn't trying to blackmail anyone.’
Just as her name was spoken her white head bobbed into view.
She rushed up to Durance.
‘Oh Marius, at last I can tell you how dreadfully sorry I am about poor Sabine dying, and in such a cruel way.
You must be heartbroken, you were always so close, I mean even after you were no longer…
You always meant so much to each other.
No one will miss her as you will.’
Durance assumed a calm dignity, said a polite: ‘Thank you, Barbara.’
He moved away from her.
But she was not to be put off easily.
She followed him up the room, repeating her sympathy and when that did not hold his attention, she began to apologize for her lateness in coming to speak to him about the tragedy.
‘Now, you're not to be cross with me, my dear, because I didn't come sooner, the truth is I wanted to come straight away but it wasn't possible.
I wasn't even in Antibes, you know, I was in Nice.’
For the first time she interested him.
‘In Nice, Barbara?’
‘Yes, Philippe thought I should be kept out of the way for a few days…’
‘Out of whose way?’
Durance looked at Maurin.
Maurin gave a slight shake of the head as if to dismiss what the old woman was saying.
But she went on: ‘It was the day Sabine went to supper on the boat.’
Durance asked: ‘The day she died?’
‘No, Marius, the day before that.
I thought it was rather grand to be going to supper on the boat and I wanted her to tell me all about it later but I never saw her again.
The last time I saw her was when Benedict Joseph shoved her into his car outside the Villa Fiesole, and Philippe made me go with him to Nice.’
Durance was astounded.
He insisted on hearing her out, at whatever length and with as many digressions as she chose.
He would allow no interruptions or corrections from Maurin.
Joseph, unable to follow the French, waited in anguish, not knowing what was being said.
He saw Maurin grow more wretched as the story was unfurled.
Durance's indignation gave him power, it was as though he actually grew in physical stature.
And as that happened Maurin and Joseph were reduced.
Once or twice Barbara Coleman sought corroboration of a point from Rain or Cobalt but otherwise not one of the onlookers dared to speak.
When she had done, Durance started a scathing attack on Maurin.
‘You're a mere salesman, Maurin, nothing better than that and you'd do well to remember it.
How dare you meddle in people's lives?
I've told you before that you must not interfere.’
Maurin interjected that he had done it for the best, that he suspected she would spread silly gossip and it was sensible to keep her away from the English journalist.
Durance shut him up, saying he had never had reason to doubt the woman's loyalty and inferring that it was more reliable than Maurin's.
When he had finished with Maurin his great dark eyes fixed on Joseph.
Durance had poor English and his bitter remarks would have been wasted on Joseph had not Maurin automatically translated the essence.
It might all have ended there if Barbara Coleman had not sought to claim more of Durance's attention and prolong Joseph's embarrassment by rushing on to tell how illegal drugs had been discovered beneath the platform.
What Durance had to say, Joseph never knew exactly because Maurin did not relay any of it but took issue with Durance himself.
Durance was adopting the view that if the drugs were found in his former studio his name would be dragged into a scandal.
He wanted to know how the damaging package had been disposed of.
Maurin said it had not.
Durance struck his forehead with his hand.
‘So stupid!’
Durance cried.
‘It must be moved immediately!’
Maurin, who had been longing for an excuse to escape, said he would go himself to attend to it and made for the door.
Oliver whispered to Rain: ‘I wonder what he'll do with it?
Pop down to the beach and sell it to the pedlar?’
She whispered back: ‘Or to your friend, Rosie?’
Oliver stopped smiling.
In fact, she thought it far more likely  Maurin would go home to Nice rather than back to the villa and become ‘involved’.
Joseph was trying to get someone to explain to him what the exchanges between Durance and Maurin had been about and where Maurin had gone.
Without Maurin, and with no inclination to ask Barbara Coleman, Joseph had isolated himself.
Rain left it to Cobalt to help but Cobalt did not.
Barbara Coleman and Durance were talking together, everyone else went downstairs.
‘Where's Merlyn?’
Oliver asked Rain.
Joseph, over-hearing, said she had returned to the Jonquil.
When they reached the street door they realized his problem.
‘It's too far to walk in this weather,’ Rain said.
‘We'll give you a lift to the boat, won't we, James?’
Cobalt could hardly refuse, but Joseph was adamant he would not accept.
He ran out into the wet streets saying he would find a taxi.
The others negotiated the puddles to Cobalt's car.
Rain sat beside Cobalt, with Oliver and Tim in the back seat.
She did not remember anyone inviting Tim, he had just tagged on to them, but she felt it was safer to take him than leave him near Durance in case he made any further blackmail attempts.
Cobalt drove back to the Villa Fiesole.
They were well on the way when he explained: ‘Barbara asked me to fetch a bag she's packed.
It's in her bedroom but was too heavy for her to carry.’
Rain accepted this but knew his other reason was to check on the box beneath the floorboards.
She feared it was a reckless bit of curiosity.
Supposing Maurin had returned to the villa?
Here they were, chasing after him when caution should have kept them away.
She and Oliver believed him guilty of murder, she had no idea what Cobalt believed.
When they reached the villa they saw Maurin's car in the lane.
‘We're in time,’ said Cobalt.
He took a camera from his pocket, checked the film, dropped it back into his pocket.
Rain, Oliver and Cobalt all gave Tim rather doubtful looks.
It was crossing their minds that it might be safer to leave him in the car, but they had to consider whether they could trust him not to steal it.
‘It's up to you,’ Rain said to Cobalt.
He shook his head.
‘I need to get home again.’
Tim went into the garden with them.
The ground was slippery, what had been a path was now a torrent.
The veranda behind the house was flooded as drains failed to cope.
They ran into the house with its unlocked back door, along the passage and upstairs.
Through the open door of her room they could see Barbara Coleman's packed bag just as she had promised.
Further along the landing light came from another room.
Oliver hesitated, but Cobalt walked straight in.
They heard his step falter and as they pressed into the doorway after him they came face to face with Philippe Maurin, holding a gun.
30
A sardonic smile spread over Maurin's face.
He looked at each of them, his eyes coming to rest on Rain.
Then there was a sharp laugh.
Maurin spun the gun in his hand, tossed it on to a stool.
‘Four very frightened faces,’ he said.
‘I wish you could have seen them.’
Cobalt retorted that it was not an amusing thing to do, pointing a gun at people, and he could not see what Maurin found so funny.
Maurin was still laughing.
‘You alarmed me, too.
How was I to know who was marching up the stairs and in here?
I was not expecting any of you.’
Cobalt was not appeased, and Oliver, to prevent further argument, went across to Maurin, saying: ‘Let's take the heroin to the police station and…’
He stopped short.
He was standing beside the raised floorboard, looking into the cavity.
‘Yes,’ said Maurin.
‘As you see, the box has gone.’
They all gathered round to inspect the empty space where two of them had previously seen a box.
Rain confronted Maurin: ‘Did you move that box?’
‘No.’
He dared her to disbelieve him.
Oliver said: ‘Then who…’
Rain butted in: ‘Did anyone see Merlyn at Durance's studio?’
No one had.
She had been last noticed at the wheel of the car when the Josephs arrived there.
Maurin said: ‘Merlyn was most determined to take charge of the box.’
‘So keen,’ said Rain, ‘that she came back once we were all with Durance.’
‘We don't need to look in the police station for her,’ Cobalt added.
‘She won't have taken the box there.’
‘The boat, then?’ suggested Oliver.
The boat, it was agreed, was the likeliest place for Merlyn and the box to be.
Rain wanted to go there straight away, but Maurin preferred that the floorboard and the platform should be replaced and the arrangement of stool and drapes reconstructed before they left.
He was concerned that the room must be left just as Durance would have wished.
Oliver and Tim carried out the task while he watched.
Maurin picked up the gun and put it in a pocket.
Rain drew Cobalt aside.
‘How did you know there would be drugs here?’
‘If I say one of my contacts tipped me off, I expect you'll pester me for his name.’
‘No, I won't.’
‘All right, then: one of my contacts tipped me off.’
He was being especially exasperating.
She said: ‘But did you suspect the Josephs knew the drugs were here?’
‘I wasn't convinced until I saw how anxious Merlyn was to get hold of the box once I'd mentioned it.’
Rain thought about Cobalt and the cache of drugs as they drove to the harbour, with Oliver and Tim once more in the back seat and the windscreen wipers rhythmically at work.
The Villa Fiesole was a fairly big house and yet it had not taken him long to find the box.
His contact had not merely tipped him off that drugs were on the premises, he had told him where to look.
If Tim had not been with them Rain would have questioned Cobalt about that.
Near the harbour entrance Maurin overtook Cobalt, pulled up and got out of his car to speak.
‘I do not wish to go to the Jonquil with you,’ he said.
‘If there is anything wrong then I have no need to be involved in it.’
Oliver muttered something unkind about rats and sinking ships but Maurin missed it.
Rain said: ‘Will you go back to Nice now?’
She imagined him next morning parading in his gallery, cosseting his reputation, toadying to his rich clients, dissociating himself from whatever unpleasantness the Josephs faced.
He did not answer, although she knew he had heard her.
He went before there were any more questions.
‘He doesn't want to be involved ‘if’ there's anything wrong!’she said sarcastically once Maurin's car moved off.
If’ there is anything wrong Philippe Maurin is definitely involved.’
They drove along the harbour.
Rain suggested Cobalt carried on well past the Jonquil so that anyone arriving at the boat would not see the car and guess they were there.
They walked back in pairs, Oliver and Tim ahead, then Rain and Cobalt.
‘Maurin didn't kill Sabine Jourdain,’ said Cobalt.
‘Oh?
And how can you be so sure?
He's known the truth about the Durances, he's kidnapped Barbara Coleman, he knew someone hoped to kill me, he probably knew about the Josephs and the drugs…’
Cobalt said, with a sideways glance at her: ‘What sort of a word is ‘probably’ for a journalist to use?’
‘Why are you determined Maurin couldn't have killed Sabine Jourdain?’
Cobalt flicked back his wet hair.
‘I don't say he couldn't have, just that he didn't.
If she was killed to prevent her telling the truth about the paintings, her killer was someone who believed she would tell.
Maurin didn't.’
Rain conceded: ‘He insisted to me that she was too loyal to give anything away.’
‘Well, there you are.
He thought the danger was Barbara Coleman so he tried to keep her hidden until you'd gone away.
That's less shocking than killing.’
‘James, you're doing an excellent job for the Maurin defence, but why couldn't he have kidnapped one old woman and killed the other?’
‘Because the prosecution would notice that hiding Barbara Coleman made him a prime suspect for the murder of her friend.
He's not stupid, he'd know he hadn't a hope of getting away with it.’
She edged around an especially deep puddle before replying: ‘Once Barbara Coleman was free to talk, suspicion would point to him.
But what might have happened to her if  we hadn't found out where she was, if you hadn't brought her back?’
‘I don't believe Maurin would have killed her any more than I think he killed Sabine Jourdain.’
Rain asked about the ease with which Cobalt had found the heroin.
In return she got his little smile.
‘I'd like to claim the credit but you'd find out I lied.
One of my magazines in the States has been following up rumours about the Josephs.
They have an extremely lavish lifestyle — for instance, do you know what it costs to charter the Jonquil?’
She remembered.
‘Yes.
Your magazine discovered they didn't legitimately earn enough to meet their bills?’
‘There were some strands of a drugs story in California but the reporters couldn't link it to smuggling from South America, which was the obvious line of enquiry.
So they asked me if it was possible the Josephs were bringing drugs in from France along with their haul of works of art.’
Rain congratulated him on finding the proof.
He said bitterly: ‘And losing it.
I photographed the box in the cavity, but there will be nothing to link the photograph with the Josephs or even with the Villa Fiesole.’
She told him what Maurin said about the reason for the attempt to kill her.
Cobalt stopped her.
‘I know,’ he said.
‘In a way that was my fault.
Neither of us were attacked because of the Durances but because the local drug dealers knew I was making enquiries about trafficking and they thought you were working with me.
I suppose they imagined we were going to expose their uninteresting little rackets, whereas I was only interested in what the Josephs were up to.’
Oliver and Tim were waiting for them at the gangway.
‘I'm not sure how we explain our presence,’ said Oliver, and let Rain and Cobalt board first.
‘I hope,’ said Rain over her shoulder, ‘we don't meet anyone else with a gun.’
The three faces behind her assumed looks of varying panic.
Ross, the steward, appeared, commiserated that they were all soaked through and took them into the lounge.
He said the Josephs were not there and Rain let him assume they  were on their way and expected to find four very wet friends.
Ross offered coffee while they waited.
Rain sat in the turquoise chair with the purple footstool, Oliver was on the settee not far from the replacement Chinese screen, Cobalt fingered the bronze bird, Tim stood in the doorway and watched the downpour slanting over the deck.
Coffee came and when Ross had retreated again, Tim said: ‘You'd think there'd be a chase, wouldn't you?
They should have rushed back here, started up the engines and dashed out to sea, and we'd have sent a police launch or the local equivalent of the Customs and Excise after them.’
Rain laughed.
‘In real life it would take them some time to get this boat ready to go to sea.
It uses lots of expensive gallons of fuel to the mile and it probably hasn't got even one of its tanks full so it wouldn't get any distance.’
Tim would not be put off.
‘But it would go really fast, wouldn't it?’
‘It might cruise at around 12 knots.
All in all, the Josephs could make a quicker getaway in a rowing boat.’
Cobalt said: ‘In this weather they'd be wiser to stay on land.’
Silence.
Just the sound of the wind outside and the angry rush of water against the harbour wall.
Oliver closed the door to the deck.
Deeper silence.
Then he said: ‘Perhaps they aren't coming here.’
Rain rang for Ross.
She asked whether Joseph or Merlyn had been back earlier.
He said not.
When he had gone Rain said: ‘At least we know why Joseph didn't want a lift back to the boat.
He and Merlyn had planned to go somewhere else, and she was taking the box there.’
‘They'll have to come back here some time,’ said Cobalt.
‘I'm going to wait.
I want some quotes from them for the magazine story.
They'll deny everything, of course.’
He looked quietly confident.
The American magazine would pay him very well for his work.
Rain wished he had someone to make sure he spent part of the proceeds on smartening up his flat.
Oliver and Tim were talking together, Cobalt was waiting  for his prey.
Rain felt uneasy.
She did not mean to be swayed by Cobalt's defence of Maurin, and yet he had undermined her confidence.
She asked herself whether it was possible that, after all, one or other of the Josephs had killed Sabine Jourdain and whether it happened because she knew of the drugs and not because of the Durances.
Rain mulled it over, but in the end thought the theory would not do.
Barbara Coleman lived at the villa and she had not known about the cache.
If she had, she would have been sure to say so when she was blaming Joseph for the murder.
And if Barbara Coleman had not known it appeared unlikely that Sabine Jourdain had.
Altogether, the link between the drugs and the murder was weak.
Rain sat there, thinking about Barbara Coleman, a woman who was both brave and pathetic.
She must have changed radically since she came to France, a carefree young woman writing home enthusiastic letters about her life in the sun.
Rain guessed what had caused such changes: the realization that her talent did not stretch very far; the passing of a way of life which had been so thrilling; impending old age with few friends, little money and no certainty of a roof over her head.
She had never had much, and now she had nothing.
And it was thinking of Barbara Coleman, what she had enjoyed and what she had become, that led Rain to a disturbing idea.
31
Rain did not want to explain to the others.
The doors to the deck were shut against the weather so she thought she could get ashore unseen.
She went into the corridor, up the stairs with the gilded banisters, crossed the cocktail bar and descended the open wooden steps near the gangway.
Lamps glowed through the ports of boats, vehicles had driving lights on.
Water swilled over the harbour road but Rain was already so wet she barely noticed as she splashed her way towards the town.
Her mind was preoccupied with what might happen at the end of her journey.
A car, moving much too fast, turned a puddle into a wave that flowed up to her ankles.
She looked after the car, knowing she had been so absorbed she would never have noticed if the Josephs had been in it.
She thought about the Josephs, apparently guilty of an especially heartless and greedy crime, and wondered how they had got drugs into the United States and whether they would ever do so again.
She ran through the stone arch.
The Bar de la Marine was full as people took shelter.
At Place Massena, she entered the gloomy passage to the rue du Bateau, but she did not go to the flat, she turned right and wound through the lanes instead.
As she went she thought about Philippe Maurin.
Maurin had been involved to some degree in everything that had happened.
Where he was not active, he at least had guilty knowledge.
Her step slowed.
At the end of the street in front of her she recognized his car.
She had not been wrong.
He had come here as she guessed he would.
They would meet again, but this time she would challenge Sabine Jourdain's killer.
She tapped at the door of Durance's flat.
Barbara Coleman opened it.
She was strained but managed a smile.
‘My dear, you're so wet.’
Rain followed her in.
The room was disarranged, in the way rooms get disarranged for cleaning.
Barbara Coleman found Rain a towel.
Rain said: ‘Are you here alone?’
‘Yes.
I insisted I was going to clean and tidy up.
Men can't stand that, can they?
They went to the studio.’
‘Are you going to stay here or go back to the Villa Fiesole?’
Her face clouded.
‘For the moment I shall be here.
Then I shall find somewhere new.
After the things that dreadful man has done and said I couldn't go back.
Do you suppose it was true about him keeping drugs there?’
‘I'm afraid it probably was.’
Barbara Coleman shuddered.
‘I wonder how long it was going on?
I had no idea at all, you see.’
Rain patted her hair with the towel, trying to soak up the water which seeped down her neck and face.
‘Has Philippe Maurin spoken to you about finding somewhere else to live?’
‘He's being most kind.
He came to talk to me about that.
He's concerned what will happen to me.’
She gave a little laugh, to indicate that this was foolishness on his part and she was not anxious herself.
Rain was not tricked.
‘Did he make any suggestions?’
‘Only that I ought to ask some of my old friends, people like Madeleine Corley, if I could be allowed to join them, but…
You can imagine how difficult it is to do such a thing.
I can't go around my friends begging for a home, can I ?
And giving a home to an artist isn't the easiest thing.
As a breed we take up such a lot of room.’
She came closer to Rain as though she wished to speak without being overheard, although they were alone.
‘As a matter of fact, my dear, I have one tiny idea which I will ask Durance about in a while, when I can choose the best moment.
You see, there is no one living at the Villa Souleiado now…
Perhaps he would let me go there.’
Rain said that was a good idea.
She felt utterly insincere.
Barbara Coleman would detest the solitude, the place would bring back memories of the good times and she would be  confronted more than ever with the evidence that the good times had gone.
But Rain kept up the pretence until she climbed the stairs to the studio.
Again there were two figures in the room but this time the light was on.
Maurin and Durance looked up.
They had the paintings leaning up against the trestle table and a chair.
‘We are surprised, Rain,’ said Maurin.
He smiled his most charming smile.
She presumed he meant they had not expected her, but she liked the ambiguity in his English.
She was quite sure she had surprised them in the act of carrying out the next stage of the deception concerning the Jourdain-Durance paintings.
She joined them near the table.
She said to Maurin: ‘I never knew how you and Joseph decided which pictures went to the States and which were sold through your gallery.
I suppose you don't have to consider him now.’
His smile faded.
‘Ben is a partner in my gallery.
The destination of the paintings is a matter for consultation between us.
We sell where we believe we can make most money.
What are you suggesting?’
‘If he goes to jail for trafficking in drugs you won't have to bother about consulting him, will you?
Or sharing with him?’
Durance's eyes were flashing.
‘What are you saying?’
Maurin translated and Durance looked insulted.
Rain went on in English to Maurin: ‘You knew the drugs were at the villa.
It was you who tipped off James Cobalt.
When he started making enquiries into the Josephs’ business affairs in France you were obviously one of the first people he'd ask.
You wanted to be there when he found the box, your arrival was nothing to do with Barbara Coleman going home.’
Durance intervened again, frustrated at being left out.
Rain challenged Maurin: ‘Go on, translate that for him.
Tell him the thieves have fallen out.’
‘You know nothing of what I did.’
She thought fleetingly of Cobalt and his objection to ‘probably’.
But the truth was arrived at through probabilities.
She said: ‘I believe you intended to trap the Josephs with their  smuggling.
You wondered how they contrived to be so rich from dealing in paintings.
There had to be another source of money and you realized what it was, and that they had acquired the Villa Fiesole to use in that business.’
He laughed a mirthless laugh.
He said: ‘Even if I were to say you are right, you would have no proof.
Yes, I guessed about the Josephs.
Someone even told me there was a place in Durance's studio at the house where the stuff was left for them.
I went there one day and hunted and found the, hiding place.
Barbara never knew I was there, anyone could go in and out of that house and she would never notice.
That is why the Josephs did not mind her staying there.
It was safer for them to have one old woman occupying part of the place than to leave it empty and risk a group of drifters moving in.
Yes, I knew what the Josephs were doing, but it was not up to me to stop them.
How could I ?’
Durance demanded to know what they were arguing about.
Rain said she would tell him presently, which did little to pacify him, and she went on in English to Maurin: ‘Joseph can't operate here without you, can he?
Neither of the Josephs speaks the language, they can't discuss things with Durance without your help, and because of the way the paintings were created they couldn't trust anyone else.’
He understood what she was thinking.
‘No!’ he said vehemently.
‘I had nothing to do with them buying drugs.
There is a man they meet, an American who has lived here many years, they deal through him.
Do not ask me any more, it is dangerous knowledge.
But, as Oliver has already challenged their whereabouts on the evening Sabine was killed, I will say this: on that evening the Josephs were at that man's house.
A little supper, a little dealing, all very civilized, no doubt.
But it does not provide a very useful alibi, does it?’
‘Please!’ shouted Durance.
‘I must know what you're saying.’
‘It's nothing to worry you.’
Maurin sounded soothing.
‘But I am worried!
What has Sabine to do with what you are saying?’
Maurin laughed again.
‘You always worried too much about Sabine.
Sabine was completely loyal to you, she'd never have done anything to damage your reputation.’
Durance's voice became a menacing whisper.
‘What do you know of loyalty?
You understand nothing but money and making a fine impression before rich people.
Without my name you're nothing.
You and Joseph are the same, feeding off the reputation and work of others.
Do you think I never realized how you were using me?
Because I don't care for material things to the degree you do, you chose to believe it didn't matter that you grew rich on my name.’
‘Please, don't go on.’
Maurin tried but Durance would not be stilled.
If Oliver had seen him now he would not think he was a man who was finished, he would see a desperate will to survive and defend himself.
Once more, Durance appeared to grow before Rain's eyes as his passion was roused.
She saw the spell-binder he used to be and the strength of personality that bound people to him.
He was raving at Maurin, at all the people who had failed to live up to his expectations of them.
He began to address Rain.
‘This man is of no more use to the world than those artists who came to fawn on me and scrape a little importance for themselves.
Where are they now?
Once they left my house they became nothing.
Take note of that, Maurin.
Without me they are nothing, they have nothing.’
‘You're going too far,’ Maurin protested.
‘You encouraged those people, then when you tired of them you discarded them.’
‘No!
I've never gone far enough.
I've let you play your games, you and Joseph, and I've said it was nothing to me, it was enough that I was a painter.
The market place is for people like you, my world is the studio.
But there's a price to pay for not going into the market place.
The price is having to tolerate people like you and Joseph.’
Maurin defended himself.
‘We've always helped you…’
‘You've always helped yourselves.’
Durance's voice was a growl.
Then there was a quietness in the room.
Outside, the storm lashed the windows, there was nothing to be seen of the sea or the red roofs.
But in the room the Durance paintings created their own world.
The Mediterranean colours  danced from them and always would, no whim of the weather could destroy their beauty.
Maurin would not face Durance.
Durance moved towards the paintings, to the one where the woman stepped from the shadow of the tree into the full light of the sun.
Everything Rain had seen at the Maurin gallery and everything the Contessa Mantero had shown her compared unfavourably with this painting.
She remembered her conversation with Joseph, not just the discussion about the blues and the greens but the joke about coveting it.
‘It's worth killing for,’ she had said.
In the corner of her eye she saw Maurin stir, looking up and gauging whether Durance's rage was abated.
Durance was engrossed by the painting.
He breathed one word: ‘Wonderful!’
But his admiration was tinged with bitterness.
Rain's voice was scarcely audible.
‘This is why you killed her.’
Maurin's head snapped up.
His eyes were wide, his mouth open.
But Durance did not look Rain's way.
He stared at the painting.
Rain saw him in profile — predatory nose, stubborn chin, arrogant eyes.
As she watched, the power died in him and a sadness came.
He was reduced to a short old man who had once been the great painter Marius Durance.
When he spoke next his voice was uneven.
‘There's such confidence in this.
It wasn't painted by the pupil of a fine painter, carrying out someone else's wishes.
This is what she'd grown into.’
A pause which no one dared break.
Durance sighed, the long deep sigh of a man who has given up hope.
‘This painting bears my name but I had no part in it.’
Maurin recovered himself.
He said urgently: ‘Marius, there's no need to say any more.’
Durance shook his head.
‘If it's so easy for Rain Morgan of the Daily Post to get at the truth, it's a secret which can't be kept.’
‘No,’ said Maurin, growing desperate.
‘She's guessing.
Please, Marius, I beg you to say nothing…’
Durance was still looking at the painted woman stepping from the shadow.
‘She told me she wanted to work on her  own.
Do you know what that meant to me?
The end of our relationship.
I said to her: ‘Sabine, we can't be friends if we aren't working together.’
I thought it would be enough to call on her loyalty, it used always to be enough.
And do you know what she did?
She laughed at me.
She said: ‘All that has held us together for years is that I've been working for you.
It's time I did something for myself.’’
Durance appealed to Rain: ‘Can you believe a woman I'd taught everything could speak to me like that?’
Rain said nothing, reflecting that the odd thing was that it had taken Sabine Jourdain so long to outgrow her need of that relationship.
Maurin said: ‘Marius, I'm pleading with you, for your own sake don't tell her any more.’
Durance ignored him.
‘After she moved to the Villa Souleiado Philippe used to bring me the paintings to sign, or I'd go there and do it.
But I never saw this one.’
He lapsed into silence.
Maurin gave Rain a warning look.
She concentrated on Durance instead and said: ‘You saw this the first time on the Jonquil, didn't you?
In the study?’
Durance was surprised.
‘You also saw it there?’
‘Benedict Joseph showed me, the night we all had supper on board.’
‘I suppose you noticed it bore no signature.’
She wished she had done and admitted she had not.
‘When I saw it here this afternoon I felt there was a tiny change.’
‘The greens have dared to move much nearer to blue than I ever let her go, I put my signature through that blue patch to diminish the effect.’
‘When did you do that?’
He did not answer that straight away.
He reverted to his story of the break-up of the Durance-Jourdain friendship.
Maurin stood by, pained but not interfering, although he occasionally shook his head to deny what Durance was saying.
Durance said: ‘Maurin and Joseph believed that as long as Sabine promised never to talk about the extent of her work  on the paintings there'd be no trouble.
They were worried only about what would happen to the monetary value of the paintings and their business as dealers.
They tried to persuade me she was interested only in sculpting in future.’
From below came the noise of the street door.
Durance rushed on.
‘I wouldn't let her talk to you.
I had to be sure she would tell you only about things that happened long ago.
Joseph said you couldn't be stopped from coming but he'd arrange matters so you couldn't speak to her.
He thought you'd give up and go away, as the woman who was supposed to be writing the book did.
The day after we all met you she assured me she'd say nothing damaging and said she'd convinced Merlyn who'd arranged another meeting on the boat.
When evening came I was afraid I couldn't trust her, because I didn't know how much you suspected, what clever questions you might have to get at the truth.’
With a heavy heart Rain prompted him.
‘You went to the Jonquil, too?’
Maurin appeared about to speak, then bit his lip.
Durance said: ‘I believed that if I were there I could control what she told you.’
‘Was she alone when you went on board?’
‘I saw no one else.
Sabine was in the study and this painting was on the wall.’
His voice rose with indignation.
‘She confessed she had not meant to let me see it or sign it and said Joseph had promised to take it to America and sell it under her own name.
She said she'd got him to agree that day and it was no use arguing because it was her price for keeping her promise to be silent about her work on the other paintings.’
Maurin gasped, stunned by this news of Joseph's duplicity.
Durance said to Rain: ‘I can't believe Joseph doesn't understand that selling under her name a painting recognizable as a Durance is equivalent to telling a journalist she had been painting my pictures.
As long as she was alive and working my reputation could be destroyed at any time.
There would be a scandal, Maurin and Joseph would lose money, so would collectors.
But I would lose everything.’
Rain asked when he discovered there was someone else  on board.
He said Sabine rushed out of the study, saying she was not going to wait on the boat any longer.
He was following when he heard her speak, so he held back.
He took down the painting and planned to leave with it, but then he heard Sabine and a man shouting in the lounge.
‘It was fierce.
I could not understand what they were shouting, but I heard them throwing things.
I didn't go to them, instead I went to the Josephs’ bedroom.’
He paused long enough for Rain and Maurin to doubt that he would resume.
Then: ‘I knew there was a gun.
Merlyn had shown it once, saying they kept it to protect the valuable things they bought.
I thought she'd fetched it from the bedroom.
I rested the painting by the bed and looked in the drawers.
It wasn't difficult to find and it was light and easy to fire, a woman's gun.’
Another pause.
Maurin began to speak but Durance prevented him, saying: ‘At the time I believed I wanted the gun so I could intervene.
What use would it have been if I had gone into the lounge without something like that?
Whoever was attacking Sabine was wild, I heard him threatening to kill her.
He would have disregarded me, but with a gun in my hand…’
Rain said: ‘But when you had the gun you didn't stop the fight.’
They waited a very long time for his answer.
‘I put the gun in my pocket but I didn't go near the lounge.
I took the painting and went through the cocktail bar and down the steps to the other deck and left the boat that way.
It's possible I knew subconsciously all along what I was going to do with the gun.
Do you think it's possible?’
Rain said she did not know.
He said: ‘I walked through the harbour.
There was a dark place — some boat fitter's equipment was lying around and there was the sailmaker's van as well as parked cars.
The pathway was in deep shadow.
I leaned the painting against the van and sat on a box and waited.
There was nobody around.
I stayed there, listening to the fireworks and the noise of a party nearby.
I knew she'd come.
I can't say how long I waited.
A few people came by but I'd swear no one saw me.
Then Sabine came.’
Another gap.
Again a door slammed down below.
He said: ‘You can see how simple it was.
I walked forward to meet her.
We went on a few yards, then I held back to let her go ahead of me where the path was narrowest.
I did it then.
Just one shot and I pushed her into the water.
Then I took up the painting and carried it back here and I signed it.’
Maurin groaned.
He took out a handkerchief and wiped sweat from his face.
‘Why do you insist on saying all this?’
Rain said to Maurin, in French now that there was no need to exclude Durance from their conversation: ‘You've known all along, haven't you?
You and the Josephs have known.’
‘Of course,’ said Maurin.
‘I came here the morning after she died and he told me.
We argued about it but in the end he agreed I had to tell the Josephs.
And what did you expect us to do?
Call the police?
Putting him behind bars won't serve any purpose, will it?
He isn't likely to do it again.’
‘No,’ Rain agreed, ‘and putting him behind bars would bring to light the reason for the murder.
Then the Josephs and you would be ruined, and Durance's reputation lost.’
‘We are interdependent as we always were,’ Maurin said.
‘Ben and I protect Durance's reputation and in doing so we protect our own interests.’
Rain said: ‘Despite Barbara Coleman's chattering and despite what I've just been told, you're all safe because there's no proof about the provenance of the paintings.’
‘Nor about the identity of the murderer.
If there'd been any evidence to link the death to anyone connected with the Jonquil the police would have found it by now.
I understand they believe she was shot by someone who meant to rob her, the chance victim of a killer she didn't know.
That's what the newspapers have suggested.’
That was the rarest of murders and Rain expected Maurin knew it, too.
‘The gun!’
Durance said.
‘Did you get rid of it as you promised?’
Maurin said: ‘Yes.’
He explained to Rain: ‘He should have thrown it into the harbour but he brought it back here.
I took it from him the next day.’
Durance was satisfied with Maurin's answer, Rain less trusting.
She thought of that moment at the Villa Fiesole  when Maurin had pointed a gun at them.
She wondered whether it was not in his pocket now, how long the interdependence of the three men would last and what might happen when it ended.
Maurin had already tried to ruin Joseph by helping Cobalt reveal his drug smuggling.
Joseph had planned to sell Sabine Jourdain's work for her and cut out Maurin.
Durance was weary of both of them but the price of their silence was as high as the price of Sabine Jourdain's.
Footsteps came upstairs.
Barbara Coleman put her head into the room.
‘It's all done.
The rooms are back to normal, but much tidier and a good deal cleaner.’
No one congratulated her.
Rain gave her a distant smile, worried she would get on Durance's nerves.
Durance had a vicious tongue and used people cruelly.
Barbara Coleman said: ‘I've made a pot of coffee.
I think we could all do with a cup.
It's such a wretched day, isn't it?’
Rain went out of the room with her.
She did not stay for coffee.
The storm had blown itself out, there was only steady drizzle.
She ran through it, discovering how cold she had grown standing in the studio.
First she called at the flat in the rue du Bateau and made a telephone call.
Oliver was not there and she supposed he, Cobalt and Tim had stayed at the Jonquil.
She went there, guilty at having crept away.
The gangway was slippery beneath her feet.
She clutched the rail to steady herself, reached the deck and went to the closed doors of the lounge.
As she had hoped, they opened at her push.
But the scene which awaited her was not at all what she expected.