

The formal organisation
Introduction
The previous chapter was concerned with bureaucracy as a form of government.
In the next two chapters we shall be examining a number of different perspectives on organisations.
These perspectives fall under two main headings — the formal and the informal approaches to organisations.
In this chapter we link the discussion of bureaucracy to the wider concern with formal organisations in general and examine the formal relations, structures and processes that exist within an organisation.
In contrast to this, the informal approach to organisations concentrates upon the informal relations that exists between individuals and groups within an organisation.
Within the public sector we need to be aware of formal relations existing at different levels and we need to show how these organisations relate to each other.
Thus, whilst we shall discuss the structures of local government we need to be aware that local government exists at different levels, i.e. county, district and parish or, in Wales, community councils each having both formal and informal relations with each other.
We also need to be aware that local government exists within a wider network of quangos, agencies and voluntary organisations (see Rhodes, 1988).
More importantly, local government exists within the context of central government domination.
Within each level of government we may find competing tensions inherent in the relationships between the different sectors.
Thus, for example, within local government there appears to be an increasing tendency to move towards a more decentralised service provision and organisational structure; at the next level of government the centre may be wishing to increase its control over what local government does.
A second dimension that we need to be aware of is one of organisational change and the reasons for it.
We can ask ‘Why are new departments created?’ or ‘Why are old ones abolished?’and ‘Why are new methods of working introduced?’
We may like to think that such changes enable the organisation to be more efficient and effective in achieving its goals and yet it may well be that such changes arise as a result of trying to satisfy an individual's political ambitions or to undercut the ambitions of a rival.
Organisational change may be the result of these kinds of issue rather than in response to some logic of organisational design.
Sir Patrick Nairne (Guardian, 2 August, 1988) suggests that political factors were of paramount importance when the DHSS was created in 1968.
It seemed that a fuller role was required for the M.P.
Richard Crossman and this had precedence over any organisational logic.
Former head of the civil service Lord Armstrong comments that: ‘There are some general principles of organisation, but the application of them is constantly interrupted by short-term political considerations.
In my experience politicians have a contempt for good organisation.’
(Quoted in Ponting, 1986, pp. 124.)
A third dimension that we also need to be aware of is the development of organisational structures over time.
In local government this is not so much a problem because of the wholesale reorganisation of local government in 1974 which followed a more or less universal pattern in terms of new structures and new functions.
A set of reasons was given for re-organisation in terms of linking an appropriate size to the functions to be performed in order to reap the benefits of the economies of scale.
Similarly, successive re-organisations of the National Health Service have attempted to impose some form of uniform pattern on the structure.
It is more difficult in central government to trace a common pattern or rationale for the present structure of government departments.
Each department has its own history, traditions and culture, and to impose a general framework to account for their development is not easy.
The title of Chapman and Greenaway's history of government departments is The Dynamics of Administrative Reform (1980), and it captures the ebb and flow of central government changes.
This is understandable when we consider differences in:
size There are approximately 2400 civil servants in the Department of Education and Science and there were 96,000 in the old DHSS before its split into two separate departments in 1988.
functions The Department of Education and Science is concerned with advice and monitoring, whereas much of the work of the Department of Social Security is dealing with clients.
organisation Some departments, such as the Welsh, Scottish, or Northern Ireland Offices, are organised on a geographical basis while others such as the Treasury are primarily centred in Whitehall.
history The Treasury can be traced back to the eleventh century whereas the Department of the Environment was created in 1970.
It is important that we bear these differences in mind when we attempt to analyse the formal nature of public sector organisations.
The classical approaches
We have discussed the importance of Weber in understanding the workings of bureaucratic organisations.
There are other classical studies that attempt to, understand how organisations work.
Scientific management
As the heading suggests, this approach is concerned with the application of the methods and techniques of science to organisations.
It is the belief that universal and general principles can be applied to every organisation.
The approach suggests that organisations can be viewed as essentially the same and that there are few differences between organisations that cannot be overcome by the application of general principles.
Two of the leading exponents of this approach to organisations were F.W. Taylor and H. Fayol.
Unlike the academic approach of Weber, however, Taylor and Fayol were not content to just analyse organisations.
Both were concerned to offer prescriptions as to how organisations should be run with a view to particular management ends.
Taylor was an engineer by training and his approach to understanding organisations reflected both his scientific background and the belief in science as the solution to society's problems that was so characteristic of the late nineteenth century.
Taylor (1967) examined the traditional working methods of individual workers in a number of studies covering such simple tasks as bricklaying or shovelling materials.
He believed that it was possible to apply scientific principles to each task which would replace the old rule-of-thumb method of working.
He believed that the workforce should be selected on the same scientific basis.
Such an approach would lead to a more efficient worker and hence to a more profitable organisation.
He also believed that the worker was rational and would respond to financial incentives as a way of increasing productivity.
Hence the payment by piece-rate for the individual worker.
Taylor believed in the division of labour since tasks could be broken down into simple repetitive jobs.
This would allow the individual to specialise in a particular job and the division of labour would lead to a clear distinction between management and the workforce.
The modern versions of Taylorism are expressed in terms of job design and work study.
Similarly, the concepts of the division of labour and organisation through specialisation still hold sway within many organisations.
Although Taylor was carrying out his research at the beginning of the century and despite the fact that his conclusions did not meet with the universal approval of either the workers or the management he left an important legacy which later theorists built upon:
the application of universal scientific principles;
specialisation;
division of labour;
clear hierarchies;
ethos of management control.
Those familiar with either central or local government within Britain will, no doubt, recognise some of these features as characteristic of their own experiences:
emphasis upon routine tasks;
clearly defined tasks;
clear hierarchical control.
The concern with the scientific approach to organisations was developed by Henri Fayol (1988) although the scientific discipline that he used was biology rather than engineering.
He was apt to use biological metaphors to explain the workings of organisations.
His principles of management were as follows:
1.
The division of labour and the stress upon the advantages that such specialisation brings.
2.
The stress upon authority.
3.
The stress upon discipline and the penalties incurred when discipline broke down.
4.
The concept of the unity of command — a dual-command system leads to dissension and chaos.
5.
The unity of direction since, to use one of Fayol's biological metaphors, ‘a body with two heads is a monster’.
6.
The subordination of individual interests to those of the organisation as a whole.
7.
The fair remuneration for the workforce.
Like Taylor before him, Fayol believed in the motivating force of money.
8.
The principle of centralisation.
Centralisation, like the division of labour is, according to Fayol, a feature of the natural world.
9.
A scalar chain or line of authority, both vertically and horizontally.
10.
A concern with order.
This is the idea that there is a place for everyone and everything.
11.
Equity in the form of equitable treatment for the workers.
12.
Initiative.
13.
Stability of tenure.
14.
‘Esprit de corps’.
This is the notion that union is strength.
The modern-day equivalent of this is the idea of an organisation having a corporate image such that all those within the organisation can respond to and identify with.
Fayol suggested that management is concerned with planning, with organisation, with command, co-ordination and control.
Formal authority is important.
There is a sense in which scientific management is concerned with a way of thinking about organisations irrespective of the individual prescriptions of individual writers and researchers.
It links into organisational structure insofar as structure is concerned with:
specialisation;
with standardisation of rules and procedures;
standardisation of employment practices;
formalisation of rules clearly specified;
centralisation;
a concern with configuration, i.e. is the chain of command long or short.
The advantage of this formal approach to organisations is that it shows how organisational objectives can be reached by:
1.
Formally allocating people and resources.
Individuals may feel happier if they have a clearly specified job within the organisation and know exactly where they fit into the workings of the organisation.
It helps if we know where to go for formal approval of decisions, or know who is responsible for what.
Accountability and responsibility can be clearly located.
2.
Such an approach also clearly specifies operating procedures and mechanisms laid down in a formal manual for example.
In local government the existence of Standing Orders, codes of conduct, and conditions of service clearly stipulate what can and cannot be done in certain circumstances.
This is particularly important when we consider that much of the work of government is legal in nature involving the carrying out of statutory responsibilities.
3.
It also indicates the decision-making procedures which show how and where decisions are made within organisations.
Again the formal committee structure of local government indicates where authority is located.
We shall see later, though, that in practice this may not always be where power is located.
A more recent organisational theorist illustrates the enduring qualities of these principles.
According to Child (1977) the five major dimensions of an organisational structure consist of:
1.
The allocation of tasks and responsibilities to individuals.
2.
The designation of formal reporting relationships.
3.
The grouping of individuals into units, units into departments and departments into larger units.
It allows the compartmentalisation of tasks and jobs.
4.
It shows where authority is located.
5.
The structure can be designed to show channels of communication, interpretation and participation.
The mechanistic and the organic organisation
Burns and Stalker (1961) offer us a more sophisticated version of this approach by suggesting that we also need to take into account the context within which different types of organisations operate.
They compare two different types of organisation, what they term the ‘mechanistic’ and the ‘organic’.
The mechanistic organisation is characterised by:
a hierarchical system of control and communication;
functionally specialised and precisely defined jobs;
information flows up the organisation;
decisions and instructions flow down the organisation;
loyalty and obedience.
We can see the similarities here between the scientific approach to organisations and its similarity to bureaucracy that we looked at in the previous chapter.
However, in contrast to those who can see nothing good in this type of organisation, Burns and Stalker argue that this type of organisation may be appropriate to an organisation operating within a particular environment.
If the organisation is in a stable environment then such formality may be no bad thing.
The problem is that if the organisation is in an unstable environment then a different, more flexible, organisational structure is necessary.
As we shall see later this is one of the reasons behind the call for changes in the civil service and local government in Britain.
It is argued that the traditional bureaucratic mechanistic structure that has been operating for so long can no longer cope with the dynamic environment that we now live in.
Burns and Stalker contrast this type of organisation with the organic organisation, which is characterised by:
jobs lose much of their formal definition;
functions cannot be demarcated easily;
interaction is lateral as well as vertical;
the content of communications is information and advice rather than instructions — participation rather than control.
Burns and Stalker argue that this type of organisation is more likely to survive in an uncertain environment.
Thus, using the distinction between mechanistic and organic organisations we can argue that insofar as we live in an uncertain world where political consensus is not guaranteed and economic stability is not assured then our public sector organisations ought to be moving more towards an organic, and away from, a mechanistic structure.
We can conclude this section then by picking out a number of criticisms of the scientific management approach to organisations.
1.
It may prove difficult to co-ordinate the many specialised tasks and divisions that are required by the division of labour.
2.
It may prove difficult because individuals may not be able to see the whole of the organisation since they are so wrapped up in their own specialised part of it.
3.
The organisation may prove to be inflexible and unable to respond to changing circumstances.
4.
It may be too bound by rules and not allow individuals to exercise discretion within their work.
5.
It may lead to lack of motivation.
Individuals may be seen as ‘cogs in the machine’ and one of the major criticisms of Taylor's approach was that he had a tendency to treat workers as automatons who would respond to financial incentives automatically.
6.
Individuals lower down the organisation may be given little responsibility with few decisions delegated down the organisation to them.
Whatever the structure, an organisation needs people to make it work and hence the need to take into account the roles of individuals, their beliefs, values, motivations and how they interact with each other and with groups.
This is  examined in the next chapter and it forms the basis of the human relations approach to organisations.
To what extent, however, can the principles that we have looked at so far help us in designing an organisational structure?
Organisational design
The concern of the writers that we have looked at in the preceding pages are with a number of organisational variables:
specialisation of tasks;
standardisation of rules, procedures and work practices;
formalisation in terms of clear duties and responsibilities;
centralisation and control;
configuration in terms of the different levels within a hierarchical structure;
communication and instruction;
co-ordination of the different activities.
All organisations will have to address these issues and the way in which they do so will depend, to some extent, on what kind of environment they are working in — be it stable or unstable.
A second set of concerns is with the structuring of the organisation and the way in which it groups its activities.
Mintzberg (1983) suggests that different criteria are available:
1.
Knowledge and skills — a university may be divided into departments based upon knowledge in a subject area.
We thus find Departments of Philosophy, Mathematics, Politics and so on.
Hospitals are often composed of groupings based around particular medical skills such as physiotherapy or radiology.
In central government we have, for example, the Central Statistical Office offering statistical expertise.
2.
Functions-many organisations are divided into departments centred around the function that they perform such as personnel, finance, research and marketing.
Local authorities are often composed of these kinds of functional departments.
3.
Tilne — some organisations operate on a shift system so the structure is based around a particular shift.
This is often the case with a continuous production plant, but we also find it in hospitals and also in the police force.
4.
Output — some firms will have departments reflecting a particular product such as furniture, soft furnishings or kitchenware.
This is less common in the public sector.
5.
Clients — an organisation may be constructed around the clients.
This would take the form of one department being responsible for all the services affecting a particular client group.
A recurring theme in government re-organisation is whether or not to have, for example, a Ministry of Children, or a Department of Senior Citizens.
Some local authorities have committees organised upon a, particular client group basis such as women, ethnic minorities, the disabled and so on.
6.
Place — very simply the organisation is divided on a geographical basis.
Thus we have the Welsh Office, Regional Health Authorities, and County Councils.
The problem is, when re-organising in terms of place, to make sure that people's wishes are taken into consideration.
The new county of Cleveland created after the local government re-organisation of 1974 has failed to create a sense of identity amongst its inhabitants and many still feel a sense of belonging to North Yorkshire.
The Haldane Report (1918) on the machinery of central government, which has since dominated thinking on the design of central government, examined a number of these criteria and recommended the distribution of government work on the basis of functions performed.
Such a basis is fairly common throughout Western Europe.
Most governments seem to have departments of defence, transport, education, the environment and so on.
As we have indicated earlier, though, the dynamic of administrative reform seems to have been fairly arbitrary in terms of central government.
Within the same department we might find more than one of these criteria in evidence.
For example, the social services department within a local authority is a functional department.
Its internal structuring, however, may be on a geographical basis in terms of area offices and on a client basis in terms of individual officials having a number of cases to deal with.
Thus, not only are there ambiguities in practice in terms of the organisational design of public sector organisations but they do not tell us very much about the power and status that attach to particular departments.
The Treasury is only a small department in terms of the number of civil servants that work there but it has tremendous power as a result of its financial role at the heart of government.
Organisational charts
Almost all organisations of any size have organisational charts which show how an organisation may be expressed in formal terms.
Such charts purport to indicate where control is located, the degree of centralisation, the division of labour, tasks, hierarchies and so on.
Thus, in local government we often find charts modelled on the pattern indicated in the Bains Report (1972) on the management and structure of local authorities.
The Report encouraged the idea that there is one ideal form of organisational structure which can be applied to all organisations.
As we have already indicated the reform of local government in 1972 attempted to put some uniformity on to the pattern of local government in Britain.
The Bains Report recognised the diversity of local authorities but suggested that certain basic structural features should be common to all authorities.
Thus the structure of a district council may look like Figure 4.1.
Below the chief officers the rest of the department's staff will be arranged on the same hierarchical basis.
The tradition within local government is to have a parallel' structure for the councillors.
The officers are arranged in terms of both functions   dealing with housing or environmental health but also support services dealing with finance or personnel.
However, the structure above does have a number of weaknesses:
it tells us nothing about which departments or chief officers might be more important than others;
such charts are fairly simple in nature and do not indicate the complexity of the organisation.
Thus an organisation may need departmental or unit charts to show all the jobs and tasks that go on within an organisation;
such a vertical representation tells us nothing about the relationships that go on between the centre and field offices.
Thus an education department may be organised on an area basis so that the centre plays only a co-ordinating role.
In the provision of services the field or area offices may be more important than the centre;
it tells us nothing about where power is located.
We have seen charts that describe the organisational chart of a police authority and yet miss off the lowly police constable.
For the public this may be the most important part of the organisation;
such charts also tell us nothing about decisions, channels of communication (it assumes these to be formal) and relationships (it assumes these to be hierarchical).
In reality individuals will often by-pass these formal structures in order to get things done by contacting their opposite number in another department directly.
Like the formal approach to organisations, such charts give us a picture of how an organisation works but it is only a partial picture and misses out on the crucial aspect of how people behave within organisations.
Most organisational charts reflect vertical relations.
A more sophisticated approach is to adopt a matrix structure which also examines horizontal relations.
Indeed the Bains Report advocated the use of programme teams which cut across the traditional departmental structure of local government.
This would ensure communication and co-ordination horizontally as well as vertically.
A matrix structure can indicate how relationships may be brought together across functional departments which in practice is how organisations are more likely to operate' 
Thus, for example, in deciding to build a new school there will be other departments than just the education department involved.
There will be a need for the technical support services, for new roads to be built for access, for liaison with police, social services and so on.
To ensure co-ordination a project team may well be set up which draws upon the various departments.
Likewise in central government the creation of task forces to deal with specific problems such as those associated with the inner city will cut across departmental boundaries.
Here the structure is determined by the problem to be solved rather than by trying to fit a particular problem or project into a formal structure.
It shows how in reality there is a need to communicate horizontally as well as vertically.
Such an approach forces managers to communicate with one another and it helps break down rigid departmental boundaries.
It does, however, sacrifice one of the classical principles of organisational structures — which is the unity of command.
Systems theory
Systems theory is a more modern perspective upon organisations and sees organisations as a system interacting with the environment within which they operate.
The work of Burns and Stalker that we briefly introduced earlier is an example of an approach to organisations using the concept of a system.
We can define a system as an organised unitary whole composed of interdependent parts or sub-systems and with boundaries separating it from its environment and other systems.
Systems theory borrows ideas from the physical sciences and economics and applies them to organisations.
For example, we can characterise the human body as a system which is comprised of a number of sub-systems.
The reproductive system, the digestive system, the thinking system all go to make up the overall system.
Similarly, a motor car is a system which takes the driver and passengers from point A to point B. It is also made up of a number of sub-systems — the braking system, the heating system, the gearing system and so on.
If one of these sub-systems does not work properly it will affect the working of the system as a whole and the motor car will not function to the best of its abilities.
Both the human body and the motor car interact with the environment.
The motor car uses inputs such as petrol, oil and human effort and produces outputs such as movement, noise and other forms of pollution.
The human body will use inputs such as food, oxygen and ideas and produce outputs such as activity and carbon dioxide.
The concept is expressed diagrammatically in Figure 4.3.
We can apply this thinking to organisations and look at how they interact with their environment and with other organisations.
Thus we can talk of a local government system which is different from a central government system but nevertheless interacts with it.
Some  systems are considered to be closed and others are thought of as open.
Thus, a mechanistic system is closed and an organic system is open to the environment If we take local government as an open system we can see that inputs from the environment will include the following:
legal, e.g changes in the law;
economic, e.g. decrease in resources;
political, e.g. attitudes of political parties;
demographic, e.g. declining birth rate;
technological e.g. new computer systems.
Local government then transforms these inputs into outputs in the form of the provision of services such as education or housing.
Its ability to do this depends upon what goes on within the system itself, i.e. who has power, who makes decisions, who implements decisions and so on.
Systems theory helps us to understand the role of organisational change and why organisations differ.
Organisations need to be adaptive to respond to the changing inputs and therefore the process of management and organisational structuring will need an environmental orientation.
Of course, sometimes the boundaries between systems are not entirely clear.
Do we define a system as one local authority or is it the system of local government as a whole?
Is it the Training Agency or the whole system of training?
Is it a prison or the whole criminal justice system?
Perhaps these kinds of questions are best answered by knowing what we want to analyse.
If we want to understand the functioning of a pay-roll system of a local authority we could see it as a system and the near environment will include the other departments of the local authority as well as the banks, building societies and other financial institutions.
If we wish to examine the problem of recidivism amongst offenders, to look at the prisons alone would ignore the crucial roles played by the courts and the Home Office in the determination of sentences and the prison system we have.
The contingency approach
The perspective adopted by the ‘contingency’ theorists rejects the view that there is one best model for an organisational structure.
Rather, such theorists suggest that for any particular organisation the most appropriate structure is that which best fits the particular organisation, depending upon the relationship between a number of variables.
These variables will include size, technology, people, purposes and environment.
Within an organisation, depending upon these variables, it may make sense to have different organisational structures.
Thus a local government department offering central support services such as the Training Department may require a different structure than one which is decentralised and based around service provision.
A number of studies based primarily upon private sector organisations have analysed the impact that these variables will have.
Child (1977) has examined the relationship between size and the economic performance of the organisation.
Perrow (1967) has examined the relationship between technology and structure.
Woodward (1958) has looked at the relationship between technology and organisational performance in the manufacturing industry
Lawrence and Lorsch (1967) analysed the internal structure of firms in the plastics, container and consumer food industries in terms of differentiation and integration.
Differentiation refers to the different relationships, departments and goals that exist within an organisation and integration is the degree of co-ordination and co-operation between different departments with inter-departmental tasks.
The matrix structure that we examined earlier would take account of these two variables.
Unlike systems theory, the contingency approach examines particular organisations.
The theory argues that we cannot develop one universal scientific approach to create the perfect organisational structure, but rather we have to look at a number of variables and see how they interact with each other within particular organisations.
Thus to reorganise central government, say, without taking into account the many different functions that the individual departments perform will not work.
Any change has to be designed to fit the particular needs of particular departments.
The problem is the difficulty of selecting the key variables and then analysing the relationships between them.
Organisational performance tends to be multi-faceted.
Changing the technology in an organisation may have no impact unless there is a willingness on the part of staff to adapt to it or unless the operating processes take account of the increased speed of communications that new technology can allow.
Which is more important and can we clearly identify the key variable?
Similarly, there may be no control over the consequences of changing the different variables and there may be unforeseen consequences.
We also need to take into account other variables, particularly when concentrating upon the public sector.
Thus, Hinings et al.(1975), note the importance of political values and power.
The contingency approach does, however, draw our attention to the fact that different structures may be necessary for the different activities that an organisation performs and takes account of the differing environment within which organisations operate.
Summary
The stable mechanistic organisation form is more appropriate when the following conditions hold:
the environment is relatively stable;
the goals are well defined and enduring;
the technology is relatively uniform and stable;
there are routine activities;
decision making is programmable and co-ordination and control processes tend to make a tightly structured, hierarchical system possible.
The adaptive organic organisational form is more appropriate when the following are true:
the environment is relatively uncertain and turbulent;
the goals are diverse and changing;
the technology is complex and dynamic;
there are many non-routine activities in which creativity and responsiveness are important;
the systems of communication and co-ordination are informal and non-hierarchical.
(Kast and Rosenzweig, 1985, pp. 111–17).
Decentralisation
Finally we need to spend some time considering the role of decentralised administration in the public sector.
At the time of writing this is of particular importance as more and more government activities are being provided at a more localised level.
Such moves have taken a number of different forms:
in the National Health Service clinician budgeting has been introduced so that doctors' responsibility for clinical practice will be matched by the responsibility for management and financial consequences of their decisions;
in education the introduction of the Local Management of Schools will pass many of the decisions affecting individual schools to the school itself and away from the local education authority;
there is a long history of decentralised management in the field of housing where local offices on council estates have their own budgets for minor repairs.
Decentralisation is usually examined from two perspectives:
1.
The deconcentration of administration where an activity is located at a more' local level as with field offices.
2.
The decentralisation of the decision-making processes where power is given to those lower down the organisation.
In local government in particular we have seen substantial moves towards more decentralised forms of service provision in terms of area offices, or neighbourhood forums.
(Stoker et al., 1988).
We have to ask what is being decentralised?
Is it (a) structures;(b) physical location;(c) services; or is it really power over decision making?
We can contrast centralisation with decentralisation.
The advantages of centralisation will include:
easier implementation of a common policy for the organisation as a whole.
A working party on government statistics has, thus, advocated the centralisation of central government statistical services (Guardian, July 26 1990);
preventing sub-units becoming too independent;
making for easier co-ordination;
improving economies of scale and a reduction in overhead costs;
greater use of specialisation;
improving decision making which might otherwise be slower and a result of compromise because of differentiated authority;
ensuring uniform and equitable treatment of clients.
The advantages of decentralisation are:
it enables decisions to be made closer to the operational level of work;
it encourages motivation and is good for morale;
it allows responsiveness to the customer or the client;
it will break down bureaucratic procedures;
it will allow increased accountability since it will be more difficult to pass the buck up the organisation.
Decentralisation is thus seen as an alternative to the bureaucratic practices that we investigated in the previous chapter.
According to Hambleton and Hoggett (1984) decentralisation will allow:
the improvement of services;
greater accountability of services;
easier distribution of services;
increased political awareness by encouraging participation.
Decentralisation has supporters from all parts of the political spectrum.
On the left it is believed that it will encourage political participation, and on the right it is believed that it will get the central state off the backs of individuals and allow greater individual choice.
We can ask, though, to what extent does it allow individuals to have (a) control over day-to-day operational matters;(b) control/influence over strategic decisions;(c) control over finance?
Conclusion
There are a number of tensions inherent in organisational structures and the formal approach to organisations needs to recognise the tendency for different organisational principles to pull in different directions.
These tensions are between:
Central control and decentralisation
Although we have indicated the growing strength of the movement towards decentralisation we have to embrace this with caution.
We used the example of the Local Management of Schools to indicate devolved decision making to the school itself.
And yet, at the same time, central government has imposed the National Curriculum on the education system which seems to move in the opposite direction.
Tensions also exist between:
Integration and differentiation
Lawrence and Lorsch (1967), as we saw earlier, developed this tension in their contingency approach to organisations.
In central government there are a number of mechanisms for co-ordination.
There are also a number of inter-departmental committees based in the Cabinet and there is Cabinet itself to co-ordinate government policy.
There are also co-ordinating departments such as the Treasury in central government and the Chief Executives Department in local authorities.
Such co-ordinating mechanisms are required to counter the tendency of functional departments to pursue their own goals and interests even when in conflict with the interests of the organisation as a whole.
Another area of tension is:
Continuity and adaptability
We have indicated that organisations exist within a changing environment and they have to respond to this environment.
At the same time they also need to ensure continuity.
This is particularly important for public sector organisations where a change in the ruling political party may mean a change in policies and priorities.
One of the advantages of the bureaucratic structure is that it can ensure continuity through the use of standard work practices and also provide some measure of stability.
Other contributions to continuity will be the existence of professional norms and values that persist over time; the need to be responsible and accountable to Parliament; and the constraints placed upon radical change by legal requirements.
The picture that is emerging is of dynamic organisations existing within changing environments with the need to balance competing tendencies to survive.
This picture is added to in the next chapter where we examine the informal relations that exist within organisations, and in Chapter 6 where we examine power.
Further reading
Most of the introductory texts to organisational theory will have a chapter on the classical, systems and contingency approaches to organisations.
Mullins (1989) is  particularly thorough.
The selected readings in Pugh (1984) include excerpts from the classical texts.
Mintzberg (1983) is especially good on organisational design.
Haynes (1980) is extremely good on the local government context; likewise Pitt and Smith (1981) on government departments.
A wealth of material on the history and organisational structures of central government can be found in Hennessey (1989a).
Child (1977) examines the notion of organisational structure in depth.
Hambleton and Hoggett (1984) raise many of the issues associated with decentralisation in local government.
The informal organisation
Introduction
The main emphasis of the classical writers on organisations that we examined in the previous chapter was upon the formal characteristics of organisations, particularly in terms of organisational structure.
Little attention was paid to the individuals within organisations in terms of their beliefs, values and their relations with each other.
This chapter begins by examining these informal relations and assesses their importance in terms of our understanding of how organisations operate.
This informal perspective is not meant to replace the formal approach but rather to supplement it and to develop a fuller understanding of how organisations operate.
The classical approach used the methodology of the physical sciences to illustrate a view of organisations.
Those that study the informal aspects of organisations tend to do so from perspectives drawn from the social sciences, particularly sociology and psychology.
The human relations approach
This approach is associated with the famous Hawthorne experiments at the Western Electric Company in America between 1924–32 (see Mayo, 1971 and Roethlisberger and Dickson, 1939).
The original intention behind the research was to measure the effect on the individual worker of variations in the work conditions.
The researchers used control groups from amongst the workers to assess the effect upon productivity of such variations.
The first phase of experiments was concerned with the variation in the lighting.
The results of this first phase were, much to the researchers' surprise, that productivity increased no matter how much the lighting was varied.
The conclusion drawn was that it was the fact that the group was working as a team that was important.
Also the workers felt a certain status and a privilege to be singled out for special treatment.
Thus, it was argued that the increase in productivity was a direct result of improved relations among the workers.
Subsequent experiments tested the effect of rest periods, the duration of  work and the use of a payment by piece-work system.
The results of these experiments seemed to indicate that:
informal group dynamics were important;
informal group norms would develop which could undermine formal working relations.
The researchers found that the workforce would work more easily with one supervisor rather than another;
informal group norms developed over what was to count as an acceptable day's work despite what management thought.
Those individuals that worked above or below these group norms risked being ostracised by their fellow workers;
such informal group norms were important to the workers even to the extent that an individual worker might refuse promotion if it meant leaving the group;
if management took an interest in the workforce and allowed them some control over their environment then the workforce would feel less alienated from the workplace;
where norms of co-operation and high output are established because of a feeling of importance, physical conditions may have little impact.
The methodology, the results and the interpretation of those results have all been questioned and criticised (see Parsons, 1978) but the Hawthorne experiments do suggest a number of considerations:
Individuals will interact in much more unpredictable and complex ways than the classical writers would have us believe.
Taylor assumed, for example, that workers were rational and would be motivated by an increase in wages and hence by linking wages to productivity the worker would produce more.
The Hawthorne researchers argued that this does not necessarily follow.
Productivity may be affected by the dynamics of changing social relations at work.
Working in a group and feeling part of a team is important.
The Human Relations approach, as its name suggests, thus concentrates upon the people dimension within organisations and how they interrelate with each other.
We shall return to this later in the chapter when we examine the impact of groups and of culture within organisations.
The individual
A number of writers have concentrated upon the psychological make-up of individuals and indicated that we need to be aware of the individual's nature.
Maslow's hierarchy of needs
Maslow (1943) argued that individuals have a number of basic psychological and, physiological needs which an individual tries to satisfy.
These needs are:
physiological: for food, drink, shelter, etc;
safety and security;
social: to relate to others, have friends and so on;
esteem: to have the respect of others;
self-actualisation: to achieve full potential.
Maslow argued that as one need is met then the individual moves on to the next need.
Thus as the need for basic sustenance is met we move up the ladder to the next step, which is the satisfaction of the need for safety.
As each need is met the individual moves up the hierarchy.
We shall examine these ideas in more detail when we come to look at motivation and morale within organisations.
For the moment we need to take account of individual needs coming into the picture.
McGregor's Theory X and Theory Y
McGregor (1960) argued that within organisations the style of management is also important in determining how an organisation operates.
He suggested that there are two different approaches based upon the basic perceptions that the manager had of the workforce.
The first perspective, Theory X, assumes that (a) the average person is lazy and does not care to work;(b) most people must be coerced, directed and controlled if the organisation is to benefit by employing them;(c) the average person lacks ambition and has no interest in taking on responsibility.
In contrast to this, Theory Y assumes that (a) for most people work is natural;(b) people are interested in their work and will exercise self-direction;(c) given the right conditions then people will seek responsibility;(d) people are committed to organisational objectives since rewards are associated with the achievement of these objectives.
The importance of this approach is to suggest that it is perceptions that are important and depending on how the management views the worker then a different style of management will develop and a different set of relationships between the management and the workforce will exist.
Herzberg on motivation and hygiene
Herzberg (1966) argued that we need to take into account not just the needs and motivations of the individual worker but also the context within which they are operating.
He thus developed a theory which argues that there are two sets of factors at work.
The first set of factors are concerned with the content of work and the amount of job satisfaction that an individual receives — the motivation factor.
This factor includes:
the sense of achievement;
the sense of responsibility;
the sense of recognition;
advancement at work;
the content of the job itself.
The other factor is associated with the context of work and the work environment.
Herzberg terms this the ‘hygiene’ or ‘maintenance’factor.
He argues that by maintaining the job environment at an acceptable level then feelings of dissatisfaction can be avoided.
The hygiene factor includes:
the level of salary;
the quality of supervision;
working conditions; o interpersonal relations with supervisors;
company policy and administration.
In Chapter 8 — on motivation — we shall examine research on the civil service which draws heavily upon the two-factor analysis developed by Herzberg.
Argyris on self-actualisation
Argyris (1957) suggests that whilst the individual may seek to actualise or achieve his or her full potential the organisation does not always allow this to happen.
This is particularly the case for individuals working in the kind of formal organisations that were described in the previous two chapters.
The individual is frustrated by the formal constraints imposed by formal organisations and creates informal activities.
The individual becomes apathetic and disinterested, reduces the speed of work and the care taken over work.
Group norms are developed that condone such behaviour.
Eventually the organisation will modify its form in order to take account of the individual.
Groups in organisations
Although psychological explanations tend to concentrate upon the individual worker within the organisation, we can also examine the role of individuals as members of groups and note how the existence of different groups, both formal and informal, have an important role to play in developing our understanding of organisations.
According to Mullins (1989) a group consists of a number of people who share (a) a common objective or task;(b) an awareness of group identity and boundary;(c) a minimum set of agreed values and norms.
The classical writers completely ignored the existence of such factors.
Organisations consist of both formal groups and informal groups.
Thus, formal groups are created to achieve specific organisational objectives and are concerned with the co-ordination of work activities.
Formal groups can be split into:
team groups such as research teams or inter-departmental working parties;
task groups centred around administrative tasks such as finance or personnel;
technological groups centred around a piece of technology such as in assembly line production.
In local government this might take the form of computer, services;
decision-making groups such as committees (particularly prevalent in local government and an integral part of local government structure);
problem-solving groups cutting across different divisions such as working parties or task forces;
representative groups such as the British Medical Association representing the views of doctors, or trade unions representing the views of their members.
We would expect individuals to belong to more than one of these groups.
Problems may arise when loyalty to one group may be in conflict with membership of another group.
We can imagine the dilemma that an individual might face if, for example, she works in the personnel department of an organisation and has to give redundancy notices to members of the same trade union.
Such formal groups do, however, perform a number of useful functions:
1.
Certain tasks can be performed only through the combined efforts of a number of people working together — e.g. a police or a medical operation.
Sometimes such tasks require groups working together.
A car accident, for example, may involve all the emergency services such as the police, fire service, ambulance service and surgeons.
2.
Groups may encourage companionship and provide a source of mutual understanding and support from like-minded colleagues.
3.
Membership of a group may provide an individual with a sense of belonging.
Maslow, if we recall, suggested that this is one of our basic needs.
4.
The group may provide guidelines for behaviour such as a professional ethic or a code of conduct.
5.
It may provide protection for its members as with a trade union.
Strong and cohesive work groups can have beneficial effects for the organisation where they share common goals and values.
At the same time the existence of strong groups may have a detrimental effect upon the organisation where the group puts forward its own interests at the expense of the organisation as a whole.
The Hawthorne experiments that we discussed earlier indicated that peer group pressure was more important in determining an acceptable level of output irrespective of the demands of management.
Homans (1950) suggests three concepts for understanding individual behaviour in social groups: activity, interaction and sentiment.
The more the people share activities, the more likely they are to interact with one another.
The reciprocal is also true; interaction in one sphere of activity often leads to shared activity in unrelated spheres.
Increasingly, the importance of group working within organisations is recognised and much of the work of public sector organisations has a team element.
For example, the National Health Service uses quality circles to ensure quality in its service.
A quality circle usually involves relatively permanent small groups of between five to 15 people from the same work group who meet periodically to consider quality problems.
The features of such groups are trust, involvement, the  commitment to improvement and recognition for success.
(See Chell, 1987, pp. 214–19.)
Professional groups
Within the public sector we find that professional groups usually have a tremendous impact upon the culture of an organisation and their influence is felt widely throughout the decision-making channels.
It is, therefore, worth exploring in some detail their role.
Dawson (1988) indicates that the characteristics of professional groupings include:
1.
The commitment to a particular body of training: accountants, lawyers, doctors have to sit examinations set by the professional bodies.
2.
Specific and lengthy training — usually over a period of years so the non-committed will fall by the wayside.
3.
A restricted entry — usually through the attainment of other examination passes such as A-Levels and, increasingly, degrees.
4.
Prescribed codes of ethics and standards of behaviour — there are both formal and informal codes which indicate how the member of the profession is expected to behave.
In serious breaches of these codes, the professional can be struck off the professional register.
5.
A proclaimed concern for client groups — doctors exist to serve their patients, teachers to educate their students.
6.
Peer group evaluation, control and promotion — the work of the professional is usually assessed by other professionals.
7.
Possession of a status and a mystique associated with the profession.
Doctors are held in high regard by society, teachers used to be and social workers strive to be.
Such professional groupings have a number of implications for organisations.
Firstly, we can ask, given the existence of a professional code, to what extent is the professional committed to the profession before the organisation?
An architect working in local government may insist upon designing buildings that conform to a professional standard rather than to fit the needs of the authority.
Winning design awards may be more important than building affordable, practical housing estates.
The architect may wish to design the most aesthetically pleasing school using the best materials, the educationalist may be concerned that the school has appropriate classroom sizes for the different educational activities, and the accountant will concentrate upon costs.
Such different perspectives may lead to organisational conflict between the professional group and the organisation as a whole.
Secondly, the professional may insist upon controlling the work that he or she does rather than allowing the administrator to impose control.
Doctors may not, for example, be happy with, interference in their work by somebody who lacks their medical expertise.
Thirdly, self and peer evaluation seem to indicate that professionals are unwilling to be held  to account for their actions by outside individuals or groups.
Again, the medical profession will argue that an individual without medical expertise cannot pass judgement on their performance.
Finally, professional groups have distinct cultures, norms and values and these cultures may come into conflict.
The administrative civil servant may operate within a legal culture with a concern for following regulations and statutes.
The architect or the engineer working within the civil service may believe this to be unnecessary red tape and their culture may be dominated by a concern to do the best possible job conforming to the highest professional standards.
The role of the professional within the civil service has traditionally been that of the ‘specialist on tap’.
In other words the generalist administrator calls upon the economists, the statisticians, etc. for information but it is the generalist who is ‘on top’.
The generalist dominates the decision-making procedure and it was this tradition that was heavily criticised by the Fulton Report (1968) on the civil service.
The report argued that the specialist should be encouraged to develop managerial skills and be allowed to play a bigger role in the strategic decisions of the organisation.
Such a view has more recently found favour in the National Health Service where the medical profession is encouraged to develop managerial skills.
The local government dimension is slightly different with specialists in charge of the different departments.
Thus the Chief Housing Officer will have expertise, experience and relevant professional qualifications.
It is also the case that the generalist administrator is becoming more ‘professionalised’ with qualifications available through the Business and Technician Education Council (BTEC), the Institute of Personnel Management (IPM), the Institute of Chartered Secretaries and Administrators (ICSA) and so on.
Ultimately our interest with professional groups within organisations is a concern with power and the extent to which professionals have power as a result of their expertise.
Following on from that is the question of accountability.
If an important concern in the public sector is with accountability then we can question whether peer accountability is sufficient.
In the public sector there has to be accountability to the public or the client.
A major theme in local government is to control the power of the professional.
The concern with professional power is developed in Chapter 6 and our concluding chapters show how the recent changes in public sector organisations may affect the power of the professionals.
Discretion
In Chapter 3 we examined the role that formal rules may play in bureaucratic organisations.
It is also the case that informal rules exist within organisations and that discretion is exercised even within the most seemingly formal organisation.
Discretion always exists even over such matters as the pace of work, the attitude to work or the willingness to perform tasks.
Smith (1981) sets out the issues for us:
How is discretion defined?
Discretion is concerned with the element of choice that an individual has when making a decision.
The mechanical following of rules would leave little scope for discretion to be exercised.
Thus:
A public officer has discretion wherever the effective limits on his power leave him free to make a choice among possible courses of action or inaction.
(Davis, 1969, pp. 4.)
How is it controlled?
In practice there will not be complete freedom of choice for the individual.
Group norms and values will act as constraints and even informal rules can be as rigid as formal rules.
Professional codes of conduct will constrain individuals and ultimately the law will deter extreme interpretation of rules.
What are the consequences of widespread discretion?
Discretion will allow officials to exercise some autonomy in their work and may allow the official to respond to the individual needs of clients rather than applying a set of standard rules.
It may encourage, though, the arbitrary nature of decision making so that, for example , the receipt of benefits comes to depend on the attitude of the official and how he interacts with the claimant.
What models do we have to provide guidelines?
Throughout the public sector individuals exercise discretion over a wide range of issues.
For example, the social worker exercises discretion in individual case work.
The police officer exercises discretion in areas such as minor traffic offences.
What factors will influence the use of discretion?
1.
The need for accountability — no matter how much discretion those working in the public sector exercise they will ultimately be accountable for their decisions either to superior officers or to the public through the tribunal systems.
2.
Resources — the reason why discretion is used in the first place may be because of limited resources.
If all minor traffic offences were prosecuted it would clog up the system.
3.
The clarity of formal rules — if the rules are clear, specific and cover every eventuality there would be no question of them being open to interpretation.
Often, though, legislation is general in nature allowing interpretation by officials to meet individual cases.
Any organisation will have a mixture of formal and informal rules and will allow discretion.
However, we need to be aware that they all influence behaviour.
Culture
A more recent approach to the informal organisation is to consider the beliefs and values of individuals and groups as part of an organisational culture.
Writers are concerned with such issues as: Does culture belong to the organisation or to the individuals within it?
Is it thus greater than the sum of the individual parts?
We also need to consider the extent to which organisations have one dominant culture, or the extent to which they consist of sub-cultures.
In the light of the previous discussion we would be concerned with the extent to which professionals have their own sub-culture which is distinct from the organisational culture as a whole.
However, Schein (1987) suggests that organisational culture is concerned with the
…basic assumptions and beliefs that are shared by members of an organisation, that operate unconsciously, and that define in a basic ‘taken-for-granted’ fashion an organization's view of itself and its environment.
These assumptions and beliefs are learned responses to a group's problems of survival in its external environment and its problems of internal integration.
(Schein, 1987, p. 6.)
Our first concern is with deciding what culture does.
Here we can offer a number of different possibilities:
1.
Culture will inform the goals and objectives of the organisation.
In the private sector, an organisation's corporate identity may perform this function and will contain such phrases as ‘service with a smile’, ‘the customer is always right’, ‘the ultimate driving machine’, and so on.
Some universities and polytechnics compete to convince us that they are ‘centres of excellence’.
The NHS is ‘working for patients’ and the local authority is ‘serving the public’or ‘caring for the client’.
Such phrases try to give us an image of what the organisation is about and individuals within the organisation are expected to adopt such a culture and to pursue the goals that it prescribes.
2.
Culture will specify the relations that exist within the organisation and define what is to count as legitimate or illegitimate behaviour.
In the Hawthorne experiments that we discussed earlier it was group pressure that determined the appropriate behaviour of individuals rather than formal guidelines, and informal sanctions were imposed if the individual did not conform to the group norms and expectations.
In the civil service, the relationship between the civil servant and the politician is partly governed by the need for confidentiality.
Civil servants who leak information are criticised by politicians for a breach of trust.
After the Ponting case (1985) the head of the civil service, Sir Robert Armstrong, issued a code of conduct in an attempt to guide the behaviour of officials (Armstrong, 1985).
3.
Culture also specifies what qualities are valued within organisations such as loyalty, confidentiality, dynamism, hard work, the ability to sell a product, and so on.
Each organisation, and different groups within that organisation, may value different qualities.
Difficulties arise when individuals are asked to develop, qualities which they do not possess or which they have previously dismissed as  irrelevant or not worth  possessing .
Thus to ask the civil servant to cut costs irrespective of the effect on the quality of the service provided may be difficult not only if the civil servant does not possess the appropriate financial skills but also if the civil servant takes pride in the quality of service provided.
Similarly, if the official is expected to trim advice so that it is politically acceptable she may find this unpalatable if she takes pride in offering impartial advice.
All organisations exist within some wider context and we would expect an organisation's culture to reflect this.
Thus it may be unrealistic to expect a democratically run workplace when the prevailing political and social ethos is authoritarian.
We would, however, expect a match between the organisational culture and the wider culture of society at large.
Thus we can pose the question; to what extent is the traditional hierarchical nature of bureaucracy at odds with a less deferential and more egalitarian society?
Can we expect individuals to enjoy equal rights and participation in their social lives and yet work under an authoritarian structure at the workplace that gives them little responsibility and allows them little scope for participation?
Apart from the societal context within which the organisation operates we would also expect the history of the organisation to influence its present culture.
Past values and beliefs are transmitted to new members through formal induction programmes and informal working practices epitomised in such phrases as: ‘We do things this way in this office’.
The transmission of values ensures continuity and allows the organisation to survive changes in personnel.
The former head of the civil service, Lord Bridges, describes departmental life in the civil service and suggests that:
…in every Department a store of knowledge and experience in the subjects handled, something which eventually takes shape as a practical philosophy, or may merit the title of a departmental philosophy…in most cases the departmental philosophy is nothing more startling than the slow accretion and accumulation of experience over the years…
Every civil servant finds himself entrusted with this kind of inheritance.
He knows that it is his business to contribute something of his own to this store of experience; and that he should play his part in moulding it and improving it to meet changing conditions.
Equally he knows that it is something he will ignore at his peril.
(Bridges, 1950, p. 16.)
It may happen that individuals are taken over by the organisation and by groups within it, particularly where the corporate identity and image is a strong one.
This transmission of culture is aided by the tendency to recruit in ‘one's own image’ where members of interview panels tend to look for similar qualities that they themselves possess when recruiting new members.
The Oxford and Cambridge arts and classicist graduates at the top of the civil service may, consciously or subconsciously, favour individuals from similar backgrounds because such candidates will possess similar qualities to themselves.
Not to do so is to admit that  one's own qualities are not required by the organisation.
Politicians may apply the same criteria.
Margaret Thatcher is supposed to have applied the acid test of ‘Is he one of us?’ when making her senior appointments.
Thus we are concerned with organisations as social systems that have shared understandings, norms and values and have a common language.
The new recruit into any organisation or group has to learn these norms and the codes of speech that groups employ before they can feel part of the group.
Young and Sloman discovered this sense of intimacy in the Treasury.
They quote an Under Secretary commenting upon informal communications networks: ‘Some of these people I've known for twenty-five years and we can of course communicate with each other almost in code.’
(Young and Sloman, 1984, p. 25.)
The difficulty arises, as we saw with professional groupings, of sub-groups existing within an organisation that do not all share the same goals or values.
To what extent does an organisation exhibit a common, homogeneous culture?
We can imagine that a small advertising agency may well share a common culture, but a large government department, such as the Home Office, with multiple functions and goals is unlikely to exhibit the same homogeneity.
Similarly, the picture we have of the civil service drawn from such programmes as Yes Minister! only depicts a small number of Mandarins at the top of the civil service.
We can legitimately ask what does a senior official based in Whitehall and acting as a policy adviser to a minister have in common with an administrative officer working in a local branch of the Department of Social Security other than the fact that they are both civil servants?
Of course, it may well be that there is a dominant culture within an organisation which is formed at the top and is transmitted downwards through formal and informal mechanisms.
This point is important if it is the case that the leaders at the top of the organisation are the ones who create the image and identity of the organisation.
Handy (1985) has analysed the different types of organisational culture and offers a four-fold typology:
The power culture
The organisation stresses the role of individuals rather than committees.
Individuals are power-oriented and politically aware.
Control is exercised at the centre and it is characterised by informal webs of influence rather than formal procedures.
It is not characterised by bureaucracy.
The role culture
Here the stress is upon formal rules and roles and authority is vested in these roles.
It is characterised by formal procedures and offers the individual security, stability and predictability.
It is, therefore, characteristic of a bureaucracy.
The task culture
This is job-oriented and is concerned with getting the job done.
It is concerned' with utilising resources to meet the organisation's objectives and is characterised  by the requirement of efficiency.
The culture adapts itself to change and is driven by the need to provide goods and services for the customer.
The person culture
The individual is at the heart of this organisation and this culture, according to Handy, is not often found.
The organisation serves the individual rather than the other way round.
Control mechanisms or hierarchies are virtually impossible and influence is shared.
The commune would possess this type of culture.
Traditionally bureaucracy has been described as a role culture, but there is no reason to suppose that the different cultures cannot all exist within the same organisation particularly if the organisation is as large and diverse as a government department or a local authority.
Indeed the contingency approach to organisations would argue that, depending upon the dominant activity, an organisation should consist of different sub-cultures reflecting different activities.
In the public sector the concept of a role culture would seem to have some relevance.
However, we may wish to use a different set of criteria:
A political culture — given that government takes place within a political context then we may wish to consider the political dimension as the most important.
Thus, we might be interested in the relationship between the politician and the official; the relationship between the different parties particularly where there is a hung council; the role of interest groups and their relationship with departments and so on.
An administrative culture — which is concerned with rules, roles, authority and fits in with the concept of a role culture.
A legal culture — particularly important in local government where much of the work may be governed by statute, or may involve the regulation of activities.
Market culture — where public sector organisations are exposed to the market through competitive tendering, contracting out, internal markets and so on.
Each of the different cultures may express the roles that organisations perform.
Problems arise where there is a clash of cultures.
Thus, it would be unrealistic to expect officials to be responsive to the market when their traditional activity has been conditioned by the need to follow statutes.
The creation of the Training and Enterprise Councils by central government to run the bulk of the country's training has encountered problems of culture clash.
The businessmen brought in to run the Councils have been frustrated by the tight operating and financial practices imposed by the Department of Employment Such practices sit uneasily alongside the entrepreneurial freedom that business leaders are used to (see Guardian, 23 March 1990).
Within government there will be strong traditions which have to be overcome if a new culture is to develop.
Depending upon the strength of the existing culture then, change is not easily brought about.
The strength of the civil service culture is  commented upon by Hennessy who suggests that, after three decades of travelling up the hierarchy, senior civil servants become indistinguishable from each other:
Their habits, modes of thought, patterns of speech, style of drafting will have rubbed off on one another to the point where but a few free or tough or independent spirits resist mutation into a sludgy administrative amalgam.
(Hennessy, 1989(a), pp.521–2.)
Where sub-cultures exist they could weaken the hold of a dominant culture and may respond to change more readily.
Conclusion
Taken together the formal and the informal approaches almost complete our picture of how to understand organisations.
We need, however, to add one further ingredient — that of power.
Although we have introduced the concept of a power culture from the work of Handy, it can be argued that all organisations are really concerned with power.
From this perspective, all organisations are political in that they are characterised by bargaining, compromises and conflicts between individuals and groups.
Further reading
Most introductory textbooks on organisational theory will have chapters on the Human Relations approach to organisations.
Litterer (1969) is generally good on the informal organisation.
Schein (1987) is very detailed on the relationship between culture and leadership.
Adler and Asquith (1981) edited a very good collection of essays by different authors on welfare and discretion.
Ham and Hill (1984) link discretion to the policy process.
Kakabadse (1982) examines culture in a social services department.
Handy (1985) explores the concept of organisation culture in detail and is also good on the workings of groups.
Power and conflict within organisations
Introduction
All organisations, whether in the public or the private sector, are involved in politics.
This may be more explicit within the public sector because of the fact of government organisations being led by politicians and their work involving the implementation of a political party's policies.
And yet private sector organisations are also political in the sense of competition between ideas and individuals within the organisation.
There is conflict between departments, between hierarchies and over decisions that are made.
All organisations are concerned with who makes decisions, who controls resources, who determines which issues are discussed, who sets the agenda and how is conflict between individuals and groups resolved.
We are also concerned with the political environment within which all organisations operate.
Decisions taken by politicians concerning the economy, for example, will affect those organisations engaged in business.
We need, therefore, to examine who has power within society and locate that within the context of the power of the state.
Through such an examination we can see who has power over decisions and which groups and individuals can achieve their aims.
There are a number of general theories that are concerned with such issues and we shall briefly investigate these before moving on to an examination of power within organisations.
All the theories that we examine have variations and we shall be concerned to pick out the main themes that the different interpretations of these theories have in common.
Pluralism
This theory suggests that within society power is fragmented between different groups all of whom are in competition with each other.
Depending upon the issue, different groups will get their own way and no one group dominates power within society.
Political power can result from a variety of factors including wealth, control over information, status, popularly and legally.
Pressure group politics is a manifestation of this where individuals organise into groups to achieve their aims.
Examples of such groups range from trade unions and professional associations through to environmental groups trying to save the whale or local groups that are concerned with juggernaut lorries travelling through a small village.
The issues are numerous and diverse but groups form to try to influence decisions concerning these issues.
Pluralism is a development of democratic theory and recognises that often individuals can best get their views heard by combining in groups to give them a stronger voice.
Pluralism presupposes that groups have access to the decision-making process and that power is widely spread.
Although power is widely spread it does not necessarily mean that it is evenly spread between all groups.
However, in society the groups that we might think of as having an influence upon the decision-making processes will be the trade unions, representatives of the business world such as the Confederation of British Industry (CBI), the bureaucracy and political parties.
In organisational terms, a pluralist approach would suggest that organisations are made up of different groups each with access to the decision-making processes and with the ability to influence those processes.
Thus, for example, in the National Health Service groups such as the consultants, junior doctors, administrators, nursing staff, GPs and so on , will all be striving to influence the organisation and to get their views accepted by the organisation.
In local government we might find groups composed of councillors, officers, local businessmen and women, client groups, voluntary agencies, all attempting to get their views accepted.
Stoker and Wilson (1986) argue that a range of resources are available to the competing groups involved in local decision making such as access to contacts, position in the hierarchy, control of information and so on.
They identify a number of actors involved in the decision-making processes in local government and suggest that the picture of who has power is sometimes not clear.
Similarly, the conventional picture of decision making within health authorities is that of consensus between different coalitions of interests represented by practitioners, politicians and administrators, each with different resources and power bases.
Pluralism, then, seems to be concerned with competition between different groups involved in making decisions.
Critics argue that this does not seem to be very realistic.
Some groups seem to have more power than others.
Big business or some trade unions, for example, seem to have exercised power consistently over long periods of time.
Similarly, within organisations is it not the case that certain groups consistently seem to be able to get their own way?
Thus, in the National Health Service it may well be the consultants that always seem to get their own way and the nurses rarely so.
In the civil service it may well be the small number of Permanent Secretaries heading government departments that make decisions.
In local government it may well be a small group of chief officers and committee chairpersons that control decisions.
More widely, it may well be that central government usually gets its own way over local government.
If this is the case then society and organisations, far from being pluralist in nature, are, in fact, elitist so that on any given issue there may be a small group that exercises a great  deal of power.
Indeed many of the pluralist writers were acutely aware of inequalities in the distribution of power.
Elitism
Elitist theories argue that power is always in the hands of a minority.
Within society power is in the hands of a small number of individuals and groups who may be prominent in industry, in financial or in political circles.
It is these elites that dominate society.
Those who support the arguments of the elitist theories will point to the tendency for senior politicians from all parties to come from similar social and educational backgrounds.
Similarly, it is often the case that senior officials within the civil service all seem to come from the same sort of background.
The absence of women and members of ethnic minorities and the continuing dominance of Oxford and Cambridge arts and classicist graduates amongst the senior civil service and the ‘high fliers’ are said to support these criticisms.
C. Wright Mills (1956) advances the notion of a power elite composed of men from similar social and educational backgrounds sharing similar values.
We can legitimately ask, however: What is wrong with this state of affairs?
Indeed, Schumpeter (1976) argued that democracy is really about competition between competing elites for the votes of the people and that democracy did not require mass participation.
From a different perspective it can also be argued that it is right and proper that, for example, the Mandarins of the civil service should have power, because, after all, they have the expertise and knowledge in government matters.
The politician may have been democratically elected but the politician does not have the same experience as the career official.
We can characterise this as rule by the non-elected with power in the hands of a bureaucratic elite.
Those familiar with the television programme Yes Prime Minister! will recognise this characterisation.
Similarly, it can be argued that the consultants and their professional body, the British Medical Association (BMA), should dominate decision making within the National Health Service since they have the medical knowledge and expertise which the politician, the administrator and the patient do not possess.
Such arguments are powerful ones and, as we shall see later, possession of specialised knowledge is an important source of power.
There are also strong arguments, however, to suggest that a more pluralistic decision-making process is the best way for society and organisations to operate.
Expert knowledge may be too narrow in its focus.
A decision made in the light of wider considerations may be a better decision.
To what extent can it be the case that a decision-making process that is dominated by white, male, middle-aged and middle class civil servants is likely to be appropriate for all areas of social and economic policy?
Such decision makers may have little experience of the issues that affect women or ethnic minorities, for example.
In the long run a more efficient and effective — not to say democratic — decision may be one that draws upon different points of view and has considered several possibilities.
Marxism
To do justice to the many writings of Marx and the vast body of work that has accumulated around his writings is impossible within the confines of this book and we shall, therefore, merely attempt to discuss one or two ideas and indicate their impact upon organisations.
Marx was very much concerned with conflict; indeed for him the driving force of history is based upon conflict between different groups or classes within society.
This conflict comes about because of economic differences between different classes based around who has control over economic production.
Thus, for example, one of the most important features of capitalism is the pursuit of profit and owners can increase their profit by exploiting the workforce.
This inevitably leads to conflict between these groups.
Within organisations such conflict may take the form of strikes or go-slows because of the attempt by owners and managers to control the workers.
Inevitably, as capitalism developed it made sense to introduce more machinery, to move to a division of labour and to a conveyor-belt system of production.
We saw in our discussion of bureaucracy that such developments can lead to a more efficient and effective organisation.
And yet the individual worker is forgotten in all of this.
In a drive for improving productivity and hence greater profit the values, needs and concerns of the worker are ignored.
The worker becomes, in Marx's terms, ‘an appendage of the machine’ and is alienated from the workplace, from the job and from fellow workers.
The provision of welfare benefits merely preserves an exploitative and inegalitarian system and Marx argues that the bureaucracy becomes merely the tool of the ruling classes.
Braverman (1974) argues that scientific management and the work of individuals such as F. W. Taylor, that we looked at in an earlier chapter, encouraged the development of the control of the worker by management and that the transformation of work advocated by scientific management led to the de-skilling and to the degradation of the worker.
Such effects also apply to the office worker who similarly experiences an increased division of labour, the mechanisation, simplification and routinisation of tasks, and strict management control.
Corporatism
Corporatist theories argue that major interest groups are incorporated into the decision-making apparatus of the state.
Conflict is kept to a minimum by allowing such groups to share power.
An example of corporatism at work may be that of Britain in the 1960s where the unions, represented by the Trades Union Congress, and big business, represented by the Confederation of British Industry, seemed to have easy access to government.
Corporatism is a development of pluralism that, allows for the domination of a small number of powerful groups.
Schmitter defines corporatism as:
…a system of interest representation in which the constituent units organised into a limited number of singular, compulsory, non competitive, hierarchically ordered and functionally differentiated categories, recognised or licensed (if not created) by the state and granted a deliberate representational monopoly within their respective categories in exchange for observing certain controls on their selection of leaders and articulation of demands and supports.
(1979, p. 13).
In the context of Britain in the 1960s, for example, government recognises the legitimate right of the Trades Union Congress to be consulted over issues which affect its members.
In return, government expects the Trades Union Congress to respect that right and to control its members.
Rhodes (1981) utilises this definition of corporatism in an examination of the policy networks within which public sector organisations operate.
We have thus examined some of the general theories of power within society and within organisations.
We now need to narrow our focus and concentrate upon the concept of power itself.
We shall accordingly define the concept, examine its usage, and investigate the sources and limits of power.
The definition of power
Immediately we have difficulties since there seems to be no generally accepted agreement on the meaning of power.
In the language of political philosophy, power is deemed to be a concept that is ‘essentially contested’ which means that although the concept has featured prominently in political philosophy over the centuries and is now a major concern of organisation theorists we are still left with disputes over its meaning.
We can, however, offer a very general working definition, which seems to feature in most discussions.
Thus we take power to be the ability of one person or group (A) to get another person or group (B) to do as A wants.
From this very general definition we can see that power is relational in character.
Power is not something that is possessed such as blue eyes or red hair but manifests itself in terms of relations with others.
Indeed it is often the case that a powerful person is not necessarily somebody who is physically strong but will depend upon the extent to which that person can get others to do as he or she wishes.
Indeed it may well be that the most powerful person is someone who does not have to resort to physical force at all.
We can see this idea expressed in international relations between states: the USA could not defeat Vietnam despite the fact that in terms of military equipment the USA had the most powerful weapons.
Military hardware alone is not sufficient to ensure military victory.
We have to take into account the skill of the leaders, the morale of the troops, the influence of world opinion and so on.
In organisational theory Pfeffer (1981) argues that power is a relational concept that can only be understood in terms of interactions between individuals and groups.
We can see that power is related to other concepts such as force, influence, authority or manipulation.
Power is one of a cluster of concepts that are all, concerned with the ability of one person or group to affect another person or group as expressed in our general definition of power.
However, we do not need to  embark upon a lengthy discussion of differences between these concepts as such differences will be explained as they bear upon our concern with power in public sector organisations (see Connolly, 1974, for treatment of these conceptual issues).
What we can do is examine the concept of power from a number of different perspectives.
The basis of power
Power in any form will be based upon something.
In general terms we can suggest that power is based upon a number of different factors:
Economic power
This will be based upon the possession of scarce resources such as coal or oil or manpower and the extent to which those resources are in demand.
Also the existence of alternative resources will limit the power of the individual or the group.
Thus the power of a group like the miners will depend upon the demand for coal compared to other forms of energy.
Hence their power to influence the government will depend upon the extent to which alternative forms of energy are readily available.
The economic power of the individual may also depend upon the possession of a particular skill or knowledge that others want.
Thus the government may offer extra financial rewards to try to recruit scarce science teachers.
Political power
This will be based upon legitimacy, i.e. that which is accepted within a particular society as conferring the right to rule.
Sometimes ‘might is right’ has been accepted as a legitimate form of political power, whereas at other times and in different societies hereditary succession has been accepted as the legitimate source of political power.
In democratic societies the will of the people, as expressed in elections, is deemed to be the appropriate legitimation for political power.
Thus our elected representatives are entitled to make decisions on our behalf.
Military power
This may be based upon weaponry but, as we have seen, other factors are also important.
An extra dimension is introduced which depends upon the perceptions of these factors by the opposition.
A crucial element in determining the power of an opponent is whether you believe that the opponent has the will to use its forces.
Two general points arise out of the above discussion.
(1) The basis of power will depend upon the context within which it is exercised.
Thus the will of the people as a basis of power may not be accepted easily in a society with a tradition of monarchical rule.
(2) The basis of power may change.
What is to count as a scarce resource, for example, may change over time.
In times of low  unemployment labour will be in a strong position because it is in demand by employers and is not easily substituted.
At other times labour will be in a weak bargaining position if, as in times of high unemployment, the employer can easily acquire alternative sources of labour off the dole queues.
Individuals who possess certain skills may also find their power diminished if those skills are made redundant by developments in new technology.
Organisational power
What then is organisational power dependent upon?
We can identify a number of factors:
Information Organisations rely upon information in order to function and it is likely that the individual or group that has control over information will have power.
Thus, part of the explanation for the power of the official over the politician may well be the extent to which the politician relies upon the official for information in order to make decisions.
Critics argue that because of the control of information officials are in a position to slant their recommendations to one course of action that they prefer rather than one they do not prefer.
If, on the other hand, there are alternative sources of information and advice then the monopoly position of the official will be undermined.
Politicians may thus seek to use special advisers or use research units or policy units outside of government for their advice.
The Conservative governments throughout the 1980s have taken advice from the Centre for Policy Studies and the Adam Smith Institute in drawing up their policy proposals.
Similarly political parties also have their own policy teams which draw up policy documents.
Knowledge Linked to the power acquired through the control of information is that acquired through the possession of some specialised knowledge or skill, particularly where that knowledge cannot be easily substituted.
The power of the officials stems from their understanding the processes and procedures that characterise the bureaucratic organisation.
The politician may not possess this knowledge.
This will be the case where, for example, a minister stays in a government department for only a limited period of time.
The average stay is two years and this is considered insufficient time to master the workings of a complex government department.
Other examples include the power of the medical profession within the National Health Service as a result of their medical expertise; the power of the professionals in local government, be they accountants, architects or social workers.
The power of such groups will be enhanced if the organisation requires their expertise in order to function.
The type of knowledge required within organisations may, however, change over time.
In times of financial stringency and the adoption of Value for Money strategies in government those with financial expertise may acquire power.
Similarly, in those organisations that are becoming increasingly reliant upon information technology then those with computing skills may become more powerful.
Personal power and charisma Power may depend upon the personal skills or charisma of certain individuals who, because of their particular characteristics, induce others to follow them.
Successful politicians may have it; captains of industry may have it; captains in sport may have it.
We can legitimately ask to what extent such personal qualities are important as a source of power within the public sector.
According to Weber, bureaucracy is characterised by rational-legal authority rather than by charismatic authority.
Given the constraints placed upon officials by formal rules and regulations we may wonder to what extent there is the opportunity for officials to express personal qualities.
The attributes of the official are traditionally considered to be formal, anonymous and impersonal in character; hardly the stuff of charisma.
And yet even with formal organisations there will be some discretion and there will be opportunities to impose oneself on the organisation.
The police constable on the beat will occasionally be in situations where leadership skills have to be shown; team leaders will need to elicit the support of other team members, and some supervisors are more readily followed than others.
Resources Those who control resources — such as financial or legal — will have power within organisations.
We have seen how the control of resources, particularly scarce ones, within society will determine who has power.
The same arguments can be applied to organisations.
The resources of organisations will include people and money and those who control these in terms of salaries, promotion or budgets will have power.
Middle management will have power over those lower down the organisation if middle management determines pay, promotion and bonuses.
This argument presupposes that others seek and value these resources.
If, for example, an individual does not seek promotion then it will be difficult for those who control promotion to have power over that individual.
Where such resources are controlled at the top or are determined by national agreements, as with much of public sector salaries, then the power of middle management will diminish.
A further dimension is where one organisation is dependent upon another for resources.
Local government depends upon central government for much of its finance and such dependency will limit the scope of local government work.
At the same Lime local government is responsible for implementing central government policy and hence we may find mutual dependency between organisations.
Rhodes argues that any organisation will be dependent upon other organisations for resources.
He uses the term ‘power-dependence’ to describe this mutual dependency and suggests five resources that are used in the relationship between central and local government.
These are:(1) Constitutional-legal resources that are allocated between local authorities and central government by statute.
(2) Hierarchical resources.
These may take the form of, for example, central government circulars that guide the work of local authorities.
(3) Financial resources.
(4) Political resources, such as the access to decision making bestowed on politicians by their election into office.
(5) Informational resources, so that the group or individual who has these resources is in a powerful position.
Rhodes also suggests that central government  and local government will be dependent upon each other‘to different degrees in different circumstances’(Rhodes, 1981, p. 101).
Professionalism We have seen how public sector organisations are made up of professional groups and have briefly discussed their importance for organisations.
We can locate that earlier discussion within the context of power by arguing that membership of such groups can confer power upon individuals, particularly if that group has status and prestige.
Doctors have a high status based upon their profession and the perception of that profession by the public at large.
In contrast, social workers may not have the same status and their power will be less.
The concept of a profession is, as we have seen, based upon claims to specialised knowledge and skills developed over time through training.
Where certain skills and knowledge are not valued then the profession will have little status.
We can expand the argument concerning the power of occupational professions to cover any group.
Thus a trade union will have power within an organisation if the union represents all workers and those workers have skills and knowledge that are in short supply.
Organisations may also be made up of different groups and professions and when these groups seek to assert themselves then the organisation may well be characterised by competition between groups.
This argument fits in with the pluralist notion of power that we discussed at the beginning of the chapter.
Authority A final source of power is that of authority.
There are individuals within organisations who have power by virtue of the fact that they occupy a certain position within the organisational structure.
This power is not necessarily dependent upon their personal qualities and nor will it depend upon their control of information or their expertise.
We may not like or respect our superiors, for example, but they will have power over us just because they occupy a position above us in the organisational hierarchy.
Of course, the higher up the organisation an individual progresses it is likely that they will possess skills and expertise, but it does not necessarily follow.
In theory, Parliament is the supreme legislative authority in the United Kingdom, but it could be argued that real power, as opposed to authority, is located elsewhere in the hands of the Cabinet or Prime Minister or leaders of industry.
The power of Parliament will be limited where a government has a working majority in the House of Commons.
Similarly, in the case of a local authority, formal authority to make decisions will rest with the full council; but in reality it may well be that power is in the hands of a few councillors and chief officers such that the locus of decision making may be far removed from the full council meeting.
Power, then, is not the same as authority, even though the two will be closely related.
Indeed it may well be that power is not linked to the position of an individual within the formal structure of an organisation at all.
An example here may be the power of the receptionist within an organisation to project an image of that organisation since the receptionist is often the first point of contact that we have with organisations.
Not only that but the receptionist may control access to individuals within the organisation and hence play an important role as  ‘gatekeeper’ to the organisation.
The civil service recognises this: ‘Reception staff will convey the image of the office to the public, and they should therefore be carefully selected for the task.’
(Cabinet Office, 1988, para. 2.23, p. 12.)
Despite this, receptionists are usually low down in the formal organisational structure.
Power and decision making
We have examined the concept of power within organisations and we now need to see how it is exercised.
Power is only seen when it is put to use.
This often manifests itself within decision making in terms of who gets their own way within organisations.
We can approach decision making from several dimensions.
We will follow the approach adopted by S. Lukes (1974) who suggests three different dimensions.
First dimensional view
This view is associated with the pluralist view that we discussed earlier.
An early version of pluralism and decision making was developed by R. Dahl in Who Governs?(1961).
This book was a study of decision making in the town of New Haven, America, in the 1950s over issues such as urban development and public education.
Dahl focused upon the making of decisions over which there was an observable conflict of opinion and he studied how that conflict was resolved between the different individuals and groups involved.
Dahl argued that power is fragmented between the different groups involved in the decision-making process since different groups got their way on different issues.
Thus when there is an observable conflict between different groups then whosoever gets their way has power.
It may well be a different group on different issues.
We might, therefore, examine different groups involved in the policy process concerned with, say, education.
Such groups would represent parents, teachers, political parties, the Local Education Authority, local business, school governors and the Department of Education and Science.
According to Dahl, we can see which group gets its own way on a particular issue and conclude that this group has power.
We would expect different groups involved in the policy process to have power on different issues.
Second dimensional view
This first view was criticised, in particular, by Bachrach and Baratz (1962) for being too narrow.
They argued that some groups can consciously or unconsciously put up barriers to the public discussion of issues.
Dahl concentrates upon issues over which there is an observable disagreement and yet it may well be that certain issues are kept off the agenda altogether.
Some issues may be filtered out because, they are too controversial and hence public discussion may be confined to relatively safe or non-controversial issues.
We need, therefore, to be aware of the power of the  group or individual who decides what is discussed in the first place.
Stringer and Richardson (1980) show how information can be managed and how the presentation of statistics by government departments can keep problems off the agenda.
One example they give is that of Home Office statistics on drug addicts that show only those addicts that are registered.
Low numbers might indicate that there is no drug problem.
Yet what about all those addicts that acquire drugs illegally and hence are not registered?
Another example of the differences between the two views is the location of power within central government in Britain and the role of the Cabinet.
The first view would suggest that in Cabinet issues are ‘up for grabs’ and whichever minister gets his or her own way on an issue has power.
The second view would point to the fact that in reality it is the Prime Minister who, in setting the agenda for Cabinet discussion, decides what is to be discussed in the first place and consequently has power.
The relationship between central government and local government further illustrates this point where local government will have the power to make policy and spend public money but within limits set by Parliament and central government.
Third dimensional view
This is the most radical view and is the view endorsed by Lukes himself.
Lukes argued that both the previous views are unsatisfactory in that power is only seen to operate where there is conflict.
Yet a person or group may have power by shaping beliefs, values and desires.
Thus the power of advertising is such that we believe that our lives will be unbearable unless we possess the latest dishwasher, video recorder or television set.
This, Lukes argued, is the most insidious form of power in that we can be manipulated into a course of action or believing in a set of values without realising it.
From this perspective, political power in Britain is in the hands of the Prime Minister not just because she controls the agenda but also because we would never question her right to do so.
Ultimately the attempt to undermine the power of the Prime Minister can be portrayed as an attempt to undermine the whole system of parliamentary democracy as we know it and this will not even be considered.
We are ‘indoctrinated’ into believing in the value of parliamentary democracy just as we are indoctrinated into believing in the merits of this or that soap powder.
The extent to which the majority believe in parliamentary democracy or advertising will be an indication of how much power those who propagate such views have.
Similarly, those within organisations who can persuade others to put the good of the organisation before that of the individual or group will have power.
Thus, nurses are persuaded that they must put organisational goals such as the welfare of the patients before individual and group goals.
Any attempt to win better pay or conditions through industrial action is criticised by the government as selfish and, insofar as many nurses agree with this, then such prevailing beliefs are a very powerful tool in the hands of government.
The major problem with Lukes' view is that if there is no observable conflict then how do we know that power is being exercised at all?
It is all very well to use the language of manipulation or indoctrination but how do we know that this in fact is what happens?
Individuals may freely endorse an organisational culture or set of values and who is to say that they have been indoctrinated?
A more fruitful line of enquiry is to examine the concept of conflict within organisations and to show how power is exercised in practice.
Power and conflict
If organisations are pluralist in nature such that different groups and individuals can influence the decision-making process then we would expect competition between these groups who will represent different interests.
Competition may be no bad thing if it encourages the development of new perspectives, sets standards and encourages groups to improve their performance.
Conflict, on the other hand, may lead to tension, to inter-personal friction, and to the pursuit of individual or group goals rather than the pursuit of organisational goals.
Competition characterises a healthy organisation and conflict an unhealthy organisation.
Competition will be channelled into avenues that benefit the organisation, and one of the major tasks of management is to manage and resolve conflict.
From the perspective of power we can suggest, similarly, that power can be used to aid or hinder the organisation.
What then are the possible causes of conflict within organisations?
Hall argues that there will be four components in a situation of conflict (I) The parties involved.
(2) The field of conflict.
(3) The dynamics of the situation, or how the parties react to each other.
(4) The management, control or resolution of that conflict.
(Hall, 1972, p. 153.)
In the first instance we can suggest that individuals will enter into organisations from a diverse range of social, economic and educational backgrounds which will give them different perspectives and different values.
At the same time individuals will enter into organisations for different reasons and will have different expectations of that organisation.
Some will see the organisation as offering a career; others as a stop-gap before moving on; still others as a means to earn as much money as possible in order to pursue life outside the organisation.
These differences will inevitably lead to disagreements within the organisation.
There will also be conflicts and disagreements arising from the organisation itself which will result from a number of factors.
Incompatible goals
Individual goals may well be in conflict with organisational goals even where there is a strong commitment to one goal by the organisation.
It is worth repeating that there may also be competing goals within the organisation itself.
Thus, for example, the prison service may wish to pursue the twin goals of the punishment of offenders  and at the same time their rehabilitation.
These two goals may prove to be incompatible and yet each will have its supporters.
Within the National Health Service there may well be a commitment to provide the best possible medical care that the state of medical knowledge will allow and yet this may be tempered by the requirement to act within tight financial constraints.
The two goals may be in conflict.
Many organisations will face the problem of which goals to prioritise in the light of competing goals.
In the public sector there is also the added dimension of the politician-official relationship.
The goals of the politician may well be in conflict with those of the official.
When the politician pursues the goal, for example, of reducing the size of the public sector, is it likely that there will be a whole-hearted commitment to this goal when this may directly threaten the job security and promotion prospects of the official?
Centre versus periphery
There may well be conflict between the different parts of an organisation as a result of its geographical and physical dispersal.
There will be conflict between central and local government and also within the same authority or department.
The region or local office may feel that it is being dictated to by a central office that has no understanding of local needs and conditions.
A decision made in Whitehall may look very different in the North East of England.
At the same time, the central office may argue that local offices are too parochial and that central control and the imposition of a uniform provision of service has to be of paramount importance.
Interdepartmental conflict
Different departments may wish to pursue their own interests at the expense of other departments or of the organisation as a whole.
Within central government there will be conflict between the spending departments and the non-spending departments.
Between the spending departments there will be competition for resources.
Indeed, as we have seen elsewhere, Public Choice Theory is based upon the premise that bureaucrats are in competition with each other to expand their budgets.
Each year there will be competition between the departments of Education, Health, Social Security, Defence and so on, to ensure a slice of the public expenditure cake.
Within local authorities there will be similar competition between personnel and finance, between education and social services.
The professional versus the official
If different groups within the organisation resent or do not understand the work and contributions of other groups then there will be conflict.
The National Health Service administrator may be critical of the doctor who is profligate in the use of equipment and resources and at the same time the doctor may resent having to' account for expenditure to the administrator who may lack the medical expertise to  understand why such equipment and resources were used.
Similarly, within the civil service the engineer or architect may resent being bound by the rules and regulations of administrative practices and accountability rather than those of the profession.
Structural differences
Disagreement may occur between different levels within the organisation where one level controls the resources that the other wants in terms of information, salary increases, promotion and so on.
These differences may be exacerbated in a more formal hierarchical structure where clear divisions exist between the different levels.
Personal differences
It is likely in any organisation that individuals will have different opinions, there will be personality clashes and there may well be conflicts of interest where an individual is required to pursue a particular course of action that they cannot, in all conscience, perform.
The public sector is likely to throw up issues that may require the individual to go against the organisation's instructions.
The former civil servant, Clive Ponting, was taken to court for disclosing information about the sinking of the Argentine ship, the Belgrano, during the Falklands conflict.
Ponting's defence was that he was acting in the public interest since he felt that the government was trying to mislead Parliament.
As an individual who had access to this information he felt that he could not, in all conscience, keep quiet about it.
Finally, we can suggest that there will be:
competition for resources in terms of budgets, status, prestige and staff;
competition for goals, particularly where those goals remain unclear or there is no agreement on objectives or priorities.
The goal of a local authority may be expressed as ‘Serving the public’ but this is rather vague and can be interpreted in any number of different ways;
competition for territory.
Handy (1985) makes the point that organisations can be seen in territorial terms, characterised by empire building.
There will be violation and jealousy of the resources or territory that another group or department has at its disposal.
For example, the Civil Service Department was created in 1968 to oversee manpower and training issues within the civil service.
These functions had previously come under the Treasury.
The Civil Service Department eventually lost a running battle with the Treasury and was disbanded in 1981, with some of its functions returning to the Treasury.
There may also be overcrowding in some areas.
Certain issues quickly become topical and every group wishes to be involved.
At the end of the 1980s environmental issues rose to the top of the agenda and suddenly we were all ‘greens’ as attention was directed, towards environmental issues.
Conclusion
To what extent, though, is the exercise of power, the endless competition, healthy or unhealthy?
As was suggested earlier, competition may generate new ideas, stimulate and channel energies, set standards for others to follow.
It may also waste time and energy; it may be unproductive; it may lead to hostility and to low morale.
Whatever the form power takes or the extent to which conflict exists, it is important for us to recognise their existence within organisations.
It is in this sense that we can say that every organisation is political and every organisation is concerned with the use, and abuse, of power.
Bacharach and Lawler (1980) argue that organisations comprise bargaining systems and we need to understand how they work to understand organisations fully.
The research by Thompson (1986) on decision making within district health authorities found much evidence of bargaining, not just between the different coalitions of politicians, administrators and the medical profession but also within these coalitions.
Perhaps this is not  surprising if we agree with the English philosopher, Thomas Hobbes, who argued that the pursuit of power is part of human nature.
Further reading
For general theories of power and the state the book by Cox, Furlong and Page (1985) is very useful.
Pfeffer (1981) and Bacharach and Lawler (1980) both examine power within organisations.
Rhodes (1981) examines power in the context of relations between central and local government and is well worth reading.
For those interested in a case study approach then Thompson (1986) is most illuminating.
Finally, for those interested in the radical approach to power, Lukes (1974) is required reading.
Leadership
Introduction
Increasingly the qualities of leadership are deemed to be desirable for those working in the public sector.
In the private sector the quality of leadership has long been recognised as a key factor affecting organisational performance.
The Local Government Training Board publication The Leadership Audit (1987b) recognises the importance of leadership for local government officials.
Management development within British Rail has been built around a leadership programme for their top managers.
A recent scrutiny of public sector job advertisements reveals such phrases as: ‘You will be expected to take a lead on all aspects of work in the Division.’
‘The General Manager will be required to play a leading role.’
‘You must be able to demonstrate leadership.’
We shall examine the different theoretical approaches to leadership and apply these approaches to public sector organisations as well as asking a number of questions.
How do we define leadership?
Who are the leaders?
What does leadership consist of?
What do leaders do?
Each of these questions will be addressed in turn.
How do we define leadership?
Writers often distinguish between management and leadership.
Ackerman (1985) argues that there are a number of important differences.
He suggests that management is synonymous with organisations but that leadership can exist outside of the organisation.
According to this author, management may be related to formal authority within an organisation and managers-get others to do their bidding because of their organisational position.
Individuals follow leaders because of the additional attribute of charisma and the personal attraction of the leader.
As Stewart puts it:
Managers have subordinates.
Leaders have followers: people who recognise and find attractive the leaders' sense of purpose.
Leaders are those who can get the people with whom they work, whether subordinates or not, to be convinced co-operators.
Leaders make others feel that what they are doing matters and hence makes them feel good about their work.
(1989, p.4.)
There are many different definitions of leadership, but they do seem to have certain features in common and a useful general definition is that given by Kossen: ‘Leadership is the ability to influence the behaviour of others to go in a certain direction.’
(1983, p. 201.)
This definition of leadership is similar to that of power that was used in the previous chapter.
This should come as no surprise since leaders possess a certain amount of power.
However, Kossen's definition of leadership can encompass:
the military leader who is concerned to win support of the troops to pursue the goal of military victory;
the political leader who is concerned to persuade the citizens that her way is the right way;
the team leader at work who is concerned to ensure that members of the group are all pulling in the same direction towards greater productivity or an improved service.
Another feature of this definition is that it does not specify at what level within the organisation the leader is.
Thus, if an official lower down the organisation can influence those at the top to move in a certain direction then we could designate that person a leader.
This may occur where a lower level official may have specialised knowledge or is considered an expert in some area.
Leadership, traditionally, has been seen as a form of activity that is expressed in terms of a relationship — that between the leader and the led.
More recent theories, which we shall examine later, suggest that the idea of individuals being led is too passive and that the capacity for leadership may be in all of us.
We shall need to study, not just the individual characteristics of leadership, but also the reaction to leadership by others.
Leadership is also apparent in many different spheres of activity — the military, the political, the organisational and so on— and it may exist at different levels.
If we return to the definition of leadership as the ability to influence others to go in a certain direction then this ability may be required at many different levels within the organisation.
At one level it may be expressed by a Commander-in-Chief who is determining the strategic objectives of the military and has to convince the generals.
At a different level it may be the squad leader who has to define these overall goals in operational terms and who has to lead the squad in battle.
In the same way the Chief Superintendent of Police may be concerned to define strategic goals for the police force as a whole while the individual police constable may need to exercise leadership in an operational situation and direct others in that situation., Here we might use the term ‘street-level’ leadership.
Similarly, the manager  in charge of a local authority department may need to give a lead to others in defining the role and objectives of that department.
The ability to give direction to people is necessary not just at the top of an organisation.
Its necessity will depend upon the context and the situation.
Stewart (1989) argues that, despite the traditional subordinacy of the nurse to the doctor, nurse managers, for example, will need to demonstrate leadership not least in terms of acting as a role model for younger nurses and for maintaining morale.
There are situations, like the operational one that the police find themselves in, where an individual has to take the lead.
We can expand, therefore, Kossen's original definition so that our definition of leadership is the ability to influence the behaviour of others to go in a certain direction within a given context.
Who are the leaders?
Traditionally, we have perceived leadership as belonging to those at the top of organisations and have described others within the organisation as followers, subordinates or the led.
This is likely to be the case in formal hierarchical establishments where it is felt that the proper locus of decision making is at the top.
Where there is an increasing use of decentralised structures and accountability we would expect individuals lower down the organisation to take on more responsibility.
The traditional view of the leader may, then, be questioned and our model of leadership may have to be widened to encompass the different locations of leadership.
Indeed, Bradford and Cohen (1984) argue that the image of the leader as hero is inappropriate for today's organisations.
There is a mythology of the ‘good leader’ where such a person:
knows what is going on at all times within the department;
has more technical expertise than those lower down;
should be able to solve any problem that crops up;
should be the primary person responsible for how the department is working.
This image, according to Bradford and Cohen, is outdated.
It is the image of the tough, resourceful ‘lone ranger’ figure who rides in to rescue the town from the wicked cattle baron.
What happens when our hero is not there?
Surely it is better for the townsfolk themselves to develop the necessary skills to fight their own battles?
Our ‘post-heroic leader’ will allow others to take responsibility, develop their own skills, solve their own problems and develop their own goals.
Our leader, according to this approach, will allow others to develop, to act as an enabler rather than as a director of subordinates.
This view, though, has implications for the public sector where convention has it that it is the role of the politicians and not the officials to determine goals and take responsibility.
Indeed the idea of civil service leadership is a contradiction in terms within a democracy.
The problem with decentralising responsibility and, accountability within public sector organisations is that traditionally it is the politician who is held to account rather than the official.
Thus if leadership is to be  practised throughout the organisation then it has to be consistent with political objectives and compatible with the role of the politician.
At the same time Painter (1989) argues that senior officials within the civil service need to be aware of their responsibilities in offering professional leadership and articulating the values of the civil service as an organisation.
Senior officials have a duty to protect junior officials and to set standards for those lower down.
What does leadership consist of?
We are all familiar with the cliche ‘Leaders are born and not made’, and whether this is true or not it does suggest to us that leadership is dependent upon an individual possessing certain characteristics.
This idea has received much support and it is known as the ‘trait theory’ of leadership.
The theory states that individuals possess certain characteristics so that they are predisposed to act in a certain way within a given situation.
Trait theory
Kossen (1983) has suggested that possession of certain characteristics is required for leadership:
the ability to solve problems creatively;
the ability to communicate and listen;
a strong desire to achieve;
many interests and sociability;
a positive and sincere attitude towards subordinates;
self-confidence;
enthusiasm;
self-discipline;
manners;
emotional stability.
Kossen also says that these characteristics can be learned and developed, thereby suggesting that leaders may be made as well as born.
One of the problems, though, is that there is no general agreement on what these characteristics should be.
A workshop on leadership skills in local government produced a list of ten key skills:
1.
Vision — creating a sense of what the organisation is about and where it is going.
2.
Prioritising — the ability to distinguish between, for example, the urgent and the merely important.
3.
Motivation — through recognising achievements and rewarding staff.
4.
Inter-personal skills — such as listening, suggesting, being positive.
5.
Political sensitivity — to the needs of councillors and to organisational power.
6.
Resilience — to remain steadfast in the face of adversity.
7.
Charisma — difficult to define but it attracts others.
8.
Risk-taking — in areas such as delegating work to other staff.
9.
Flexibility — to respond to new ideas and practices.
10.
Decisiveness — when the situation demands it.
(Local Government Training Board, 1987)
In her work on the National Health Service, Stewart (1989b) produces a similar list:
pointing the way or creating a vision;
symbolising what matters in terms of the values of the organisation;
getting others to share these values;
creating pride in the organisation;
making people feel important;
realising people s potential;
self-sufficiency and relying on oneself.
The problem with such lists is that they do not specify any order.
Is flexibility any more important than decisiveness?
May the two, in fact be in conflict with each other?
We can imagine a situation where a decision needs to be made quickly and the official does not have the scope to take into account individual or local circumstances.
Likewise, we may not wish a budget-holder to take risks with taxpayer's money and to ensure equity the official may need to follow formal rules rather than respond flexibly to each new case.
It may also be that we look for different attributes in different parts of the public service.
In the civil service, for example, recruitment is dependent upon the selector's perceptions of:
1.
Penetration of thought.
2.
Fertility of ideas.
3.
Judgement.
4.
Written ability.
5.
Oral expression.
6.
Personal contacts.
7.
Influence.
8.
Drive.
9.
Determination.
10.
Emotional stability.
11.
Maturity.
(See Chapman, 1984.)
Once again, though, such a list may be too general and does not indicate any order of preference.
It may be that for any individual to succeed in any organisation then he or she will need some or all of the qualities listed above.
Likewise the ability to listen or to communicate or show enthusiasm and self-confidence know no organisational boundaries.
There is one feature that is included in the local government list of characteristics that may be unique to the public sector and that is the requirement that our public sector officials have political sensitivity.
Thus our official, in dealing with the, politician, needs to be aware of the political impact of his or her advice and be  sensitive to the needs of the politician.
In drafting reports, for example, the official will need to be aware of the ruling party's political values.
This issue has been of particular importance within central government in recent years as the traditional task of the civil service — that of offering objective, impartial advice — has come under scrutiny.
Recent Conservative governments have stressed a greater concern with commitment to putting policies into practice and getting the job done.
However, any organisation has to be aware of the environment within which it operates.
The businessman has to be sensitive to the needs of the customer or to the demands of the shareholders.
The approach to leadership purely in terms of individual characteristics is also deficient in that it does not take into account the relationship between the leader and the followers.
If we recall our definition of leadership we stressed that leadership involves a relationship.
This relationship may take a number of different forms.
There are a number of theories that discuss this relationship and they are generally known as ‘style theories of leadership’ where the focus is upon the style that a leader adopts in dealing with others.
Style theories
A common approach is to suggest that there are different styles of leadership such as:
Autocratic — identified with a strong domineering leader where power and control are centralised.
Participative — the leader gives up some power and authority to subordinates.
Laissez-faire — the absence of direct leadership.
The leader may believe that the most important role for them to play is that of a co-ordinator.
An example of the first might be Mrs Thatcher, insofar as it is said that she dominated her Cabinets.
However, she cannot control every aspect of government and she will give up some of her authority to, for example, the Chancellor of the Exchequer where financial matters are concerned.
Thus it may be that style theories are too simplistic.
Different situations may require different styles of leadership and a good leader may be one who uses a combination of different styles.
Where there is a task to be completed and deadlines to be met an autocratic approach may be appropriate.
Where the issue is one that requires a consensus decision it may be that a more participative style is required.
Not only is the particular situation important but also the attitudes towards the leader by the followers are.
A leader may believe that individuals need coercing into following a particular direction, or alternatively may believe that encouragement is the key.
The model of the post-heroic leader that we discussed earlier is certainly based upon the premise that individuals will respond to encouragement.
One of the better known theories concerned with leadership styles is that put, forward by McGregor (1960).
As we saw in Chapter 5, he suggested that the style  adopted depends upon the perception that leaders have of their subordinates.
A leader who believes that their subordinates are lazy, lacking in ambition, self-centred and resistant to change will adopt an autocratic style of leadership.
The emphasis here is on securing the compliance of the subordinate through direction and control.
McGregor calls this Theory X. In contrast to this is Theory Y, where he argues that if the leaders see subordinates as willing and able then the leader will be less inclined to pursue an autocratic style but instead prefer a participative style of leadership and encourage subordinates to accept responsibility and authority.
Blake and Mouton (1964) argue that leadership behaviour is based upon a conflict between two opposing forces within the individual — a concern for the task to be done and a concern for people.
Blake and Mouton construct a matrix with concern for task on one axis and concern for people on the other axis.
They identify five main leadership styles to be plotted on the matrix, depending upon the various commitments to either people or the task.
So far, then, leadership can be seen as a number of different factors, comprising;
1.
An individual's characteristics.
2.
The organisational context — some organisations will value different characteristics.
3.
Different styles that leaders prefer.
4.
Different styles appropriate to different situations, depending upon whether the situation is task-oriented or people-oriented.
5.
The perceptions by leaders of the qualities and values of those they are seeking to influence.
Contingency theory
This group of theories suggests that leadership will be a combination of different factors, depending upon the situation.
Different leaders will choose different approaches, depending upon the context.
It depends upon what ‘best fits’ the situation.
This is an expression used by Handy (1985) who suggests that there are a number of leadership variables and the best combination is one appropriate to a particular situation.
The variables that Handy uses are:
the leader's style, which may change;
expectations of the leader's behaviour;
the objectives of the group;
the environment of the organisation.
Fiedler (1967) suggested that the elements of a leadership situation are three-fold:
leader member relations and the extent to which there is support for the leader,
the task itself; is it simple or complex?
position power; to what extent does the leader have the power to reward or punish other members of the organisation?
A leader must assess whether favourable factors exist, i.e. good relations, high task structure and strong position power, before selecting an appropriate style.
Fiedler  found that extremely favourable or unfavourable conditions required a task-oriented or autocratic style of leadership.
Those situations deemed to be moderately favourable required a people-oriented style.
The leader could be matched to the situation which suited his/her style or the situation could be changed to suit the particular style.
A more recent approach emphasises not just the relationship between the leader and others but also stresses the changing nature of this relationship.
Developmental approach
This approach stresses the fact that as individuals ‘mature’ in an organisation then the leader should take account of this and allow the relationship to develop as a consequence.
Thus we might expect to move gradually to a more participative or laissez-faire approach.
Banner and Blasingame (1988) suggest that there are nine stages in this development:
1.
Attention — leaders initially pay attention and give time to subordinates.
2.
Support — help the employees in their work.
3.
Feedback/information sharing — show how the employee's work fits into the wider scheme of things.
4.
Nurturing — move towards the sharing of ideas.
5.
Emerging autonomy — the employees begin to define their own role but still need guidance.
6.
Setting limits — autonomy plus limits determined by the leader.
7.
Personal competence — employees are highly ‘mature’, i.e. they are high achievers who take responsibility for results.
8.
Independent personal and professional growth — employees begin to lead themselves.
9.
Loyalty and commitment — the leader and the organisation are now seen as ‘family’ by the individual.
This approach takes into account the changing nature of the relationship between the leaders and others and indicates how it may develop.
It is a more sophisticated account than the simple trait and style theories that we began our account with.
What do leaders do?
Leadership is concerned with performing a number of different tasks and below we explore some of these tasks in detail.
Providing a vision
We have discussed the notion that leaders will influence others to go in a certain direction.
In order to do that our leaders must, themselves, have a clear idea of where that direction lies.
Increasingly, management theory stresses the most, important role is that of the visionary where the leader:
creates a vision;
communicates it to others within the organisation;
shows its relevance to their work;
ensures commitment to that vision.
Peters and Austin (1986) use the image of the leader as ‘chief salesperson’ where leadership is involved in creating an image of the organisation and symbolising what it stands for.
Within the public sector we tend to think of politicians as providing the vision for the organisation, expressed in terms, depending upon the ideology of the party in power, which include:
reducing poverty;
promoting equality and freedom;
pursuing justice;
caring for the welfare of the population;
promoting enterprise;
educating the population.
Perhaps we should also expect the officials to provide a vision for the organisation even though less grandiose in scope.
We can imagine a departmental head in a local authority urging his/her staff to be the most efficient and effective, the most caring or the friendliest department.
Such visions can be utilised at all levels within an organisation and are not the sole prerogative of those at the top.
Indeed, they may be considered to be much more practical than the visions given to us by politicians and hence may be more likely to have support.
It is difficult to operationalise the politician's objective of promoting freedom and equality.
Overall perspective
Linked to the notion of creating a vision is connecting that vision to the overall perspective of the organisation.
Both require standing back from the day-to-day running of the organisation and examining the wider picture.
One of the major criticisms that is made of senior management is its unwillingness to let go of the reins of an organisation, to delegate routine tasks and to concentrate upon the longer term.
Leadership has to see the work of the organisation within a wider context and to be aware of the environment within which the organisation is working.
Garratt (1987) suggests that leaders need to be aware of the wider economic, social and political contexts, the uncertain world within which organisations operate, and to take account of this external environment.
Stewart (1989) argues that the call for leaders in the National Health Service is precisely because the National Health Service increasingly operates within an uncertain and changing environment.
We would expect leaders at all levels to be aware of the wider context of their work.
Departmental heads will need to be aware of other departments within the organisation, will have outside relationships involving clients or customers, and will need to work with other agencies.
People in departments dominated by the professions will need to be aware of developments within the professional field and  keep up-to-date with the latest techniques or equipment.
At whatever level it manifests itself, leadership is concerned with standing back from the day-to-day routine of affairs.
The Fulton Report (1968) on the civil service was critical of the generalist class within the civil service and suggested that a greater role in management should be found for the specialist classes.
However, recent writings on leadership would seem to support the retention of the skills of the generalist administrator.
We have suggested that a feature of leadership is the ability to stand back and take the wider perspective.
This means not being bound by the commitment to a narrow specialist view.
The generalist administrator is concerned to take this wider view and not be bound by a narrow perspective.
This role would fit easily into the modern view of leadership.
Similarly, in local government the tradition that senior officers are specialists with professional expertise has been questioned.
The suggestion is that there needs to be a move away from the narrow professionalism of the past towards a more generalised and politically aware professionalism.
The concern is with taking a wider perspective, looking outwards rather than inwards.
Transmitting the vision
We suggested earlier that leadership is concerned with influencing the behaviour of others.
This may take a number of different forms:
coercion;
manipulation;
threats;
promises;
explanation;
persuasion;
setting an example.
The more extreme forms of influence, such as coercion or threat, are unlikely to be sustained over any length of time.
If a leader constantly has to threaten individuals, it is unlikely that those individuals will come to share the vision of the leader.
Of course, it may be that under certain circumstances a more autocratic relationship is appropriate.
For example, where a decision has to be made quickly then it may be more appropriate to tell an individual what to do rather than persuade him.
This may be appropriate in an organisation like the Army where discipline and the carrying out of orders is essential to the success of that organisation.
Here there also may be more compliant subordinates who prefer this more authoritarian style there may be individuals in any organisation who do not want responsibility and who prefer to be told what to do.
We suggested earlier that leadership will need to take account of different situations and the different relations that leaders will have with others.
The perceptions that individuals have of the leaders is also important, here.
The Developmental model that we discussed earlier suggested that the relationship between the leader and others will develop through various stages and it is up to the leader to know what is appropriate at any given time and with any given individual.
Relations with others
We have stressed the notion that leadership is concerned with a relationship and we have indicated what forms this relationship might take.
Many difficulties faced in the public sector will stem from the formal, hierarchical structure within which such relationships take place.
As we have seen, such organisations tend to be dominated by formal rules and by committees which may lend themselves to the more autocratic style of leadership.
Hence it will be necessary to take account of the structure in determining what leadership role is most appropriate.
It will be pointless advocating a more participative style of leadership if the structure does not allow participation and informal rules to develop.
A further problem is that the promotion, pay and career development of officials may be outside the control of immediate superiors and hence it may be difficult for the departmental head to have much impact upon the work, the responsibilities, the morale and the development of individuals within the organisation.
As we saw earlier with Fiedler's model of leadership, position power is an important factor.
In the civil service it may not exist lower down the organisation.
The Developmental model of leadership advocated by Banner and Blasingame will require greater responsibility and the identification of leadership lower down the organisational structure than has traditionally been the case within either central or local government.
Conclusion
We have examined the various models and explanations of leadership, from the traditional concern with leaders and their subordinates to a more recent approach which suggests that leadership needs to be more enlightened and to allow individuals to develop their own leadership skills.
We illustrate these points diagrammatically in Figures 7.1 and 7.2.
Thus if we were to compile a checklist of leadership it would comprise the following:
1.
Take an integrated view.
2.
Learn to delegate tasks and responsibility.
3.
Know the staff.
4.
Help and allow individuals to develop.
5.
Provide direction.
6.
Be constructive and positive rather than destructive and negative.
7.
Trust and have faith in the staff.
8.
Treat staff with respect and value their abilities.
Stewart's prescriptions for the leader in the National Health Service urge:
do not be afraid to think of yourself as a leader,
have a strong belief in what needs doing;
be willing to convey the vision to others;
show enthusiasm and commitment in pursuing the vision;
show a passion for excellence;
show a positive attitude to setbacks;
encourage others and do not let disappointments show.
(1989, p. 17.)
Finally, then, we also need to locate our concept of leadership within:(a) the political environment within which the organisation operates and hence be aware of political objectives;(b) the organisational structure that exists;(c) the ‘fit’ between the structure of public sector organisations, and the preferred leadership style.
It is no good advocating a more participative style of leadership if the organisation is dominated by a bureaucratic structure.
Further reading
There are many general textbooks on the subject of leadership.
The ones that we have found useful are Kossen (1983), Selznick (1957) and Chell (1987).
There are also a number of texts that are prescriptive in giving guidelines to improving leadership performance.
Bradford and Cohen (1984) and Wright and Taylor (1984) both fall into this category.
A similar approach based upon research in the National Health Service is offered by Stewart (1989).
We found Local Government Training Board (1987b) instructive for the local government context.
The short article by, Painter (1989) is also useful for the dimensions of leadership in the civil service.
Motivation and morale
Introduction
Lack of motivation and the existence of low morale is of concern to all organisations.
From an organisational perspective, motivation is linked to performance.
A highly motivated individual, it is argued, will perform better than one with a low level of motivation.
Organisations, therefore, have an interest in ensuring that motivation is high in individuals and morale is good throughout the organisation.
Within the public sector one of the implications of attempts by government to reduce the size and change the structure of public sector organisations has been declining morale — or so commentators would have us believe.
There is ample evidence that pay levels in the NHS are too low and that there are insufficient rewards.
These pay levels have resulted in low morale within the Service and have made it increasingly difficult to recruit and retain staff.
(Institute of Health Service Management, 1988, para 2.8.)
We find similar accounts in the press.
The lack of public confidence in the police and the declining status of the police profession was commented upon by a police constable: ‘I want to leave the station wearing my uniform and feel proud, that it means something, honour and dignity.
But now, that uniform feels like a rag.’
(Guardian, 21 February, 1990.)
Problems arise when we attempt to measure motivation and morale.
The approach to understanding organisations that concentrates its focus on people within organisations needs to be aware of what it is that motivates people within those organisations.
We have already examined the Human Relations approach to organisations, and this is a precursor to examining what it is that motivates people to perform within organisations.
We shall be concerned with a number of general questions about motivation and morale:
1.
What is motivation?
2.
Why is it important within organisations?
3.
Is it linked to performance?
4.
Can we measure it?
5.
Does motivation vary between individuals and between different types of occupations?
6.
Is there anything distinctive about motivation and morale within the public sector?
In order to answer these questions we need, in the first instance, to examine theories of motivation and then discuss their practical relevance.
Theories of motivation
A number of theories are built upon some conception of human nature.
The theories make certain assumptions about individual needs and desires and how individuals are motivated to satisfy these needs and achieve our desires.
Depending upon what view of human nature we take then we will arrive at different explanations of what motivates us.
Maslow's hierarchy of needs
We discussed Maslow's theory in Chapter 5 and so we do not need to reproduce his basic arguments.
But it will help our present purposes if we show his theory of basic needs in the form of a diagram (see Figure 8.1).
Although Maslow was not concerned specifically with individuals within organisations, we can suggest a number of implications where concern would apply.
1.
Our needs change so that our motivation will change.
It may well be that, throughout our careers we are motivated by the desire to satisfy different needs.
2.
The higher up we go in an organisation then what motivates us will also change.
3.
Motivation is a reflection of position within the hierarchy.
If we are at the bottom of the organisation we may be motivated by the desire to satisfy physiological needs.
In the first instance we go to work in order to eat and drink and provide ourselves with shelter.
At the top of the organisation we may be motivated by the desire to satisfy self-actualisation needs.
At the top the individual may be earning enough money to satisfy the basic physiological needs.
4.
Managers need to be aware of these different needs and recognise the stage at which individuals have reached in the satisfaction of their needs.
Giving an employee more money may not motivate him/her if that individual needs to satisfy the desire for respect and the esteem of colleagues.
That may be satisfied by giving the individual more responsibility or more challenging work.
5.
Satisfaction in terms of needs says nothing whatsoever about improving performance.
Individuals may be more content and morale may be high, but does this necessarily lead on to an improved performance?
Although Maslow offers us useful insights into individual psychology, his theory is open to a number of criticisms:
1.
The basic components of Maslow's theory are often presented as a pyramid, but this seems to imply that those needs situated at the top of the pyramid are more important than those at the bottom.
This is open to debate.
It also seems to imply that relatively few of us ever reach the stage of self-actualisation.
2.
What exactly is self-actualisation?
Although it can be linked to the idea of attaining personal meaning through work, much of our potential may be attained outside of work in terms of sport or hobbies.
3.
Are there only five basic needs?
Do we know what they are?
Can we prove it?
There is no evidence to suggest that Maslow's assumptions are correct or incorrect.
4.
Are there clear dividing lines between the different levels?
It may be that people wish to satisfy a number of needs at the same time.
5.
It may be that individuals can satisfy their needs outside the organisation altogether.
Thus, an individual's need to belong may be satisfied by close family and friendship ties.
McGregor's Theory X and Theory Y
As we saw in Chapter 5, McGregor argued that the style of management adopted is a function of the manager's attitudes and assumptions about human nature.
We can wonder to what extent McGregor's Theory X is appropriate for the modern organisation since it implies direction and control through a centralised system of organisational structure.
In other words, this theory will apply to the traditional, formal organisation.
Under Theory X motivation occurs only at the physiological and security levels of Maslow's hierarchy.
In contrast, Theory Y focuses upon the top three tiers of Maslow's hierarchy and implies the integration of individual goals with those of the organisation.
An important feature of McGregor's approach is that it shows how management assumptions are important in determining motivation and morale.
It is in this sense that the scientific management approach and that of the Human Relations school that we discussed in earlier chapters are both managerialist in that increased efficiency of the organisation is the context for both approaches.
McGregor's approach suggests that motivation also depends upon relations with others as well as the individual's own nature.
However, we need to be aware that.
individuals respond differently to different types of management style.
Thus, some individuals may welcome the opportunity to exercise responsibility whereas others may not be interested and prefer the security of being directed by others;
situations may also respond to different styles of management.
Thus, for example, in a police operational matter it may well be that one individual must make a decision and make that decision quickly.
Clear direction has to be given and control over colleagues exercised.
Downs and bureaucratic motivation
Although rarely included in standard textbook discussions of motivation, the work of Downs (1967), as representative of Public Choice theorists, is important.
Public Choice theorists explicitly examine the motivation of bureaucrats and suggest that, in crude terms, the most important motivator is the desire to increase one's share of the budget which leads to increased status.
The assumption is that it is much more difficult to assess the work of a public manager than it is of a private sector counterpart.
There are no sales or profit figures to judge the bureaucrats' work.
Public Choice theory argues that bureaucrats are judged by the size of the budget that they control and by how much they can increase it.
It is a fairly cynical thesis but one that is not without its merits, as those who work in the public sector might testify.
Downs argues that bureaucrats do exhibit personality traits but these may differ.
Not only that but they do have different ways of achieving their maximum personal utility.
He goes on to argue that:
1.
Bureaucrats are made up of different types of officials.
2.
These officials can be characterised in two ways:(a) purely self-interested; and (b) mixed-motive.
3.
The purely self-interested officials are of two types:(a) climbers — motivated by power and prestige and the pursuit of both.
These types of individuals are the ones who are said to stab you in the back in order to achieve their ends; and (b) the conservers — motivated by the desire to retain the status quo.
They resist change because they feel threatened by it and are the ones who constantly refer to the rules and regulations before they will do anything.
They tend to be, characterized by the phrase ‘its more than my job's worth…’ and may be termed petty officials.
4.
Mixed-motive officials are of three types:(a) zealots — they are especially obsessive about particular pet policies even though no one else may share their enthusiasm and although it may be detrimental to the organisation as a whole;(b) advocates — concerned with getting things done and loyal to a broader set of policies;(c) statesmen — concerned with the good of the state or society as a whole.
They comprise the classical concept of the public official who is anxious to promote the ‘public interest’.
The assumption is that organisations are made up of different types of individuals who have different motives.
Not only that but motivation can be expressed in terms of self-interest, however that may be perceived, and in terms of serving organisational interests.
And yet we can offer a number of criticisms of this approach:
1.
Only the most senior officials may be in a position to have some impact upon determining their own interests.
The theory will not apply to the vast majority of officials.
2.
If Public Choice theory as a whole is based upon the concept of maximising budgets it may be the case that most officials have no control over budget allocation.
As Dunleavy (1985) argues, different kinds of government bodies will vary in their control over their budgets.
3.
As officials move up the hierarchy they may be more involved in policy advice rather than managing budgets or people.
Herzberg's two-factor theory
From Herzberg's theory we can suggest that motivation is thus concerned with both the content and the context of work.
According to Herzberg (1966), job enrichment through increasing responsibility and providing more challenging work can lead to job satisfaction.
If we received job satisfaction, we would be motivated to work harder.
At the same time if the hygiene factors were a poor working environment, poor salary and poor supervision then we might ask: ‘Why work here’?
We might be able to do the same job elsewhere under better working conditions.
However, like many of the theories we have been looking at, it leads to oversimplification.
What satisfies one individual may not satisfy the next.
Some workers do not seem to be particularly interested in the job content of their work.
As long as the context of work allows good working relations and a pleasant environment then morale may be high but individuals may not be particularly motivated to seek responsibility.
Expectancy/valence theories
These theories attempt to link the value of rewards, the probability of receiving these rewards and the effort put in.
This simple proposition is linked most closely with the work of Vroom (1964) and Porter and Lawler (1968).
Expectancy theories are concerned with the relationships among the inputs that make up motivation.
The motivation to perform is seen as a function of the beliefs that individuals have concerning future rewards multiplied by the value they place on those rewards.
Thus individuals desire certain goals and they put a value on these goals.
To determine motivation we need to break the model down into two components:
expectancy
valence (or the value which an individual places on an outcome)
Thus:
1.
Individuals believe that acting in a certain way will lead to certain outcomes (the performance — outcome expectancy).
2.
Individuals believe that these outcomes have positive value for them (valence).
3.
Individuals believe that they are able to perform at the desired level (effort performance outcome).
Here ‘Can I do it?’ is the question.
4.
Expectancy is the perceived probability that effort will lead to perceived outcomes.
The individual will want to know the answer to two questions:
1.
What am I most likely to get out of this if I do it?
(Expectancy).
2.
How much do I value what I am likely to get out of it?
(Valence).
The theories are based upon individuals' perception of what they expect out of work and recognise that individuals place different values on rewards and the effort that they have to expend in order to achieve those rewards.
There is thus believed to be a direct correlation between expected rewards and performance.
However, such theories have limited predictive capability in that we cannot measure the individual's perception of values.
Unless we assume that all individuals are the same then presumably we may all have different values and different perceptions of how to satisfy these values.
We can also legitimately ask to what extent people are rational in the sense of making some kind of calculation concerning the best way to satisfy their needs.
Although we have offered a fairly simplistic version of these theories we can still see that even a simplified version is very complex.
Adams and equity theory
This theory brings in the element of comparison such that an individual will compare his/her ratio of input (effort) to output (pay) with a similar ratio for some other relevant person.
Other theories are based upon the individual.
This group of theories is based upon how we perceive others in comparison to ourselves.
We desire to be treated equitably (Adams, 1965).
Thus:
It is perceived equity that motivates behaviour and provides satisfaction.
Perceived inequity will lead to dissatisfaction and conflict between individuals.
The individual is motivated to change the situation back to an equitable one.
The theory is based upon exchanges and the equity of those exchanges.
If we work extra hard for our employers we expect some kind of reward in return.
Not only that but we expect that reward to be a fair and just one.
The organisation must ensure that employees believe that they are being treated fairly in comparison with others.
This comparison may be based upon pay since this can be easily measured.
It may also involve comparison with other professions and other occupations and not just with rewards within the organisation.
The administrative officer working within the civil service may compare pay and conditions with similar jobs in the private sector such as a building society.
Indeed this may more likely be the case if there is a uniform salary within the civil service which is not based upon performance.
However, most of the research in this area is based upon employee reactions to pay inequalities.
This may be too narrow a base if it is the case that pay is only one factor in determining levels of motivation.
It may be used by the employer to induce individuals to be over-competitive with each other.
A major problem is that there is no reason why we choose the referents that we do other than the fact that they may be someone we know or whose occupation we have information about.
Thus, there is no particular reason why we should choose one referent rather than another.
We may choose a professional sports person as our referent and bemoan the fact that our salaries do not compare despite the fact that we may have as much talent in our chosen fields.
It is difficult trying to build a theory on such subjective criteria.
Summary
Each set of theories offers us insights but none is conclusive.
However, we are left with a number of general points:
views on human nature are important;
the role of management is crucial;
the content of work is important;
the context of work is important;
individual perceptions of reward and the relation between performance and reward are important;
the notion of a fair or equitable reward compared to others is also important.
Implications for managers
Increasingly it is recognised that the role of management is of crucial importance in securing motivation and morale.
The Griffiths Report (1983) on management in the National Health Service suggested that the presence of a general management process is important in: ‘securing proper motivation of staff.
Those charged with the general management responsibility would regard it as vital to review incentives, rewards and sanctions’(para 9c, p. 13).
Given the theories that we have explored above we can suggest that the manager needs to:
1.
Be aware of the individual needs of employees (Maslow).
2.
Be aware of the assumptions that they are making concerning human nature (McGregor).
3.
Be aware of the organisational context of work and not just concentrate on the job itself (Herzberg).
4.
Calculate that outcome which each employee values (Expectancy).
5.
Make sure that the desired levels of performance are attainable (Expectancy).
6.
Link desired outcomes to required performances (Expectancy).
7.
Make sure that employees are treated equitably (Equity).
Such a role for management assumes that:
it is possible to measure motivation;
rewards are linked to performance;
management has the time and the expertise to assess individual performance;
organisations can be individualised and take account of the many different needs of employees.
The public sector
As we indicated at the beginning of the chapter, there is a growing interest in issues of motivation and morale within the public sector.
The extent to which it is being seriously addressed throughout the sector is less clear.
However, efforts in this direction are increasingly being reported on:
Lawrence and Santry (1989) report on the work being done in a division of the Department of Trade and Industry and indicate the techniques used.
These included the introduction of specific work targets, a more open and informal management style, the establishment of a quality circle.
The Local Government Training Board (1988b) report that morale and motivation can be improved by defining the core values of the organisation and communicating these to employees.
One piece of research looked specifically at the civil service and was carried out by Livingstone and Wilkie (1981).
The exercise was concerned with the motivation of junior and middle managers within the civil service and in broad terms used Herzberg's two-factor analysis described briefly above.
Livingstone and Wilkie presented a number of factors leading to dissatisfaction:
Failure to achieve.
Lack of a challenge.
The feeling of being an unimportant cog in a large machine.
Ungrateful or demanding clients particularly in the — what was then — Department of Health and Social Security.
The lack of autonomy and responsibility.
The lack of promotion prospects.
Salary — a low proportion identified this as a source of dissatisfaction.
Dissatisfaction was mostly aimed at individual anomalies or inappropriate differentials within the organisation rather than those outside.
The manager's inability to delegate responsibilities or to communicate to those lower down.
The lack of training to carry out the job.
Departmental practices were often unworkable.
Livingstone and Wilkie also identified a number of factors leading to satisfaction, the most important of which were:
A sense of achievement — successfully completing a task or overcoming a challenge.
Recognition.
Decent colleagues.
The physical environment.
A degree of autonomy in one's work.
Livingstone and Wilkie make a number of comments concerning their findings.
They suggest that relatively junior and often youthful staff do not shirk opportunities for taking responsibility when the opportunity is there and they, in fact, associate responsibility and autonomy with a high degree of job satisfaction.
Thus an improvement in performance is often related to the content of the job rather than to pay.
Thus an interesting, worthwhile and challenging job was deemed to be a motivator.
Unfortunately the tradition in the civil service is to bring about changes in structure rather than changing job content or levels of responsibility.
Just to redesign the structure misses the point.
Many respondents felt that the most effective barriers to change were the attitudes, beliefs and behaviour of senior management itself.
In the civil service the prevailing ethos is one of control of subordinates rather than allowing discretion.
Paradoxically, attending courses at the Civil Service College often led to more dissatisfaction when contrasted with the reality of civil service life.
Livingstone and Wilkie conclude by arguing for the decentralisation of control and the democratisation of work processes.
Comments
The sample may be biased insofar as Livingstone and Wilkie used middle management as their study and it may well be that at this level individuals are reasonably well paid and hence money is not as important as other factors.
If they had interviewed the — what were then termed — clerical officers and assistants, they may well have come up with different results.
In the Department of Trade and Industry case, reported above, junior staff were short of money and welcomed the opportunity to earn more through overtime.
However, their work does cast doubt on two recent developments within the civil service.
Firstly, merit pay; if it is the case that money is not the most important motivator then linking pay to performance, as with merit pay, is not likely to improve performance.
We look at this in more detail below.
Secondly, recent changes in the structure of the civil service with the development of the agency model through the Next Steps programme will not improve matters unless it is linked to changing roles and relationships.
Changing the structure alone is insufficient to improve performance.
Indeed the Next Steps Report found that: ‘People who had recently resigned from the Civil Service told us that frustration at the lack of genuine responsibility for achieving results was a significant factor in encouraging them to move to jobs outside.’
(Efficiency Unit, 1988, para 2.3, p. 3.)
A surprising feature of the Livingstone and Wilkie research is the lack of a commitment to the public service ethos.
Certainly in certain professions such as teaching, nursing or social work it is generally considered that a desire to serve the public is of paramount importance.
A more recent report from the Department of Social Security indicated low morale and a lack of confidence in the organisation.
It suggested that lack of job satisfaction is related to:
pressure, with too much work and too little time;
recognition and regard, with efforts going unnoticed by both employer and the public at large;
career development and training, where it exists it leads to a happier employee;
communications, where people prefer formal communication from the department rather than relying on the ‘grapevine’;
pay, which was perceived to be poor both in terms of the duties involved and pay for similar jobs elsewhere;
the quality of service, where the feeling of providing a quality service improves morale.
(1988, pp. 16–7.)
Performance-related pay
Throughout much of the public sector performance-related pay is being introduced.
In the National Health Service it was introduced in 1986 for General Managers and has since been extended to other levels of management.
It is linked to the achievement of individual and organisational objectives.
In the civil service merit pay has been extended to cover all grades from April 1990.
It is linked to an appraisal system usually based upon a banded assessment of performance.
For example:
Band 1 — Outstanding.
Band 2 — Performance significantly above requirements.
Band 3 — Performance fully meets requirements of grade.
Band 4 — Performance not fully up to requirements of grade, some improvement necessary.
Band 5 — Unacceptable.
We have already suggested that theories of motivation seem to indicate that money is only one of many factors that have a bearing upon motivation and morale.
Another problem is that of trying to assess performance when there may be no tangible product to measure.
If we recall, the main advocate of scientific management, F.W. Taylor, argued that pay should be related to an individual worker's output.
This may be fine when we can identify the output in terms of manufactured goods but it may be more difficult to measure the output of a government official.
Thus judgements are made on subjective grounds concerning the performance of the individual and this will be open to interpretation.
Not only that but where the nature of the work requires working in a team then how is the performance of the individual team member assessed?
We examine performance indicators in more detail in later chapters.
Conclusion
There are a number of problems in discussing motivation and morale.
1.
How do we measure motivation and morale?
We can measure productivity but with motivation we can only make certain assumptions that improved motivation may lead to improved performance.
It is probably easier to measure lack of motivation.
Thus, for example, a high level of absenteeism may be a sign of low morale; high staff turnover and the inability to retain staff may be a sign of low morale (witness the number of teachers that leave the profession every year); industrial action or strikes may be an indication that morale and motivation are low.
Thus if we want signs of low morale in the civil service, for example, we could point to the 1981 civil service strike.
2.
A second general problem is associated with the esteem with which a profession is held by society as a whole and, as far as the public sector is concerned, the attitude towards it of the government of the day.
Thus, commentators have suggested that the Conservative Party came into power in 1979 and was committed to reducing the size of the public sector.
Not only that but a change in methods of working, in its ethos and what were seen as its privileges, such as index-linked pensions, was to follow.
There is evidence to suggest that this did in fact happen.
Within the civil service the Priestley pay bargaining system was abolished which linked civil service pay to rates in the private sector.
Equity theory that we examined earlier suggested that a feature of motivation was the individual's perception of equity compared to others.
At one stroke the Conservative Government undermined that principle.
The banning of trade unions at the Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ), the naming and blaming of civil servants in the Westland Affair, and the Rayner Scrutinies were all seen as undermining the morale of, civil servants.
The former Labour Party leader, Michael Foot, suggests that there may be another reason:
Does not the Prime Minister appreciate that one of the reasons for the very low morale in the Civil Service is that she has appointed so many confirmed Thatcherites to some of the best jobs?
(Hansard, 18.2.1988, p. 1152.)
In local government developments such as compulsory, competitive tendering, or the introduction of GCSE in schools, have been said to undermine morale.
3.
There are a number of factors that are to be considered when looking at motivation and morale within public sector organisations and these operate at many different levels.
These factors are both external and internal to the organisation and are a reflection of individual needs and the organisational context.
We can represent this in Figure 8.2:
Further reading
Steers and Porter (1979) offer a good general introduction to the concept of motivation.
The collection of essays in Vroom and Deci (1970) also provide a useful introduction.
The article by Fowler (1988b) describes the history, of performance-related pay and offers a guide to the future use of such systems.
The Livingstone and Wilkie article (1981) on motivation in the civil service and on the application of one of the main theories of motivation is well worth reading.
Planning and decision making
Introduction
The concept of planning can be applied in its various ways to a whole range of activities.
The common theme is that planning is used to solve problems.
Because of the wide range of problems that the public sector faces there will be different approaches to planning in different situations.
One view of the administrative task is to see it as planning and decision making (Simon, 1976).
If we accept this view, we need to consider what decision making is about and then examine the various prescriptions on how best to make decisions.
This chapter discusses the notion of planning, examines different approaches to planning and looks at the changes in attitudes to planning that have taken place.
In so doing, we will look at two approaches to decision making — the rational and the incremental models — and assess their suitability to modern public sector organisations.
Planning
According to Wedgewood-Oppenheim, planning ‘can be seen as a process whereby aims, factual evidence and assumptions are translated by a process of logical argument into appropriate policies which are intended to achieve aims’(Wedgewood-Oppenheim, 1982, p. 107).
This definition assumes that organisations have aims which are clearly stated and they have the capability to gather information and use it in a positive way to develop policies.
At this point we must note that policies need to be put into practice — a theme that will be developed later in the chapter.
As we have already stated, decision makers in organisations will formulate aims or objectives which they wish to achieve or, in other situations, a commanding authority will impose objectives on organisations.
In order to achieve those objectives, an organisation will need to plan its activities: it will need to take account of factors internal to the organisation such as its assets, the qualities of the  staff, the task to be achieved, etc. as well as environmental factors such as demand for services, government policies and so on.
In Chapter 4 we considered the idea of systems theory, which enabled decision makers to take a holistic view of organisations and how those organisations relate to their environments.
The activity of planning illustrates the usefulness of this approach for organisational analysis.
It is often difficult for people in organisations to see the wood for the trees, and it is very, easy to concentrate on large amounts of internal detail while ignoring important trends in the outside world.
For example, organisations may tend to concentrate on improving minor internal processes while failing to plan for the single European market.
Organisations need to be adaptive to respond to the changing environment and therefore the process of management and organisational structuring ‘should have an environmental orientation’(Haynes, 1980).
To be fully effective, managers must concentrate on the total organisation and environmental changes instead of on artificial internal segments.
What do public sector organisations plan?
The concept of planning can be applied to a wide range of activities.
We identify a number of areas where planning has, or is having, influence.
The list of these areas is by no means exhaustive.
National planning
Nations in what was formerly the Soviet Bloc were characterised by national planning.
Instead of leaving economic decisions to the free hand of the marketplace, economic decisions were made by highly centralised states which were responsible for resource allocation and the planning of economic activities.
This method of planning was widely criticised for its inefficiency and its inability to adapt to changing demands.
Western economies are based on a mix of the free market and state planning and have tended to move towards greater use of market forces.
However, the state still intervenes in many areas of social and economic activity including the provision of welfare services — hence the existence of the public sector.
Town and country planning
As Elcock (1986, Chapter 9) points out, town and country, planning can be traced back to the Victorian era when enlightened industrialists sought to improve areas such as Bournville in Birmingham and Saltaire in West Yorkshire.
The Town and Country, Planning Act 1946 formed the basis of the modern planning system, requiring local authorities to make plans for their local areas, and to control land use in those areas.
Though the system has now been modified for some years, local authorities still play a crucial role in the shaping of the local environment by, for example, forecasting the need for roads for travel to work or leisure, and thus plan on the basis of that need Planners seek to influence behaviour, for example , by deciding that particular zones will be devoted to industrial estates, others to shopping centres and residential use in order to harmonise traffic movement and so on .
The Skeffington Report of 1969 emphasised the importance of public participation in the planning process, and local authorities were urged to publicise plans and encourage the public to contribute to the process.
Critics of the planning system argued that the resulting system was bureaucratic and slow moving because of the problems of dealing with competing interests and the long cycles of committee meetings that local authorities use.
Recent initiatives, such as the creation of Urban Development Corporations, have sought to speed up decision making and involve people with business experience.
These initiatives, however, have not been without criticism.
Corporate planning
Traditionally, local government exhibited one of the dysfunctions of bureaucracy mentioned in Chapter 3 — that it was run on departmental lines with departments such as housing, education and public works providing services in isolation from each other.
As Haynes points out, the planning process reflected this in that it ‘usually took the form of a series of isolated, departmental exercises which lacked any common framework of reference apart from the central control of financial input’(Haynes, 1980, p. 82).
As the scale of local government grew and the environment began to change more rapidly, it became apparent that services needed to be more closely integrated in order that they would meet the needs of the environment.
The late 1960s and early 1970s saw a plethora of government sponsored reports which sought to influence the way in which local authorities were organised and the services that they provided.
For example, the Seebohm Report on Personal and Allied Social Services (1967) pointed to the need to anticipate events and to conduct research on future needs.
The Bains Committee on The New Local Authorities: Management and Structure (1972) recommended that local authorities should adopt a corporate approach which would enable the authority to provide a range of integrated services to meet the changing needs of the local community.
Like many other ideas that we consider in this book, it is not an idea which originated in the British public sector.
Corporate approaches had their origins in business thinking in the United States of America, were implemented in large multinational corporations in the 1950s, and eventually found their way into public sector thinking in Britain in the late 1960s.
Corporate management and planning required that the local authority adapt its internal organisation in order to provide a set of integrated services to the local community.
Particular emphasis was placed on the links with other service providers in the area.
For example, the then new local authority social service departments needed, according to the Seebohm Report, to develop close working  links with health authorities and local authority housing departments.
The internal organisation of the local authority was to be integrated by appointing a chief executive officer as the senior official of the organisation.
A chief officers' management team, as well as parallel political structures including a policy and resources committee (consisting of senior elected members), was recommended to co-ordinate the decision-making process.
These proposals were adopted with (often unquestioning) enthusiasm by many local authorities.
This, together with the development of central research capabilities, underpinned the transition that local authorities had made from town and country, planning to corporate planning.
Strategic planning
Strategic planning involves those at the top of the organisation formulating the organisation's objectives and developing strategies to achieve those objectives.
In Chapter 3 we examined the concept of bureaucracy and the features of the bureaucrat.
In order for strategic planning and decision making to be effective, a different set of values needs to be held by senior officials.
Vision, leadership, the ability to be proactive, flexible and forward-thinking are the essential qualities that need to be present.
Senior managers should be able to look to the external environment in order to obtain messages about likely future trends, for example in the demand for services, resources that may be available, changes in the legislative framework, etc.
They need to develop strategies to enable the organisation to make the appropriate policy choices and implement them in order to enable the organisation to meet the needs of the environment.
Strategic planners use techniques such as SWOT analysis.
This involves an analysis of the internal Strengths and Weaknesses of the organisation and the Opportunities and Threats to the organisation (hence SWOT).
The idea is to improve the overall organisational performance by eliminating weaknesses and developing strengths.
Opportunities are to be maximised and threats either avoided or turned into opportunities (see Sharplin, 1985, pp. 54 6, 190–4. where it is referred to as WOTS-UP analysis).
As with corporate planning, strategic planning has its origins in the private sector.
But in the light of recent developments in the public sector such techniques may be particularly useful in enabling managers to plan the future direction of the organisation.
As National Health Service hospitals are forced to compete with each other for business they may begin to see other hospitals as competitors.
With the advent of compulsory, competitive tendering in local authorities, direct service organisations are forced to compete with private sector organisations for contracts to provide certain services and as a result they are beginning to use strategic planning techniques (see the section below on business planning).
Writing about local government, Clarke and Stewart argue that a strategic perspective ‘places a premium on the role of the chief executive and its support; it also demands that senior management of service and support departments set their’ separate sectional interests within a wider strategic perspective.
The latter must give  their departmental organisations purpose and direction but this must be rooted in what the authority as a whole is trying to do' (1988, pp. 14 — 15).
Policy planning
Governments and other public sector organisations plan and manage policy areas such as housing, education and law and order.
The complex nature of policy provision for many policy arenas involves a large number of actors in local authorities, central government, voluntary, bodies, pressure groups, inter-governmental bodies, local authority associations, professional bodies and so on(see Hambleton, 1986).
For example, Malpass and Murie document the complex machinery, which administers housing policy (1987, pp. 136–77).
Business planning
The introduction of compulsory, competitive tendering through the Local Government Planning and Land Act 1980 and the Local Government Act 1988 means that direct service organisations may see themselves as agencies with a degree of independence from the actual client, for example, the social service department requiring the cleaning office buildings.
As such they are in a position to see themselves as running a business and may adopt the whole gambit of business techniques when addressing their organisational problems.
It is impossible to make a technical distinction between strategic planning and business planning: both use techniques such as SWOT analysis.
Private sector consultants such as Peat Marwick McLintock have offered their services to local government to enable them to apply business planning ideas to strategic and operational levels of the organisation.
Expenditure planning
As we have observed in earlier chapters, one of the major concerns of government one which can be traced back to the last century — is the control of the level of expenditure by the state.
Various strategies have been adopted to reduce the level of expenditure.
These will be examined in detail in the next chapter.
The planning process
The examples above illustrate the fact that different things can be planned.
However, planning is only a part of an administrator's work.
Ideas need to be put into action.
Therefore we need to consider a model of decision making which can be applied to the planning process.
The model — known as the rational model involves a cycle of decisions which need to be made so that an organisation can achieve its objectives.
The rational model
The cyclical process shown in Figure 9.1 is an adaptation of decision-making models that economists have used to maximise the utility obtained from the use of scarce resources (see for example, Haynes, 1980, Chapter 4).
The model has been used widely by political scientists and, interestingly, underpins the Business and Technician Education Council's guidelines on problem solving on public administration and business studies courses.
It begins with the identification of a problem or issue which requires consideration.
At this stage there will be a decision to do nothing or pursue the issue.
If the issue is pursued then it needs to be defined and a fuller understanding of the nature of the issue needs to be gained.
Analysis based on a partial understanding of the issue is likely to be flawed.
In matters relating to the social sciences, the number of variables is large and hence it is often difficult to establish valid theories of cause and effect.
This, together with the political dimension, means that it is hardly surprising that problems such as the inner cities tend to be defined and redefined over the years.
If the rational model is followed, the decision maker is then required to identify possible courses of action to solve the problem.
For example the Review of Railway Finances chaired by Sir David Serpell was given the following terms of reference ‘to examine the finances of the railway and associated operations, in the light of all relevant considerations, and to report on options for alternative policies, and their related objectives, designed to secure improved financial results in an efficiently run railway in Great Britain over the next 20 years’.
(Department of Transport, 1983, p. 1).
The terms of reference are reproduced here in full because they provide an interesting example where the overall objective behind the policy development is clear — improved financial results or, in other words, reducing the size of the state subsidy or Public Service Obligation as it is correctly known.
The Committee considered the long-term options for the railway network.
They did this by ‘producing a set of mathematical models which linked variables (demand, service levels, unit costs and infrastructure) in such a way that, as changes were made in one or more of these variables, the estimated consequences for the others, and for financial results could be evaluated’(Department of Transport, 1983, p.63).
This resulted in the production of a set of options.
These varied from what was essentially the retention of the existing system with a few modifications, to an option referred to as a Commerce Railway consisting of about 16 per cent of the existing network (meaning that to travel from Manchester to Leeds one would need to go via London).
Given that decision makers often deal with complex problems, there is a requirement to think beyond the obvious and usual solutions to such problems and to consider innovative solutions.
Techniques such as‘brain storming’ and ‘lateral thinking’can be used to generate such alternatives (see Mullins, 1989, Ch. 14).
Once the alternative courses of action have been identified they need to be evaluated, and particular attention is devoted to the implications of each option.
In the case of transport planning — for example the location of a third London airport planners used a technique known as cost-benefit analysis in order to establish the costs and benefits of each option.
This involved costing up the advantages and disadvantages of each of the proposed courses of action and selecting the preferred option on the basis of the balance of each calculation.
Problems arise firstly in trying to forecast events and make realistic costings of programmes, and secondly in making costings of intangibles such as the cost of noise pollution in the case of a new airport (for a thorough critique of this technique see Self, 1975 on the Roskill Commission on the third London airport).
The selection of the preferred option is often a political process and so subject to the values that politicians bring to the process as discussed in Chapter 2.
However, once the preferred solution has been selected, we have a policy in the form of a statement, perhaps an Act of Parliament or a government circular.
The next stage is to implement it or put it into action.
Academic research tells us that this rarely happens perfectly and so we need to examine the effects of the policy in practice.
This takes the form of obtaining feedback and evaluation.
As we shall see in later chapters the public sector is making increasing use of performance indicators in order to assess the effect of policies.
Suffice it to say at this point that because of the complex and changing world in which the public sector operates, implementation of policies may solve certain problems but is likely to throw up further problems which in turn need to be solved: hence the cyclical nature of the policy-making process.
Criticism of the rational model
One of the implicit assumptions of the model is that those who are making decisions are rational actors.
We have noted in Chapter 2 that politicians bring values, policies and priorities to the process and these will, of course, influence the process.
Peter Self cites a former head of the civil service, Lord Bridges:
However complicated the facts may be, however much your junior may try to persuade you that there are seventeen arguments in favour of one course and fifteen in favour of the exact opposite, believe me, in four cases out of five there is one point and one only which is cardinal to the whole situation.
(Quoted in Self, 1977, p.3).
Similarly, administrators may not have the open-mindedness, breadth of imagination, intellectual or organisational resources, or the time to generate the full range of alternative courses of action and assess their implications.
A career official may be reluctant to present an option to a political master in the knowledge that it would be politically unacceptable.
Personal experience shows that the best ideas never work perfectly in practice.
Lewis Gunn provided civil servants with a number of conditions which would have to be satisfied if perfect implementation of policies were to be achieved (Hogwood and Gunn, 1984, pp. 198–206; see also Hood, 1976).
It is helpful to look at these to realise the complexity of planning for the world of public sector organisations.
The circumstances external to the implementing agency do not impose crippling constraints
As we have seen, public sector organisations work in a world where they are heavily dependent on the co-operation of other organisations to get things done.
For example, local government depends on Parliament and government to determine the financial framework.
That adequate time and sufficient resources are made available to the programme
For example, the local authorities implementing the Griffiths Report on Care in the Community (1988) are dependent on central government making the resources available to complete the changes from long-stay institutions for the elderly to community care.
That the required combination of resources is actually available
The predicted demographic downturn will mean that in the future there will be labour and skills shortages for many organisations.
At the time of writing, the  comparatively low levels of public sector pay mean that schools and benefit offices in the south-east of England have difficulty in recruiting and keeping staff.
The policy to be implemented is based on a valid theory of cause and effect
In other words, if we do X now then Y will happen.
The theory behind the Community Charge or Poll Tax was that individual flat rate charges for most members of the community would focus attention on the level of spending by the authority and increase local accountability.
Critics say that this is not the case and cite ‘poll tax capping’ as evidence.
If accountability had been enhanced, profligate councillors would have been dismissed from office and replaced by more prudent ones.
That the relationship between cause and effect is direct and there are few, if any, intervening links
Often the theory of cause and effect is extended to cover a whole series of events.
For example, we may assume the if we do P then Q will happen; if Q happens then R will then occur.
The longer the ‘chain of causality’, as Gunn calls it, the more likely it that there is going to be a weak link in the chain.
For example, if a verbal message is to reach its audience then the reduction in the number of people passing the message will reduce the possibility of the message being distorted.
That dependency relationships are minimal
One of the problems that the Conservative government faced in the 1980s was that it depended on over 400 local authorities in England alone to implement large parts of its policies, for example housing, education and social services.
These are political organisations, many of whom were opposed to the policies, some of whom were obstructive to their implementation.
One solution that government has used is to replace or override them with more compliant organisations such as the urban development corporations referred to above.
That tasks are fully specified in correct sequence
If an office development is being built, the foundations are built first, the cosmetics such as paint and carpets last.
That there is perfect communication and co-ordination
We have already referred to the problems of co-ordination in organisations individuals and groups within the organisation need to identify with the objectives of the project.
The success of the organisation will depend, in part, on the effectiveness of the communications systems in the organisation.
That those in authority can demand and obtain perfect compliance
As Gunn states, this situation is difficult to achieve and is probably undesirable.
Leaders of large organisations will inevitably find problems in getting those at lower levels in the hierarchy to comply with their objectives — a problem illustrated by the frequent leaks of confidential memoranda and reports in Whitehall.
As we indicated above, the rational model may generate untried solutions.
Organisations may take giant leaps and consequently deal with the unfamiliar.
One of the strengths of organisations is the expertise that officials have accumulated over time.
This expertise, based on past practice, may not be appropriate to new solutions.
Organisations may be less ready to deal with radical solutions because of the dangers of dealing with the unfamiliar.
Alternatives to the rational model
In this section we discuss two points.
Firstly, we will introduce an alternative model of decision making — incrementalism — and secondly, we will consider whether it is an approach that can be commended to policy makers.
An increment is a small step from the existing position.
Most public sector officials will be paid on a salary scale which has a number of incremental points on it and each year the official will advance a small step towards the top of the scale.
Policy making can be conducted in a similar fashion; indeed, research testifies to its popularity.
Herbert Simon (1976) argues that decision makers seek to be rational and behave like economic men in maximising the utility of any decision.
However, the circumstances in which they operate mean that, in practice, they settle for being satisficers.
In other words they aim to satisfy and to perform to satisfactory standards.
The barriers to rationality outlined above, in terms of the lack of organisational, intellectual resources and time mean that the well-intentioned official will settle for satisficing or getting by.
In particular, Hogwood and Gunn (1984) cite five types of limitation to explain why the opportunities for rational decision making are limited:
Psychological limitations
Decision makers lack the complete knowledge of the issues, do not have the skills or understanding of the values that underpin decision making which are necessary to behave rationally.
Limitations arising from multiple values
In situations where there is a collective rationality there is likely to be a conflict of interest and because different people weigh values in different ways, there is no, rational way of resolving the conflict.
Organisational limitations
In earlier chapters we have discussed the limitation of organisations as tools for solving problems.
The high degree of specialisation in terms of function, the implications of departmentalism and the inadequacy of management information all mitigate against rational decision making.
Cost limitations
Rational behaviour is expensive.
As Hogwood and Gunn point out, it is likely that the costs of rational behaviour will outweigh the benefits.
Situational limitations
All decisions are taken in the light of past events, the demands of pressure groups, the expectations of the future — all of which mitigate against rationality.
We can add to this the uncertain environment in which decision makers operate.
For example, local authority treasurers are faced with a high level of uncertainty in planning budgets because of the lack of information on resources available from central government and the uncertainty about the number of community charge defaulters.
So far we have presented a pessimistic view about decision making — that incrementalism is adopted as a decision-making technique because of the impossibility of the rational model.
However, writers such as Lindblom (1959), have argued that an incremental strategy of ‘muddling through’ may be a positive one.
Again it is Hogwood and Gunn who summarise the case in favour of incrementalism:
1.
Making objectives explicit is a hostage to fortune and the failure to do so may reflect a shrewd awareness.
2.
Giant leaps into the unknown are dangerous and therefore wiser counsel may preach limited change from the existing position.
3.
In practice, it is unlikely that problems are solved in one go.
A better approach is to adopt a serial approach and solve them over a number of stages.
4.
Because of the number of agencies and interests in any policy issue, the conflict of competing interests means that rational approaches are unlikely to succeed.
5.
The nature of policy making means that those involved in the process are open to negotiation and compromise as a method of solving problems.
6.
Although a rational approach may produce the best policy, there may not be widespread agreement on it.
Compromise may be a better alternative.
The two models summarised
Figures 9.2 and 9.3 demonstrate how the two approaches to decision making can be used to move from the current state of affairs to a desired situation.
Supporters of the rational model may seek to move to the desired situation in one strategic move.
However, the problems that we have considered mean that it is likely that we may   miss the target and actually arrive at an unintended situation.
The incremental model demonstrates how a successive number of small steps may enable decision makers to move slowly towards the intended state of affairs with the facility to re-address the situation at each stage in the process.
The rise and fall and rise of planning
As we have already discussed, planning and the use of rational techniques were highly popular in the late 1960s and early 1970s.
This was a period of growth in the size of government in terms of budgets and the areas of service provision.
Added to this there was a belief in the economies of scale of large organisations — hence the 1970 White Paper on the Reorganisation of Central Government and the 1972 Local Government Act which reduced substantially the number of local authorities creating much larger organisations.
Rational techniques were introduced to try to solve what were perceived to be problems at the time.
Planning and the rational model fell into disrepute in the mid to late 1970s for a number of reasons.
Firstly, changing external factors meant that many plans became rapidly out of date and so they could never be implemented properly.
These included:
the economic environment changed with the Labour Government obtaining a loan from the International Monetary Fund in 1975 which had conditions attached to it requiring cuts in public expenditure;
the imposition of cash limits on areas of public spending;
the election of the Thatcher Government in 1979;
the growing uncertainty of the environment in terms of reductions in the amount of capital and revenue money available;
the effects of high levels of inflation particularly on the costs of long-term capital projects;
the changing requirements of central government in terms of what was required through legislation and circulars;
the changing demands of the clients of public services (or ‘customers’ as we are now urged to call them).
Secondly, there was growing disillusionment with planning as a technique to solve problems.
As we saw above, there are limitations with the rational model as a method of solving problems.
Despite these criticisms, recent approaches to decision making have sought to pursue the rational approach.
The new agenda for the public sector emphasises organisational planning — the setting of objectives, measuring performance against those objectives, etc.
Business plans are used to achieve economy, efficiency and effectiveness.
Conclusion
In this chapter we have examined approaches to planning and decision making.
Many factors contribute to the effectiveness or otherwise of the various techniques.
These include the formal organisation, the informal organisation and the nature of the environment.
We need to examine these issues further.
Perhaps the key issue of the 1980s was resources.
In the next chapter we examine how resourcing issues have affected organisational performance.
Further reading
The literature on the policy process is examined in Barrett and Fudge (1981), Hogwood and Gunn (1984) and Burch and Wood (1990).
A more applied approach is offered by Hogwood (1987).
On local government and its relationship with  central government, see Hambleton (1986), Chandler (1986) and Rhodes (1988).
For a critique of corporate management see Dearlove (1979).
Much of the older work remains salient — see Lindblom (1959) on ‘muddling through’ and Simon (1976) on the administrative man.
Resourcing the public sector
Introduction
At the heart of the debate about the role of the public sector is invariably the issue of finance.
Some critics of the public sector maintain that it is inherently inefficient and unable to control its expenditure.
Though this point of view is not a new one, it took on increased importance in 1975 when the Labour government obtained a loan from the International Monetary Fund which was conditional upon a reduction of the level of public expenditure.
The Conservative governments elected in 1979, 1983 and 1987 instigated a range of policies which sought to reduce further the overall level of expenditure.
Although this strategy has met with limited success in terms of reducing the overall level (Dunleavy, 1990), it has had severe implications for the management of public sector organisations.
This chapter examines the processes of revenue raising, allocation, spending and control.
These activities are considered in the context of the two models of policy making — the rational model and the incremental model — which were examined in the previous chapter.
Examination of the budgetary process in the public sector provides interesting evidence on how organisations actually behave and the applicability of these models as descriptions and prescriptions for their behaviour.
To this end, three case studies of budgetary behaviour are discussed: resourcing in central government, local government and the National Health Service.
As we shall see, the role of finance is inextricably linked to the programmes they are financing.
Getting: The revenue-raising process
Revenue can be raised from a number of sources.
These vary from service to service and will reflect political choice.
Some services are financed out of general taxation and are made available for all of us to consume.
Alternatively there may be a direct cash relationship between the service provider and the customer.
In some cases, such as defence or law and order, we all stand to benefit from the service and it would be difficult to envisage how it could be financed other than out of direct taxation.
In other cases, the decision about how to finance a service will reflect the  political and ethical values that underpin the policy.
For example, the National Health Service was founded on the principle that there would not be a financial exchange between the doctor and the patient.
It was thought that if people had to pay at the point of delivery then this might deter some people from using the service.
Critics of the Conservatives' policy on health point to the decline in the number of people having eye tests since the introduction of a fixed charge for the service.
The so-called ring fencing of local authority housing revenue accounts in 1990 has meant that current spending on housing has to be financed out of the revenue raised from rents alone.
This means that the council housing customer will normally pay the full cost of the service while the owner-occupier will enjoy a subsidised mortgage.
This reflects the Conservative government's concern that people should not be drawn into what is called the ‘dependency culture’.
Instead they prefer to promote the values of a ‘property-owning democracy’.
The unsuccessful policies aimed at reducing the level of direct taxation (Gamble, 1988) intended to create an ‘enterprise culture’.
On the assumption that people are motivated by monetary reward, it was argued that this would provide incentives for them to work harder and for entrepreneurs to create wealth and jobs.
It was also assumed that if people had more of their gross income to spend as they chose then they would purchase goods and services that they wanted rather than the state spending money on goods and services for which there may be little or no demand.
Other criteria will influence decisions about the sources of finance.
The Layfield Committee on Local Government Finance (1976) argued that in order to achieve a vital local democracy, a larger share of the revenue of local authorities must be raised locally, thus enhancing local accountability.
Other criteria for a suitable tax are that it is easy to collect, the yield is predictable, it is cheap to collect, and that it is fair.
An interesting exercise is to analyse current and possible forms of local taxation against this checklist.
Spending
Spending by public sector organisations has to comply with complex and changing legal regulations, and is exposed to scrutiny at a number of levels.
It is quite possible for one organisation to be audited at five levels, as well as being accountable to internal decision-making bodies, political masters, and the law.
All organisations will make the distinction between capital and revenue or current expenditure.
While there are exceptions, capital expenditure is defined as:
‘Expenditure on new construction, land, and extensions of and alterations to existing buildings and the purchase of any other fixed asset (e.g. machinery and plant)— including vehicles — having an expected working life of more than one year’(Likierman, 1988, p. 219); while current expenditure on goods and services ‘includes direct expenditure by central and local government on providing services (e.g. health or education)…
’(Ibid., p. 220).
In general terms, capital expenditure will commit future current expenditure.
For example, it is capital expenditure that will finance the development of a new leisure centre while current expenditure will be used to pay for the running costs, for example staff, heating and lighting, etc.
Decision makers therefore need to plan budgets and commit resources for the future if capital programmes are to be undertaken.
Equally, when cuts in expenditure are considered, capital programmes are usually the first victims.
In our discussion on accountability in public sector organisations in Chapter 2 we pointed out that a principal focus of processes of accountability was finance.
Repeated attempts to cut back the global total of public spending have placed an increased emphasis on control of public spending.
We will see that various strategies can be adopted, many of which will be discussed in more detail in the next two chapters.
The creation of the Audit Commission in 1982 has increased accountability.
It appoints auditors for local authorities to ensure probity and promotes improvements in economy, efficiency and effectiveness.
As well as investigating the activities of individual authorities, it publishes papers which compare practice and offer suggestions for improvement.
The National Audit Office scrutinises the accounts of government departments on behalf of Parliament and periodic audits of the National Health Service (Perrin, 1988).
Since October 1990 the Audit Commission's area of work has extended to cover the National Health Service.
The role of the budget
When we speak of budgeting in the public sector we are not referring to the Chancellor of the Exchequer's spring Budget statement.
This is only a part of the public spending process which focuses on demand management and changes in levels of taxation.
The budgetary process will vary from organisation to organisation but all will share the common theme of allocating resources through a political process.
It is political, not necessarily because politicians are involved, but because it involves the representation of organisational interests and has scope for bargaining and conflict.
One of the traditionally cited differences between public and private organisations is the role of the budget.
In the private sector, a budget will be a set of projections about likely future activity.
A motor manufacturer will only be in a position to estimate revenue because they do not know how many cars they will sell.
In the public sector, sources of money will often be precise and known for the forthcoming year.
It is debatable how well this distinction holds up today.
Large commercial organisations need to allocate budgets to programmes such as research and development and design.
These will be needed to finance long-term programmes.
In the public sector there is a great deal of uncertainty about the assumptions implicit in budgets.
Local authorities will be unaware of the yield of  the Community Charge, the level of pay settlements and the level of inflation.
Hence budgets are made amidst uncertainty.
Organisational culture and public spending
As we considered in earlier chapters, public sector organisations are divided into large departments and they will develop cultures of their own.
At the heart of these organisations is a central finance department, whether it is the Treasury in central government or the treasurer's department in a local authority.
Heclo and Wildavsky's study of the Treasury, The Private Government of Public Money, portrays the organisation as a nuclear family with a distinct culture and a set of norms and values all of its own.
They act as guardians of the public purse when dealing with members of spending departments who seek additional resources.
The authors summarise Treasury norms as:
1.
Decide by reacting.
2.
Let others do the technical work.
3.
You know as much as anybody and more than most.
4.
Above all, be sceptical — especially of enthusiasts.
5.
Probe, delay and question again.
6.
As a rule, cut by bargaining rather than absolute no's.
7.
A reputation for toughness inhibits would-be spenders.
8.
Be on guard against hidden and built-in expenditure escalators.
(Heclo and Wildavsky, 1981,49–50.)
John Stewart demonstrated how the budgetary environment can impact on the culture of public sector organisations.
He analysed local government spending and labour-force figures in the post-war period leading up to the late 1970s.
He identified two periods — firstly a period of budgetary growth (until 1976), and secondly a period of reduction in growth leading to a standstill and in some cases cutbacks (1976 onwards).
He argued that a period of continued budgetary growth is likely to build expectations that the pattern of growth will continue.
If growth is perceived as being the norm by those in the organisation then it ‘would begin to influence their behaviour and through their behaviour the procedure and structure of the organisation’(Stewart, 1980, p. 11).
This is characterised by:
1.
The environment will generate demands which could be met by the increment in the budget without challenging the existing budget thus leaving existing programmes of expenditure untouched.
The allocation of the increment becomes the key decision.
2.
Procedures established to control the level of spending evolve over time to become bidding procedures for the increment.
Hence the emphasis on growth at the margins.
3.
Organisations tend to emphasise the benefits of policies rather than their costs, looking at the objectives to be achieved rather than the resources available.
4.
Uniform provision of services as opposed to discrimination or targeting services towards groups with high needs become the norm.
5.
Capital development was a dominant feature in budgets because of the assumption that, for example, in the case of a swimming pool, the revenue expenditure would be available in future years to heat and staff the pool.
6.
Choices tend to be about when to implement a given policy rather than whether to implement it.
(Stewart, 1980.)
The overall characteristic of a period of growth is that of a consensus among decision makers.
The possibility of conflict is reduced because of the expectation of the continued availability of the increment to avoid the questioning of the existing budget (or baseline as it is often referred to).
However, if the assumption of growth is removed, then there is a change in the experience of those involved in the process which leads to a change in expectations.
The main characteristics of a period of standstill are:
1.
The environment continues to present new and changing demands but these cannot be satisfied by the allocation of the increment.
2.
Consensus becomes difficult to achieve and decision makers become reluctant to create future commitments.
Capital programmes are cut.
3.
The budgetary process focuses more clearly on the resource allocation process with more thorough scrutiny of existing commitments.
Control procedures are strengthened.
4.
Greater control over the staffing levels results in the freezing of posts.
5.
Cash limiting of expenditure is used to control the expansion of budgets through inflation.
6.
Attention becomes focused on costs of programmes rather than benefits, and resources available instead of objectives to be achieved.
7.
Political consensus disappears and relationships become increasingly adversarial.
8.
Uniform provision is replaced by targeting of services at the most needy.
(Stewart, 1980.)
Thus we can see a very different style of behaviour resulting from a change in the budgetary environment.
If we were to move from standstill to cutbacks, we would expect to see further changes in behaviour.
For example:
1.
Voluntary redundancies or compulsory redundancies.
2.
Increasingly departmental behaviour in order to protect oneself.
3.
The use of voluntary and private organisations to save costs.
4.
Increasingly close scrutiny of discretionary expenditure and consideration given to alternative methods of achieving existing goals.
5.
The use of creative accounting techniques such as lease-back arrangements if legal.
6.
Increasingly power exercised by central budgetary control staff and auditors.
7.
Further adversarial relationships.
8.
‘Sore thumbs’ and ‘shroud waving’to demonstrate the effect of cuts or potential cuts.
(See Elcock et al, 1989, p. 178.)
Thus the environment in which budgetary choices take place will be an important determinant on budgetary behaviour.
In order to understand fully the effect of resource issues on the public sector we need to examine what happens in practice.
To this end we present three case studies.
It is not our intention to supply the reader with the full details of the various initiatives; instead we seek to examine the effect of these initiatives on organisations.
Case Study 1: Central government
Control of public expenditure until the 1960s was highly fragmented and largely revolved around the consideration of annual estimates: there was little or no attempt to plan expenditure programmes for the medium or long term.
Concern about this led to the appointment of the Plowden Committee on the Planning and Control of Public Expenditure which reported in 1961.
The committee recommended a system of annual surveys of planned public expenditure for years ahead.
This led to the introduction of the so-called PES system.
The PES (Public Expenditure Survey) involved ‘the cost projection of existing policies’(Heclo and Wildavsky, 1981, pp. 216–7).
The committee (known as the Public Expenditure Survey Committee, PESC) consisted of an inter-departmental group of departmental finance officers and Treasury officials who prepared information for decision makers.
They then compared total spending implications of policies against available resources and different expenditures against each other.
This was done by costing programmes up to five years ahead.
According to one senior civil servant, Otto Clarke, PES was designed to achieve the effective collective responsibility of ministers for public expenditure, regular ministerial appraisal of public expenditure for five years ahead, and increased stability of public expenditure (see Hennessy, 1989a, p. 179).
The idea was then to introduce greater rationality to the public expenditure process.
However, the eventual effect was, as Heclo and Wildavsky observe, to enshrine incrementalism.
They state: ‘If PES makes it less likely that new monetary programmes with large spending implications will be introduced inadvertently, it also helps to assure departments that their on-going programmes will not suddenly be disrupted’(Heclo and Wildavsky, 1981, p. 238).
In other words, it did not lead to the questioning of the validity of existing programmes, but instead re-costed them, thus providing updated costings (see Pliatzky, 1982, p.98).
In an attempt to remedy this weakness, a further system was introduced — Programme Analysis and Review (PAR) in 1970.
Spending departments were to carry out reviews of programmes by questioning existing commitments and to ask whether they should exist at all and not only how they should be carried out (see Pliatzky, 1982, p. 99).
It was a system that was widely criticised for making heavy demands on officials, raising sensitive issues and increasing the level of conflict.
It  required staff with specialist skills — economists and statisticians — who were not available.
Both officials and politicians saw the system as an unwanted intrusion and not for them (see Heclo and Wildavsky, 1981; Gray and Jenkins, 1985).
Hennessy wrote the following obituary: ‘To be brutal and brief, PAR became slow, top heavy, and a victim of the relentless, interdepartmental grind’(Hennessy, 1989a, p. 236).
The election of the Thatcher government in 1979 was to see a new approach to the management of the civil service.
The intention was to seek lasting cultural changes in the service to transform it from a reactive bureaucracy to a more proactive business-like organisation.
Four initiatives merit examination: the Rayner scrutinies, the Management Information System for Ministers (MINIS), the Financial Management Initiative (FMI) and agency status.
Following her election to power, Mrs Thatcher abolished PAR and introduced a new system of scrutiny of departmental expenditure — the Rayner scrutinies.
Sir Derek Rayner (now Lord Rayner) from Marks & Spencer stated that the reviews aimed to:
(i)
examine a specific policy or activity, questioning all aspects of work normally taken for granted;
(ii)
propose solutions to problems and to make recommendations to achieve savings and increase efficiency and effectiveness; and
(iii)
implement agreed solutions, or to begin their implementation within 12 months of the start of the scrutiny.
(Cited in Gray and Jenkins, 1985, p. 118).
The subjects of the scrutinies varied from payment of social security benefits to the organisation of the coastguard (Gray and Jenkins, 1985).
The emphasis was on action and results rather than the collection of pages of analysis — the report produced by the scrutiny team was to include recommendations for the minister to act on.
Several other initiatives have been undertaken, often influenced by the work of the Efficiency Unit.
Michael Heseltine was unusual among ministers in having an interest in the detail of the management and internal working of his department.
This interest led to the creation of MINIS.
This was introduced by Heseltine in the Department of Environment in 1980 and later in the Ministry of Defence.
The basis of the system was to establish what was happening, who was responsible, what the targets were and whether they were being monitored (see Greenwood and Wilson, 1989, p. 125).
Interestingly, Heseltine recalled that nobody could remember the questions being asked before.
The system involved a cyclical process of establishing what is done, how many people do it, what is achieved, linked to a number of performance indicators.
These statements-were then considered by ministers and senior civil servants who then made decisions which were implemented.
The system was received with scepticism both by fellow ministers (despite enthusiasm from the Prime Minister) and civil servants (see Hennessy, 1989a, p. 608–9).
However, this led to a more widely implemented Financial Management Initiative (FMI).
FMI aims to produce:
a system in which managers at all levels have (a) a clear view of their objectives; and means to assess and wherever possible measure outputs and performance in relation to those objectives;(b) well-defined responsibility for making the best use of their resources, including a critical scrutiny of the output and value for money; and (c) the information (particularly about costs), the training and the access to expert advice which they need to exercise their responsibilities effectively.
(Cited in Metcalfe and Richards, 1987, p. 183).
Greenwood and Wilson identify four features:
1.
Top management systems: the creation of an information system for senior managers particularly concerning resources, activities, and the review of policy programmes.
2.
Statement of objectives: clear statements of what departments were setting out to do were required.
This has proved difficult because of the intangible nature of the activities of many departments.
3.
Decentralisation and delegation: particularly the delegation of decision making and budgets to cost centres so that decisions are made by those responsible for carrying them out.
4.
Performance measurement: measuring the relationship between inputs and outputs, and the effectiveness of policy programmes.
(See Greenwood and Wilson, 1989, p. 129–34.)
Our principal concern here is the delegation of decision making down the hierarchy.
A key element of the FMI has been the use of delegated budgeting and the creation of cost centres to hold managers to account for their expenditure.
This involves a move away from the traditional form of centralised bureaucratic administration and will inevitably meet with resistance from those at the centre who seek control.
However, the thinking behind the FMI was that if the budgetary process works and if officials have the information and the skills to use the process then good management will result.
This has implications for the organisation as a whole: ‘in the rhetoric of the FMI, departments are expected to move from structures based on centralised but separate responsibilities for finance, personnel, policy, executive operations and performance improvement towards structures that decentralise and cluster these responsibilities in ‘businesses’.’
(Metcalfe and Richards, 1987. p. 194).
The National Audit Office Report on the FMI (1986) found, in practice, that departments differed in the extent to which they had adopted the FMI.
It was also found that middle and lower management had reservations about the new arrangements.
In the Ministry of Defence, for example, there was very little participation by those at the lower levels of management.
Similarly, in the Department of the Environment, managers felt a lack of decision-making capability to accompany the new processes.
The theme of decentralisation is one that is pursued further in the Next Steps Initiative.
Described by the Treasury and Civil Service Committee as ‘the most  ambitious attempt at Civil Service reform this century’(1990, para 1), it involves the creation of executive agencies to perform the administrative work of large parts of the civil service (see Chapter 12).
The project, which aims to cover three-quarters of the service work by the end of the century, is intended to give chief executives of agencies a higher degree of autonomy from central control.
Implicit in the idea is a distinction between the policy-making work of advisers to ministers and the day-to-day administration of the departments.
The new relationship, which will be set out in framework documents agreed between the minister and the chief executive of the agency, will cover areas such as recruitment and staff management, planning and financial arrangements.
It is intended that managers will have greater freedom to make the service meet the needs of the environment.
For example, the role of the Employment Service will be very different in an area with high levels of unemployment compared with one with low levels of unemployment.
It is envisaged that staff will be consulted on the work that they do.
Already ‘wish lists’ have been made where staff indicate what they want to see from agency status and these suggestions have been acted on.
The project is at its very early stages and it is difficult to predict what the eventual impact will be.
Hood and Jones offer four possible fates for the project:
major changes resulting in total success;
superficial adoption with mix of success and failure;
a step to a further radical initiative;
termination after enthusiasm wears off.
(Hood and Jones, 1990, p. 82–3.)
The key to the success of the project is the relationship between the agencies and the host department, and the degree of freedom that the agencies will be allowed.
Given the history of Treasury control over financial matters, it will require a substantial cultural shift if agencies are to have the financial freedom which is crucial to the success of the project.
Case Study 2: Local government
In the previous chapter we discussed the ways in which local government has changed its approach to planning.
Changing approaches to resourcing issues arise out of the same organisational thinking, particularly the experimentation with rational techniques.
The traditional local authority budget was characterised by:
a narrow focus by senior officers and politicians with limited control over the process.
Departmental estimates were prepared in isolation from the other departments;
the core budget of established expenditure went unchallenged — the focus of the debate was the increment;
because of the isolation of the various departments whilst preparing the budgets, there was little co-ordination, and little prioritisation of bids for new expenditure, and no attempt to assess the overall impact of the individual estimates of the departments.
(See Elcock et al, 1989, 69–71.)
Although we do not need to reconsider all the issues relating to the corporatisation of local government during the 1970s, it is important to remind ourselves of the widespread adoption of policy and resources committees, consisting of the senior elected members (with sub-committees specialising in land, finance, personnel and performance review).
There were parallel structures on the officers' side with chief officers' management teams consisting of the senior departmental heads.
The intention behind these structures was to focus thinking on the overall co-ordination and control of the activities and resources of the authority.
This period saw experimentation with rational techniques such as Planning, Programming and Budgeting Systems (PPBS).
This is an attempt to bring together the annual budgetary process with the policy planning process by linking the analysis of objectives and activities with the outputs of the authority.
As Table 10.1 indicates, this is an example of an attempt to implement the rational model of decision making discussed in the previous chapter.
Variants on PPBS such as Zero-Based Budgeting (ZBB) have been experimented with.
This technique according to Henley et al.(1983, p. 69), is more suited to situations where restraint or cutbacks are called for.
It involves the selection of a zero-base which, confusingly, is rarely zero but may equate to a minimum level of service consistent with the law.
Hence there is a gap between the zero-base and the existing budget.
This is the area which is subjected to scrutiny and would enable the consideration of, say, a reduction in the level of environmental services together with an increase in spending on education.
Inevitably this process will address difficult questions and may generate difficult solutions which may in turn have severe effects on existing interests both inside and outside the organisation.
For example, it may require the termination of a service, thus affecting the clients of the service.
A number of problems are associated with these techniques.
Experience has shown that they call for more work from officials, and that they meet with resistance from officials (see Jenkins, 1978).
Haynes states that PPBS makes an ‘inherent demand for self-criticism and the need for a creative dissatisfaction with the status quo’(1980, p. 79).
Elcock et al.(1989, pp. 85–6) point to the sheer  volume of paper that ZBB exercises consume, the possibility of losing sight of overall objectives, and thus the possibility of incrementalism by default.
Paul Griffiths' study of the 1986–87 budgetary process in Mid-Glamorgan County Council illustrates the influence of a number of factors in the budgetary process: culture, the environment and the relationship between members and officers.
Firstly, the council had a large Labour majority with political decision making often restricted to the Labour group and with little debate in committees.
There was a political culture of stability ‘thriving on the creation of symbolic dragons — the English, the Tories, the Church of England, Twickenham’(Griffiths, 1987, p. 215), a lack of a corporate revolution and an inherent conservatism reflected by one councillor who believed that borrowing money to finance capital expenditure was tantamount to creative accounting.
The changing policies of the Welsh Office meant that a standstill budget would result in a 14 per cent increase in the rate and a 2 per cent cut in the budget would mean a 5 per cent increase.
Following criticisms that budgetary behaviour had been too incremental in the past, one group of officers conducted a Zero-Based Budgeting exercise which assumed a core budget of 85 per cent.
The exercise involved the generation of a number of options including a growth in the budget, standstill and a re-ordering of priorities.
The results of the officer-led exercise were presented to the Labour group.
They committed themselves to simple pro-rata savings rather than a re-ordering of priorities, reflecting the changing demand for the education and social services.
This was, according to Griffiths, due to some members not understanding the budgetary data and the closed nature of the decision-making process and also the lack of debate in committees.
He concludes: ‘In the end the rationalist aspiration of the officers was overridden by the conservative political values of the members’(Griffiths, 1987, p. 223).
During the 1980s central government sought to increase its control over spending by local authorities.
This strategy has been pursued through a number of means there were over 40 Acts of Parliament which changed the finance system culminating in the introduction of the Community Charge.
It is not our purpose to review these initiatives, merely to point out that this has been the single most important factor responsible for the change in budgetary climate in local government in recent years.
In addition, the Audit Commission has, as mentioned above, promoted better financial management.
One of the major themes of the 1980s was the decentralisation of services to make them closer to the public.
This involves the creation of small teams who need to be able to turn their hands to a wide variety of tasks.
This move away from the traditional specialisation which was a feature of local government, has meant that generic workers need to develop financial skills and take responsibility for budgets.
For example, a housing neighbourhood office manager may be responsible for budgets covering empty properties, rent arrears, maintenance, staff such as wardens, office expenses and income from garages (Audit Commission, 1989a).
Case Study 3: The National Health Service
The National Health Service provides an excellent example of an organisation facing the problem of making a best fit with its environment.
Among the problems it faces are:
the continuing popularity of the service amongst the general public.
This has meant that it has become a politically sensitive issue;
demographic trends show that the proportion of elderly people is set to rise dramatically over the next ten years.
This section of the population makes a high demand on health care resources;
developing medical technology means that more and more types of illnesses can be treated, thus increasing demands for treatment;
the consensus on which the National Health Service was founded in 1948 was based on a service financed out of taxation.
Though charges for certain services have been introduced and increased, the majority of funding comes from central government sources;
the academic literature on professionalism cites the medical profession as a prime example of a highly professionalised body.
Doctors exercise considerable power and often come into conflict with politicians;
the rate of inflation for the health service tends to be higher than the overall rate of inflation.
This means that to stand still in terms of health service provision, funding has to increase over and above that for other services.
The National Health Service is accountable to central government and decision making has to be seen in the context of the central government initiatives on financial control discussed above.
Indeed proposals for the service to be administered by local government have fallen by the wayside because of the determination of central government to control the cost of the service.
The service has been the victim of organisational reforms in 1974 and 1982, which reflected the conventional wisdom in the administrative thinking of those times.
These reforms created a service which was controlled at the top but left some regional autonomy in relation to the allocation of funding and service organisation (see Klein, 1989).
New directions in National Health Service budgeting have emerged during the 1980s.
According to Perrin (1988) it is possible to budget by subjective costs (such as staff, supplies and equipment), functions (such as nursing, catering and estates), specialties (such as neurology, geriatrics and general surgery), or by the units that comprise the district.
The problem is to devise a system that enhances financial accountability.
The Griffiths Report (1983) saw the introduction of general managers at regional, district and unit levels.
This reform was intended to give the service a clearer management direction.
In order to enhance management accountability, budgets were allocated to units.
As Perrin (1988) points out, improved accountability was dependent on managers having financial skills, and the creation of effective decentralised structures with staff (especially clinicians) able to understand budgetary information.
Following Griffiths, the Korner Report (1984) recommended that district budgets should be linked to specialties such as X-rays or operating theatres.
If a patient was sent for an X-ray, the cost would be attached to the department, giving clinicians information on the cost of their work.
Again the aim was improved financial accountability.
Problems that arise include the unwillingness of clinicians to see themselves as resource managers.
They may believe that this conflicts with the clinical autonomy that they traditionally enjoy.
Also, the quality of the information may not be sufficiently high to enable effective decision making.
Budgeting techniques are only one solution to the problems of the health service.
According to the King's Fund Institute (1988), decision makers are faced with a number of options.
Amongst these are:
more public expenditure: the King's Fund researchers provided a tentative estimate that spending would have had to be just under £400 million higher in 1987/88 if it was to match 1981/82 levels, taking into account changing demand and technology;
supplementary and alternative sources of funding: a number of alternatives exist.
These range from private insurance schemes, to shops in hospitals and charging for services;
the creation of internal markets: this would allow general practitioners to make decisions about which hospital or clinician to use.
It is argued that the doctor would have the information to decide from where the best value for money could be obtained.
expansion of private health care: the private sector in health care has grown considerably.
Like all decisions about the future provision of health care, it is dependent on the value systems of the decision makers.
If private provision is considered acceptable, it is highly attractive in deflecting demand away from the public sector.
However, the King's Fund researchers argue that limited private sector expansion may lead to ‘distortion in NHS planning priorities, cost inflation and possible adverse effects on NHS labour supply’(King's Fund Institute, 1988, p. 24).
Internal markets form the basis of government thinking about the reform of the National Health Service.
This reflects the view that if the logic of the private sector is introduced into public sector organisations then greater efficiency will be achieved.
This theme is pursued in more detail in the next chapter.
Conclusion
The above three case studies bring out a number of points about resourcing the public sector which demonstrate that resourcing issues are not the sole province of the technical experts in the area: accountants and economists.
Instead resourcing issues impinge on all of us.
We can make a few more concluding points:
The environment affects budgetary behaviour.
In a period of growth, the increment is the focus of debate; with cutbacks the baseline is questioned leading to increasingly adversarial relations.
As we saw with the Treasury, organisational culture will impact on budgetary behaviour.
In the National Health Service clinicians may see their role as providing health care, not managing budgets.
Managers and staff need to be motivated towards financial management.
The structure affects budgetary behaviour.
Decentralised structures may mean that budget holders are closer to the point of service delivery, but usually they will not be financial specialists.
The introduction of local cost centres may result in people identifying with departmental objectives rather than the objectives of the organisation as a whole.
Central finance department may be reluctant to concede power to the periphery by, for example, allowing cost centres to vire money from one budget heading to another.
This may reduce the flexibility which decentralisation aims to promote.
Further reading
The importance of organisational culture is examined in Heclo and Wildavsky's study of the Treasury (1981).
More recent material on the Financial Management Initiative is contained in Gray and Jenkins (1985) and Metcalfe and Richards (1987).
There is little substantial work yet published on the Next Steps, though the Treasury and Civil Service Committee (1990) contains a number of useful appendices.
The public spending process is covered by Likierman (1988), and Heald (1983) provides an economist's perspective on public expenditure.
In local government finance, work by Tony Travers (1988) is useful as are the case studies on local authority budgeting edited by Elcock and Jordan (1987) and the ensuing more theoretical book by Elcock et al.(1989).
The Audit Commission publishes management papers (see, for example, 1989b) which highlight the latest developments.
On the National Health Service, see Perrin (1988), and Harrison (1988) on general management.
The journal Public Money and Management contains topical articles covering the whole of the public sector.