

Chronology continuing
Themes in existence by 1950 were continued in subsequent decades but they have developed so extensively and changed so dramatically that their origins may now appear to be many years away.
Although the historical approach to physical geography had prompted an approach often styled as denudation chronology, the emphasis had been upon the sequence of denudation rather than upon chronology strictly connoted as the science of computing dates.
In much work that was to develop within the compass of physical geography, the chronology assumed a greater significance, it required a greater knowledge of existing and recently developed dating techniques, and it thus involved close liaison with other disciplines particularly geology, biology and archaeology amongst the broadening spectrum of the earth and environmental sciences.
Although it may seem that the developments were exclusively within geomorphology this was not the case, because environmental reconstruction was increasingly shown to be dependent upon knowledge of the ways in which the soils and sediments as well as the surface morphology related to past systems of vegetation and to patterns of climate.
When attempting to reconstruct the past evolution of physical landscape and to establish the chronology of its stages of evolution, we are confined to ‘windows’ of limited and varying opacity and size (Lewin, 1980).
It is through the ‘windows’ that survive that we can glean the evidence necessary to permit environmental reconstruction and, necessarily, the amount of evidence surviving in a particular area will depend upon the age of the landscape and the subsequent changes to which the landscape has been subjected.
The evidence that can be obtained through the available windows is of four major kinds.
First is evidence relating to morphology of the environment, and a portion of a river terrace could be a fragment of evidence through the window of a much more extensive valley floor in the past.
Secondly is evidence from sediments and materials, and the material comprising the river terrace could be used to infer something about the mode of deposition and the physical environment at the time.
Thirdly is knowledge of the processes operating in the landscape and this may be gleaned from historical records or by analogy with situations elsewhere.
Fourthly are the fragments of evidence that allow relative and absolute dating to be undertaken by an increasingly varied range of techniques.
In an early comment upon denudation chronology Day Kimball (1948) proposed that historical geology could be divided into two parts: stratigraphy, which deals with what is there and denudation chronology, which is concerned with what isn't!
When concerned with denudation chronology it is necessary to utilize as much information as possible and to avoid conceptual approaches which are too constraining.
When looking through windows for evidence it is often the case that the researcher only sees those types of evidence with a significance that has previously been established, and with an association that complies with existing models.
Confronted by a section in a Quaternary deposit there are physical geographers who would devote all their time to the analysis of the sediment characteristics and not look at the space relationships of the feature in which the deposit occurs, and there are others who would deliberate about morphological evolution without closely investigating the sediment.
It is obviously desirable that both approaches should be fully integrated and the a priori models (Figure 3.1C) should not constrain the information actually seen and obtained through the available windows!
From 1950 to 1980 the tendency was for chronological studies to become increasingly sophisticated and more interdisciplinary so that this is a stricture on visualizing earlier work rather than the most recent.
Although it could be argued that it is not really chronology continuing (as suggested by the chapter title) because there had been insufficient time specification before 1950, the sequence of this chapter proceeds from the basic foundations, to the alternative models, to sea level changes, Quaternary geography and hence to the prospect of environmental change.
Basic foundation
A feature of early denudation chronology was that it tended to concentrate upon particular areas and that the record deduced for those areas tended to exercise an unduly significant influence upon the way in which new areas were interpreted.
Southeast England was the subject for a monograph of monumental significance (Wooldridge and Linton, 1939) and the sequence of landscape evolution deduced for this area came to have repercussions throughout subsequent research.
Emphasis in the denudation chronology of southeast England centred upon drainage evolution and upon erosion surfaces which were later described as planation surfaces; relied upon interpretations based upon morphological evidence and information from fragmentary deposits; and produced a model which involved early Tertiary planation, mid Tertiary uplift, late Tertiary planation, early Quaternary planation by a Calabrian shoreline and subsequent valley development during Quaternary sea levels at successively lower altitudes.
In the light of this model other areas were investigated including Wales (Brown, 1960), where the major upland surfaces were visualized as equivalent to the late Tertiary surface of southeastern England.
The substantial amount of  research in Britain in the 1950s and early 1960s generated a number of developments and debates.
Developments included the realistic estimation of 11 million years as the likely time required for the production of an erosion surface and Linton (1957) had shown that the time scale used by some as a frame of reference for landscape evolution was too long.
In his textbook Thornbury (1954) enunciated nine fundamental concepts of geomorphology of which one was ‘Little of the earth's topography is older than Tertiary and most of it no older than Pleistocene.’
A further development was to embrace the stratigraphic sequence in the conclusions about denudation chronology, an effective comparison was made of Britain and Appalachia and the two were embraced within a general model which acknowledged the Tertiary stratigraphy of both areas (Brown, 1961).
Denudation chronology also produced a number of debates which centred not only on the existence of surfaces of a particular number, which was not readily resolved by trend surface analysis, but also on the mode of development of planation surfaces and the significance of earth movement in influencing the denudation chronology.
The principal debate about mode of origin initially centred upon the subaerial or marine hypothesis but it was later deduced, in the light of studies of contemporary shore processes, that marine planation could only be effective for less than one kilometre unless sea level was rising (Bradley, 1956; King, 1963).
The model for southeast England has been refined and developed and one reason for its modification has been the time allocated to mid-Tertiary earth movements as it was appreciated that these ‘outer ripples of the Alpine storm’ may have continued for longer than was at first envisaged.
Comparison of present rates of denudation and orogeny allowed Schumm (1963a) to deduce that the production of a planation surface could take between 10 and 110 million years and to show that present rates of orogeny are up to 10 times faster than rates of denudation.
Such contrasts, although heavily biased towards certain areas of the earth's surface, underline the necessity of incorporating earth movement in the denudation chronology model and to appreciate that much of the progress in denudation chronology was achieved against the background of tectonically stable areas.
This is much more pertinent as the tectonic background has been elucidated more completely (e.g. Vail, Mitchum, Shipley and Buffler, 1981; Evans and Hughes 1984).
The approach of denudation chronology was assimilated in what Jennings (1973) characterized as ‘the geomorphic band waggon parade’ in which a series of fashions in geomorphology were listed as denudation chronology, climatic geomorphology, morphometry, general systems approach, process study and structural geomorphology.
Structural geomorphology is still sometimes allied with the study of landscape evolution and Ollier (1981), in a view that would not be supported by all geomorphologists, has contended:
To play a part in the problems of geology over the next few decades  geomorphologists must forget their trivial catchments and see mega forests instead of trees…
Dynamic equilibrium, climatic geomorphology and process studies have all been shown to have limited application to geomorphology wherever geomorphic history is measured in hundreds of millions of years.
If we reject cyclic ideas and even uniformitarianism, what have we left?
The answer is evolutionary geomorphology.
It is true that geomorphologists have tended to neglect large-scale continental problems but this arises because they have not been prepared to contribute to tectonics and geophysics, which must surely be a prerequisite for an effective and accepted research contribution at the world level.
It is evident that Ollier (1981), although making a plea for a more evolutionary geomorphology, does not cite the quantitatively expressed geophysical research and it seems unlikely that geomorphology can contribute in such areas unless it is willing to adopt the methods and language of other practitioners.
Further pleas for macro-geomorphology have been made by Summerfield (1981) arguing for a more secure basis of geophysical, sedimentological and geochronometric, data and the potential for megageomorphology may remain (Gardner and Scoging, 1983).
This is not to deny with Brown (1980) that geomorphologists have a part to play in elucidating the history of the shape of the earth, particularly in the light of the revolution that the theory of plate tectonics brought to the understanding of continental distribution.
Brown (1980, p. 11) collects together seven principles which underlie historical geomorphological studies as:
1
Uniformitarianism
2
Evolution — the appearance of grasses, for example, in the Tertiary could have reduced erosion rates
3
Spatial variations in rates of operation of geomorphological processes
4
Base level — still crucial in historical geomorphology
5
Land surfaces are geologically young
6
Sediments provide the most important source of information concerning the erosional history of an area
7
Lithology and structure exercise a basic influence upon landform.
In many geomorphological histories there has been a propensity to ignore the most recent stages or time periods so that the Quaternary was often treated in less detail and the Holocene or last 10,000 years seldom referred to at all.
To overcome this problem Brown (1980) advocated the use of a retrospective approach so that not only can the most recent stages be assimilated but also the knowledge of research on contemporary processes may be incorporated.
In this way Brown (1979) devised five formative phases in the evolution of Britain which are necessarily unequal in length and almost plotted on a logarithmic time scale.
Schumm (1968) also demonstrated how knowledge gained from contemporary denudation rates could give clues about the rates in geological time and suggested that with the  appearance of grasses in the Cainozoic, the relations between climate, vegetation, erosion and runoff became much as today except for the subsequent influence of man.
Alternative models in historical geomorphology
Two broad groups of alternatives to, or extensions of, the denudation chronology model may be discerned, both dependent upon the influence of environment upon the researchers.
First there were alternative models of historical geomorphology evolved in areas where remnants of Tertiary planation surfaces were dominant in the landscape and these are considered in this section; and secondly there were developments in areas where Quaternary deposits and landscapes promoted a very different approach and one which often centred upon sea levels and glacial landforms and their interpretation, as reviewed below (pp. 74 and 76).
A radical alternative to the peneplanation model that had been generated in humid temperate landscapes was pediplanation as conceived and developed by the geologist L.C. King.
Developing from his early research in South Africa, Lester King constructed a new approach to geomorphology based upon a study of the world's plainlands (King, 1950) and in that approach claimed that continent-wide bevelled surfaces were produced by pediplanation.
This provided a model for the evolution of African landscapes that depended upon parallel slope retreat and the coalescence of pediplains, and it stimulated canons of landscape evolution (King, 1953) and the extension of the model to many areas of the earth's surface in The Morphology of the Earth (King, 1962).
In that universal approach, which provided a thought-provoking challenge to the established temperate models, King (1962, pp. 162–3, 643) introduced his model as:
The classic account of the ‘Normal Cycle of Erosion’ as expounded by W.M. Davis has proved regrettably in error.
With its emphasis on universal downwearing, it was a negative and obliterating conception resulting from cerebral analysis rather than from observation and has led to sterility in geomorphologic thought and retarded progress in the subject severely.
The new pediplanation approach springs from the work of W. Penck, Kirk Bryan and Jessen…(p 643) the sequence of major cyclic denudation upon all the continents alternating with episodes of elevation and mountain building, together with the relations of both phases, through coastal plain and shelf deposits, with major events in the ocean basins, are not disturbed haphazardly through geologic time but are in broad temporal conformity one with another.
The model of pediplanation served to extend knowledge about the earth surface; to introduce greater cognizance of world landscapes because in his later papers King correlated surfaces from Australia, Africa and South America and in the Morphology of the Earth in 1962 embraced landscapes from the northern hemisphere as well; and to include earth movement in the  form of cymatogenic arching as well as exogenetic processes as an integral part of the cycles of landscape development.
Emphasis was still largely placed upon Tertiary rather than upon the most recent stages of Quaternary time.
The King model of pediplanation provided a framework for an interpretation of the vegetation patterns of the savannas of the southern hemisphere and in a series of papers Cole (e.g. 1963) reviewed the climatic, edaphic and morphologic controls upon the types of savanna vegetation and concluded that the broad vegetation patterns related to the age of landsurfaces as expected from the King pediplanation model.
Also conceived in the tropics was a model of landscape development which was generated against the background of the seasonally humid tropics rather than the semi-arid, and which was related to weathering profiles and to igneous rocks and the experience of soil scientists together with the benefits of inputs from climatic geomorphology.
This grew with the realization that deep chemical weathering would be the norm in many tropical areas and that many temperate areas included tor-like residuals which were a remnant from times when climatic conditions were warmer and wetter.
In southwest England an early paper by Waters (1957) demonstrated the significance of differential weathering in oldlands and gave the basis for a new way of regarding the earlier stages of landscape evolution.
It was records of deep chemical weathering which stimulated the development of new models and in particular the notion of a double surface of levelling ( Büder , 1957).
A lower basal weathering front marked the position at which chemical weathering was actively attacking sound unweathered rock, and on the land surface exogenous processes were eroding, transporting and depositing sediment across a landsurface composed of chemically weathered rock with occasional protrusions of unweathered erosional residuals.
The relative behaviour of these two levels would reflect contemporary and past erosion systems and would vary from humid tropics to semi-arid and arid landscapes.
This significant model was adopted during the progress of subsequent research (see Thomas, 1978) and also had a significant relationship to climatic geomorphology.
This type of geomorphology, which has subsequently attracted both great support and disenchantment, has been the subject of at least two groups of interpretations and it is perhaps the lack of equal familiarity with the achievements of both groups that may account for the differing viewpoints some of which are listed in Table 4.1.
One view is that climatic geomorphology assumes that climate governs the character and distribution of landforms and although this view appears to be assumed by some of the critics of climatic geomorphology they do not cite many specific cases where the viewpoint is clearly advanced.
However, this view arises because a klima-genetische geomorphologie was proposed by Büdel (1963) and became widely available in the English reading literature in 1965 (Holzner and Weaver, 1965).
Büdel distinguished three generations of geomorphology namely dynamic which concerns the study of  particular processes; climatic which considers the total complex of present processes in their climatic framework; and climatogenetic geomorphology which involves the analysis of the entire relief including features adjusted to the contemporary climate and also produced by former climates.
This model was supported by five climato-morphogenetic zones (Büdel, 1963) which were later expanded to seven (Büdel, 1969) and then to eight (Büdel, 1977).
Each zone was characterized by particular landscape-forming processes and by relief features and so could also be the basis for understanding  past landscape development.
Thus the extra-tropical zone of former pronounced valley formation was dominated by relict landscape features both glacial and periglacial.
This model provided a way of visualizing the pattern of morphogenetic systems over the earth's surface during the Cainozoic and so lent itself to a clear way of integrating contemporary world zones with those of the past when ice sheets were non-existent or much less extensive.
Date
Author
1979
C. D. OLLIER
‘There is no doubt that climate affects landform development but it does not provide a good basis for a general theory of landscape evolution'
Table 4.1: Views of climatic geomorphology
1980
I. DOUGLAS
‘While climatic geomorphology proper might be seen as a valuable adjunct to applied pedology and applied ecology in understanding the operation of landscape systems at the present, climato-genetic geomorphology ( Büdel , 1963) which relies on the principle of actualism in historical studies is less readily tenable…
Geomorphological understanding has not been helped by the educational device of splitting geomorphology into two simple categories of climatic geomorphology and structural geomorphology which obscures the subtle interdependence between structural and climatic influences on landforms’
1968
D. R. STODDART
‘While it may be possible to derive a satisfactory methodological basis for climatic geomorphology…one must conclude that, as at present formulated, much of climatic geomorphology is (a) not new, being implicit in Davis's own work;(b) not well-established, especially in terms of the climatic control of process; and (c) premature, in setting up generalized world-wide schemes, both of present climatic-morphologic regions, and of climatic-morphologic changes in the Pleistocene and earlier, before sound factual bases exist'
1973
E. DERBYSHIRE
‘Traditional climatic geomorphology as represented by most of the papers in this volume has to a large extent glossed over this paucity of knowledge of fundamentals; it may be said to have proceeded, like Davis's work, to premature generalization on the basis of quite vague ideas on the underlying process relations.
In the light of this, the way forward in climatic geomorphology, already recognized in studies of fluvial catchments, becomes evident.
It will involve the geomorphologist increasingly in sophisticated instrumentation of both climatic and geomorphological parameters, the design of specific, long-term experiments and the use of multivariate methods.
The requisite technology, plant and techniques are available and await the formulation of appropriate experimental designs.’
1976
K. W. BUTZER
‘Climatic geomorphology attempts to cope with the excessive complexity of natural parameters by holding variables such as structure, lithology and man constant.
In much the same way implicit or explicit models for describing the evolution of stream channels or drainage basins commonly are used to make simplifying assumptions that eliminate considerations of time, history and sometimes even progressive change.’
1980
J. BÜDEL
‘The differences between various processes at work and the resulting differences among the landforms themselves are the object of climatic geomorphology.’
The second view of climatic geomorphology emerged much more in relation to attempts to relate process to climate and to emphasize the interrelation between the morphological, pedological, vegetational and climatic characteristics of the earth's surface.
This theme emerged  when Peltier (1950) identified nine different and possible morphogenetic regimes each of which should be distinguished by a characteristic assemblage of geomorphic processes.
Peltier (p. 222) acknowledged earlier ideas when discussing the distinction of morphogenetic regions:
The climatic boundaries of this graph are in part the same as those given by Penck (1910), Davis (1912) and Troll (1947) whose influence is acknowledged by the writer.
Particularly are the glacial, selva and arid regimes…parallel to the glacial, humid and arid climates of both Davis and Troll.
I should, however, say that many of the ideas here expressed are explicitly stated in the lectures of Professor Kirk Bryan whose emphasis on climatic morphology has led to the formulation here set forth.
He then proceeded to identify a periglacial cycle which went beyond a relationship between climate and process and attracted some of the criticisms that had previously been levelled at the Davisian ‘normal’ cycle.
Somewhat independently, climatic geomorphology was developing in France under the influence of J. Tricart and A. Cailleux.
A feature of the morphoclimatic zones recognized by the French school (Tricart, 1957) was the attempt not only to relate such morphoclimatic zones to climates and to processes but also to soils and to vegetation.
Indeed the approach in some ways resembled that of the early Russian school of soil science and involved the recognition of zonal phenomena as the direct results of latitudinal climatic belts; of azonal phenomena arising from non-climatic control including endogenetic effects; extrazonal phenomena which occurred beyond their normal range of occurrence such as sand dunes on coasts; and polyzonal phenomena including those which operate in all regions of the globe subject to the same basic physical laws.
This school of geomorphology produced an introduction to climatic geomorphology (Tricart and Cailleux, 1965, 1972) and a series of volumes dealing with specific groups of morphoclimatic zones.
Although simple relationships based upon mean annual values of climatic parameters are prone to oversimplification, more recently this second approach has developed along more specific process lines (see p. 110) and has had much in common with energy budget climatology, particularly as pursued by the Russian school  subsequent to the work of Budyko (1958).
A potential danger is that the trend away from the identification and analysis of planation surfaces could go too far so that insufficient attention is accorded to these remnants in the landscapes of areas dominated by formerly extensive landsurfaces.
Particularly in parts of the world such as Australia the planation surfaces contribute a major part of the geomorphological story and Ollier (1979, p. 534) has concluded that process studies are of limited value; the present is not invariably the key to the past, much of Australia is not in equilibrium with the present conditions of base level, tectonics or climate, and cyclic theories do not fit the Australian scene very well.
Landform inheritance (e.g. Pain, 1978) is therefore a concept emphasized by some researchers in environments of this kind, and Ollier (1979, 1981) proposes evolutionary geomorphology not as a cyclic approach with a sequence of stages but suggests that the earth's landscapes as a whole are evolving through time and this is analogous to the concept of an evolving earth as used in some geology books (e.g. Windley, 1977).
Evolutionary geomorphology has been used with a very different connotation by Thornes (1983b) and this is introduced in chapter 8 (p. 182).
In collecting together a Benchmark series book Adams (1975, p. 449) suggested areas of general agreement concerning planation surfaces:
1
Planation surfaces do exist and are not merely steady-state topographic products of random dissection.
2
the most distinctive unit surface is the pediment;
3
in attempting to estimate the emergence of a land mass from present altitudes of planation surfaces, their origins, base levels and most probably regional slopes must be considered;
4
most planation surfaces are or have been graded  with respect to some base elevation, usually sea level, but often to an endorheic basin or to a climatic control above sea level;
5
the most important time aspect of a planation surface is from the latest possible time of initiation of the cycle that produced it to the earliest possible time that it ceased being shaped (i.e. its terminal date) because of either burial or uplift;
6
a planation surface need not be presently under the same climatic regime as when it was initially developed;
7
planation surfaces should be considered in the general framework of plate tectonics, sea floor spreading, and the resulting change of continental areas with respect to the position of climatic zones.
These seven suggestions invite comparison with the 50 canons of landscape evolution that had been suggested by L.C. King in 1953 (King, 1953, pp. 747–50).
Sea level changes
A second group of alternative approaches was inspired in areas where Quaternary deposits and landscapes required a very different approach and this may be envisaged as of four basic kinds associated with sea levels, glacial sequences, periglacial landscapes and arid landscapes.
Sea level change inspired studies because many areas possessed evidence of stages of Quaternary erosion marked by river terraces and adjacent or other areas presented former raised shorelines around coastal margins together with evidence from buried valleys and remnants of former sea levels which were later submerged.
Studies of this kind were influenced first by studies and methods of denudation chronology, of which they naturally formed the later stages, and secondly by developments in the study of the Pleistocene where the work of Zeuner (1945, 1958) and the work of geologists (e.g. Wright, 1937; Flint, 1947; Charlesworth, 1957) had been particularly influential.
Figure 4.1: Views of Quaternary change (after Goudie, 1977) The classic sequence of Pleistocene sea levels is shown above and sea level curves compiled by various authors for the Holocene are indicated below.
In the analysis of shorelines and chronological stages many studies first followed Baulig (1935) and other workers, including Deperet working on Mediterranean shorelines, and then were influenced by the masterly synthesis achieved by Fairbridge 1961 and by Zeuner's (1959) consolidated view of sea level change in the Quaternary.
In the latter view a classic sequence of Pleistocene sea level (Fig. 4.1) fluctuations included transgressions associated with interglacials and regressions accompanying the glacial phases and these fluctuations were superimposed upon a gradual sea level decline during the course of the Pleistocene.
This explanation was primarily glacio-eustatic in nature because it depended upon sea level fluctuation in relation to the amount of water stored in the ice-caps during glacial and interglacial phases.
Other world-wide eustatic causes of sea level change include sedimentary infilling of ocean basins which could give a sea level rise of 4 mm/100 years equivalent to 40 m in a million years (Higgins, 1965); orogenic eustasy whereby orogenic uplift creates ocean basins of different size; geoidal eustasy whereby the ocean surface reflects the variations in the geoid surface due to the earth's irregular distribution of mass which can give a difference between lows and highs of as much as 180 m.
In addition, a number of local factors can be responsible for sea level change (Goudie, 1983) and these include glacioisostasy whereby the earth's crust responds to the development or removal of large ice sheets, and hydroisostasy when a similar response occurs as a result of large bodies of sea water or lake water from continental shelves and lake basins; orogenic and epeirogenic activity; compaction of sediments; and the increased gravitational attraction associated with large Pleistocene ice-sheets.
The initial model proposed, based upon data from the Mediterranean, has been superseded with the advent of information from a greater range of sites elsewhere in the world, with emphasis upon correlation other than on simple altitudinal grounds and with more complete methods of absolute  and relative dating.
Of the latter the advent of oxygen isotope dating of deep-sea sediment cores has probably been most significant and also very important in relation to reconstructing climatic change and glacial chronology.
In addition, the use of Uranium-series dating of uplifted coral coasts (Chappell.
1974) and of amino-acid dating, especially as applied to coasts of the USA (Wehmiller, 1982), has advanced knowledge and has allowed separation of sea level and tectonic components on rapidly  uplifting coastlines.
However, it is still not possible to be certain about world sea levels before the last quarter of a million years.
Perhaps it is not unexpected that simple correlation cannot easily be made between different parts of the world in view of the advent of the theory of plate tectonics because of the amount of movement associated with the displacement of plates.
Particular attention has been devoted to the Late Quaternary sea levels and especially to those of the Holocene.
In consolidating data from several areas it has been proposed that a rapid rise of sea level occurred in the early Holocene but that in the last 6000 years the rate has been far less, although it may have diminished progressively, it may have risen to c .
3600 BP and then remained constant, or it may have oscillated to positions above and below present levels (Fig. 4.1).
In an extensive review arising from IGCP 61 Kidson (1982) has concluded that the search for a universal eustatic curve should be regarded as over; that regional differences in changes in the geoid mean that eustatic sea level curves can have only regional validity; and that no part of the earth's crust can be regarded as wholly stable.
Work on sea level changes has tended to concentrate upon these most recent stages (e.g. Tooley, 1
Quaternary geography
In areas dominated by Quaternary deposits emphasis in research in the late 1950s and subsequently was naturally directed towards the interpretation of the stages and nature of Quaternary landscape change, and this involved the inception of new conceptual models of glacial landform development well exemplified by the way in which J.B. Sissons of the University of Edinburgh developed a theme in many research papers of the interpretation of patterns of deglaciation involving stagnant as well as active ice (Sissons, 1976).
However, three major features may be discerned as characterizing research by physical geographers on the Quaternary: increasing involvement in chronology, the impact of new techniques, and the progress towards an interdisciplinary focus.
When influential textbooks were produced by Quaternary geologists (e.g. Flint, 1947; Charlesworth, 1957) the disparities between areas such as northern Europe, central Europe, and North America were perhaps most apparent.
A classical model was produced by Penck and Bruckner in 1909 and this involved four main glaciations although it has subsequently been appreciated that the sediments on which this four-fold sequence was based represented only a small proportion of the time span, and unconformities between each successive terrace probably conceal events lost to the record regionally or locally (Bowen, 1978).
The four-fold sequence, and the four names derived from the names of Alpine rivers, continue to echo in research around the world although this interpretation has now been superseded.
Additional models had been proposed for Northern Europe where a classic sequence of glaciations and interglacials had been proposed based on the investigation of sequences on the North European Plain and in Scandinavia; in the British Isles; and in central North America (Bowen, 1978).
Although physical geographers had not contributed to their development, these model sequences were increasingly evident in research writings as knowledge of the sequence in one area and correlation between areas were necessary to proceed towards explanation of local and then of regional patterns.
Whereas influential books like Flint's Glacial and Pleistocene Geology adopted a structure in which landforms and landscape patterns comprised the early part of the book and then were succeeded by chapters on stratigraphy and chronology in different areas and this was echoed in the structure of research on specific areas; by the late 1970s books by physical geographers had adopted a structure in which chronology and the classic models appeared at the beginning.
Greater interest in, and involvement with, chronology and environmental reconstruction became possible because of the greater pace of development of new techniques to complement established ones which could be used for dating and/or the provision of environmental information.
Such established techniques included the analysis of varves in lake deposits indicating an annual or seasonal rhythm, used since the pioneer work of de Geer in Sweden in 1912; analysis of tree rings when dendrochronology has been linked very convincingly to climate; relative dating of landforms; and palynology and other types of micro-fossil analysis including non-marine mollusca.
Some of these techniques have been extended and especially at the University of Birmingham G.R. Coope (Coope et al .,
1971) has made great progress as a geologist who used the wing cases of fossil beetles (Coleoptera) to indicate climatic characteristics of palaeoenvironments because coleoptera are very sensitive to changes in wetness and dryness.
Palynology has been adopted by many biogeographers and pollen analysis was the basis for the reconstruction of the detailed vegetation history of many specific areas although more recently emphasis has changed from individual sites to the reconstruction of patterns of change in Britain (e.g. Barber 1976) and in the tropics (e.g. Flenley, 1979).
To complement these existing techniques new ones have developed which derive particularly from isotopic dating techniques and from  analysis of deep-sea ocean cores.
Isotopic methods provide geochronometric methods of dating to support stratigraphic investigations which are radiometric to complement the use of varves, dendrochronology or palaeomagnetic evidence that can give chronology relative to a floating scale.
Radio-carbon or C14 dating was first applied in 1949 and together with other evidence now provides the chronology for the last 50,000 years and may be extended to 75,000 years.
As growing organisms incorporate radio-carbon and after death of the organism the trapped radio-carbon begins to decay at a known rate with half lost after 5730 years, it is possible to indicate when death occurred.
Such radio-carbon dating has been used on wood, charcoal, peat, organic mud and calcium carbonate in molluscs, foraminifera and bones.
Uranium nuclides 238 U and 235 U decay to stable lead and this decay is the basis for a method applied to molluscs, coral and deep sea sediments which usefully complements 14 C dating because it can be used for materials up to 350,000 years in age.
Potassium-argon dating can be applied to volcanic rocks such as lavas and tuffs and although difficult to measure the decay, it attains its maximum usefulness in the Middle and Early Pleistocene and can be used for a range greater than 20,000 years.
The range of techniques has been reviewed by Bowen (1978) and by Goudie (1981a) and an indicative summary is included in Table 4.2.
Technique
Methods
Range
Radiocarbon dating
Measurement of radioactivity in a fossil sample compared with modern standard and knowing rate of decay (half-life).
Wood, charcoal, peat, organic mud, calcium carbonate in molluscs, foraminifera and bones, soil organic matter
Uranium series disequilibrium methods
Two long-lived Uranium nuclides 238 U and 235 U decay through a series of short-lived products to stable lead.
Fossil corals
Potassium-Argon and Argon-40/Argon-39
Small amounts of 40 K in rocks decay to 40 Ar and the ratio of the two can give a measure of age of rock.
Volcanic rocks including lavas and tuffs
Fission track dating
Traces of 238 U in minerals and glasses of volcanic rocks decay by spontaneous fission at a known rate
Volcanic rocks and provides checks on other methods
Magnetostratigraphy
Analyses of natural remanent magnetism (NRM) in rocks which reflects orientation and intensity of earth's magnetic field at time of rock formation.
Volcanic and some sedimentary rocks
Amino acid diagenesis
After death of organisms amino acids in protein are released and the ratio of amino acids can give an indication of relative age.
Bone samples in uniform temperature conditions 
Glacial varves
Analysis of accumulation of annual layers accreted in still water.
Lakes in proglacial areas
Dendrochronology
Annual growth rings give indication of number of years and wet summer may produce thicker rings
To indicate climatic variations and age of surfaces such as slopes
Stable isotope fractionation
Small but measurable differences in isotope composition of any two chemical species of the same element.
Thus differences in 18 O/ 16 O ratio may be expected between water and calcite precipitating from it.
Deep sea sediments, Continental freshwater calcareous deposits, water in hydrological cycle
Thermoluminescence
Some materials can acquire thermoluminescence from irradiation by naturally occurring radio isotopes and length of exposure can be deduced.
Pottery at archaeological sites, some Pleistocene sediments including loess
Obsidian hydration
Rhyolitic volcanic glass (obsidian) when exposed to the atmosphere absorbs water to form a hydrated rind that increases in thickness in relation to time and/or temperature.
Archaeological samples of obsidian artifacts
Lichenometry
Measurements of lichen thalli on surfaces of known dates can be basis for growth curve which can then be basis for indicating age of other surfaces.
Depositional surfaces, and features such as moraines and erosional surfaces such as rock fall scars
Caesium-137
Isotope generated artificially by fission reaction and thermo-nuclear weapon tests since 1954 have given cascading systems of radioactive products in atmosphere, surface, soil and vegetation.
Recent sediment changes
Table 4.2: Some developments of techniques for dating and environmental reconstruction (Based upon Bowen, 1978, Worsley, 1981; and Cullingford, Davidson and Lewin, 1980)
Deep-sea cores potentially provide a complete stratigraphical record whereas the continental record is necessarily less perfect.
With the development of appropriate piston corers in the late 1940s it was possible to collect columns of sediment 10–30 m in length which contained material that could be dated by radiometric and other means and could also provide environmental information, for example by analysing the frequency of sensitive foraminifera.
Abundant information has been yielded by cores and one extracted from the Pacific near the equator from a water depth of 3120 m indicated a sequence of 900,000 years including eight completed glacial cycles and nine terminations which are rapid deglaciations.
The new hydraulic piston corers (Shackleton and Hall, 1983) are now providing better samples as the basis for more detailed analysis to allow a greater  degree of isotopic structure and this should enable the climatic variability of the early Pleistocene to be analysed in detail comparable with that already achieved for the late Pleistocene.
The frequency of glaciations indicated by this record has now been confirmed by the loess record in central Europe (Kukla, 1975) the USSR and China (Goudie, 1983).
Much of the progress achieved in studies of Quaternary environmental change has involved increasing amounts of interdisciplinary cooperation.
This has been manifested in a number of ways including the birth of interdisciplinary journals such as Quaternary Research (1970-) and Boreas (1972-) and Quaternary Science Reviews (1982-); of national organizations for Quaternary Scientists including AMQUA in America, DEUQUA in Germany, NORDQUA in Scandinavia and the QRA (Quaternary Research Association) in Britain; of the growth of the International Union for Quaternary Research (INQUA) with its meetings every 4 years and many commissions which coordinate research in many fields; and of international cooperation under the auspices of the International Geological Correlation Programme (IGCP) which includes Quaternary investigations within its endeavours.
In addition the closer links between branches of physical geography such as geomorphology and biogeography have necessitated links with biologists and geologists and then with palaeoclimatologists because of the importance of studying climatic change.
Perhaps the clearest indication of the increasingly multidisciplinary nature of Quaternary investigations is that a book written by a geographer, D.Q. Bowen, and published in 1978 is entitled Quaternary Geology and is subtitled A Stratigraphic Framework for Multidisciplinary Work .
It is also notable that Bowen has been in the vanguard of interdisciplinary and international cooperation which has established the utility of amino acid dating, and he has been instrumental in establishing a laboratory for this purpose in the Department of Geography at the University College of Wales, Aberystwyth.
The benefits of more extensive methods for dating and environmental reconstruction were also reflected in the investigation of Quaternary morphogenesis in areas beyond ice sheets.
Although emphasis was initially upon recognition of the variety of landscape features, sediments and structures that could be developed under periglacial conditions, the potential subsequently arose of developing a greater knowledge of phases of periglacial landscape development, and in Poland and other countries in Europe this emphasis was clearly evident in research in the 1960s and much of the research was reflected in Periglacial Geomorphology (Embleton and King, 1975) which was one of two books to derive from the earlier Glacial and Periglacial Geomorphology (Embleton and King, 1968).
Earlier developments by geographers which proceeded somewhat independently were located in arid, semi-arid and subtropical areas.
These were additional to interpretations of planation surfaces and were particularly concerned with the alternation of pluvial and arid phases in the Quaternary and their possible relationship to those of temperate latitudes; with the  sequence of valley development particularly as revealed by the chronology of alluvial deposits; and with the significance of human activity which in some of the areas studied extended over many centuries.
Such studies are exemplified by the work of Professor K.W. Butzer on areas in the Middle East and in the Mediterranean where he reconstructed stages of landscape change as related to Quaternary stratigraphy and indicative of changing Quaternary climates.
These studies depended upon detailed analysis of fluvial, lake, aeolian and cave sediments together with inputs from related disciplines particularly to furnish techniques and results from palaeobotany, palynology, palaeoclimatology and archaeology.
The latter was necessary because man-land relationships provided necessary insight into the use of environments throughout the middle and late Quaternary (see Butzer, 1964).
A stimulating approach to The Mediterranean Valleys provided by Vita-Finzi (1969) also relied upon the close association between human activity and valley evolution as exemplified in the sediments in valley floors and revealed a fascinating sequence.
In hot desert areas investigations of fossil dunes in India, Africa and Australia together with changes in the extent of pluvial lakes in Africa, the Middle East, and North America (Goudie, 1983) have provided further insight into the chronology of Quaternary environments.
A historical emphasis in biogeography prevailed during the 1960s in particular and is collectively described as Quaternary ecology by Simmons (1980).
Using palynological and chronometric dating techniques a great number of cores have been investigated and the flora and fauna of the terminal Pleistocene and of the transition during the early Flandrian in western Europe from tundra to closed deciduous woodland, have been investigated and the major phases distinguished.
Progress in this direction has now been achieved for a diversity of world areas and requires ancillary information related to climatic change and, in turn, when sufficient information becomes available could contribute to the reconstruction of world patterns.
An excellent example of international cooperation is provided by IGCP Project 158B devoted to the study of lakes and mires in the temperate zone (Berglund, 1983) and to the collation of detailed information that facilitates the development of generalizations about trends in vegetation change and hence in climate during the last 15,000 years.
This international project is organized from a Department of Quaternary Geology but involves inputs from physical geographers as well as from biologists, geologists and archaeologists.
Climatology as viewed by a geographer necessarily involves consideration of climatic change (Lockwood, 1979a) and of the energy balance, general circulation, and statistical dynamical models (Lockwood, 1983a) that afford the main types of model used in studies of climatic change.
Changes of climate have also been investigated during the historic time scale when a range of historical techniques have been utilized, including diaries and records together with sedimentary evidence, and information  from faunal remains, archaeology, tree rings and ocean deposits, and G. Manley, a geographer at London University prior to his appointment as the first Professor of Environmental Sciences at Lancaster University, was one who researched many of the obscure details of climatic fluctuations in Western Europe (e.g. Manley, 1952).
Biogeographers investigating landscape change on the most recent time scale have also resorted to documentary and field evidence because palynology may not be sufficiently reliable at this scale for the studies which have been completed including those of the outer Leeward Islands (Harris, 1965), the southwest of the United States and the vegetation of Barbados 1627–1800 (Watts, 1966).
In the development of studies of change particularly by biogeographers, increasing interdisciplinary cooperation and a greatly expanded range of techniques are very evident.
In some cases geographers are adapting techniques, as in the use of soil micro-organisms as an indicator of the relationship between land use change and soil characteristics (Maltby, 1975) and developing techniques with a great range of applications based upon magnetic susceptibility (e.g. Oldfield, 1983a) and dating using 210 Pb which is of great accuracy and value for recent sediments (Appleby and Oldfield, 1978), and particularly enhanced the study of lakes and their drainage basins (Oldfield, 1977) and these developments are referred to also in chapter 6 (p. 124).
Quaternary geography and the prospect for environmental change
Studies of the Quaternary by physical geographers since the 1950s have led generally in one of two directions: either towards a more process or model-based investigation or towards a greater emphasis upon chronology.
The former will reappear in chapter 5 in relation to investigations of glaciers, for example, and the latter is the reason for interdisciplinary cooperation that has been stressed in the preceding pages and is further developed in chapter 8.
Such cooperation can present problems for teaching, training and research because the necessary techniques and methods are the province of more than one discipline.
One solution has been to create university departments of integrated environmental science or of earth sciences.
In some of these the emphasis is upon environmental change in the Quaternary whereas in others they have accommodated investigations of contemporary environmental processes as well.
In the context of geomorphology Clayton (1971), himself a geographer progressed to environmental sciences at the University of East Anglia, has argued that it is difficult to achieve a balanced development across the two subjects of geography and geology that it depends upon, and Worsley (1979) particularly concerned for the diminishing resources available and the imminent policy of selective resource concentration argued:
The inference to be drawn is obvious; regrouping is necessary and the longer the fateful day of decision is delayed, the greater the likelihood that the established  geoscience groups will capture those limited resources.
It is hoped that the proverbial geomorphological cuckoo in its geographical nest will stretch its wings and fly, rather than become a grounded ostrich.
To continue the analogy however, one danger of a cuckoo in a nest is that before flying it may permanently displace other promising chicks which could be particularly concerned with processes (chapter 5) and man (6) and such themes are not readily accommodated in an earth science, geoscience or environmental science structure.
Perhaps the answer lies in diversity and in that the very existence of different organizational structures in different countries is a very positive attribute and that when diverse arrangements exist within a single country this also may be highly desirable.
Some physical geographers have perceived the need for adjustment of fundamental outlooks and Bowen (1979, p. 167) suggested:
Outmoded models are still conventional wisdom and in geomorphology there are signs that, rather than face the new realities, there is a retreat into the more rarefied atmosphere of conceptual model-building and complex correlation structure diagrams.
Or alternatively the new situation is completely ignored and the time-space mesh contracted to such a degree that landform is almost taken as read and interest is, instead, directed at hydrological matters relating to the transmission of water and sediment across land-surfaces which look increasingly like the isotropic ones of human geographers.
 Similarly Andrews and Miller (1980) have argued that the importance of chronology is frequently overlooked and/or understressed in many geomorphological studies and that
The dominance of studies on modern processes in the field of geomorphological methods needs to be balanced by the longer perspective that falls traditionally within the area of Quaternary geology and geomorphology…
Chronology is one of the cornerstones of geomorphology, and researchers are urged to balance their studies of present geomorphic processes by an appreciation of rates of work over timescales of 10 4 — 10 6 years.
Such restraining views are typical of many that are fully justified by the emphasis upon process studies that characterized the 1960s and 1970s and led to smaller investment of resources in historical studies and to the fear that process studies will not profitably link back with chronological ones — in fact there are many indications that such links are happening again including the way in which physical geographers who have been mainly concerned with processes and modelling are moving towards evolution.
One leading proponent, J.B. Thornes, in contributing to an interdisciplinary symposium in Geography, Archaeology and Environment, affirmed that palaeoenvironmental reconstructions are crucial if the understanding of the ecology of past societies is to be substantially improved (Thornes, 1983a) and elsewhere (Thornes, 1983b) has advocated evolutionary geomorphology and has anticipated that it will produce major new insights into historical problems such as river terrace formation and his  proposal is considered more fully in chapter 8 (p. 182).
G.H. Dury .
a geomorphologist who has made a substantial contribution which includes a considerable number of process-type contributions as well as some concerned more with evolutionary geomorphology, concluded after a review of three recent statements on the issue (Dury, 1972, p. 201):
My own response to the question of where geomorphology belongs must be, that the question is badly structured.
Formally it belongs where its practitioners are attached for payroll purposes.
Functionally, it belongs on the surface/subsurface interface.
There was a time when the soil nexus held the promise of unifying physical and human geography.
Now, the union if it is to come, might conceivably come through common techniques of analysis.
Alternatively it might well come through environmental research, including work in environmental geomorphology.
It seems highly unlikely to result from the subdivision of territorial claims.
Strictures such as those by Bowen and by Andrews and Miller are very necessary if physical geography is to avoid losing sight of the historical dimension and the links with process and systems studies (see chapter 8, p. 161).
However, it may be that the existence of diverse approaches is inevitable and Butzer (1973) concluded that pluralism was inevitable and possibly desirable.
There is still disagreement as to the extent to which the study of contemporary present-day phenomena can be a key towards understanding similar phenomena in the remote past.
This is referred to as the principle of actualism by Douglas (1980) citing Russian geologists Gorshkov and Yakushova and, whereas it is rejected by Douglas and also by Ollier (1979,1981), it is possible to believe that although the past development of an area may not be explicable in terms of the processes at present operating in that area, nevertheless study of present processes may collectively help to illuminate the past.
In this case pluralism as visualized by Butzer is required.
Indeed Butzer is a geographer who has made great contributions in defining a field of Pleistocene Geography which was the term used as a subtitle for his book on Environment and Archaeology first published in 1964.
Whereas Pleistocene geology was seen to be primarily concerned with stratigraphy and chronology, Butzer saw the need for a more comprehensive study of past environments and envisaged Pleistocene Geography as concerned with the natural environment and focused on the same themes of man and nature that are the concern of historical and contemporary geographies.
In addition to collecting the techniques available Butzer (1964) applied the zonal concept to provide a background of world physical environments against which he reviewed Pleistocene environments of the Old World and man-land relationships in prehistory.
Subsequently a development of the theme has appeared in Archaeology as Human Geography (Butzer, 1982), in Geoarchaeology (Davidson and Shackley, 1976) and in a book which endeavours to develop the theme of the nature of the environment during each of the phases of British prehistory (Simmons and Tooley, 1981).
A slightly different but very stimulating approach also  originating from earlier experience of chronological change is a review of Recent Earth History (Vita-Finzi, 1973) which looks at the record particularly of the last 20,000 years and at methods of dating and clearly argues that:
The immediate past does, of course, have the attraction of serving as a bridge between present day processes and their fossilized counterparts.
Several themes in physical geology suffer from falling between the stools of historical geology and geomorphology.
To judge from the literature, the distinction drawn between palaeontology and genetics or archaeology and anthropology, is sometimes equally deleterious even if largely administrative (Vita-Finzi, p. 111).
Quaternary or Pleistocene geography, environmental change (Goudie, 1983) geoarchaeology, and alluvial chronology are all examples of the new focus for chronological investigations.
This new focus has required the replacement of conservatism, which in geomorphology has ignored subjects of topical concern like accelerated soil erosion, and the persistent misconception that denudation chronology can be equated with Davisian cycles ‘dated’ by landform geometries (Butzer, 1980).
Butzer outlines a revolution in historical geomorphology that was made possible by the successful application of sedimentological techniques, by advances in isotopic dating, and by collaborative geo-archaeological efforts.
He reviews the problems of internal dating, of intraregional correlation, of regional delimitation and of causation against the background of detailed results from a variety of areas proceeding towards a challenging opportunity to examine the spatial and temporal dimensions of human interference in complex ecosystems.
The need for a radical change of outlook has also been stressed by Bowen (1979) who sees progress in this direction being made by a mixture of basic and applied work by both multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary endeavour diminishing what Butzer (1975a) saw as particularism — the tendency for individual specialists or groups to regard their own field as the cornerstone for others.
He envisages that a change in outlook may derive from appreciation of the complex event sequences that new techniques have now exposed in the Quaternary; from appraisal of the classical models of change to accommodate the realization that extreme rapidity of change now has to be considered when evaluating chronological biotal and geomorphological processes; from adjustment of geomorphology to new knowledge of Quaternary change such as rate of ice sheet growth and decay; and similar adjustment of biogeography and of palaeoclimatology.
One of the most advanced examples of development has been CLIMAP (Climate, Long Range Investigation, Mapping and Prediction, Hays and Moore, 1973) which has made a reconstruction of global sea surface, ice extent, ice elevation and continental albedo for the northern hemisphere summer at 18,000 years BP and this has provided the boundary conditions for global general circulation models to simulate the climate when the northern ice  sheets were at their maximum extent (see Lockwood, 1983a).
Thus the inception of a new focus for the study of chronology has been promoted by such stimulating developments and Bowen (1979) points out that the CLIMAP group have discovered significant evidence which supports the idea that the immediate future is one of adverse orbital geometry and general cooling and hence that ‘the prediction of the future must rest on the past in the present’(Bowen, 1979, p. 181).
Processes prevailing
Although study of the past can be useful for extrapolation into the future it is also imperative that investigation of contemporary processes is undertaken to assist understanding of the way in which environment operates now, operated in the past, and may operate in the future.
Studies of processes were undertaken to remedy what many physical geographers perceived to be a deficiency and in doing so it was necessary to overcome considerable resistance such as that in geomorphology where Wooldridge (1958, p. 31) avowed:
I regard it as quite fundamental that geomorphology is primarily concerned with the interpretation of forms, not the study of processes.
It may help to see how the need for process studies was perceived to exist and then to proceed to indicate in which branches studies were undertaken using what methods as a basis for assessing how our knowledge has increased in spatial terms and in time with reference to catastrophic views.
Perceiving the need for process
A recurrent criticism of historical approaches in physical geography up to the 1950s was that they had insufficient knowledge of environmental processes to fall back upon which could enhance the understanding of landscape.
More specifically, in geomorphology it had often been pointed out that although the Davisian trilogy embraced structure, process and stage or time the emphasis had been very clearly upon stage with very little upon process.
In an influential paper on the dynamic basis of geomorphology A.N.
Strahler (1952, p. 924) of Columbia University characterized the situation:
The weakness in understanding of geomorphic processes (and hence also a weakness in the understanding of the origin of landforms) has not been confined to the American continent.
The geomorphologists of France and England, closely attached to the schools and departments of Geography, have also tended to give much attention to descriptive, deductive studies of landform development and to regional geomorphological treatments…
If geomorphology is to achieve full stature as a branch of geology operating upon the frontier of research into fundamental principles and laws of earth science, it must turn to the  physical and engineering sciences and mathematics for the vitality it now lacks.
Strahler continued (1952, p. 937) to suggest a programme for further research in geomorphology and this required five steps which were (1) a study of geomorphic processes and landforms as various kinds of responses to gravitational and molecular stresses acting on materials;(2) quantitative determination of landform characteristics and causative factors;(3) formulation of empirical equations by mathematical statistics;(4) building concepts of open dynamic systems and steady states for all geomorphic processes; and (5) deduction of general mathematical models to serve as quantitative natural laws.
This programme was vast but necessary because Strahler suggested that geomorphology was already a half-century behind developments in chemistry, physics and the biological sciences.
This prescription for geomorphology was applicable to physical geography as a whole.
It is important to make the distinction between what Chorley (1978) identified as functional and realistic approaches, because both were integral parts of the movement towards a greater focus upon processes.
Functional studies were essentially positivist in nature and depended upon the notion that phenomena can be explained as instances of repeated and predictable regularities in which form and function can be assumed to be related, and indeed form and process figured in the titles of a number of books concerned with processes (e.g. Carson and Kirkby, 1972; Gregory and Walling, 1973).
The realist approach, although developed as an extension of the functional positivist approach, attempted to probe beyond the relationships derived from observed regularities and to seek the mechanisms and underlying structures which are responsible for the operation of environmental processes.
These functional and realist stages tended to develop in sequence and characterized each of the branches of physical geography albeit to varying degrees.
Processes were scrutinized to remedy deficiencies internal to physical geography.
Therefore it was first necessary to gain information on the rates at which processes operate but then subsequently to establish relationships between process and controls.
These could be utilized to estimate values for unmeasured situations or for unknown time periods despite the black box nature of this functional approach, and finally there were endeavours to proceed towards a more realist explanation.
Within geography the replacement of an idiographic by a nomothetic approach produced an atmosphere in which process measurement was very germane.
Furthermore, some branches of physical geography had proceeded as far as they could without an enhanced knowledge of processes.
Thus the understanding of glacial landforms such as cirques required further knowledge of the processes of ice movement and glacial erosion and the interpretation of planation surfaces as having been produced by marine erosion required knowledge of the nature and rate of processes of coastal erosion.
A further characteristic of earlier physical geography had been the tendency to ignore the Holocene  and to concentrate instead upon earlier phases of landscape development.
With attention turning to the Holocene it was desirable that more should be known, for example, about processes of ecological dynamics.
Thus the historical approach to the development and distribution of savanna vegetation which had been developed by M.M.
Cole had emphasized the relationships with landsurfaces of different age and character, but to demonstrate exactly how ecological processes were manifested it was necessary to focus upon the interrelationships of all factors in the savanna ecological system and therefore the dynamic ecology was a feature of the University of McGill Rupununi Savanna Research project (Hills, 1965, 1974) and of work by Eden (1964, 1974).
There were also indications that branches of physical geography were acknowledging the necessity for studies of processes in view of the way in which processes were featuring more prominently in related disciplines.
This is reflected in the intentions of journals and in 1947 in the Journal of Glaciology the content of a leaflet issued by the British Glaciological Society was recalled in which
Snow and ice from their mutuations and from the part they play in nature as precipitation, agents of erosion and modifiers of climate come within the range severally of physics, meteorology, geology, physical geography, oceanography and climatology.
The behaviour of ice crystals in glaciers has close connection with crystallography and metallurgy.
Similarly in hydrology the Journal of Hydrology (1963-) arose because:
The steadily rising interest in many countries in hydrology in all its branches makes this an opportune time in which to launch a new Journal concerned with the scientific aspects of the subject.
There is too a growing appreciation of the need for an international approach to hydrological problems…
In soil science emphasis had naturally proceeded towards soil processes including soil biology and microbiology (e.g. Russell, 1957) as described in the New Naturalist Series of books and interest in soil processes and soil dynamics also led to the inception of new ideas.
Thus the factors of soil formation as propounded by Jenny (1941) was superseded by a more process-based vision of the soil profile as based upon additions, subtractions, translocations and transformation of constituents (Simonson, 1959).
A further development was that the soil series adopted in the 1950s as soils with similar profiles, derived from similar materials under similar conditions of development as the basic unit for field mapping acquired a third dimension with the definition of the three-dimensional soil body or pedon (Johnson, 1963).
The smallest volumes, usually between 1 and 10 m 2 on the surface, were the basis for mapping units, or polypedon , which contain more than one pedon.
A further aspect of the climate external to physical geography was provided by the beginning of greater public awareness of the environment and the realization of the implication of the possibility of finite resources and that spaceship earth required concern for the wise use  of its resources and reserves.
Although this intellectual atmosphere, or aspect of social concern (Stoddart, 1981) was particularly germane to the study of the effects of human activity (chapter 6, p. 116) and to the application of environmental investigations (chapter 9, p. 186), it also created a situation in which acquisition of information on environmental processes and environmental change was certainly favoured and sometimes positively encouraged.
Thus in the UK the Natural Environment Research Council had initiated a series of working groups to advise on the needs for future research.
These included a working group in Climatology which suggested (NERC, 1976):
The study and understanding of past climatic changes poses many problems of considerable scientific interest, but of great intrinsic difficulty.
The need to assess the likelihood of possible future changes in the climates of the world provides a strong reason for encouraging research on these problems, and is reinforced by the recognition that human activities are developing towards a scale from which significant effects on world climate might arise within the next century…
No purely theoretical studies of world climate can properly achieve their objectives without an adequate base in observational data.
It is important that there should be not only a record of the climates of the past on all time scales, but also a continuing record of short-term fluctuations of climate (variations over a few years) coordinated on a global scale.
More data were required but the availability of quantitative data in atmospheric, hydrological and coastal processes, for example, together with the collection of information associated with national mapping programmes such as those for soil survey, produced a situation in which the need for further process studies was highly desirable.
The pages of many of the new journals initiated after 1960 (Table 1.1. p. 6) were commonly occupied by results of investigations of environmental processes and existing journals also reflected an influx of process-based papers.
In addition international collaboration was encouraged by the International Geographical Union by establishing commissions that included one on present day processes, and a later one on field experiments in geomorphology (Slaymaker, Dunne and Rapp, 1980).
Process in the branches of physical geography
In attempting to summarize the developments in studies of environmental processes pertinent to, and made by, physical geographers it is evident that it is extremely artificial to distinguish the contributions made by physical geographers per se from those contributed by practitioners of other disciplines.
The distinction has to be considered at least to some extent because only by identifying what has been done in the past can one see how deficiencies remain to be corrected in the future research agenda.
Thus in a review of Models in Geography Slaymaker (1968, p.407) concluded that:
With the publication of this book, British geographers can no longer be content to quote the aphorism about geography being what geographers do, and then gracefully retire from the discussion as though there were nothing to add.
This volume demonstrates beyond any further doubt that the traditional classificatory geographical paradigm is inadequate and that, in the context of the ‘new geography’, an irreversible step has been taken to push us back into the mainstream of scientific activity by way of the uncomfortable and highly specialized process of model-building.
Also throughout the branches of physical geography it was necessary to convince members of other disciplines that physical geographers had a contribution to make and this had to be done by showing what could be done rather than by simply stating in advance that a physical geographer had much to contribute.
In Britain, with the foundation of the Natural Environment Research Council in 1966, it was notable that physical geography was not mentioned in the charter of NERC (Hare, 1966) as one of the environmental sciences that the Council would support.
Hare wondered whether geographers could get away with posing as being simultaneously earth scientists and social scientists and this is what did happen in the ensuing decade.
Also in 1965 the Environmental Science Services Administration (ESSA) was instituted in the United States and its concern with the interactions among air, sea and earth and between the upper and lower atmosphere embraces the scope of physical geography, although a physical geographer was not significantly involved in the early stages (Hare, 1966).
Contrary to(uninformed?) views sometimes expressed it is acknowledged that physical geographers are respected for the contribution that they can make — when they do make a specific contribution.
The contributions that were to be offered with the study of process may be surveyed from the viewpoint of soil science and the biogeographer, from that of the climatologist and the geomorphologist and then from the field of hydrology which to some extent provided a new focus of interest for physical geographers and one that proffered a link between at least the geomorphic and climatic aspects of physical environment.
In each case it is evident that physical geographers had to become conversant with progress in related disciplines and a number of excellent papers in Progress in Physical Geography (1977-) provide reports reflecting progress in other disciplines.
In the study of soils it has been argued (Bridges, 1981) that soil geography aims to ‘record and explain the development and distribution of soils on the surface of the earth’.
As such it is located between geography and soil science, which Bridges visualizes as concerned more with the biology, chemistry and physics of soil all of which converge on the study of soil fertility and crop production.
However this definition firmly identifies the contribution of physical geographers to the investigation of soils as primarily a historical or global one and that is not necessarily unanimously accepted in all the books produced by physical geographers in the 1970s (Table 5.1).
Date
Authority
Objective
Source
1981
E.M.
BRIDGES
‘The aim of soil geography is to record and explain the development and distribution of soils on the surface of the earth.’
Table 5.1: Stated purposes for the physical geographer contributing to the study of soils
Progress in Physical Geography 1981
1981
E.M.
BRIDGES and D.A.
DAVIDSON
‘The aim of soil geography is to record and explain the development and distribution of soils on the earth's surface It is a branch of learning which lies between soil science and geography and is of particular importance to both subjects…soil studies are one means of integrating large parts of physical geography in a way which is of immediate relevance to mankind and in this way gives coherence to geography as a whole.’
Principles and Applications of Soil Geography London: Longman
1981
A.J. GERRARD
‘Modern research is increasingly demonstrating the close dependence of soils and landforms, and a new discipline ‘soil geomorphology’ or pedogeomorphology as proposed by Conacher and Dalrymple (1977) seems to be emerging, incorporating traditional approaches to soils as well as modern soil engineering.’
Soils and Landforms London: George Allen & unwin 
1972
J.G. CRUICKSHANK
‘…soil geography is largely the study of the spatial variation of the interaction of environmental elements; and this is how soil is made.’
Soil Geography Newton Abbot; David & charles 
Increased attention devoted to processes was first exemplified by measurements of the variables involved in the soil system including soil moisture, soil organic matter content, soil pH, and this then necessitated knowledge of the measurement techniques themselves.
Once process variables had been isolated and quantified then the interaction of dynamic process variables with spatially distributed variability of soil properties could be investigated (Trudgill, 1983).
Although attention to processes at this level could be proceeding to what some geographers would clearly categorize as soil science, the movement did catalyse the development of a more three-dimensional view of the soil.
Thus Runge (1973) interpreted soil properties (s) as functions of organic matter production (o), water for leaching (w) and time (t) in a form s = f (o, w, t) where all parameters are fairly easily measured.
To achieve a more three-dimensional model of soil it was necessary to proceed beyond the catena concept that had been introduced into soil studies based on work in East Africa, and development depended upon close relation between soils and the landsurface.
One of the most striking developments was a nine-unit landsurface model proposed (Conacher and Dalrymple, 1977) as an appropriate framework for pedogeomorphic research.
This model developed from one that was earlier suggested in relation to slope processes (Dalrymple, Conacher and Blong, 1969) and was important because it introduced the term landsurface catena to refer to a three-dimensional slope extending from interfluve to valley bottom and from the soil/air interface to the base of the soil, with arbitrary lateral dimensions.
Each landsurface catena is composed of landsurface units which are identified and defined according to responses to single or groups of contemporary geomorphic (in 1968) and also to pedologic (in 1977) processes.
The processes include interactions amongst soil materials, water and gravity or the mobilization, translocation and redeposition of materials by water flow and mass movements, whilst the responses are identifiable physical and morphological properties of the soil and also of surface morphology.
Recognition of aperiodic soil/water/gravity events in a landsurface catenary concept makes this approach appropriate for studying the dynamic interaction between soil properties and landforms.
Although Ruellan (1971) distinguished between those researchers who attach great importance to the geomorphological processes of erosion and deposition (allochthonists) and those who attribute the major characteristics of soils to pedological processes (autochthonists), Gerrard (1981) in his treatment of soils and geomorphology argues that soils are the results of the interaction of both sets of processes.
One subject studied relatively little by physical geographers has been the occurrence of soil erosion.
Although there have been some investigations of a functional kind relating soil erosion amount to controlling variables in areas like Zimbabwe (Stocking, 1977), studies of soil loss are potentially very useful (Stocking, 1980) and may be undertaken by detailed process investigations which are usually concerned with parts of the erosion process or with laboratory measurements (e.g. De Ploey, 1983), by empirical investigations which monitor output in relation to input and use a relation similar to the Universal Soil Loss equation; and factorial survey methods which Stocking (1980) visualizes as analysis and collation of the spatial pattern of all factors which relate to soil loss erosion.
Although interest in soil erosion has developed in the late 1970s (e.g. Morgan, 1979) it is a paradox that earlier work, for example developing from the Universal Soil Loss Equation (Wischmeier, 1976), did not materialize.
In biogeography it is not easy to separate natural from cultural biogeography or to disentangle the contributions which have originated in ecology from the work undertaken by physical geographers.
Clues to the foci of several biogeographers may be gleaned from definitions in the number of texts on biogeography that have emerged to fill a gap that was acute until 1970 (Table 5.2).
Very significant was the movement by ecologists towards trophic-dynamic ecology which was developed by Lindeman in a classic paper published in 1942 which built upon earlier conceptual frameworks and treated natural ecosystems on the basis of the capacity of their primary producers (photosynthetic plants) to capture part of the incident solar and atmospheric energy, and to incorporate it into the dry organic matter that would subsequently yield it to the grazing and  decay food webs.
Focus upon ecosystems in this way also required emphasis upon biogeochemical cycles which are the pathways whereby mineral nutrients are cycled through the world system and this was important as a major thrust in the systems approach (chapter 7, p. 156).
In an ecosystem, identification of the trophic levels within the feeding hierarchy could be necessary in studies of specific areas which could then proceed to establish ‘what eats what’ and therefore how the trophic structure is built up.
An extremely detailed investigation was based upon the Hubbard Brook forest of New Hampshire, USA where the pathways of chemical elements were studied under natural conditions and then after deforestation the biogeochemical cycles were investigated again and during subsequent recovery (Likens et al .,
1977).
Date
Authority
Objective
Source
1977
N. PEARS
‘…the biogeographer may study the same phenomena as the ecologist, but he usually places as much emphasis on the distributional aspects as on the environmental relationships in this study.
Further he will tend to stress the role of man in these patterns and processes.’
Table 5.2: Attitudes of biogeographers in recent texts
Basic Biogeography London: Longman
1971
B. SEDDON
‘…forces that shape the territories of living things and the problems that are posed by their geographical distribution.’
Introduction to Biogeography London: Duckworth
1971
J. TIVY
‘…the geographical focus in biogeography is two-fold: first, a study of the intimate relationships between the organic and inorganic elements of the earth's environment, and secondly the reciprocal relationship between man and the biosphere.’
Biogeography.
A Study of Plants In the Ecosphere Edinburgh: Oliver & boyd 
1971
D.A.
WATTS
‘…to interpret the differential patterns of distribution among organisms and their changing relationships with each other and their environment both in time and space.’
Principles of Biogeography Maidenhead: McGraw Hill
1979
I.G. SIMMONS
‘Biogeography…to describe our study of the biosphere and of man's effects on its plants and animals and the ecological systems of which they are a part.’
Biogeography: Natural and Cultural London: Arnold
1983
P. FURLEY and W. NEWEY
‘Biogeography is a field of study which has come to assume a slightly different meaning for different disciplines.
Literally it may be defined as ‘the geography of living organisms’ or since geography is traditionally the study of living things and particularly man in relation to the environment, the most accurate job description of the subject may be the ‘geography of the biosphere’.’
Geography of the Biosphere London: Butterworths
Studies of climatology embraced process investigations in at least three ways, each corresponding to a particular scale.
At the global scale  numerical modelling has developed and was applied to the planetary boundary layer, facilitated by the development of powerful computers used in short-range forecasting research, and then in the construction of general circulation models and thence models of global climate.
At the meso scale models of synoptic and planetary scale motions are constructed for both research and forecasting purposes (Atkinson, 1983) and involve general models of meso-scale flows involving the planetary boundary layer (PBL) and models of particular kinds of meso scale circulation such as sea/land breeze models, urban circulation models, and slope, mountain and valley wind models.
Also at this scale has been research on precipitation areas which has shown that the vertical air motion responsible and the areas themselves are organized into a hierarchy according to the horizontal size.
Atkinson (1978) has reviewed the small meso-scale precipitation areas (SMPA) and large meso-scale precipitation areas (LMPA) and the way in which these areas are associated with frontal systems.
Although the SMPAs last for 3–4 hours and move parallel to and ahead of the front, a theoretical explanation for the size of SMPAs is still required.
At the most detailed scale, research developments have embraced microclimatology and also applied developments such as agricultural meteorology.
Microclimatology was stimulated by Geiger's The Climate near the Ground (Geiger, 1965).
It has been suggested that, because physical geographers have traditionally been involved in atmospheric processes, hydrology and the soil, it is logical that contributions could be made in the characterization of the plant environment both spatially and temporally (Hanna, 1983).
In this field as in others physical geographers are only one group of contributors to research but recent endeavours have included field measurement of soil water and relationship between condition of the environment including soil water status and plant growth, and it is suggested that the impact of atmospheric pollution on crop growth and yields in advanced industrial countries is an area of research where physical geographers could make a significant contribution.
In geomorphology the impact of studies of process was perhaps most substantial and also the most dramatic in physical geography.
At least six significant antecedents may be discerned for the study of geomorphological processes and the first was undoubtedly the work of Grove Karl Gilbert.
In his work in the western part of the United States not only did he describe physical erosive processes but was also able to derive a system of laws governing progress from initial to adjusted forms (Chorley, Dunn and Beckinsale, 1964) and in his Report on the Geology of the Henry Mountains (1877) he provided the first major treatment by a geologist of the mechanics of fluvial processes.
In 1914 he published a remarkable investigation into The Transportation of Debris by Running Water and this included the results  of laboratory experiments.
Gilbert is now acknowledged to have been a brilliant geomorphologist who made a contribution which anticipated many of the developments half a century later and whose deductions regarding stream and landscape mechanics ‘have given new life to quantitative geomorphology in the twentieth century’(Chorley, Dunn and Beckinsale, 1964, p. 572).
A second antecedent could be found in work by engineers, and R.A. Bagnold published his monumental Physics of Blown Sand and Desert Dunes in 1941, in which he stipulated the bases for the underlying processes in desert areas.
Bagnold subsequently worked on processes involving fluids other than air and contributed to understanding of beach formation by waves based upon wave tank experiments (Bagnold, 1940) and also to the analysis of fluvial processes (Bagnold, 1960) and in one of his last papers (Bagnold, 1979) he reviewed fluid flow in general.
Work by other engineers was obviously germane to the investigation of geomorphological processes but was not fully appreciated until the 1960s.
A third source derived from Scandinavia where in 1935 F. Hjulstrøm published the results of field and laboratory investigations related to the River Fyris and identified relationships between stream velocity, particle size and the processes of erosion, transport and deposition that became of fundamental significance in sedimentology as well as in studies of geomorphologic processes.
Later research by Sundborg (1956) on the river Klarälven, also in Sweden, led to some modification of the relationships produced by Hjulstrøm.
Also in Scandinavia was an important study of the mass movement processes on the slopes of Kärkevagge (Rapp, 1960) and this was important not only because it endeavoured to quantify all of the processes that affect a slope in a subarctic environment, but also because it established the relative significance of the different processes and concluded that the most effective agent of removal was running water removing material in solution.
The remaining antecedents all emerged in North America but for slightly different reasons.
Fourthly there was research directed by A.N.
Strahler at Columbia University, already referred to in relation to quantitative advances (p. 56).
In the Columbia school of geomorphology measurements were made of processes operating on stream channels and slopes of a number of areas (e.g. Schumm, 1956), later the focus turned to coastal processes as exemplified by changes in an equilibrium beach related to the tidal cycle (Strahler, 1966) and perhaps most significant was Strahler's advocacy of the need for a dynamic basis for geomorphology (Strahler, 1952).
This significant paper endeavoured to extend geomorphology from what is now appreciated to be a functional viewpoint towards a more realist view, as indicated by the aim (Strahler, 1952, p. 923):
…to outline a system of geomorphology grounded in basic principles of mechanics and fluid dynamics, that will enable geomorphic processes to be treated as manifestations of various types of shear stresses, both gravitational and molecular, acting upon any type of earth material to produce the varieties of  strain, or failure, which we recognize as the manifold processes of weathering, erosion, transportation and deposition.
This fundamental approach was later to be followed by other realist approaches to geomorphology including Carson (1971).
A fifth contribution came from the ideas of dynamic equilibrium advanced by J.T. Hack (1960).
Influenced by the work of G.K. Gilbert, Hack argued that the concept of dynamic equilibrium provides a more reasonable basis for the interpretation of topographic forms in an erosionally graded landscape, that every slope and stream channel in an erosional system is adjusted to every other, and when the topography is in equilibrium and erosional energy remains the same, all elements of the topography are downwasting at the same rate.
In this view the accordant summits in areas like the ridge and valley province of the USA were interpreted as the inevitable result of dynamic equilibrium rather than as remnants of earlier erosion cycles, and this followed from the assumption (Hack, 1960, p. 81) that:
It is assumed that within a single erosional system all elements of the topography are mutually adjusted so that they are downwasting at the same rate.
The forms and processes are in a steady state of balance and may be considered as time-independent.
To some extent the attitudes of dynamic equilibrium and of longer-term perspectives were reconciled by the extremely significant paper (p. 161) on Time Space and Causality in Geomorphology (Schumm and Lichty, 1965).
A final and sixth antecedent may be found in the investigation of magnitude and frequency of geomorphic processes (Wolman and Miller, 1960) and subsequently of fluvial processes in general(Leopold, Wolman and Miller, 1964).
This influential paper proceeded from an explanation that for many processes above the level of competence, the rate of movement of material can be expressed as a power function of some stress, to demonstrate that the largest portion of sediment transported by rivers is carried by flows which occur on average once or twice each year, and that transport of sand and dust by wind follows the same laws.
The analogy was drawn between the efficacy of geomorphic processes and that of a giant, a man and a dwarf attempting to cut down a forest.
The dwarf maintains an assault on the trees for long periods and achieves little (the equivalent of frequent, low-magnitude events); the giant sleeps most of the time but occasionally wakes and causes great destruction (a catastrophic event) whereas the man works regular hours and systematically achieves the greatest effects (events that occur once or twice each year).
It was concluded that (Wolman and Miller, 1960, p. 54):
Closer observation of many geomorphic processes is required before the relative importance of different processes and of events of differing magnitude and  frequency in the formation of given features of the landscape can be adequately evaluated.
In 1964 publication of Fluvial Processes in Geomorphology (Leopold, Wolman and Miller, 1964) ushered in a new era of process investigations.
This book was in effect the first which emphasized contemporary processes and underlying physical principles and it focused upon river channels, drainage systems, slopes and had some reference to climatic-inspired systems.
In their introduction the authors explained that (Leopold, Wolman and Miller, p. 7):
At the present deductions are subject to considerable doubt, for the detailed properties of landform have not been studied carefully enough and the fundamental aspects of most geomorphic processes are still poorly understood.
So long as this is true, the interpretation of geomorphic history rests on an exceedingly unstable base.
Accordingly, we plan to concentrate on geomorphic processes.
The emphasis is primarily upon river and slope processes…
Process implies mechanics, that is, the explanation of the inner workings of a process through the application of physical and chemical principles;
and the import of this publication was reflected in the citations that have subsequently been made to it and in the reviews which appeared including: Glenn W. Frank writing in Professional Geographer (1965, 17, p. 46):
‘This book is the most penetrating and comprehensive book dealing with geomorphological processes available today.’
B.W. Sparks in Geographical Journal (1965, 131, p. 133):
‘If students are to be well grounded in a healthy and promising attitude to fluvial geomorphology, they will have to grasp the ideas contained in this book.’
E.H.
Brown in Geography (1965, 50 p. 193):
‘Geomorphology is changing rapidly; this book signposts one of the ways in which it will surely develop.’
In the 1960s and subsequently the discovery of the need to study processes led to appreciation of the need for familiarity with subject matter from interdisciplinary origins and to acquire and develop techniques that could be employed for process investigations and particularly for empirical measurements.
Thus research papers were sometimes apparently preoccupied with technique simply because techniques had to be defined and refined for the purpose of the physical geographer.
Just as the scope of physical geography had become unbalanced (Brown, 1975), so the content of geomorphology now began to show signs of imbalance as the emphasis moved towards fluvial geomorphology and hydrology.
One area where the importance of process measurements had always been appreciated was in limestone areas and these were the focus of many of  the earliest, and simplest process techniques developments.
Initial progress was made in tracing water discharged at resurgences but this was succeeded by deductions of limestone erosion rates, by determination of drainage areas, by distinction of the significance of percolation water and of conduit flow and thence of application of the results of process investigations to the derivation of modified models of landscape development as proposed by Smith and Newson (1974) for the Mendips.
In coastal geomorphology the process foundation was also well established by the achievements of engineers and of research institutes and incorporated theoretical and laboratory investigations as well as empirical ones.
The coastal geomorphologist therefore focused upon the processes that control shoreline equilibrium and the significance of long-shore currents and sediment transport, of wave activity in relation to the swash, nearshore and offshore zones, and to the less-studied influence of tides and of impulsive events such as tsunamis.
Research investigations were exemplified by work by C.A.M.
King and other staff from the University of Nottingham who investigated changes in the coast of south Lincolnshire at Gibraltar Point from 1951 to 1979.
The impact of processes in the study of coastal geomorphology was reflected in the content of a major text (King, 1972) and a further text (Davies, 1973) included a map of wave environments of the world, which is one way in which geographers endeavoured to establish spatial variations.
It seems as if each major branch of geomorphology had at least one new textbook which served to disseminate techniques and ideas and to serve as a baseline from which new research and teaching could develop.
In relation to deserts Cooke and Warren (1973) provided a standard Geomorphology in Deserts in which they were primarily concerned with desert landforms, the materials that compose them, the processes of debris preparation, erosion and transport that modify them, and the environmental factors influencing all these phenomena.
In the fields of glacial and periglacial geomorphology the first modern textbook (Embleton and King, 1968) was soon followed by others (Price, 1973); and later work utilized a systems framework (Andrews, 1975; Sugden and John, 1976) as indicated later (p. 159).
In their introduction Sugden and John indicated in 1976 (p. 1) that the study of glacial processes and forms had been left out in the cold and poorly understood because a gulf had arisen between those who study glaciology and those who study glacial landscape and deposits, and further that:
Perhaps there is a need for a more glaciological type of geomorphology and a more geomorphological type of glaciology.
There is now a strong case for a realistic dialogue between those studying glacier dynamics and those studying forms.
Until this occurs, there can be few spectacular advances such as those achieved recently in fluvial and slope geomorphology.
The way in which glacial processes were studied was by investigations in areas including Iceland, Baffin Island, Antarctica, Alaska, Scandinavia, and the European Alps and it was from such research that the understanding  and interpretation of past glacial systems was enhanced, as in Scotland by Sissons (1967).
Thus glacial geomorphology was defined (Gjessing, 1978) as concerned with bedrock forms and superficial deposits produced by glacial and fluvioglacial processes in areas of present glaciers as well as in areas covered by glaciers during the Quaternary.
In periglacial geomorphology, knowledge of contemporary processes was achieved by investigations of permafrost in Siberia and in Alaska and Canada and of cryonival processes in areas such as Spitsbergen.
Thus work, such as that on thermokarst in Siberia in relation to the development of lowland relief (Czudek and Demek, 1970), had a significant influence on research in areas of Quaternary periglacial morphogenesis.
The influence of theoretical research in glaciology such as that by the physicist J.F. Nye (1952) was substantial.
Nye derived equations for glacier flow assuming that ice is a perfectly plastic substance, that it flows down a valley of constant slope, and that the conditions of temperature, accumulation and ablation are simple and uniform, and his model could be compared with field observations.
Textbooks in periglacial (e.g. Davies, 1969; Pewé, 1969; Washburn, 1973), as well as textbooks in glacial geomorphology acknowledged the contributions made from other disciplines, from research institutes and from international conferences.
Thus the Institute of Arctic and Alpine Research (INSTAR) at Colorado founded in 1951 in the United States, the Scott Polar Research Institute in Cambridge, UK (1920-) and the V.A.
Obruchev Institute for Permafrost Science in the USSR (1930-) are examples of research institutes that contributed significantly to developments in the science of cold regions.
Slopes had become the focus for revived interest since 1950 (Strahler, 1950b) and had been the subject for quantitative description and analysis (Bakker and Le Heux, 1952) and then for measurements which could lead to measurements in specific areas using for example the Young Pit (Young, 1960) and providing many indications of rates of erosion (A. Young, 1974).
Slope process investigations were influenced by empirical measurements first using single, and later continuous, recording; by theoretical approaches which were admirably exemplified in the book Hillslope Form and Process (Carson and Kirkby, 1972); and by stability analysis which utilized the factor of safety approach and related approaches used by the civil engineer.
These three strands tended to complement the well established qualitative models of Davis and Penck and the blend of the four approaches adopted in textbooks tended to vary according to author and date of writing, with an emphasis on factors and measurement in the earlier books (e.g. Young, 1972) and a more theoretical foundation stressed in others (Carson and Kirkby, 1972).
As noted above, Sugden and John (1976) implied that spectacular advances had occurred in slope and in fluvial geomorphology.
In the latter some 27.7 per cent of British research could be categorized as fluvial including both processes and landform development in 1975 (Gregory, 1978d) but the pattern was complicated because of interaction with hydrology.
From a geomorphological viewpoint the great increase in research investigations particularly since Horton's 1945 paper and the research of the Columbia school has been reviewed and ascribed (Gregory, 1976) to research associated with seven contributing themes, namely network morphometry, drainage basin characteristics, hydraulic geometry, river channel patterns, theoretical approaches, dynamic contributing areas, and the palaeohydrology-river metamorphosis approach.
The latter owed much to research by Schumm and his students and is reviewed further in chapter 8 (p. 172) whereas the other themes owed much to increasing knowledge of, and dependence upon, hydrology.
In addition to many research contributions in the field of fluvial morphology which are reflected in the books that succeeded Leopold, Wolman and Miller (1964) and were devoted to streams (Morisawa, 1968), to drainage basin form and process (Gregory and Walling, 1973), to water and environmental planning (Dunne and Leopold, 1978), and to alluvial river channels (Richards, 1982), there were also books produced by geographers dealing with hydrology (Ward, 1967) and with aspects of hydrology such as floods (Ward, 1978).
Indeed, although some physical geographers perceive hydrology to be a separate field of scientific enquiry and, for example,Progress in Physical Geography maintains progress reports on fluvial geomorphology as well as on hydrology, other physical geographers have advocated the notion of geographical hydrology.
Thus Ward (1979) uses the term geographical hydrology to connote the hydrology worked on by geographers and noted that:
the engineer resorts to empiricism and coefficients, to simplification and generalization of systems and processes.
The geographer on the other hand, is primarily interested in how the landscape works, and in man's interactions with it, and thus recognizes that water is but one of the terrestrial phenomena in the total complex interacting ecosystem in which he is really interested.
This implies that much of the geographer's hydrological endeavour is directed not towards the solution of a specific hydrological problem but towards a more complete understanding of the landscape…
Recent trends in both disciplines have begun to blur such distinction.
Ward (1979) noted with alarm the signs of what he called ‘Frontier man's fright’ whereby after working in an area for some time without apparent response from professional colleagues in related disciplines there is a tendency to desert it just as its true worth is to be recognized by others:
…within hydrology at the moment we can see a growing interest among civil engineering hydrologists in ‘process’ studies at a time when some geographers are beginning to show signs of impatience with these (Ward, 1979, p. 393).
It is debatable whether the idea of prefixing other disciplines with the word geographical is indeed a sound one because it may tend to suggest a greater separation of physical geography endeavour from that of other  researchers when in fact there is no clear distinction in methods or objectives.
In addition to the seven types of investigations specified above as referring to fluvial geomorphology, the main focus of research by physical geographers was on small instrumented areas as indicated below (p. 107) and this developed towards the assessment of sediment and solute yields, as exemplified by Walling (1983) and to the assessment of human impact including that on urban areas (e.g. Hollis, 1979).
The contribution now made by physical geographers to international cooperation and research is exemplified in the work of D.E.
Walling, first as Secretary and then as President, of the Commission on Continental Erosion of the International Association of Hydrological Sciences.
Physical geographers have made substantial contributions to hydrology and this has arisen not only from contributions concerned with the drainage basin and with run off generation but also from hydrometeorology.
The above review of the branches of geomorphology would perhaps indicate that the increasing emphasis upon process was accompanied by increasing fragmentation of geomorphology as the branches each became more closely associated with other disciplines.
In a review of physical geography Marcus (1979) has noted that in addition to maintaining some contact with human geography, ‘most physical geographers today keep one foot in the AAG and the other in a cognate scientific society.
It is a reality of our professional lives.’
However although fragmentation was a feature evident in the 1960s, in the 1970s there were at least two trends that tended to foster integration: namely the use of common techniques and a more realist approach.
Techniques were initially to some extent specific to particular branches of geomorphology but increasingly were found to have much in common and this trend should be further intensified as the potential of environmental monitoring by remote sensing becomes even more widely available and fully utilizes the opportunities offered by developments in microelectronics.
An early book on techniques in geomorphology (King, 1966) covered the range then available, specific manuals have been produced such as the US Geological Survey Techniques of Water Resources Investigations and the Technical Bulletins of the British Geomorphological Research Group, and an edited manual of geomorphological techniques (Goudie, 1981a) embraces the earlier developments.
Although techniques assumed a more significant role, as indicated by these publications and by major sections in textbooks (e.g. Gregory and Walling, 1973), specific laboratory and field techniques courses were not quickly adopted in teaching physical geography in all departments although a self-paced course was one that had been developed (Clark and Gregory, 1982).
A more realist approach had been advocated by Strahler (1952) and had the implication that not only would there be an approach to processes in terms of physical principles, but that this should also involve a similar approach to materials.
After Strahler one of the earliest movements in this direction was by E. Yatsu in Rock Control in Geomorphology , which  proposed a quantitative approach to the underlying mechanics of processes, and as Yatsu (1966) remarked:
Geomorphologists have been trying to answer the what, where and when of things, but they have seldom tried to ask how.
And they have never asked why.
It is a great mystery why they have never asked why.
Subsequently, in the 1970s this approach was also addressed by M.A. Carson in The Mechanics of Erosion (Carson, 1971) in a book which provided a unified introduction to the mechanics of erosional processes and which was aimed at undergraduates in earth science.
In this important book Carson considered the concept of stress, the mechanics of fluid erosion, stress-strain-strength interrelationships, mass movements in rock and soil masses, and mechanics of glacial erosion and concluded that (Carson, 1971, p. 166):
The neglect of the study of geomorphic processes by workers in geomorphology must rank as one of the most puzzling features in the development of this discipline.
There are those who put the blame for this on the writings of W.M. Davis, arguing that his all-embracing model of landscape evolution left little for geomorphologists to do besides applying the model successively to new areas.
And yet this is hardly fair.
Two decades ago, Strahler tried valiantly to infuse a genetic approach into the subject but was greeted with meagre response…
There is something strange about a subject in which its research workers are willing to dabble at the application of the jargon of thermodynamics but unwilling to apply even the most rudimentary aspects of mechanics to these problems.
One suspects that geomorphology will emerge as a reputable discipline only when its students have become well versed in the established principles of natural science.
Carson (1971) identified the achievement that had already been made by the mechanics approach and predicted that more would follow, but that because most erosional processes are weathering-limited to varying degrees, therefore on a geological time-scale erosion mechanics must be closely linked with the mechanics and chemistry of rock breakdown.
However, progress in a similar way towards an understanding of the mechanics of weathering processes (e.g. Curtis, 1976) requires not only an adequate knowledge of chemistry and of exchange reactions, but also of processes at a different scale.
Geomorphology has been categorized (Chorley, 1978) as a meso-scale science and as in the case of the other earth sciences the extent to which it is realistic to extend geomorphological processes to the micro-scale is arguable, especially as the positivist view is no longer sustained in physics and other natural sciences.
There can be little doubt, however, that geomorphology within physical geography needs to overcome its unnatural reluctance to become familiar with the principles underlying landscape processes because this will not necessarily prejudice the retention of a meso-scale approach and it has been achieved by sedimentology (e.g. Allen, 1970) and by soil science.
For example, Carson (1971, p. 167) argued that an approach more firmly based in mechanics would lead to a more integrated understanding of geomorphological processes so that the student would be more impressed by unity rather than alarmed by superficial diversity.
We have yet to reach the position where sufficient students appreciate the import of underlying theory and this is why the geomorphologist reaches for his soil augur once theory is mentioned (Chorley, 1978) and perhaps the situation will be resolved only when training in physical geography demands greater familiarity with scientific and mathematical methods and notation.
S. Gregory (1978) underlined the need for a more secure mathematical and scientific foundation for physical geographers.
One way in which this has been achieved is by devising larger units for education in which physical geography is more closely allied with other earth and environmental sciences as noted by Clayton (1980a).
At pre-university level the originally dominant historically-based approach has been replaced by teaching which often focuses upon the impact of human activity and upon management considerations but gives much less emphasis to the mechanics and principles of landscape function.
This is rather like putting the cart before the horse and it is very difficult later to take up the study of the horse when all previous emphasis has been placed upon the cart!
Physical geography in general, and geomorphology in particular , could be in danger of developing into a science which does not even attempt understanding of such basic mechanics and principles, partly by analogy with the decline of positivism in human geography.
This has continued to be the fault of the superficial application of the effects of human activity and of the systems approach (see p. 116, and 140).
Despite the appearance of other books (e.g. Statham, 1977) that follow the approach used by Carson and also of excellent illustrations of research benefits to be realized by this method (e.g. Prior, 1977) there is still considerable potential for development in this direction.
Although some physical geographers such as Thomas (1980 p. v) have argued that study of the energetics of the land surface ‘has perhaps robbed the subject of some of its scope and depth’ it can be argued that investigations of process energetics have provided some depth of understanding and have extended the scope towards recent temporal change (p. 153).
Methods of process investigations
When process investigations began to increase in the 1960s it was not realized exactly how difficult they would prove to be.
The primary objective is to measure energy transfer in physical geography and the closer one gets to the transfer the more realist is the approach, in contrast to the functional which tends to employ surrogates for process work functions.
The fundamental problem confronting process measurement is that there is energy transfer taking place at what is effectively an infinite number of  points in space and in time.
To measure or assess processes there has to be a strategy adopted for sampling from what is an infinite population.
In geomorphological terms Church (1980) has expressed this situation in terms of mass or energy fluxes or changes in content of a storage or control volume.
Thus a sequence of observations will specify magnitudes of fluxes (q t ) or successive states of a system parameter (x t ).
The net amount of work which occurs is often estimated by observing the frequency of an externally applied effective stress (such as a weather- or hydrologically-related stress) which is more easily measured or is accessible from records.
Such a stress is converted into the sequence of interest via a rating calibration or transfer function which links the applied stress and material flux or strain.
Change in landscape over a period T = t 2 -t 1 can be measured either by integration of fluxes  or by net displacement of a system parameter ().
Church (1980) clearly identifies the fact that the character of geophysical event sequences complicates simple analysis.
Three features which are significant are trend, which includes well defined cyclic behaviour; persistence, when a particular value in a sequence is constrained by adjacent values; and intermittency, whereby there is a tendency for non-periodic grouping of like values over long periods of time, which effect is called the ‘Hurst phenomenon’.
These complications are illustrated in Figure 5.1 and an example of variance spectra also conjectured by Church (1980) is also illustrated in Figure 5.1 and introduces a theme which will be resumed in chapter 8 (p.161).
Four main strategies have been utilized to provide the data for analysis via a sequence such as that indicated in Figure 3.1.
First are theoretical approaches which depend upon some empirical knowledge to apply theoretical concepts such as the continuity equation.
Secondly are direct empirical measurements, thirdly are experimental investigations; and fourthly there are historical techniques.
Direct empirical measurements are provided by national monitoring agencies including measurements of meteorological elements and of river discharge.
In many cases such measurements may not be available with spatial and temporal sampling frequencies that meet the demands of research programmes.
Hence additional measurements have often had to be made and not only should these be related to an a priori hypothesis but also they may be derived from small experimental areas.
Although measurements in small watersheds were undertaken in the late nineteenth century, it was after the mid twentieth century that the movement developed very rapidly and absorbed the attention of some physical geographers.
The Vigil Network scheme was initiated in the mid 1960s and involved the careful measurement of processes at individual sites and in selected study    basins.
Observations were intended to be made of stream channel changes, mass movement, vegetation changes, precipitation, reservoir sedimentation, and dendrochronology, and the intention to maintain measurements over a decade or more has been realized at some sites (e.g. Leopold and Emmett, 1965).
A range of objectives for watershed experiments was identified by Ward (1971) and these extend from specific black box approaches to comprehensive studies in which there is an attempt to monitor many of the processes operating within a small area.
The Hubbard Brook experimental basin (15.6 ha) in New Hampshire was monitored in great detail including the effects after complete clearing of the woody vegetation and treatment with herbicides for three years.
Some small instrumented areas have been selected as representative of particular conditions whereas others were experimental, in which change due to logging or other forms of land use change could be monitored either by change in one basin or by comparison of several areas in which changes were taking place to differing degrees.
A substantial number of small instrumented areas have been instituted in different parts of the world and physical geographers contributed to the initiation and running of a considerable number of these.
The aims and objectives of all experiments were not always formulated as clearly as possible and there was sometimes a tendency for instrumentation to be set up in the hope that a specific problem would arise once measurements were obtained.
In this and other cases a number of problems often arose reflecting lack of control and replicability of measurements, insufficient representativeness, unreliable accuracy of data, and problems of finding suitable methods of analysis of the data collected.
Thus Ackermann (1966) writing about the United States suggested that ‘small experimental watersheds have cost this country uncounted millions of dollars and unfortunately have yielded a small return on the investment of time and money.’
However a considerable number of advances were made in the framework of small instrumented areas and there is no immediately obvious alternative to the approach when large numbers of empirical values are required.
Newson (1979) has argued that process studies in geomorphology seek to quantify three systems; the mechanical sediment system, the chemical system, and the hydrological system, and it is notable that progress towards the quantification of these systems has been achieved by greater cooperation of physical geographers with scientists in other disciplines and in response to requirements of engineers and planners for resource information.
Figure 5.1:Event sequence (above) and conjectural variance spectrum (below) after Church (1980).
In the event sequence is shown the long-term mean, the linear trend, the well-defined cycle, and the intermittent signal so that a typical sample period as shown will produce statistics which are biased with respect to the whole sequence.
The conjectural variance spectra for glacial transport is standardized on the annual cycle.
Experimental investigations embrace a range of approaches which include field plot experiments, through laboratory hardware models which attempt to use scaled-down versions of the real world, to analogue models which employ a different medium for investigation.
A Kaolin glacier was an example of the last-named (Lewis and Miller, 1955) but much more extensively used have been measurements using rainfall simulators especially in relation to erosion experiments, flumes, wave tanks and wind  tunnels.
In all cases the potential available has probably not been fully explored in geomorphology (Mosley and Zimpfer, 1978) but of all the limitations the difficulty of overcoming the scale problem and of relating the observations to geophysical event sequences (e.g. Fig. 5.1) have been most evident.
Historical techniques in physical geography offer some of the most imaginative available and have been reviewed by the cooperation of a geomorphologist and a historical geographer (Hooke and Kain, 1982).
They contend that:
…evidence from the past has considerable potential for providing longer term perspectives for studies of current physical processes, for understanding the nature and causes of change and, above all, for understanding the magnitude of the impact of human activities on the physical environment.
They review graphical, written and oral sources, statistical sources and series, and non-documentary sources and clearly demonstrate the amount of scope which remains for the use of such sources.
The methods available are constantly increasing in number and their utility is greater as the complexity of contemporary processes is revealed.
One somewhat unconventional data source is the newspaper for reconstructing past event-frequency and character and a series of studies by M.G. Pearson (e.g. Pearson, 1978) analysed the incidence of eighteenth and nineteenth-century weather conditions in Scotland based upon reports in newspapers.
This source has been reviewed by Gregory and Williams (1981), who produced maps of hazard distribution in Derbyshire 1879–1978 based upon reports in the Derby Evening Telegraph .
Patterns of processes
A recurrent problem encountered in investigations of processes is that measurements and analysis are conducted for a detailed level near the climatological station, in the soil pit or on an erosion plot, whereas many potential applications of process studies depend upon knowledge at a much greater spatial scale and possibly that of the world level.
Study at such world levels can now be achieved first because enough process data have been collected to allow some degree of national and world pattern to be discerned; secondly because international cooperation has been initiated specifically to remedy the past deficiencies of data coverage; and thirdly because the opportunities of remote sensing are now beginning to provide further clues to the world picture.
World spatial systems afford an enormous scope for review but perhaps the dominant trend has been towards the differentiation of the earth's surface on a more realist dynamic basis to replace a more static arid functional treatment that had been current previously.
This trend is exemplified by all branches of physical geography.
Climatology is probably  the most data-rich branch, in which maps showing mean values of climatic elements such as precipitation or temperature had been long-established and numerous attempts had been made to classify climates upon a world basis.
Whereas many such attempts embodied a somewhat static view of the pressure distribution, this was succeeded by what Barry and Perry (1973) termed a kinematic view of the weather map in which the synoptic weather map is viewed in terms of airflow and the movement of pressure systems.
This included what Court (1957) described as pressure field climatology and led to a range of approaches which included weather patterns and air mass climatology, all of which provided a more effective reflection of processes.
A more dynamic approach of this kind was possible with the advent of computers which could analyse the necessary amounts of synoptic data.
Then with the utilization of satellites when satellite climatology ushered in a new era which Barrett (1974) has characterized as providing observing systems of the earth and atmosphere, as highly convenient data collection platforms, and as connection links between widely spaced ground stations between which large daily exchanges of weather data must take place.
Although much had been achieved by 1974 Barrett argued that ‘the best is yet to be’(see also chapter 10, p. 211).
Also in the field of biogeography world maps of plant formations had been utilized for many years and had indeed been adopted as the basis for some climatic classification by attempting to fit the classification to the plant distribution.
However, the static quality of such maps could be replaced when research on ecological energetics, or nutrient cycling and on population dynamics led towards greater use of net primary productivity (NPP), which is the material actually available for harvest by animals and for decomposition by the soil fauna and flora or their aquatic equivalents.
The rate of accumulation of biomass or NPP is expressed as weight of living matter/unit area/ unit time and recent work by the International Biological Programme (IBP) has provided more accurate estimates of NPP on a world scale for both continents and oceans, and this makes it possible to rank biome types according to NPP or present processes.
This offers an additional dimension to biogeography (Simmons, 1979a) and because it is infinitely renewable but subject to substantial modification by man, the NPP of an area can be viewed as what Eyre (1978) characterized as ‘the real wealth of nations’.
Soil geography has also had a well established legacy of soil maps which have attempted to relate the one extreme of detailed soil survey to the other of a world distribution.
Emphasis has been more towards the local scale because of the demand for soil maps in relation to agricultural and other land use purposes.
Perhaps emphasis at this level has been upon soil evolution rather than upon soil dynamics, which has been treated in relation to land capability.
However the increasingly similar basis underlying national soil maps allows correlation to take place more easily and a soil map of the world which is in an advanced state of preparation is envisaged (Bridges, 1978a) as the basis of soil geography in future years.
In geomorphology, as in soil geography, it has not been easy to achieve representations of global spatial patterns based upon processes to succeed the long-established static morphological or structured landform regions.
However, coastal environments have been classified according to wave energy by Davies (1973) and this can assist a more meaningful correlation between wave type and coastal morphology.
It is in regard to erosion rates that perhaps the most dramatic progress has been made and in addition to world patterns of discharge, Walling and Webb (1983) have now reviewed earlier attempts to portray world patterns of sediment yield, some of which conflicted quite significantly, and have provided a revised map of global sediment yields based upon data from nearly 1500 measuring stations and pertinent to sediment yields from basins of 1000 to 10,000 km 2 in area.
Such progress exemplifies the way in which a physical geographer can contribute by deriving a world pattern that depends upon the most recently reviewed methods for assessing sediment yield and presenting it in a form that is pertinent to applications in a wide range of disciplines.
Walling and Webb (1983, p. 95) point to the need for closer cooperation between limnologists and fluvial geomorphologists which could lead to greater understanding of sediment yield.
Whereas examples from each branch of physical geography indicate the way in which spatial patterns reflecting process and dynamics can be derived, there is also the possibility of a more integrated approach.
Climatic geomorphology was introduced earlier (p. 70) in relation to landscape chronology and one of the earliest approaches by Peltier (1950) endeavoured to relate climate to geomorphological process employing a semi-quantitative basis involving mean annual temperature and mean annual precipitation.
In a later paper Peltier (1975, p. 129) contended that
Climatic geomorphology is one part of a broader structure of regional geomorphology which includes both tectonic geomorphology and the stratigraphy of continental deposits.
He produced a general landform equation in which landform (LF) could be viewed as a function of geologic material (m); rate of change of geological material, structural factor (dm/at); rate of erosion (de/dt); the rate of uplift (du/dt); and the total time of duration of the process (t) in the form LF = , and he then proposed expressions for an erosion factor (de/dt).
It is certainly desirable that relationships between geomorphological processes and climatic parameters are established using the results of process studies and then extended towards the global scale, and such relationships could enhance the understanding involved in climatic geomorphology.
However it should also be possible to coordinate progress on soil and ecosystem patterns as well and a leading paper on this subject (Hare, 1973) begins with a quotation from Budyko and Gerasimov (1961):
…the heat and water balance of the earth's surface is, as a rule, the main mechanism that determines the intensity and character of all the other forms of exchange of energy and matter between…the climatic, hydrologic, self-forming, biologic and other phenomena occurring on the earth's surface…
Hare (1973, p. 171) wisely avows that ‘synthesis is easy to announce, but hard to pull off’ but in leading towards a focus upon energy (see p. 155) investigates the links between climate and soil, plant and animal life and concluded in 1973 that this was a more promising avenue of exploration than links with geomorphology.
A considerable amount of research on energy-based and energy-budget climatology had been undertaken since 1956 when Budyko (translated 1958) attempted a heat balance of the earth's surface and proceeded from equations of  where
H = convective heat (enthalpy) flux
E = evapotranspiration
N = runoff
P = precipitation
R = net radiation or radiation balance defined by  where
I = incident global solar radiation on a horizontal surface
a = albedo
R↓ and R are the downward and upward long-wave radiative fluxes at the surface.
Budyko then proceeded to attempt a physio-geographical zonation of the earth and his approach has subsequently been developed by systems in which energy and moisture regimes are related to vegetation types (e.g. Grigor'yev, 1961), to genetic soil types (e.g. Gerasimov, 1961) and later to geomorphic zonality (Ye Grishankov, 1973).
It is curious that geomorphologists have not generally explored the potentially fruitful links with energy-based climatology that are identified by Hare, who comments (1973, p. 188):
In spite of the spread of quantitative, physically inspired methods, and a growing preoccupation with process, geomorphologists have not put their discipline on an energy balance basis to nearly the same extent, and probably with good reason.
The reasons adduced by Hare include the facts that fluvial processes tend to be dominated by extreme events rather than balance relationships, so that stochastic methods and extreme-value theory are closer to the reality of geomorphic processes than is energy-balance climatology; and that the geomorphic time scale is longer than that utilized by the climatologist.
However, the climatic influence has been the subject of review on aspects of geomorphology (Derbyshire, 1976) and the map produced by Walling and  Webb (1983) is included in a volume on palaeohydrology which is one of the more recently developing temporal approaches (p. 172).
Hence the prospect of an energy related and integrated physical geography including geomorphological processes may not be too far beyond the horizon.
The direction
…of a common, quantitative, theoretically-based language…in my judgement, is what physical geography needs.
They lead us, also, in the direction that all science aims at, towards prediction.
(Hare, 1973, p.189).
Time and catastrophic punctuations
It is impossible to study processes in physical environment independently of time although timeless and timebound approaches have been distinguished (Chorley, 1966).
For purposes of description time can be considered under four headings (Thornes and Brunsden, 1977).
Continuous time means that observation is unceasing, such as a continuous record of river discharge;quantized time is when imaginary sections are used to subdivide time, as when precipitation amounts are measured daily or weekly;discrete time is when interest focuses upon time duration and frequency of events per unit of time; and sampled time is when observations can only be made at particular periods, such as weekly measurements of plant growth.
Whichever heading is appropriate it is necessary to appreciate the significance of events which may occur beyond the period of normal measurement during the duration of a research programme.
The significance of such events was highlighted by Wolman and Miller's (1960) consideration of the magnitude and frequency of geomorphic processes and subsequently the significance of rare events has been scrutinized.
On coasts of coral atolls the effects of hurricanes are shown to be significant not only to the reef morphology but also to the organisms and the total environment (Stoddart, 1962) and in drainage basins in general and along river channels in particular the impact of rare floods and the time necessary for recovery has been investigated.
In a review of previous studies it has been indicated (Gupta, 1983) that stream channels are affected by low-frequency, high-magnitude events and the persistence of such effects is greater in arid and semi-arid than in temperate areas (Wolman and Gerson, 1978).
Recent research has shown how glaciers may be affected by periodic surges in which ice may be transmitted down-glacier at speeds 10–100 times faster than normal and this has been identified from small glaciers and also from some ice sheets on a continental or subcontinental scale (Sugden and John, 1976).
The incidence of such infrequent but significant events has promoted two consequences.
First, there have been studies of earth hazards and a range of single and composite hazards have been identified, as indicated in Figure 5.2.
However because (White, 1974, p. 3):
Extreme natural events illuminate one aspect of the complex process by which people interact with biological and physical systems…
By definition no natural hazard exists apart from human adjustment to it,
Figure 5.2:Potential earth system hazards (after Gregory, 1978c) Compound hazards are shown on the right.
the progress in the study of hazards is reviewed later (p. 130) in relation to human activity and to applied physical geography, because as White (1973, p. 193) has also noted:
To a remarkable degree during the 1960s, geographers turned away from certain environmental problems at the same time that colleagues in neighbouring fields discovered those issues…
By neglecting the theory of man-environment relationships and its applications to public policy
Second has been the revival of interest in neocatastrophism which has arisen as a concept which acknowledges the significance, and in some cases the dominance, of events of greater magnitude and low frequency.
Developed for the purposes of palaeontology concerned with sudden and massive extinctions of life forms, a review of the implications for parts of physical geography has been provided by Dury (1980a).
Growing interest in storm-generated deposits is evident in sedimentology, and in erosional geomorphology studies of the quantitative effects of events of great magnitude and low frequency have indicated that stream channels and interfluves must be visualized separately, just as there are differences between arid and humid areas.
Therefore when considering environmental processes the significance of large events must be considered, the modifications to a strict uniformitarian view must be assimilated and the development of step functions and of catastrophe theory must be attempted.
A process paradigm?
Once the investigation of processes embraces such high-magnitude events it becomes increasingly difficult to distinguish what is timeless and timebound physical geography.
On 15 August 1952 a major flood affected the East and West Lyn rivers on the coast of North Devon, had substantial effects on the river channel, the valley and the human settlement, and has been estimated to have a recurrence interval of possibly 1:1000 years (Dobbie and Wolf, 1953).
Is such an event appropriate for a process timescale or more pertinent to a chronology approach?
This indeed is one of the implications of investigations of environmental processes because they are now becoming assimilated with new approaches to time and environmental change as outlined in chapter 8 (p. 161).
A further consequence arising from studies of process has paradoxically been progress towards a more integrated approach because investigations of one specific process have often proceeded to encompass other processes in the way that soil process investigations have become involved with hillslope processes and with plant-soil moisture relationships and also with boundary layer  climatology.
It is apparent that even where investigations have commenced within physical geography they have often proceeded to become intertwined with other disciplines.
One should not endeavour to place boundaries around physical geography too firmly but an idea of the frontier zone with other disciplines may be essential to shape future developments.
Investigations of processes initially functional in nature have begun to remedy deficiencies perceived in the early 1960s, have led to some new visions, and have also led in two directions.
On the one hand towards a more realist approach which is essential but cannot go too far because if pursued at other than a meso-scale level is in danger of leading towards natural and biological sciences.
On the other hand the path has been from empirical field investigations towards continental or global patterns and this may be one important direction which must continue to be followed because large-scale soil erosion as in China, large-scale deforestation as in the Amazon, atmospheric pollution or global climatic change inspired by changes of carbon dioxide are all contemporary environmental processes on a scale which has not attracted sufficient physical geographers.
However that aspect of the current physical geography balance sheet is more appropriate in the next chapter (6).
The advent of man
On the one hand the effect of human activity upon earth environment has been very apparent and increasing, and yet on the other hand until the 1950s or 1960s the significance of human activity did not attract much attention by physical geographers, who instead often chose to study environmental change before man, to seek processes largely unmodified by man, or at best to include man as an afterthought or an appendage.
This tendency can still be seen in text books where, after a majority of the text devoted to ‘straight’ physical geography, a final chapter, often brief, may introduce human activity and possibly applied considerations as well!
This state of affairs prevailed despite the fact that the theme of the man-environment relation has, according to Harvey (1969), never been far from the heart of geographic research, and for many was the overriding theme.
This paradoxical situation arose notwithstanding great endeavours to retain the strong links between physical and human geography and it was often thought (e.g. Fisher, 1970) that a revival of the regional approach still offered the only method of recementing the two parts of the subject.
Such an aspiration prevailed among some geographers at least partly unaware of first, the revival of interest in human activity; secondly, the focus in physical geography research upon the magnitude of human impact; and thirdly, the hazard research that was facilitating closer links between physical and human geography although these links did not impress Johnston (1983c).
These three trends combined to form a more environmental physical geography which may have been late but hopefully not too late.
In a clear look at man and environment, Hewitt and Hare (1973, pp. 23, 31) assessed the position from their point of view:
Until quite recently, however, the writers saw this environment in categories that were highly conservative.
We accepted the time-honoured division of physical geography into climatology, soil science, geomorphology, and biogeography, holding that these were concerned with the explanatory description of large, tangible and plainly visible parts of the natural landscape, or the directly measurable crude properties of the atmosphere.
When, however, we began to teach a course of generalized man-environment relations, in the crisis atmosphere of the early 1970s the physical geography of our background appeared totally inadequate.
It simply did not, and does not, offer a framework on which to hang a convincing story…the geographer, when he analyses the  material properties of the man-environment systems, must base himself on the central functions of that system, rather than on the traditional divisions of physical geography.
The central functions that Hewitt and Hare identified were partly concerned with human activity and partly involved the systems approach reviewed in the next chapter (p. 140).
The albeit late advent of man can be appreciated by outlining the antecedents, the research undertaken to ascertain the magnitude of man, the emphasis upon hazards and upon man-made environments as a basis for a more environmental physical geography.
Antecedents for the investigation of man in physical geography
It is curious that despite frequent allusion to man-environment relations by geographers, they largely chose to ignore the signposts that were evident from the mid nineteenth century onwards and physical geography proceeded largely in isolation from the hand of man.
This is very surprising on reflection because there were clear pointers available waiting to be followed.
In the introduction to a book on Man and Environmental Processes (Gregory and Walling, 1979) the pointers available were resolved into a century of milestones (to 1960), a decade of papers in the 1960s and a decade of readings in the 1970s.
Man and Nature , published in 1864, was undoubtedly the first milestone.
Its author, George Perkins Marsh, conceived the book as a
…little volume showing that whereas others think the earth made man, man in fact made the earth…
The object of the present volume is: to indicate the character and approximately, the extent of the changes produced by human action in the physical condition of the globe we inhabit; to point out the dangers of imprudence and the necessity of caution in all operations which, on a large scale, interfere with the spontaneous arrangements of the organic or the inorganic world; to suggest the possibility and the importance of the restoration of disturbed harmonies and the material improvement of waste and exhausted regions; and incidentally, to illustrate the doctrine, that man is, in both kind and degree, a power of a higher order than any of the other forms of animated life, which, like him, are nourished at the table of bounteous nature.
To demonstrate the magnitude of changes wrought by man upon nature the book devoted chapters to vegetable and animal species (chapter 2), to woods (3), waters (4), sands (5) and to the projected or possible geographical changes by man (6).
This book provided a fundamental basis for the conservation movement (Mumford, 1931), it proved to have a great influence upon the way in which land was visualized and used (Lowenthal, 1965), and its full title Man and Nature or Physical Geography as Modified by Human Action clearly indicates the direction in which it was pointing.
The clearest reflection of the way in which the full implications of Marsh's book were not appreciated in physical geography is shown in the fact that he is  not referred to in relation to the history of the study of landforms before Davis (Chorley, Dunn and Beckinsale, 1964), or in Explanation in Geography (Harvey, 1969), in Geography Its History and Concepts (Holt-Jensen, 1981) or in Geography and Geographers: Anglo-American Human Geography (Johnston, 1979, 1983a).
Such omission is completely in sympathy with the trend in physical geography for nearly a century after Man and Nature .
There were other pointers occasionally, such as Charles Kingsley's book on Town Geology published in 1872 and the objection of Kropotkin (1893, p. 350) to the trend to exclude man from physiography.
Man as a Geological Agent , published by R.L. Sherlock in 1922, and a related article (Sherlock, 1923) offered the next major milestone.
Sherlock distinguished biological aspects which were not considered in detail in his book, which focused instead upon geological aspects with particular attention devoted to denudation by excavation and attrition, to subsidence, to accumulation, to alterations of the sea coast, to the circulation of water, and to climate and scenery.
By focusing upon the impact of man, Sherlock emphasized the contrasts between natural and human denudation and concluded that in a densely populated country such as England (Sherlock, 1922, p. 333):
Man is many more times more powerful, as an agent of denudation, than all the atmospheric denuding forces combined.
Because of the extent of such powerful human action Sherlock concluded that there were indications that the doctrine of uniformitarianism had been carried too far, believing that the present, which has been so modified by human action cannot readily be the key to the past, when the extent of human modification and human influence was significantly less.
In 1922, the year that Sherlock's book was published, H.H. Barrows gave a presidential address to the Association of American Geographers (Barrows, 1923) entitled Geography as Human Ecology .
Barrows argued that geography should concentrate on the study of the association between man and environment, it should concentrate on themes which lead towards synthesis with an economic regional geography occupying a central place, but that specialized branches, including geomorphology, climatology and biogeography should be separated from the parent subject.
These proposals were not adopted, they were seldom referred to although in the USA much physical geography did not develop in geography departments, but exactly 50 years later a paper with the same title as Barrows's (Chorley, 1973) sought to examine the extent to which the ecological approach to geography provided a unifying link between the human and physical sides of the subject.
After reviewing the ecological model and resource management Chorley (1973, p. 167) concluded that the control system (p. 146) could be adopted as an appropriate focus and that this would clearly incorporate human activity and focus upon links between human and physical environment and that:
It is clear, however, that social man is, for better or worse, seizing control of his terrestrial environment and any geographical methodology which does not acknowledge this fact is doomed to in-built obsolescence.
In the 1930s and 1940s, although the impact of man was becoming increasingly more evident from situations like the dust bowl, the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA), and the much greater use of fertilizers, this situation was not fully acknowledged in physical geography and this is perhaps particularly startling given the appearance of books on soil erosion (e.g. Jacks and Whyte, 1939).
However, a major milestone in 1956 was the publication of Man's Role in Changing the Face of the Earth (Thomas, 1956) which was an 1193 page book, based upon an interdisciplinary symposium with international participation which was organized by the Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research and held at Princeton, NJ in 1955.
This monumental achievement acknowledged the work of Marsh and also that of the Russian geographer A.I. Woeikof (1842–1914), who had developed a utilitarian approach to the study of the earth's surface acknowledging the impact of man's activities.
The 52 chapters of the work (Thomas, 1956) were organized in three parts: the first retrospective, elaborating the way in which man has changed the face of the earth; the second reviewing the many ways in which processes have been modified; and the third concerned with the prospect raised by the limits on the role of man.
This important volume, subsequently republished in parts, did not perhaps have the immediate effect that might have been expected.
However its significance may gradually have been more fully appreciated in  the 1960s as a series of papers and books provided at least four ingredients which emphasized the necessity to consider man in physical geography.
First there were a series of general review papers sometimes based on inaugural or presidential addresses and these included a review of Man and the Natural Environment (Wilkinson, 1963); advocacy of the need for study of anthropogeomorphology because of the earlier deficiency of studies of the form-creating activity of man and of the influence of man in natural phenomena (Fels, 1965); and a revival of the title used by Sherlock for a review by Jennings (1966) in which he stressed that ‘Man as a Geological Agent’ is significant because studies of contemporary processes are nearly always heavily biased by anthropogenic effects.
Perhaps the most significant paper, also geomorphological, was that in which Brown (1970) characterized man as both a geomorphological process in relation to his direct, purposeful modifications of landforms, and also as indirectly effective through the human influence upon geomorphological processes.
Gradually therefore the significance of man began to achieve greater significance in physical geography, although few textbooks before 1970 allocated much space to the effects of human activity.
Certainly the notion of the Noosphere (Trusov, 1969), as a new geological epoch initiated as a consequence of man's activity, although capable of wider use in geography (Bird, 1963) did not find unequivocal acceptance.
A second strand in research of the 1960s was a consequence of the increasing focus upon processes which gave indications of the magnitude of human activity and also led to the inauguration of research investigations specifically designed to measure the magnitude of man by comparing man-modified and unmodified areas or by measuring one area before, during and after the effects of man.
Thus it was possible to investigate processes in a small drainage basin before, during and after the effects of building activity and urbanization (Walling and Gregory, 1970).
Equally significant was research on landscape evolution, which was now focused on those timescales intermediate between those used for earlier chronological studies and those adopted in process investigations.
Sometimes this research was located in areas where the effects of human activity had been sustained for many centuries.
Thus in the Mediterranean basin the evolution of valleys (Vita-Finzi, 1969) could only be understood by reference to human activity and, more biogeographically, the significance of cultural biogeography was exemplified by the work of Professor D.R. Harris, which was initially in the field of historical ecology but proceeded to embrace the domestication of plants and animals (e.g. Harris, 1968) and which later led to greater contacts with archaeology and to his appointment as Professor of Archaeology in the University of London in 1979.
As a result of the impact of research of this kind a further third strand could be detected which devolved upon the investigation of earth hazards and of physical geography from a socioeconomic-viewpoint.
Instrumental in launching the study of hazards was Professor Gilbert White's (White et al .,
1958)‘Changes in Urban Occupance of Flood Plains in the United States ’ which stimulated much later research (p. 132).
An excellent illustration of an integrated approach was provided by Water, Earth and Man (Chorley, 1969) which was an edited volume reviewing aspects of the physical and the socioeconomic environment that relate to water and which affirmed that (Chorley and Kates, 1969, p. 2):
…it is clear without some dialogue between man and the physical environment within a spatial context geography will cease to exist, as a discipline.
To proceed towards such a dialogue Chorley (1969) believed that an integrated body of techniques for physical and human geography and an emphasis upon resources of the physical world such as water could be effected in a volume which (Chorley and Kates, 1969, p. 3) concentrates:
…on the physical resource of water in all its spatial and temporal inequalities of occurrence, and by its conceptualization of the many systems subsumed under the hydrological cycle…
In the development of water as a focus of geographical interest the evolution of a human-oriented physical geography and an environmentally sensitive human geography closely related to resource management is well under way…
Geographers, freed from the traditional distinction between human and physical geography and with their special  sensitivity towards water, earth and man, have in these both opportunity and challenge.
In studies of this kind there was evidence of a shift in the attitude to physical environment as environmental perception had a significant influence on the research undertaken by on physical geographers.
A fourth and final strand evident in the 1960s was the atmosphere created by the inception of international research programmes and of increasing environmental concern.
Programmes dependent upon interdisciplinary as well as international participation included the International Biological Programme (1964–74), the International Hydrological Decade (1965–74) which embraced man's influence as one of its major themes, and the Man and the Biosphere programme.
Environmental concern mushroomed during the 1960s and was stimulated by warnings about the impact of human activity and by debates about the extent to which earth resources were finite and therefore the basis for a pessimistic or optimistic future for spaceship earth.
Simmons (1978) noted that geographers had taken little notice of the wave of concern for environment which peaked about 1972 and he proceeded to argue in favour of a humanistic biogeography (see p. 124).
At the beginning of the 1970s, in an exploration of the role and relations of physical geography, Chorley (1971) had proposed that control systems offered an approach whereby human activity acts as a regulator in natural systems and this was explored in a major textbook on systems (Chorley and Kennedy, 1971).
This book had a substantial influence in physical geography and perhaps initiated a more consolidated attitude to the significance of human activity in physical geography.
As the literature available was not entirely adequate for the new acceptance of the significance of human activity, the deficiency was remedied first by a series of collected readings (Coates, 1972, 1973) and Coates (1973, p. 3) noted:
A twentieth-century innovation has been man's growing awareness of his impact on the environment.
With very few exceptions, such as the case of George Perkins Marsh, man before 1900 had a hostile view of the earth; his need was to conquer and subdue nature.
Similarly Detwyler (1971) collected previously published papers to produce Man's Impact on Environment and the Association of American Geographers Commission on College Geography conceived a collection of essays devoted to research on environmental problems (Manners and Mikesell, 1974).
Subsequently an edited collection reviewed Man and Environmental Processes (Gregory and Walling, 1979) and in 1981 A.S.
Goudie published The Human Impact, Man ‘s Role in Environmental Change .
This book (Goudie, 1981b, p. 1):
…seeks to find out whether, and to what degree, man has during his long tenure of the earth, changed it from its hypothetical pristine condition, for as Yi Fu Tuan (1971) has put it: ‘The fact of diminishing nature and of human ubiquity is now obvious’.
The approach adopted by Goudie is to separate physical geography into its conventional divisions of vegetation, animals, soil, water, geomorphology and atmosphere and in a chapter on each to identify and illustrate the effect of human activity on environment and upon processes.
In a brief concluding chapter it is shown how study of the human impact can lead to wise management but also that man and nature are difficult to separate, that man is not always responsible for some of the changes with which he is credited, and that environmental impact statements of any kind are difficult to make.
This seems something of a disappointing conclusion because some other work has  proffered a reorganized approach, in particular either by focusing upon the environment theme or upon the urban environment, which has been covered by Urbanization and Environment (Detwyler and Marcus, 1972) by Urban Geomorphology (Coates, 1976c) and by The Urban Environment (Douglas, 1983).
Statement
Source
‘It is clear, however, that social man is, for better or worse, seizing control of his terrestrial environment and any geographical methodology which does not acknowledge this fact is doomed to inbuilt obsolescence.’
Table 6.1:Statements by physical geographers emphasizing the need for the study of human activity
CHORLEY (1973b)
‘Only a relatively small part of this literature has stressed man's role as a geomorphic agent, exerting a notable effect on the earth's crust.
On the whole, specific attention to this geomorphic rather than ecologic aspect has been neglected…
The study of man's geomorphic activities,…is one of the paradoxical ‘recognized yet unrecognized subjects’.’
GOLOMB and EDER (1964)
‘If geography is to play a full role in the study of environmental problems it is important that greater stress be given to the biosphere, which constitutes a vital resource base for man, and which has been altered more extensively by human activities than most other elements of the environment.’
HILL, 1975
‘…a more meaningful and relevant physical geography may emerge as the product of a new generation of physical geographers who are willing and able to face up to the contemporary needs of the whole subject, and who are prepared to concentrate on the areas of physical reality which are especially relevant to the man-oriented geography It is in the extinction of the traditional division between physical and human geography that new types of collaborative synthesis can arise.’
CHORLEY and KATES (1969)
The foregoing review has been necessary to demonstrate what now seems almost unbelievable; that physical geography for so long contrived to ignore the significance of human activity and thence the potential which associated studies afford.
Examples of statements reflecting the recent necessary missionary zeal are included in Table 6.1 Indeed it is indisputable that physical geographers have entered the field later than  they should have done.
Their contribution so far has emphasized reviews of human impacts often reflecting research in other disciplines rather than appropriate fundamental impact studies by physical geographers.
This indeed is one of the reasons why Hare in 1969 noted ‘sometimes I think that Geography as a science deliberately stays out of phase with the climate of the times.’
The magnitude of man
In one of the most recent textbooks (Goudie, 1981b) the approach adopted was to review the impact of man on environment and processes generally but in this section the purpose is much narrower: to indicate some of the research investigations pursued by physical geographers and to refer to the attitudes which this engendered.
Biogeography provides the most obvious area in which the significance of human activity should be particularly demanding of study and there have been two particular themes, albeit increasingly related, which have proceeded in this direction.
First were studies of Quaternary ecology dedicated to reconstruction of the sequence of vegetation systems in particular areas and often using palynology as a technique of central significance.
Physical geographers together with biologists, limnologists and other researchers were able to establish the nature of the flora and fauna in the late Quaternary and at the transition during the early Flandrian from tundra to closed deciduous woodland.
This research successfully established the major stages of vegetational change but also necessarily included the influence of human activity, which was effective through modification of the biogeographic systems.
This naturally fostered closer links with archaeology (Simmons and Tooley, 1981).
In Britain the impact of prehistoric man has been considered by physical geographers and in a thematic issue of the Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers devoted to this research (Curtis and Simmons, 1976, p. 257) it was explained that:
The papers presented…belong mostly to the tradition of elucidating the effects of early man upon his surrounding landscapes.
This might seem a particularly appropriate task for geographers although similar work has been the province of biologists, archaeologists and geologists.
Work of this kind demonstrated the significance of the Bronze and Iron Ages in reducing the forest cover of the British landscape particularly in upland Britain, where blanket peat growth may have been influenced by deforestation rather than simply by climatic change (Simmons, 1980).
Although initially research was often focused upon a single pollen site, the subsequent research was able to proceed towards the regional assessment of past vegetation not only in Britain but also in overseas areas such as the tropical rain forest (Flenley, 1979).
In this research, palynology was dominant for many years but subsequently enormous potential has been offered  by research developed by F. Oldfield on mineral magnetic properties which are valuable because many magnetic properties are environmentally diagnostic, are preserved for long periods in many situations, and have parameters which are easy to measure.
Initially applied in the context of lakes and their drainage basins which can be used as units of sediment-based ecological study (Oldfield, 1977), the techniques have now been shown to have widespread application to sediment correlation in lake sediments, to differentiation of weathering and pedogenesis, to the identification of sediment sources, and there may subsequently be application of mineral magnetic measurements to long sediment sequences from major lake basins in non-glaciated regions, to near-shore marine sediments in morphogenetically dynamic areas, and also to cave sediments, alluvial fills, river terrace sequences and to loess successions.
Oldfield (1983a, p. 150) also indicates:
The ubiquity and sensitivity of magnetic minerals, the speed and versatility of measuring equipment and the persistence of magnetic linkages between source and sediment make the emerging methodology ideally suited to both process- and reconstruction-oriented catchment studies and more especially to that integration of the two approaches so strongly advocated in recent time.
Experience of these techniques has recently prompted Oldfield (1983b) to propose a steady-state model of ecosystem change related to man's impact on environment as an additional alternative to more familiar successional and cyclic models, and this is more appropriately considered in relation to other time-bound developments (chapter 8, p. 182).
A second theme evident in biogeography has been the progress made towards cultural biogeography and historical ecology.
This approach has been very evident in the United States, in the most recently settled areas, and has involved reconstruction of changes in biogeographical systems in recent decades and centuries incorporating the influence of human activity.
Similarly Murton (1968) reconstructed the immediate pre-European vegetation on the east coast of the North Island of New Zealand.
However, particularly in long-settled countries, it is difficult to differentiate such biogeographical studies from those by historical geographers or economic historians and it was a historical geographer (Darby, 1956) who mapped and compared the distribution of forest in AD 900 with that in AD 1900.
However, progress in research in this second theme also influenced the presentation of biogeography as reflected in textbooks.
Although a number sought to focus upon the original vegetation, and therefore to relegate human activity to a chapter or afterthought, this was becoming increasingly invalid as the effects of human activity were so substantial.
I.G. Simmons in his book devised a title Biogeography: Natural and Cultural which encapsulates the approach that he promoted (Simmons, 1979a).
Having suggested that within geography, biogeography teaching has lacked a crystallizing focus, he contended that (Simmons, 1979a, p. 1).
Instead there has been something of a supermarket approach: according to the interests of the teacher a number of packages have been bought off the shelves and put in the course trolley.
The major world soil-climate vegetation units; soils, the ‘natural’ vegetation units of a region or country; some vegetation history; and the consideration of energy and chemical element flows through ecological systems, have been put together and presented as ‘biogeography’at the check-out point of the examination paper.
Simmons proceeds to offer a stronger conceptual framework.
Acknowledging the concepts of Dansereau (1957) that man creates new genotypes and new ecosystems, he considers nature without man as natural biogeography in Part I of his book and then uses this as a datum against which to set the larger Part II in which cultural biogeography is concerned with the effects of man in changing the genetic make-up of plants and animals, in redistributing them over the earth's surface, and in altering the structure of many ecosystems.
Although Simmons indicates that such an approach may encompass only part of the traditions of study in geography, it would allow man's impact on individual taxa and ecosystems, on biotic resources their conservation and protection (Simmons, 1980, p. 148)
to find a place in a coherent whole, which relates to the concerns of the world about us.
Nevertheless, I expect that the methodological pluralism which has characterized our biogeography during my time will continue, and diversity of both material and outlook must in any final reckoning be a source of strength.
There is a danger in indulging in too great a diversity of material and outlook and, as biogeographers have been few in number, diversity could lead to the continuing omission of the study of the impact of human activity.
However Simmons's (1979a) approach is one which leads productively towards consideration of natural resources (Simmons, 1974) and towards involvement in conservation (Simmons, 1979b) as reviewed in a later chapter (p. 186).
In the study of soil geography two strands similar to those in biogeography may be discerned: one arising from studies of soil profiles and their evolution and one more concerned with recent historical changes.
Associated with late Quaternary vegetation changes were changes of pedogenesis and of soil systems.
In Britain, for example, podzolization succeeded brown earth formation, and because human action was involved in the vegetation change there was also an effect upon soil profiles (Bridges, 1978b).
Recent historical changes of soils are more numerous than the degree of research attention accorded by physical geographers might suggest but the effects of salinity, drainage, fertilizers, pollution and land use change all have considerable significance for soil pedons and soil processes.
Bearing in mind the magnitude of soil erosion which has occurred in sensitive areas including the Dust Bowl, parts of China and of Africa it is surprising that more attention has not been directed to this aspect of the human impact.
It has been argued that special attention  should be focused upon the resilience and potential for recovery of the soil profile in view of the inputs induced by man (Trudgill, 1977, chapter 8), and the importance of the problem is underlined by Toy (1982) in a review of accelerated erosion when he concludes that such erosion can be considered to be the pre-eminent environmental problem in the United States by virtue of its widespread occurrence and cumulative cost.
A review by one geographer who has contributed to the development and application of indices of soil erodibility (Bryan, 1978) includes the aphorism (Bryan, 1979, p. 207):
It has been said that if each soil conservationist stopped the movement of one grain of soil for each word he has written on the topic, the problem of soil erosion would disappear.
It is true that despite close attention from numerous scientists around the world for the past 60 years, soil erosion is now perhaps more widespread than ever before.
Despite the numbers of scientists involved, physical geographers have not perhaps been as prominent as they should have been in the investigation of the human impact upon soil systems.
Whereas the long-term significance of human activity upon plants and animals and soil characteristics and distributions has provided one research focus, in climatology the emphasis has perhaps been more evident on a spatial scale with the impact of human activity first appreciated at the local scale but then subsequently extended to the meso and thence to the world scale.
With this progression the atmosphere has increasingly been viewed as a resource (Chandler, 1970) and research interests have concentrated upon (Chandler, 1970, p. 3):
…those aspects of the atmospheric sciences, which, to my mind, geographers with a knowledge of physics and mathematics are especially well equipped to study, namely the particular conditions of the planetary boundary layer…
In draining the marsh, clearing the wood, cultivating the fields, and flooding the valleys, man has inadvertently changed the thermal, hydrological and roughness parameters of the earth's surface and the chemical composition of the air…
There are indeed very few ‘natural’ boundary layer climates remaining…
Although some recent textbooks have included human activity in a final concluding chapter (e.g. Lockwood, 1979a) others have accorded the significance of human activity a more central position.
Thus Oke (1978) emphasized the physical basis of physical, topo-, local-, meso- and regional climates in the boundary layer climates of the lowest kilometre of the atmosphere, then proceeded to deal with natural climates of non-vegetated and vegetated surfaces, topographically affected climates and the climates of animals, and then progressed to man-modified environments embracing conscious and unconscious modification of boundary-layer climates particularly those including urban climates.
Subjects to which physical geographers have contributed include changes in the radiation balance, changes in precipitation including conscious and inadvertent ones, man-made climates and pollution.
Perhaps in the area of man-made climates has the physical geographer climatologist contribution been most significant and the work of T.J. Chandler (1965) on the Climate of London stands as an exemplary model in this field, and subsequent research by B.W. Atkinson on thunderstorm activity (see Atkinson, 1979) clearly demonstrates the kind of contribution that can be made to document the inadvertent effects of man.
Until recently the contribution by physical geographers to the investigation of atmospheric pollution by carbon dioxide, aerosols, fluorocarbons , thermal pollution, and other pollutants, and the effects which they have had, has been less evident.
However as Chandler, who was a member of the Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution established in the UK in 1970 (Chandler, 1976), has remarked (Chandler, 1970, p. 10):
…atmospheric pollution has been with us since the creation; it became much worse…with the Garden of Eden and infinitely worse following the mechanical ingenuity of James Watt.
Considerable interest is now centred upon these problems and it is appropriate that physical geographers should be very aware of the work being undertaken and the work remaining.
In 1980 an international meeting in Villach, Austria was called by the International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU), the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) to prepare an assessment of the impact of CO 2 on global climate.
They concluded that because approximately half of the 5 gigatons of carbon released into the atmosphere each year by the consumption of fossil fuel remains in the atmosphere, the world temperature has already been affected.
More specifically they suggested that the impact of change will vary differentially over the earth's surface, and that further research is needed on likely consumption of fossil fuel in the next century, on prospective modes of management of the global biosphere over the next century, on quantitative clarification of the carbon cycle, on climatic response to increasing CO 2 in the atmosphere, and on the potential impact of climatic change (Nature and Resources, 1981).
It was believed that a major international interdisciplinary research effort was needed and in such areas physical geographers should surely be poised to participate.
In geomorphology assessments of human impact have really been focused upon four themes if one includes consideration of hydrology and hydrogeomorphology at the same time.
First has been research focused upon chronology of landscape change which has (Butzer, 1974; Vita-Finzi, 1969) demonstrated how human activity was a pertinent factor influencing the course of alluvial chronology and in Greece Davidson (1980a) has demonstrated that erosion was underway during the Bronze Age but that spatial variations were substantial.
In more recent periods of decades there have been, secondly, many investigations of the impact of human activity for example upon river channels (Gregory, 1981; Park, 1981) and of changes during decades rather than  millennia .
Many of these are mentioned in chapter 8 (p. 173) but a particularly important viewpoint offered by  Strahler in 1956, provided fundamental guidelines which acknowledged earlier work by engineers, hydrologists, soil scientists and geologists and proceeded to formulate an improved understanding of fluvially produced landscapes.
This included a diagram of drainage basin transformation from low to high density which related the severe gullying that could occur on slopes to the aggradation along the main valley axis.
Thirdly there have been studies of geomorphological processes affected by human activity and particularly important stimuli were produced by Wolman (1967a) who suggested the way in which sediment yield varied at the present time between urban and non-urban areas and extended this to provide a model of change of sediment yield in the northeast of the USA since 1700, and also by Douglas (1969).
In his review of man, vegetation and the sediment yields of rivers Douglas suggested that little account had previously been taken of human influence and his studies of rates of erosion in a wide range of climatic conditions in eastern Australia suggested that the present sediment yields are far in excess of those which may have prevailed in the geological past.
Methods of calculation of such denudation rates have been greatly refined by Walling (e.g. Walling and Webb, 1983) who has also reviewed the ways in which hydrological systems are modified by man, and results from catchment experiments have documented the effects of land clearance, land drainage, recreational pressure, strip mining, conservation measures and urbanization (Walling, 1979).
In the  eastern part of the USA the significance of conservation measures has been demonstrated at two different scales (Fig. 6.1).
The magnitude of human activity has also been reviewed with respect to coasts where sea walls, breakwaters, dredging and dumping, sediment supply, and vegetation effects can all be significantly affected by human activity (Bird, 1979) and the beach sediment budget can be profoundly changed (Clayton, 1980b).
Whereas effects upon coastal processes have been long considered at least in qualitative terms, the significance of human activity in affecting permafrost as illustrated in Canada (Brown, 1970); and in influencing endogenetic processes (Coates, 1980), by loading effects from dams and reservoirs, water injections, irrigation and structures, and by withdrawal effects due to groundwater, oil and gas, and mineral extraction, and by surface excavation effects have been appreciated more recently.
Important inputs to environmental management are afforded by studies of human influence upon permafrost and upon endogenetic processes.
Figure 6.1:The influence of human activity upon sediment transfer.
In the cartogram the magnitude of sediment production from different sources in Cook Creek is compared before and after conservation measures (after Trimble, 1983).
In the lower two maps suspended sediment discharge is reduced by 1970 after the implementation of conservation measures and after changes in land use (after Meade and Trimble, 1974)
A fourth theme in geomorphology has been concerned to demonstrate the world impact of human activity.
Although no geomorphology texts have been structured to emphasize man, as in the case of Simmons (1979a) in biogeography and Oke (1978) in climatology, some progress towards global assessment is being made.
Thus Brown (1970) estimated world-wide natural erosion rates to range from 12 to 1500 m 3 km -2; yr -1; and man-induced rates to range from 1500 to 85,000 m 3 km -2; yr -1; and the results from a wide variety of areas were reviewed by Gregory and Walling (1973, pp.342–58).
Demek (1973) concluded that the effects of human society on the development of the earth's relief already exceeds the effects of natural geomorphological processes and that, of the dryland surface of the earth, 55 per cent is intensively used by man, 30 per cent is partly modified by man, and the remaining 15 per cent is either unmodified or slightly modified.
Perhaps recognition of a field of urban physical geography is an indication of the way in which geomorphologists are beginning to perceive a world pattern.
When surveying the focus of attention of physical geographers it is evident that the major part of the earth's surface, the oceans, has been ignored in physical geography research.
Although a textbook on oceanography was produced by a physical geographer and was subsequently divided into two volumes,(King, 1962; 1975) the separate discipline of oceanography has been responsible in physical oceanography for research on sea level and its changes; tides, waves, currents, the physical and chemical properties of sea water as well as the form of the sea floor and marine sediments, and in biological oceanography for research on ocean flora and fauna.
Physical geographers have also tended, with some exceptions in countries where there are a large number of lakes, to leave the study of lakes to the limnologists.
However, rather more attention has been devoted to what R.U. Cooke characterizes as an ‘empty quarter’(Cooke, 1976).
The deserts of the world which comprise this empty quarter demonstrate a sensitivity to human impact but one which is not easily separated from the effects of fluctuations in climate, as studies of arroyo development have clearly shown (Cooke and Reeves, 1976).
Much recent concern has been focused upon desertification, which is taken to mean (Grove, 1977, p. 299):
the spread of desert conditions for whatever reason, desert being land with sparse vegetation and very low productivity associated with aridity, the degradation being persistent or in extreme cases irreversible.
Desertification arises from climatic change and from unwise use of land by man and has been the subject of a number of international and interdisciplinary meetings.
At the International Geographical Union meeting in Montreal in 1972 the Arid Zone Commission was succeeded by a working group established to study desertification in and around arid lands with J.A.
Mabbut as chairman and the aim was to ‘collect evidence on the nature and causes of environmental changes constituting extension of deserts into marginal regions or an intensification of desert conditions within desert regions’(Mabbut, 1976).
A number of UNESCO programmes have embraced this research area and the MAB (Man and the Biosphere) Programme has brought attention to the impact of human activities and land use practises on arid and semi-arid regions.
Earth hazards
Desertification is of course, at least in part , an instance of drought as an earth hazard.
As studies of human impact and reviews of the magnitude of this impact encouraged physical geography to move towards applied problems it was necessary to alter attitudes to physical environment and this occurred as a result of three tendencies.
First there was the trend to focus upon extreme events because these are the ones that may occasion damage and costs, they are the ones for which landscape management strategies  may be designed, and this was a departure from the earlier emphasis upon the average experience.
In addition to the immediately obvious atmospheric hazards it was possible to include less immediately obvious ones associated with volcanoes (Clapperton, 1972) and earthquakes.
Whereas endogenetic processes had not been studied as extensively as exogenetic ones this now gave a focus for study by physical geographers as illustrated by the analysis of eruptions by Etna (Clapperton, 1972).
The study of volcanoes in space and time has been advocated by Clapperton (1972) to build a bridge between volcanology and volcanic geomorphology which would be analogous to these fields developed in glacial and in fluvial geomorphology.
Secondly a trend reflected in the juxtaposition of investigations of physical environment and of the socio-economic relevance was exemplified by Water, Earth and Man (Chorley, 1969) and by the Value of the Weather in which Maunder (1970) introduced the range of atmospheric hazards and then proceeded to evaluate their cost in terms of studies of economic impact and the costs of hazard relief.
Maunder expressed his objective as (Maunder, 1970, pp. xxi, 2).
The purpose of this book is to bring together, for the first time, the most significant and pertinent association between man's economic and social activities, and the variation in his atmospheric environment…specific attention is focused on economic activities and the weather, the economic analysis of weather, and the benefits and costs of weather information, including weather forecasting and weather modification.
In addition some of the many sociological, physiological, political planning and legal aspects of man's atmospheric resources are discussed…it is hoped to provide a starting point for econoclimatic studies on a national and international scale, and a greater appreciation of the value of the atmospheric environment.
A later study of the hurricane impact (Simpson and Riehl, 1981) also epitomizes the way in which a focus can be placed on the nature of the hazard and the socioeconomic cost.
A third trend was centred upon growing awareness of the difference between the real world and the way in which environment was perceived because it was such perception which influenced decision-making and therefore management.
Following from this it was therefore axiomatic that knowledge of environment was time-dependent and the environmental perception at the time of decision-taking could be very significant.
Although early progress in study of environmental perception often related to socioeconomic geography such as the attitudes of farmers to the drought hazard on the Great Plains (Saarinen, 1966), later research concentrated more upon the physical environment and the fascinating evaluation of myth and reality in the context of a volcanic eruption in Papua New Guinea (Blong, 1982) has already been referred to.
These three ingredients collectively formed the background in which natural hazards research crystallized, although as noted earlier the origins clearly arose in North America and particularly derived from the work of  Gilbert White at the University of Chicago, later at the University of Colorado, and leader of the Commission on Man and Environment (1968-) of the International Geographical Union.
Professor White's earlier research was directed to flood plains and following the Flood Control Act of 1936 the research group asked the following questions (White, 1973, p. 197):
1.
What is the nature of the physical hazard involved in extreme fluctuations in streamflow?
2.
What types of adjustments has man made to those fluctuations?
3.
What is the total range of possible adjustments which man theoretically could make to those fluctuations?
4.
What accounts for the difference in adoption of adjustments from place to place and time to time?
5.
What would be the effect of changing the public policy insofar as it constitutes a social guide to the conditions in which individuals or groups chose from the possible adjustments?
The study classified adjustments as modifying the cause, modifying the loss or distributing the loss and established that while flood control expenditures had multiplied the level of flood damages had risen, and that the natural purpose of reducing the toll of flood losses by building flood control projects had not been achieved (White, 1973).
Subsequent research on a spectrum of natural hazards was collected during work of the IGU Commission (White, 1974) in which natural hazard was defined (White, 1974, p. 4) as:
…an interaction of people and nature governed by the coexistent state of adjustment in the human use system and the state of nature in the natural events system.
Extreme events which exceed the normal capacity of the human system to reflect, absorb or buffer them are inherent in hazard.
An extreme event was taken to be any event in a geophysical system displaying relatively high variance from the mean.
Although White (1973) noted that in the 1960s geographers turned away from some environmental problems just as specialists in neighbouring fields discovered these issues, nevertheless research on hazards did demonstrate that (White, 1973, p. 213):
…if environmental problems are pursued rigorously enough and with sufficient attention to likely contributions from other disciplines they may foster constructive alterations in public policy but at the same time may stimulate new research and refinement of research methodology to the benefit of geographic discipline.
Subsequently a number of books have summarized this and other work on earth hazards (e.g. Whittow, 1980; Perry, 1981) but two singular ones are worthy of special attention.
Hewitt and Burton (1971) analysed the record for southwestern Ontario and found that in a 50-year period there would be 1 severe drought, 2 major windstorms, 5 severe snowstorms, 8 severe hurricanes, 10 severe glaze storms, 16 severe floods, 25 severe hailstorms and 39 tornadoes.
They therefore defined the hazardousness of a place as the complex of conditions which define the hazardous part of a region's environment.
Hazards were taken to be simple, which include a single damaging element such as wind, rain, floodwater or earth tremor; compound, which involves several elements acting together above their respective damage thresholds such as the wind, hail and lightning of a severe storm; and multiple, when elements of different kinds coincide accidentally or follow one another as a hurricane may be succeeded by landslides and floods.
A further progressive step was made by Burton, Kates and White (1978) in The Environment as Hazard .
Beginning from a consideration which suggested that the natural environment is becoming more hazardous in a number of complex ways because losses are rising, catastrophe potential is enlarging, and the cost falls inequitably amongst the nations of the world, they proceeded from hazard experience to consideration of choice on an individual, collective, national and international level.
Although they concluded (Burton, Kates and White, 1978, p. 221) that an increase in disaster may continue in the decade of the 1980s and that reduction of disaster potential cannot easily be achieved, although loss of life will be reduced substantially, loss of property is most likely to occur in rapidly developing societies and overall (Burton, Kates and White, 1978, p. 223):
The forces propelling the world toward more and greater disasters will continue to outweigh by a wide margin the forces promoting a wise choice of adjustments to hazard.
There is hope for a safer environment, but it cannot be achieved easily or soon.
Natural hazard research necessarily focuses upon the interrelation of geophysical events and human activity and as such is an important feature of recent research and one that some such as Parker and Harding (1979) have proclaimed to be of central and traditional concern to geographers and their view is included in Table 6.2.
Table 6.2:Views on the importance of natural hazards for geography
‘Natural hazard studies provide a novel and imaginative vehicle for teaching aspects of physical and human geography.
They draw attention to the dynamic relationship between man and environment, provide an opportunity to introduce the concept of perception and enhance general environmental awareness which is an important element of environmental education.’
D.J.
PARKER and D.M. HARDING (1979)
‘An important task…is to establish the place of damaging events within the overall context of man's ecology.
Many of the natural elements which cause damage are, under more normal circumstances, sources of livelihood and man's activities are closely integrated with them.’
K. HEWITT and I. BURTON (1971)
The outcome of research on natural hazards has been the emergence of a dominant view according to Hewitt (1983) and this convergence of thinking conforms to the idea of a paradigm.
This dominant view is that disaster itself is attributed to nature and embraces three main areas:
1
an unprecedented commitment to the monitoring and scientific understanding of geophysical processes — geologic, hydrologic and atmospheric — as the foundation for dealing with their human significance and impacts.
Here the most immediate goal in relation to hazards is that of prediction,
2
planning and managerial activities to contain the geophysical processes where possible,
3
emergency measures, involving disaster plans and the establishment of organization for relief and rehabilitation.
Although admittedly criticizing some of his own work Hewitt (1983) believes that the perspective of this dominant view could be the single greatest impediment to improvement of the quality and effectiveness of natural disasters research, because it fails to recognize how the roots and occurrence of contemporary disasters depend upon the way ‘normal everyday life turns out to have become abnormal’.
In a series of chapters edited by Hewitt (1983) it is demonstrated how natural hazard is not uniquely dependent upon geophysical processes, human awareness is not dependent upon the geophysical conditions, and reaction to disaster may be dependent upon ongoing social order rather than explained by conditions or behaviour to calamitous events.
Hewitt (1983) is then led to conclude that most disasters are characteristic rather than accidental features of places and societies where they occur; risk arises from ordinary life rather than rareness, and natural extremes are more to be expected than many of the social developments that pervade everyday life.
This provides an alternative perspective but still one in which man and hazards interact, which is underlined by part of the quotation used at the beginning of Hewitt's (1983) volume:
It's because people know so little about themselves that their knowledge of nature is so little use to them.
Bertolt Brecht (1965)The Messing Kauf Dialogues (London: Methuen)
Urban environments
Although texts devoted to the human impact (e.g. Goudie, 1981b; Gregory and Walling 1979) and those devoted to branches of physical geography have not yet emphasized urban physical geography, claims have been made by some writers that the urban environment is sufficiently distinctive to warrant attention as a specific milieu.
The books referred to earlier by Detwyler and Marcus (1972) and by Coates (1976a) together with a volume of readings on urban regions (Coates, 1973) constitute a considerable  directive inclined towards an urban physical geography.
This was reinforced by research investigations by physical geographers on urban climates, and the seminal work by Chandler (1965) on The Climate of London stimulated other physical geographers to document the magnitude and character of urban heat islands, of precipitation modification, of atmospheric pollution and of air movement.
Studies have been conscious of the work in other disciplines such as the Metropolitan Meteorological Experiment (METROMEX) which is based in St Louis (Chagnon, Huff, Schickedanz and Vogel, 1977) and has greatly increased knowledge of atmospheric processes within urban areas and investigations have also led towards applications of knowledge gained from the way in which a city generates its own climate so that Chandler (1976) in a review of urban climatology in relation to urban design suggested:
The reason for the neglect of climatic consideration has been partly the relative youthfulness of the science of urban climatology, and partly the relatively weak communication links that presently exist between climatology and planning.
Bur faced with the exponential growth of the world's population and the accelerating pace of urbanization, it is clear that our cities must, where appropriate, be purposefully planned in order to optimize the environment of urban areas and avoid a series of structural and functional design failures.
Climate is an essential element in this planning.
Also in 1976 a symposium on physical problems of the urban environment (Chandler, Cooke and Douglas, 1976, p. 57) concluded that:
The conversion of land to urban uses involves considerable modification of the natural environmental system, particularly with respect to its geological and geomorphological bases, its hydrological characteristics and the nature of the boundary layer of the atmosphere…
Physical geography can usefully contribute to the determination of public policies, with respect to the management and development of urbanized areas.
In the area of hydrology have been some of the most specific contributions made by physical geographers including the analysis of increased discharges (Hollis, 1975; Walling and Gregory, 1970; Walling 1979a), investigation of sediment yield (Walling, 1974), research extending into the area of water quality and pollutants related to urban source areas (Ellis, 1979) and analysis of river channel changes downstream from urban areas (Leopold 1973; Gregory, 1981).
Indeed in an edited volume devoted to Man's Impact on the Hydrological Cycle in the United Kingdom Hollis (1979) collected results of current scientific investigation for the benefit of scientists and managers and separated the chapters into sections dealing with rural and urban environments respectively, a subdivision which was also used in the hydrological field (IAHS, 1974).
In the case of urban climatology and urban hydrology there is obviously an important research contribution to be made by physical geographers and this is made by undertaking work in knowledge of, or close association with, scientists in other disciplines.
However one geographer, Douglas (1981, p. 315), has argued that:
Understanding of the dynamics of the biophysical components of the city and the way their functioning impinges on people is a vital part of urban studies.
In his attempt to determine whether the methods and concepts of ecology and physical geography can contribute effectively to analysis of urban issues in the context of the city as an integrated open system of living things interacting with their physical environment, Douglas (1981) argues that an attempt must be made to link the city as a habitat or an ecosystem with the city as a social system and he develops an ecosystem approach to the study of cities.
This approach, which had earlier been used in relation to other fields such as architecture (Knowles, 1974) embraces population ecology, system ecology, the city as a habitat, and then energy and material transfer in cities are used to highlight spatial contrasts within the city and between cities and also to differentiate cities from rural environments.
Douglas quotes support for study of urban areas such as that by Bunge (1973):
Physical geography is much needed in an urban setting…
Cities are a karst topography with sewers performing precisely the function of limestone caves in Yugoslavia, which causes a parched physical environment, especially in city centres,
but also notes that some such as Young (1974) have argued that geographers have failed to realize the potential of contributing to human ecology because they were overconcerned with environmental determinism.
Subsequently Douglas has developed these ideas in a book which collects together much material in the urban environment from a physical geography point of view but perhaps also leads towards his view that (Douglas, 1981, p. 360):
Perhaps more than in other environments the analysis of city problems reveals the inadequacy of attempts at understanding through blinkered, disciplinary approaches.
In this book Douglas (1983) elaborates an ecosystem view of the city.
He uses the background of the economic system as an ecosystem and the city as a dependent system, to proceed to the energy balance, water balance, mass balance geomorphology, biogeography and waste disposal of the city prior to looking at geographical aspects of urban health and disease and at management and planning designed to reduce environmental hazards.
Douglas (1983, p. 202) tends to the view that:
in academic scholarship the divorce between the ‘two cultures’, the humanities and the sciences, sadly persists, and only at the practitioner level is there some collaboration between the social worker and the public health engineer…
In examining cities one cannot be simply scientific or simply sociological…
To learn about or to teach about cities without considering both the biophysical environment and the social environment is downright unscholarly.
However the compartmentalized approach, rather reminiscent of that followed by Goudie (1981b), may not be as integrative as Douglas would hope, although the use of a systems paradigm and energy flows as discussed in chapter 7 (p. 153) may provide a more integrative solution.
The physical geography of the city in general can now complement studies already undertaken of specific cities.
Los Angeles has been particularly attractive as a case study and has been outlined by Cooke (1977) and used by Whittow (1980) as an environment which experiences an accumulation of hazards.
A focus upon the urban physical environment could be seen as a replacement for regional geography courses of the past but as one reviewer has noted (Clayton, 1984, p. 26):
The urban environment is not defined as readily as a region such as North America or Australia but it is a way of studying part of the world that has some unifying attribute.
Whether the result is really much better than our much maligned regional courses is hard to say.
It seems to remain unduly descriptive and obsessed with detailed case studies.
Environmental physical geography
Until the advent of man in physical geography it could be argued that physical geographers had escaped from the effects of human activity by concentrating their endeavours upon rural and unmodified spatial areas and upon time scales prior to the time when human activity began to exercise a significant influence.
Some physical geographers have envisaged that dangers lie not only in this refuge in the unmodified environment but also in the fact that research investigations in modified situations may involve small-scale studies of, for example, gully pots in urban stormwater drainage systems.
One answer to such a detailed approach has been to revitalize the notion of large-scale geomorphology for example(Gardner and Scoging, 1983) but another has been to concentrate upon human activity as providing a focus centred around the central system (p. 156).
Even in this regard however it could be argued that physical geography has not reacted sufficiently to undertake research on major global problems such as the increase of atmospheric CO 2 , the incidence of acid rain, the demise of the Amazon rainforest, the implications of world soil erosion, or the general field of environmental pollution.
It was noted earlier that Hare in 1969 had noted how geography often endeavours to stay out of phase with the climate of the times and in a later paper (Hare, 1980) he directed attention to whether the planetary environment was fragile or sturdy.
He concluded that the planet's habitability is under attack but its natural resilience is probably greater than is normally assumed, and that in the environmental field geographers have made contributions in environmental perception and hazard assessment and also in the area of unified physical and biogeographic research:
One has to admit, nevertheless, that geographers as a group have not taken the lead in the interdisciplinary study of the human environment.
More often it has been the engineers and the ecologists who have done so with lawyers, economists and political scientists sometimes joining in (Hare, 1980, p. 381).
Referring to widespread stresses Hare reviewed the carrying capacity of the earth, and planetary air pollution and climatic change with considerable vision and in ending on a fairly optimistic note commented:
For the geographer, the opportunity to analyse and predict this resilience is a marvellous challenge.
Humanity and nature exist in constant interaction.
We have understood this crucial point much longer than most of our colleagues, who tend to think in terms of the impact of nature on society, or the reverse.
In the past decade it has seemed to me, perhaps over-optimistically, that the logic of interaction was taking command over what we teach, and the things that we try to do.
The sense that our field was disintegrating had receded.
It has a unity rooted in natural logic.
A more integrated approach to the environment has also been preferred by Coates who during the 1970s, which he characterized as the Environmental Decade, edited a volume (Coates, 1971) on Environmental Geomorphology , which was defined as:
…the practical use of geomorphology for the solution of problems where man wishes to transform landforms or to use and change surficial processes…
In addition environmental geomorphology includes extraction of surficial materials and protection of certain landscapes, such as beaches, which benefit man.
The goal for geomorphic environmental studies is to minimize topographic distortions and to understand the interrelated processes necessary in restoration, or maintenance, of the natural balance.
This volume, and volumes of readings on Environmental Geomorphology and Landscape Conservation (Coates, 1972, 1973), have revitalized the scope and focus of geomorphology and the approach contained could be applied to physical geography as a whole.
However such an environmental physical geography is more a focus than a means.
In the urban environment (Douglas, 1983) and in an ecosystem approach to the city (Douglas, 1981) Douglas employs an ecosystem or systems approach and that, particularly the control system, may provide the means for study in physical geography and so that is appropriately the subject for chapter 7.
When looking at geographic geomorphology in the 1980s Graf, Trimble, Toy and Costa,(1980) observed that the human factor in geomorphology received insufficient attention until the late 1960s but that researchers are now recognizing the effect of human activity in many processes ranging from relatively minor disturbances to almost complete control.
They concluded that, especially in relation to fluvial processes, explanations that ignore the role of human activities run the risk of eliminating one of the most significant variables and perhaps an appropriate note on which to end this chapter is their affirmation that (Graf, Trimble, Toy and Costa, 1980, p. 281):
We believe that no other group engaged in geomorphic research is as well qualified to grapple with the human factor as are geographers.
Our broad training in both physical and cultural systems and our appreciation of landscape change in the natural and human senses give us perspectives and insight that are rarely found in other disciplines.
Geographers need to work closely with engineers and geologists in order to share with them such wider ranging concepts as spatial analysis and emphasis on the man-land interface.
These concepts are endemic to geography, but they may be quite foreign to other workers.
The environmental system — All systems go?
The themes of quantitative methods, of chronology, of processes and of human activity as reviewed in the last four chapters all have amongst their adherents some who would claim that one of these four was the dominant paradigm for physical geographers.
However, each of those themes requires a unifying methodology and the systems approach potentially provides that methodology.
Since 1970 the systems approach has diffused with varying degrees of success into all areas of physical geography and as visualized by Stoddart (1967b, p. 538):
Systems analysis at last provides geography with a unifying methodology and using it geography no longer stands apart from the mainstream of scientific progress.
Despite the widespread incorporation of the systems approach into branches of physical geography and its increasing use as a framework for textbook structures, some disillusionment has occurred, possibly because the systems approach did not immediately offer all that was at first hoped.
It could not stand alone because it had to be applied to the traditional concerns of physical geographers as outlined in the four previous chapters.
In turn however adjustments of attitude and method were demanded of the traditional concerns, some of which had developed simultaneously with, and sometimes interactively with, systems ideas.
This chapter is therefore structured to show how systems thinking was incorporated into physical geography, to outline the way in which systems approaches have been utilized in other disciplines, and then to sketch the position of the several branches of physical geography in the early 1980s as a vehicle for proceeding towards what may be an emerging focus for a unified approach to the system as applied to physical environment at the scale traditionally employed by the physical geographer.
Developing a systems approach
The systems way of thinking was adopted successively by biogeography, soil geography, climatology and geomorphology and this adoption extended over about 35 years from 1935 to 1971 when Physical Geography: A systems approach (Chorley and Kennedy, 1971) was first published.
However the rate of incorporation of the ideas increased exponentially and was most dramatic in the decade from 1965 to 1975.
Ecosystem was a term proposed by the plant ecologist A.G. Tansley in 1935 as a general term for both the biome which was ‘the whole complex of organisms — both animals and plants — naturally living together as a sociological unit’ and for its habitat.
Tansley (1946, p. 207) further expressed the notion that:
All the parts of such an ecosystem — organic and inorganic, biome and habitat — may be regarded as interacting factors which, in a mature ecosystem, are in approximate equilibrium: it is through their interactions that the whole system is maintained.
In his review of organism and ecosystem as geographical models Stoddart (1967b, p. 523) showed how Tansley's concept broadened the scope of ecology beyond the purely biological content and gave formal expression to a variety of concepts covering habitat and biome which date back to the late nineteenth century.
Fosberg (1963, p. 2) extended Tansley's definitions:
An ecosystem is a functioning interacting system composed of one or more living organisms and their effective environment, both physical and biological…
The description of an ecosystem may include its spatial relations: inventories of its physical features, its habitats and ecological niches, its organisms, and its basic reserves of matter and energy; the nature of its income (or input) of matter and energy: and the behaviour or trend of its entropy level.
In relation to the island ecosystem Fosberg (1963, p. 1) avowed that:
…such partial concepts of nature as climate, vegetation, biota, soil environment, and even community, though very useful for analytical purposes, are not especially conducive to synthetic thinking or integration.
Although major developments in the ecosystem were largely external to biogeography until the 1960s, Stoddart (1967b, p. 524) argued that the ecosystem concept has four main properties which commend it for geographical investigation.
First, it is monistic and brings together environment, man and the plant and animal world within a single framework in which interaction between the components could be analysed.
Because emphasis is on the functioning and nature of the system as a whole this should dispense with geographic dualism.
Secondly, the ecosystems are structured in a more or less orderly, rational and comprehensible way, and therefore provide an approach which requires identification of the structures present and the links between the structural components.
Thirdly, ecosystems function as a result of through-put of matter and energy, and in ecology the identification of trophic stages and quantification of food webs and of productivity are exemplars of the way in which the function can be utilized.
Fourthly, the ecosystem is a type of general system and therefore can be visualized as an open system tending towards a steady state under the laws of open system thermodynamics.
Because ecosystems in a steady state  possess the property of self-regulation this is analogous to mechanisms such as homeostasis in living organisms, feedback principles in cybernetics and servomechanisms in systems engineering.
The systems approach is now explicitly used in biogeography and Simmons (1978), for example, in discussion of the ecosystem scale distinguishes two approaches that are often made: one which is synoptic and develops from intuitive perception of an ecosystem to studies of ecological cohesion including, where relevant, the significance of human activity; and another approach which is more analytical whereby measurements are made of the flow and partitioning of energy through the ecosystem and of the cycles of mineral nutrients within the system.
The latter approach embraces production ecology as study of the rate of production of organic matter in an ecosystem, and population ecology which studies changes in population numbers of the species of the ecosystem.
In soil geography it is generally suggested that the systems approach was formally applied by Nikiforoff (1959) although earlier he had distinguished accumulative and non-accumulative soils and so implicitly involved an open system attitude (Nikiforoff, 1949).
Earlier still Jenny (1941) in his Factors of Soil Formation had expressed any soil character in terms of climate (cl), organisms (o), relief (r), parent material (p) time (t), and other additional unspecified factors in the relation:
In a later paper Jenny (1961) endeavoured to advance the approach by introducing ecosystems in a systems-oriented approach whereby the initial state Lo represents the assemblage of properties at time zero, Px is the combined result of inputs and outputs which provides the flux potential and t is the age of the system.
This provided a revised general state factor equation where ecosystem properties (l), soil properties (s), vegetation properties (v) and animal properties (a) are combined in an equation in the form:
Thus five broad groups of factors were suggested:
l, s, v, a =
climofunction
biofunction
topofunction
lithofunction
chronofunction
or a more convenient way of writing this could be in the form:
l, s, v, a =  climofunction
Although it is very difficult to analyse soil systems quantitatively using this approach, a number of attempts have been made to solve the state factor  equations and these have been reviewed by Yaalon (1975).
In the generalized theory of soil genesis proposed by Simonson (1959) there was a formal introduction of systems thinking into soil science with soil visualized as an open system with inputs and outputs.
These developments of the soil system were achieved within soil science but adoption and development of the approach in physical geography was achieved by Huggett (1975) when he extended the catena approach to the drainage basin, which he used as the basis for a model of the soil system, and attempted to simulate the flux of plasmic material in an idealized basin.
This model is really an extension of the nine-unit landsurface model and adduces definable flow lines of material within soil-landscape units.
Different constituents will move through the system at different rates and one time-step in the simulation could represent a day for mobile salts but as much  as a  millennium for a relatively immobile element such as aluminium.
Climatology is similar to soil geography in that the incorporation of systems ideas  were achieved by workers in disciplines other than physical geography but it is dissimilar in that there were few explicit statements of the systems approach.
This was not necessary, however, in relation to the study of the atmosphere where the earlier emphasis upon climatic classification was gradually replaced by a shift towards the understanding of the surface energy and mass exchanges especially inland over vegetated surfaces (Hare, 1973).
Geomorphology received the clear import of general systems theory when Chorley (1962) clearly and explicitly reviewed the approach although acknowledging the earlier statements that had been made, particularly by Strahler who had avowed (Strahler, 1952, p. 935):
Geomorphology will achieve its fullest development only when the forms and processes are related in terms of dynamic systems and the transformations of mass and energy are considered as functions of time.
and also by Hack (1960).
This application (Chorley, 1962) emphasized the contrast between the open-system view which was commended and the closed system view which was at least partially embodied in Davis's view of landscape development.
In a closed system the given amount of initial free energy becomes less readily available as the system develops towards a state with maximum entropy, where entropy signifies the degree to which energy has become unable to perform work.
Open systems, however, were portrayed as those which need an energy supply for maintenance and preservation and as maintained in an equilibrium condition by the constant supply and removal of material and energy.
Open systems can import free energy (or negative entropy) into the system and they can behave equifinally whereby different initial conditions can lead to similar end results.
The value of the open-system approach to geomorphology was summarized (Chorley, 1962, p.
B8) as depending upon the universal tendency towards adjustment of form and process; to direct investigation  towards the essentially multivariate character of geomorphic phenomena; to admit a more liberal view of morphological changes with time to include the possibility of non-significant or non-progressive changes of certain aspects of landscape form through time; to foster a dynamic approach to geomorphology to complement the historical one; to focus upon the whole landscape assemblage rather than upon those parts assumed to have evolutionary significance; to encourage geomorphic investigations in those areas where evidence for erosional history may be deficient; and to direct attention to the  heterogeneity of spatial organization.
A number of the implications were summarized as (Chorley, 1962):
It is an impossibly restricted view, therefore, to imagine a universal approach to landform study being based only upon consideration of historical development…the physical and the resulting psychological, inability of geographers to handle successfully the simultaneous operation of a number of causes contributing to a given effect has been one of the greatest impediments to the advancement of their discipline.
This very influential paper was succeeded by others, many also published as Professional Papers, and including exposition of the concept of entropy (Leopold and Langbein, 1962) which is referred to later (p. 159) although the emphasis upon contemporary environments which was being promulgated was reconciled to some extent with the more historical approaches by the time-scales devised by Schumm and Lichty (1965) as indicated at the beginning of chapter 8 (p. 162).
In the 1960s the import of the systems approach to geomorphology was probably reflected most significantly in the emphasis which developed in research investigations as many more dynamic investigations appeared.
Not all geomorphologists were enamoured of the approach and Smalley and Vita-Finzi (1969) considered that general systems theory was unnecessary in the earth sciences and introduced confusion rather than clarification to empirical investigations.
More generally in geography as a whole Chisholm (1967) dismissed the approach as formalizing what had been done before and employing ‘a jargon-ridden statement of the obvious’.
Whereas the developments noted above had appeared in the context of branches of physical geography, in 1971 Physical Geography A Systems Approach was published (Chorley and Kennedy, 1971).
Unlike previous texts, this book made an unreserved attempt to show how the phenomena of physical geography could be rationalized and perhaps given new significance and new coherence in terms of systems theory, and ‘by avoiding the usual pot pourri of information about the earth and its atmosphere which had traditionally been termed physical geography’ it was devoted to the identification and analysis of some of the more important systematic relationships with which modern physical geographers are concerned.
It did not purport to deal with all the subject matter of the field and it was believed that:
…ultimately the real value of this book may lie in the intellectual stimulation it  provides to view traditional material in physical geography in a new light.
The dual purpose of the book was identified as attempting to present a view of landscape and processes in terms relevant to the student of human geography by indicating the ways in which socioeconomic and physical systems interlock and interact, and also by showing how far knowledge of the physical world and its processes is compatible with the ideas of systems theory to demonstrate areas in which research might profitably be concentrated.
In achieving these aims it was undoubtedly enormously successful and must rank as one of the most cited and most influential physical geography textbooks of the twentieth century.
Its impact could probably have been even greater but it ceased to become available to students by 1980 and this was unfortunate when many much less meritorious texts have soldiered on!
The structure of the book was based upon the distinction of four types of medium-scale systems each showing distinct but complementary properties and giving a progressive sequence to higher levels of integration and sophistication.
The four types of system, illustrated in Figure 7.1, were:
a.
Morphological systems which comprise morphological or formal instantaneous physical properties integrated to form a recognizable operational part of physical reality, with the strength and direction of connectivity revealed by correlation analysis.
Figure 7.1:Systems terminology and classification (after Chorley and Kennedy, 1971).
The four types of systems are summarized on p. 146.
b.
Cascading systems composed of chains of subsystems which are dynamically linked by a cascade of mass or energy so that output from one subsystem becomes the input for the adjacent subsystem.
c.
Process-response systems are formed by the intersection of morphological and cascading systems and involve emphasis upon processes and the resulting forms.
d.
Control systems are those where intelligence can intervene to produce operational changes in the distribution of energy and mass.
The impact of this approach on physical geography can be attributed to the ways in which these four types of system could rationalize physical geography endeavour, and could catalyse the introduction of new concepts especially concerned with temporal change.
In an evaluation of the book Cooke (1971) wrote of the work as:
…a further contribution to geography's New Testament, which already includes several works by the senior author.
Written with refreshing vitality and, perhaps, missionary zeal, it will delight the converted, and it may attract physical geographers who are earnestly seeking new solutions to certain of their difficulties.
Cooke noted how many of the examples were rather parochial in being drawn largely from drainage basin, slope and channel studies in geomorphology and hydrology and to a lesser extent from atmospheric research, so that the reader was left to determine how systems related to the biosphere and to the pedosphere.
However in an assessment of the approach in 1971 Cooke (1971, p. 214) concluded:
In terms of integrating physical geography with related disciplines, a systems approach undoubtedly succeeds.
By adopting the terminology of systems, the physical geographer effectively translates his jargon into the lingua franca of much natural, physical and engineering science, and communication with these subjects is thus improved.
Subsequently applied to geography as a whole, Bennett and Chorley (1978) produced a text which attempted to explore firstly the extent to which systems theory provided an interdisciplinary focus for environmental matters and to what extent systems technology provides an adequate vehicle; and secondly to ascertain the manner in which systems approaches aid in the development of an integrated theory relating social and economic theory to physical and biological theory.
The approach which they employed was by using hard systems which are capable of specification, analysis and manipulation in a more or less rigorous and quantitative manner; soft systems which are not tractable by mathematical methods; by exploring examples; and by combining interdisciplinary approaches by  reviewing the dilemmas which confront man's intervention in natural systems.
In their conclusion Bennett and Chorley (1978, p. 541) suggest that systems methods have illuminated thought, clarified objectives, and cut through the theoretical and technical undergrowth during the third quarter of the twentieth century in a most striking manner but in addition:
At the very least we should view the systems approach as a complex training ground wherein to develop the ringcraft, the deftness of touch, the timing, the incisiveness of action, and the introspective forethought which are increasingly necessary in dealing with our escalating environmental problems.
At most, the systems approach provides a powerful vehicle for the statement of environmental situations of ever-growing temporal and spatial magnitude, and for reducing the areas of uncertainty in our increasingly complex decision making control situations.
In an appraisal of the book by Bennett and Chorley (1978) and of a book applying systems throughout geography as a whole (Chapman, 1977) it has been suggested (Kennedy, 1979) that it is premature to adopt the systems approach exclusively if it would lead to the abandonment of other important parts of the subject.
Systems in science
When systems were being adopted in branches of physical geography there were similar developments in other earth sciences.
The concept of a system was not new because Newton had written on the solar system, biologists had been concerned with living systems, and geography had implicitly used notions of the systems concept since early days of the subject.
However as Harvey (1969, p. 449) noted, systems concepts, although old, had tended to remain on the fringe of scientific interest acting more as constraints than as subjects for intensive investigation.
General systems theory was proposed by a biologist Ludwig  von Bertalanffy (1901-) as an analytical framework and procedure for all sciences.
He saw the theory as a way of uniting all sciences but the academic world did not readily accept the theory as presented at a philosophical seminar in Chicago in 1937 (Holt-Jensen, 1981).
Although physics was concerned with general theory at that time the trend elsewhere was to emphasize detailed investigations and to avoid general theories.
This attitude changed by the 1950s and was emphasized by the development of cybernetics, information theory and operations research.
Cybernetics was a new branch of science in the late 1940s formed as a study of regulating and self-regulating mechanisms in nature and technology.
It was primarily concerned with the control mechanisms in systems and with communication processes which determine their successful operation, and part of its mathematical basis is found in information theory (Holt-Jensen, 1981).
The philosophical aspects of general systems theory that von Bertalanffy published in papers and books in the 1950s and 1960s could be approached using cybernetics.
Bertalanffy (1972) distinguished three aspects of the  study of systems.
Firstly, systems science which deals with the scientific investigation of systems and with theory in various sciences.
Secondly, systems technology which is concerned with applications in computer operations and theoretical development such as game theory.
Thirdly systems philosophy which involves reorientation of thought and world view consequent upon the advent of system as a new scientific paradigm.
A system has generally been defined as
(a)
a set of elements with variable characteristics
(b)
the relationships between the characteristics of the elements
(c)
the relationships between the environment and the characteristics of the elements
In analysis, attention has been accorded to the structure of the system, its behaviour which involves energy transfer, its boundaries, its environment, its state whether transient or equilibrium, and its parameters which are unaffected by the operation of the system.
The systems approach has necessarily been identified with a positivist approach and as such has been less resilient in human (Johnston, 1983a) than in physical geography.
Although it has been argued that most of the ideas central to general systems theory are certainly valuable, they had been applied to it without formal knowledge of the theory (Jennings, 1973, p. 124), nevertheless the theory has focused thinking and has probably been responsible for a more comprehensive view of many environmental situations.
The theory is primarily inductive in nature and so lacks explanatory value but it may have helped to counter the trend towards specialization in science.
Boulding (1968) has identified the crisis of science as arising from the fact that communication among disciplines and subdisciplines is increasingly difficult so that the greater the fragmentation into subgroups the more likely that the total growth of knowledge may be inhibited.
Knowledge instead of being pursued in depth and integrated in breadth is pursued in depth but in relative isolation (Lazlo, 1972a) by the specialist who concentrates on detail and tends to ignore the broader context.
The scientist taking a more generalist view should concentrate upon the structure and magnitude at all levels of magnitude, fit detail into the general framework and, by endeavouring to identify relationships, believe that some knowledge of connected complexity is preferable to an even more detailed specialized knowledge.
One expression of this is by Medawar (quoted in Coffey, 1981, p. 30) that ‘in all sciences we are progressively relieved of the burden of singular instances, the tyranny of the particular.
We need no longer record the fall of every apple.’
A basic twofold hierarchical evolution was perceived (Lazlo, 1972b) in the many systems of the universe.
Firstly, the entities of astronomy present a macrohierarchy embracing the entities of astronomy, galaxy clusters, galaxies, star clusters, stars, and planets and subsidiary bodies.
Secondly in a microhierarchy are the terrestrial entities of physics, chemistry, biology, sociology and international organizations which are atoms, molecules, molecular compounds, crystals, cells, multi-cellular organisms and communities of organisms.
The basic components of each hierarchy are atoms or their constituent elementary particles which are composed of quarks.
Huggett (1976b), in an attempt to define geographical systems, extended Lazlo's (1972b) bipartite scheme to include another microhierarchy to provide an evolutionary link between atoms and planets in the macrohierarchy, namely the hierarchy of planetary and geological systems.
Huggett (1976b) also noted that the systems of the atoms-to-planet and the atoms-to-societies hierarchies commingle to produce a third hierarchy which is the hierarchy of environmental systems.
He proceeded to construe geography as the science that deals with systems at the uppermost levels of this environmental, or atoms-to-ecologies, hierarchy although noting that some geographers may delve into systems at a more detailed and fundamental level.
Anuchin (1973) in his view of theory in geography has noted the uncertainty which has characterized much of the geography's growth and its attempts to become an established science when many scientists who were substantially geographers (he cites V.V. Dokuchaev as an example) have often preferred to give their activities another name and (Anuchin, 1973, p. 44):
When one recalls that for decades geography was not recognized as a scholarly discipline, one cannot perhaps be surprised that some scientists have unsuspectingly spent their whole careers studying geography — rather like the well-known character of Molière who did not know that he had been speaking prose all his life!
Anuchin proceeded to style the subject matter of geography within the geographical sphere of the earth as a synthesis of all near-surface spheres (lithosphere, hydrosphere, atmosphere, biosphere, and the sociosphere or neosphere) into one interacting system.
In his application of systems analysis in geography as a whole Huggett (1980) has distinguished a strategy of systems analysis that is applicable to both theoretical, at either a micro- or macro-scale level, or an experimental mode of analysis which observes the nature of relationships between system parts.
The strategy (Huggett, 1980) involved four phases identified as the lexical phase which necessitates identification of system components; the parsing phase which involves establishing relationships between system components; the modelling phase which requires expression of relationships in the context of a model and then calibrating the model; and the analysis phase in which there is an attempt to solve the system model and if not successful the procedure is repeated with a modified model.
An additional approach to geography as a whole using a systems framework has been advocated by Wilson (1981).
Although a human geographer who has specialized in the analysis of urban systems particularly using entropy-maximizing models, in this book he recognizes three types of  system and applies them to both physical and human geography.
He characterizes systems analysis as being concerned with handling complexity, with identifying and understanding systemic effects, with seeking methods which are applicable to a wide range of systems classified into certain types, and with providing tools which aid planning and problem solving.
He concludes that although developed during 25 years, progress has been very rapid, but in many fields there is still considerable scope for further empirical work.
Systems in physical geography
The conclusion of Wilson (1981) that a considerable amount of scope remains for the further empirical development of environmental systems is certainly exemplified by physical geography.
The position achieved in the early 1980s can be assessed from the textbooks that have been written because these should be influencing the methods of instruction in the subject of physical geography as a whole, and also from the position in the branches of physical geography.
Physical geography books written for a variety of educational levels have adopted a systems viewpoint to provide an organizational structure.
Thus in her Physical Geography King (1980a) adopts a systems framework in combination with an emphasis upon three scales of investigation and treats local-scale studies and continental-scale studies, and global-scale studies separately.
In his book on Environmental Systems Dury (1981) adopts an approach to physical environment in which he adopts the four-fold classification of systems devised by Chorley and Kennedy (1971) but in addition adds a fifth type in the form of an ecosystem justified as including ‘sets of biosystems which interact with one another and with their immediate physical environment’.
In a sequel to his earlier well-established physical geography texts Strahler adopts a systems basis for his book in which (Strahler and Strahler, 1976):
Two contemporary trends in physical geography are emphasized.
One trend is toward a climatology geared more closely to the soil-water balance and the availability of soil water to plants.
A second trend is toward linking physical and organic processes through the concept of cycling of energy and materials within ecosystems.
To analyse problems of world food resources, the geographer must integrate his knowledge of physical systems with the  ecologists' knowledge of ecosystem dynamics.
In these examples, and more could be cited, the system is used as a convenient model for disseminating the contemporary attitude to physical geography.
One book, published before Chorley and Kennedy, presented the geosystem as a single planetary system in which land, sea and air are dynamically integrated as a consequence of processes by which energy, matter and momentum are continually exchanged (Rumney, 1970).
Although this book was published before many of the systems texts, and therefore is largely non-quantitative, it was refreshing in that it was a brief treatment, which began with the energy budget of the atmosphere and proceeded to include all aspects of the environmental system including the sea in the geosystem, a topic frequently ignored by physical geographers in the second half of the twentieth century.
Although ignoring man and control systems, taking many detailed facts from the period of physical geography before systems and beginning with two chapters which are very climatologically inspired, nevertheless the approach was refreshing in that it indicated what could be done to redress the imbalance detected by some physical geographers (e.g. Brown, 1975) and to counter the increasingly fissiparist tendencies of the previous decades.
Perhaps one of the greatest advantages of a systems viewpoint has been to cement the branches of physical geography more closely and therefore to make what Walton (1968) characterized as the unity of the physical environment a more realistic prospect.
In branches of physical geography the systems approach was also used as part of a fundamental basis for the study of drainage basins,(Gregory and Walling, 1973) or of alluvial river channels (Richards, 1982) and it has been used as the basic vehicle for other branches of geomorphology.
In presenting a geomorphological approach to glaciers and landscape Sugden and John (1976) utilize a simple systems approach as a vehicle for the explanation of complicated ideas because they believe ‘in the value of a systems framework as a powerful explanatory tool’.
In such cases the system is merely used as a collective vehicle for an open-system approach which involves input, storage, output relationships; for systems hierarchies; and for concepts such as thresholds and relaxation times which relate to change and are considered in chapter 8 (p. 174).
More recently Sugden (1982) has utilized a systems framework for his synthesis of the character of the Arctic and Antarctic.
In geomorphology in general Thornes and Ferguson (1981) follow Weaver (1958) and Wilson (1981) in recognizing three kinds of systems.
First are simple systems which involve not more than three or four variables and can be handled by relatively simple techniques, including regression models and partial differential equations although finite difference methods may increase in the future.
Secondly are systems of complex disorder where there are large numbers of components and therefore of variables but only weak linkages between them, and they are handled by probabilistic methods of statistical mechanics.
This includes probabilistic approaches to soil creep and to stream networks, coastal spit simulation and Box Jenkins models.
Thirdly there are systems of complex order where there are a large number of components which have a strong organized interaction.
The complexity increases as the square of the number of components so that simple analysis techniques cannot be employed and catastrophe theory and perturbation analysis are examples of appropriate analysis procedures.
In climatology the system has been adopted as providing a suitable framework and appears as the introductory foundation for Causes of Climate (Lockwood, 1979a), where it is argued that the application of systems theory and mathematics has completely changed the subject of climatology.
The three types of systems which are distinguished are isolated systems which have boundaries which are closed to the import and export of both mass and energy; open systems where there is exchange of both matter and energy between the system and its environment, such as clouds; and closed systems in which there is no exchange of matter between the system and its environment though there is in general an exchange of energy.
The atmosphere, oceans and landsurfaces are considered as a series of cascading systems connected by flows of mass or energy.
In a review of climatology as it relates to geography Terjung (1976) reviewed the position of climatology in geography teaching and research and suggested:
…geographers who are interested in the physical environment of man need to be trained rather differently than in the past.
We can afford no second-class investigators.
Geographers who want to work in the environmental sciences must be willing to learn the methods of these sciences, lest we lose the respect of our colleagues in such fields.
Prospective physical geographers should take basic courses in calculus, physics, chemistry, engineering, modern biology, and computer programming.
On higher levels of instruction, geography departments should develop courses which stress a core of basic thermodynamics and hydrodynamics and their relation to the environmental envelope of relevance to mankind.
Instead of drumming the trivial facts of physical geography of yesteryear into the heads of reluctant freshmen, introducing classes should teach the concepts of systems analysis and the flows of energy, mass, momentum, and information through various environments of our planet.
Acknowledging the creative ideas in the systems approach of Chorley and Kennedy (1971) five classes of methodology were identified by Terjung (1976).
These include qualitative inventory and associations; quantitative structural correlations analogous to the morphological system in geomorphology; functioning processes concentrating upon the paths followed by energy, mass and momentum through the subsystems of the planetary boundary layer, the interfaces near the earth's surface, and the soil-plant-water systems; physical process-response systems which link the morphological and cascading systems; and finally physical-human process-response systems which are equivalent to the geographical control systems identified by Chorley and Kennedy (1971).
Although this fifth category is as yet insufficiently developed Terjung (1976) argued that it is increasingly appropriate as a research level for geographer climatologists.
In hydrology the systems approach has been easily assimilated because the hydrological cycle readily lent itself to systems representation and because use of the cycle, as in water resource systems, further commended the approach.
Therefore a number of general geographic texts (e.g. Bennett and Chorley, 1978; Huggett, 1980; Wilson, 1981) have used illustrations  from this subject area and such illustrations were also prominent in physical geography (Chorley and Kennedy, 1971).
Approaches to hydrological model building have been either via physical hydrology, which is the investigation of the components of the hydrological cycle to achieve a full understanding of the mechanisms and interactions involved, or by systems synthesis investigations, which attempted a complete simulation of drainage basin operation by adjusting the components and the parameters of the model until outputs from the model agreed with empirical results from known inputs.
Physical geographers have been most devoted to the physical hydrology approach using models for subsystems such as evaporation, infiltration, surface runoff or groundwater or overall catchment models.
Although physical geographers have contributed less extensively to the optimization of general systems synthesis models, nevertheless they have to be aware of the work achieved by engineers.
More (1967) in a review of hydrological models in geography concluded that although there are large areas of overlap between hydrology and geography, the two disciplines have developed quite separately, that many of the hydrological models developed have not been geographic in their inception, but that geographers should not ignore the implications of the fast-moving science of hydrology.
When investigating the hydrological system a convenient distinction has been made (Amorocho and Hart, 1964) between parametric hydrology which develops relationships between physical parameters involved in hydrologic events, and stochastic hydrology which employs the statistical characteristics of hydrologic variables to solve hydrologic problems.
Soil and vegetation systems have been considered together by Trudgill (1977) when he perceptively noted that:
The maddening thing is that once it is realized that the environment is a mutually reactive system, it becomes extremely difficult to isolate and discuss specialized points in a simple way without at the same time being tempted to discuss every interaction and interrelationship which exists in the system.
The expedient adopted by Trudgill is to deal with each component of soil and vegetation in turn and then to build up a sequential picture of the whole system.
The components of nutrient systems treated are weathering and atmospheric inputs, the leaching output and nutrient cycling, and this leads to models of the system and to models of stability and change.
Although Trudgill (1977) did not follow his initial intention to deal in detail with the three main systems of flow and cycling nutrients, energy and water, these energy flows are prominent in his book.
In his alternative biogeography Gersmehl (1976) also focuses upon the circulation of mineral elements modelled as a system of compartments and transfer pathways.
A focus within the environmental system
A review of the way in which a systems viewpoint has been adopted by  physical geography textbooks as well as in some research is justified because the alacrity with which the approach was adopted perhaps emphasizes that there was a clear need for a unifying approach.
The systems viewpoint has certainly retarded, or perhaps even reversed, the trend towards great specialization and separation of the branches of physical geography from each other and from human geography.
However the adoption of the systems approach as a textbook framework, although producing some stimulating texts which effectively transcended the traditional boundaries of physical geography (e.g. Chorley and Kennedy, 1971; Trudgill 1977), has not been paralleled by an equal amount of adoption as a vehicle for research programmes.
Is there a danger that physical geographers pay lip service to the benefits of the systems approach but do not adopt, adapt and apply it sufficiently in their researches?
Perhaps also in certain textbooks the systems approach has become adopted in outline as a prelude to conventional content without requiring any fundamental adjustment in the content of the physical geography textbooks.
It is important to distinguish between systems analysis which can mathematically optimize some attribute of the links within and between systems, and General Systems Theory which purports that all systems can be understood by the application of systems principles.
The danger of adopting a systems approach uncritically is that it is assumed that it is sufficient to identify system structures and to portray the multitudinous variables involved in a particular system which then reinforces the first law of ecology as graphically described by Commoner (1972) that everything is connected to everything else.
However Commoner (1972) also stated three other laws of ecology; everything must go somewhere; nature knows best; and there's no such thing as a free lunch because somebody somewhere must foot the bill.
Perhaps physical geography has been overtly concerned with the parallel to the first law rather than proceeding to the equivalent of the other three!
A further example of the somewhat static way in which physical geographers have tended to utilize a system is afforded by the runoff-producing system.
Many physical geography texts and papers have used the hydrological cycle as an exemplar of the way in which systems components may be identified and the structure expressed.
However although the diagrams presented identify the stores and the pathways between the stores they do not effectively represent the dynamics of the runoff-producing system.
Such dynamics have to be visualized in three dimensions because, as the area of saturation adjacent to water courses expands during a storm, so the runoff-producing area expands and hence other types of runoff begin to influence the operation of the system.
Thus a systems diagram cannot completely represent the dynamic situation and the way in which changes occur during a storm event.
To progress beyond such a static application of systems it is necessary to focus upon the dynamics of the system and in the preceding few pages a number of instances have been cited where physical geographers have  already advocated placing emphasis upon the function of the system.
These include the approaches adopted by Lockwood (1979a), by Terjung (1976) and by Simmons (1978), the approach considered by Trudgill (1977) and the approach developed in an introductory text by White, Mottershead and Harrison (1984).
In each of these cases the emphasis is placed upon the transfers of mass and energy and this may provide a much-needed focus of further development for the extension of the systems approach employing the notions of rate of doing work or of power.
Such transfers of mass and energy are fundamental features of cascading systems as recognized by Chorley and Kennedy (1971) but are capable of further emphasis.
The geography of energy was the subject for a paper by Linton (1965) which appeared well before the advent of the systems approach.
Although Chorley (1973b, p. 157) argued that Linton's idea of:
…flows of capital investment, population, technological information, generated energy, water, and the like, together with such constraints as involve interest policies and the mechanisms of group decision-making, can be reduced to comparable units so as to be structured into energy linkages similar to those of ecosystems is clearly an illusion…
however in physical geography the geography of energy may afford a pertinent focus.
Considering geography as the description of the changes that take place or have taken place in or at the surface of the earth Linton (1965) suggested that any changes which occur in the real world imply that work has been done and energy expended.
Four sources of energy were identified namely radiant energy from the sun; internal energy from the earth's interior; rotational energy of the whole and parts of the solar system; and vital energy which is energy in the service of man.
Each of these sources was explained very geographically and Linton (1965, p. 227) concluded:
To my academic colleagues on both the physical and human sides and the biogeographical middle of the subject I would like to express the hope that my method of expressing salient parameters, in fields as far apart as climatology and social geography, in terms of a common set of units — the Watt and the calorie — has value for the future of our subject.
Perhaps the future which Linton perceptively visualized has not yet been realized in this way but the basis of energy has certainly been advocated in the branches of physical geography, and perhaps most c! early in climatology.
In the paper which succeeded that by Linton, Hare (1965) emphasized energy exchanges within the atmosphere where energy signified the capacity to do work and where work is what happens when force accelerates mass over distance.
Subsequently Hare (1966) suggested that the outstanding change in climatology in the post-1945 years has been the shift away from parameters such as temperature and relative humidity and towards the measurement of fluxes.
This has necessitated a concern with the movement and transformation of energy in the atmospheric  boundary layer, in the plant cover and in the soil so that progress could be made towards understanding the mechanism of energy and moisture exchange.
Subsequently it was suggested (Hare, 1973) that this trend in climatology had been emphasized by three other contributions identified as the micrometeorological method whereby a branch of experimental physics has used experimental techniques to provide physical insights into the nature of the earth's surface and planetary boundary layers; the microclimatological method where the techniques of micrometeorological measurement and boundary layer theory together with the related parts of soil physics and plant physiology are applied to exchange and transformation processes over natural surfaces, leading to study of energy transformation at the land surface, water movement upwards and downwards through the soil, and to how carbon dioxide is assimilated during photosynthesis and released during respiration; and the hydrological method whereby energy exchange during the hydrological cycle was quantified.
These methods are analogous to the energy-centred methods adopted by ecologists.
In his view of climatology for geographers Terjung (1976) has also advocated the emphasis on the process-response systems related to mankind which occur with the planetary boundary layer, interface and substrates and he has advocated study of flows of energy, mass, momentum and information through the various environments of the planet earth (see p. 152).
Similarly in their view of climatology: ‘The challenge for the eighties’ Mather et al .
(1980) concluded that climatology must systematically investigate the exchanges of heat, water and momentum that occur at or near the earth's surface and should focus upon topoclimatology as well as on transfer processes.
In a search for a more unifying theme for the physical-human geography interface, Simmons (1978) advocated the study of energy in contemporary society.
Although not referring to Linton's earlier (1965) article published in the same journal, Simmons did trace the relevance of the Lindeman model of ecosystems and its development in a book by H.T. and E.C.
Odum (1976) on Energy Basis for Man and Nature .
This book begins with the statement that everything is based on energy, provides simple box models of energy flows in ecosystems and so embraces both cultural and natural components.
In addition to clear definitions of energy, power as the rate at which energy flows, and efficiency which is any ratio of energy flows, Odum and Odum (1976) propose three principles of energy flows; the law of conservation of energy; the law of degradation of energy which introduces entropy as a measure of technical disorder to signify the extent to which energy is unable to do work; and the principle that systems which use energy best survive, which is the maximum power principle or minimum energy expenditure principle.
Adopting the taxonomy of energy systems employed by ecologists Simmons (1978) suggests that geographers could use a set of ecosystem types which broadly provide a set of spatial regions (Table 7.1) which conform to patterns identified from analysis of  satellite data.
Subsequently in casting his text on biogeography Simmons (1979a) imaginatively used energy as an early key to the understanding of natural biogeography which through food chains, productivity, nutrient cycles and population dynamics provides the basis for the subsequent treatment of cultural biogeography.
Elsewhere it has been argued that ecosystems are ordered arrangements of matter in which energy inputs carry out work (Stoddart, 1965) and that if the energy input is removed the structure will break down until the components are randomly arranged which with maximum entropy is the most probable state.
Stoddart subsequently noted (1967b, p. 537):
Geography is clearly concerned with systems on a multitude of levels.
A preliminary attempt to develop a science of ‘geocybernetics’ has been made in a little-known paper by Polonskiy (1963)…
The study of geosystems may now replace that of ecosystems in geography…
Table 7.1:Ecosystem types according to energy level (Based upon Simmons, 1979 after Odum, 1975)
A focus upon energy flows is certainly appropriate for physical geography and Simmons (1978) has considered how it may provide a more generally applicable theme but has cautioned (Simmons, 1978, p. 320):
A case can thus be made for energy flows as linkages between man and environment, both in terms of resource uses and environmental impact.
But caution is necessary, for the homogeneity of kilocalories and gigajoules may hide qualitative and cultural aspects of the flows which as geographers we are not at liberty to ignore.
F.E. Egler sounded the same note when talking about the way ecological energetics — especially the trophic level concept — ignored taxonomic consideration.
He said that ecological energetics was like grinding up cows to make hamburgers — you could not be sure a monkey had not slipped in somewhere.
The basis for use of energy in biogeography derives not only from work in ecology generally but also from the field of bioenergetics.
Thus Broda (1975) has suggested that until the significance of the first law of thermodynamics that heat is a form of energy, had been appreciated, and until energy distribution implications of the second law had been assimilated, then progress in the analysis of bioenergetical processes was uneven and patchy.
This can be developed by regarding organisms as chemodynamical machines, by identifying three classes of bioenergetic processes namely fermentation, photosynthesis, and respiration, and by utilizing an approach to classification based upon microphysiology and biochemistry as well as upon macrostructure of organisms and upon macrophysiological processes.
Broda, who was in 1975 in the Institute of Physical Chemistry in Vienna, then applies bioenergetics to early conditions on earth and to the ecosphere in general.
Although it could be assumed by some that this is a development towards a more specialized and fragmented approach it may alternatively be a foundation for a more unified approach and one which accommodates the necessity to combine understanding at the microphysiology and biochemistry (realist?) level with that at the biome level which had traditionally been approached more in functional terms.
In soils energy considerations have already been noted (p. 142) and Gerrard (1981) referring to Runge (1973) has reviewed the energy status of soil systems by recognizing three components.
The decay component is where the energy status gradually declines and eventually the system should continue to a state of virtual exhaustion; the cyclic component occurs because energy and possibly material input changes in a rhythmic manner associated with diurnal and seasonal climatic cycles; and a random component is provided by irregular supplies of energy such as rainstorms.
In the Runge (1973) model soil development is visualized in terms of organic  matter production, time, and the amount of water available for leaching.
The water available depends upon the amount of water that infiltrates and becomes available for pedogenesis compared with that which is removed by surface flow and hence is not available.
The three-dimensional view of the plasmic flux of material in an idealized basin is modelled by Huggett (1975).
In hydrology, definition of the pathways of movement through the hydrological cycle has necessarily provided an important focus in studies by physical geographers but in geomorphology the use of concepts based upon energy-balance concepts has been less striking.
Hare (1973) has suggested (see also p. 111) that this is because fluvial processes tend to be dominated by extreme events rather than balance relationships, and that the geomorphic time-scale is very long compared with that appropriate for climatic processes, although glaciology is in a very different situation.
Indeed it is in the field of glacial geomorphology that one of the most imaginative approaches has been devised by Andrews (1972), who provided an analysis of total glacier power (W T ) as the product of basal shear stress and the average velocity.
Effective power (W E ) was determined by the proportion of the total average velocity resulting from basal sliding so that the ratio W T /WE could vary largely according to the proportion of basal slip to internal ice deformation.
Andrews proposed that W T /WE is small, between zero and 0.2 for polar and sub-polar glaciers, but between 0.5 and 0.8 and tending towards 1.0 for temperate glaciers.
The implication which follows, that the glacial erosional forms produced by arctic and by temperate glaciers differ in size and geometry, receives some support from the glacial geomorphology literature.
A further application in geomorphology was developed by Caine (1976) when he estimated the physical work in joules represented by different types of sediment movement.
More generally, energy together with forces, resistances and responses, is used to introduce process in geomorphology by Embleton and Thornes (1979) where energy is attributed to solar radiation atomic energy, chemical energy, gravity, and energy of the earth's rotation sources.
Energy therefore provides a potentially useful theme throughout the branches of physical geography and there are indications that it could be the basis for a more integrated approach.
Perhaps the most important and fundamental paper was by Leopold and Langbein (1962) when they reviewed the concept of entropy in landscape evolution.
Because entropy relates to the distribution of energy the principle was introduced that the most probable condition exists when energy in a river system is distributed as uniformly as possible according to the physical constraints.
This principle which is analogous to the implication of the second law of thermodynamics in relation to thermal energy, governs the energy transfers in fluvial processes, the spatial relations at any one time, and the sequence of development from one stage in geomorphic history to another.
By developing the principle of least work as one of several ways in which the  condition of maximum probability may exist in relation to entropy, Leopold and Langbein (1962) theoretically derived the longitudinal profile of rivers and the hydraulic geometry of river channels.
A more general approach to the physical-geographical sphere and the anthroposphere has also been offered using entropy in relation to a cybernetic system by Krcho (1978).
This structural attempt, although not referring to earlier work in English by Leopold and Langbein (1962) or Chorley and Kennedy (1971) affords one indication of the way in which a general energy-based approach is being sought.
Although already referred to elsewhere (p. 116) the most generally applicable energy-based approach is perhaps that advocated by Hewitt and Hare (1973).
Proceeding from the system of exchanges of energy and mass in the biosphere and between the atmosphere and land surface, they show how the functions of an ecosystem require a never-ending series of exchanges of energy, water, atmospheric gases and mineral nutrients between the organic and inorganic parts of the system.
Although models of paths and storage reservoirs have been developed by ecologists, geochemists and climatologists, there is a need to progress towards a multidimensional model of the entire system and in relation to physical geography Hewitt and Hare (1973, p. 37) conclude:
The vast volume of writing on environment in the past five years has produced a cloud of obfuscation, but here and there among it one can learn from one's scientific and political neighbours.
Perhaps in the import of systems, more than in any other development in twentieth-century physical geography, there has been a need to learn from such scientific and political neighbours.
Perhaps too the future of systems, by focusing upon the mechanics of the system, will necessarily incorporate processes, man and change over time, and employ quantitative methods — thus providing an integration of the themes in the previous four chapters.
This has been achieved in outline in the urban system by Douglas (1983).
However, systems change and the more integrated approach and understanding has led to the inception of new and original concepts and these will provide the basis for chapter 8.