

Class, Race, and Sex
THE station was an extraordinary agent of social mixing.
Its position at the centre of cities and in most suburban, country-town, and rural communities meant that it was accessible to all classes.
They met there as fellow travellers, as masters and servants, as patrons and employees.
For the very poorest the station was one of the few places where they could encounter the better-off, and attempt some income redistribution by the provision of services like newspaper-selling, boot-blacking, hawking, or simply begging.
Outside Europe, class hierarchies were further complicated by those of race.
Where class was underpinned by race, the economic and cultural gulf was even greater.
Again, it was at stations that the classes were most likely to encounter each other, and be provided with brief windows into each other 's lives.
But the stations were in many respects designed to avoid these encounters across class and racial boundaries as much as possible.
The provision of waiting-rooms for the different travelling classes effectively separated social class and racial group.
The railway ticket was an indication of social standing, and, in the case of first class, a passport to protection.
The first-class passenger could move from wheeled conveyance to first-class waiting-room to first-class compartment with only the briefest rubbing of shoulders with other classes in between.
European railways not only reflected but also played their part in institutionalizing the stratified class system which had emerged in the wake of the Industrial Revolution.
Britain set the pattern with three classes of travel and the concomitant gradation of station facilities.
The rest of Europe followed.
In Imperial Russia the carriages were painted different colours for ease of recognition: blue for first class, brown for second class, and green for third.
The earliest big city terminals, like London Euston (1839) and Naples Porta Nolana (1839), had separate station entrances and separate booking-halls for different classes of travellers.
But as the century proceeded, these rigid differences were to some extent eroded.
In Britain the Midland Railway Company announced its intention in 1872 to admit third-class passengers to all of its trains at a penny-a-mile fare and in 1874 to abolish second class and reduce all  first-class fares to second-class rates.
Other companies reluctantly followed suit, though it was not until 1910 that the Great Western Railway phased out the last of its second-class carriages.
This marked a major transformation in railway-company thinking.
The companies had initially encouraged the ‘quality’ and lavished their attention on first-class passengers.
When compelled by Gladstone's 1844 Act to introduce cheap workmen's trains every weekday the companies complied only with reluctance and their ‘parliamentary trains’ became a byword for slowness, dirtiness, and discomfort.
The Midland, however, cannily saw the profit to be made from exploiting the potential mass market and led the way.
The figures speak for themselves.
In 1845, 40.51 per cent of all passengers carried in Britain were first class, 42.34 per cent second, and 17.15 per cent third.
By 1922, 1.72 per cent were first, 0.37 per cent second, and 97.91 per cent third.
It is no coincidence that the Midland's liberalization policy follows closely on the passing of the second Reform Act (1867), which extended the franchise, and Forster's Education Act (1870), which extended educational provision.
They can all be seen as part of a gradual but progressive process in the spreading of democracy.
But it was an extension that in the first instance was of greatest benefit to the middle classes, who were, in both a social and a transportation sense, the mobile classes.
The working classes rarely travelled far, and if they did it was on foot or, in the later years of the century, by tram, ‘the gondola of the working classes’.
A similar process of levelling can be seen on the Continent.
In Denmark, for instance, there were technically three classes of train travel, but first class came to be restricted to the sleeping-car stock on international trains.
So, effectively, there were only two classes, and by 1931 an estimated 96 per cent of all Danish train travellers went third class.
For all this, class divisions remained, particularly in the station facilities of the larger terminals.
John Pendleton reported in 1896:
The class ‘barrier’ is still strong and sturdy in the railway refreshment room.
The bishop and the blacksmith may travel third class together, and chat by the way; but they will not be permitted to take luncheon side by side in the first-class refreshment room, if the blacksmith, like the bishop, wears the apron of his calling.
‘You must go to the other room, sir’ says the graceful girl behind the counter firmly to the blacksmith; and the great robust worker, blushing through the grime that streaks his face, awkwardly protests, perhaps, but withdraws.
The first-class refreshment is sacred to the well-dressed and those free from toil stain.
This class division is further reflected, as profound truths so often are, in humour.
Refreshment-room manageress to waitress: ‘These tarts are quite stale.
They've been on the counter a fortnight.
Would you mind taking them through into the third-class refreshment room?’
Such distinctions continued even after the Great War.
At the rebuilt Waterloo Station, opened in 1922, there were first- and third-class ladies' lavatories.
But there was no class distinction for the men, who had access to a subterranean ‘gentlemen's court’ 800 ft. long and 40 ft. wide, with marble floors, white-tiled walls, bathrooms, boot-cleaning, and a hairdressing salon, as well as the actual lavatories.
Railway Magazine in 1910 described this convenience as ‘perhaps the finest in England’.
It was after the Second World War that the class distinction in station facilities disappeared, although it remained on the trains.
No such levelling process took place in Asia and Africa.
In the non-European world it was the requirement to provide separate facilities for a complex hierarchy of class and race which made many railway stations larger affairs than they need otherwise have been.
In India the situation was further complicated by dietary requirements.
At stations where catering facilities were available, there would be provision for first-class, European, passengers and for both vegetarian and non-vegetarian diets.
At many stations in India, and particularly in Africa, the third- and fourth-class waiting-rooms were often physically removed from the main range of station buildings.
However grand the latter might be, those who bought the lower order of tickets were condemned to tin huts at the end of the platforms where the sole facility might be a single stand-pipe tap.
Although the imperial and colonial railway companies discovered that Indians and Africans desired to travel in large numbers and contributed the bulk of passenger earnings, little money was spent on their comforts.
The rudimentary nature of sanitary provision both justified and necessitated the separation of the races.
Stations jealous of their disciplines maintained a class and racial division on specific parts of the platform and between platforms.
The provision of trains that were solely first and second class, and therefore expected to be used only by the imperial race, helped this arrangement.
This was the case on the main routes in India and in southern and eastern Africa.
These disciplines were to prove an index of the strength of imperial rule.
With decline, such distinctions broke down, and the ruling race was forced to come into closer contact with the ruled.
The imperial guides offered advice on such problems.
Murray's Handbook advised that Europeans should allow their servants to tip coolies and not do so themselves.
It also warned against thieves at stations and advised that possessions should not be left near carriage  windows.
When passengers went to station refreshment rooms, servants should be left in charge of their property.
In India the railways never made any attempt to distinguish among the castes.
Indeed, the manner in which the railways forced the mixing of the castes was said to have been a contributory cause of the Mutiny in 1857, although it must be said that the revolt broke out in an area still far from the early Indian railway projects.
The British persisted in this, and all their economic and social policies were directed towards the substitution of class for caste.
The effect of the separate dietary arrangements was to separate Hindu from Muslim in station buffets rather than caste from caste.
But even without the sanction of separate waiting-rooms or toilets, caste continued to condition the reaction of Indians to each other.
The higher castes often attempted, though not always successfully, to create their own cordon sanitaire about them when travelling.
It was always said that water-sellers at Indian stations had to be of a high caste.
At one time the classes of passenger vehicles on Indian railways were painted in different colours, as in Russia.
On the Madras railway the first-class carriages were white, the second-class dark green, and the third-class were dark red.
The choice of colours is instructive.
The Great Indian Peninsula Railway soon abandoned this system, and upgraded some third-class trains by upholstering the seats and providing Venetian shutters.
Some Indian railways attempted to cope with the great pressure of third-class passengers by installing them in double-decker carriages, but these had soon to be abandoned because they proved to be unsafe and top-heavy.
The 1919 Murray's Handbook asked in a revealing suggestion that travellers should watch out for instances when third-class passengers were not treated considerately and should report them to the management.
It was, of course, at stations that acts of gross racial prejudice were indeed committed.
The brutal ejection of Gandhi on to a station platform in South Africa has been made famous by Sir Richard Attenborough's film.
But such scenes could also be witnessed in his native India.
One visitor to India reported on just such an event which occurred in the Bombay presidency at the end of Victoria's reign:
One day a subaltern got into a first-class railway carriage and found sitting there a ‘coloured gentleman’.
In a fit of rage, he seized the poor man by the shoulders, and, shouting to him ‘Out you go, you black beast!’ pitched him and his portmanteaus on to the platform.
This, to his great astonishment, caused a considerable disturbance; and when he inquired what the people meant by putting themselves out over a black man, an Englishman who was passing  answered: ‘Well, perhaps you don't know it, but you have just thrown one of Her Majesty's judges out of the train.’’
The terms of this account make it sound like a common occurrence; only the rank of the victim was uncommon.
One of the strongest indications of class throughout the world came to be the length of time the travellers were prepared to spend at the station and the quantity of baggage which they had with them when they passed through it.
Members of upper class or ruling race were always able to send servants to the station to book tickets and to check baggage.
The higher order of passenger was able to arrive at the station shortly before the departure of the train and proceed directly to accommodation on it.
If the train were late, then these passengers could repair to the hotel which would almost certainly have been provided near by to eat, drink, or rest.
It is ironical, then, that the superior accommodation of the station was perhaps the accommodation least used.
The passage of the European through the Indian station, his dependence on servants, and the quantity of baggage carried were all well described by Sir Sidney Low, writing in 1911.
Low commented that the British in India spent much of their time on long journeys by rail, and their journeys were ‘elaborate proceedings, not to be transacted in the casual fashion’ customary in Europe:
It is no case of packing a portmanteau, whistling at the door for a hansom, arriving at the station ten minutes before the train starts, giving a sixpence to the civil porter, and finding yourself under way with an open magazine on your knees.
There are no hansoms; and if there were, a file of them would be needed to transport a very ordinary Sahib's effects.
The amount of luggage which people take with them, even on comparatively short journeys, would amaze those austere travellers who believe that the trunk and a handbag should be enough to carry them anywhere.
[In India]every white traveller…must move rather like a snail, and sometimes at a snail's pace, with his house, or a good part of it, on his back.
When he arrives at his destination he cannot rely upon finding effective substitutes not merely for the luxuries, but for the common necessaries, which he may have left behind.
Thus, like an army in campaigning order, or a ship on the high seas, he must have sufficient in his own stores to be equal to all emergencies.’
It was scarcely on his own back, however, that the Sahib's impedimenta were borne:
The servants manage it.
Some hours before the train is due to leave, a bullock-cart, or camel-cart, or perhaps even an elephant-lorry, arrives at the bungalow, and takes the whole of the load to the station, in charge of the head ‘boy’.
Round it on arrival a disorderly crowd of ragged coolies collects, and amid squabbling and objurgations about their female relatives, the various parcels are  distributed among them.
The number of these bearers is large.
My own not immoderate personal effects have furnished employment for eleven persons…
Long after all this excitement has subsided, the owner of the property drives down comfortably in a carriage or pony-cart, having sent the indispensable chit to the station-master, asking that official to allow his servants to stow his hand-baggage in the compartment reserved for him.
Quantity of baggage was everywhere a sign of class and status.
On the Ceylon railways, first-class passengers were allowed 84 lb., second-class 56 lb., and third-class a mere 28 lb.
The General Regulations and Information for Passengers of the railways of that colony had elaborate provisions for the conveyance of horses, dogcarts, carriages, and palanquins, together with their servants.
The railway station seems to have symbolized the reliance of Europeans upon their servants throughout Asia and Africa.
In Egypt, Lord Edward Cecil was incapable of buying so much as his ticket on his own.
When going on leave, Cecil sent his servant with all his baggage to the station, but the servant forgot his master's railway pass (the servant forgot it, note), so
I am obliged to take a ticket.
The ticket clerk, who is a villainous-looking Copt, is apparently adding up the monetary results of his last night's murders, and dislikes being interrupted.
To mark his disapproval of my doing so he gives me the wrong ticket and some change, of which the amount, as far as I can see, bears no relation to any previous transaction between us.
Just as I am drawing his attention to the point and beginning what I know will be a long and wearying discussion, Mirsal, who has been fighting the cabman about his fare outside, appears and lets loose such a torrent of thumbnail word portraits of the clerk's family that, used as I am to his powers in this respect, I am struck dumb with admiration.
The clerk, realising from Mirsal's uniform that I belong to the sacred official class, merely bows his head to the storm, pays up and looks pleasant.
On finding his carriage on the train, Cecil is
greeted by my secretary and the man with the feather brush, no one else having arrived as it is so early.
However, the man with the feather brush is there.
The man with the feather brush is indispensable in the highest ceremonials, and is present on the most ordinary occasions.
When you enter a railway compartment, the seats are dusted by him.
The operation itself is usually purely formal, and only just stirs up enough dust to make you cough a little, but it is a sign that you belong to the higher or fit-to-be-dusted classes.
The man with the feather brush seems to have been a station functionary unique to Egypt.
At the lower end of the social scale, the dusty rather than the ‘fit-to-be-dusted’ classes, people were prepared to encamp at the station for days.
With less reliable means of reaching the station, with perhaps less requirement for haste, and less opportunity to understand the timetables or gauge time by any other means than the sun, these passengers used all the patience of the peasant to wait for their appropriate train.
And they normally used the ‘mixed’ trains, which, since they stopped at every station and carried all manner of freight as well as third- and fourth-class carriages, were the ones which were most likely to be inordinately late.
It was regarded as a great advance when third-class passenger expresses were introduced on the East India Railway.
The distinction between the punctual ‘mail’ train for first- and second-class passengers and the unpunctual ‘mixed’for the others persists in Southern Africa to this day.
On his ‘Big Red Train Ride’ in 1977, Eric Newby found these class approaches to the catching of and waiting for the trains, which have been such a characteristic of colonial societies in India and Africa, still very much the norm in the communist countries.
The waiting room at the Moscow station where Newby caught the Trans-Siberian was like waiting-rooms in all communist countries, the ‘preserve of the lumpen proletariat, the hoi polloi’, with not a member of the administrative or managerial class to be seen.
The latter would arrive by taxi or office car, and proximity to the time of departure of the train would be a sign of status.
In the waiting-room itself, the poorer people encamped for days, eating, sleeping, occupying every available area of seating and floor space.
And, Newby went on, the superior class would have their baggage wheeled to and installed on the train, tipping the porters in the process, much as in the time of the last of the Tsars.
Just as the Revolution in Russia made little difference, so has the departure of imperial rule from most Afro-Asian countries.
The lower classes still wait, as in Russia, days for the train.
If there is any difference, it is that they have now taken over all the station and the upper classes have generally disappeared.
The latter now choose to use what they regard as the more salubrious transportation of the motor car or the aeroplane.
But for the rest the similarity in the descriptions of station encampments shows a remarkable continuity between the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
No such continuity can be found, however, in the case of Japan.
In 1898 a visitor noted that the poorest among early Japanese rail travellers were prepared to make long waits for the train:
For hurry and the Oriental are two.
Though the Japanese are by no means a lazy or an idle race, and though they possess none of that apathetic indolence common to those Eastern races who dwell beneath a tropical sun, still all notions  of speed, haste or flurry are utterly foreign to their nature.
Centuries of Western training will be necessary before a Japanese will be able to appreciate the significance of such a phrase as ‘catching a train by the skin of one's teeth!’
The native of Japan arrives at the station two or three hours before the train is due.
If he be a rustic, or unused to travelling, and he intends to take a morning train, he will probably make a point of taking up a strong position at the station the night before his prospective journey and camping on the platform.
The contrast with modern Japanese rail travel can well be imagined.
But not all station encampments have been of rail travellers.
Others — pilgrims, itinerants, beggars, hawkers — used the station because they could find there light, water, security from robbers, as well as the opportunity to earn some money.
The station thus harboured a community of people who slept, ate, cooked, suckled infants, and tried to earn a living there.
It was divided into its own hierarchies, the commercial sector of small-scale business men and women at the top, the beggars at the bottom.
European stations showed signs of developing such communities in the nineteenth century, but they were usually swept away.
In Africa and Asia such encampments were tolerated because of the sheer scale of the problem.
But beggars everywhere have found the station a prime pitch.
When leaving on his epic journey around the world, Phileas Fogg encountered a begging woman with her child at Charing Cross Station and gave her the proceeds of his recent success at whist.
In the early 1950s an English visitor to Russia observed that beggars were still to be found around the terminals of Moscow, ‘often young men with one or more limbs missing’.
They were probably war veterans.
But although they had vanished by the late 1950s, together with beggars from most European stations, the importunate begging hand thrust through the window of the railway carriage remains common throughout much of the Third World.
In these parts of the world, the genuine passenger still picks his way through the station encampment, with a sense almost of intruding upon the privacy of a village community.
The presence or absence of station dwellers was part of the social tone of stations throughout the world.
In Europe and the United States, stations reflected the tone of the areas they served, in their style of architecture, in the services they provided.
But this was even more striking in the colonial empires.
Murray's Handbook repeatedly warned white passengers that particular stations were only used by Indians.
The railway buildings at the hill stations, on the other hand, only expected a European clientele (together with servants) and were organized accordingly.
All the large cities had at least two stations, the town and the cantonment.
A town station, like Agra Fort, lying beneath the great  Mughal palace itself, adjacent to the densely packed old city, would mainly be used by Indians.
Agra Cantonment, on the other hand, had space and air, waiting-rooms and restaurants, and a hotel near by.
It was the European station.
That pattern was duplicated all over the subcontinent.
In some cities there was an additional pilgrim station where special pilgrim trains could be brought directly to the pilgrimage area without having to cause alarm or inconvenience to European residents.
In others, there were stations near barracks for the convenience of moving troops.
Some of the Indian princes had private stations, and in China special stations were even built so that the Emperor could visit the western tombs at the appropriate time of the year.
In Ceylon, stations ranged from those which served the elegant bungalow coastal suburbs of Colombo and those used by Europeans seeking refreshment at the hill stations or at Mount Lavinia to special ‘coolie’ stations, where the Tamil labour migrants introduced from South India to the tea plantations could be detrained and kept in quarantine until health requirements could be met.
These were analogous to the special migrant stations in the United States and Russia with the exception that most of the Tamils were expected to be only temporary migrants.
A station's status in Africa would depend upon its proximity to a European community or a white plantation area.
In South Africa the social and racial tone of stations was institutionalized through apartheid, although systems of racial segregation had, of course, existed long before they were systematized by the Nationalists.
Certain stations in black rural areas or town locations were expected to be used exclusively by Africans.
Throughout the Johannesburg commuter system, all station platforms were divided in half, for Whites and non-Whites respectively, and the trains were similarly divided so that the appropriate part stopped at the relevant stretch of platform.
At Johannesburg Central Station, Africans used separate entrances and exits together with their own small concourse and facilities.
The main concourse with its waiting-rooms, restaurants, and shops would only be penetrated by Africans in their capacities as porters or cleaners.
For many visitors to the country the stations might present the main opportunity to see apartheid in action.
In the 1950s one of the authors of this book, as a boy, was first confronted with the racial realities of South Africa at Mafeking Station.
There, sitting in his plush first-class compartment on the mail train, he saw the overcrowding, squalor, and discomfort of a wooden-seated African train on an adjacent platform.
When Ransome-Wallis visited South Africa during the war, he allowed his desire to get close to the steam engine to overwhelm his awareness of South African racial niceties.
At one station  he entered the coach directly behind the engine, only to be summarily ejected by the guard.
Since the front of the train was more likely to be affected by coal and smuts, that was the section reserved for Blacks.
Boer nationalism merely erected a massive legislative panoply for racial discrimination.
It was just as apparent elsewhere in Africa, if more insidiously so.
When the station arrangements at Bulawayo in Southern Rhodesia were reorganized in 1960, a special African station was built near the African locations, ostensibly for the convenience of African travellers but, one suspects, rather for the comfort of the Whites, who secured more exclusive use of the main Bulawayo station with its important connections to Salisbury, the Victoria Falls, and through Bechuanaland to Kimberley and the Cape.
Throughout colonial Africa there were often unwritten regulations about who could use which accommodation and facilities both on the trains and in the stations.
Such racial discrimination was also apparent at all stations in the Southern States of the United States.
Blacks had separate waiting-rooms, toilets, and sometimes lunch-rooms.
At most of these stations the accommodation for coloured people was directly accessible from street and tracks, so that there was no need for the races to mix.
This was the case at Memphis, Tennessee, New Orleans, Louisiana, and Savannah, Georgia.
Even small country stations had separate waiting-rooms.
An examination of the plans of these Southern stations reveals an interesting sanitary discrimination.
Whereas the men's and women's toilets in large American stations usually led off the separate men's and women's waiting-rooms, no such delicacy prevailed for the Blacks.
Given the lavishness of accommodation provided for white and upper-class passengers on railway systems everywhere, it is ironic that they were the first to desert the railways.
In Southern Rhodesia after the Second World War, Whites abandoned the trains for the motor car, while black rail passengers increased in numbers.
It happened too in the United States and in many other places.
American stations in fact illustrated better than anywhere the great dichotomy between social theory and practice in the United States.
American trains were classless, but none the less they had a wide range of different styles of accommodation, and the passengers paid for the luxury appropriate to their standing.
This was made possible by the fact that long American journeys involved overnight sleeping accommodation.
Instead of booking a class, the passenger booked different forms of sleeping arrangement rather like booking a hotel room.
But it was perhaps in the great days of immigration that the station acted as a centre of awareness for the existing population viewing their new fellow citizens, and for the immigrants discovering the no less real inequalities of their adopted country.
These migrants were pushed from station pillar to post from the moment they left their homes in Europe to the time they settled in the western United States.
In the nineteenth century, Italians and Alsatians heading for the New World arrived and departed via the great Paris terminals.
In Britain, for the Irish entering in search of a new life, Liverpool and London stations were their gateways to the streets more often paved with misery than with gold.
But more exotic figures than the ubiquitous Irish thronged the platforms of Liverpool's stations, as John Pendleton described in 1896:
[Liverpool's]great stations — Lime Street, the Central and the Exchange — are centres of bustling life, of passengers coming and going; and scarcely a day passes without the reminder that the city by the Mersey is not only English but the Continental portal to the New World.
On the platforms may be found groups of Germans, Swedes, Poles, of men, women and children of nearly every European nationality, surrounding curious luggage, and, in railway porters' opinion, ‘jabbering a lot of nice lingo’.
For those who reached the New World, a special station was built at the Castle Garden immigrant centre in New York where they entrained for the West.
The rough wooden immigrant cars supplied for their use were often segregated by both sex and race, in order that discipline could be maintained.
Western railway companies like the Union Pacific built immigrant lodging-houses and segregated eating-places at stations throughout the West, and attempted to keep immigrant and normal trains separate, but this proved to be impossible at the larger stations.
Cheap fares were available only for the westward journey, so that the disincentive to return to the East was considerable.
Most of the larger stations in the United States had separate immigrants' waiting-rooms.
Often these were actually designated ‘second class’, as at Spokane, Washington, neatly reflecting the American attitude to recently arrived immigrants.
At the new Grand Central in New York there was a separate waiting-room for gangs of labourers and immigrants, with its own attendants, so designed that these groups need not encounter other passengers.
Droege recommended that the immigrants' waiting-room should be
in an out of the way place, and may even be a separate building.
It should be furnished with complete sanitary equipment, and, if possible, tubs for washing  clothes and dryers.
A lunch room for immigrants where food can be served at a low price is desirable.
Immigrant rooms should be well ventilated and the interior of them so designed that they may be easily cleaned.
The image of the immigrant as not yet integrated into American society, poor, and not fulfilling American standards of cleanliness was complete.
Some stations also had immigrants' or colonization agents, some of whom were expected to speak a variety of languages.
The new Fort Garry Station at Winnipeg of 1911 contained elaborate provision for the offices of the agents.
As was so often the case with railway stations, these facilities were reaching their highest point at just the time when immigration — like the passenger statistics themselves — was about to take a steep downturn.
For travellers to the United States in the last few decades of the nineteenth century the immigrants to be seen at stations in the West, particularly in Omaha, were one of the most striking images of their visits.
R. L. Stevenson encountered immigrants from China as well as from Europe and reflected upon the irony of immigrants from hungry Europe and hungry China meeting face to face in the American West.
Sometimes migrant trains were seen travelling eastward, despite the higher fares, just as packed as those going west.
Their occupants had failed to find land or position and stood on station platforms calling on their westbound fellows to give up and turn back.
Languages from all over Europe as well as the Orient could be heard on all stations west, where the platforms often overflowed with migrants.
Better-heeled passengers penned a succession of sad descriptions of the flotsam and jetsam of Europe they encountered beached on many an American station.
The women were often contrasted with the men and the children, the first representing the cares of the past and the present, while the husbands and little ones looked to the future, full of hope.
One traveller wrote of ‘swarthy men with bare arms splashing about in buckets’, who seemed ‘energetic and strong, confident and assured, with a bright never-say-die look upon their faces’, while the women looked ‘faded, wan, and anxious’.
Another thought the women looked ‘tired and sad…dressed in gowns that must have been old on their grandmothers’, while the children were dressed in ‘garments of nondescript purpose and size, but were generally chubby, and gay, as they frolicked in and out among the baskets, bundles, bedding, babies’ chairs etc, piled waist-high on various parts of the platform'.
A poor German woman presented a pathetic sight kneeling before her chest, which had burst open.
The contents, the observer thought, could not have been worth five  dollars.
But ‘it was evidently all she owned; it was the home she had brought with her from the Fatherland, and would be the home she would set up on the prairie’.
Rudyard Kipling wrote of a train-load of ‘Scotch crofters’ which arrived at Winnipeg on a Sunday:
They wanted to stop then and there for the Sabbath — they and all the little stock they had brought with them.
It was the Winnipeg agent who had to go among them arguing (he was Scotch too, and they could not quite understand it) on the impropriety of dislocating the company's traffic.
So their own minister held a service at the station, and the agent gave them a good dinner cheering them on in Gaelic, at which they wept, and they went on to settle at Moosomin, where they lived happily ever afterwards.
The migrants in other parts of the world were often internal.
Like the American western railroads, the Russian Trans-Siberian had been built with an eye to migration and settlement.
Almost five million rail-borne settlers entered Siberia between 1894 and 1914.
To gauge the extent to which the railway transformed migration patterns we need only note that whereas 40,000 migrants per annum travelled east between 1887 and 1892, 250,000 per annum migrated after the Russo-Japanese War.
Some of them travelled in fifth class, which consisted of boxcars totally bereft of comfort.
They too were segregated into wagons for families and those for single men.
Like the western stations of the United States, the eastern stations of Russia had special facilities for them.
Spur lines led from principal stations into vast spartan dormitory accommodation where they could be quarantined and prepared for settlement.
The emigrants were just as strikingly a part of any Russian railway journey as they were in America.
There were times when Russian and American migration overlapped, and British stations became stopping-off points for Russian migrants.
Pendleton described some at Liverpool's Central Station in the 1890s:
Railway travel develops many interesting situations; but it has created few more bewildering than those occasionally to be seen during the Russian famine, when a number of peasantry, weary of the Czar's despotic rule and black bread, or no bread at all, came through England on their way to America, and clustered, apparently hopeless, on the platform at the Central Station.
They were in costumes that, in spite of their crumpled shabbiness, recalled the garb of Count Arnheim in the opera of ‘The Bohemian Girl’, and looked like fugitive kings and emperors beside the thick-set railway porter, in capacious velveteens, whose duty it was to put them on the right track towards the ‘free land’.
What the Russians thought of their rough but kindly guide it is impossible to say; but he grinned, and exclaimed in amazement as he tried in vain, with a stumpy pencil to get a list of their names, and then sympathetically remarked, as he looked at their wan  faces, ‘There is no wonder at the chaps being ill; even their names is all coughs and sneezes’.
But the vast majority of Russian migrants travelled east on their own railway lines.
In 1902 the Trans-Siberian railway carried well over one million passengers, and the statistics of their class breakdown are fascinating:
First 8,000
Second 140,000
Third 370,000
Fourth 420,000
Fifth 140,000
Soldiers 55,000 –––––––––
1,133,000
Thus only a tiny fraction of passengers (0.7I per cent) travelled in the luxurious first class.
It is clear that large numbers of migrants avoided the boxcars of emigrant fifth and travelled fourth.
The Trans-Caspian line in Central Asia similarly sucked in migrants to dominate the local Islamic population.
But the local population was soon assembling at the stations to use the train for its own purposes.
Curzon reported that as early as 1887, with the line barely completed, 6,000 Central Asian pilgrims used the Trans-Caspian westwards on the first leg of their journey to Mecca.
Railways throughout the East were to contribute to that greatest religious migration of all.
It was not just in Russia that lower-class passengers were transported on freight wagons.
It happened in many parts of Africa and Asia, particularly in the early days of railways.
The third-class passengers on the Beira and Mashonaland railway travelled in this way in 1900 and for many years afterwards.
Photographs in the Crown Agents' collection indicate that excursion trains laid on to celebrate the opening of West African lines carried their African passengers in ‘flat cars’.
Pilgrims in India were often conveyed in boxcars into the twentieth century.
African labour migrants were invariably transported in this way.
They were temporary, not permanent, migrants: not for them the single journey to a new land.
It was an experience which normally they would repeat many times in their lives, for they were expected to return to their home territories at the end of a year-long contract.
As the mines of Central and Southern Africa set up their insatiable demand for cheap black labour, labour-recruiting agents and organizations scoured African areas for labourers.
Once recruited they were marched to the nearest railway station, entrained on a  variety of wagons, and transported to recruiting reception centres and on to the mines.
It was at stations that other travellers were made aware of these human shipments and their minimal comforts.
Throughout the black ‘homelands’ and adjacent African territories of modern Southern Africa the station continues to bear its reputation as the beginning of the migrant trail to labour in the ‘white’economy.
Stations throughout these areas invariably have their quota of migrants lying on the platforms waiting for trains to take them to another instalment of toil.
Native peoples throughout the world were also turned into a source of picturesque ethnic entertainment on railway stations.
In the western United States travellers encountered the native Americans, the Indians who had so often been dispossessed of their lands and livelihoods by the railway companies.
The first train of excursionists west on the Union Pacific was treated to a war dance performed by Pawnees on the station at Columbus, Nebraska.
Next day they provided a mock battle.
But they were well aware of the dangers of trusting white men.
They had demanded to be paid first.
Such entertainments by Indians at stations which not so long earlier they had attacked became commonplace.
Chief Black Moon and a thousand braves attacked the station at Huntly, Montana, only a few years before they were appearing in a more peaceable guise there.
The numbers of Indians at stations did indeed become an index of the distance the American traveller had journeyed westwards.
In Russia the same effect was produced by Buryats, Tatars, and other eastern peoples encountered on the Trans-Siberian.
In Australia and New Zealand travel into remoter parts produced station encounters with Aborigines and Maoris.
In East Africa, travellers were advised to watch out for the variety of indigenous ‘types’ to be seen at railway stations, from the Islamic, partly Arabized, Swahili of the coast, to the Kamba and Kikuyu of the interior, and then, a special treat, the magnificent Masai, bearing their shields and spears in a sadly peaceable demonstration of subjection, before reaching the Nilotic peoples of the shore of Lake Victoria.
Many of these peoples were soon producing ‘station art’.
For most of them the railway symbolized dispossession and in some cases the collapse of their traditional economies.
In entertaining, begging, or hawking at stations they were making shift to use the railway as an inadequate substitute.
Soon villages by railway lines became centres of new craft industries, in wood-carving and other allegedly traditional bric-a-brac.
In fact, of course, much of this material bore only a tenuous similarity to its genuinely customary counterparts.
Styles changed to suit the visitors' demands, and with volume and speed of production becoming the prime  considerations, standards of craftsmanship steadily declined.
So did prices, as hard-nosed passengers haggling on railway platforms and through carriage windows clinched on their lowest offer as the engine hooted a warning of the train's imminent departure.
It was a form of bargaining in which the enforced departure of the customer placed all power in his hands.
Indian women in the Western states discovered that they could charge travellers to peep at their papooses.
When the novelty wore off, the female beggar's gesture to the baby on her back and to her mouth became a standard plea throughout the world.
The Indians in America soon took to travelling on the trains.
In some cases their treaty rights specifically gave them access to them, but as passengers they underwent a steady process of rejection.
In Nevada, Shoshani and Paiute Indians made frequent use of their treaty rights to ride on the trains.
But this was desert country and the Indians were usually dusty and unwashed.
They were soon relegated to the emigrants' cars, and when even the emigrants complained they were forced to travel on baggage wagons or on the boarding steps.
In Canada, a train frequently used by Mohawk Indians came to be known as ‘The Moccasin'.
Famous people also became a source of station spectacle.
Rudyard Kipling (who once was forced to travel on a migrant train in the United States and found it a ‘nightmare’) encountered a peculiarly American hazard for the famous traveller.
Conductors could make some money for themselves by selling lists of well-known passengers on their trains to representatives of the Associated Press.
Such passengers would then be met by reception committees and crowds at stations along the route, as well as at their destinations.
Worse, there would be the still-familiar posse of jostling journalists.
Railway stations not only illuminated the full social and racial hierarchy of the railway traveller, they also reflected the great range of employment offered by the railways themselves.
For railway employment was notably hierarchical, with as finely graded a sense of status as any group of below-stairs servants in a great Victorian country house.
As a result a form of class and, most notably, racial job reservation grew up in railway employment.
In Andean Latin America the racial gradations were particularly complex, as Brian Fawcett described.
Railway employment was divided into obreros and empleados, ‘workers’ and ‘employees’, that is those paid respectively by the day and by the month.
The lowliest of railway jobs were carried out by the mountain Indians or the men of slightly mixed blood, the cholos.
On the coast, the middling types of position were held by the mestizos, the people of mixed race which could include African, European, and Chinese.
The clerks and station officials  were normally people of pure Spanish descent, while the managers and engineers at the top were usually British or American.
At times this racial mixture could be modified.
In 1909 the Hispanic station-master at Antofagasta in Chile was discovered to have been embezzling.
The problem went right up to the London board of the company, and it decreed that, in future, sums of money of any size should be handled only by European expatriate employees of the company.
On the Mexican Central Railway, the higher officials, engine-drivers, and conductors were all American at the turn of the century (on the British-financed lines, many of these would have been British); the brakesmen and station-masters were Mexican; while all catering was in the hands of Chinese.
In India a similar hierarchy established itself.
There the middling positions, engine-drivers and mechanics, clerks, station-masters at the medium-sized stations, were all held by Anglo-Indian people of mixed race.
A Eurasian engine-driver would invariably be accompanied by both a trainee of his own race and a fireman, much inferior, who would be an Indian.
The porters, labourers, and cleansing menials would be low caste Indians, while the engineers and senior officials were all British.
The Goanese from the Portuguese territory in western India traditionally dominated the catering trades.
Even among the whites in a single grade there was a strict sense of hierarchy.
Engine-drivers recruited from Britain earned a great deal more than and regarded themselves as distinctly superior to those white employees who were recruited in India.
These social distinctions were reflected in the residential patterns of workers associated with the stations.
At the bottom end of the scale, some small ‘third-class’ stations, which were expected to be used only by Indian travellers, were staffed entirely by Indians.
The Anglo-Indians, for whom railway employment became a special preserve, were always accommodated in their own railway settlements not far from the larger stations.
Just such a community is graphically described in John Masters's Bhowani Junction.
The role of people of mixed race in the railways spilled out of India into Malaya and East Africa.
As late as the 1940s, Ransome-Wallis discovered that engine-driving in Malaya remained the preserve of Scottish Eurasians.
There racial employment hierarchies were complicated by the presence of both indigenous Malays and immigrant Chinese on railway staffs.
The Kuala Lumpur railway workshops employed 1,000 Chinese.
The Chinese, despite their own alleged antipathy to railways, had a world-wide connection with them.
As well as providing the catering in Mexico, they had provided much of the labour for the  construction of the Canadian Pacific through the Rockies.
It was their absence from the building of the later Grand Trunk line which was alleged to have made its construction much less speedy.
To complicate matters further, the railway police in South-East Asia, Hong Kong, and East Africa were invariably Indians, usually Sikhs.
When the East African railways were built, Anglo-Indians, Goanese, and Sikhs arrived to perform their usual tasks.
In Africa the racial proportions depended on the nature of the territory.
In settler colonies, a higher proportion of railway workers was white.
The capital of Kenya, Nairobi, can truly be said to have been made by its station.
The divisional point was established there only because it marked a significant change in grade, and the station buildings, tracks, and settlements always dominated the city.
The European employees had superior bungalows closer to the station, the special quarters for the people of mixed race lay in an intermediate position, and the African workers were accommodated in a ‘location’ further out.
It was a pattern to be found in many other railway cities.
Bulawayo was another such, and there the large white railway population voted en masse not to join the Union of South Africa in the referendum of 1922 because the considered that conditions of railway employment were poorer there.
Their votes played no small part in ensuring that Southern Rhodesia remained a British colony.
Later, one of the dominant figures of Central African white politics was an ex-engine-driver, Sir Roy Welensky.
In West Africa, as in all aspects of life there, Africans played a much larger part on railway staffs.
Engine-drivers on the Gold Coast, Sierra Leone, and the Lagos Government Railway were always white, assisted by African firemen and stokers, but guards, conductors, and even station-masters were usually Africans.
Ernest Protheroe in his Railways of the World, published in 1914, reported that this led to considerable language difficulties:
The [Gold Coast]line is equipped with Webb and Thompson's instruments, and to explain the electric staff regulations, in a temperature somewhere around 90 degrees, to a native stationmaster who understands about as much of English as the average English railway official does of French, is a task which white officials feelingly affirm requires a considerable amount of patience, to say nothing of linguistic gymnastics.
Very similar racial hierarchies, involving a mix of Europeans, people of mixed race, Arabs, and Africans, occurred in the French North and West African territories.
In China and Japan it was an article of faith to replace European railway workers by local employees as soon as possible.
A fascinating  insight is provided into those two cultures by the fact that Western writers disapproved in the case of China, but greatly approved in the case of Japan.
In 1900 a writer in the Railway Magazine commented disapprovingly on Chinese efforts to man the newly opened Sung-Wu Railway:
The line had not been run a week before all Europeans connected with it were discharged, and the whole thing was controlled by the Chinese, who had carefully watched the progress of the work, and had stored up a vast mass of data for future use.
The engine drivers are Chinese, and the repairers are Chinese.
Not one person now connected with the line has had experience of railways in Europe or America.
In these circumstances it is not difficult to predict speedy failure, unless, as has been proposed, the line is taken over by a British firm which has secured the concession for the building of a line from Shanghai to Peking.
On the other hand, Ernest Protheroe noted approvingly the speed with which the Japanese had taken over their railways:
It did not take long for the Japanese to recognise the value of railways, and their natural imitativeness served them well in grasping the salient features of railway work.
In 1877 there were 120 British engineers, drivers, foremen etc. employed by the Railway Administration, but by 1880 only three foreign advisers remained.
In colonial territories, railways were often the largest employers of labour.
A vast number of local people performed the menial tasks; people of mixed race found jobs most appropriate to their status as buffers between the white managerial class and the mass of indigenous employees.
These jobs also enabled the mixed-race people to band together into tightly knit communities, where they could keep their existence constantly before the white masters whose earlier sexual peccadillos had brought them into being.
Such hierarchies produced, as they always do, an intense jealousy of status.
In the United States the first ‘engineers’ or drivers and their firemen performed other tasks, such as selling tickets and moving baggage and freight.
Demarcation soon reigned, however, and the ‘engineers’, particularly those in the West, aspired to a high status.
Station-masters and conductors were also anxious to emphasize their exalted positions.
This was done by uniform, demeanour, and voice.
The conductor prided himself on being the ‘captain' of the train, a sort of superior butler with a whole range of footmen, menials, and tweenies under his command.
These lower orders also had racial dimensions.
Sleeping-car and Pullman attendants were invariably black.
All Pullman-car  attendants were traditionally called ‘George’, presumably after the name of the founder of the company.
Even in Canada, sleeping-car attendants were usually black Canadians.
Their community was largely made up of American slaves who had fled across the border to freedom in a British territory.
Now the railways levelled them with their black cousins on the other side of the 49th parallel.
The Civil War was a significant turning-point in the history of American Black employment on the railways.
In the ante-bellum period, remarkably few Blacks were employed on Northern railways, but in the South they played a key role.
Almost all locomotive firemen were slaves, either hired from slave masters or owned directly by the railroad companies.
The companies often preferred slaves to white skilled labour and as a result slaves aspired to skilled positions which were later denied to them as freedmen.
Many other tasks were performed by Blacks, and female slaves could be found on the trains carrying water, attending lady travellers, and selling fruit.
After the war, Blacks formed the backbone of the unskilled labour force in both North and South, laying the tracks and building the stations, working as firemen, switch-tenders, and brakemen in freight yards, as cleaners, station porters, or redcaps, cooks, waiters, kitchen helpers, and sleeping-car attendants.
They could be found in low-grade clerical jobs, but positions like drivers, conductors, clerks in contact with the public, telegraphers, station agents, and train dispatchers were all closed to them.
White unionization led to the increasing exclusion of Blacks from the better-paid jobs.
Railway employers often used Blacks as strike-breakers or as a means of fighting unions by employing them to depress wages.
Thus Blacks became a prime source of hostility for white unionists who set about erecting discriminatory barriers.
In the twentieth century the position of Blacks on the railways steadily deteriorated.
As railway employment declined (there were two million railway workers in 1920 and only one million in 1930) it was Blacks in unskilled work who were the most vulnerable.
In the 1940s fourteen railway unions excluded Blacks.
When station redcaps were self-employed, there were many of them, but when the federal authorities insisted that they should be employed by their companies their numbers rapidly dwindled.
The formal elimination of colour bars made little difference.
Black employment at stations continued to decline until working on the railway was seen as detracting from black dignity.
The poor record of black conditions on American railways is well illustrated in the manner in which several civil rights leaders emerged from railway employment.
In Russia, station positions were as rigidly hierarchical as the classification  of both stations and passenger accommodation into five categories might indicate.
Station-masters in all but the meanest stations aspired to high status, although they were subjected to great physical dangers during times of civil disturbance, the Revolution, and the Civil War.
They wore white uniforms in summer to distinguish them from the crowds that might throng their stations.
But they also had an unenviable reputation for drunkenness, particularly on the Trans-Siberian, no doubt as a result of the privations of climate and loneliness they had to endure there.
In Tsarist times the official positions on all Russian railway lines were occupied by European Russians but the menial tasks were more likely to be performed by the lowest order of migrant or by members of the local population.
By the time Eric Newby and Paul Theroux travelled on the Trans-Siberian, many of the station-masters were women, who seemed to establish their authority by dispatching trains in the traditional manner.
This was done by standing to attention outside the station building with the station-master's staff of office held out in front of the body.
The appearance of women at Russian stations has to some extent been matched by a growth in women's employment in railways elsewhere.
However complex the racial and social hierarchies of station employment in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, generally they were exclusively male.
Women first appeared as station employees in Europe on tasks such as carriage-cleaning or waiting in refreshment rooms.
In small country stations, a husband and wife team might run the station together.
Gradually women secured employment on larger stations in clerical positions, at information counters, or as station announcers.
In 1900 Edinburgh Waverley Station boasted forty lady operators working in the telegraph department, sending out 4,000 messages a day.a But it was of course the First World War which suddenly gave a tremendous fillip to women's employment in stations.
In 1914, 13,046 women were employed by British railway companies, mainly on jobs at stations.
By 1918 the figure had reached nearly 60,000.
Women had come to take over men's jobs as platform, goods, and parcel-porters, ticket-collectors, and engine cleaners.
So that women porters could cope, the weight of luggage allowed to passengers was restricted and three women were employed in the place of two men.
Early in the war a postcard was issued at Crewe Station showing women railway workers holding out their hands to indicate that it was clean work.
The same growth in women's employment at stations took place in France and Germany.
In 1915 the Prussian State Railways employed 35,000 women; by 1918 this had risen to 89,000.
In the United States many of the jobs performed by women in  Europe continued to be done by men, as John Droege indicated in his instructions for station operation in his Passenger Terminals of 1916, although black women often performed cleaning tasks.
The wartime surge in women's employment in Europe was, however, largely temporary.
In 1919 most of their jobs reverted to the men returning from the war.
Women had to wait until the Second World War before invading station employment once more.
A painting by W. Roberts, Women Railway Porters in Wartime, depicts them shapelessly dressed in grey and brown, hauling cases, milk churns, and pigeon crates, almost unidentifiable as women.
The presence of women working at stations was by then a clearer indication of the changes in their status taking place throughout society.
Stations reflected most powerfully, however, the desire of their male designers and operators to protect women.
The provision of separate waiting facilities for women was almost universal.
Where three waiting rooms were provided, general, men's, and women's, the men's was usually designated, particularly in the United States, the ‘smoking room’.
In the larger American stations the women's waiting-room sometimes had a ‘matron’ available to help women with their children or those fatigued by their journey.
The status of a small-town or country station would be marked by whether it had a women's waiting-room or not.
In Canada, second-class stations invariably had them, but third- and fourth-class did not.
On the other hand, neither coloured nor immigrant waiting-rooms were separated by sex.
All sorts of additional class niceties were well known to travellers, even if they were not hallowed by signposts.
Lower-class women who did not come into the black or immigrant categories would be expected to use the general waiting-room, rather than the ladies', which was largely the preserve of the well-dressed middle class.
In India and in the colonial environment generally the women of the ruling race were especially cosseted at stations.
In India there was an additional need for female protection among the Muslims.
Some stations had purdah rooms, and many trains carried a special carriage for third-class women Muslims.
There was a bell at the end, which was rung by the ticket-collector or guard to warn the women of his approach so that they could cover themselves appropriately.
Stations were invariably seen as places of danger for women.
In Canada and the United States representatives of the Travellers' Aid society were to be found at most large stations to advise women.
Posters were displayed at stations large and small across the continent bearing the following message:
Young Women Travelling Alone.
Do not start for a strange city or town, even for a night, without previous information of a safe place to stay.
Do not ask for or accept information, advice, or direction except from railway officials or the Travellers' Aid.
On arrival in a strange city, if you are alone, if your friends fail to meet you, if you wish the address of a reliable hotel or boarding house, look for the woman at the station wearing the Travellers' Aid badge.
In modern times the careful protection of women at stations has declined, and the complex hierarchies of race and class have been simplified.
In Southern Rhodesia so many Whites were withdrawn for war service, particularly in the Second World War, that Africans and mixed-race ‘coloureds’ had to be trained to do some of their jobs.
Expatriates have disappeared from the official positions in Latin America, much of Africa, and Asia.
In Latin America this occurred during the great wave of nationalizations which took place after the Second World War and involved dislocation from which some of the railways have never recovered.
In the ex-French territories of North Africa the sudden removal of Frenchmen from all senior and technical posts caused severe problems for the railways for a period after independence.
Elsewhere, people of mixed race lost their monopoly of the middling-rank jobs, as they found themselves jostled from below.
The class disciplines of stations broke down, although in many places the wealthiest took themselves off to other forms of transport.
And with the declining status of railways and of railway employment, station-masters, clerks, guards, and the like no longer possessed the prestige which had been theirs when the railway was the vital source of communication with the outside world for entire communities.
With the end of empires, Europeans found a curious reversal taking place.
Black and Asian guards began to appear in Britain and in many places menial station tasks, catering employment, and the like were taken over by immigrants or by guest workers.
As racial distinctions were ironed out and replaced by class in the Third World, a certain amount of the reverse process was taking place in the old imperial metropoles.
7 Some Station Types
STATIONS came in all shapes and sizes, and served a multiplicity of functions.
They ranged in size from towering architectural masterworks like London St Pancras and the Victoria Terminus, Bombay, to undistinguished single-platform halts like Borrobol and Salzcraggie, request stops on the Highland Line for the shooting gentry.
Some stations stood in the heart of thriving capital cities and teemed with life day and night; others in desolate fastnesses, where as Dickens remarked of the remote New England depots, ‘the wild impossibility of anybody having the smallest reason to get out is only equalled by the apparently desperate hopelessness of there being anybody to get in’.
There are passenger stations and goods stations.
There are public stations and there are private stations.
Private stations often resulted from deals done by railway companies with landlords as part of the purchase of land for railway development.
The most famous is probably the delightful half-timbered Dunrobin, on the Highland line to Wick.
It is the prime example of the station as lodge to the great house, in this case the Duke of Sutherland's home, Dunrobin Castle.
There were a number of such privileged gatehouse stations to the aristocracy.
There have been racecourse stations, such as Newbury Racecourse and Aintree.
There have been port stations, waterfront interchanges between the railways and the water-borne transport of river, lake, and sea: in the United States, New Bedford, New Haven, and East Boston; in Canada, Prince Rupert, Vancouver, Montreal; in Britain, Holyhead, Folkestone Harbour, and Portsmouth Harbour.
There have been stations for service establishments, such as RAF Cranwell and Cosford Aerodrome.
There have been stations for factories.
In Britain there were the Daimler Halt for the motor-car works, Singer for the sewing-machine factory, Irlam Halt for the Co-op soap works.
In the USA there was the Boeing Aircraft Factory Station at Seattle.
In Australia there was a spur line, known locally as ‘The Chocolate Box Line’, from Hobart, Tasmania, to Cadbury's Factory Station.
There have been stations for hospitals (Cheddleton Asylum, Whittingham Hospital) and stations for schools (Wellington College, Christ's Hospital).
There have been coal stations and milk  stations.
The Société l'Anthracine had its own Paris station, the Gare des Mines, in the boulevard Victor Hugo to receive exclusive coal supplies.
Also in Paris, each network had its own centralized milk station from the 1930s on: Nord at La Chapelle-Charbons, Etat at the Gare de Vouillé, Paris-Orléans at the Gare de Chevaleret, and P L M at the Gare de Bercy.
There has even been a hotel station.
Just after the turn of the century, Leland Stanford, President of the Southern Pacific Railroad, built the luxurious Delmonte Hotel two miles from Monterey in California.
Southern Pacific ran a spur line from Monterey to a Delmonte Hotel station one mile from the actual hotel.
At weekends a special train was kept with steam up in the hotel station yard, so that Mr Stanford could leave at moment's notice if his business affairs called.
Each of these station types had its own distinctive character and ambience.
Let us linger a while at some of them.
Royal Stations
Where better to begin than at the top?
The heyday of the railways coincided with the last great age of monarchy.
Kings and queens travelled regularly by train and all the big city stations in monarchies boasted lavishly appointed suites reserved for the sovereign.
The king of Italy was able to retire from the gaping gaze of the public into his royal waiting-rooms at Milan and Rome stations; at Hanover Station there was a special royal dining-room for the use of the Kaiser.
Queen Victoria too had her own royal stations.
The most notable was Windsor and Eton, where it is possible to see it now in its pristine state, for in 1983 Madame Tussaud's opened the fully restored and refurbished royal station, adjoining the main Windsor terminal and unused for thirty years.
Tussaud's spent two million pounds re-creating the scene on Jubilee Day 1897, with Queen Victoria receiving her royal guests in the elegant waiting-room, with its marble fireplace, crimson upholstery, and brass-domed Renaissance cupola.
The fact that she actually arrived a week after the Jubilee is a trifling historical detail unlikely to mar the magnificence of the concept.
The royal station was specifically built by the Great Western Railway for the Jubilee.
Now standing at the platform is a reconstruction of the royal train, hauled by the GWR locomotive The Queen.
Behind it is the royal day saloon, a stunning creation in plush and velvet, green, gold, and white, superbly wood-panelled and wonderfully comfortable.
Inside stand the figures of Grand Duke Serge of Russia and his wife, Grand Duchess Elizabeth.
The visitor crosses the maroon red carpet into the royal waiting-room of Bath stone, complete with original fireplace.
In the  ante-room the Queen's Indian servant, the Munshi, sits beside the royal tea service, preparing to dispense refreshment to the royal party.
Beyond it are the royal conveniences.
The Queen-Empress herself, attended by the Prince and Princess of Wales, sits beside the fireplace.
From the sitting-room the royal party proceeds to the concourse, where an Ascot landau waits, its postilion in highland dress.
Seventy men of the 2nd Battalion, Coldstream Guards, parade in full review as the Guard of Honour, resplendent in scarlet and gold.
Overhead, the canopy gleams, decorated with festive flags and garlanded in green.
The Queen, attended by the Prime Minister Lord Salisbury, the Lord-Lieutenant of Berkshire, the Mayor of Windsor, and the Chairman of the Great Western Railway, prepares to board the landau.
Behind her Princess Henry of Battenberg is trying to control a sailor-suited Prince Maurice and Princess Ena of Battenberg, while Prince Henry chats with the Prince of Wales.
Watching the scene is a cross-section of British society — barefoot crossing-sweeper, prosperous bourgeois party, child in baby-carriage with attendant nursemaid, and a single lady with one of the new-fangled bicycles.
This splendid succession of tableaux of life-size figures, enhanced by patriotic music and natural sounds of the period, is further complemented by a panoramic exhibition of highlights of the Queen's sixty glorious years, a remarkable example of modern technology being put to use to re-create the sights and sounds of the past.
The Jubilee Day display demonstrates all the meticulous organization and mastery of pageantry for which the British have become renowned.
But they only started to perfect it at the end of the nineteenth century.
Earlier, an almost surrealistic comic chaos attended royal occasions.
In 1863 the special train bringing royal visitors to the Prince of Wales's wedding at Windsor had too few carriages.
So when the wedding was over, the special train pulled out amidst a rainstorm, and there was an undignified scramble for seats in the first ordinary scheduled train into Windsor Station.
The Archbishop of Canterbury grabbed a seat in third class and the Chancellor of the Exchequer ended up sitting on Mrs Disraeli's lap.
There was a royal station also on the south coast of England, the Royal Dockyard Station at Gosport.
It had a single curved platform and a handsome waiting-room, and provided access from the railway to the royal yacht.
Every August the Queen travelled from her house at Osborne on the Isle of Wight to Gosport and thence to Balmoral by train.
It was at this royal station that the body of the Queen arrived on its final journey on 1 February 1901.
She had died at Osborne and the royal  yacht Alberta, with an escort of eight torpedo-boat destroyers, carried her to the mainland where she was reverently placed aboard the royal train for London.
Although Nine Elms Station was closed to passenger traffic in 1848 and converted to goods traffic when Waterloo opened, Queen Victoria continued to use it.
She liked it for its privacy and its proximity to Buckingham Palace.
So her royal saloons were kept there permanently.
Eventually, however, the London and South-Western accommodated the imperial will by building her a private station at Wandsworth Road in 1854.
This was not used after her death, as Edward VII and his successors were perfectly happy to use Waterloo.
After the purchase of the Sandringham Estate in 1862 by the Prince of Wales, Wolferton Station on the Great Eastern Railway became a royal station.
In 1876 a handsome suite of royal waiting-rooms was erected and often used for luncheon parties when the royal party was on a shoot.
The station was damaged in a curious fashion during the coming of age celebrations of the Prince of Wales's eldest son, Albert Victor, Duke of Clarence and Avondale.
Sanger's Circus arrived to give a command performance for the estate workers, and an elephant escaped and demolished the station gates.
Queen Victoria had first used the railway in 1842 to travel from Slough to Paddington and thereafter she became a regular railway traveller.
Royal patronage put the seal of approval on the new form and the companies went to particular pains to arrange the Queen's journeys.
George P. Neele, line superintendent of the London and North-Western Railway, devoted three long and detailed chapters of his memoirs to describing the organization of the royal progresses.
Special timetables and special trains, cleared lines and cleared platforms, official receptions, all had to be readied and accommodated.
Neele took extraordinary pride in the smooth operation of the Queen's journeys.
The Queen's own saloon was always kept in special care at an equable temperature.
The electricians were apprised so that all electrical appliances could be in perfect order.
The Locomotive Department and the District Superintendent were advised, in order to ensure the clear road required not only for the train but for the pilot engine running fifteen minutes in advance.
The Engineering Department received notice, so that the whole length of the line could be watched and patrolled, because of constant fears of a Fenian outrage.
The hotel proprietors and refreshment rooms who were to furnish meals were advised of the Palace's requirements.
Most of all the Queen insisted on privacy and quiet during her journey.
‘Almost a funereal silence was observed’, commented Neele.
Neele was ultra-sensitive to the proprieties and was particularly preoccupied with keeping undesirables away from the Queen, even though these sometimes included notabilities.
When the Queen called at Perth General Station for breakfast, which was taken in the company offices, she invariably encountered, much to Neele's distaste, the Chairman of the North British Railway, Mr Stirling, known locally as ‘Kippen Davie’,
a very able man in business matters, but unfortunately lame; he had to support himself on a crutch, in addition to which the dark glasses he wore to hide some defect in his eyes, did not improve his appearance; altogether it always struck me that the prominence of position he seemed to claim was undesirable.
At whatever cost, royal orders had to be adhered to.
This led to an unfortunate incident at Leamington Station in 1874.
Special instructions were issued to keep the station completely private.
Lord Aylesford, however, in his Volunteer uniform, determined to be on the platform to greet the Queen.
The railway staff on duty refused him admission and he demanded to see Mr Burlinson, Birmingham District Superintendent of the Great Western Railway:
Mr. Burlinson…went down to the gateway and told his lordship that the orders were stringent, and he was bound to refuse admission.
‘And, pray, who are you?’ said his lordship.
‘I am the Superintendent of this division of the Great Western Railway’, ‘And where do you come from?’
‘Birmingham’, ‘Oh’(with supreme contempt), ‘Birmingham!
I thought so.’
However little his lordship might think of Birmingham or a Birmingham man, he failed to get admission that night to the platform and was ‘left swearing’.
There were, none the less, sometimes unforeseen station encounters.
One such occurred at Dunbar Station when the Queen was en route for Balmoral in 1858.
The Illustrated London News reported it:
On the 7th of September a monster train of excursionists, under the guidance of Mr. Cook of Leicester, were returning from their wanderings in the land of the mountain and the flood, and nearing the ancient town of Dunbar…when the exclamation was suddenly heard, ‘The Queen is coming!’
The train stopped, and instantly passenger after passenger mounted the roofs, and thence saluted the Royal company with a united shout of welcome.
The next moment, as the Royal train stopped, hundreds of men, women and children left their carriages, resolved to see the Queen; and their wish was gratified; there were no officials to interfere.
All ranks joined in hearty cheer after cheer for every member of the Royal family: the young Princess gained laurels by her quick apprehension of the wishes of the people.
The carriage window was quickly let down, and the Queen and Prince Consort…turned with smiling faces to the multitude who thought only of expressing their loyalty to the utmost.
After five minutes spent in this  familiar manner the excursionists withdrew, greatly delighted at this unexpected meeting with their Queen; and her Majesty, equally pleased, no doubt, with such an impromptu outburst of genuine loyalty, proceeded towards her Highland home.
Other crowned heads enjoyed less smooth organization on their travels than did Queen Victoria.
Count Witte, Head of the Russian Department of Railway Affairs and later Prime Minister, recalled a number of highly eventful railway journeys to the Crimea by Tsar Alexander II.
On one occasion, the Tsar got out of the Imperial train for a stroll at Binul Station and the train left without him.
On another occasion, the train left the rails near Zhmerinka Station and the Tsar had to make his way to the station on foot.
On a third occasion, Alexander II was returning from the front during the Russo-Turkish War and recognized on a station platform an officer who had deserted from the army.
The Tsar ordered his immediate arrest.
But the man stabbed himself to death.
Witte ordered the body hustled out of sight and dispatched the train at once, so that the Tsar should not be distressed by the sight.
It was all so unlike the train life of our own dear Queen.
Commuter Stations
The words ‘commuter’ and ‘suburbia’are nineteenth-century coinings, potent by-products of the railway age.
The nineteenth century was also the era of the Great City, sucking in population from the countryside to staff factories, shops, and homes.
The 1851 census revealed that in Britain for the first time more people lived in towns than in the country and that trend continued.
Between 1871 and 1901 alone the number of towns with populations over 50,000 doubled.
But at the same time, a reverse movement was taking place which was to accelerate in the last decades of the century — the flight from the city centres to the suburbs.
The association in the popular mind of the city with crime, squalor, and the physical deterioration of the population was a recurrent theme in nineteenth-century literature and thought.
It gave a boost to the exaltation of the countryside, the idealization of a lost, golden, pre-industrial Arcadia.
Total remove from the city was impossible.
But a half-way house was possible — suburbia — which combined the fresh air, green fields, and floral delights of the countryside with easy and speedy access to the place of work in the city.
So an integral element in the life of the great city became the daily weekday ingress and exodus of commuters.
Arnold Bennett described the grim scene in his novel Hilda Lessways:
A dark torrent of human beings, chiefly men, gathered out of all the streets of the vicinity, had dashed unceasingly into the enclosure and covered the long platform with tramping feet.
Every few minutes a train rolled in, as if from some inexhaustible magazine of trains beyond the horizon, and, sucking into itself a multitude and departing again, left one platform for one moment emptying — and the next moment the platform was once more filled by the quenchless stream…
It was like the flight of some enormous and excited population from a country menaced with disaster.
He was writing of the London suburb of Hornsey but the same phenomenon was observable in Paris, New York, Tokyo, and Moscow.
The railways in Britain did not take the lead in developing the suburbs.
Indeed the earliest suburban development preceded railway expansion by a decade or so in the big cities.
But the existence of the railways made continued suburban development a real possibility.
Land availability, the activities of speculative builders, and rapid association of suburban living with status and respectability, combined with the growing railway network, contrived to ensure that during the second half of the nineteenth century the population of London's outer suburban ring grew by approximately 50 per cent in each of the ten years between 1861 and 1891 and by 45 per cent between 1891 and 1901.
Simultaneously the residential population of the City itself fell from 128,000 in 1851 to 75,000 in 1871.
For most of the new suburbanites the railways and the railway station became an integral part of their lives.
As one child remembered it before 1914: ‘Suburbia was a railway state…a state of existence within a few minutes walk of the railway station, a few minutes walk of the shops, a few minutes walk of the fields.’
The inhabitants of the new suburbs were in the main middle class.
They were drawn from that army of white-collar workers, managers, administrators, lawyers, technicians, and clerks which had been called into existence by Britain's commercial and financial pre-eminence.
It was these men who travelled into London each day by train from Clapham, Wimbledon, Richmond, Putney, and Barnes.
It was not long before such people became the butt of the intellectuals.
The suburbans were seen as the epitome of clerkly conformism, complacency, and conservatism.
In the course of a comprehensive attack on English suburbia, its inhabitants, manners, and mores, T. W. H. Crosland distilled the view that the essence of ‘suburbanism’ was ‘shallowness and cheapness and mediocrity and dullness and stupidity and snobbishness’.
Most seriously, their lack of taste was encapsulated in ‘a sublime appreciation of red-brick villas, seven-guinea saddle-bag suites, ceraceous fruit in glass shades, pampas grass, hire-system gramophones, anecdotal oleographs, tinned soup, music in the parks and kindred horrors’.
The poor suburbans were thus condemned as a race of unregenerate Pooters.
The working classes were not by and large users of trains in the nineteenth century.
Indeed the railway companies resisted the idea of workmen's trains, for which from the middle of the nineteenth century there had been a vocal lobby.
Charles Booth wrote in the 1890s: ‘It is only the man whose position is assured who can treat railway and tram fares as a regular item of his daily budget’.
The 1883 Cheap Trains Act made concessionary fares for workers general and compulsory.
But the London and North-Western and the Great Western Railway companies were criticized for their poor provision of workmen's trains in 1892 and a parliamentary select committee was still pressing for the provision of cheap trains for workers in 1905.
The railway companies' resistance had both social and economic roots.
On the one hand, they did not want working class hooligans swarming all over the country causing mayhem.
They were only too aware of complaints from some seaside resorts about the descent of hoi polloi on them at bank holidays.
They also feared that the workers, inclined to swearing, smelling, and spitting and given to assorted vandalism, would deter better-class passengers.
On the other hand, there was no profit in short journeys and irregular runnings of trains at peak times.
There was also the fear that clerks and shop assistants who could afford the more expensive fares would use the cheap trains for preference.
An exception to this general attitude was the Great Eastern Railway, which, as the price for getting parliamentary permission for the extension of Liverpool Street Station, introduced workmen's trains in 1872, with two-penny return tickets for a journey of up to ten miles.
Under the stimulus of this concession, large working-class suburbs developed in north-east London at Ilford, Leytonstone, Walthamstow, and Tottenham.
In the provinces, commuting was smaller in scale, but no less significant.
Buses, trams, and particularly suburban railways began to segregate the classes into precisely defined, socially distinct areas, a process which sharpened the awareness of class differences and fuelled resentment in the increasingly active and vocal working-class movements.
Manchester and Salford provided the classic example of suburbanization.
By the 1860s high-class suburbs had developed at Alderley Edge on the Manchester to Crewe main line and at Bowden and Altrincham on the Manchester to Chester line.
The intervening stations along both the main lines became the focuses for the growth of prosperous, if not quite so grand, suburbs: Heaton Moor, Cheadle Hulme, Bramhall, Wilmslow, Sale, and Stretford.
Urmston and Flixton developed on the Manchester to Warrington line, and Heaton Park, Crumpsall, and Prestwich on the Bury line.
The  opening in 1880 of the Midland Railways' London connection across South Manchester to Central Station initiated suburban development in Heaton Mersey and Cheadle Heath.
This left the profile of the city as an inner core of offices, factories, shops, railway yards, and slums; an outer ring of lower middle-class and middle-class estates for clerks and small professional people; then the railway suburbs, strung out along the lines, each of them a self-contained village within walking distance of the station.
Elsewhere the private carriage and the omnibus dominated early suburban traffic.
But in both Liverpool and Birmingham in the 1870s there was suburban railway development.
In Liverpool from the 1870s on, the stations on the Southport line to the north (Waterloo, Crosby, Formby) and on the Wirral line to the south became the focuses of respectable residential development.
There was railway development too in Birmingham to link Selly Oak, Bournville, King's Norton, Harborne, Yardley, and Acocks Green to the centre.
But in Birmingham the railways were never the principal means of transport for the urban commuter.
It was London where the railway suburbs were numerically the largest and most populous with regular commuters.
The predominantly middle-class character of the suburbs and the commuting population was to have important social consequences.
Since mid century, philanthropists and social reformers had been urging the removal of the population of the inner-city slums to the more salubrious outskirts of the city.
John Blundell Maple, the furniture magnate, declared in 1891, for instance: ‘It must be infinitely more wholesome for the workers of London to reside in their own suburban homes than to be congregated together…
Our working population would be reared in a more healthy atmosphere, becoming thereby in every respect better citizens and keener for the welfare and future of their Empire.’
But it did not happen.
It was the fault not so much of the railways as of the suburban landowners who deliberately kept land prices beyond the pockets of the working class and thus preserved social exclusivity.
But in the 1880s and 1890s there was a sharpening of class antagonism with the rise of militant trade-unionism and the expansion of popular socialist organizations like the Social Democratic Federation and the infant Labour Party.
Surveys revealed that a third of the population lived below the poverty line.
As a result, the urban masses turned to the Labour Party and the suburbanites in self-defence to the Tories.
Harold Perkin has concluded that ‘The ground was thus laid in the Victorian commuter age, and to a large extent by the social consequences of commuting itself, for the class politics of the twentieth century, with a  predominantly working-class Labour party on the one side and the middle-class led Conservative party on the other.’
Nevertheless suburban development proceeded apace.
The Great Western, London and North-Western, and Midland railways had refused point-blank to make any concessions to suburban travellers or workmen in fares or services throughout the nineteenth century.
The Great Northern, however, enterprisingly inaugurated a policy of half-rate fares to attract the lower-middle classes moving into the northern suburbs, with the result that passenger traffic increased from 12.9 million in 1880 to 30 million in 1900.
In the Edwardian era, with company revenues falling, the companies began to cultivate the suburban commuter.
The Great Western began actively to promote its Thames Valley services, the Great Eastern Broxbourne and Bishop's Stortford, and the London and South-Western Epsom.
The Great Northern opened an enquiry bureau, giving information on houses in ‘The Northern Heights’.
Thirty-four new stations were opened in the period 1900 to 1914.
Although few new railways were opened in the London area after 1919, almost seventy new stations were provided.
The railways remained vital to suburban development.
When choosing estate sites, many developers gave priority to their convenience in relation to the railway.
‘Station on the estate’ was a favourite phrase in housing promotion and the promise of new railway facilities usually caused a rapid rise in land values.
The railway companies were debarred from acquiring land for themselves in excess of their need for lines.
But there was one exception, the Metropolitan Railway.
It had the power to grant building leases and fix ground rents.
In 1919 the Metropolitan Railway set up its own company to promote select housing estates in Buckinghamshire, Hertfordshire, and Middlesex.
Posters, magazines, even songs, held out the prospect of Arcadia within travelling distance of the metropolis — a detached house in leafy seclusion, but close enough to golf club, tennis club, and railway station.
It was Metroland, the inter-war middle-class paradise so lovingly celebrated by Sir John Betjeman.
Almost all the new stations opened in the London suburban area after 1920 had some form of subsidy from the developers.
Their names are somehow redolent of inter-war suburban values: West Weybridge and Sunnymeads (1927), Pett's Wood (1928), Woodmansterne and Belmont Halt (1932), Berrylands and Northwood Hills (1933).
By 1937 Pett's Wood alone was issuing 320,000 tickets a year.
A number of older stations, particularly on the Southern Railway, were modernized and  enlarged, often with shops added, to accommodate extra passenger traffic.
Over a third of the additional stations opened in the London area after 1919 were on Southern Region.
This company actively promoted commuter traffic, completing its electrification programme by 1931.
The traffic figures at Charing Cross Station reflect this development.
A 1926 survey showed 13,446 passengers arriving at Charing Cross Station between 7 and 10 a.m. on a typical day.
By 1935 the figure had grown to 31,723 and by 1938 to 37,095.
The availability of cheap and regular transport by train and tram promoted suburbanization in the United States too, though a generation or so later than in Britain.
It was not until the 1920s that suburbanization became a common feature of American cities.
But between 1850 and 1920 some 15 per cent of the total population of the United States moved to the suburbs.
The highest rate of suburban development was in the cities of the North-East.
The trend for suburban dwelling was set by the wealthy, and planned suburbs appeared in order to meet their needs in the 1860s.
By the end of the century the middle classes were emulating them.
Out along the railway lines between 1880 and 1930 there developed ‘a metropolitan corridor’, whose history J. R. Stilgoe has traced in his absorbing book of the same title.
It was the matrix of an American suburbia, with a population of commuters and a distinctive architecture, environment, and life-style.
Its appearance symbolized the transition of the United States from a rural to an urban nation, a transition reflected in a wealth of literature featuring the railways as the system of transportation and in the development of an industrial aesthetic which found beauty in factories, chimneys, freightyards, and machinery.
In France, where between 1801 and 1881 the population grew by 40 per cent, the population of Paris grew by 134 per cent .
The second half of the nineteenth century saw suburban development along the railway lines stretching out of Paris.
But there was a difference in the social composition of the Paris suburbs.
The very rich in Paris preferred to live in high-class areas within the city, and the suburbs tended to attract the lower-middle classes and skilled working class.
As a result of this suburban development, the annual movement of travellers in Paris rose from 16 million to 400 million between 1900 and 1930.
By 1930, from 400,000 to 450,000 people were travelling in from the suburbs to work in Paris: 180,000 into the Gares Saint-Lazare, Montparnasse, and des Invalides, 90,000 into the Gare du Nord, 85,000 into the Gares de l'Est and de la Bastille, and 45,00 into the Gares d'Austerlitz, d'Orsay, and de Lyon.
In 1916 the Gare Saint-Lazare was declared by the American  railwayman John A. Droege to be ‘the busiest station in the world’, with 1,200 daily train arrivals and a maximum traffic of 250,000 passengers a day.
London Liverpool Street, with 200,000 a day, was thought to be the next busiest.
Today, Europe's busiest station, handling 180,000 passengers a day, is London Waterloo.
The station etiquette of the suburban commuter was quite distinctive.
Alan A. Jackson, the perceptive and meticulous historian of  suburban London, described it:
Arrived at the station, the daily travellers, dressed to a man in dark suits, white, stiff-collared shirts, and bowler or trilby hats, with their tightly furled umbrellas held as elegantly as they were able, would quickly assemble in their respective and habitual positions along the platform, for they knew exactly where ‘their’ compartment would come to rest.
As advanced amateur gardeners, they would, whilst they waited, offer unsolicited advice on the station gardens, tended lovingly by an abundant uniformed staff with little to do between the rush hours.
By unspoken arrangement, those who preferred to travel in silence were left alone when they had received and returned a nod of acknowledgement from their closest neighbours…
If he cared to make use of it, station and train fulfilled the role of a social centre for the suburban male, a forum for the exchange of news, the making of new acquaintances and contacts, the publication of requirements, even the collection of money for charities.
Station staff knew everyone worth knowing in the suburb apart from the few tradesmen who made no use of the railway for carriage of goods.
The suburban commuter station was emphatically a male preserve at certain times of day.
Katherine Chorley recalled the commuting habits in Edwardian Alderley Edge:
Every morning in my childhood the businessmen caught the 8.25 or the 8.50 or the 9.18 trains in Manchester.
The times are graven on my memory.
Anyone out early would see them hurrying to the station…
The businessmen travelled, of course, in the first-class carriages, dividing easily into groups so that compartments were made up between more or less particular cronies…any wife or daughter who had to go to Manchester by one of those trains always travelled third; to share a compartment with the ‘gentlemen’(we were taught never to call them just plainly ‘men’) would have been unthinkable.
Indeed the ladies always avoided the business trams if they possibly could.
It was highly embarrassing, a sort of indelicacy, to stand on the platform surrounded by a crowd of males who had to be polite but were obviously not in the mood for feminine society.
In the film The Rebel (1960) Tony Hancock memorably demonstrated how to get the corner seat in a commuter train.
As the film opens, one platform of a suburban station is crowded with bowler-hatted, umbrella wielding, Times-reading city gents.
The other platform is empty but for  Hancock.
Two trains come in simultaneously and Hancock simply scampers through one and into the corner seat of the other, while the commuters are struggling to enter.
Pilgrim Stations
The religious metaphor is never very far from the pen of the writer on railways and stations.
But railways have also had a powerful literal effect upon religious movements around the world.
Stations everywhere took on the role of the Tabard Inn at Southwark, where Chaucer's pilgrims assembled for their journey to Canterbury.
Muslims flocked to the stations of Russian Central Asia, up-country India, Malaya, and North Africa to commence their long journeys to Mecca.
The leaders of Eastern religions which had resisted the appearance of the railway, as in China and Japan, soon found that their co-religionists swiftly took to the rails to visit temples and shrines.
The stations of the South African Boer Republics, themselves huge concessions to the modern world which the Boers would originally much rather have done without, took on some of the dour, flinty character of Dutch Reformed Calvinism.
But it was in India that the railways produced their most dramatic religious effect.
Hinduism is one of the most mobile of all religions and Hindus found in the railways a hitherto unimaginable opportunity to travel to shrines, pilgrim centres, and important ceremonies.
The Murray's Handbooks to India are punctuated with references to stations much used by pilgrims.
In 1906 the Chief Superintendent of the East India Railway provided readers of the Railway Magazine with a graphic description of a pilgrimage to Allahabad.
Every twelve years, a ceremony known as the Kumbh mela took place at the confluence of the Jumna (Yamuna) and Ganges rivers just outside Allahabad.
The ceremonies lasted for a month and millions attended, many coming only for a few days.
For the duration of the mela as many as twenty pilgrim trains a day, each carrying a thousand passengers, might be brought into Allahabad in addition to the normal traffic.
It was necessary to use all the Allahabad stations, Naini, Kotaparcha, Kyogunge, Allengunge, as well as the Main and Fort stations to distribute the tremendous pressure of passengers.
Temporary booking-offices, thatched and constructed of railway sleepers, were built near the site of the mela itself to sell tickets to returning pilgrims.
At the station barriers, barricades and pens had to be constructed to separate ‘up’ from ‘down’passengers and avoid crushing and injury.
Most of the special pilgrim ‘rakes’ were made of goods wagons with a mat on the floor to sit on, and an oil lamp hung from the  roof for illumination.
Superintendent Huddleston assured his readers that pilgrims found this accommodation perfectly comfortable and never made any complaints.
Pilgrims, he went on, were the most patient of passengers.
But even they had been known to take direct action when driven to desperation.
Some years earlier a train carrying pilgrims had been so seriously held up that its journey had taken twenty-four hours rather than seven or eight.
Towards the end of the journey the pilgrims discovered that their train had been shunted into a siding at a station in order to give precedence to the mail train:
They thought it time to take action on their own account.
Several of them thereupon left their carriages and placed their heads on the rails vowing that, rather than allow another train to pass by they would sacrifice their lives.
After this demonstration it is needless to say which train got away first, but, of course, there was an outcry because the Mail ran late!
Sometimes the lack of co-ordination among the different Indian railway companies made things difficult for pilgrims.
There were, for example, no through trains from the East India Railway to the Oudh and Rohilkan railway, and pilgrims together with other travellers had all to change trains at Moghalsarai junction, a mere ten miles from the great pilgrim city of Benares (now Varanasi).
Huddleston described the scene:
During pilgrim rushes, surging, struggling crowds filled the platforms and the waiting halls, and while the masses changed from one train to another the station was a Babel.
The delays between connecting trains often being considerable, it is needless to remark that the position was one of intolerable discomfort, though it was accepted by both passengers and railway staff as part of the day's work.
Through trains were eventually provided, and ‘the convenience to pilgrims and relief to Moghalsarai station is immense’.
The complexities of the arrangements made for pilgrimages is borne out in a number of ways.
The Government Health Department sent men to examine pilgrims alighting from trains.
Their job was to watch out for cases of smallpox and cholera.
The railway also had its own medical department, which attempted to take action when cases of plague, smallpox, or cholera were reported:
During the mela a slight outbreak of cholera occurred at a small station called Manickpore on the Jubbulpore line.
The company's doctor was on the spot in no time, attended the patients, examined the sanitary arrangements, disinfected and closed the station well, and arranged for tanks of pure water to be conveyed from 62 miles away.
The traffic arrangements for the Kumbh mela in 1906 were entrusted to the same officer who had made all the arrangements for the Great Delhi Durbar organized by the Viceroy Curzon in 1904.
He was provided with 450 employees to help.
The earnings from the pilgrims, who travelled at very low fares, amounted to £53,500 in 27 days.
Superintendent Huddleston noted with evident self-satisfaction that ‘everything worked without a hitch, and there was not a single accident of any kind’.
Seaside Stations
By the end of the eighteenth century, the seaside resorts were undergoing the first stages of the process that was to transform the seaside holiday from an exclusive upper-class recreation into a national institution.
The Industrial Revolution gave birth to a large and well-to-do middle class and they were not slow to emulate their betters in travelling to the seaside to enjoy the air and the water.
The last three decades of the nineteenth century in Britain were to see a similar move on the part of the working class, desirous of experiencing the benefit of sea air and sea water, the chance of amusement and relaxation from their work, or just a change of scene from the grim tenements and back-to-back houses in which they lived, and the mills and factories in which they toiled.
To bring the new holiday-makers to the sea, however, a transport revolution was required.
Steam was the great liberator.
The railways carried middle-class visitors to the seaside in their thousands for a week's holiday and the urban proletariat on the increasingly popular day trips.
The upper classes rapidly gave up the struggle to maintain social exclusivity at the seaside resorts and fled to the Highlands, the Lakes, and eventually the Continent, to pursue their particular pleasures, unhampered by the proximity of their inferiors.
By the 1860S, middle-class holiday-makers had effectively taken over the resorts.
They brought with them their families, particularly the young children, and under this stimulus the seaside holiday became something which it had not been in its aristocratic heyday — a family affair.
This accurately reflects the dominance of the family concept in Victorian society.
For both middle and working classes, where the sexes tended to undertake their leisure activities in strict segregation, it provided an outward and visible sign of the family's cohesiveness.
For the children, the long railway journey to the seaside became one of the year's great adventures and the station a place of mystery, anxiety, excitement, and unending interest.
Molly Hughes in her touching memoir of a London childhood in the 1870s recalled the excitement of the family's annual holiday trip to Cornwall:
We used to go to bed earlier the day before, not so much to please mother as to bring to-morrow a bit sooner.
We got up long before it was necessary, impeding all the sandwich-making and hard-boiling of eggs that was going on.
But eat a good breakfast we could not, being ‘journey-proud’, as our old cook used to express our excited state…
The next crisis was the fetching of a cab.
At 7 o'clock in the morning there was no certainty of getting one quickly and we kept rushing to the window until someone shouted ‘Here it comes’…
To us children, no Cinderella's fairy-carriage could have been handsomer than the cab actually at the door.
If we were all going my father and the elder boys had to follow in a second cab.
Luggage was piled on top and we were packed in among rugs, umbrellas and hand-bags.
At last the cabby climbed up to his seat and whipped up the horse.
It took an hour or more to jog along from Canonbury to Paddington, but we did reach the enchanted spot at last.
The ‘enchanted spot’ presented its own set of problems:
In order to travel all together in one compartment, we had to arrive more than half an hour before the train was to start.
There was then the suspense of waiting for it to come in, and my fear that we might not be on the right platform or that the Great Western had forgotten about it.
My father meanwhile was taking the tickets and having the luggage labelled.
Never did he hasten his steps or hurry, no matter what the emergency, so that there was the additional fear that he would miss the train.
When at last we were all safely in a carriage, he would saunter off to buy a paper, and other people were coming in.
In time everything was settled and we were gliding out, ‘with our faces towards Cornwall’, as mother used to say.
Thereafter the stations passed en route provided a never-failing source of fascination:
Reading, the first stop, was great fun for those on the near side.
What more cheering than to see distracted people looking for seats when we were definitely full up?…
Didcot had one definite pleasure.
We knew that little boys would be going up and down the platform singing out ‘Banbury cakes!
Banbury cakes!’
And mother would crane out and buy some, just to encourage the crew.
Next came Swindon — name of sweet assurance.
How often Mother used to say ‘They can't leave Swindon under ten minutes, no matter how late we are’.
Considering our early breakfast, or lack of it, the refreshment-room at Swindon was a land of Canaan, and the hot soup all round is still a joyful memory…
The charm of Bristol was its appearance of being a half-way house.
Not that it was so by any means, but it was the elbow-joint in the journey.
The muddle and rush were greater even than at Reading, and we were often kept there for some twenty minutes.
Yet we dared not leave the carriage for more than a mere leg-stretch just outside the door…
We used to hail Exeter as almost being ‘almost there’, for it was Devon, actually the next county to Cornwall, and definitely ‘west’.
A  quiet dignity pervaded its saintly stations but we could never stay long because of course we were late…
Finally they reached Cornwall:
We greeted the tiny whitewashed cottages of the ‘natives’ with far greater fervour than we had shown over Windsor Castle.
We vied with one another in trying to remember the order in which the stations came.
We stopped at all of them.
And when I say stopped I mean stopped.
There was none of the hurry of Reading or Bristol.
We leant out to catch the accents of the porter, proclaiming his piece in the soft west-country drawl.
We watched all the greetings and partings and wavings of hands of the travellers…
Then would descend that peculiar silence of a country station that signifies that every one is settled, and the guard feels that it is safe to let the train start again.
Eventually, if the train was on time, their journey which began at Paddington at 9 a.m. ended at Camborne Station at 9 p.m.
The railway companies did not initially appreciate their potential as a means of mass cheap travel and concentrated on providing for the better-off.
But when enterprising individuals like Thomas Cook began chartering trains and organizing cheap day excursions, the working classes seized upon the opportunity to get away.
In Whit Week 1850 over 200,000 day-trippers left Manchester for the countryside and the sea.
The 1850s became the heyday of the excursion, particularly on Sundays, for most people their only free day.
Despite the fact that excursion trains were often extremely uncomfortable, slow, and dirty, the volume of travellers they carried eventually convinced the railway companies of the value of the mass travel market.
A railway link came to be essential for a seaside resort.
The relatively cheap and rapid transportation it provided and the elasticity of capacity the companies boasted gave a powerful boost to the mass holiday-making industry.
The railway revived the flagging fortunes of Brighton.
When the railway reached Torquay in 1848 a public holiday was declared.
It was the opening of a direct rail link between Morecambe and the West Riding which created the strong tradition of Yorkshire holidays in that resort.
The coming of the railways literally made possible resorts like Skegness and Rhyl; conversely, the lack of a rail link retarded Eastbourne's development.
But the role of the railways must not be overstressed.
The Furness Railway invested heavily in the promotion of the seaside resorts of Grange and Seascale.
But this was to increase utilization of that Cumbrian coast line which had originally been conceived for the  movement of iron ore and coke and this symbolized the extent to which the railway companies, as distinct from the resorts, long regarded the holiday traffic.
The Lancashire and Yorkshire Company's service to Blackpool and Southport was regularly criticized as slow, uncomfortable, and dilatory.
It only improved in the last years of the nineteenth century with the company's realization of a profitable traffic in middle-class commuters living at the seaside while working in Manchester and Liverpool.
John K. Walton, the premier historian of the British seaside resort, concludes:
The seaside resorts in the North-West of England, as elsewhere, could not have grown very far without the railways…
In general, however, and especially in south Lancashire, the major growth area, their role was passive and their attitude lukewarm for most of the period under discussion [i.e. 1830 — 1914].
The demand for working class seaside visits in Lancashire predated the railways and they were a convenience for, rather than a cause of, its subsequent growth…
The railways were necessary to the rise of the North-Western holiday industry, but they did little actively to promote it, and the real cause of its growth, and of the pattern of its development, lay in rising living standards and changing attitudes to the use of leisure time among the potential visiting public.
Nevertheless for many industrial workers the station was their gateway to one week's or two weeks' escape from mill and factory, and they rejoiced at its sight.
Just as they came late in the century to promote travel facilities actively, so the railway companies were slow to issue promotional travel literature.
Nevertheless the promotion of tourism was as old as the railway itself.
For others were quick to see the advantages of swift and economical access to the beauty spots of Britain.
As early as 1835 there was a Tourist Companion to the Leeds, Selby and Hull Railway and in 1836 The Scenery of the Whitby and Pickering Railway was published.
By the 1880s guides to all the railways of England had been published by Cassell's.
It was not until the 1890s that the railway companies themselves entered the promotional market.
In 1887 the Great Eastern Railway produced lists of seaside and country lodgings for tourists using their services.
By 1900 twenty other companies had followed suit.
The North-Eastern Railway produced a series of pocket guides to various beauty spots in their area.
The Great Eastern then pioneered a new development, annotated timetables designed for tourist use and pamphlets detailing local trips with train times and fares for each of the Great Eastern seaside resorts.
The Glasgow and South-Western catered for a more specialist interest with The Golfing Resorts of the  Glasgow and South-Western.
Rather less of this tourist literature was available on the Continent, though Swiss and Belgian Railways produced similar material on tourist trips and resorts.
In the United States, the New York Central Railway issued a 532-page book entitled Health and Pleasure on America's Greatest Railway, while the Northern Pacific issued a very detailed guide to its natural beauties and resorts enticingly entitled Wonderland.
So the eager tourist, arriving at the station, could arm himself with all the necessary guidance and advice to make the most of his visit and of the railway routes connected with his destination.
For those who could not afford a seaside holiday — and they were still many — excursions provided the escape.
As late as 1934 the New Survey of London Life and Labour was opining that ‘a large proportion, perhaps a majority, of London working class families are still unable to reach this very modest standard [a week's holiday]and have to be content with day outings on Bank Holidays or Sundays’.
Excursions were regularly organized by churches and chapels, firms, clubs, street committees, and this for many would be the great occasion of their encounter with the railway station.
With so many people pouring into the stations on these occasions, there was always concern about keeping the excursionists disciplined and organized.
There are instances of people being crushed to death or pushed under trains by the crush of excursionists on station platforms.
In 1847, for instance, excursionists at Hadleigh Station, awaiting the train to Ipswich, were buried under bricks when a newly built 300 ft. wall was blown down on them.
Fortunately there were no fatalities.
The smooth and successful handling of excursionists came only with experience.
Its Nine Elms terminal had only been open a week when in 1838 the London and South-Western announced the running of eight special trains on Derby Day to Kingston, the nearest station to Epsom.
Five thousand people gathered early in the morning, but the trains were not sufficient to accommodate them.
An impatient mob broke down the doors, took possession of the station, and commandeered the trains without paying their fares.
The police were called in and no further trains were dispatched that day.
It was not just the seaside or the countryside that drew excursionists.
Exhibitions, cup finals, race meetings, and great royal occasions drew the excursionists to their local station.
For Diamond Jubilee Day, 1897, Lever Brothers chartered six special trains to take 2,300 employees from Port Sunlight to Euston.
Ten years earlier, on the Saturday afternoon of the Golden Jubilee Review, seventy-two special trains had been run into Aldershot without interrupting the usual flow of traffic.
But for many people, the Sunday-school outing remained the fondest memory of day-tripping and the station a vivid part of that memory.
A. J. Taylor recalled his annual Sunday-school outing from Sutton Bridge to Hunstanton in 1936:
For at least an hour previously the straggling, laden families would have walked along the Main Road towards the station…
Entire families too had travelled to the station on bicycles…bicycles that were now parked untidily by the diamond woodwork of the station-yard fence.
The sun always seemed to shine on that crowded platform.
It smelled of shellfish, newsprint, disinfectant — and the lime-encrusted urinal at the far end.
It was too late in the year for daffodils and tulips but there were a few cardboard boxes of cut flowers stacked on a trolley waiting for the Peterborough train.
And a few early punnets of strawberries.
There was a marvellous happy sort of chaos — trippings over push-chairs, bucket and spades; a faded last-year's Union Jack, baskets and string bags holding sandwiches and towels and costumes for bathing and paddling…
As the time approached the late arrivals would join the jostling to get a good seat.
Families manoeuvred and mothers shepherded in the hope of cornering a compartment to themselves.
The train would be too long for the platform; as it approached there would be frantic snatchings and shrieks…
When one half of the train had been filled to bursting point it would ‘draw up’…
The stragglers took their seats in the second half of the train.
They joined those who had deliberately held back…the wise ones knew that the train turned round at Lynn.
The rear end would get into Hunstanton first — a precious six coach-lengths nearer to the ticket barrier.
But the eagerness to get to Sutton Bridge Station to start the trip was matched by the reluctance to get to Hunstanton Station at the end of the day for it meant the excursion was over:
Getting to the station early was surely an adult ploy, and we were never first…
The train of carriages was already in the station.
The western sun would scorch and dazzle and we would pull down the blinds in the compartment.
There would be sticky fingers everywhere, the result of handling rock, candy floss, oranges.
Last drops of lemonade would be squeezed from near-empty bottles.
Bananas and apples helped to stave off the effect of raging thirst…
At Sutton Bridge there were fathers and relatives waiting on the platform to greet us…
Home again.
Country Stations
The country station was literally a lifeline, a vital and potent source of contact with the outside world.
It was also a community centre.
In the Highlands of Scotland, for instance, stations like Rannoch and Kyle of Lochalsh doubled as village halls, where church services could be performed, council meetings convened, school classes given, and dances held.
At Garsdale Station (formerly Hawes Junction) on the Settle-Carlisle line, there was a library, whose nucleus was 150 books presented at the turn of the century by two elderly ladies from Wensleydale who travelled regularly from the station.
It was kept in the ladies' waiting room and was used by staff and their families, and by stranded passengers.
On a celebrated occasion in Wales a county court judge sitting in a civil case in Bridgend had not completed the case when the train was due to leave, so he continued it on the train and gave his final judgement in the station-master's office at Llantrisant.
David St John Thomas, celebrant of the English country station, has summed up eloquently the multiplicity of functions the country station performed:
The station was the place where the railway greeted its local customers and took their money, the doorway through which important people right up to royalty would pass on visits to the district, the storeplace for every kind of commodity, precious and bulky in transit from town to country and vice versa.
It was also the place where news came from the outside world either by telegraph — provided on the railways long before post offices began transmitting telegrams — or by newspaper or word of mouth.
It was the place where every piece of invention of the Victorian age could first be seen — from the railway's own telegraph instrument and signalling system, newest engine or crane, to threshing machines, mangles, toilet cisterns and bicycles.
And here troops would arrive to quell local disturbances and uprisings, while local organizers of the Anti-Corn Law League and early unions went off to national gatherings.
Here, too, came Gladstone and other politicians to whip up support.
Just how important the station was to the life of the community can be gauged from the numerous stretches of approach road and land that were improved at the ratepayers' expense — widened, often given pavements which look particularly incongruous leading from nowhere today, and lit with gas lamps.
In many cases, the gas came from new works with their own coal sidings beside the station.
The massacre of country stations which accompanied the dismembering of the British railway network in the 1960s permanently diminished the lives of the villages these stations had served.
Nothing equivalent took their place.
The bus services which replaced the train service did not long survive.
Instead the planners condemned many villages to long, slow, lingering decline.
Like so many of the decisions of sixties planners, this cruel decision has brought both spiritual and physical desolation in its wake.
Quite apart from anything else, the country station was a thing of beauty, and was encouraged to be so by the railway companies.
Several  companies offered prizes annually for the best-kept country station, promoting keen rivalry among stations.
The North-Eastern Railway set aside 200 guineas annually to be divided among the 60 best-kept stations, divided into four groups.
Each of the groups had five first-class prizes of £6 each, five second-class prizes of £3 each, and five third-class prizes of£1 10/ each.
No station was allowed to take a prize in the same class for more than two successive years, but if a station which had done so was deemed worthy of being placed in the same class in a third year, it received a special first-class certificate but no money.
Judging was done by directors and heads of staff each August.
The money was divided amongst the station staff, with the station-master taking the largest share.
Castle Howard, Clifton, Coxwold, Middleton-in-Teesdale, Brough, and Snainton all won first-class certificates for three successive wins in 1897–9.
Brough in the East Riding of Yorkshire not only won several first prizes in the North-Eastern Railway's own competition, but it also won a prize of £10 offered by a London weekly paper for the prettiest station in Britain.
It was lovingly tended by its station-master, Mr James, who retired in 1899 after fifty years of service there, during which time he had installed not only flower-beds but a fountain complete with goldfish.
Sleights, also on the North-Eastern Railway, won the award for photographs of the prettiest station at the National Co-operative Show at the Crystal Palace.
Among town stations, Tynemouth was long notable for its wealth of flowers and plants.
Across the Pennines, the Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway's Fleetwood Station, with its hanging baskets, potted plants, foliage and greenery was described by the Railway Magazine in 1898 as a ‘floricultural paradise’.
The Great Western Railway set aside, £250 annually to be divided among the winners of twelve sections, with a first prize of £5 in each section.
No prize was given unless the offices, waiting-rooms, and lavatories were also spotless.
Torquay was a frequent winner, with its carefully designed beds of petunias, zinnias, and brilliant pink geraniums, designed to show off the colour harmonies.
The Midland Railway's competition was often won by Matlock Bath Station.
Such competitions kept the country stations on their toes, provided the service with valuable publicity, and gave to the travelling public a pleasing and uplifting sight to welcome them to their rural destination, the ideal blending of technology and nature.
The garden competitions in England had a direct effect on the maintenance of stations in Britain's greatest dependency, India.
In 1926 the Railway Gazette published the awards made to London and North-Eastern stations for garden upkeep.
Later that year the Great Indian  Peninsula Railway Magazine quoted these results in full and announced its own competition:
Anyone who is acquainted with the many beautiful station gardens at home must be impressed painfully by the apparent absolute lack of interest shown in the appearance of railway stations, particularly in connection with gardens, in India.
True, there are some enterprising station staffs who take a pride in beautifying their charges, but these are few and far between.
The Agent has, therefore, decided to encourage Great Indian Peninsula railwaymen to take a greater interest in such matters by the institution of a competition under the rules of which first, second and third prizes of Rs. 150, Rs. 100 and Rs. 50 respectively will be awarded annually for the best station platform gardens and premises.
The great complexities of Indian railway employment were recognized: the prizes were to be shared among the permanent way inspectors, the station-masters, and the malis (Indian gardeners).
It must be presumed too that much of this effort would be concentrated on those stations used by Europeans, where they could expect to find every facility, including even letter-racks for their mail.
In the United States, as early as 1867 a Connecticut landscape architect, Donald G. Mitchell, was arguing the case for the railroad companies to plant station gardens to advertise both the train service and the town it served.
The companies took the point and began beautifying the environs of their stations in the manner suggested by Mitchell, designing their station gardens to be seen to best advantage by both those arriving on the train and those waiting on the station.
The Boston and Albany Railroad appointed one of its suburban station-masters who had achieved considerable success with his gardens as the company's superintendent of station gardens.
The Michigan Central Railroad Company built greenhouses to provide flowers for its dining-car tables and station gardens.
The Boston and Maine Railroad Company established an annual prize for the best station gardens.
By 1905 learning to design station grounds had become an accepted part of landscape architectural education.
But a dispute grew up in the always cost-conscious companies between those who wanted to beautify the trackside to delight the approaching train travellers and those who wanted more spacious station gardens as an urban amenity.
By the 1920S the former had won the day and landscape architects turned their talents to municipal projects.
The companies dispensed with their services and left it to their employees to provide the beautification.
Those gardens which survived were in the  main bulldozed and concreted over to provide station car-parking in the 1950, another victory for functionalism over aesthetics.
In the United States and Canada the country station, with or without garden, was much more than a stopping-place for passing trains.
It was invariably a community centre, where the pot-bellied stove, the wooden benches, and the convivial sense of being in touch with the rest of the world drew local inhabitants to hear the news, discuss problems, and entertain each other.
Farmers collected to discuss livestock prices.
People went to buy newspapers and get the weather forecast.
At least one railway company regularized this by posting weather symbols on the side of trains for the benefit of local farming communities.
People brought their musical instruments and had impromptu — or sometimes organized — concerts and sing-songs there.
On election nights members of the locality would collect in a state of great excitement to hear the results coming in on the station telegraph.
All of these uses of the railway station survive in the oral evidence of many North American villages and townships that have long since lost their rail service.
Appropriately enough, one station in Canada, Harriston, Ontario, has been reused as a senior citizens' recreation centre.
Necropolis Stations
The station — so vital and bustling and alive — also played a part in man's last journey — to ‘the undiscovered country from whose bourn no traveller returns’.
The London Necropolis Company had its own station, first opened in 1854 as part of the Waterloo Station complex.
Funeral parties left with the deceased from the Company's platform and ran over London and South-Western lines to the Company's cemetery at Brookwood, near Woking.
The London terminal was moved and rebuilt with two new platforms in 1902 during the reconstruction of Waterloo and the Company was provided with its own suitable ornate and monumental private entrance at 121 Westminster Bridge Rd.
It was destroyed by enemy bombing in 1941.
At the Brookwood end there were two cheap wooden and cast-iron structures to serve as receiving stations, one for Anglicans and the other for dissenters, Roman Catholics, Parsees, and others.
In 1861 another private company founded the Great Northern Cemetery at Colney Hatch and served it by rail from King's Cross.
Australia followed the lead of Britain with an ornate cemetery receiving-station at Haslam's Creek for Rookwood Cemetery, Sydney.
It was built in 1868 and connected by rail to a dispatching station, Redfern, at Regent's St., Sydney.
The Rookwood branch fell into disuse in 1939 with the advent  of the motor car.
But for the receiving-station there was to be life after death.
The design, roof beams, decorated columns, and funerary angels so much resembled a chapel that, after the station was closed, it was demolished in 1958 and removed to Canberra to be re-erected as a church.
Thus the often-employed religious metaphor applied to the railway station became a reality.
8 The Station in the Economy (I) Britain and Europe
THE station's prime economic function was as a reception and distribution point for goods of all kinds.
The magic castle that is London's St Pancras Station rests upon a forest of unseen arches, forming a vault which in the railways' heydays, from the 1870S to the 1920s, housed the thousands of barrels of beer that arrived daily from Burton-on-Trent.
Nothing could more eloquently express the nature of the Victorian railway system — a towering, splendid, multi-faceted edifice built four-square on a foundation of industry and trade.
It was the economic imperative — the energy demands of an industrializing North-East of England — that prompted the building of the world's first railway line, the Stockton and Darlington Railway (1825), which was essentially a coal-carrying line.
Coal-carrying was thus from the first, and has remained both in Britain and on the Continent, one of the basic economic functions of the railway.
Indeed George Stephenson originally envisaged the railway system as an extension of the colliery system.
Once the success of the Liverpool and Manchester Railway (1830) in transporting both passengers and freight was demonstrated, industrial and commercial Britain began vociferously to demand this vital new mode of transport, which would link centres of production, distribution, and raw material and would progressively quicken the pace of economic life.
By 1837 the railway had linked Birmingham with Liverpool and Manchester, by 1838 Birmingham with London, by 1840 London with Southampton, by 1841 London with Bristol.
The railway spread outwards from Britain to continental Europe, initially often with British capital, technology, and expertise.
Belgium was the first European country to possess a fully fledged rail network.
The first line (Brussels to Malines) was opened in 1835.
By 1842 Brussels was linked to Antwerp, Ostend, and the French frontier.
Germany's first line opened in 1835, Austria's in 1837, Italy's and Holland's in 1839, Switzerland's in 1847, Spain's in 1848.
The pace of development varied.
Holland, with its extensive waterways, had only 211 miles by 1860.
Scandinavia, equally well served by rivers and coastal sea traffic, was also slow to develop national networks after initial line foundations — Denmark in 1847, Norway in 1854, and Sweden in 1856.
Although France had a railway line from the coalfield of Saint Etienne to Lyons in 1832, it too was slow to develop a national network, partly because of governmental reluctance to embrace the new form of transportation and also because the economy remained predominantly agricultural and the road system was more efficient and extensive than Britain's.
By 1842 France had only 350 route miles and by 1850 only I, 870, compared with Germany's 3,735 miles and Britain's 6,621.
But Napoleon III's Second Empire changed all this, decisively and enthusiastically embracing railway-building so that by 1870 11,000 miles had been built by a partnership between the State and the six great companies that emerged from the initial burst of railway fever.
On the whole, railway development on the Continent was a generation behind Britain.
Between 1850 and 1870, 50,000 miles of new line were laid in Europe, as against 15,000 in all the years before.
By 1870 the major European trunk lines had been established and it was a matter of filling in the network, a process that continued until the end of the century.
The story of the railways is intimately tied up with the wider saga of the industrialization of Europe, and it proceeded at a different rate in each country.
Britain set the pace in the first half of the nineteenth century.
In the 1850s and 1860s France and Germany, particularly Germany, followed suit; they caught up with, and by 1914 had overtaken, Britain in the field of industry.
Italy, Russia, and Austria lagged further behind, their major period of industrialization being concentrated in the last three decades before the First World War.
But their industrialization remained partial because of an entrenched semi-feudal agrarian system and large peasant populations.
Spain and Hungary, despite the presence of the railways, remained industrially backward, with comparatively little development by 1914.
Clearly, then, the provision of railways does not lead inevitably to industrialization.
There is an interlocking complex of reasons for industrial take-off.
But the presence of railways is one of them and when industrialization occurs, the railways speed the process.
In recent years there had been considerable debate about the nature of the railways' contribution to economic growth.
This was initiated by the practitioners of the so-called New Economic History.
These scholars, with their narrow reliance on sometimes incomplete statistics and a hypothetical input for ‘social saving’, argue that the railways were much less important than is usually assumed, because if they had not existed, something else would have emerged to take their place.
But this is like suggesting that pigs might fly.
They might, but they don't.
Far too much scholarly energy has been wasted in trying to assess what would have happened to industrialization without the railways.
The railways were a fact and the economy responded directly to that fact.
The arrival of the railways made an important and lasting impact on many sectors of the economy.
The building and then the operation of the railways created a vast new industry, which provided work across the whole range of employment grades.
In Britain, on average 60,000 men were employed annually in building the railways between the 1830s and the 1870s.
The number of permanent employees of the companies grew from 56,000 in 1850 to 350,000 in 1890 to 600,000 in 1910.
In France the number of railway workers increased from 27,900 in 1851 to 113,000 in 1866, 222,800 in 1881, 308,000 in 1907, 355,600 in 1913.
These figures take no account of the numbers employed in ancillary activities, such as delivery-men, cab-drivers, and employees of businesses like shops, cafes, and hotels, which regularly sprang up in the environs of the great railway termini.
Neither can they measure the stimulus the railways provided to the growth and maturation of the professions — law, engineering, accounting, surveying — all of whose services were in demand by the railway companies.
The railways stimulated capital investment, entrepreneurial adventure, and the money market.
As The Economist noted in 1845: ‘Railway property is a new feature in England's social economy which has introduced commercial feelings to the firesides of thousands.’
Britain had a large stake in the early overseas railway-building.
Robert Stephenson and Co. had by 1840 supplied locomotives to Austria, Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, Russia, and North America.
Thomas Brassey built the Paris to Rouen Railway in the early 1840s and held contracts in fifteen other countries.
Later in the nineteenth century the British Empire and South America became potent fields of railway investment activity.
Belgian industry and capital played an important part in developing the railways of France and Russia.
France itself, once it moved into the railway field, carved out lucrative areas of railway-building in, for instance, Spain.
An estimated 5,250 million francs was invested in foreign transportation between 1852 and 1881.
The railways stimulated demand for coal, iron, engineering, and from the 1870s steel.
The cheapening delivery costs of coal extended its use in manufacturing and in domestic consumption.
Between 1844 and 1851 British railways probably took one-fifth of the total output of the engineering industry.
The industrial stimulus and technological acceleration  which the railways caused in the metallurgical and engineering industries has been traced in Belgium, Russia, and Germany.
For Germany, one scholar has demonstrated that ‘both the growth and modernization of the German iron industry and to a lesser extent the engineering sector, may be regarded as a consequence of the railroad’.
Figures for locomotive manufacture in Prussia show that up to 1842 the bulk of Prussian locomotives were imported from Britain.
The proportion dropped steadily until 1851 when all fifty-four locomotives brought into use were made in Prussia.
Similarly, until 1845 most rails were imported.
By the 1850S most rails were produced in Germany.
But the rise of the railways had much more general effects.
The railways provided a cheap, efficient method of bulk transportation which dramatically lowered costs.
In Britain in the 1860S coal was carried by British railways at one-twentieth the cost by road.
In France it was three or four times as expensive for French farmers to send merchandise by road as by rail.
By 1914, 70 per cent of total freight transport in France was by rail, 77 per cent in Belgium.
Falling freight costs led directly to easier marketing, cheaper raw materials, reduced prices, greater demand, and increased productivity.
The railway linked up manufacturing areas with raw material sources and centres of distribution and consumption, providing a major stimulus to further growth in coalfields like the Ruhr in Germany, the Pas-de-Calais in France, and those in Central Spain, in the iron ore works of South Wales, and in the new industrial centres of the developing European economies, like the Ukraine in Russia and the upper Po valley in Italy.
In all these areas, stations played a vital role as the staging posts of industrial supply and demand.
Industrialization and its concomitant — urbanization — had a direct effect on agriculture.
The increased demand for food to feed the growing populations of the great cities was met by speedy rail communication with the countryside, which allowed the transportation of perishable goods over long distances and promoted commercialization, specialization, and modernization in the agriculture of many countries.
In France, for instance, the railways became the suppliers of Paris.
In 1889 the railways supplied half the 44,969 tonnes of dead meat and half the 8,013 tonnes of cheese imported into the capital, almost all the 20,899 tonnes of poultry and game and the 15,694 tonnes of fruit and vegetables, and all the 25,215 tonnes of fish, the 12,076 tonnes of eggs, and the 5,790 tonnes of mussels.
In all, 122,243 tonnes out of a total of 149,990 tonnes of foodstuffs of all kinds was carried into Paris by rail.
Roger Price, in his masterly account of the modernization of rural  France, has demonstrated the pivotal role of the railways in transforming the ancien regime economy of the countryside in the middle of the nineteenth century.
Up to that time, the rural economy was characterized by slow and expensive modes of communication, over-population, subsistence agriculture, and compartmentalized markets.
Rural society was isolated, localized, and subject to recurrent food crises which bred an atmosphere of apprehension and insecurity and led to periodic outbreaks of disorder.
There had been some reduction in transport costs and a degree of commercialization in the early part of the century, but not enough to break the recurrent cycle of harvest failure, food shortage, price increase, misery, and unrest.
The basic cause was low productivity, exacerbated by distribution difficulties and the inefficient transmission of information.
The coming of the railways and their ally, the telegraph system, put an end to this situation.
Subsistence crises ceased after the 1850s and their disappearance can be linked directly with the rise of the railways.
In their wake, French economic life came to be characterized by market integration, specialization and commercialization in farming methods instead of subsistence polyculture, and intensified competition between the regions.
For the people, this meant stable price levels, rising living standards, and increased employment opportunities.
Price notes that one potent expression of this transformation was the physical change that took place in bakers' shops.
They ceased to be fortresses protected by strong doors and iron bars and became elegant shops with windows in place of grilles.
The change did not, of course, take place uniformly.
There were variations between areas, classes, and products.
There were periods of advance and of stagnation.
Urbanization, for instance, proceeded much more slowly in France than in England.
By 1901 only 41 per cent of the French population lived in towns.
In England the figure had passed 50 per cent as early as 1851.
Nevertheless the coming of the railways had permanently transformed the structure and nature of French agriculture and rural life.
The role of the station was, as ever, crucial in this process, as Roger Price reminds us:
An initial distinction might be made between communes with and those without a railway station.
In general, the latter tended to experience economic (and demographic) decline and to place all hope of arresting this in the improvement of their communications.
The former did not invariably experience substantial development as commercial centres — some railway centres were better located than others — but were better placed to market their own products and to develop economically, even though Le Mans developed at the expense of  Alençon, for example, and Orlèans, Besançon and Montpellier all lost some of their traditional importance in the wine trade, the last losing out to Béziers and Nîmes which were at junctions in the railway network.
Position on main rather than on secondary rail routes and especially at crossroads in the network (nodal points) was an important factor for growth.
It was in the mid 1840s that the full implications of the potential for the new transport system sank in.
Britain's railway companies laid increasing emphasis on freight, in pursuit of the dictum of Captain Mark Huish of the London and North-Western Railway: ‘Quantity is the essential element of Railway success.’
It was 1852 before freight receipts exceeded passenger receipts and it was around the same time that the railways overtook the canals to become the principal freight carriers.
By 1856 the canals were carrying half as much freight as the railways.
British railways carried an estimated 38 million tons of freight in 1850.
By 1875 the total was 199.6 million tons.
In France, the railway companies underestimated the demand for their services.
The Compagnie de l'Est admitted in 1853 that goods traffic had ‘increased…with such rapidity that our material has been found to be insufficient.
We have found it necessary to refuse traffic.’
In 1850, 64.74 per cent of total receipts on French railways came from passengers and only 35.26 per cent from goods.
But by 1860 the proportion was almost exactly opposite: 33.96 per cent of receipts came from passengers and 66.04 per cent from goods.
What were the goods carried by the railways in such bulk?
Everywhere from Spain and Russia to Italy and Britain, the principal freight cargo was coal, the key to industrialization.
For more than a century after 1850 the movement of coal was the life-blood of British railways.
The tonnage carried was always well over half the total volume of freight traffic.
In 1856 the quantity of coal carried by rail was 50 million tons, compared with 13 million tons of other minerals and 32 million tons of general merchandise.
The Midland Railway Company, which linked eight major coalfields, transported one-tenth of all British coal.
In Germany the average rate per ton-kilometre declined by 74 per cent between 1840 and 1880.
The initially high freight charges encouraged the import of cheap British coal.
But establishment of a special rate for domestic coal in the 1850s enabled German mines to undercut British coal, and regular coal traffic from Upper Silesia and the Ruhr to Berlin and other big cities was established.
In countries like Spain and Italy, where coal was imported in bulk, it was the railways which transported it and distributed it.
For much of the period 1860 to 1900 Spain was a net importer of foreign, mainly British, coal, which dramatically undercut the price of home-produced coal.
In  Italy in 1911, coal formed 55 per cent of total rail-borne imports.
In Russia in the 1960s, which with only a tenth of the world's railway mileage carried almost half the amount of freight moved by the rest of the world, coal and coke constituted a quarter of total freight, with other goods like petrol, oil, ore, and timber comprising only one-fifteenth each.
Coal-sidings came to be a feature of stations large and small right across Europe.
After coal, building materials figured importantly among bulk cargoes.
In Italy in the later nineteenth century high-grade building materials formed one of the principal bulk cargoes for internal rail distribution.
In Russia in the 1960s building materials formed a fifth of all freight.
In Britain the railways not only transported but considerably stimulated the making of bricks.
In 1845 an estimated 740 million bricks were used in stations, bridges, aqueducts, and embankments under construction.
In 1847, the record year of rail-building, a third of all the bricks produced in Britain were used in the railways.
But as urbanization proceeded apace, bricks remained in demand for house-building.
Brick-making was expanded in country market towns to provide employment at a time of decline in the need for farm labourers.
The brick-making operations were often directly linked with the railway, as for instance at Whittlesea, near Peterborough.
At Whittlesea Station in 1898 a staff of twelve dispatched 108,000 tons of bricks during the year, a total which represented a spectacular increase over 1891, which had seen the dispatch of 7,130 tons.
The increase meant more and more work for the staff.
From thirty to sixty trucks were loaded with bricks daily for dispatch to London and its surrounding area.
Work began at seven in the morning and went on until the time, as the station-master put it, ‘when the work is finished’, usually seven in the evening.
The station also supplied the nearby brickworks with its coal, 23,000 tons in 1898, chiefly from Yorkshire.
Among foodstuffs, grain was the principal bulk freight.
The possibility of widespread internal and, indeed, export distribution by rail caused a major transformation in Hungarian agriculture from pastoral to cereal production.
The reduction in cost of transportation in Spain due to railways stimulated the integration of the home market there, with domestic consumption of grain increasing dramatically.
In 1882 only 25 per cent of Spanish grain was transported by rail.
This had almost doubled by 1913.
Railways made a particularly dramatic impact on the grain trade in Russia, where it supplanted the use of waterways and short-haul wagons.
In 1870 grain constituted 27.5 per cent of total freight.
By 1875 this  figure had reached 42.1 per cent.
On some railroads, however, it was far and away the most important single item of freight.
On the Tambov-Kozlov railway 73.
I per cent of total freight was grain, on the Oryol-Gryazi railway 83.6 per cent, and on the Ryazhsk-Morshansk 88.9 per cent .
The net result of this activity was to create a national grain market, with trade no longer centred on a few major points of collection, transit, and marketing.
The Ryazan-Uralsk railway succeeded in linking the grain producing regions along the Volga with the major consuming area around Moscow, and the Trans-Caucasus Railway linked the southern port cities of Odessa, Rostov, and Novorossiysk with the grain areas of the Middle Volga.
This facilitated not only internal grain trade but also export.
By the 1880s half the wheat harvest was being exported.
Regional price variations equalized, agriculture was commercialized and a new breed of entrepreneurs was brought into being, dependent upon the railway and the station.
As Peter Lyaschenko wrote:
In place of the great Moscow or Kolomna merchant, the Nizhny Novogorod miller, the Moscow flax or hemp-factory owner, the large export wholesaler, and the old ‘flour dealers’, the railroad stations now swarmed with a mass of small traders, exporters, and commission merchants, all buying grain, hemp, hides, lard, sheepskin, down and bristles — in a word, everything bound for either the domestic or the foreign market.
Operating with relatively little capital, aided by credit, with a small mark-up in prices but with rapid turnover of capital, these petty commercial middlemen penetrated deep into the village, constantly drawing the rural area into the orbit of cash turnover, increasing the role of the market in the economy of the village, and augmenting the volume of goods available both for domestic and foreign commerce.
The most immediate effect upon the lives of the people, however, came in the railways' ability to transport perishable foodstuffs very long distances, not just within but between countries.
For this had revolutionary effects on agriculture, on food manufacture, on retailing, and on diet.
The railways carried right across Europe Danish eggs and dairy produce, Russian grain and poultry, Italian and French fruit, and Dutch vegetables.
In most countries, the railways were responsible for the speedy and cheap distribution from countryside to town of slaughtered meat, fresh fruit and vegetables, and fresh milk, and from the coast to the town of fresh fish.
This was particularly important in a country like Britain whose population grew from 17,900,000 in 1851 to 36,000,000 in 1911, the majority living in towns and cities.
But no country was immune from railway developments in any other.
The opening up of North America by the railways made American wheat available to Europe.
It was so cheap that it could be sold at half the price of the home-grown grain.
So in Britain in the 1870s many wheat farmers went over to meat production.
But in the 1880s a successful means of refrigerating meat cargoes was found, and within a few years Australian and Argentine beef, New Zealand lamb, and American pork were flooding into the country.
By 1900, imports had halved the cost of meat and bread, greatly assisting the diet of the working classes.
The response of British farmers to this development was to turn increasingly to specialization — dairy farming, market gardening, poultry and fruit farming.
The acreage under small fruit increased from 15,949 in 1871 to 76,331 in 1914.
This, of course, stimulated the jam-making industry considerably.
Indeed food manufacture as a whole underwent a transformation.
In 1850 the food industries were generally small-scale and localized.
But improved communications, technological change, and increased demand led to concentration of food production in fewer and greater units.
Jam, chocolate, and biscuits began to be produced under factory conditions and shipped out by rail, thus introducing household names in food-production like Huntley and Palmer at Reading and Cadbury at Bournville.
Similarly, brewing came increasingly to be concentrated in major provincial centres like Burton and Norwich, which utilized the rail network to the full to distribute their product.
The result of all this was that, although at the end of the century a third of the population still lived below the poverty line and the diet of the poorest included items such as white bread, condensed milk, and vegetable oil margarine, the earnings of a Lancashire cotton operative in 1913 permitted him ‘a breakfast of coffee or tea, bread, bacon and eggs — when eggs are cheap — a dinner of potatoes and beef, an evening meal of tea, bread and butter, cheap vegetables or fish, and a slight supper at moderate price’.
In the transport of all these different perishables, the station was intimately concerned.
It was the hub of activity in milk delivery and milk churns were a feature of every station.
Philip Unwin recalled: ‘The clatter of these milk churns was inseparable from railway stations, suggestive of cheerful bustle by day but strangely mournful in the small hours of a night journey.
It was not called ‘railway milk’ for nothing.
The railways were to transform dairying.
Before the railways, most of the milk produced in the country went for butter and cheese.
The demand for milk in the cities was met mainly by cow-keepers operating in the city itself or in the suburbs.
Milk was brought to Manchester by train as early as 1844 and to London by 1845.
But the volume of ‘railway milk’ traffic grew only slowly in the first decades of railway transport.
By the mid 1850S, for instance, only 5 per cent of London's milk arrived by train, and the bulk of that carried by the Eastern Counties Railway.
By 1914, however, the situation was totally transformed: 96 per cent of London's milk came by train.
The amount of milk carried by train had risen steadily, from 1.4 million gallons in 1861 to 10 million gallons in 1871, 26 million gallons in 1881, 42 million gallons in 1891, 93 million gallons in 1914.
There was at the same time a dramatic decline in the amount of milk produced by urban cattle-keepers and supplied by road.
‘Railway milk’ had received its first boost with an outbreak of cattle plague in the mid 1860S which had seriously restricted urban milk production.
But its real take-off period was the 1870S when the introduction of a new cooling apparatus and the addition of chemical preservatives to the milk enabled it to be transported very long distances while remaining fresh.
By the 1870s London was drawing on Berkshire and Wiltshire for its milk, by the 1880s on Somerset, and by the 1900s on Devon and Cornwall.
In 1910 St Erth, 300 miles from London, sent nearly 30,000 gallons of milk to Paddington Station.
So much milk came into Waterloo that it was renowned for smelling of sour milk all day.
At the outset, the railways adopted a negative attitude to the trade, failing to provide special terminal facilities, refusing to grant concessionary freight rates, and making no special timetable provision for milk trains.
But as the value and importance of the trade became clear, some companies moved to meet the milk importers' requirements.
The Great Western, whose rich agricultural heartland was providing an increasing volume of the capital's milk, opened a special milk halt at Wootton Bassett in Wiltshire and constructed special milk platforms at Paddington, the first in 1881.
But as late as 1890, only the Great Western and the Great Northern, with its London milk depot at Finsbury Park, had provided special terminal facilities.
Milk was generally carried by passenger trains, but increasingly milk rather than passengers became their raison d'être.
In 1890 the Great Western inaugurated two daily express milk specials from Swindon Junction.
Already from the 1860s they had introduced a reduced long-distance freight rate for milk to encourage the trade.
The Midland Company also increased its share of the London milk trade by offering special freight concessions to Derbyshire farmers.
The London, Brighton and South Coast Company introduced special rates for milk sent from particular stations.
So it was that the companies gradually came to terms with the increasing traffic and provided it with a further impetus.
Other factors converged in the 1870s.
There was increased urban  demand, with a fast-growing population and with a rise in real wages, competition from cheap imported foodstuffs encouraged farmers to switch to milk production, and the wholesale and retail end of the business became more efficient and organized.
But it could not have taken place without the railways, which once again proved to be the vital enabling factor.
The milk train became an essential fact of rural life, altering its rhythms by demanding the co-ordination of milking times with train departures.
Fruit, flowers, and vegetables, of course, had their seasons.
The railways had to accommodate a wide variety of produce under different conditions and at different times of the year.
In June and July there were the ‘strawberry specials’, 30 tonnes of strawberries being carried daily by the Midland Railway from the Vale of Evesham to London.
The London and South-Western carried in a whole season one million baskets of strawberries from ten stations in Hampshire: Swanwick, Botley, Romsey, Eastleigh, Wickham, Fareham, Bursledon, Netley, Sholing, and Bitterne.
Both the Great Western and the Midland were involved in the carriage of produce from the Vale of Evesham virtually all the year round, but the actual cargoes varied according to the time of year.
The transportation of early vegetables such as cabbages, Brussels sprouts, and young onions began in March, with asparagus following until June, and after the strawberry harvest, the plum season in August and September, which had the Midland conveying a thousand tons of plums a week.
In autumn and winter the cargoes were damsons, tomatoes, marrows, cucumbers, apples, and pears.
West Cornwall was a centre of broccoli- and potato-growing.
In 1898 the Great Western Railway conveyed 5,978 tons of broccoli from Cornwall, much of it going north via Didcot, Birmingham, and Crewe.
Similarly, in 1898, 12,395 tons of potatoes were distributed by the GWR network, mainly to the North and Midlands.
At the end of July the Great Eastern Railways conveyed 500 tons of green peas on a single day from the area around Maldon in Essex.
Perhaps most romantic of all were the ‘flower specials’.
Flowers from the Isles of Scilly were picked in the morning, packed in light, non-returnable boxes, made up into packets of five, and conveyed by steamer to Penzance.
They left for London on the 4.50 p.m.
GWR mail train from Penzance, arriving at Paddington by 4 a.m. next morning.
But at the height of the season, there were so many extra loads of flowers that ‘flower specials’ were laid on.
Coaches containing flowers for Manchester were detached at Bristol and for Birmingham at Didcot.
In 1896, 514 tons of flowers left Penzance Station for various parts of the country.
But the railways were also involved in the next stage of the life of some of the fruit harvested round the country.
At the Great Eastern Station of Histon near Cambridge, 90 per cent of the goods traffic was involved in the local jam-making industry.
The jam factory was next to the station and had its own sidings.
Six goods trains arrived at Histon every day, bringing in the necessaries for jam-making: sugar from Amsterdam, Hamburg, and other Continental ports, earthenware jars from St Helens, Newcastle, and Chesterfield.
The trucks were shunted on to the company's sidings, unloaded by the company's employees, and loaded with the jam, made from fruit harvested locally and brought direct to the factory.
The station-master and his staff of twelve dealt with 20,099 tons of goods traffic incoming and outgoing in 1898.
Furthermore, many of the women and girls working at fruit-picking and jam-making were related to railway workers at nearby Cambridge Station and were brought to work by the 8.20 train from Cambridge in the morning and taken back home by the 6.34 in the evening.
Before the railways came, livestock was usually driven ‘on the hoof’ to the market, which not only took time but resulted inevitably in the animals losing weight and hence value.
Cattle trucks made the transport of meat both faster and easier.
They also facilitated the movement of perishable dead meat quite long distances.
Indeed it was at one time believed that the advent of the railways had signalled the end of the movement of live meat.
But this never occurred, as the railways charged high rates for the carriage of dead meat, which required greater handling, than they did for livestock.
The central role played by the railways in transporting meat dictated the location of the meat markets.
In 1855 the new Metropolitan Meat Market at Islington was opened.
It was provided with a direct link to the London and North-Western's Camden Station and so animals were driven direct to it from the trains.
Wolverhampton, Bristol, Shrewsbury, and Liverpool also built new cattle markets close to railway stations.
The dead-meat trade increased in the 1860s as a result of restrictions on the movement of live cattle in order to control the spread of cattle plague.
It was a vital part of the railway freight business.
Seymour Clarke, General Manager of the Great Northern Railway, told the 1869 Parliamentary Select Committee on the transit of animals that his company sent meat from almost all the 197 stations on its lines.
In the 1850s and 1860s, before cold storage was introduced, the dead-meat trade was seasonal, the heaviest burden falling in the coldest months of the year, between September and May.
Different meat-market centres tended to specialize in different forms of meat, Aberdeen, Edinburgh, and Leeds dispatching mainly dead meat and Leicester and Norwich livestock.
The great stations in these cities thus became massive meat railheads.
The existence of the railways also opened up the Continent, and Hamburg and Rotterdam served as terminal stations on a network of lines running to Austria, Hungary, and Poland, along which livestock was carried for export.
During the 1880s the Scandinavian countries sent an average 106,244 head of cattle to Britain every year.
But after 1892 animal disease legislation put an end to the importation of European livestock.
By that time, however, refrigeration techniques had ensured that meat could be brought from much further afield: beef from North and South America, mutton from Australia and New Zealand.
By 1910 the inhabitants of Britain consumed a million tons of meat over and above home produce.
Much of the beef from the United States in fact arrived in cattle ships on the hoof.
Typical was the American meat traffic to Birkenhead.
The cattle arrived at the landing-stage at Woodside, spent 10–14 days in pens (‘lairages’) recovering from the crossing, and were then slaughtered.
At the Woodside and Wallasey abattoirs 2,600 cattle a day could be killed.
The meat was then skinned, dressed, cut into ‘sides’, sewn into canvas, and placed in refrigerator vans for distribution throughout Britain by the London and North-Western Railway.
Seventeen trains a day, mostly filled with such meat, left Birkenhead Station.
Every part of the animal was used and nothing went to waste.
The entrails, blood, and skulls were used for manure on the farms of Cheshire.
The kidneys, liver, heart, tail, tripe, and heels were packed into hampers and sent to the Lancashire manufacturing towns like Bury, Wigan, and Oldham where the factory workers prized them as cheap and nourishing food.
Game and poultry were also imported in this way, to Fishguard from Ireland, to Liverpool from Canada, and to the East Coast ports from the Continent.
Two forms of livestock in particular are worth singling out.
The railways were vital in facilitating pigeon-racing.
National competitions entailed special trains to carry the birds to the agreed starting points.
Where there were only a few birds they were carried in the guard's van and released at the time and place stated on the label.
But the traffic was so heavy in the North-East that the North-Eastern Railway from 1905 on ran a ‘pigeon special’ every weekend from Newcastle to the South.
At the height of the season, they ran two a day.
The runs became longer in successive weeks, with the destinations moving from Selby to Doncaster to Nottingham and ultimately as far south as Southampton.
At  the named destination, all the baskets would be unloaded and the birds liberated simultaneously.
At a number of North-Eastern stations a porter would spend half an hour every Saturday or Sunday releasing pigeons from individual baskets, according to the instructions on the label.
No such freedom awaited another exotic cargo, the quails from Alexandria and Algiers, which arrived at King's Cross Goods Station for dispatch to Leadenhall Market.
They were conveyed in crates with a hundred live birds in each, fed en route by attendants; 200,000 a month reached London in the season.
Their destination was the tables of the well-to-do.
But the poor had cause to be grateful to the railways too, in particular for their supplies of fresh fish.
Until the mid nineteenth century, pickled or salted herring was the only form of fish available to the working classes.
But in the 1860s and 1870s the development of the steam trawler, the use of ice for preservation, and the exploitation of the rail network signalled the arrival of cheap cod and made possible the fish-and-chip shops which multiplied at the end of the century to furnish an important source of protein to the working class.
Between 4.30 and 9 a.m. every day a dozen fish trains left Grimsby for all parts of the country.
By 1861, 100,000 tons of fish was being carried by rail in England and Wales.
This development had a marked effect on the structure and nature of the fishing industry.
Small-scale and localized in the early nineteenth century, it became large-scale and increasingly concentrated in several main trawler ports as the century wore on.
There were few stations without their coal sidings or their milk churns.
Many had livestock pens and some had specialized functions connected with a local firm or factory.
But the principal focus for freight traffic was the goods station.
Goods traffic comprised three general categories — minerals (coal, metal ore, stone), livestock, and general merchandise (everything from raw cotton and spun silk to shovels and bicycles).
Into the goods stations would come fish trains, milk trains, coal trains, meat trains.
But the greater proportion of goods traffic was not carried in specials but in ordinary merchandise trains, made up of all kinds of vehicles containing an assortment of commodities, raw and manufactured.
The term ‘goods station’ conjures up an impression of a grim, functional building, a sort of glorified warehouse wholly lacking the glamour of the great passenger terminal.
But some goods stations were by an accident of history very grand.
As the railways penetrated deeper into the heart of the great cities, many large terminals were superseded.
Instead of being demolished, they were turned into goods stations.
The earliest  purpose-built station, Manchester Liverpool Road, closed to passengers in 1844, continued as a goods station until 1975.
The London and Southampton Railway's terminal at Nine Elms, with its fine classical portico designed by Sir William Tite, closed to passenger traffic in 1848 when Waterloo opened.
But it remained in service as a goods station.
The Eastern Counties Railways' terminus at Shoreditch, opened in 1840 and renamed Bishopsgate in 1846, boasted an impressive facade in the Italianate style by Sancton Wood.
It closed to passengers when Liverpool Street Station opened in 1875.
But it was converted to a goods station and reopened in 1881.
Birmingham's Curzon Street, with its Ionic portico, the Midlands' equivalent of the triumphal arch at Euston, was replaced as passenger terminal in 1854 by New Street Station but continued as a goods station.
Elsewhere Southport Central, Sheffield Wicker, Leicester West Bridge, and Bradford Adolphus Street went over from passenger to goods traffic, when supplanted by more extensive terminals.
The picture of life in a goods station was painted by Ernest Protheroe:
All through the day the collecting vans and lorries bring consignments of every description to the goods station proper, which consists of lines of rails and long platforms under cover.
As fast as the packages are unloaded they are checked with the consignment notes, trundled off to weighing machines for their weight to be recorded, and are then conveyed to the decks or platforms convenient to the spot where they will be loaded later in the day.
By eight o'clock at night the platforms of a London goods station are congested with great stacks of goods, every imaginable commodity and every conceivable shape.
When the work of loading the vans and trucks commences, one is persuaded that the chaotic array will never be reduced to order.
Men, busy as ants, wheel the packages to the waiting vehicles; there is bustle and noise, but no confusion, since each man knows what to do — and does it.
The loaders are skilled in fitting in packages of the most awkward shapes; and as each article is placed in a van it is entered upon a slip for later reference.
As soon as a truck is loaded it is removed by a ‘traverser’ on to a clear inner set of metals, and is then drawn out into the outer goods yard.
Upon a network of metals, lighted by great arc lamps, the workers here deal not with packages but with trucks.
They are shunted from one set of rails to another; turn-tables spin them round until they can be run upon any particular line; by means of capstans and ropes the loaded trucks are warped this way or that; and tank engines push them hither and thither.
Most of the movements are directed by voice or a waving lantern.
To the uninitiated it might seem that the shunters are engaged in a game of hide-and-seek with the trucks; they appear to scatter them all over the yard, as if their object were to separate many of them as completely as possible.
But when a goods engine makes its appearance from the outer darkness, it is possible to realize that the shunters' apparent madness is  nothing but the acme of method.
The engine backs down upon a few trucks, perhaps a single one; there is a quick manipulation of a coupling stick, and the engine draws off with its insignificant load.
Shortly it reappears upon another set of metals, and bears down upon more trucks.
Backwards and forwards the engine passes, increasing its load at each operation, until behind its tender it may have a string of vehicles more than two hundred yards in length with a brake van in the rear.
As far as possible the trucks are in the order in which they will be disconnected from the train at the various stopping-places.
There is then a pause of perhaps only a few seconds, a semaphore drops, a gleaming red light changes to green, and the long goods train moves out on its journey.
Goods stations had their aficionados, every bit as keen as the devotees of passenger stations.
One of them, D. T. Timins, wrote:
The great goods depots of London possess an importance superior even to that of the passenger termini themselves and furnish to the keen observer fields of study every whit as interesting as those afforded by the heterogeneous masses of humanity which daily pack themselves into express and local trains.
In pursuit of this philosophy, the Railway Magazine in 1900 ran a series of articles on the notable British goods station, preserving for us a picture of these hives of economic activity at the height of the railway age.
D. T. Timins was one of their eager reporters, and he began with a visit to the London and South-Western's Nine Elms Station.
Covering 37 acres and employing a staff of 1,170, it was a vital centre not only for the arrival and departure of merchandise and foodstuffs to and from the South and South-West of England but also France, the Channel Islands, and the Americas.
The New Shed dealt with manufactured goods (toys, groceries, hardware, etc.), the Old Down Shed with bulk traffic (flour, grain, fresh fruit), and two special sheds were set aside for American and French imported goods.
S. E. Marsh, assistant goods superintendent, described the rich variety of produce the station handled:
On this side we handle the up-goods from the American and Cape line ships.
It is nothing for 50 trucks of Canadian pea-fed bacon to arrive in one day, or as many as 2,000 barrels of apples.
Oysters and American bicycles, together with large consignments of hops, are among some of the principal items of a very varied and numerous assortment of commodities which we receive in quantities from the United States.
From the Cape comes wool, skins, fruit etc. etc., while from France we often get 3,000 sacks of chestnuts at a time.
During last autumn 20,000 packets of English hops, grown at Farnham, Bentley and Alton, were unloaded in this shed.
There was seasonal trade too.
Five hundred truck-loads of holly and mistletoe arrived from the New Forest for Christmas 1899, and in May and June ‘we are flooded with potatoes and also with strawberries’.
Several special trains of American frozen meat arrived every week, leaving Southampton at 6 p.m., arriving at Nine Elms at 10 p.m., and being at the market by midnight.
In one month at Nine Elms the clerks invoiced 35,874 tons of general goods, 5,933 tons of minerals, and 7,753 tons of coal and coke inwards, and 50,311 tons of general goods, 9,426 tons of minerals, and 2,849 tons of coal and coke outwards.
The steady increase in goods traffic which had taken place over the century can be demonstrated by the fact that during twenty-six weeks in 1847 the London and South-Western took in £38,906.19/11d as a result of their freight traffic.
The equivalent period in 1899 brought them in £637,515.11/.11d.
The Forth Goods Station, Newcastle upon Tyne, was living proof of the comprehensive functionality of the goods station.
Built on the banks of the Tyne and opened in 1873, it had been extended in 1893 until it stood three storeys high, 609 ft. long and 330 ft. wide.
A complex of cellars, warehouses, and offices, it was bounded on the north by the seventeen arches of the bridge carrying the Newcastle-Carlisle line into Central Station.
These arches were used for storage.
To the west was the junction, where a thousand or more trucks were marshalled daily and where the cattle docks lay, and the machinery supplying the motive power for the hydraulic cranes, capstans, and traversers.
To the east lay the entrances to the warehouse for road vehicles and the entrance yard, around which were the carting, time, weight, telegraph, and enquiry offices.
The station had twelve platforms (‘benches’) in constant use, while attached to the station were farriers', joiners', plumbers', and saddlers' departments, and stables for the 250 horses used in carting.
A staff of 1,400 employees of the North-Eastern Railway worked there, not to mention men of the North British and Caledonian railways who also had a part of the station.
During the course of a year, 1.1 million tons of merchandise and 800,000 head of livestock were dealt with.
Paddington Goods Depot, built in 1838, covered 22 acres and employed a staff of 2,000, which included 255 clerks, 711 porters, 893 carters, and 30 policemen.
Its eleven platforms were capable of accommodating 300 trucks under cover at the same time.
Each platform dealt with thirty-six trains outwards and thirty-eight inwards each day.
Paddington was essentially a station for mixed general traffic, but  foodstuffs of various kinds formed a large proportion of incoming merchandise.
In season, 1,100 tons of vegetables arrived daily from Worcester and Evesham.
This included 69,000 packages of asparagus alone.
Four hundred tons of potatoes arrived daily from the Channel Islands.
Three hundred tons of fish arrived daily from the western fishing ports.
Major recurrent items were bacon from Ireland and meat from Birkenhead.
Three days a week the Irish cross-channel boats brought over between 600 and 700 bales of bacon, requiring fourteen trucks to convey them to London.
The bacon was stored under the station arches on arrival at Paddington but the meat was conveyed to Smithfield.
There was traffic too in the opposite direction.
Fresh-killed meat from Deptford, nineteen wagon-loads of it, arrived every evening to be loaded into 800 special refrigerator vans waiting to receive it.
In the prepared food line, 30 tons of Cadbury's chocolate and 30 tons of Fry's cocoa arrived at Paddington every day.
South Wales, the principal supplier of paper for London newspapers and magazines, was part of the GWR empire and so Paddington was the destination for that bulk cargo, an average of 623 reels of paper arriving daily.
Perhaps the classic London Goods Station was King's Cross, the product of the entrepreneurial acumen of the Great Northern Railway.
Hemmed in by a board school, a gasworks, a depot for Bass ale, and the neighbouring St Pancras Station, King's Cross Goods Station was proclaimed by its retired outdoor Goods Manager to be in appearance ‘prosaic enough — you can't go into ecstasies over the beauty of its situation or the classic lines of its architecture’.
Its clerks had for many years to work in ‘dark, stuffy offices, with smoke-grimed ceilings and an atmosphere compounded of overnight gas-burning and the indefinable mouldiness of adjacent ’ bookrooms’‘.
Yet the Great Northern was the first company to establish a large potato depot in London, fed by bulk cargoes from Lincolnshire and Yorkshire.
It was the first company to set up a coal depot to supply the capital, displacing with railway coal the hitherto pre-eminent ‘sea coal’.
It also secured its own connection with the Islington Cattle Market by means of Holloway unloading pens and a private road.
At King's Cross itself there was a granary covering an area of 9,000 square yards, sheds for the storage of bricks from Hertfordshire, Lincolnshire, Staffordshire, and Yorkshire, and accommodation for the other regular bulk cargoes of stone, timber, hay, and straw.
The growth of goods traffic as a proportion of railway activity can be traced in the story of the Paris goods stations of the Nord network.
In  France, as in many Continental countries, there was a two-tier freight system, parcel (grande vitesse), carried in passenger trains, and goods (petite vitesse), carried on special freight trains.
Parcels thus came into the Gare du Nord, the splendid Paris terminal of the network opened in 1846 and rebuilt and extended in 1864.
So much of the station was given over to the passengers, who by 1863 numbered 2.1 million annually, that a special parcels depot was built next to the station proper in 1889.
But in 1899 the principle of transporting all parcels by passenger train was abandoned and a new parcels station (Paris-Messageries) was established at the rue du Faubourg-Saint-Denis.
Even this proved insufficient for both receipt and dispatch of parcels, so domestic parcel dispatch was moved in 1903 to La Chapelle.
The original Nord goods station was opened at La Chapelle-Saint Denis in 1842.
Over the years, the traffic swelled to such an extent that La Chapelle eventually expanded to form four separate stations: La Chapelle-lntérieure, La Chapelle-Charbons, La Chapelle-Triage, and La Chapelle-Annexe.
In 1856 a special coal station was established (La Chapelle-Charbons) and in 1864, as a result of Baron Haussmann's building boom, a station was set up to receive building materials, particularly finished stone.
But in 1878 the building goods station was merged with the coal station and La Chapelle-Annexe was built to receive all bulk goods, including building materials.
In 1873 the Nord network purchased the Saint-Ouen Docks and turned the reception centre for water-borne goods there into a major goods station, linked to La Chapelle by rail.
Finally in 1886 La Chapelle-Triage, a marshalling station, was created to co-ordinate traffic for all the Nord goods stations and was linked to the Gare du Bourget (1884), a regulating station for ensuring transit between Nord and the other networks.
By 1886 La Chapelle covered 60 hectares of land, and it was lit by electric light from 1877.
A further major goods station had been opened in 1876 at La Plaine Saint-Denis to supplement the activities of the others and by 1904 still another was required at Gennevilliers.
By the peak year of 1913, these stations between them were receiving 5,791,700 tonnes of goods.
This grand total included 1,837,500 tonnes of combustibles, 925,600 tonnes of building materials, 809,800 tonnes of foodstuffs, 525,100 tonnes of metallurgical products, 340,400 tonnes of chemicals and industrial products, 280,600 tonnes of papers and textiles, and 108,100 tonnes of ceramics and glass.
As everywhere else, coal formed the principal bulk freight, a quarter of all the tonnage of the Nord stations in Paris; its destinations were industrial, domestic, and public utility use.
It  was a sixfold increase in coal traffic between 1850 and 1855 that had prompted the building of La Chapelle-Charbons.
By 1862, La Chapelle was receiving 565,000 tonnes of coal, 364,000 tonnes from Belgium, dispatched principally from Erquelines and Quévy Stations, and 194,000 tonnes from the North French coalfields, dispatched chiefly from Somain and Lens stations.
By 1896 La Chapelle was receiving more than a million tonnes, but by now the bulk of it was French and only a small proportion Belgian, testimony to the industrialization that had taken place in the wake of the railways.
Building materials — stone, wood, bricks, sand, and gravel — were next in importance and were the principal traffic from certain stations, notably Gennevilliers, Saint-Ouen-les-Docks, and La Chapelle-Annexe.
There was, as in England, the usual wide variety of foodstuffs and produce.
In 1913, 150,000 tons of unrefined sugar arrived at the Nord stations, 85 per cent of it at La Chapelle-Charbons.
This was seasonal traffic, between October and December, and was largely a Nord monopoly, dispatched from Valois, Soissonnais, and Santerre.
The three great grain stations were La Chapelle-lntérieure, La Plaine-Saint-Denis, and Saint Ouen-les-Docks, which between them received a quarter of all the grain and a fifth of all the flour brought into Paris by train.
It came in the form of imports from the ports of Dunkirk, Le Tréport, Dieppe, and Rouen, or from home-grown stocks dispatched from stations in the Vexin, Valois, and Picardy.
Fruit and vegetable production was localized and seasonal.
Thus May-June saw the arrival of new potatoes from Algeria, June-August peas and August-October beans from the Soissons region, July-October cauliflowers from Saint-Omer, October-December potatoes from Flanders, and all the year round mushrooms from Chantilly and Villers-Cotterêts and watercress from Duvy, Clermont, Senlis, and Nanteuil.
Wine arrived usually at Saint-Ouen and La Plaine Saint Denis.
Only a sixth of Paris's milk came in on the Nord network, the biggest importer being Etat.
The total for 1913 was around 60 million litres.
There was a special Paris station (Paris-Bestiaux) for the meat market at La Villette, where 2,476,149 head of livestock arrived in 1913.
Only 34,690 head were handled by La Chapelle.
The First World War represented a major turning-point.
Thereafter, with the rise of road transport, there was a slow, steady, and continuing decline in the amount of freight carried by rail.
But the Nord goods stations went through one more transformation in 1937 when, in pursuit of efficiency and streamlining, all the goods depots were merged into a single, centralized complex with a single controlling authority, a chef de gare principal.
It was  typical of moves that were to take place on other systems.
But nothing was to stem the loss of traffic to the road.
The reign of King Steam was moving peacefully to its close.
9 The Station in the Economy (2) The Non-European World
IN Britain the development of the railways followed the Industrial Revolution, accelerated its impact, and pressed it forward into a new phase.
But almost everywhere else in the world, railways were the necessary engine of the nineteenth-century world economic integration which followed that revolution.
It is true that oceanic, river, lake, and only rudimentary land transport had been responsible for the extension of Christendom and the transfer of Iberian culture to Latin America and elsewhere, for the establishment of Dutch power in the East, British hegemony in India, French authority in North Africa, and the carving out of the great territories of white settlement.
But it was the railway which pressed forward the industrialization of the United States and of parts of Europe and which confirmed the continental power of Europeans in North America, Asia, Australasia, and Africa.
The railway acted as a great consolidator, confirming strategic power and opening up new areas for settlement, industrial markets, mineral extraction, and the production of raw materials and foodstuffs.
The railway station lay at the heart of all these developments.
In the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries the railways were like a great international grid, and the railway stations, freight yards, and depots were like power stations, sub-stations, and power-points on that grid.
But this was a system which was slow to develop.
In Britain, Europe, and the eastern United States it is perhaps customary to think of the decades from the 1830s to the 1880s as the great era of railway-building.
But in much of the rest of the world, the extension of the railways was to be a characteristic of the period from 1890 to the 1920s.
In Latin America, in North and South Africa, in some parts of Asia, and in the Australasian colonies, there had been tentative beginnings to railway-building in the middle of the century, but the great explosion of lines was not to come until its last decade.
Even in India, where railway-building developed rapidly between the 1860s and 1880s, the crucial feeder lines most important to the exploitation of India's resources were only built in the twenty years before  the First World War.
In Canada, Siberia, and the Far East, in the trans-Andean regions of Latin America and in Africa, the heroic building period was to come in the years when the railways stood on the threshold of being overtaken by new transportation developments, the internal combustion engine and later the aeroplane.
In the Canadian prairies and in some parts of Africa the last branch lines constructed in the 1920s were obsolete almost as soon as they were built.
The lorry, with its greater flexibility and convenience to farmers and country shippers, was about to take over.
What the lorry did for goods, the omnipresent omnibus soon did for passengers.
Transportation systems have a habit of being overtaken by new technology even as they reach their apogee.
The railways had done it to the canals and now it was to happen in turn to the railways.
It is this speed of development of alternative means of land transport which helped to produce the ‘new’ economic history's approach to railways in the 1960s.
By then railways were no longer fashionable, and the financial shenanigans of the nineteenth-century railway-builders were all too open to exposure.
So the role of railways in the late nineteenth-century economic order was decried.
The old vision of the centrality of the railways was replaced by a set of counterfactual conditionals, estimations of the extent to which development could have taken place without the railway.
However true this may be for the economic development of the United States — and even there such contentious hypotheticals are highly dubious — it certainly cannot hold good for European expansion and supremacy in the later nineteenth century.
Railways were crucial to the erection of the new specialized and integrated economic order.
So far as white settlement is concerned, the rapid peopling of the Canadian prairies and north country, of southern, central, and eastern Africa could not have taken place at such a speed without the railway.
Such settlement, indeed, took place just in time, before the First World War created a whole new set of conditions.
When the great wave of railway-building took place at the end of the nineteenth century, the old industrial commodities of iron, coal, and cotton were still important, but they were now joined by many others.
There was a renewed interest in gold and other precious metals, but base metals like copper, lead, and zinc took on a new significance, together with a whole range of new raw materials and foodstuffs.
What amounted to a second phase in the Industrial Revolution accelerated world integration and specialization, confirming the division of the world's peoples into industrial workers in Europe and the eastern United States and producers of raw materials and foodstuffs elsewhere.
And these two blocks of people  would be united by railway lines and steamships, inseparably associated with each other through the railway station and the port.
Few railway lines were built for non-economic reasons.
A few branches were constructed for ‘refreshment’ and tourism, like the hill-station lines in India.
The Hejaz line in the Middle East was primarily designed to take pilgrims to Mecca and Medina.
In one or two places railways were said to have been built to alleviate famine.
In India some lines were laid down to expedite famine relief.
In Japan the stimulus for the building of the first railway line came from a famine in 1869.
The British emissary, Sir Harry Parkes, urged that a railway line should be built to ensure that it would not happen again, and the first line, connecting Tokyo to Yokohama, was duly opened in 1872.
Many railway lines were dubbed strategic, but strategy and economics are so inseparably intertwined that it is a meaningless exercise to attempt to separate them.
Thus, for example, the ‘strategic’ lines of India were ultimately concerned with the protection of Britain's vital economic interests in the Subcontinent.
For the rest, all railways had economic origins, even if some were based on known resources, while others were planned in the hope of creating new economic opportunity.
The few short railway lines of southern Africa were galvanized into rapid growth by the discovery of diamonds and gold between 1869 and 1885.
Gold was the propelling force in New South Wales and Western Australia, British Columbia, and the Yukon.
(The Whitehorse and Yukon railway did, however, eventually carry many more tourists than prospectors or miners.)
Coal in India, copper in Central Africa, tin in Malaysia, silver in Mexico, and nitrates and copper in the Andes all drew railways to them like lightning to its earth.
Elsewhere, railway lines tapped more effectively crops which had formerly been transported on water, by animals, or by porters.
This was the case with ground-nuts, cocoa, and palm-oil in West Africa, cotton and gums in Egypt and the Sudan, sugar in the West Indies, Natal, Queensland, and elsewhere, cotton, jute, and tea in India.
Finally, the railway was the vital engine of settlement and of the opening of vast regions to new crops, in the prairies of Canada and the plains of the United States, the interior of East Africa, the tea-growing mountain areas of Ceylon, the Argentine pampas, the stock-rearing and fruit-growing areas of Australia and New Zealand, and the rubber plantations of Malaya.
Although there had been considerable Russian settlement in Asia before the railway age, it was not until the building of the Central Asian and Trans-Siberian lines that settlement, and with it the exploitation of minerals and other natural resources, really took off.
There has been no greater continuity in the economic power of railways than in tapping minerals.
The first railway line in Bengal, the forerunner of the entire East India Railway network, was built to exploit the coal of Raniganj.
The line to the Zambezi in Central Africa was diverted to run through the Wankie coalfields, while one of the largest projects in the inter-war years in Africa was designed to tap the coal of the Tete province of Mozambique.
The particular suitability of railways to carry bulk minerals like coal cheaply has ensured that the connection between the railways and such minerals has been maintained to the present day.
New railway lines have been built in British Columbia, Australia, Siberia, and elsewhere to exploit coal and other minerals.
These recent ones are, however, often specialized railways without passengers or conventional stations.
In the late nineteenth century, minerals acted as lead sectors for other aspects of economic growth, encouraging migration, urbanization, and cash-cropping in large regions of the world.
Moreover, geopolitics have played a role in duplicating lines to land-locked deposits.
The copper of Central Africa has struggled to find outlets south, west, east, and north, creating vital junction stations and new  communities in the process.
Although imperial lines, like the Canadian Pacific and the Grand Trunk Pacific in Canada or the Uganda and Cape to Cairo railways in Africa, stole the British headlines since they enhanced so many colonial myths, British investment and railway-building were more considerable and in many respects more potent in the Anglo-American ‘informal Empire’ of Latin America.
The journalist and geographer Percy F. Martin visited Latin America just as this process was reaching a great peak in the early years of this century.
On his journey ‘through five republics’(Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Uruguay, and Venezuela) in 1905 he devoted more attention to railways than to any other single development.
British companies had to build their lines between revolutions and had to be prepared to accept the damage to bridges, track, and stations caused by civil war and insurgency, but the opportunities presented in the wheat-growing and stock-rearing of Argentina, the coffee, rubber, and minerals of Brazil, the gold, silver, copper, nitrates, and sheep-farming of Chile, the cattle of Uruguay, and the sugar, coffee, cocoa, tobacco, cotton, and cattle of Venezuela seemed at that time limitless.
Even Caracas in Venezuela, a small capital as South American cities went, could boast four railway stations.
But although there was a multiplicity of (short) railway systems in Venezuela, its relative lack of railway development matched its comparative economic backwardness.
In his two-volume Mexico of the Twentieth Century (1907) Martin moved  on to examine British investment and influence in that country.
‘Five and twenty years ago’, he wrote, ‘who in all the earth would have invested his money in a Mexican bank; have trusted his savings in a Mexican mine; or have considered it a safe and prudent thing to go to Mexico at all?’
Part of the answer for the change by 1907 lay in the fact that by then Mexico had 20,000 miles of telegraph lines and 17,000 miles of railways.
To make the country even more civilized the railways were embarking on building great hotels by their stations for the first time.
Stations, hotels, and all other railway works were capitalized on the mineral riches which had first attracted the Spanish.
Mexico produced no less than one-third of all the world's silver, together with copper, lead, gold, and many agricultural products.
In his survey of each of the states of Mexico, Martin linked the extent of their prosperity and economic integration directly to railway-building.
It was these mineral riches which enabled so many Latin American railway companies to build grandiose stations for a passenger traffic which formed an insignificant part of their revenues, to flatter a national vanity which demanded a new ‘civic excess’ in the period.
Coal was, of course, always central to the railways.
Not only were lines built to tap it, not only did almost every station become a distribution centre in all those areas where the fossil fuel was vital for domestic and industrial use, but trains themselves in many countries ran on it.
Divisional stations stockpiled coal.
Its dust penetrated to all corners of such stations and lumps of coal, as well as cinders, littered the tracks.
Coal was labour-intensive and the need to move it around the station and load it into engine tenders required large numbers of labourers.
In Europe and in North America automatic coal hoists were introduced and became yet another stark element in the silhouette of many stations, but where labour was cheap, loading was done by the most primitive of methods, by men running up ramps with baskets on their heads.
But coal was not universal as engine fuel.
In Russian Central Asia the engines were designed to burn the naphtha left over after the refining of the petroleum from the Central Asian oilfields.
This was a process which fascinated George Curzon, the future Viceroy of India, when he travelled on the line in 1888 soon after its opening.
‘The tenders for the year 1889 he wrote, ‘specified the total amount required as 6 million gallons.
Large reservoirs of this naphtha are kept at the superior stations, the tank at Askabad containing 80,000 gallons, and it is transported along the line in cistern cars, holding 2,400 gallons each.’
Here was a striking portent of things to come.
But wood was a much more common fuel for engines, and the appearance  of railways and the provision of stations had the power to change the appearance of vast regions.
The building of the Trans-Siberian, it was noted in 1900, had led to the systematic extermination of the forests of Siberia, for the construction of the line and its stations and for fuel for the workers and engines.
Similar deforestation took place in Canada and in Africa.
In Canada, so profligate were railway-builders and settlers of the country's timber resources that huge fires were started to clear areas.
Where coal was used as engine fuel, the divisional stations became overshadowed by their enormous woodpiles.
On the Lobito Bay line through Angola, so dependent were the engines on wood that re-afforestation had to be undertaken to keep the engines supplied.
The fast-growing, drought-resistant eucalyptus was imported for this purpose and the appearance of an entire region was transformed by the importation of an alien tree.
As well as the flora, railways had a devastating effect on the fauna of the regions they penetrated.
The hunting of game meat, particularly in Africa, was a vital support system for the builders of the lines and, for a few years at least, for those who ran them.
Hunting was a common pursuit of station-masters in game-rich areas in Canada and the United States, above all in Mozambique, Rhodesia, Kenya, and elsewhere in Africa.
But apart from hunting for the pot, there was often a requirement to hunt dangerous predators to protect railway employees.
The most famous such incident was the case of ‘the man-eaters of Tsavo’ in the building of the East Africa line.
Both there and in the lion-infested flats of Mozambique, the water-towers of stations became redoubts against the marauders.
It was at stations that the carcasses, horns, and tusks of successful hunts were often displayed.
Soon the hunters who travelled by rail hunted not for food or protection, but for trophies and sport.
Armed to the teeth, they were to be seen in North America, Africa, and Asia and many stations became notable as jumping-off points for hunting expeditions.
When Winston Churchill visited East Africa in 1906 as Under-Secretary of State for the colonies, his private coach was frequently detached at station sidings along the line so that the distinguished Nimrod could go hunting near by.
In the early days, both in the United States and in Africa, some even hunted from the railway carriages themselves, but very soon the game was being driven further and further from the railway lines.
The retreat and disappearance of game was lamented in countless travel- and guide-books.
Many lines were designed to tap peasant production: for example, ground-nuts, cocoa, palm-oil in West Africa, cotton, jute, and rice in India, rice in Burma, cotton in Egypt, and so on .
In all these areas the  country stations and the great freight yards of the main cities represented the concentration of the staple crop.
India was perhaps the classic case.
In Bombay, cotton was king; in Calcutta and Dacca jute supreme.
In such areas station design had to take account of the nature of the main crop and of the manner in which that crop was fed into the station by the producers.
The produce was brought to the station by a multiplicity of carts and wagons drawn by oxen, ponies, mules, camels, or even on the backs of elephants.
The station had to have yards large enough for hundreds of such vehicles to be marshalled, areas where the animals could be tethered or grazed, perhaps for days.
Sir Bartle Frere, the Governor of Bombay in the 1860s and a great enthusiast for railways, pointed out to his London masters that for these reasons the Indian station required three or four times more space than its British counterpart.
Moreover, the large city or freight terminals had to have massive capacity to cope with intense seasonal pressures.
In the country districts, so great was the pressure of traffic to the stations that the approach roads were so worn as to be impassable, and in wet weather were impossible quagmires.
One of Frere's subordinates, the Collector of Dharwar, wrote to him:
I write from here while the senses of smell and sight are still suffering acutely from the dreadful state of the approaches to the stations at Kandalia and Campoolie…
About two or three hundred yards of road approaching either of these stations is absolutely half knee-deep in the most offensive and malarious black mud.
It is disgraceful to our Public Works Department, most unhealthy to the wretched people, European and native, who have to live in the neighbourhood, and most offensive to all railway passengers.
There could be no more vivid illustration of the manner in which the railway station acted as a magnet for all the vehicles of its locality.
Similar concentrations of peasant products could be encountered at stations on other continents.
In Brazil, hundreds of ponies brought bales of cotton to stations.
There is a photograph of just such a scene at Vicosa Station on the Alagoas section of the Great Western Railway of Brazil.
Elsewhere in India and in Central Asia, the railway station became the new setting for an ancient trade.
Central Asian merchants bringing raw materials to the carpet-making, silk, gold, silver-thread, and ribbon manufactories of Amritsar took to the train.
In turn, Amritsar became the depot for piece goods, copper, and brass which were destined for the Central Asian markets.
At the other end of the Central Asian connection, the economic changes wrought by the great Russian Asian railways were particularly striking.
In 1873 there was only one Russian merchant  in Bukhara.
As late as 1885, the agents of the Russian Commercial Company lived there almost as prisoners of the Amir.
By 1888, however, when the trans-Caspian railway had been opened to Bukhara, the situation had been transformed.
A whole range of Russian banks and commercial agencies had opened there, and the stations themselves reflected the quickening of the commercial tempo.
As a contemporary German writer, Dr Heyfelder, wrote:
In the summer of 1888 landowners from Poltawa came to the Amir's dominion and bought up live sheep in Kara Kul, which they took home by the railway.
From Moscow came buyers of lambskins; from Asia Minor, French dealers for the export of walnut-trees; from the Caucasus, Armenians and Jews, who bought huge quantities of carpets, so that the price was almost doubled.
Not a single foreigner who attended the opening ceremonies, not one of the travellers from France, England, Italy, and Russia, who have journeyed over the half-finished line, went away without purchasing some silks, embroideries, metal-work, arms, or knives.
But they also brought with them European innovations; and already, in the winter of 1888, the bazaars were stocked with articles never before seen: porcelain, lamps, glasses, mirrors, brushes, writing materials, coffee, preserves, biscuits.
At the railway stations appeared cards, cigars, beer, wine, brandy (the sale of which on their own soil the Bokhariots have prohibited by agreement)…
Moreover, some engineers have constructed the station-buildings in beautifully hewn freestone and marble from the neighbouring rocks, as an example to the Sarmatians for the use of their rich mountain stones and marbles.
Even in Central Asia, the railway and its stations were helping to make the world one.
Nowhere was the process of imperial specialization more apparent than on the Trans-Siberian railway.
The manganese and iron ores of the Urals were linked to great coalfields 1,250 miles further east.
The vast grain production of Western Siberia could now be distributed throughout the Russian Empire, and the Chinese Eastern Railway (built by the Russians) hoped to tap the riches of Manchuria in gold, iron, coal, soda, cattle, silkworms, rice, tobacco, ginseng, and the opium poppy.
The 1900 Guide to the Great Siberian Railway marked out for travellers the important stations in these new trading networks.
Belebey, Aksakovo, and Develekanovo were important stations for grain exports; Osharovka and Kryazh for cattle and animal products; Samara for grain, cattle, and tallow.
Further east, Yurganysh had a settlement of corn merchants near the station; Kurgan was important for butter and grain; Omsk for meat, hides, and grain; while timber came from any number of sources.
Travellers on Indian railways similarly had their attention drawn to the  important products shipped through the stations en route: Bangalore for grain and cotton, Dacca for jute, and so on .
Subsequent extensions to the Siberian system continued this process of creating complementary economies.
The Turkistan-Siberian (or Turksib) line was built between 1928 and 1931 so that the grain of Western Siberia could be exchanged for the cotton of Central Asia, releasing the Central Asian cotton-growers from the need for food production.
This complementarity was, of course, developed through the massive emigration which the Trans-Siberian made possible from European Russia.
That was but one of the great waves of migration which took Europeans to the New World, Africa, and Asia in the period.
While a great deal has been written about railways in migration, little notice has been taken of the role of the railway station.
Throughout western Canada and the United States, in the interior of Latin America, in Australasia and the settler territories of Africa, the provision of railway stations was the vital adjunct of settlement.
Although railway-building in North America has been described above as ‘quintessentially capitalist’, in fact railway companies were prepared to build to the West only in return for massive inducements.
The American western railroads received no fewer than 155 million acres of land as subsidies and guarantees.
Not all of the conditions of these land grants were fulfilled, but the companies still secured almost 140 million acres.
At a time when vast tracts were unsettled, it was all too easy for governments to be profligate.
Most western towns were created by the railroad land grant companies.
They had, according to Dee Brown, a ‘drab uniformity’, with the station painted a sombre colour, a water tank, a grain elevator, and a bleak main street.
In Canada, the Canadian Pacific Railway was provided with a subsidy of 25 million dollars and land grants amounting to 25 million acres.
Such liberal financing added to the wealth and power of the railway magnates, and turned the railway into an immigrant and land agency on a grand scale.
The CPR created no fewer than 600 new communities with villages, towns, and farming settlements growing out from the railway stations.
This process was to gain momentum in the last three decades of the nineteenth century, reaching a peak in the years before the First World War.
This was truly the boom era in western Canada.
In the early 1870s there were only 23,000 people west of Lake Superior.
In 1875 there were 5,800 miles of railway line in Canada; by 1935 there were 45,000 miles.
At first Canadian settlement had been largely along the border with the United States, south of the 50th parallel, and American railway companies had taken Canadian grain to the world market.
The Canadian  Pacific, in both its western and its eastern guises, had been designed to alleviate this dependence, to keep Canadian grain on Canadian metals and shipped through Canadian ports.
It therefore took a southerly route across the prairie provinces of the Dominion.
It had indeed been thought that the climate was too severe for wheat to grow further north, but the richness of the soil there, the abundance of river and lake water, and the intensity of the short summer soon exploded this theory.
The Grand Trunk Pacific Railway, chartered by a Canadian Liberal government in 1904, was designed to exploit these vast northern regions.
It was suggested that no fewer than 300 million acres of grain-growing land were opened up by this railway.
Moreover, it transformed the fortunes of the northern prairie cities.
In 1903 there were only 113 people in Saskatoon; in 1910 there were 14,000.
Edmonton in 1901 had a population of 2,626; by 1910 there were 30,000.
Within ten years, the GTP had created between Winnipeg and Edson 120 new towns with a total population of 50,000.
Many more were created in British Columbia and in northern Ontario in the same period.
But although the GTP produced a massive land boom, it was not given the vast land grants of its predecessor, the CPR.
The Liberals chartered the GTP specifically as an act of defiance to the Canadian Conservative party and its allies on the CPR.
Different, liberal, techniques had to be used.
An election was fought and massively won on the issue in 1904.
The GTP was given land grants only for its line from Lake Superior Junction on the main line to Fort William on Lake Superior (a distance of 188 miles).
It received a subsidy of 6,000 acres per mile.
Together with the Temiskamming and Northern Ontario Railway it also opened up northern Ontario, which was discovered not only to be good for settlement, but also to possess staggering mineral resources in copper, gold, silver, zinc, and cobalt.
In addition to opening up the northern prairies, it produced a land boom in northern British Columbia, where land values rose from 50 cents an acre to 30–60 dollars an acre in the space of a few years, and created a new Pacific port at Prince Rupert, 500 miles north of Vancouver, a new town where the population reached 5,000 in the space of two years.
All this was happening at a time when the Canadian Northern Railway was creating, in effect, a third transcontinental railway, built on much more economical lines than the exceptionally expensive and high-quality GTP.
There can be no doubt that all this constituted, as D. B. Hanna put it, ‘calamitous overbuilding’, and trapped many investors still enthralled by nineteenth century railway booms.
Many would lose a great deal as a result.
Wherever railway lines were to go, settlers eager to secure land bargains  just preceded them.
When the GTP was built, settlers had begun to develop the land along its route to such an extent that construction trains had to bring back wheat despite the unfinished nature of the track.
Town ‘boomers’ also preceded the railway builders, hoping to secure land where new towns would grow up.
Such an atmosphere inevitably produced intense speculation as to the route of the line, the positioning of small towns and of the more important divisional points.
But the speculators were not always successful.
Even although stations were established every four to nine miles along this immense line of rail, the boomers often chose the wrong spots.
As F. A. Talbot put it:
Commercial interests always flocked around the point where the train stopped to take up and set down passengers and merchandise.
The railway station became the hub of the community within a certain surrounding radius.
And he went on to describe the manner in which the station made and broke settlements:
The speculating element had pushed far ahead of the line into Alberta along the location, and a place called Denwood sprang up.
True, it was but a small village, but the fact was maintained that the railway would have to establish their station at that point.
The speculators tolerated a rough-and-ready existence for several months, dwelling in rude shacks and tents, and subsisting as best they could.
The future of Denwood was their sole topic of conversation, and many a pioneer built a magnificent castle in the air.
The outlook was considered all the more rosy from their point of view, since Denwood would have to be made what is known as a divisional point, that is to say, a station of more than ordinary importance, inasmuch as it would indicate the end of a running section — the point where the train would have to change engines.
Consequently round houses, extensive sidings, and various buildings essential to the railway's purpose would have to spring up, and these in their turn would require labour, which would have to live in the vicinity.
From the flamboyant tone in which the speculators discussed the prospects for Denwood, a stranger within its precincts might have come to the conclusion that he was standing upon ground which was destined to become the Winnipeg of the Middle West.
Any scrap of intelligence regarding the approach of the steel, as the railhead is called, was devoured and discussed with keen delight.
As the line crawled gradually closer and closer excitement and enthusiasm rose to fever pitch.
On July 25th, 1908, the rails forced their way into Denwood, and those who had been waiting so long and patiently considered that the prizes were theirs at last.
Many a ‘boomer’ saw his pocket bulging with dollars accruing from the result of his determination and success in being first on the spot.
The next day their feelings of joy gave way to dismay.
The line continued its progress as if Denwood were at the North Pole.
The speculators rubbed their eyes.
What!
Was Denwood  going to be overlooked?
The engineers did not know; they could give no intelligible reply.
Ah, well, perhaps the steel was pushing ahead with renewed vigour to meet some condition beyond which was not conspicuous to the ‘boomers’, so they sat down to another period of waiting.
Suddenly they learned the truth.
Denwood, ‘the coming metropolis of the Middle West’, despite its attractive situation, was useless to the railway.
Their point was 2½ miles farther west, and they had named the station Wainwright.
This was to be the divisional point.
Then ensued a mad stampede from Denwood.
The ‘boomers’ packed their tents hurriedly, the log buildings were emptied of their contents and demolished, and one and all hurried to Wainwright as best they could, and with what vehicles they could command.
Within a few hours Denwood was stripped of everything, there was not a soul or a vestige of its recent occupation to be seen in the place.
In a month it was forgotten; it was but a dream, and to-day you might search in vain for the place which enthusiastic optimists averred was the cradle of a second Winnipeg.
Once the railway company and the engineers had decreed where the station was in fact to be located, particularly the larger divisional points, 120–140 miles apart, towns were laid out on the traditional grid-plan.
The towns were generally laid out on the northern side of the tracks.
The street leading from the station was usually dubbed ‘Main Street’, with lateral thoroughfares crossing it.
Auctions were held to sell off the town lots, those nearest the station being the most expensive.
Moreover, restrictions were placed upon these to ensure that they would be developed and not simply held by speculators.
Otherwise, ‘a stranger detraining and observing the vacant appearance of a town around the station where there should be bustle would think naturally that something serious was the matter’.
Once the several grades of station were built (see Chapter 2), the distinctive economic elements of the prairie station, the grain elevator and (sometimes) the stock pens, would reflect the whole life of the community and its local region.
Although the GTP has been used as a late and well-documented model, the same developments could be found wherever the ‘colonizing roads’ went in North America.
As the local elevators filled with grain, laden trains conveyed it to the lake-head shipping points, where the world's largest elevators dominated the stations at Port Arthur and Fort William in Canada and, of course, at Chicago in the United States.
The growth in this traffic was staggering.
The CPR carried 3.9 million bushels of grain in 1882; 7.8 million bushels in 1885; 29.3 million bushels in 1892; 42.8 million at the end of the century; and 175.5 million in 1921.
The growth between the latter two dates was achieved at a time when the GTP and the Canadian  Northern were themselves turning into grain-carrying lines.
The passenger traffic through the hundreds of stations created by the CPR and its rivals exhibited a similar expansion.
In 1882 the CPR carried only 317,841 passengers.
By 1886, the first year after the completion of the transcontinental line, the figure was 1,665,960.
In 1890, 4.6 million passengers were carried; 8.3 million in 1902; 22.3 million in 1913 (the peak year), falling back to 20.5 million in 1920 after the lean war years when immigration largely fell away.
Such a dramatic movement of peoples could not have been undertaken by any other contemporary transportation method, and must reflect remarkable activity at the hundreds of newly built stations throughout the system.
In northern Ontario, railways that had originally been designed as ‘colonization roads’ to link any pioneering agricultural communities and to increase settlement in the ‘clay belt’had become instead ‘prospecting roads’in the remarkable scramble for the mineral riches of the area which developed in Edwardian times.
In 1904 the Ontario Provincial Geologist, impressed by the quantities of the rare mineral cobalt he had detected in the ores of one locality, Long Lake, put up a post with a board attached bearing the legend ‘Cobalt Station, Temiskamming and Northern Ontario Railway’.
As S. A. Pain put it, ‘The idea caught on at once, the station was built, and received its famous name’.
Soon afterwards a gold rush developed to an area known as the Porcupine gold-fields.
The prospectors, unlike their predecessors in many parts of the world, were able to go by train:
Clad in their khaki-coloured canvas, with slouch hat, high, thick-soled boots, with a tin mug strapped to their belt and their gunny-sack crammed to bursting point with gold-pan, pick, axe, and other impedimenta, they left the railway at Kelso, the railway point nearest the gold fields.
Even this station was in embryo.
There was no platform, not a building to indicate its whereabouts, nothing but a small board nailed to a decapitated tree trunk with the name inscribed thereon in white letters upon a black background.
A magnificent station replete with various buildings will rise there some day, but its time is not yet.
The railways in Russian Asia also had the power to make and break cities.
The Trans-Siberian railway bypassed Tomsk some sixty miles to the south.
Until that time Tomsk, with Irkutsk, had been the most important city in Siberia.
The wealth and power of Tomsk were irreparably damaged, and supremacy passed to Novosibirsk, the ‘Chicago of the Soviet Union’, a small settlement which became a great city simply because it was on the main line.
There is a story, probably apocryphal, that the surveyors had demanded a bribe of the merchants of Tomsk to  take the railway there.
They had refused, convinced that their city was so important it could not be avoided.
In Central Asia, the train was known as the ‘Devil's Wagon’ and the rulers of Bukhara stipulated that the line should pass the old city at a distance of ten miles.
The Russians proceeded to lay out a new town.
Plots of land were taken up by commercial companies near the imposing station, the Russian Agent moved there, and Bukharan merchants and others from the old city flocked there.
As Curzon noted:
In another decade the new Bokhara will have attracted to itself much of the importance of the ancient city, and with its rise and growth the prestige of the latter must inevitably decline.
Thus, by a seeming concession to native sentiment, the Russians are in reality playing their own game.
In the United States, the various railway companies were known by the products which supplied the freight profits which underpinned the passenger business and therefore the stations.
Fifty per cent of the traffic of the Vanderbilt lines in the late nineteenth century was in grain; the Pennsylvania was dependent on iron and coal; the Hill lines on cotton and lumber; the Rock Island, more diversified, on corn and cotton, timber and iron, precious metals and fruit; the Atchison on corn and cattle; the Chicago and North-Western on iron ore.
The installations of the great freight yards and stations of these systems reflected these concerns and Chicago represented them most profoundly of all.
Chicago was made by the railway.
Its 1½ square miles of business district were completely surrounded by railway tracks and terminals.
Twenty-five trunk lines went into Chicago and most of them had attendant freight and passenger depots.
As one writer put it, all trains went to Chicago and none passed through.
In 1912 it was said that the rail freight yards of the city handled 112,000 tons of freight per day.
307 million bushels of grain passed through the city's elevators in 1907, representing an 88 per cent increase over 1887.
Her eighty-seven elevators could store almost 60 million bushels, more than the entire annual load of the Canadian Pacific.
Three and a half million head of cattle were moved to the great stock yards by rail each year, together with 8 million hogs and 5 million sheep.
These stock yards covered 500 acres and could accommodate at any one time 75,000 cattle, I25,000 sheep, 300,000 hogs, and 6,000 horses.
Chicago had to be supplied by a mass of smaller stations where grain and stock were loaded.
There were 800 grain elevators at stations on the Northern Pacific alone.
Chicago was, of course, a massive centre of collection and distribution, a key point in America's export system.
A host of smaller cities and towns  were supplied with the foodstuffs and manufacturing goods essential for the rapidly developing American living standards of the day.
Every American city had its multiplicity of freight stations, with more sidings, land, and staff lavished upon them than the greatest of the passenger terminals.
In many places the freight yards were more carefully and conveniently located, as in Carl Condit's Cincinnati, than the passenger stations themselves.
These freight stations, like their European counterparts, were febrile centres of activity, collecting and distributing all manner of goods.
They had transformed what some writers saw as being the traditional American way of life.
The Americans, wrote Frank Spearman in 1905, had become a ‘hand-to-mouth’ people:
The last generation laid in its supplies in the fall for the winter; this generation buys from day to day.
The country merchant bought then twice a year; he now buys twice a week.
Why carry stock when trains run so often and it has been made so easy to get goods?
The travelling man no longer makes a sixty-day trip.
He sees his trade once a week or once in two weeks, and covers three or four towns in a day.
Railways, Spearman went on, had the power to break local strikes, as they had done in a recent coal strike in the United States, and the operating officers and freight-yard superintendents took on a military-style power.
They moved battalions, controlled division staffs, and were, in effect, ‘the field marshals of our daily bread’.
John Droege, in his Freight Terminals and Trains of 1912, also wrote of freight-station masters in heroic terms, ‘men of the hour, men of initiative and resourcefulness’, constantly in ‘action — consistent, insistent, persistent’.
They were like generals in command of armies, receiving, sorting, dispatching thousands of vehicles in an irregular flow, fighting their great enemy, blockade.
This massive power was to last only three or four decades, but as late as 1916, 77 per cent of all inter-city freight traffic in the United States went by rail (much of the balance was water-borne), and 98 per cent of all passengers took the train.
Railway revenues constituted 8 per cent of the gross national product, and 4 per cent of all those employed in the United States — about 1.7 million people — worked for the railways.
After the depression of the 1890s and the dilapidation of many of the lines, the companies were able to make a remarkable resurgence in the early decades of the twentieth century before their terminal decline.
In 1923, on the eve of that decline, American railways passed 2,200 million tons of freight and 1,250 million passengers through their stations.
But by 1925, when Droege published the second edition of his  Freight Terminals, the truck was making its ominous presence felt.
In the years since the First World War, trucks had come to transport 100 million tons of farm produce per annum directly to the cities.
North America provides, of course, the most striking instance of European settlement on a grand scale.
But wherever Whites went to settle they clamoured for railway stations.
The presence of a nearby station obviously greatly enhanced the value of land.
The building of branch lines could transform a previously struggling region.
Not surprisingly, the building of branch lines and the provision of freight sidings never failed to create controversy.
In Ceylon each new highland railway project was attended by public meetings, agitations, and petitions by white plantation owners hoping to secure the most favourable route and the most convenient placing of stations.
In eastern and central Africa the value of ‘white’ land was often directly related to its proximity to the railway station.
The cost of human or animal-borne transport was so great that the economic viability of white farming rapidly declined as the distance from the station increased.
White settlers on the line of rail from Umtali (Mtare) to Salisbury (Harare) demanded that stations should be established at suitably frequent intervals near them.
Branch lines were arranged to tap either mineral resources or new areas of settlement.
Africans were moved further and further from the line of rail, reflecting the fact that in settler territories their main economic contribution was to be labour for the Whites.
For them stations would act principally as a means of access to the labour market in mines, farms, and towns, not as a route to the world market for their produce.
In the 1920s and 1930s such distinctions in land and station use were given even more precise legislative sanctions.
Norman Leys, a doctor critical of white settlement in Kenya, noted that the branch lines there were designed to support white areas, particularly the vast estates of Kenyan settlers like Lord Delamere and E. S. Grogan.
They carefully avoided the black peasant producing regions which would probably have been more beneficial to the Kenyan economy.
As well as playing a role in grand economic affairs, world-wide integration no less, the station was vital in small-scale local economic relations.
In Ceylon it was discovered that mountain areas could produce fresh vegetables which could be conveyed from local stations to Colombo to provision passing ocean liners.
The extension of the Ceylon railways southwards enabled the fishermen of the Galle coast to send their fish to Colombo.
Stations became associated with certain products: Dehiwala for fish, Dodanduwa for plumbago and coir rope, Ambawela for vegetables.
Although the railways were crucial to tea-growing and marketing from Ceylon — because of the absence of other suitable forms of transportation — tea was successfully brought out from Assam by elephant, ‘country boat’, and steamer for several decades before the arrival of the railway.
But in the Darjeeling districts and in Assam a complex railway network soon became a vital part of the supply system and comforts of the white tea planters.
The railways brought coal to fuel the tea factories, and above all transported labour to work the plantations.
Recruitment took place in Bengal as well as in South India, and the remarkably comprehensive Murray's Handbook pointed out to European travellers the stations where the migrants might be seen entraining for the tea plantations.
Throughout North America, farmers' wives in country districts could be seen boarding local trains, often known as ‘butter and egg specials’, bearing a basket of eggs and some home-churned butter for the market at the local town.
A once-weekly trip gave them the opportunity to earn some ‘pin money’ and secure a change of scene from their relatively monotonous round.
In Latin America, Africa, and Asia, peasants might make a similar journey to market with a few chickens or other stock and produce if the fare were low enough to leave some profit.
As in Britain and Europe, milk churns became a characteristic of stations everywhere that cows could be kept and a town market found.
One example will suffice.
The tiny ‘Cordwood Ltd.’ line on British Columbia's Vancouver Island, opened in 1894, became the principal supplier of milk to the provincial capital, Victoria.
Trains had to wait upon the cows and were frequently late in consequence:
The morning train from Sidney picked up milk from various farms for shipment to Victoria and on at least one occasion it was held up for two hours while cows, that had been turned into the bush the previous night to pick up what nourishment they could were searched for, rounded up, milked and the milk loaded for the trip to town.
The line was a mere eighteen miles long, and there were no fewer than seven stations on its route.
The trains which handled the local traffic took ninety minutes for the journey.
As the name implied, the line carried timber, but it also conveyed the rather more exotic salmon and clams.
The railway station, then, acted as the collection and distribution point for local, regional, and international economic systems.
The local and regional networks were based on the railways with animal power feeding to and distributing from the stations.
The international network, at least for the Western imperial system, added a long ocean voyage between two  rail journeys.
Through the great Asian railways, Russia created a system that was entirely rail-borne.
Commodities like fish, milk, and vegetables might be transferred locally; labourers — as in India and Southern Africa — regionally, together with grain, rice, coal, and perhaps some manufactured goods; while the great international transfers included human migrants, cotton from India, Egypt, the United States, and some parts of Africa and Latin America, tea from India and Ceylon, coffee from Latin America, wheat from Canada and the United States, gold from South Africa, silver from Mexico, copper from Central Africa and South America, cattle from the Argentine and the United States, lamb, wool, and dairy products from Australasia.
In the other direction countless stations throughout the world were the distribution points for manufactured goods.
Cotton piece-goods, pots and pans, hoes and ploughs, all manner of tools, and a host of other commodities arrived by train.
It is in this respect that the role of the railway station has been most dramatically transformed.
In very few places does this economic function survive.
With the exception of bulk traffic like coal and other minerals, the world's collection and distribution systems are now largely operated by road.
Great imperial systems propelled by steam have broken down into a myriad nationalities propelled by the internal-combustion engine and oil.
Where a great imperial system survives, as in the Soviet Union, the railways retain some semblance of their former power.