

POSTMODERNIST CULTURE
CRITICAL THEORY AND POSTMODERNIST CULTURE: THE ECLIPSE OF AURA
Two ongoing debates have come to assume some prominence in recent years.
In ‘culture studies’, and quickly entering the more proper sociological study of culture, talk has been of modernity versus postmodernity, of modernism versus postmodernism.
In social theory and increasingly in sociological theory, a school of writers of German origin, whose leading figures are Habermas, Adorno, and Benjamin, have been pitted against a group of writers of French background, whose leading lights are Foucault, Derrida, and Lyotard, in the controversies between critical theory and poststructuralism.
It has been the sometimes unspoken assumption of these two parallel debates — whose spokespersons are often one and the same — that to be on the side of modernity and modernism is to be on the side of critical theory, and that to be a postmodernist is at the same time to be in sympathy with poststructuralism.
What I should like to do in this essay is to challenge this assumption.
Of the three just-mentioned most serious and central figures of critical theory, it is Walter Benjamin who comes closest to offering a sociology of culture.
Jürgen Habermas, by temperament and by his own admission, has devoted relatively little thought to the aesthetic sphere.
Theodor Adorno, on the contrary, has produced what are perhaps the most considered, influential, and lengthy analyses of modernist art; yet these analyses tend to be formalist, to ignore the realm of popular culture, and to focus rather singularly on the production of cultural forms rather than on the social bases of their reception.
It is only Benjamin, in his writings on the city, his essays on surrealism, and elsewhere in his work, who consistently  interconnects the cultural with social phenomena of every-day life.
I should like to argue in what follows that Walter Benjamin, probably critical theory's foremost sociologist of culture, is not in any simplistic sense a ‘modernist’, but that instead his analyses have important connections with the aesthetics, ethics, and politics of postmodernism.
I should like to pursue this argument through the use of Benjamin's conceptual framework in the analysis of postmodernist cultural forms.
Before I attempt to support these claims, however, I should like briefly to sketch some of the broadest parameters of the analysis of art and culture that critical theory of the Frankfurt School proffered.
Critical theory differs from more positivist versions of the sociology of culture in a number of respects.
First, whereas positivism is concerned with the brute ‘facts’ of cultural life, critical theory does not want to separate fact from value or theory from practice.
That is, cultural forms are also understood in terms of their potential as a critique of existing social conditions.
The Frankfurt School analysts disputed what Adorno called the ‘identity-thinking’ involved in positivism.
The latter involved the subsumption by concepts of social reality.
Adorno insisted instead that thinking be ‘mimetic’ and contain a ‘utopian moment’from which critique can be launched.
The critique of positivist ‘identity-thinking’ is connected with a second way in which the Frankfurt School diverges from positivism.
This is that critical theory offers an aesthetic evaluation of works of art.
Here critical theory has also found elements of positivism in the ‘social realism’ of orthodox Marxist culture analysts such as Lukács.
Adorno thus argued that Lukács's aesthetics was an example of identity-thinking, because his realism privileged works of art which correspond with social reality.
Adorno maintained that nonrealist art, such as the work of Kafka and Beckett, provided that utopian moment necessary for critique (Slater 1977, pp. 119–46).
Furthermore, critical theory departs form positivism in understanding the facts of culture in terms of a social totality.
Culture in this view bears important characteristics of the capitalist social totality, and in the case of mass culture, or the ‘culture industry’, functions to reproduce labour power and by extension reproduce the capitalist social formation as a totality.
This analysis in terms of totalities is rooted in the Hegelian  background of the Frankfurt theorists, and is integrally interwoven with the historical thinking that is fundamental to Hegel and foreign to positivism.
Adorno, Marcuse, and Habermas, like Lukács, work from a similar historical periodization of culture whose fundamental characteristics can be found in Hegel's writings on aesthetics.
The chronology involved is one that conceives of culture (and the most often cited example is the Homeric epic) as part of a unified social totality until the rise of capitalist modernity, at which point the cultural sphere gains autonomy and separateness from every-day social life (Ká0tz 1982, pp. 37–55).
Now I should like briefly to locate Walter Benjamin's cultural criticism in the context of the other Frankfurt analysts.
Benjamin was the oldest of the Frankfurt writers and related more directly to the neo-Kantianism of a previous generation of German scholars, which included Simmel and Weber, than did Adorno or Marcuse.
Benjamin's pivotal notion of ‘allegory’ can be understood as similar to the neo-Kantian sociologization of Kant's categories in, for example, Weber's types of social action or Durkheim and Mauss's primitive classifications.
In Benjamin's dualistic conception, allegory refers to bits and pieces of every-day life — often discarded objects, sometimes relics — that together constitute ‘myths’ through which individuals in a given historical period understand the social world.
Thus, in his study of seventeenth-century German Baroque tragic drama, ruins, relics, and deathheads were the elements of such allegories.
In his writings on Baudelaire's nineteenth-century Paris these elements included the arcades, the faubourgs, detective stories, and prostitutes in the night.
The other, more Hegelian, Frankfurt analysts, especially Adorno, were not happy with Benjamin's dualism and extreme subjectivism.
Benjamin, Adorno noted, understood ‘commodity fetishism’ as part and parcel of allegory and both as integral to human consciousness.
Adorno preferred instead to see fetishism as part of an objective social totality and not as a characteristic of human subjectivity (Frisby 1985, pp. 233–72).
The second main point on which Benjamin differed from the other Frankfurt theorists, including Habermas, was in his estimation of the role of popular culture.
Adorno and Marcuse both argued that popular culture did not have critical potential  in that it was not part of an autonomous cultural sphere as were certain high cultural works of art.
Popular culture was seen in terms of a ‘culture industry’ that was not separate from what was becoming a ‘one-dimensional’society.
Popular culture instead reproduced essentially passive individuals as labour power for monopoly capitalism.
Benjamin also understood popular culture as inseparable from the social, but such popular culture forms for Benjamin (who was influenced, on the one hand, by Brecht and, on the other, by surrealism) could have radical political potential for the masses (Rose 1978, pp. 1091–35).
To Benjamin, the modernization of Paris and the construction of the grand boulevards destroyed the radical and allegorical potential of the older arcades and faubourgs.
At the same time, however, modernization created new cultural forms, such as cinema and radio, which could constitute new allegories that themselves had radical possibilities for the populace.
The second difference underscores a radical divergence in the criteria of aesthetic judgement of Benjamin, on the one hand, and the other Frankfurt analysts, Marcuse, Adorno, Horkheimer, and Habermas, on the other.
The valuation of high cultural works of art, which sees possibilities of critique only in an aesthetic realm that is separate from the social, is constitutive of the modernist aesthetic of critical theory's ‘mainstream’.
Benjamin's valuation of popular cultural products, which can envisage critique from an aesthetic dimension that is integral to the social, is consistent with a postmodernist aesthetic.
The body of this paper will produce detailed arguments in support of this proposition.
Central to this analysis is Benjamin's (1975b, pp. 219–54) notion of ‘aura’, which he understood largely in terms of the singularity, the uniqueness of a work of art.
This, he observed, came under increasing challenge by new means of mechanical reproduction of art and by the historical avant-garde of the 1920s.
What this singularity and uniqueness of the auratic work of art imply is also its isolation from the social, both in its inaccessibility and in the absence of political effectiveness (Benjamin 1975b, p. 225).
The modernist work of art, to take Adorno's ideal-typical figures of Picasso and Schoenberg, is auratic in each of these respects.
The postmodernist cultural form is not (Bürger 1984, p. 122).
This departure from high  modernism can best be understood through examination of the historical avant-garde of the 1920s, which I think (and shall argue) was the first flourishing of postmodernist culture.
In this paper I shall thus look systematically at this break with the aura of high modernist art in the 1920s' avant-garde and in more recent decades.
THE DEMISE OF AURA
Max Weber, in the famous Zwischenbetrachtungen, presented his most systematic conceptualization of modernity, which he understood in terms of the separation of value spheres and life orders ( Lebensordnungen ).
He argued that the economic, political, ethical, legal, aesthetic, and erotic value spheres, which previously had been structured according to a unifying principle of the world religions and later of Enlightenment rationalism, now began to march to the beat of different drums (Whimster and Lash 1987).
Most basic to Weber's modern and foundationless ‘plurality of gods and demons’ was this autonomization of the diverse value spheres and particularly the autonomization of the aesthetic value sphere.
Many of Weber's contemporaries supposed that with the decline of religion the aesthetic realm might be the only place of retreat for any type of meaningful life — conduct in the face of encroaching purposive rationality (Whimster 1987).
The point here is that if cultural modernity is to be understood in terms of the separation and even the transcendence or ‘aura’ of aesthetic realism, then post-modernity would be a matter of transgression of the boundaries that separate the aesthetic from other cultural practices and from the social itself.
Peter Bürger (1984), a contemporary German analyst whose roots are critical-theoretical, proffers a similar, although this time Marxist-inflected, chronology.
For Bürger (1984, p. 48) it is specifically ‘bourgeois art’ that sets itself up as an autonomous realm.
Previously, art was intimately interwoven with the social.
Primitive and mediaeval ‘sacral art’ fulfilled a cultic function, whereas its successor, ‘courtly art’of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, functioned to promote ‘sociability’among the courtier class.
It is only from the eighteenth century that ‘bourgeois art’ sets itself up as a realm separate from the social  with its own specific ‘institutional’apparatus of production, distribution, and reception of aesthetic forms.
Fredric Jameson (1984) has associated ‘realist’ culture with early or liberal capitalism and ‘modernist’culture with organized capitalism or monopoly capitalism.
Bürger in such a context would assimilate both ‘realist’ and ‘modernist’art to autonomous and bourgeois art, the only distinction between them being that modernism with its inaccessibility and greater cult of the creator is even more autonomous, more ‘auratic’, than realism.
Realism, as Wolin (1984–5, p. 11) has noted, in its accessibility, at least to the middle classes, was instrumental in identity-formation in the creation of a bourgeois public sphere in the nineteenth century.
The more rarefied modernism played no such role.
Yet both realism and modernism largely functioned as ‘affirmative’ culture in Marcuse's (1968) sense of the term.
The very separation of the institutions of art from society neutralized the critical impulse of modernism, whereas realism functioned to centre, rather than to decentre, bourgeois identity.
The ‘historical avant-garde’ of the 1920s — especially Dada and surrealism, but also constructivism, De Stijl, the Bauhaus, and Neue  Sachlichkeit — was postmodern in the sense that it constituted a radical attack on the autonomy, on the aura, of the aesthetic.
While I concur with much of Bürger's (1984, p. 57) analyses, I do not accept his claim that the ‘failure’ of this historical avant-garde came about because any radical attack on the institutions of art was impossible in bourgeois society.
I do not agree that such a postmodern attack on autonomous and auratic culture is at all necessarily an offensive against ‘bourgeois’ art.
The reason, I suspect, that the postmodern avant-garde of the 1920s did not have greater social effects was because of a delinkage or desynchronization of the cultural and the social.
At this time ideological and economic conditions were unpropitious for a sizable audience for postmodernist culture.
It is only from the 1960s that such an audience was created on a mass scale.
I take the avant-garde of the 1920s to be postmodernist.
Because of this, and because of the particularly sharp way in which it set itself up as distinct from, and opposed to, modernist culture, this paper will devote a considerable amount of space to it.
Now let us attempt to understand postmodernist culture — in the 1920 and  today — through Walter Benjamin's notion of ‘aura’.
What Benjamin means by ‘aura’ or ‘auratic art’is very much what Weber meant by the aesthetic in modernity constituting itself as a separate value sphere.
But Benjamin also means a lot more.
For Benjamin, natural objects as well as cultural objects can possess aura.
He (1975b, p. 225) cites the example of a distant and majestic  mountain range to be fully as auratic as a hypothetically existing never-photographed masterpiece by Picasso.
‘Aura’, Benjamin (1979a, pp. 250–1) writes, is ‘a strange weave of space and time’.
The auratic cultural (or natural) object is characterized thus by its ‘unique appearance’, its ‘semblance of distance’, and its ‘duration’.
The demise of aura, which Benjamin (1975b, p. 239) attributes not just to the incursion of mechanical reproduction, but also to the activities of the avant-garde of the 1920s and especially to surrealism, is correspondingly characterized by the overcoming of uniqueness, the need to bring things closer to people, and transience.
Let me systematically reconstruct the implications of Benjamin's analysis:(1) A cultural text can be auratic or nonauratic with respect to(a) the object depicted,(b) the means by which it is depicted, and (c) whether or not the text itself is mechanically (or electronically) reproduced.
(2) The consumption or reception of a text may or may not be auratic, depending on whether it is individually or collectively consumed, or whether the audience views the cultural object in a state of immersion or distraction.
(3) The very process of production may or may not be auratic, depending again on whether it is individualized or collective, and the extent to which it is expressive (auratic) or impersonal (nonauratic).
(4) The institutions of art — that is, the ideas that animate art criticism, the museums, and the art schools — can foster either auratic or nonauratic art.
(5) Nonauratic art fosters the interfertilization of high and popular culture.
(6) Nonauratic art is for Benjamin somehow at the same time ‘political’, which is not true to auratic cultural forms.
(7) The demise of aura entails the obliteration of the distinction between the cultural and the social.
I shall address these points in this order.
(1a) In a cultural text the object depicted can either be auratic or nonauratic.
In his ‘Small History of Photography’, Benjamin (1979a, p. 248) notes that in photography's early mid-nineteenth-century days, ‘the client’ who came to be photographed was ‘the  member of a rising class equipped with an aura that seeped into the very folds of the man's frock coat or floppy cravat’, but that the later ‘imperialist bourgeoisie’lost its aura in its ‘deepening degeneration’, its Jugendstil photos featuring a fashionable ‘twilight’and a ‘non-auratic pose’.
Benjamin (1979a, pp. 248, 250, 256) writes that Eugene Atget's celebrated photographs ‘initiate the emancipation of the object from aura’, which worked ‘against the exotic, romantically sonorous names of the cities’.
The pictures of the like of empty courtyards and brothel addresses ‘have been likened to the scene of crime’ and ‘pumped the aura out of reality like water from a sinking ship’.
(lb) The means by which an object is depicted in a cultural text can also be auratic or nonauratic.
There are two variants of this.
The first is in the use of increasingly technological means of production of cultural texts, in which the medium of construction is somehow reproducible and interchangeable.
This was reflected in, for example, the Bauhaus's shift from an arts-and-crafts to a technological base in the course of the 1920s, and in the shift in cubism to the more geometric means of figuration of Léger after World War I (Willett 1978, pp. 13, 118–19).
More important, however, in this break with high modernist aura is the postmodernist departure from the notion of the ‘organic unity’ of the ‘integral work of art’.
This was perhaps the most fundamental bone of contention between Adorno's high modernist aesthetic (Wellmer 1984–5) and what can be understood as Benjamin's postmodernist alternative.
High modernist aura assumes the production of a unique work of art by (legitimation for this comes from Romanticism) the single creative individual producer.
This singularity of the work of art, the idea of the ‘work of art’ itself and the separation of the work of art, on the one hand, from the social, on the other, impute self-sufficiency, totality, and organic unity to the high-modernist text.
Hence Adorno's demands on the use of a single stylistic principle — such as Picasso's cubism or Schoenberg's twelve-tone music — whose implications and permutations must be consistently worked through in order to achieve ‘aesthetic rationality’(Bürger 1984–5, p. 127).
Benjamin was sceptical of Adorno's enthusiastic embrace of the Weberian separation-of-spheres principle of modernity.
Benjamin (1975a, pp. 83–4), like Weber, observed that the autonomy of the aesthetic and the  separation of spheres more generally result in a ‘shrinkage of experience’, or what Weber called the creation of a class of ‘specialists without heart’.
Instead, Benjamin embraced the principle of collage and montage of Dada and surrealism, which so radically violated Adorno's principle of the organic unity of style.
Benjamin used this avant-garde antiorganic use of the disparate and plural flotsam and jetsam of every-day life as artistic means in his own concept of ‘allegory’.
Postmodern collage and montage would function then for him as allegory in the most effective work of Dada, Russian constructivism, and surrealism.
(1c) Finally, and this was the central issue in Benjamin's ‘The Work of Art in an Age of Mechanical Reproduction’, aura is lost in so far as texts themselves are reproducible.
This ranged from the reproducibility of the film which is now telescoped through television and video; to the opera or concert through the increased availability of gramophone recordings from the 1920s; and to the reproduction of paintings themselves through photographic means in books, magazines, and television.
Rosalind Krauss has observed that this principle of textual reproducibility was prevalent, although at the same time given ideological denial, in modernism, itself.
She notes the confusion of an audience sensitized to auratic art at the 1978 unveiling of the new cast of Rodin's Gates of Hell.
Was it original?
Was it authentic?
Rodin in his will indeed bequeathed to the French nation the right to make bronze casts from his plaster models, a right that a National Assembly vote limited to 12 casts per model.
The first bronze of the Gates of Hell was cast in 1921 well after Rodin's death.
The original plaster lay scattered in pieces on his death, it not being clear just how Rodin would have wanted it pieced together.
Was even the high modernist Rodin, the ‘form-giver’, the figure of the ‘reflexively-intended hand-of-God imagery’, also an instance of Benjamin's mechanical production, of the ‘existence of multiples without an original’?
Krauss notes that even in Rodin's Three Nymphs, it was the same plaster model that was realized for each of the three figures.
Much the same can be said for the use of the ‘grid’ in countless high-modernist abstract paintings by Mondrian, Reinhardt, and many others.
Does not the transparency, the reproducibility of the grid, contradict the modernist ‘insistence on the opacity of the  pictorial field an insistence that is also a claim for its singularity and uniqueness?
Krauss observes another case of mass reproduction in Manet's ‘assembly line’ style of the continued overpainting of a large number of canvases at the same time.
Her point is that ‘the discourse of the copy’ existed also in high modernism, but it was repressed.
In postmodernism, however, as in Rauschenberg's silk-screens, this discourse has entered fully into consciousness (Krauss 1981).
(2) In primitive, medieval, and courtly art, reception was collective.
In autonomous and auratic art, reception by contrast is individualized and the audience is typically immersed in the work itself.
In postauratic culture, Benjamin argues, reception is once again collective and now no longer occurs under conditions of ‘immersion’.
Rather, the consumption of culture takes place under conditions of ‘distraction’.
Benjamin's (1975a, pp. 241–2) paradigmatic example here is the cinema, in which the rapid succession of images makes contemplation impossible, and reception is collective.
Reception under conditions of distraction is taken to its extreme in television, which is half watched in the course of pursuing other activities and in which very often, especially among children, entire programmes are not viewed at all; instead, fingers rarely leave the remote control device as there is a constant change of channels (Ellis 1982, p. 137).
The same is true of our reception of postmodernist painting.
No longer is there the immersion of contemplating the high modernist work of art.
The intention instead is to shock the audience.
When we view, for example, a Francis Bacon picture, the effect is immediate and often initially in the pit of the stomach (Deleuze 1981).
Postmodern multimedia performances are an extreme example of consumption under distraction.
(3) The producer of the auratic work of art is characteristically the unique, gifted, and creative individual; the work of art is highly personalized.
In the postmodern alternative the producer can be (and is) often collective and the production impersonal.
On the first point, Erwin Piscator's Berlin theatre of the mid- and late 1920s recruited a dramaturgical collective, including Bertholt Brecht, to write and adapt plays.
Ex-Bauhaus director Walter Gropius was to design a Totaltheater for Piscator's productions.
George Grosz was set designer for Hasek's Schweik, which Piscator produced in 1928.
In 1929 Piscator invited from the  Bauhaus first Oskar Schlemmer and then Laszlo Moholy-Nagy as scene designers.
Brecht carried on this collective principle in the course of his later productions (Willett 1978).
Also important was the impersonality of the new naturalism, which was seen, at least in Germany, as part of a critique of auratic, expressionist culture of the pre-war period.
Piscator thus embraced the idea of a politically committed ‘documentary theatre’.
Influenced by Eisenstein, his epic theatre used naturalistic language, a technologically advanced yet nonornamental stage set, and was intended to make theatre into a mix of ‘lecture hall and debating chamber’(Willett 1978, p. 151).
Brecht later worked out of this mould in his different epic theatre.
In his Jungle of the Cities he used contrived precise dates and times for each episode.
His idea was to tell his story ‘in a perfectly matter of fact and sober manner’(Willett 1978, p. 154).
Eisenstein was probably the most influential pioneer of this impersonality and naturalism in his documentary style.
His use of location shooting, natural lighting, and lay actors stood in total contrast to the older expressionist cinema.
This new naturalism also stood in contradistinction to the straightforward narrative of classic realism; for example, Eisenstein's first film Strike was ‘a montage of shocks, of images…’ whose design was to turn disparate items into an artistic whole (Willett 1978, pp. 107–8).
In Germany as well, directors such as G. W. Pabst turned away from the expressionist cinema that Fritz Lang had exemplified.
In The Love of Jeanne Ney, Pabst used real-life detail such as broken mirrors and iron basins.
Contemporaneous critics lauded this new cinema in which people were no longer made up to look like ‘artificial dolls’(Willett 1978, p. 146).
The impersonality of this naturalism constituted a postmodern challenge to the modernist cult of the singular and expressive creative artist.
(4) So far, in the characterization of postmodern as postauratic art we have spoken of the cultural text, of its reception and production, in terms of auratic and nonauratic.
Perhaps even more important than these three elements are the ‘institutions’ of culture.
‘Institutions’ here should be understood in a sense consistent with Weber's sociology of religion, in which the institutions of the church mediate between the prophetic reactors of religious ideas and the ‘laity’(Bourdieu 1987).
The prophet would here be analogous to the producer of art, the religious  ideas to the cultural text, and the laity to the audience.
Peter Bürger (1984, p. 22), in a rather similar vein, has defined the ‘institution of art’ in terms of(1)‘the production and distribution apparatus of art’and (2)‘the ideas which determine its reception’.
Bürger's stress on the ‘ideas’ that are expressed in criticism is particularly important here.
They influence not only the way the audience receives cultural texts, but also what gets exhibited in museums, the paintings we see in books and magazines and on television, and what gets taught in the art schools.
The point here is that institutions define the discourses and narratives through which aesthetic experience is received.
The concept of the integral work of art, of aura, in this sense is itself discursively created and, as already noted, can foster identity formation in the ‘bourgeois public sphere’.
Institutions in ‘oppositional public spheres’ can have a wholly different effect (Schulte-Sasse 1984).
Discourses in the latter can produce nonauratic and political readings of cultural texts.
Roger Fry and Clement Greenberg, for example, played inordinate roles in shaping the sensibility of successive generations of a high modernist audience.
For Greenberg who privileged the flatness of the modernist world of art, the masterpiece was ‘a universal, transhistorical form’.
Greenberg claimed that ‘modernist art developed out of a past without gap or break, and wherever it ends up it will never stop being intelligible in terms of the continuity of art’(Krauss 1985a, pp. 1–8).
If writers such as Greenberg had such effects on the generation of the 1960s, contemporary postmodernist artists and architects, as their critics have sorely lamented, have surely been similarly affected by the institutional mediation of poststructuralist theory.
The problem is that much of this institutional intervention has quickly become part and parcel of the established academy.
This stands in marked contrast to the antiauratic institutional role of the Bauhaus, the Russian Vkhutemas, and De Stijl in the 1920s which maintained their critical and oppositional thrust.
(5) The eclipse of aura creates partial and selective dissolution of the boundaries between high and popular culture.
There are several variants of this new high/popular culture juxtaposition with different aesthetic and political implications.
We may note initially the adoption by high culture of the objects of popular culture.
An example from the 1920s is the almost universal  influence of Chaplin and jazz in the avant-garde.
The musical sensibility of Stravinsky, Milhaud, Kurt Weill, and Hindemith was overwhelmingly influenced by jazz.
The latter was partly formed in dissatisfaction with the expressionist and even symbolist affinities of Schoenberg and his disciples' twelve-tone music.
The newer music, which was ‘dissonant, contrapuntal, rhythmically forceful’(Willett 1978, p. 162), instead downplayed the emotions.
Otto Klemperer at the Kroll-Oper, for example, in this naturalist vein dispensed with crescendi, vibrato, and sentimentality.
Opera featured jazz interludes.
Weill's philosophy here was that songs should not blend with, but should deliberately interrupt, narrative in his contemporaneous documentary style operas (Willett 1978, p. 167).
(6) Willett (1978, p. 110) makes a distinction between two rather different uses of popular culture for high culture: the first is for political reasons, as in the case of the German avant-garde and particularly the Dada movement; the second is for formal reasons, and it is found in surrealism and more generally in the Parisian avant-garde of the 1920s.
This distinction is useful in the consideration of contemporary postmodern culture.
An example of such ‘political’ postmodernism in the fine arts is the work of Ed Kienholz, whom critics have labelled a neo dadaist.
In an eminently Benjaminian vein, Kienholz has said that one can only understand a ‘society by going through its junk stores and flea markets’.
He explicitly confronted issues of racism in his 1960 commentary on the antisegregation struggles in Little Rock, Arkansas (The Little Eagle Rock Incident) and in his installation, Five Car Stud.
The latter was set up in a tent and foregrounded five white bigots beating a black man in the glare of automobile headlights.
He addressed the war in Vietnam in The Eleventh Hour Final, an installation of a living room in which a television screen broadcasts a fixed image of the evening news containing the week's death toll and the disembodied head of a Vietnamese child.
He and Nancy Reddin Kienholz have more recently addressed issues of gender inequality in their Berlin Women (1982).
Early on and independently, although contemporaneous with the beginnings of the Pop movement, Kienholz began making use of junk material in the late 1950s.
His installations, such as Roxy's, which features decapitated whores with mechanical pelvic movements in a brothel, and The Back  Seat Dodge —‘38, which puts its viewers in the place of voyeurs of a necking couple whose heads are melted into one, deal naturalistically with the seamy and discarded side of social life.
At times his work has been cast in a Tzara-like parody of high modernist art.
Whereas Robert Rauschenberg already had produced an erasure of a De Kooning drawing in the early 1950s, Kienholz assembled his Odious to Rauschenberg in 1960.
The latter was to be posted in a box, to which was attached an electric cord.
When plugged in, a tongue would stick out of the apparatus; additionally it contained an electric device that was intended to block television reception in the immediate area.
Nearly two decades later his installation Art Show at the Centre Pompidou foregrounded figures with tape decks for hearts, which gave out phoney art jargon, with hot air literally coming out of the figures’ vents (Rickey 1983).
The political significance of the vulgarization of high culture is exemplified in the more complicated case of Andy Warhol.
Considerable controversy has been generated as to whether his work undermines or reproduces contemporary power relations (Lyotard 1980; Jameson 1984, p. 63).
In Warhol's postmodernism there is an overproduction of cultural goods in relation to the quantity of meanings that consumers bring to the cultural marketplace.
There is an overload of sounds, of images, of words to the point at which a number of these cultural goods cannot be found meanings that can be attached to them (Ratcliff 1985).
In Warhol's 1965 film, Kitchen, there is no plot, no character development, and indeed the characters have interchangeable names.
What these characters are engaged in, however, is a competition for the attention of the camera, for which during the course of the film they posture and scheme.
The same overproduction ethos, that of turning out in principle reproducible cultural goods based on unskilled labour, and to which meaning can only be implausibly attached, underscores his 1978 ‘Oxidation’ series, in which aleatory colour schemes are created through Warhol urinating on bronze- or copper-covered canvases.
As does his 1984 ‘collaborative’ work with Jean-Michel Basquiat and Francesco Clemente, in which he silk-screened the paintings of the two young artists (Ratcliff 1985, p. 70).
The scarcity of meanings in the cultural marketplace, as Carter Ratcliff (1985, p. 74) observes, is also a ‘scarcity of self’.
Warhol  drove this point home and develops this thematic oversupply of signifiers in his ploy in the 1980s of sending someone else (with silver-sprayed hair) out on the lecture circuit in his place.
Although Warhol's images so perfectly captured the essence of postmodern cultural overproduction, he was too much the cultural entrepreneur to be fully taken in by it.
He clearly understood that the postmodern audience is radically different from previous audiences in that it brings to the marketplace a set of ideal interests that are no longer connected with meanings, but in which demand has become increasingly oriented to detached, shallow, and meaningless signifiers that he obligingly produced.
(7) Postauratic art entails the destruction of the distinction between the cultural and the social.
Although Sontag (1979) may have been guilty of exaggeration in her claim that Benjamin's most important influence came from surrealism, it is certain that he was enthusiastic about surrealism both as a movement in the arts and as often explicit politics.
Benjamin, who was particularly impressed by Aragon and Breton, shares this influence with poststructuralists Foucault, Derrida, and Deleuze, although, to the latter, surrealists such as Bataille, Artaud, and Magritte have been most significant.
Both Benjamin and the poststructuralists understood the surrealist lineage as running through Rimbaud, Lautréamont, Mallarmé, and Nietzsche.
My point here is that the surrealists and Benjamin spoke of the destruction of the (modernist and auratic) distinction between art and life.
Benjamin's concept of ‘allegory’ which, Sontag (1979, p. 17) argues, is the governing concept in his two most substantial works on Baudelaire's Paris and The Origins of German Tragic Drama, does have roots in surrealism.
Semiotics has conventionally spoken in terms of a tripartite model of signifier, signified, and referent, in which the signifier is commonly a word or statement, the signified is a concept or thought, and the referent is the object in the real (and social) world to which both signifier and signified connect.
In the language of semiotics, high modernism would be characterized by the radical separation of the signifier from the real (and social) and by a formalism of the signifying material.
In postmodernism and in surrealism it is the referent, the real itself, that becomes the signifier.
Thus, it has been argued that photography is the  quintessential surrealist art form, that photographs are like ‘death masks’, like footprints in the sense of being ‘imprints of the real’(Krauss 1985b, p. 110).
Surrealist spokesperson André Breton compared the camera with psychic automatism in that both for him were processes of mechanical recording.
Surrealist photography indeed developed techniques that self-consciously played upon this juxtaposition of the real as signifier and the signifier as real.
This was the case in their technique of writing or drawing on photos, or photographing bits of reality, like J.A.
Boiffard's telescopically enlarged shot of a big toe (Le Gros Orteuil), which seem primarily to be (in this case phallic) signifiers.
It is also illustrated in the ‘doubling’ technique of using double exposures in which the first shot is read, not photographically, but as a signifying element whose referent is the second shot (Krauss 1985b, p. 109).
Surrealists not only saw art as being composed of signifying elements drawn from the real, but also understood reality to be composed of signifying elements.
Pierre Naville, for instance, enthused that we should get pleasure from the streets of the city in which kiosks, autos, and lights were in a sense already representations, and Breton spoke of the world as ‘automatic writing’(Krauss 1985b, p. 99).
This thematic of the real, or the referent, as signifier is essential to the surrealist strategy that Walter Benjamin understood in terms of‘allegory’.
Surrealist allegory, in Breton's words, would be based on ‘the bringing together of two more or less distant realities’, these realities forming ‘an aggregation based on elective affinities’(Kuspit 1983, p. 58).
The point here is that these surrealist signifiers in ‘allegory’ are real, already referents.
Further, surrealist allegory for Benjamin is a method in which these figural signifiers are taken from ‘the petrified and insignificant’, from Breton's ‘dresses of five years ago’(Sontag 1979, p. 26).
This bringing together of ‘two more or less distant realities’ creates the surreal ‘point sublime’.
This ‘profane illumination’, this ‘poeticization of the banal’ was a matter, for Breton, not just of painting, literature, and photography, but also of life and love, the latter arising in no small portion from an intoxication in connection with the things of the beloved.
Benjamin (1979b, p. 226) wrote of the surrealist movement that ‘life only seemed worth living where the threshold between waking and sleeping was worn away in everyone as by the steps  of multitudinous images flooding back and forth, language only seemed itself where sound and image, image and sound interpenetrated with such felicity that no chink was left for the penny-in-the-slot called ‘meaning’’.
Benjamin's allusions in this passage are not just to the dominance of image and sensation and the devaluation of meaning in surrealism, not just to its characteristic patterning by eruptions of the primary process into consciousness, but also and especially to surrealism's unconditional refusal to consider art as of a different order than life.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
I have tried to show how Walter Benjamin's notions of ‘aura’(and also of ‘allegory’) can be used in the analysis of postmodernist culture.
I have at the same time suggested that Benjamin's own aesthetics were very much a postmodernist aesthetics.
Benjamin's own optimism regarding mechanical reproduction in culture, his advocacy of collective reception, his devaluation of meaning, his advocacy of pastiche-like allegory as distinct from the ‘organic work of art’ are, we have seen, all part and parcel of his break with a high modernist and auratic aesthetics.
His sympathy with the antiauratic surrealists, his proclivity for finding aesthetic signifiers among the flotsam and jetsam of every-day life, his refusal to consider art as of another order of life, and his affirmation of the political nature of the aesthetic are again also integral to the postmodernist programme.
One important assumption of the modernity/postmodernity controversies is that the political left of Marxists and critical Theorists is aligned with the modernists, whereas those (especially French-influenced poststructuralists) who connect somehow to postmodernism are apolitical and have little concern with contemporaneous social struggles.
Benjamin's fully political postmodernism throws this assumption into question.
Benjamin may never have convincingly reconciled his commitment to such an aesthetic project with his Marxist convictions.
Yet he wrote:
The collective is a body, too.
And the physis that is being organized for it in technology can, through all its political and  factual reality, only be produced in that image sphere to which [surrealist]profane illumination initiates us.
Only when in technology body and image so interpenetrate that all revolutionary tension becomes bodily collective innervation, and all the bodily innervation of the collective becomes revolutionary discharge, has reality transcended itself to the extent demanded by the Communist Manifesto.
For the moment, only the Surrealists have understood its present commands.
(Benjamin 1979b, p. 239)
Althusser (1972, pp. 23–4) once asserted that scientific and social-scientific revolutions were made possible by preceding revolutions in philosophy.
Today some analysts (Frisby 1985; see Chapter Five above) are  beginning to suggest that the place to look for formative conditions of paradigm change in the human sciences is instead in the aesthetic sphere.
Thus, it has been argued that a set of at least tacit beliefs that underlay aesthetic modernism also underlay the birth of classical sociological theory in the work of Weber, Simmel, and Durkheim.
It has equally been mooted that postmodernism in the aesthetic realm — and I have argued that such postmodernism first surfaced in the Surrealism and more generally in the historical avant-garde of the 1920s — has been an important condition of formation of poststructuralism in the human sciences (Huyssen 1984; see above, Chapter Three).
Benjamin's contribution to the human sciences, which converges remarkably with poststructuralism, also bears the stamp of the postmodern aesthetic programme, only some 40 years avant la lettre.
Thus, the relationship of critical theory to postmodernism and poststructuralism is indeed a far more complex matter than is commonly assumed.
If Habermas has relegated the aesthetic realm to foreground the place of practical and theoretical reason, and if Adorno has attributed priority to the aesthetic, albeit a rationalized and formalized aesthetics from which connections to the social-political are at best obscure, then Benjamin, probably critical theory's foremost sociologist of culture, has — much like French poststructuralism — promulgated an aesthetics and politicized understanding of art and culture that on a range of essential points are effectively postmodernist.
Acknowledgement
This chapter first appeared as an article in Current Perspectives in Social Theory, Volume 8, pages 197–213, 1987, and is reproduced by permission of JAI Press Inc, USA.
DISCOURSE OR FIGURE?
POSTMODERNISM AS A ‘REGIME OF SIGNIFICATION’
Some of the very best and sharpest critics of postmodernism have put forward a strikingly similar, yet quite powerful, argument against the claim that we live in some important sense in a postmodern era.
Analysts such as Anderson (1984), Frisby (1985) and Callinicos (1985) have thus aggressively disputed Lyotard's famous pronouncement that the contemporary scepticism before ‘metanarratives’ has been midwife to the birth of the postmodern condition.
Such analysts point out such a refusal of the ‘great narratives’ and the ‘foundationalisms’took place, not in the past decade or two, but were integral to the very rise of modernism itself.
Thus Baudelaire, arguably the godfather of aesthetic modernism, broke with the foundationalist assumptions of realism to celebrate the transitory, the fleeting, the contingent.
And Nietzsche, well before the turn of the century, castigated foundationalisms not just in the aesthetic realms, but similarly refused the certainties of notions of unconditional ethics and realist, mirror-of-nature epistemologies.
Indeed a recent collection of essays shows a remarkable convergence of opinion among contributors supporting the propositions that Max Weber himself had an eminently post-Enlightenment and ‘post-metanarrative’ idea of modernity (Whimster and Lash 1987).
It is helpful in the understanding of the modernist, late nineteenth-century departure from foundationalism, if we think in terms of the traditional sociological, structural-functional model which features the process of differentiation.
Let us however confine this process of differentiation to only the cultural realm.
In this sense the non-referential and anti-realist nature of, for example, modernist painting and literature can be  seen in terms of the differentiation of aesthetic forms from the real world.
And the modernist critique of realist epistemologies (present, for example, in Durkheim's ‘sociologistic epistemology’) is a matter of the differentiation of the ‘theoretical realm, from the real world.
The differentiation of fact from value, of the ethical from theoretical spheres, is similarly evidenced in Weber's work, and in the work of English philosophers such as Moore and Stevenson (MacIntyre 1981).
This process of differentiation is integral to the process of ‘modernization’.
Modernization conceived as differentiation is of course the linchpin of Parsonian sociology, but can be traced back through the work of Weber and even of Lukács to the aesthetic writings of the mature Hegel (Ká0tz 1982).
And if modernism is the result of a stage of differentiation whose onset is proper to the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, then modernity is the product of a much earlier stage of this differentiation process.
On this account the Renaissance would document the differentiation of cultural from religious realism, and, as Hegel underscored, the differentiation of the aesthetic realm from the social.
It makes sense perhaps, then, to speak in terms of an ‘early’ modernity of the Renaissance and the Enlightenment, and a ‘late’or at least later modernity co-extensive with the much later rise of aesthetic modernism.
Both of these would be products of a continued modernization process based on a principle of cultural differentiation.
The critics of postmodernism are thus correct in their contention that what Lyotard takes to be postmodernity is in fact part and parcel of modernism.
This however does not entail that postmodern culture does not exist.
Indeed I think it does exist, but that Lyotard has not got it quite right.
I think that if modernism and modernity result from a process of differentiation, or what German social scientists call Ausdifferenzierung, then postmodernism results from a much more recent process of de-differentiation or Entdifferenzierung.
There has been in this sense de-differentiation in the postmodernist attempt to drain the aura from the work of art.
De-differentiation is also present in the postmodernist refusal to separate the author from his or her oeuvre or the audience from the performance; in the post-modernist transgression of the boundary (with no doubt greater or lesser success) between literature and theory, between high and  popular culture, between what is properly cultural and what is properly social.
In Chapter Three I illustrated this characteristic de-differentiation in conceiving of postmodernity in terms of the notion of ‘desire’.
Here, ‘modernist’ Freudian theory would conceive of the psyche as differentiated into two spheres — of desire, on the one hand, and the conscious mind on the other.
Postmodern psychotherapy, in contradistinction, could no longer speak in terms of such differentiation.
Desire instead would have to be on the very ‘surface’ of a now largely de-differentiated psychic apparatus.
Similarly, the no longer representational, modernist painting would correspond to the formal principles of rationality of the secondary process, while the postmodernist painting of, say, Francis Bacon, would break with such principles of formal rationality and show again desire on the canvas's surface (Deleuze 1981).
In what follows I should like further to work through the implications of conceiving of postmodernism in terms of de-differentiation.
This time I want to concentrate on what might be called the postmodern mode of signification, or a postmodern ‘semiotics’.
In Chapter Three I argued that a postmodernist culture that foregrounded ‘desire’ signalled somehow a renunciation of signification.
This resulted in a sort of ‘naturalism’, which relegated signification and semiotics to the ranks of the merely modern, with whose possible political implications I am not entirely happy.
In what follows I shall claim that postmodern cultural forms do indeed signify, only that they signify differently.
I shall argue that modernist culture signifies in a largely ‘discursive’ way, while postmodernist signification is importantly ‘figural’.
The terms ‘discourse’ and ‘figure’of course are taken from Lyotard.
My conception of postmodernist de-differentiation via an aesthetics of desire was also in large part dependent on Lyotard's work.
Little of this work draws on Lyotard's Postmodern Condition (1979), on which so much ink of secondary analysis has been spilt, and which, as indicated above, I think is largely misconceived.
The work in which Lyotard is the most valuable about post-modernism is, I think, his earlier work, in which he does not directly address the topic at all.
In Chapter Three I contrasted desire with discursive signification.
The notion of figural  signification developed in this chapter is fully consistent with the notion of desire in Chapter Three.
The body of this chapter will then attempt to construct as contrasting ideal-types a ‘discursive’ modernist sensibility with a ‘figural’and postmodernist sensibility.
In this context the discursive (1) gives priority to words over images;(2) valuates the formal qualities of cultural objects;(3) promulgates a rationalist view of culture;(4) attributes crucial importance to the meanings of cultural texts;(5) is a sensibility of the ego rather than of the id;(6) operates through a distancing of the spectator from the cultural object.
The ‘figural’ in contradistinction:(1) is a visual rather than a literary sensibility;(2) devalues formalisms and juxtaposes signifiers taken from the banalities of everyday life;(3) contests rationalist and/or ‘didactic’views of culture;(4) asks not what a cultural text ‘means’, but what it ‘does’;(5) in Freudian terms, advocates the extension of the primary process into the cultural realm;(6) operates through the spectator's immersion, the relatively unmediated investment of his/her desire in the cultural object.
This contrast of the two, discursive and figural, ‘regimes of signification’, will be addressed via rather theoretical considerations first, of Susan Sontag's contrast of an (I think, postmodernist) aesthetics of sensation with a (modernist) aesthetics of interpretation, and second, briefly, through Lyotard's more systematic distinction of ‘discourse’ and ‘figure’.
Then I turn to the (in large measure postmodern) avant-garde of the 1920s and examine how surrealism worked through the opposition between an image-centred culture, associated with the unconscious, and a formalist, word-centred culture, associated with the conscious mind.
Finally cinema, and the cinematic experience, is addressed in a similar vein.
Here it is noted that even in mainstream cinema, narrative content is increasingly losing centrality and giving way to a more image-centred ‘spectacular’ cinema.
It is then argued further that in non-mainstream, critical cinema, a new image-centred mode of signification, based on an alternative ‘regime of pleasure’, may come increasingly to displace the most pervasive type of critical cinema which is modernist, discursive, and intellectualist.
SENSATION VERSUS INTERPRETATION
The new postmodern sensibility was perhaps first given systematic articulation by the critic Susan Sontag in the middle 1960s.
Sontag counterposed an aesthetics of sensation to what she described as an aesthetics of ‘interpretation’.
She claimed that, ‘in a culture whose already classical dilemma is the hypertrophy of the intellect at the expense of energy and sensual capability, interpretation is the revenge of the intellect upon art’.
‘It is simultaneously,’ she (Sontag 1967, p. 7) continued, ‘the revenge of the intellect upon the world.
To interpret is to impoverish, to deplete the world — in order to set up a shadow of ‘meanings’’.
Sontag's attack on interpretation was two-pronged and aimed at both works of art and art criticism.
Her attack on any notion of art as ‘expressive’ was generalized into an opposition to works of art whose main effect on an audience lies in their ‘meaning’.
She thus had little use for cinema which gave great weight to symbolism, and unfavourably contrasted symbolist poetry to the work of poets like Ezra Pound whose world operated, not through meaning, but through the ‘direct impact of words’.
For Sontag, who contrasted an ‘erotics of art’ with ‘hermeneutics of art’, a work of art should -be, not a ‘text’, but another ‘sensory, thing in the world (Sontag 1967, pp. 165–7).
What Sontag saw as the ‘new sensibility’ was clearly not a literary sensibility, but foregrounded a ‘cooler art’with ‘less content’; it favoured not the novel, but music, dance, architecture, painting, sculpture.
She discussed in this context who she saw as the twentieth century's two most influential analysts of theatre: Brecht and Antonin Artaud.
Sontag (1967, p. 2i) advocated, against Brecht's ‘theatre of dialogue’, an Artaudian ‘theatre of the senses’, whose driving force would be, not the playwright, but the director.
This sort of theatre was not literature but was visual, its effects created through sounds and images.
To the Brechtian ‘didactic theatre’ or ‘theatre of the intelligence’was opposed the ‘theatre of magic, of gesture, of ‘cruelty’’(Sontag 1967, p. 173).
Sontag's postmodernist aesthetic was formed in opposition to contemporaneous ‘hermeneutic’ criticism, which for her foisted Marxian and/or Freudian interpretations onto the meanings of literature.
However, her main opponent here was what has come  to be known as the cultural conservatism among New York's intelligentsia, purveyed today by writers such as Daniel Bell and Irving Howe, but whose perhaps most influential figures were Lionel Trilling and Clement Greenberg.
Cultural conservatives privileged the auratic work of art, whether realist or high modernist, either on grounds of the significance of its meaning, or on Apollonian pounds of its formal qualities.
By contrast Sontag's postmodern criticism aggressively disputed such a separation of text and life.
She (1967, p. 300) broke with such an implicitly Arnoldian view of art as a ‘criticism of life’ and instead endorsed a Nietzschean aesthetic in which even ideas should function as ‘sensory stimulants’and in which art is an extension of or a ‘supplement’to life.
Jean-François Lyotard provides a theoretical grounding to Sontag's distinction between a modernist hermeneutics and a postmodern aesthetics of sensation in his counterposition of ‘discourse’ and ‘figure’.
Lyotard's ‘discursive’ is the Freudian secondary process, the ego operating in terms of the reality principle.
The figural, by contrast, is the primary process of the unconscious which operates according to the pleasure principle (Lyotard 1971; 1973; 1984).
Lyotard's notion of the figural is formulated partly as a critique of Lacan's dictum that the unconscious is structured like a language.
Lyotard holds that we can best understand the nature of the unconscious through examining precisely how it is not structured like a language, that the most important criterion of demarcation of the unconscious from the ego lies in the ways that the former does not operate as does language.
This has crucial implications for Anglo-American and Continental Culture Studies, whose Lacanian impulse has arguably prevented the establishment of important distinctions between cultural forms.
We should note here that Lyotard does not maintain that the unconscious does not signify but only that it does not signify like a language.
Lyotard's (1984, p. 69) understanding of ‘the discursive, is rooted in his understanding of language as a means by which the ego discharges energy according to the reality principle.
That is, in the secondary process energy is discharged ‘through activities of transformation and verbalization’.
In the primary process, by contrast, energy is discharged (and desire is fulfilled) through cathexis; through investment in ‘perceptual memories’.
Lyotard  further clarifies this distinction in discussion of fantasies and hallucination.
He observes that fantasies operate like the primary process in that they ‘fulfil desire’ without the transformation of external reality but instead through the cathexis of, for example, the perceptual memory (image) of an organ.
And hallucinations resemble the primary process in that again energy is discharged through investment in perceptual memories, through the displacement of energy from what Lyotard (1984, pp. 57–68) calls the ‘verbal-motor’ end of the psychic apparatus to the ‘perceptual’end.
Lyotard then has initially defined ‘discourse, and ‘figure’ as two alternative means for the discharge of psychic energy.
Discourse discharges energy through the transformation of the external world, while ‘figures’ are perceptual memories through which psychic energy is straightaway discharged by investment in them.
There is another important way secondary and primary processes are for Lyotard characterized through the language/ image opposition.
This again relates to Lyotard's focus on perception in the unconscious, which derives from the influence of Merleau-Ponty's phenomenology of perception on his work.
Here the secondary process does not just operate through discourse, but is structured like discourse, while the primary process does not only discharge energy through the use of perceptual memories, but is structured like a ‘perceptual field’.
That is, the unhindered mobility of the eye in the ‘continuous and asymmetrical visual field’ resembles the ‘unhindered mobility of cathexis’in the primary process.
Discourse, on the other hand, does not have the same unhindered mobility.
It must proceed according to a set of obstacles, a set of rules, that is, through a ‘process of selection and combination of language’, which itself is more bound than mobile in language's articulated and differential nature.
Similarly, in the secondary process the investment of energy is canalized by rules, by obstacles, that the defence mechanisms of the ego construct, which subordinate the possibility of energy discharge to the ‘transformation of the relationship between the psychic apparatus and the external world’(Lyotard 1984, p. 58; Dews 1984).
Lyotard has thus asserted the existence of two alternative economies of desire.
In the first, the discursive, the secondary process makes inroads into the primary process.
For example Lyotard considers Freud's ‘talking cure’ itself to promote a discursive economy of desire through the colonization of the unconscious by discourse; through the subversion of the primary process by language and the transference (Lyotard 1984, p. 106).
What he prefers of course is a figural economy of desire; he wants a sensibility, a culture and a politics in which the primary process ‘erupts’ into the secondary process like ‘the application of a force to text’(Dews 1984, p. 47).
Lyotard's (1984, pp. 60–1) aesthetics is an aesthetics of Freudian ‘unconscious space’, which (i) permits condensation and other contradictions;(ii) permits the mobility of cathectic energies and hence displacement; and which (iii) severs temporality from rule-boundedness.
This figural aesthetics is a doctrine which opposes the subordination of the image to the dictates of narrative meaning or representation; to language like rule-bound formalisms (hence his preference for Cage over Schoenberg); or (in his (1984, p. 80) example of advertising images) to the dictates of capitalism and the law of value.
What both Sontag and Lyotard have endorsed is an effectively postmodernist aesthetics based on paradigm of cultural de-differentiation.
Sontag was arguing in the context of intellectual New York of the early 1960s.
Then, as arguably now, the terrain of debate was partly structured by the polarization of a serious and moral ‘uptown’ high modernist culture versus a more self-consciously populist and ‘funky’yet equally elite, ‘downtown’culture.
Sontag argued against what was in effect the differentiated mode of signification implicit in the assumptions of uptown culture.
This was the thrust of her attack on ‘hermeneutics’, whether the latter be of Arnoldian, Freudian, or (reformist) Marxist complexion.
Her attack on hermeneutics was an advocacy of de-differentiation in three important senses.
First her challenge to the primacy of ‘meaning’ and support of ‘cool’rather than‘expressive’aesthetic assumptions was at the same time an advocacy of the collapse of some sort of deep level of signified into the signifier.
Second, her refusal of the counterposition of text and reality and determination to see the work of art as a ‘sensory thing’, was simultaneously an insistence that this already overloaded signifier was in fact not very different from a referent.
Third, her dispute with ‘interpretation’, which is for her also a dispute with any kind of critical theory, is due to the assumptions of cultural differentiation built into the former and latter.
In both there is a differentiated level of criticism standing over and above both art and life.
Sontag counterposes to critical theory, casting adrift from both Marx and Freud, a de-differentiated Nietzschean aesthetics of affirmation, in which aesthetic analysis would be a supplement to art and art a supplement to life.
Lyotard similarly has proposed a de-differentiated semiotics.
Arguing in the very different Parisian intellectual climate of the early 1970s, he assimilates assumptions of differentiated signification to Lacanian and orthodox Freudian psychoanalysis, to the commodity form in capitalism, to the ordered temporality of narrative realism and to the formalism of Adornian aesthetic rationality.
Unlike Lacan, Lyotard very rigorously distinguishes between the image-based (in perceptual memories) signification of the unconscious and the discursive signification of the ego.
His subsequent endorsement of the former, figural signification is an endorsement of cultural de-differentiation in two important senses.
First, in the sense that unlike words or utterances, images signify iconically, i.e. through resemblance, and hence are less different from referents than properly linguistic signifiers.
And second his promotion of the colonization of the secondary process by primary process in art and in psychoanalysis is also a rejection of the psyche rigidly hierarchized into levels for one in which desire is no longer an underlying ‘essence’.
Instead desire is present on the very surface of social and cultural practices.
Let us move now from the level of cultural theory to cultural ‘practice’.
We will find here, in the case of surrealism, a not dissimilar state of affairs.
In arguing, in what follows, that surrealism also exemplifies de-differentiated signification I will be eo ipso arguing that surrealism exemplifies postmodernism.
SURREALISM: THE REAL BECOME SIGNIFIER
Surrealism was self-consciously ‘figural’ in its foregrounding of the visual.
André Breton, self-styled ‘pope’ of the surrealist movement, contrasted a high modernist aesthetic in which all art would be based on a musical model with the surrealist (and, in the present context, postmodern) idea that all art should partake  of a visual mode.
And indeed the reflections on art by modernists such as Flaubert, Klee, and Auguste Macke did hold that literature and painting should be like music in a quest for the attainment of formal qualities and in a departure from realist notions of representation.
Breton, on the other hand, juxtaposed the ‘savage eye’ with the ‘educated ear’and celebrated the immediacy of the visual (Krauss 1985, p. 93).
Surrealist écriture automatique, grounded in a Freudian unconscious structured through free association and perceptual memories, presented vision itself as a written form, a ‘cursive’ rather than a discursive flow, which Breton understood to be, not representational, but immediate.
Semiotics has conventionally spoken in terms of a tripartite model of signifier, signified, and referent, in which the signifier is often a word or statement, the signified is a concept or a thought, and the referent an object in the real world to which both signifier and signified connect.
In the postmodern and figural aesthetic suggested by Lyotard, we saw above, that the image took the place of the word as signifier.
In the surrealist movement, by contrast, it was the, equally figural, referent, the real itself, which becomes the signifier.
Thus Rosalind Krauss can argue that photography is the quintessential surrealist art form.
Photographs, she (1985, p. 110) observes, are like death masks, like footprints in the sense of being ‘imprints of the real’.
Breton compared the camera with psychic automatism in that both for him were processes of mechanical recording.
Surrealist photographers indeed developed techniques which self-consciously addressed this juxtaposition of the real as signifier and the signifier as real.
This was the case in their technique of writing or drawing on photos, or photographing bits of reality — like J. A. Boiffard's telescopically enlarged shot of a big toe (Le Gros Orteil)— which seem primarily to be (in this case phallic) signifiers.
It is also illustrated in the ‘doubling’ technique of using exposures in which the first shot is read, not photographically, but as a signifying element whose referent is the second shot.
The point here is that not only did surrealists see art as being composed of signifying elements drawn from the real, but understood reality to be composed of signifying elements.
Thus Naville enthused that we should get pleasure from the streets of the city in which kiosks, autos, and lights were in a sense already  representations, and Breton spoke of the world itself as ‘automatic writing’.
This thematic of the real, or the referent, as signifier is essential to the surrealist strategy which Walter Benjamin understood in terms of‘allegory’.
Surrealist allegory would be based on, in Breton's words, ‘the bringing together of two more or less distant realities’, these realities forming ‘an aggregation based on elective affinities’(Kuspit 1983, p.58).
The point here is that the surrealist signifiers in ‘allegory’ are real, are already referents.
Further, surrealist allegory for Benjamin is a method in which these figural signifiers are taken from ‘the petrified and insignificant’, from what Breton spoke of as the ‘dresses of five years ago’(Sontag 1979, p. 26).
This bringing together of ‘two more or less distant realities’ creates the surreal point sublime.
The latter is a ‘profane illumination’, a ‘Weticization of the banal’ and was a matter for Breton, not just of painting, literature, and photography, but also of life and love, the latter arising in no small portion from an ‘intoxication’in connection with the things of the beloved.
There is surely a significant thematic of Benjaminian allegory in surrealist painting, in the young De Chirico's and Ernst's, not to mention Dali's, poeticization of petrified figures, or even in De Chirico's later, more kitsch method of juxtaposing scenes from Antiquity with the banal present (Dell'Arco 1984, p. 82).
De Chirico himself, upon arriving in New York in the mid-1930s, compared its architecture with his metaphysical paintings as a ‘homogeneity and harmonic monumentality formed by disparate and heterogeneous elements’.
Such surrealist allegory mirrors the process of displacement and condensation in dreams and in the primary process more generally.
Benjamin (1979b, p. 226) wrote of the surrealist movement that ‘life only seemed worth living where the threshold between waking and sleeping was worn away in everyone as by the steps of multitudinous images flooding back and forth, language only seemed itself where sound image, image and sound interpenetrated with such felicity that no chink was left for the penny-in. the-slot called ‘meaning’’.
Benjamin's allusions in this passage are, not just to the dominance of the figural and the devaluation of meaning in surrealism, not just to its characteristic patterning by eruptions of the primary process into consciousness, but also  and especially to surrealism's unconditional refusal to consider art as of a different order than life.
Perhaps the exemplar of this surrealist categorical imperative was Antonin Artaud.
Artaud's initial public appearance before literary France came in the form of ‘life’ and not art, in the publication of his personal correspondence with Nouvelle revue française editor Jacques Rivière, after the latter had refused his poems due to their failure to live up to certain formal canons.
As Derrida (1978b, p. 234) noted, Artaudian theatre was not to refer to life or represent life but instead to be life.
Theatre was to be a ‘genuine reality’, an ‘event, like, Artaud proposed, a police raid on a brothel.
He wrote in a theoretical essay published in the collection The Theatre and Its Doubles, ‘For if theatre is a double of life, life is a double of time theatre…
The double of theatre is reality which today's mankind leaves unused’(Esslin 1976).
Artaudian theatre is profoundly figural theatre.
Key here was the influence of non-western cultural forms on Artaud — first the foregrounding of actors' movements and the absence of props in Japanese theatre; then his exposure to Cambodian dance in 1922; but most importantly the Balinese Dance Theatre which Artaud witnessed at the Colonial Exhibition in Paris in 1931, after which he wrote a succession of now canonical theoretical essays on theatre.
In Balinese dance, as Esslin (1976, p.35 passim) notes, all of Artaud's ‘ideas of a non-verbal, magical theatre of light, colour and costume seemed realized’.
Several aspects of Balinese dance as interpreted by Artaud have important implications for the understanding of postmodern culture in that they illustrate cultural de-differentiation.
First such theatre, in a sense reminiscent of premodern art, takes on important ritualistic functions; the implication is that, in contradistinction to autonomous, modernist theatre,(postmodern) theatre itself should double as cultural ritual.
Second, the absence of clarity as to whether Balinese dance is, on the one hand, art, or on the other, life, underscored for Artaud the importance of cancelling the separation of the two realms.
Third, the centrality of body movements in such theatre helped Artaud to develop his own aesthetics ‘of the body’.
Fourth, the cries in Balinese dance seemed to Artaud to have a cosmic power and communicated not through the differentiated and ‘shadow’ realm of meaning, but, directly, through impact.
What struck Artaud perhaps most of all about Balinese dance was the centrality of actors' bodily movements.
He wanted actors, through for example exaggerated breathing, to establish an identity between their bodies and the bodies of spectators.
Anaud had in some ways a curiously desexualized view of the body and spoke of a ‘body without organs’, which was for him a body deprived mainly of functions of reproduction and defecation, that was mainly a locus of feeling and sensation.
Yet his idea of theatre was, unlike poetry or the novel, intended ‘to reach the organism directly, and in the period of neurosis and low sensation into which we are about to plunge, to attack that low sensuality by physical means which it will not resist’(Esslin 1976, p. 70; Deleuze and Guattari 1984, pp. 9–15).
Theatre, then, in Artaud's sense is not about life, but is a supplement to life.
Theatre's task is ‘to smash language in order to touch life’; it is to show that the force of the aural lies in sound (reduplicating for Artaud the significance that dreams give to the sounds in speech) and not words (Sellin 1968, pp. 49–52).
Speech on this account functions primarily not as a conveyor of meanings, but as incantation — in which voices have, so to speak, a magical effect independent of the meanings of words.
Incantatory speech is paradigmatic in contemporary Artaudian theatre and in surrealism and postmodernism more generally, are I think a sort of bodily aesthetics.
This would contrast with both a ‘realist’ aesthetics of meaning and modernist formalism.
Walter Benjamin (1979b, p. 239), in a rather similar context, called for a politics in which ‘technology, body and image so interpenetrate that all revolutionary tension becomes bodily collective innervation, and all the bodily innervations of the collective become revolutionary discharge’.
Artaud, the least political of the surrealists, promulgated an aesthetics in which ‘the bodily’ applies both to means of production and conditions of reception.
He understood literature not to be formal craft, but instead viewed writing as a bodily process, a process which he experienced as wreaking pain, suffering, and destruction on his own body (Sellin 1968, p. 83).
In its usage of the real or referent as signifier, surrealism eminently illustrated de-differentiated signification.
The surrealist aesthetic advocates signification, not through meaning, but through impact.
And this impact is to be achieved in a  particular way, i.e. through a ‘profane illumination’ brought about through the juxtaposition of two or more seemingly incongruous figures.
The surrealist innovation thus is a problematization not just of the nature of high modernist painting and of the signifier, but also a problematization of what constitutes the real.
It is thus similar to Warhol's silk-screens, which problematizes, not just high art, but also the real in that it reveals reality itself to be composed of images.
The source of the surrealist and pop art's problematization of both signifier and referent are different, however.
For Pop Art the source is the Baudrillardian society of the image.
For surrealism it is the Freudian unconscious.
Surrealist allegory, which attains its ‘point sublime’ and impact through the juxtaposition of ‘two more or less distant realities’, proceeds on three levels.
First as signification in the unconscious through displacement and condensation.
Second, in the work of art.
And third, in every-day reality.
In each case the result is not only a problematization of the real, but a problematization of the positioning of the subject.
The eruption of the primary process and its analogues in art and reality foster an ambivalent positioning of the subject.
They foster the development of, in contradistinction to any type of fixed positioning, what Deleuze and Guattari (1984) have called the ‘nomadic subject’.
This mobile positioning of subjectivity is in itself political in that it leaves space for alternative forms of identity construction as well as the toleration of ‘difference, in identity construction.
The second major aspect of cultural de-differentiation addressed by surrealism is the issue of avant-gardes.
Although surrealism (unlike contemporary postmodernism) was rather self-consciously an avant-garde, the logic of the surrealist ethic involved a dispute of the very nature of avant-gardes.
The Artaudian break with the ‘double’ and embrace instead of the ‘supplement’entails the rejection of avant-gardism in aesthetics, politics, and theory.
If art is no longer to be considered as of a different order than life, then the idea of aesthetic avant-gardes is questioned.
If theory itself is to be no longer the ‘double’ of art or life then Nietzschean affirmation, and not critical theory, would be on the intellectual agenda.
It is in this context that Benjamin's work qualitatively differs from Adorno's and Habermas's.
Benjaminian allegory functions perhaps as crucially as  supplement as it does as ‘criticism’.
Finally, the challenge to political avant-gardism, exemplified in Benjamin's effective call for a politics of the supplement, quoted just above, is a shift towards de-differentiation in political culture.
It is a condemnation of the strong state as well as of the centralized Marxist vanguard party, and move towards the implicit embrace of anarchist doctrines.
Such a rejection of state and vanguard party with its accompanied space opened up for pluralism and difference is of potential significance for left political culture today.
CINEMA: FROM THE REPRESENTATION TO THE REALITY
Cinema, taken generically, signifies in a de-differentiated manner.
No other form of cultural representation — not painting, nor literature nor music nor even television — can signify quite as figurally as can cinema.
That is, cinematic signification, especially in the age of high technology and 30-million-dollar film, comes closer than other forms of signification to resemblance of reality.
Cinematic signification again taken generically is further de-differentiated in that it portrays the primary process and sexuality, not as a deep otherness, but as erupting on the very surface of representations.
This is true on four counts:
(1) The experience of cinematic viewing — the dark, the succession of images (‘perceptual memories’), the wonder, the wish fulfilment — has, as Metz (1982, pp. 106–9) observed, a very great deal in common with the experience of dreaming and of unconscious processes.
(2) As Benjamin (1973) noted, cinematic reception, unlike reception of the painting or the novel, takes place, not in a state of ‘contemplation’, but of ‘distraction’.
Cinema consists of a set of mechanically reproduced images which can be presented along the lines of the temporal causality of narrative realism.
But as a literal succession of images they come closer to the disconnected temporality of the succession of perceptual memories in the unconscious.
(3) Film itself, is, as De Lauretis (1984, pp. 85–6) observes, a discourse (in the Foucauldian sense) of sexuality.
Cinema was born virtually contemporaneously with the other great discourse  of sexuality, psychoanalysis.
Cinema, further, more than any other cultural product, has been structured around sexuality, or rather around the objectification of male desire in screen images of women — that is, film narratives themselves have been structured by such a patriarchal economy of desire.
These origins continue characteristically to put their imprint even on contemporary cinematic productions.
(4) Cinema has always given primacy of place to images.
Cinema is always an ‘imaging machine’.
This is a point not to be neglected in the context of the film criticism which has become dominant in Anglo-American culture studies.
Grounded in the work of Barthes and Lacan, such criticism has looked instead at how cinema operates like a language.
In doing so it has often tended to neglect crucial distinctions between the nature of language and the nature of images.
In contrast to such ‘an increasing grammatization of discursive and textual operations’, analysts such as De Lauretis (1984, p. 45) want instead to examine how cinema produces its specific effects on spectators through what is specific to images.
Images, she notes, are signifiers of a different order than language.
The elements of language are relatively arbitrary in regard to their referents in the real world, whereas images signify through their ‘iconicity’, through their resemblance to referents in the real world (Eco 1976, pp. 191ff).
Moreover, ‘images articulate meaning and desire’ in a way that words or ‘utterances’do not.
That is, more than to words, ‘not only semantic and social values but affect and fantasy as well , are bound to images’(De Lauretis 1984, pp. 8, 38).
Given this figural ‘bias’ built into the cinematic apparatus, it still makes sense to speak in terms of realist, modernist, and postmodernist films.
One way to make sense of these different paradigms in cinematic signification is through Laura Mulvey's (1981) distinction between ‘narrative’ and ‘spectacle’.
Mulvey argued that mass-market cinema has been structured around the ‘spectacle’ of women's images.
Here she identified film ‘narrative’ with Freud's ego and spectacle with the sexual instincts of the id.
In her account of realist cinema, the beginning of a film would centre on the spectacle of the free, desirable, perhaps somehow dangerous female lead.
As the film progressed, however, and as the male star tamed, captured, and finally possessed his female counterpart, the place of spectacle would be  increasingly subordinated to that of narrative.
My point in this context is that in films of recent years ‘spectacle’— especially if we expand the definition of spectacle to include also images marked by the aggressive instinct — does not any longer become subordinated to narrative.
That is, there has been a shift from realist to postmodernist cinema, in which spectacle comes heavily to dominate narrative.
A number of analysts have noted this.
Coates (1985, pp. 27, 77), for example, argues that in recent decades narrative has broken down to be replaced by a cinema of ‘isolated heterogeneous events held together by the ramshackle constructions of Victorian melodrama’, and that from the mid-1960s we have seen the dissolution of the distinction between realist and non-realist film.
Heath has noted a new presence of the body in contemporary films; in, for example, films like Jaws which feature mutilations of the body.
He (1981, pp. 185–8) points to the pervasion of pornographic films in popular cinema in which ‘the compulsive repetition of sexuality’ takes the place of narrative.
He (1981, p. 190) observes the ‘suppression of voice in pornographic cinema, a phenomenon which has extended to commercial cinema in general, in which voice is increasingly ‘a support for a certain visible presence of the body’.
This shift from a narrative cinema to a postmodern cinema of spectacle can be detected in some of the biggest moneyspinning films from the mid-1960s, such as Spaghetti Westerns (Frayling 1981, pp. 39f), in which realist narrative structure is violated by the presence of events which are interchangeable or gratuitous, by films like Scorsese's Mean Streets which resolutely refuse to end.
This tendency was reinforced in the mid and late 1980s in which the blockbuster box office hits have been, for example, the Indiana Jones films and Ghostbusters and the Stallone and  Schwarzenegger films which have catered especially to an audience in their early teens, and use plot as an excuse for a succession of spectacular events.
This shift to figural and postmodern films has also taken place in art cinema.
Only, whereas in mass-market films postmodernism has partly displaced narrative realist films, in specialist cinema it has come to challenge ‘high modernism’.
Modernist cinema is cast in a Brechtian mould of distantiation and bears formalist characteristics.
Pivotal to such a ‘discursive’ cinema is Jean-Luc Godard.
He has pursued this goal via techniques which lay bare the cinematic convention.
In this context MacCabe (1980, p. 44) comments on the use of ‘montage’, which Godard counterposes to ‘image’.
Montage is a ‘juxtaposition of images and sounds’ without ‘a unity imposed by the director’.
Montage always ‘places the spectator's look in question,(it) poses the question of its constitution, and makes the institution of cinema the question of every film’.
Distancing and the critique of spontaneity and freedom motivate such practices as the use of tableaux to break narrative continuity and let the spectator stand back, and characteristically Godardian elucidation of the relations of production in the film production process (Cook 1985, pp. 137, 166).
There are several techniques that Godard uses to produce distancing and consequently the disinvestment of desire in images.
First is his extraordinary valuation of words themselves.
Godard has used the voice-over in a documentary type style, adopted for the Soviet director Vertov.
This is true particularly in his political films, in which the relationship of language and image is questioned through the juxtaposition of political discussion, on the one hand, with prima facie unrelated images, on the other.
Films such as British Sounds were conceived in order to ‘portray the struggle between images and sounds’, and were especially concerned with ‘how sounds can be used against the image’.
Similarly in Deux ou trois choses, released in 1966, the voice-over misdescribes the hair colour and actions of a part-time prostitute.
Likewise, Le Gai Savoir, made in 1968, was a gloss on Rousseau's Emile ou l'éducation and propounded that ‘the central problem of education is to provide some understanding of the sounds and images that bombard us in our everyday lives’(MacCabe 1980, p. 20).
If Godard's post-1968 films deliberately gave primacy to sounds over images, his earlier, less didactic films were themselves critiques of an image-centred politics, and in particular of the very political use of images in advertising.
Thus in Une Femme mariée (1964) he, conscious that ‘the image is a cultural product’, was ‘interested in advertising, the body, the commodities produced for women and the image which sells the commodities’(Mulvey and MacCabe 1980, p. 92).
In the film the protagonist, Charlotte, works in an ad agency; she has an affair  and lies to both husband and lover.
Her gaze is constantly directed at advertising images which then become her image.
In Deux ou trois choses, the prostitute-protagonist's ‘position is also determined by the advertisements which constantly produce images for her’.
Godard has revealingly said that cinema is dependent on capitalism in two senses: first in the making of the film and second that ‘in film the money comes back in the image’(MacCabe 1980, p. 27).
Thus the Godardian question —‘who speaks in the image?’— is given answer in Adornian tones: it is the ‘system which decrees that the order of money determines the order of the image’(MacCabe 1980, p. 45).
Godard had instead proposed a critical cinema which gives an activist role to the spectator.
By posing a challenge to the spectator's libidinal investment in the image, he returns the question of desire to the eye of the spectator him- or herself.
In questioning both narrative and pictorial realism and creating an effect of distancing, he poses for the spectator the issue of actively transforming reality (Heath 1981, p. 63).
Despite the sharply effective critique of patriarchal and capitalist economic of desire, Godardian modernist ‘counter-cinema’ does have certain limits (Wollen 1982).
The substitution of a regime of ‘intellectualist displeasure’ for one of visual pleasure limits accessibility even for the art cinema audience.
By contrast, as De Lauretis has noted, a different and more recent set of developments seems to be taking shape.
She (1984, p. 46) writes,
what matters is once again spectacle, as in the earliest days of cinema.
contradiction, paradox, ambiguity in the image as well as the textualized overlay of sound, language and image no longer produce distancing effects by baring the device of cinema and thus inducing rationality and consciousness.
They are the spectacle, the no longer simple but excessive, ‘perverse’ pleasure of current cinema.
Surely this contemporary trend towards a figural cinema of spectacle in today's avant-garde often results in a repetition for the highly educated middle classes of patriarchal and capitalist economies of desire.
Yet, De Lauretis argues, this new figural cinema at least poses the question of ‘how to reconstruct and organize vision from the impossible place of female desire’.
She  (1984, pp. 69, 87) calls for the production of films structured by an alternative economy of desire, for a ‘microanalytics’ of cinema with ‘effects of resistance and counterinvestment’.
It is possible then to speak of four ideal-types of cinematic signification.
(1) Realist or narrative cinema, whose roots are (a) pictorially, in Quattrocento perspective, and (b) narratively, in the non-teleological causal temporality, with beginning, middle, and end, of the nineteenth-century novel (Heath 1981, pp. 28–37).
(2) Mainstream postmodern cinema.
Here we find basically ‘figural’ films, which foreground spectacle over narrative, for example, several of the Spielberg films and many of the late 1980s horror and gothic films, and the Rambo and Schwarzenegger films.
Like mainstream narrative cinema, these postmodernist films position the spectator in a fixed and rigid space.
Analysts like Mulvey and De Lauretis assume that all forms of cinema position the spectator through his/her investment of psychic energy in films.
In narrative or realist cinema this mainly takes place through the identification of the spectator's ego with the hero of the narrative who serves as a sort of model or ‘ego-ideal’.
In mainstream figural cinema, which foregrounds spectacle, the investment of psychic energy and hence positioning of the subject would be, not via ego and secondary process, but via primary process.
The point is, in cases both of realist and mainstream postmodernist cinema, that the subject is placed in a fixed, rigid, and stereotyped position.
(3) Modernist or ‘discursive’ cinema.
In this there is a much more ambiguous and open positioning of the subject.
This takes place through the problematization of cinematic representation.
This is integral to cultural differentiation because is separates the process of signification from reality.
It is ‘discursive, in Foucault's sense of ‘discourse’(in The Archaeology of Knowledge) in that it draws attention to the rules, the norms, and conventions of cinematic signification itself.
It is further discursive in the Foucauldian sense (and exemplifies cultural differentiation) in that primacy in modernist cinema is given to this separate cultural and discursive level.
(4)‘Transgressive’ postmodernist cinema.
This, like mainstream postmodernist cinema, is figural and privileges spectacle.
The difference is that it, like modernist cinema, positions the  spectator in a ‘nomadic’, rather than a sedentary, manner.
It does so, however, not like modernist cinema through the problematization of representation, but instead through the problematization of the real.
The parallels with painting are immediately apparent.
Modernist painting, as theorists as diverse as Adorno, Greenberg (1983), and Wollheim (1980) have observed, draws the attention away from reality and to the picture surface itself, to the systematic development of possibilities in the aesthetic material.
In brief, to the signifying process.
Much the opposite with postmodernist surrealism and pop art.
Here not the signifying process but the fixed nature of reality is questioned.
Consider, say, a recent cult modernist film, Jim Jarmusch's Stranger than Paradise.
In this Jarmusch does not follow the cinematic norm of letting a sequence develop to a climax and then cutting to another sequence.
Instead he lets the sequence continue until long past its climax, after which the camera unduly lingers on the characters sitting around, being bored.
Jarmusch here is experimenting with and calling the spectator's attention to cinematic conventions.
He thus calls the audience's attention to the signifying practice.
In comparison a postmodernist film like Beneix's Diva or David Lynch's Blue Velvet will not distance the spectator or call his/her attention to the ‘picture surface’.
These films instead bring the viewer right into the film with a rather startling immediacy, but having done so, the ‘real’ that the spectator has been drawn into is revealed as artifice.
Thus at the end of Blue Velvet the camera focuses on a flower, which then turns out to be made of papier mâché.
It shows a return to ‘normalcy’ in its ending which is in fact a send-up and suggests an integral flimsiness and instability to reality itself.
In Diva much of the shooting highlights the interiors of the domiciles of the two main protagonists, Jules and Borodin.
But the reality of Jules's living quarters turns out already to be a set of images, i.e. a disused garage, in which pop art rubs shoulders with wrecked 1950s autos on the model of those in Nicholas Ray's Rebel Without a Cause.
The contrast of such transgressive, figural films with their mainstream counterparts should also be clear.
All figural cinema, or cinema which privileges spectacle over narrative or discourse, operates — as Mulvey suggests — largely on the model of  and through the primary process.
Consider, for example, a mainstream figural film, like the politically objectionable Fatal Attraction.
This — which several British critics have seen as a post-AIDS film — is postmodernist in its mixture of genres: it starts out as a straightforward melodrama and shifts into a horror or ‘stalk and slash’ genre.
Equally, instead of the narrative coming progressively to dominate the spectacle (as in realist cinema), the spectacle instead comes to dominate the narrative.
But its treatment of sexuality and violence, its treatment of the single working woman as if she were a virus (which is then set as polar opposite against the ‘healthy’ family unit) tends to position rigidly the spectator (Williamson 1988).
Compare, on the other hand, some of David Cronenberg's work.
Cronenberg himself has commented that The Fly and others of his films are about how viruses deform bodies, and that his originality lies in that he is ‘on the side of the virus’.
In this sense The Fly is also a post-AIDS movie.
Yet the director contrives to evoke sympathy in the spectator towards the half-human protagonist played by Jeff Goldblum, and, by implication, ambiguity towards the virus and death itself.
Here the spectator is much more ambiguously positioned, as he/she is by the problematization of representation and reality in Cronenberg's Videodrome.
The same might be said for the mix of sexuality and violence in Blue Velvet.
Some feminist critics have condemned this film for itself not roundly condemning violence towards women.
Yet is not David Lynch pushing back boundaries and underlining the instability of subjectivity when he shows, not just the villain played by Dennis Hopper, but the hero, engaging in sadistic behaviour?
Is not the whole notion of hero (or even anti-hero) of a narrative thus problematized?
Is not the problem of sadistic behaviour towards women made deeper and more urgent through this sort of portrayal than through, say, the simple moral condemnation of a villain who beats a woman?
CONCLUSIONS
I hope that my enthusiasm for the subject material in the above discussion will not be mistaken for any wholehearted support of some sort of postmodern aesthetics or politics.
In the visual arts, for example, I believe that the work of Barnet Newman is of  immeasurably more value than that of Andy Warhol.
In politics, it is true that the world of such postmodernist critics as Susan Sontag and Rosalind Krauss is marked by a notable absence of a vision of a better world.
Such a vision was present in the preceding generation of modernists; in Lionel Trilling, Irving Howe, Greenberg and Daniel Bell and others, many of whose political origins were Marxist.
It is, however, likely we do live in a culture that is in important ways undergoing a process of de-differentiation and hence ‘post-modernization’.?
It would then be folly for the political and cultural left to ignore this process because they find it unpleasant.
A lot of future conflicts are going to be fought out on this new cultural terrain and the left needs a better understanding of it.
Such conflicts can be fought out with a vision of a better world as I hope some of the above discussion has suggested.
What I have tried to do in the body of this paper is to further the understanding of postmodern culture in consideration of the latter as a figural and de-differentiated mode of signification.
I have no pretensions to the type of expert knowledge of semiotics that students of linguistics will have.
I do want to claim, however, that the sociological analysis above shows that postmodern cultural objects signify differently than do modernist cultural objects.
I have suggested then that postmodern signification is a de-differentiated ‘regime of signification’ on a number of counts:
(1) It is a figural, as distinct from discursive, regime of signification.
To signify via figures rather than words is to signify iconically.
Images or other figures which signify iconically do so through their resemblance to the referent.
And signifiers (figures) which resemble referents are less fully differentiated from them than signifiers (words, discourse) which do not.
(2) The devaluation of meaning in postmodern signification is simultaneously the de-differentiation of signifier and signified.
In this sense the recent popularity of pragmatics in academic linguistics is a postmodern phenomenon, as is the importance of speech act theory in the social sciences in the past decade or two.
The study in these of the use or effectiveness of language devalues the signified and meaning.
Further, in speech act theory the representation (speech) is collapsed into the real (action).
Such a  de-differentiation of signifier and referent has also been present in the claims of the followers of Althusser in the 1970s that ideological practices were material practices and of the followers Derrida in the 1980s about the ‘materiality’ of language.
In all of these renderings, signifiers function as referents or les mots as les choses.
(3) If in contemporary pragmatics, the signified begins to wither away and the signifier to function as a referent, in surrealism (and to this extent surrealism is postmodern) the referent functions as a signifier.
If for Althusserians and poststructuralists the signifier has become material (a referent), then for the surrealists and for Walter Benjamin the material (referent) became signifier.
In both cases there is a de-differentiation, arguably a confusion, and surely the problematization, of the relationship between signifier and referent.
Thus the surrealists suggested that we experience every-day life as if its materiality were a network of signifiers.
In this sense the claims of poststructuralists about the materiality of language is only the flipside of their claims about life being a ‘text’.
(4) This de-differentiation of signifier and referent is not just a matter of every-day life being experienced as a spatio-temporal configuration of signifiers, it is also a matter of the content of properly cultural objects themselves.
Thus photorealism is unlike realist renderings of the referent and unlike modernist devaluation of the referent.
Photorealism indeed attributes substantial value to the referent, but understands the referent to be itself a signifier.
Much the same can be said for Lichtenstein's comic-strip pop art or Alex Cox's use of Lichtenstein-type devices in his film Repo Man.
In neither case, as in modernism, is attention to be drawn to the aesthetic material itself, or to Greenberg's ‘surface of the canvas’; the spectator's attention is drawn instead to the referent, to the real world.
But the referent again becomes signifier to the extent that the viewer is reminded how like a comic strip the real world has become, or to what extent the real world now comprises comic strips.
This is patent as well in cult films of the 1980s such as Luc Besson's Metro (Subway) as well as others mentioned above.
Like realist cinema and unlike modernist cinema, these films do not ‘lay bare the device or call the viewer's attention to cinematic conventions.
Attention in these films, like in realist films, is called to the  referent, only the referent turns out to be, like the ear or the flowers in Blue Velvet and the imaged and real automobiles in Jules's living quarters in Diva, a set of false, glossy, or monstrous signifiers.
Let me finally end, both theoretically and politically, on a speculative note.
To say, following Habermas, that cultural modernization is a process of differentiation and autonomization and that postmodernization is a process of de-differentiation and implosion is to be content with a purely descriptive analysis of cultural change.
What, one wonders, is the ‘motor’ of all this?
Even if one were to, as I do, empathize with sophisticated functional Marxism of, say, G. A. Cohen and speak of the compatibility or incompatibility of certain sets of cultural forms with certain other sets of production relations, one would still be looking for an explanation of the specific properties of those cultural forms.
Perhaps the key to this lies in the realm of culture itself.
Suppose we were to begin with a crude distinction of ‘social nature’ and ‘social culture’, in which the latter were conceived in its narrow sense as representation rather than in the broad sense as symbol.
Given this, the cultural history of the West (and not only the West) could be captured by a process in which the totality of ‘social facts’ comes to comprise an increasingly greater proportion of ‘cultural’facts and an increasingly smaller proportion of ‘natural’facts.
At a certain juncture (the onset of modernism?) in such a chronology, cultural facts would accumulate to a point at which they could no longer be considered solely as representations, and the whole problem of their proper materiality and hence character as representations would have to be taken seriously.
This would be the time also of the fullest differentiation and autonomization of cultural facts.
At some later point in time in this scenario (especially with the mechanical and then electronic production and reproduction of representations), cultural facts would become so pervasive that they would come to challenge ‘natural facts’ for hegemony, and would even to some extent constitute the norm.
What would now be problematized is, not as in modernism, the character of representations, but the character of reality itself.
What then are some political implications of postmodernism conceived per se as cultural de-differentiation?
The answer may be that some sorts of postmodernist de-differentiation are  implicitly ‘reactionary’, and other sorts potentially integral to a reconstructed left political culture, and still other sorts can politically cut either way.
I suggested above that the postmodernist rejection of avant-gardes and criticism, and embrace instead of‘affirmation’ and the supplement, is not at all necessarily conservative.
Its consequences are hostility to the strong state and vanguard party and sympathy with pluralism and perhaps forms of anarchism.
The postmodernist reaction to commodification is of different colour.
Modernist differentiation, whether in Adornian, Brechtian, or Godardian guise, has provided the distance for the unambiguous critique (the ‘disinvestment of desire’) of the commodity form and the commodification of culture.
The prophets of the mid-1960s, Venturi and Warhol, on the other hand rejoiced at the interpretation of culture and commodity.
The process of de-differentiation that they celebrated has arguably increased exponentially in the past two decades.
Only its mechanism seems to have changed.
Recently there has been, not so much the colonization of representations by the commodity form (though this has happened too), but the colonization of the commodity by culture.
Hence advertisements began as bits of information to help market commodities.
Then, with the advent of ad agencies, the adverts themselves became commodities.
Not long after, images rather than information became the content of these new commodities (Leiss 1983).
The final step in very recent years is that already existent cultural representations, in pop music, have come to accompany the images.
Finally the new adverts themselves were partly responsible for the revival of early 1960s soul music in the late 1980s.
A similar story of the colonization of the commodity by culture could surely be told about pop videos (Frith and Horne 1987).
Thus postmodernist cultural de-differentiation of representations and commodities seems unambiguously to have reactionary political-cultural consequences.
The main argument of postmodernists who have sympathies with the political left seems to have been that postmodernism can be supportive of a left politics rooted in principles of pluralism and ‘difference’.
This seems a contradiction on the face of it.
How can a cultural paradigm whose main principle is de-differentiation contribute to a political culture grounded in the apparently opposite principle of difference?
Perhaps the example of ‘gender  bending’ in contemporary adverts and popular culture in general can provide a clue here.
The deliberate ambiguity in gender and sexual preference built into images problematizes reality and the normative in a sense not dissimilar to the way that surrealism and pop art (discussed above) operate.
The effect is a much more ambivalent and less fixed positioning of subjectivity.
If subjectivity is less fixed, then space is left for the construction of identities, and collective identities, which deviate from the norm (Lury 1987).
That is, space is left for difference.
The other precondition of difference and left pluralism is tolerance.
And it would seem to follow that political-cultural tolerance is also furthered by the ‘relatively autonomous’ subject positioning fostered by de-differentiated representation.
Acknowledgement
This chapter first appeared as an article in Theory, Culture and Society, Volume 7, Numbers 2–3, pages 311–36, 1988, and is reproduced by permission of Sage Publications, London.
MODERNISM AND POSTMODERNISM: SOCIAL CORRELATES
MODERNISM AND BOURGEOIS IDENTITY: PARIS/VIENNA/BERLIN
In the decades around the turn of the twentieth century, the cultural life of major western cities changed.
The nature and import of those changes is one of the questions at the heart of the current debates about ‘modernity’ and ‘modernism’.
Did this modernism, in Jürgen Habermas's terms, deepen and extend the rationalist Enlightenment project, or did it undermine that project?
Here, focusing primarily on changes in art and architecture in Paris, Vienna, and Berlin during this period, I shall try to show that there is no single ‘modern’ but rather a plurality of modernisms each with its own specific national characteristics and significance.
I shall argue that Viennese modernism can be seen as in some sense a ‘Baroque’ modernism which seems largely to have run counter to the Enlightenment project.
And that Parisian modernism did indeed represent a deepening Enlightenment rationality.
Berlin modernism, meanwhile, was an altogether different and surely stranger brew.
Sometimes it thematized a heightened irrationality, at others it slid into hyperrationality, while at still others it seems to escape the logic of these categories altogether.
To draw out these differences and peculiarities, I shall look particularly at the place of the different national bourgeoisies in these three cities.
In each case, the form of the bourgeoisie — and the nature of the city's modernity — was determined by its relationship to other collective agents, to its own ‘significant other’.
Viennese modernism, I shall argue, must be understood primarily in terms of the bourgeoisie's relationship to the aristocracy.
In Paris, it was the relationship to the petite bourgeoisie that was crucial; and in Berlin, the relationship to the state.
The now voluminous literature on modernism and postmodernism has been dominated by philosophers and modern language theorists and historians of architecture.
This has contributed to an unusual neglect of the social dimension and in particular the importance of social class.
Two of the most important exceptions to this have been works by the cultural historians, T. J. Clark and Carl Schorske.
Their books, The Painting of Modern Life and Fin-de-siècle Vienna, though receiving recognition in specialist circles, have not had any sort of widespread resonance in the more general debates.
The reason for this I think is, not in spite of, but because their work is so, ultimately, sociological.
One of the aims of this essay is to tap the full sociological richness of Clark's and Schorske's work, both in understanding of what modernism is and in the explanation of modernism via class and bourgeois identity in Paris and Vienna.
This chapter proffers two theses: a general and a comparative thesis.
The general thesis is that the disruption of stable bourgeois identity makes possible the rise of modernism, which in turn further destabilizes bourgeois identity in a sort of virtuous circle.
The chapter's main focus, however, is the comparative thesis which is that clues to the contours of various modernisms can be found in examining various types of (disrupted) bourgeois identities.
And, further, that such variation in bourgeois identity, and hence in national modernisms, is largely determined by the place of different classes and class fractions in (1) the power bloc and (2) those challenging the power bloc.
This said, the chapter is divided into four parts.
The first of these is devoted to systematic consideration of what modernism is.
The central claim here is that modernization is a process of differentiation (a) of cultural spheres and (b) of the cultural realm from the social realm.
Modernism, the tip of whose iceberg is visible by the mid-nineteenth century, but whose social conditions of existence are pervasive only from the end of that century, is an end point of this differentiation, a point at which spheres take on full autonomy.
The full autonomy, and self-referentiality of the aesthetic sphere, on this account, is matched by the full autonomization of the social itself.
Both spheres — the aesthetic and the social — then co-exist, each on the terms of its own ‘facticity’.
The rendering of the ‘facticity’ of the social by that of the aesthetic is a crucial, first realist and then naturalist, moment of this modernization process, after which aesthetic modernism moves into full self-referentiality.
The second section looks at Paris and Vienna, and largely drawing on Clark and Schorske, respectively, at the visual arts and the social structuring of urban space.
In both these arenas, a distinctly ‘popular’ Parisian modernism is contrasted with its ‘baroque’Viennese counterpart, and the social class basis of this contrast is elucidated.
I then turn to draw on a variety of sources to investigate Berlin modernism in greater detail and depth.
And in this a second theme arises to join the social class explanation of modernism.
This theme is that of civil society versus the state.
The point argued here is that characteristically German bourgeois identity was fundamentally bound up with statist ideology.
And cultural modernism, in challenging such identity, at the same time challenged the very structure of the German state.
The third section of the essay, then, examines the role of the state — first, in the restructuring of Berlin's modernizing urban fabric and then as the central antagonist to the city's ‘Secession’ movement in the visual arts.
The fourth and final section of the chapter looks at the role of the Jews in modernist Berlin.
The Jews here are crucial in their importance as part of a new class fraction in the German bourgeoisie.
In this role they featured centrally as producers, as a reception class, and in the institutions of aesthetic modernism.
Excluded, effectively, from the state, and hence symbolically excluded from the bourgeoisie, Berlin Jews as allies of modernism were simultaneously partisans of civil society against the German state.
MODERNISM: CULTURAL AND SOCIAL ‘FACTICITY’
The problem of aesthetic modernism can perhaps be best approached via the time-tested framework of the sociology of modernized.
What I am referring to is elementary structural-functionalist sociology, in which modernization is seen as a process of structural differentiation (Ausdifferenzierung).
In this, modernized societies quite straightforwardly have more highly differentiated social structures than do traditional societies.
Jürgen Habermas in Theorie des kommunikativen Handels? has used this framework specifically to analyse the cultural realm, and the sketch below follows partly from Habermas.
In crudest outline, the schema goes something like this: The early steps of cultural modernization through differentiation can be seen in the comparison of the more modern ‘world religions’ with the culture of primitive societies.
The world religions constitute an ‘advance’ from primitive societies in that individuals learn to differentiate representations, in the form of words, concepts, and categories from real tangible objects and processes.
Further, in the world religions the sacred is differentiated from the social; that is, that primitive religions are ‘immanentist’, as Talcott Parsons underscored, while world religions are ‘transcendentalist’.
Secularization in the so-called ‘Early Modern’ period, in which symbolic entities are progressively differentiated from real entities, inaugurates a further advance.
And it is possible to note, as Max Weber does, a sort of transitional phase in the movement towards a fully-fledged modernity that comes into being in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
Now one can speak of the development of autonomous ‘life-orders’ or ‘value-spheres’, and in particular of the eighteenth-century autonomization of theoretical, ethical, and aesthetic spheres.
But full autonomization and thus full cultural differentiation had not yet come to pass.
In, for example, Enlightenment natural law, theoretical and ethical spheres are not yet separate, to the extent that moral practical or normative validity is still often grounded in (theoretical) fact.
Moreover, the cultural spheres have not yet fully been separated from external reality as unproblematic assumptions of epistemological and aesthetic realism continue to predominate.
It is only with the development of more radical differentiation in the decades around the turn of the twentieth century that it is possible to speak of a fully-fledged and optimally differentiated cultural modernity.
This radical autonomization of cultural spheres entails a sharp departure from what is known as ‘foundationalism’.
‘Foundationalism’ means that an external set of phenomena imposes an order on, or serves as a ‘foundation, for, a given cultural practice.
For example in the theoretical or epistemological sphere, foundationalism would entail the belief that concepts or statements somehow correspond to the real  world; in ethics, foundationalists might propound the belief in an unconditional ethics.
In aesthetics, foundationalists would valuate realist canons which privilege Quattrocento perspective in the visual arts and an externally ordered narrative structure in literature.
All of these foundationalisms are subjected to thoroughgoing challenges, as perhaps given voice to with greatest immediacy and impact in Nietzsche's radical epistemological, ethical, and aesthetic scepticism, in turn-of-the-century cultural modernism.
What are the implications of this radical break with foundations, this radical automization of cultural spheres?
Put simply, the implications are contingency, facticity, what Weber called ‘Eigengesetzlichkeit’.
That is that practices in theoretical, moral-practical, and aesthetic spheres become ‘contingent’ in their independence from externally imposed order.
In their very independence, these cultural practices take on a certain ‘facticity’ or ‘materiality’, very much like the profane materiality of the practices of every-day life.
‘Eigengesetzlichkeit’ means self-legislation.
This implies, in the absence of foundationalist or externally imposed ‘legislation’, that cultural practices — e.g. in the various scientific disciplines, in the arts — must develop their own rule-boundedness and their own conditions of validity.
Modernism then can be defined as the absence of externally imposed order on aesthetic practices.
This leaves open two ideal-typical possibilities.
Aesthetic practices can either celebrate this absence of external ordering and accentuate disorder, randomness, the irrational in cultural objects.
Or they can develop their own autonomous ordering.
This second possibility for modernism was partly what Adorno was referring to when he spoke of ‘aesthetic rationality’.
Both of these types of modernist autonomy can be seen in the development of the work of Arnold Schoenberg.
In Western music the established framework for stability and order has been the diatonic harmonic system which was developed in the Renaissance.
Movement, in Western music, even as early as the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, has always been in a direction away from the diatonic and through dissonance.
In the end, however, this movement always falls back into order or into ‘cadence’; back into the framework of the triad, the element of ‘authority, stability, consonance and repose’.
In the nineteenth century, Beethoven and especially Wagner moved  in the direction of the expansion of dissonance.
In his earlier work, Schoenberg reached for an almost total emancipation of dissonance in ‘atonality’.
At this point Schoenberg was close to the first ideal-type of modernist practice in his accentuation of contingency.
In his later development of the 12-tone system Schoenberg illustrates the second, rationalist modernist ideal-type, in a sense that it is quite clear that the new order is a created and posited ordering.
In his 12-tone music, as Schorske observes, Schoenberg confirms a ‘faith in a hard vision of the world that could both accept a pulverised reality and posit it in an order that was not inherent in it’.
The very radical autonomy of modernist cultural forms makes their social or social-historical explanation an extremely difficult pursuit.
How can one possibly advance a social explanation for practices whose very constitutive principle is their independence from society?
Several analysts in recent years, most notably Schorske, Bell, Marshall Berman, and T. J. Clark, have attempted to tackle this issue, though they have, I think, enjoyed only partial success.
What is clear, as these and other scholars have abundantly shown, is that parallel changes are proceeding roughly concomitantly in the aesthetic sphere and in society.
In the aesthetic sphere, as I mentioned, fundamental is a pronounced break away from an anchoring by an externally imposed order.
In the social sphere four parallel phenomena, all entailing a disruption of foundations, order, and stability, can be identified, as follows.
(1) A rejection of history.
In Paris, Vienna and Berlin, modernism meant a break with a preceding historical or historicist style that predominated especially in painting and architecture.
In painting, historical figures were typically portrayed and the paintings executed in a classical style enshrined as ‘official’ by national academies of art.
In architecture, previous great historical styles were imitated.
This pre-modernist embrace of history was surely not an embrace of change or of movement.
History was on the other hand associated with stability, with coherent and fixed national and individual identities.
Such stability was also inherent in the Whiggish assumptions of historical progress.
The modernist rejection of the historical style and history was itself an embrace of movement and change.
It entailed the rejection of historical generations and hence the ‘de-centring’ of national and individual identities.
The modernist and Nietzschean devastation of the idea of historical progress was at the same time a devastation of assumptions of order, authority, stability, consonance, and repose.
(2) Urbanization and the disruption of a stable sense of time and space.
Urbanization was accompanied by the building of national and municipal railways.
The use of such transport meant an enormous change in the experience of temporality, among other things a sharp increase in the quantity of stimuli perceived in a given unit of time.
It could imply a disordered experience of time, or, to the contrary, a re-ordered temporality as was the case in the experience of new recruits to factory work.
In comparison with the village or the ‘pre-modernist’ city, not just the sense of time but the experience of space was altered.
The new variegated urban space meant the experience at any one time of a greater number and a greater variety of impressions.
It entailed the creation of open and impersonal public spaces.
In a very important sense Vienna and Berlin were much more typically ‘modernist’ cities, almost along the lines of American cities like Chicago, than were cities like London and Paris which underwent slower and more organic growth.
The population of both Vienna and Berlin at least quadrupled in the half-century from 1860 to 1910.
This disruption of spatio-temporal assumptions was not only paralleled in the world of art but also in philosophy, from the incorporation of time and space into the subject in Kant's ‘transcendental aesthetic’ to Bergmann's writings.
(3) The Id and the Ego.
At this juncture a number of assumptions regarding man's rationally-ordered consciousness were being of course challenged.
This ‘explosion of the instincts’ was at the same time an explosion of contingency into the world of order.
This libidinal energy, once let loose, could itself be exposed to an ordering, as in the theory of Freud and the practice of psychoanalysis.
Or it could revel in its very contingency, as in Nietzsche's will-to-power.
That this experience was not confined to the realm of theory, and was rather widespread in bourgeois strata, is immediately clear to the reader of Proust, Mann, or Musil.
(4) The challenge to the bourgeoisie's hegemony.
Aesthetic modernism was born contemporaneously with the transition from ‘liberal’ to ‘organized’capitalism.
This transition was  characterized, inter alia, by the explosion of the popular classes onto the political and social scene.
The previous social and political hegemony of the bourgeoisie was, in a sense, perhaps not largely dissimilar to the above-mentioned phenomena, experienced as order and stability.
For many social scientists indeed the hegemony of the bourgeoisie would be seen as the basis of the other just-mentioned types of stability.
The bursting upon the scene of an organized working class carrying out industrial action on a substantial level, or not just working-class suffrage but, for the first time, mass political parties, and especially working-class parties must have been at least partly experienced as an eruption of contingency and chaos into a world of order.
So must have the entry into politics of growing petit-bourgeois anti-semitic political forces.
Socially too, with the creation of boulevards, department stores, and railway stations, the popular classes were more visible to the bourgeois, and no longer hidden away in their traditionally invisible ghettos.
Each of these social factors runs parallel to characteristically modernist phenomena in the aesthetic realm.
Each of them is part and parcel of the turn-of-the-century crisis in the hegemony of the bourgeoisie.
Taken together they go a long way in explaining the birth and persistence of aesthetic modernism.
But to speak of parallel processes co-existing in the social and aesthetic spheres is not a very satisfying explanation because the causal mechanisms which connect the two spheres are not properly elaborated.
A place to look for such mechanisms, as T. J. Clark has suggested, might be in the content of modernist and proto-modernist works of art.
The modernist revolution in art is largely a formalist revolution, or a revolution in which art becomes judged not as much by its content as by its form.
The modernist revolution means of course a break with the traditional aesthetics of beauty which is also a foundationalist aesthetics of order.
So it entails a break with not just the importance of content, but also with traditional and established aesthetic form.
For modernists, and here critics as far apart as Adorno and Clement Greenberg have a large area of common ground, most important in determining aesthetic value is the systematic working through of the possibilities of a given aesthetic material.
Nonetheless the key to understanding this formalist revolution  might lie in looking at the content of proto- and early modernist works.
The basic argument, as Clark puts it, is the following.
Proto-modernist painting, for example naturalist and impressionist pictures, are ‘paintings of modern life’.
That is, the content of such paintings, unlike historicist painting, is modern life.
For such content to exist in the aesthetic realm, modern life must exist in the social realm.
This is the beginning of an explanatory mechanism which elucidates the relationship between social and aesthetic spheres.
Now such a mechanism must be identified which connects content and form inside the aesthetic realm.
The challenge to academic painting that impressionism posed was a challenge both in form and in content.
In both content and form there was a parallel shift from the classical and idealized to the every-day and contingent.
In painting public outings in parks, café-concerts, and common prostitutes instead of great and idealized historical figures, Manet, Seurat, and others were painting, no longer the ordered, but the contingent.
In departing from the tenets of classical execution, they were moving towards contingency in form.
It is but a short step, and it logically follows, from the consideration of social reality as contingency and facticity to the consideration of the painting process itself in terms of such contingency and facticity.
If social life is seen as no longer ideally ordered but as made up of every-day material practices, and painting is part and parcel of social life, then painting should be made up of similar practices.
Focus would then be on the painting process itself, as in modernism, rather than on what is being painted.
Hence we have moved from modernism in content to modernism in form.
Or as Clark remarks of Manet's Olympia, as exemplar of the modernist revolution both in content and in form: ‘Olympia is not an enigma, not a courtisane, the final factual existence (of the naked woman) on the bed is the key to that of the paint’.
This explanation understands ‘realism’ and early or proto-modernism not to be diametrically opposed to one another, but as two sides, form and content, of the same modernizing process in the aesthetic sphere.
Thus Baudelaire and Flaubert can be seen without contradiction as both realists and early modernists.
When Baudelaire wrote to Manet, ‘you are only the first in the decrepitude of your art’, is he meant presumably to italicize the  ‘your’ and thus confirm that he, Baudelaire, was the first in the ‘decrepitude’of his own art.
Baudelaire's was a ‘decrepitude’ in both content and form.
In his departure from classical and idealized content, Baudelaire's decrepitude entailed the realist content of the streets of Paris.
In his decrepitude in form, i.e. his departure from received poetic norms, Baudelaire was proto-symbolist or modernist.
In the novel, Balzac, Stendhal, and especially Zola illustrate a developing modernization in content, in their shift from the classical and idealized to the social and the every-day and finally, in Zola's case, to approximating the fully contingent.
Modernization in form as well, though, is not apparent in these authors as it is in the equally realist Flaubert.
Only Flaubert of these novelists applied the lessons of contingency in content to contingency in form.
For Zola, modernist content, though laced with facticity and contingency, was of the utmost significance.
Flaubert's choice of contingent, and arguably naturalist content in Madame Bovary was governed by the very trivial and insignificant character of such content.
Of significance for him, on the contrary, were the words of the novel themselves, which he thought, along the lines of the model of music, should float free from narrative content, and gain their aesthetic value through consonant and dissonant relationships with one another.
Flaubert was emblematic of a further development in modernization, in which the referent of the work of art, having evolved from the timeless and ideal to the contingent, now had moved from contingency to virtual insignificance.
The shift to fully fledged autonomization and Eigengesetzlichkeit (self-legislation), the move to full disappearance of the referent, à la Mondrian or Pollock, was now just a step away.
In this section I have attempted a preliminary outline of a definition of modernism, and tried to draw some of the connections in the generic relationship between modernism and the bourgeoisie.
The argument proceeded from the social sphere to the aesthetic sphere.
Its main thrust was that challenges to the order and stability of bourgeois hegemony in the social sphere are then registered as challenges to order and stability, first as content and then as form, in the aesthetic sphere.
POPULAR VERSUS BAROQUE MODERNISM: PARIS AND VIENNA
The first section of this chapter has been devoted to a set of theses and arguments concerning the description of (aesthetic) modernism.
The main body of the chapter will now address the explanation of modernism.
In this, I want to turn initially, through the prism of Schorske's and Clark's work, to the cases of Vienna and Paris.
Here we shall see that aesthetic modernism in both cities was conditioned by the destabilization of bourgeois identity due to the eruption into the public sphere of the popular, and ‘dangerous’, classes.
In Viennese cultural modernism this was registered more or less psychologically, in terms of the threat of the instincts to the rationality of the ego.
In Paris, this was registered more directly and, so to speak, sociologically, in the subject matter and painting style of modernist and proto-modernist art.
In Vienna, the radical challenge of such a raw aesthetic of the instincts was rather quickly recuperated into an unchallenging baroque and decorative aesthetics.
This was due largely to the symbolic hegemony of the court aristocracy in defining Viennese bourgeois identity.
In Paris, the power of popular counter-hegemonical challenge persisted, and so did the radical challenge of French modernism.
Visual Arts: ‘Psychological’ versus ‘Sociological’Modernism
The political and social hegemony of the Austrian bourgeoisie (Bürgertum) came very late, very suddenly, and lasted only a very short time.
After the defeat of liberalism in 1848, a succession of events documented liberalism's subsequent success.
Thus 1848 and 1849 were the years of great reform of the Austrian school system; the defeat of the army by France/Piedmont in 1859 was followed by the establishment of constitutional government; and the defeat of the army by Prussia in 1866 brought liberalism to as close as it would ever come to full state power and led to the establishment of the dual monarchy the following year.
As early as the 1880s, however, the new order was already being threatened from below by the rise of mass anti-semitic movements on the right and of the working-class movement on the left.
The Austrian universities came to experience a pervasive nationalism from 1875–90, anti-semitic artisan societies took form in the  1880s, anti-semitic Karl Lueger was elected as mayor of Vienna in 1897, and parliamentary government was succeeded by Ernest von Koerber's  bureaucratic administration in 1900.
Viennese culture, as Schorske suggests, should be understood in terms of two polar opposite ideal-types, the first aristocratic, Catholic, and aestheticist and the second bourgeois, legalist, rationalist, and moral-scientific.
The Viennese Bürgertum itself was never nearly as well characterized by the second ideal-type as were their counterparts in most other countries.
Even in the liberal halcyon decades of the 1870s and 1880s, the Viennese Bürgertum was pronouncedly Wagnerian, inordinately concerned with style, and possessed with a marked preference for the Baroque.
Yet the 1860s-80s were Vienna's bourgeois-liberal decades.
Early Viennese modernism at the time and just after the time of the Secession of 1898, parallel to the rise of the mass popular political movements, challenged this habitus of the Bürgertum from ‘below’.
Secession leader Gustav Klimt's Pallas Athena, painted in 1898, symbolized the ‘sensual bearer of the mirror of modern man’.
Klimt's women more generally represented sexuality, threateningly juxtaposed against the liberal ego of bourgeois man.
Klimt's Jurisprudence, a ceiling painting for the University of Vienna, showed, not a belief in legality, but portrayed a central figure who was instead a helpless victim of the law.
This early Viennese modernist challenge to bürgerliche stability breaks with any sort of aesthetics of harmony and order.
Jerzy Olbricht's House of the Secession, built in 1898, was consistent with this ethos in its very resemblance to a pagan shrine.
The subsequent evolution, though, of the Vienna Secession and Viennese modernism was in a direction consistent with, and no longer disruptive to, a now partly modified bourgeois habitus.
It was a movement away from an aesthetics of ‘life’ and the instincts and towards the traditional aesthetics of beauty, a move towards an enervated ornamentalism that was perfectly acceptable to ruling elites.
Thus the theme of the Secession's 1902 Beethoven exhibition was that of art as a replacement for religion.
Klimt's frieze in the exhibition posed no longer a Nietzschean challenge to dominant political and aesthetic values, but instead seemed to advocate salvation in a fantasy world of art.
Klimt's shift from opposition to bourgeois values was  evidenced in his movement from art nouveau towards art deco— The famous Wiener Werkstatt designers Kolo Moser and Josef Hoffmann underwent a similar evolution.
In this, art nouveau 's flowing, organic, and sensual lines were superseded by the rectilinear, geometric, metallic, and crystalline forms of deco — The shift from art nouveau to art deco was one of movement to stasis, of depth to superficiality, and betrayed a self-satisfied, Byzantine ornamentalism.
This shift was particularly evident in Hoffmann's pavilion designed for the Secession's 1908 Kunstschau.
In place of the spartan simplicity of the original House of the Secession was festive, overly decorative, self indulgence.
What had taken place was that the Viennese Bürgertum had rejected large parts of liberal values to accept substantially the Catholic, baroque, and aestheticist tradition of the court aristocracy.
The Viennese modernists, Klimt, von Hofmannsthal, Hoffmann, Moser, had only joined them in this acceptance.
This complacency was once again disputed towards the end of the decade, through the expressionist paintings of Kokoschka, through Karl Kraus's biting essays, and through the spartan and functionalist design of Adolf Loos.
But Kokoschka and Kraus were to be more comfortable in Berlin, and Loos's principles were only to be realized on a major scale by the Bauhaus architects.
Viennese modernism, which had a briefer period of flourishing than the modernism of other great cities, was also the least oppositional, the least social-critical, of modernisms.
Even prior to modernism, there was no Austrian equivalent of the French social realist novel, but instead the inner-oriented and individualistic Bildungsroman, which ran not counter to, but incorporated, the baroque tradition of fantasy.
The Wiener Werkstatt was not social-critical in the sense the British Arts and Crafts movement was.
Viennese painting and literature never rendered the sometimes brutal urban landscapes of their French counterparts.
The problem was the  aristocratic aestheticism that the court nobility had bequeathed to Viennese bourgeois culture.
This made it difficult for modernist aesthetics to become oppositional.
In Schorske's words, only in Austria was aestheticism ‘not a form of protest versus bourgeois civilization’ but ‘an expression of that civilization, an affirmation of an attitude to life in which neither ethical nor social ideals played a dominant part’.
In Viennese modernism, then, the court aristocracy was, in relation to the Bürgertum, the most salient social class.
To a certain extent the eruption of the popular classes (i.e. the petite bourgeoisie and the working class) served to destabilize bourgeois identity in Vienna, and was paralleled by a radical phase in Viennese modernism.
The very centrality of the aristocracy and its culture in Vienna, however, made possible the restabilization of bürgerliche culture, partly through the integration of a substantial element of aestheticist aristocratic culture into the bourgeois habitus.
Viennese modernism thus became in large measure a conservative modernism.
In late nineteenth-century Paris the aristocracy played no such central role.
Paris never indeed provided a space for the baroque and its accoutrements in the sense that Vienna did.
Instead it was the popular classes themselves, and especially the petite bourgeoisie, that were the most salient social classes in relationship to the Parisian bourgeoisie.
These were the very classes whose disruption of bourgeois identity was enabling for a vital, oppositional, and radical modernism.
Hence Paris modernism was able to persist as a vital and radical force.
To speak of a ‘significant other’ among social classes in a given national modernism is also to speak of the culture associated with that significant other class.
It is not clear, especially to the untrained eye, whether the subjects for Klimt's paintings were drawn from bourgeois or aristocratic culture.
It is clear, however, that the subject for the French décadents, as well as for the naturalists and impressionists, was the culture of the popular classes.
Distinct from the previously existing ‘folk culture’, it is only in the late-nineteenth-century city that one can speak with any degree of certainty about the existence of a mass and popular culture.
Popular culture, thus, and high modernism were born in the same places at about the same time.
Moreover, popular culture was the subject, and arguably the condition of existence, of high modernist culture.
The undermining of bourgeois identity in Paris came from three directions: from the popular classes, from the instincts, and from the commodity form itself.
In 1863, Manet's Déjeuner sur l'herbe was rejected at the annual Salon only to be exhibited at the Salon des Refusés.
The 1865 Salon did exhibit Manet's Olympia but quickly moved it to a place that made viewing  almost impossible for the public.
The critics, the press, and responsible opinion were outraged by the painting.
Why?
Critics and the viewing public were quite accustomed to seeing the nude and even courtisanes in pictures.
The point is however that Olympia was not a classic nude or even a high-class courtisane, but as Clark notes, a ‘fille publique’, ‘a faubourienne’.
This forced a threatening combination of sex, class, and the commodity onto the unsuspecting bourgeois viewing public.
Seurat's Dimanche après-midi à l'île de La Grande Jatte moved towards the abstract and uniform in form as it did in content, thereby making class distinctions between the figures on a Sunday outing that he drew difficult to see.
Manet's Olympia similarly allowed the features defining the prostitute to lose their clarity.
At the same time in portraying a fille publique from the lower orders, Manet let the ‘difference between the middle and the margin of the social order become blurred’.
Previous nudes, even when taking the form of courtisanes, never allowed the odour of money to tarnish their classical form; in Olympia, money is clearly at issue, sex becomes a commodity.
Manet's break with classicism was threefold.
He painted not the general, but the particular; not the nude, but the naked, thus bringing sex back in an especially embarrassing way.
He painted, finally, not the beautiful and rich, but the unseemly and chaotic popular classes.
Olympia provoked such a reaction because it ‘altered and played with identities the culture wanted to keep still’ and ‘because such identities were on the surface in such a brutal and unmediated fashion’.
Paintings such as Degas's Femmes devant un café and Au Café-concert and Manet's Un Bar au Folies-Bergère only reproduced the characterization of contemporaries of the modern Parisian crowd as ‘callicots [white-collar clerks]et des filles de joie’.
These also were central participants in the famous ‘café-concerts’.
Some conservative commentators linked the bawdy songs performed at the café-concerts with the uprising of the Paris Commune, and censors were employed to recast the song material in a more harmless mould.
The café-concerts were the stuff of the birth of popular culture.
The crowds were drawn from the popular classes.
The sometimes inattentive audience only betrayed the fact that they were as much participants in the total popular-cultural spectacle as the performers.
The singer gave expression  to the pulsing life of the popular classes, and the painter gave expression to the whole popular-cultural process.
The spectacle of the café-concert was above all the home of disorder, and particularly of the disruption of the orderly bourgeois habitus.
The special salience of a radical French petite bourgeoisie has long been the subject of commentary for historians and political scientists.
The popular classes entered on the political scene in France earlier than elsewhere, and the petits bourgeois were long the arbiter of the popular.
While surely not proletarian uprisings, 1789, 1830, 1848, and the Commune surely were popular uprisings, with considerable petit-bourgeois and artisan participation.
The Radical and Radical-Socialist parties were petit-bourgeois parties largely avant la lettre.
The historically radical, and later red, character of large sections of the French peasantry is both legend and well documented.
The mainstream of early French political socialism was for a long time essentially petit bourgeois, in its absence of rapprochement with trade unions, in its party organizational form, and in the social background of its parliamentarians and membership.
This leadership of the petite bourgeoisie within the often closely allied popular classes in France couldn't contrast more strongly with the German and Austrian cases, in which the petite bourgeoisie was substantially polarized to the right and the working class to a large degree stood on its own.
Social class and the uses of urban space
Perhaps most important in understanding the nature of modernism in Paris, though, was the very social visibility of the popular classes.
And for this we have to scrutinize the comparative process of urban development.
All cities, in so far as they became modern cities in the last decades of the nineteenth century, underwent the following changes in the organization of public space:(1) The development of separate commercial districts.
This connected with the massive extension of the general process of commodification, which for Simmel was responsible for creating the characteristically blasé urban character, bereft of identity and inner meaning.
(2) Spatial changes promoting a shift from private sociability to public sociability, or, if one likes, from ‘particularized’ to ‘generalized’forms of sociability.
These  spatial changes include the building of department stores, railway stations, exposition halls, large factories.
(3) A new centrality of the streets and circulation, comprising especially the construction of boulevards, trams, and urban railways.
(4) An extension of the checkerboard principle in the layout of city streets.
(5) The specific organization of public spaces as ‘spectacle’ to be consumed by the masses.
These changes are generic for the modern metropolis.
The crucial question though for the comparative sociology of urban modernity — that is, the question that identifies, not the constants, but the variables — is the following: What social content, and especially what social class content, consecrates the new reorganization of public space?
And this question can be at least partly reduced to: who used the new public space?
In Vienna the aristocracy and its Baroque culture left their imprimatur on this reorganized public space.
In Paris, this space, much more than elsewhere, became both popularized and classless.
That is, in Paris, Haussmannization, so to speak, let loose the popular classes into the new modern spaces it had created.
And this very social visibility to the popular in Paris was registered in the city's characteristic aesthetic modernism.
The new boulevards and open spaces that Baron Haussmann created displaced 350,000 people and some one-fifth of the streets of central Paris.
As the centre of Paris moved west, masses of workers were evicted from the city centre, some to move along with the new factories to the banlieue.
The movement of the city centre to the grands boulevards and the Bourse left the absolute majority of workers still in their quartier, and most of the quartiers still remained.
But the quartier did become much less the frame of reference for work, trade, and consumption for the popular classes.
The new grands magasins, for example, sent agents into the quartiers for purposes of purchasing craft and other goods.
The eruption of the popular classes into the public realm gave to Haussmann's Paris a sort of ‘classless’ character; the edges dividing the social classes became blurred; an arena of interclass communications and interactions was opened.
In the 1860s before Haussmannization had taken effect, class barriers were strong enough so that the ‘public idiom’ still was not satisfactorily standardized.
In the Paris that Proust describes or that  Manet painted in La Musique aux Tuileries, sociability was mainly intraclass, in a plurality of narrowly circumscribed public realms.
But by the 1880s the new clientele, of shop assistants and stock-exchange speculators, was found in restaurants, cabarets, and as shoppers in the grands magasins.
The popular classes, strolling on the grands boulevards, could observe the dining practices, previously invisible to them, of the bourgeoisie in sidewalk restaurants.
This blurring of class identities may have provoked Manet to have been impressed, not so much by Paris's streets, but by the ‘queerness’ of the people who used them.go It is this sort of ‘flattening’of identity in the creation of blasé urban character that occasioned Clark's observation that ‘the pleasures of seeing’in Haussmann's Paris involved ‘some sort of lack’, a certain ‘brazenness’.
The city, he continues, was a ‘sign of capital’; it ‘took up and eviscerated the varieties of social practice and gave them back with ventriloqual precision’.
The popular character of modern urban Paris finds its counterpart in the baroque character that the court nobility imparted to Viennese urban modernity.
First, at this juncture a few points in regard to what might be meant by ‘baroque’.
The baroque is first of all laden with a set of Counter-Reformation characteristics including a salience of symbolism, monumentality, voluptuousness, and grandeur.
Its very opening out of public space, to be seen for example in Munich, Prague, or above all Rome, is strikingly modern in comparison with the traditional and labyrinthine Gothic street plans.
Equally modern was the initiation by Baroque city planners of systematic works of right-angle streets.
In their opening up of public space, Baroque planners organized vast vistas in order to highlight central monumental features.
The idea was to create a spatial framework that would carry the sightline of viewers towards a central focus.
It was to magnify the buildings and their symbolism.
If the open spaces and checkerboard streets were modern, baroque symbolism, monumentality and voluptuousness were definitely not.
Also distinctly non-modern in comparison with, say, Renaissance construction, were the heavy, articulated block-like volumes of baroque buildings.
The Ringstrasse, which took shape in the 1860s and 1870s, was Vienna's counterpart of Haussmann's boulevards.
The  Ringstrasse was built on a huge tract of open land surrounding the city which had previously served as a military fortification.
The decline of the place of the military and the improvement of the position of the bourgeoisie and liberalism in the Austrian state, consecrated by the beginning of municipal self-government in 1850 and rapid economic growth throughout the 1850s, were pivotal in deciding the development of the Ringstrasse.
But the mode in which the Viennese Bürgertum created the Ringstrasse was still heavily coloured by baroque visions.
Unlike Paris, in which according to Benjamin, modernity opened up a previously labyrinthine structure, Vienna's traditional inner city was largely already baroque.
And this persisted into modern Vienna.
In the ‘new cities’ in European metropolises and in America's great cities a ‘functional’ethos predominated.
Not so in Vienna, where the import of the new buildings in the Ringstrasse lay in their symbolism.
The old baroque inner city was dominated by the symbols of the first and second class estates; the modern Ringstrasse by the symbols of the Third Estate.
And unlike in other Western cities the Third Estate was conceived along cultural, rather than economic, lines.
The parliament, the Rathaus, the University (interestingly in the new and not the old city), the Burgtheater, each built in a different historicist style symbolizing each building's aims and principles, were conceived on a scale of monumentality rarely seen elsewhere in modern Europe.
Not just the scale and grandeur of the Ringstrasse, but the open spaces in front of the buildings and in the buildings and in the vast squares adjoining the street, suggested the persistent power of the Baroque.
The Ringstrasse's new bourgeois Mietpalaste (apartment houses) also bore the mark of the old court nobility, their lavish stairways and vestibules, taken, as Schorske notes, from the old palace architecture and aimed at rhetorical impact.
What, apart from Third Estate symbolism, was specifically modern about the Ringstrasse?
Perhaps above all the underscored centrality of the horizontal space of the street.
In Haussmann's Paris as well, all had become subordinated to traffic; everything was organized around circulation, in straight lines from railway stations along the boulevards.
Rather than the buildings it was the lights and circulation in the new centre of Paris — on the Avenue de l'Opéra, the Boulevard Madeleine, the Boulevard des  Capucines, the Rue Auber, the Boulevard des Italiens — which attracted the foreign visitor and was registered in the cityscapes of Monet and Renoir in the 1970s.
In Vienna's Ringstrasse, Schorske observes, the new representative buildings did not face one another; instead each faced the street as if to italicize the circular flow.
This modern urban vision of the street was only further extended by Otto Wagner, first as established Ringstrasse architect and speculator, and later as a Secession leader and critic of the Ringstrasse.
Wagner's Österreichische Landerbank had no vertical lines at all on the lower portion of the building; instead, horizontal masonry reinforced the trajectory of the street.
Wagner's philosophy advocated a ‘temporal trajectory’, which gave priority to flow movement.
In the late 1890s the municipal railway replaced the grand boulevard as the symbol of urban progress.
Wagner was a key actor from 1894 to 1901 in the construction of the Vienna system, making pioneering use of iron in station construction as a symbol of technical change.
Wagner's and later especially Adolf Loos's functionalist critique of Ringstrasse symbolic monumentality underlines the elements of Baroque that underpinned Viennese modernity.
Camillo Sitte's traditionalist and communitarian critique of the Ringstrasse emphasizes instead the above-indicated continuity of the baroque and the modern.
Sitte, in opposition to baroque and modern rectilinearity, advocated the Gothic free-form of mediaeval streets.
In place of the anonymity of the ‘reign of the street’ he argued for ‘enclosed space’; instead of large impersonal urban squares, space should be internalized to promote the values of community.
Instead of the Baroque or modern architect, Sitte promulgated the values of the mediaeval master builder.
Restructured urban space and the visual arts in the modernist city were mirror images of one another.
In Vienna, challenge to bourgeois stability came, on the one hand, from the unbridled sexuality of the painting, for example, the young Klimt and Kokoschka.
And on the other from a conception of the built environment proffered by Wagner and Loos which was grounded in rejection of classicizing and historicist idealism.
It promised the replacement of the latter by spartan cleanness of line and a materialist urbanism of movement, which itself was realized in the new Viennese street plans and urban railways.
All of this was, however, compromised and overshadowed as modernism in Vienna was recuperated as a ‘cultural resource’ which reinforced a now altered bourgeois identity.
Thus the decorative sumptuousness of the no longer oppositional, visual arts was matched by monumentalism, baroque self-indulgence, and primacy of symbol over function in Vienna's built environment.
MODERNIST BERLIN: STATE VERSUS CIVIL SOCIETY
The city and statist modernization
If the relationship bourgeoisie is constituted via the popular classes in Paris and via the court aristocracy in Vienna, then it is constituted via the state in Berlin.
Above, I defined modernism in terms of disruption of the values of order, repose, stability, authority, and consonance associated with a national (or urban) bourgeoisie.
If in Vienna these bourgeois values were partly hegemonized by Catholic aristocratic culture, in Berlin they were strongly pervaded by statism.
The Prussian state, as often noted, was not just an external entity, but an entity profoundly incorporated into the consciousness of individual Germans.
Hence the famous German Beamtenbewusstsein.
Hence the very overwhelming number of German Beamten (civil servants).
So when modernity in Berlin — in the arts, in the massive new development of the city — took shape, so to speak, against the state, it also took shape in opposition to the identity of the German Bürgertum.
The very statist nature of the constitutive elements of German bourgeois identity made German nationalism a substantially different phenomenon than nationalism in other countries.
If one is curious about where the modern is in Berlin, the place to look is where the state isn't.
That is, in a very important sense the modern in Berlin was the anti-state or at least the non-state.
And the Jew and the proletarian were, not without good reason, seen as harbingers of this modern.
A whole list of factors contributed to Berlin's statist character: the relatively weakly developed guild system and mediaeval urban structures more generally; the relative insubstantiality of a Prussian noblesse de robe; the relatively powerless position of the mercantile bourgeoisie under absolutism.
Perhaps most  important was the lateness of development of the absolutist state.
This bequeathed to Berlin and Prussia the advantages of what might be called ‘political backwardness in perspective’, and enabled the creation of an inordinately powerful military and  bureaucratic apparatus.
In pre-modern Berlin the claims on land of this expanding state machinery had already driven land values famously high.
Hence workers in pre-industrial Berlin were crowded into unusually small spaces in what is today's Mitte (centre) and experienced an absence of light and air that made conditions even in contemporaneous London and Paris seem favourable.
The second half of the nineteenth century witnessed a repetition of this process.
This time in modernizing Berlin, the now much more greatly expanded needs of the state for public space, together with the rapid commercialization of the centre and especially the Friedrichstrasse-Leipziger Strasse axis, largely evicted the working class altogether from the Mitte.
The very centre of the Mitte was most fully ‘cleaned out’— the population of Alt-Berlin diminished from 32,000 to 9,000 from 1871 to 1913; the population of Alt-Cölln from 16,500 to 6,200.
But also the large Friedrichstadt Stadtteil (in today's Mitte) which had 76,350 inhabitants in 1871 had only 33,505 in 1913.
These evicted workers joined other newcomers to the now rapidly industrializing Berlin to live in the massively expanding properly urban working class districts outside of the Mitte — thus the population of ‘red’ Wedding increased ten-fold to 254,000 between 1871 and 1913; the population of the Rosenthaler Vorstadt, much of which is now East Berlin's Prenzlauerberg, increased seven-fold to 319,000 in 1913; and the population of Stralauer Viertel and Königsviertel, much of which now is Friedrichshain, increased taken together between three and four fold to 489,000.
This rate of growth pales, however, in comparison with the expansion of the ‘suburbs’, which were incorporated into Berlin as administrative districts in 1920.
The four large middle-class suburbs grew at especially great rates — Charlottenburg from 20,000 inhabitants in 1871 to 323,000 in 1919, a growth of 1,667 per cent; Schöneberg from 4,500 in 1871 to 262,000 in 1919; Steglitz from 1,900 in 1871 to 83,400 in 1919 and Wilmersdorf from 1,662 to 139,400.
Taken together the expansion of the middle-class suburbs was from about 28, inhabitants in 1871  to over three-quarters of a million (808,000) just after World War I. The other large suburbs, of mixed population, though with working-class majorities, experienced similar trajectories: Lichtenberg grew from 4,700 in 1871 to 145,000 in 1919, Rixdorf/ Neukolln from 8,145 to 262,000, and Spandau from 20,500 to 95,500.10 The total population growth of just these large above-mentioned mainly working-class districts was of the order of 1.3 million from 1871 to World War I, a phenomenon which taken together with the revolutionary uprising of 1918 must have been frightening to Berlin's middle classes in a manner hardly imaginable today.
The Berlin equivalent of Paris Haussmannization and Vienna's Ringstrasse was the Bebauungsplan of 1862.
The plan, largely developed in the late 1850s by Berlin Baurat James Holbrecht, was itself taken from a cartographic concept already established by Haussmann.
It included the development of suburbs, canalization, the creation of boulevards and a Ringstrasse, the building of living quarters, a new street system, and considerable development in transport.
The idea was to plan for an increase in Berlin's population to 1.5 million.
But despite the power of the state's repressive, military and administrative, apparatus, Holbrecht could not mobilize sufficient public power (as had been possible in Paris and Vienna) to oppose the interests and manoeuvres of property owners.
The interests and power of the railway companies put paid to Holbrecht's ideas for a Ringstrasse and for a north-south through boulevard.
His planning powers were also insufficient to enable the breaking through of older residential areas to construct Paris-type boulevards.
Success was only achieved in the construction of the two central rail stations, Potsdamer and Anhalter Banhofs; and in the construction of a row of boulevards in the south part of the city bearing (characteristically) the names of illustrious generals such as Yorck, Gneisenau, Bülow, Kleist, and Tauentzien.
Holbrecht's street plans had provided for the planning of living quarters, i.e. the planning of Baublocke and of the buildings in these blocks.
His idea was that the parcellization of building land would enable the construction of blocks that were 120–150 metres wide and some 75 metres deep.
These ‘Mietkaserne’(literally ‘rental barracks’), to avoid the slum problem of a London or central Berlin, would be four storeys  high and would open up on an interior square that was green and ample enough to permit plenty of light and fresh air.
Holbrecht advocated a mix of social classes in the same building; his outline was for a single apartment to be on the first floor of a typical building; for two apartments each on the Erdstock, the second storey and the third storey, and for three apartments on the fourth floor, as well as smaller flats on the ground floor and in the courtyard.
The outcome, due to the power of speculators and property holders, was that Berlin's Mietkaserne became a symbol throughout the West for substandard housing.
Their population was not mixed, but exclusively working class, including many unskilled workers and unemployed.
In place of Holbrecht's large yards, developers built Hinterhöfe (back courtyards) several deep, and tiny Hinterhöfe at that.
Buildings were five to six storeys high, and this, combined with the tiny Hinterhöfe, allowed inhabitants virtually no light and minimal air circulation.
Numerous tiny apartments looked out onto these ever-smaller back courtyards, and (contrary to Holbrecht's prescriptions) filled the cellars of the buildings.
In fact during so-called modernization from 1861–75 there was actually an increase in the already unfavourable ratio of inhabitants per square metre of living space.
Thus the state, which largely forced the overflow of working-class citizens outside of the central part of the city, was unable to amass sufficient powers decently to house these individuals outside of the centre.
Nor was it powerful enough, outside of a few streets with Prussian generals' names, to force through a genuinely modern network of boulevards.
The putatively modern new business district was more or less haphazardly established along the Leipziger Strasse, just a bit west of the old city centre.
Real boulevard creation, making what is now the centre of West Berlin, around  Kurfürstendamm , had to wait for its beginnings in the 1920s and its maturity under Allied rule in the 1960s.
The role of the state was even more pronounced in Berlin in the cultural sphere.
As a military-bureaucratic city, without either the tradition of a court nobility, an important mediaeval university, or even an independent mercantile culture such as existed in Hamburg or Lübeck, Berlin was, in comparative perspective, so to speak, bereft of culture.
Culture in Berlin came  first through state institutions, and developed very late and all at once.
The city's Friedrich-Wilhelm Universität was founded only after Baron von Stein's reforms in 1810, yet by 1870 it was setting international standards in history, classics, physics, chemistry, and medicine.
Considerable advance came under the Prussian Minister-Director for Higher Education, Friedrich Althoff.
He began to move the university (now the Freie Universität) from the city centre to Dahlem.
He oversaw the final establishment of the Technische Hochschule (now the Technische Universität) in Charlottenburg through the joining of the Bauakademie with the Arts and Crafts School in 1882.
And just after his term of office the Kaiser-Wilhelm Society for the Promotion of Science was grounded (1910), whose eminences included Max Planck and Albert Einstein; the Society became the Max Planck Institut in 1948.
Apart from higher education, other cultural developments were retarded.
The Royal Opera, anti-Wagnerian for a considerable time, only achieved world class status in the last decade of the nineteenth century.
The Music College was founded only in 1869, and the Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra only in 1882.
Berlin equally did not have any kind of status until very late in the day in publishing, literature, theatre, and painting.
Aesthetic modernism: the ‘Anti-State’
The predominant thrust of the city's rise to world class cultural status came apart from and was often opposed to the state.
This is perhaps best instantiated in the Berlin Secession.
The Wilhemine state was able to use a number of institutions of art to attempt to prevent the Secession's promotion of an autonomous and modernist painting.
These institutions included the following.
(1) The Royal College of Art.
(2) The Royal Academy of Art.
This was founded in 1696; separate music and painting academies were established in 1833.
The Minister of Culture had strong ties with the Academy and determined its funding.
Other German cities had colleges as well as Academies.
(3) The Society of Berlin Artists.
This was the local branch of the 1856-founded Federation of German and Berlin Artists, which won royal recognition in 1867; the latter meant royal subsidies for the holding of exhibitions and for magazines, etc. in  exchange for kingly veto powers over organizational rule changes and decisions.
These Societies were in opposition to the differentiation and autonomization model of modernity that I am using in this paper.
They were largely economic interest groups — that is, their economic function was not yet differentiated from their aesthetic function.
Thus they often promoted what their leaders knew was mediocre art in the interests of all their members.
(4) The Berlin Salon.
This was an annual exhibition.
Other large German cities had bi-annual salons.
The model was the Paris Salon established in 1830.
A city's Academy typically funded its Salon, chose the pictures which were to be exhibited, and awarded medals to prizewinners.
In Berlin, the same man, Anton von Werner, was director of the Royal College and leader of the Society of Artists from 1887.
He also was very close to the Kaiser's family.
The Society came to receive quite substantial funding from the Kaiser from 1888–1910.
The Society thus was able to purchase a new building as well as take over much of the running of the Salon.
The Salon, which had mostly only exhibited Berlin and German painters, put on exhibitions with an international character in 1891 and 1892.
In 1892 the exhibition of painting by Edvard Munch created a scandal after which state control over the Salon was reinforced.
These events provoked secession movements from the official Societies in a number of German cities.
In Berlin a splinter group formed within the Society, but it did not secede until 1898.
The famous Vienna and Berlin Secessions were two of the very last of these movements.
The dominant form of painting that the state supported, and which was also popular among the conservative middle and upper classes, was historical painting.
Von Werner was an historical painter, often of very recent historical scenes.
Kaiser Wilhelm II had effective veto power over the awarding of prizes at the annual Berlin Salon.
(5) The National Gallery.
Liberal Hugo Tschudi, sympathetic to modernist movements, was Director from 1896.
He was in charge of the commission to decide on the nature of the German exhibition at the St Louis World Fair of 1904.
The commission decided to exhibit a mixture of mainstream and avant-garde German artists.
The Kaiser and von Werner disagreed; only mainstream artists were exhibited in St Louis; and von Tschudi  was replaced at the National Gallery by the ubiquitous Von Werner.
Standing opposed to these state institutions was another set of institutions more or less representing modernization and, so to speak, ‘civil society’.
The first of these was the Secession itself.
The Secession was led by Max Liebermann and joined by such dominant figures as Max Slevogt and Louis Corinth.
Liebermann was Professor and member of the Academy of the Arts.
He was born in 1847 and was hence 40–45 years older than the young Expressionists who, less than a decade after the Secession was founded, gave to German painting its characteristically modernist form.
Liebermann, also influenced by seventeenth-century Dutch painting, was an impressionist.
He was educated during the ‘positivist’ era just after German unification and his views always bore the mark of its pronounced rationalism.
Liebermann was a self-professed and proud bourgeois.
He was a leader of the 1892 splinter group in the Berlin Society.
His powerful institutional role was nonetheless confirmed by the award of a gold medal (to which both von Werner and the Kaiser assented) in the Salon of 1897.
Liebermann was a leader of the 1898 Secession, to which he was elected president, an office which he held until 1911.
In 1899 the Secession held their first (as an alternative to the Salon) exhibition; here no foreign painters were exhibited, but at the same time neither were the didactic and patriotic paintings typical of the Salon.
The 1900 Secession exhibition was significantly international, but still included only a minority of avant-garde paintings.
These exhibitions received a lot of favourable criticism from the Berlin bourgeois press.
Equally, patrons such as Walter Rathenau and banker Carl Fürstenburg advanced sums of money for quarters for a Secession gallery.
Anton von Werner, chief Secession opponent, was not an anti-semite.
Yet German nationalists tended to see modernists and the Secession as cosmopolitan, internationalist, French, and Jewish.
Liebermann was scurrilously attacked in anti-semitic cartoons.
By 1904 most of the best of non-academic German painters were Secession members, and after the St Louis affair even most establishment figures did not take academic painting seriously.
From 1906–10, foreign artists such as Munch and van de Velde became Secession members as well as German representatives of  the newer styles such as Beckmann, Nolde, and Lyonel Feininger.
Part of the hostility of the academic Kunstgenossenschaft against the Secession's Kunstlerbund stemmed from the weak market position of the academic painters.
It was also the prejudice of the less gifted against the more gifted.
Thus can be explained the attack led by the mediocre and unsuccessful ex-Worpswede painter Carl Vinnen against ‘Non-German art’.
Vinnen, whose offensive smacked of anti-semitism in that it centred on the figure of Paul Cassirer and lambasted the critics for being in the service of speculators and dealers, called for a boycott on the purchase of non-German art.
The President of the Akademie der Künste signed Vinnen's manifesto, as did, surprisingly, Käthe Kollwitz.
But established Secession figures as well as younger modernists like Beckmann, Pechstein, Kandinsky, Marc, and Macke mobilized against it.
If reaction in Berlin saw the established Secession impressionists as somehow ‘French’ and ‘Jewish’, they were even more offended by the work, seen as ‘Negroid’and ‘primitive’, of the younger Expressionists.
The Expressionists, and especially the leading Brücke painters Nolde, Erick Heckel, Ernst Kirchener, and Schmidt-Rottluff, were shown in Secession exhibitions, though the critics and public reacted mainly either with hostility or indifference.
In 1910, however, the relatively conservative and impressionist-dominated (by Liebermann, Slevogt, Corinth, and others) executive committee of the Secession refused to give space to the Brücke painters at the annual exhibition.
This provoked a mass exit and the founding of the Neue Sezession under the leadership of Max Pechstein.
In 1913, for not dissimilar reasons, Liebermann and the remaining majority left the Secession, though substantial figures such as Corinth stayed in the organization.
In any event the experience of the Berliner Sezession points to a hostility of the state to modernity that bears comparison with the Viennese case.
If, in Berlin, the Secession pitted civil society against the state, in Vienna the battle was fought out within the sphere of civil society itself, while the state acted as arbiter between competing forces.
That is, where the Berlin Secession defined itself against the Wilhelmine state, its Viennese counterpart defined itself against the bourgeois values of the Ringstrasse culture of the 1860s and 1870s.
This is apparent when one  considers the relationship of state and secession in Vienna.
In Vienna the Secession did win representative status from the Austrian government and was, for example, able to mount exhibitions in foreign expositions.
Otto Wagner, along with Klimt major Secession leader, had a professorial appointment from 1894 at Vienna's Academy of Fine Arts; in the late 1890s he was commissioned to build local railway stations.
And in 1905 the state built Wagner's daring Post Office Savings Building, perhaps the most modern building financed by a European state since the Eiffel Tower.
From 1900 von Koerber's government set out on a programme of economic and cultural modernization.
This meant state encouragement of the Secession, especially through the offices of new Minister of Culture Wilhelm von Hartel.
Von Hartel operated through the Advisory Arts Council, of which again Wagner was a member.
Hartel opened a state-sponsored modern gallery in 1903 and created teaching appointments at the Arts and Crafts School for Kolo Moser and Josef Hoffmann.
Even ‘theoretical modernist’ Sigmund Freud used friends of Hartel to secure his own career promotion.
This Viennese phenomenon of the state and modernist culture as bedfellows could not be more foreign to Berlin, which an observer even in the late 1920s described as ‘Stadt voll protestantischer Staats und Militärphilosophie’.
New class fractions: champions of civil society
Any discussion of the institutions of art, or, more generally speaking, the institutions of culture, in Berlin is incomplete, or even impossible, without discussion of the role of the Jews.
The connection between the Jews and modernity — conceived as economic and cultural modernization — is one long of concern to sociologists, and dates at least back to the work of Werner Sombart.
The Jews along with the Huguenots were welcomed with open arms by Friedrich Wilhelm after the Thirty Years War in the hope of achieving rapid economic growth on the cinders of destruction.
Not much later, in 1670, the Jews were expelled from Vienna, many to settle in the nearby hinterland.
Of import to my argument here, however, is not the role of the Jews in the Early Modern period, but in the modernity, here conceived as modernism, of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
And there is an important difference.
The Jews of early modernity were famously, ‘not a nationality, but the state people’ par excellence.
In the nineteenth century, however, they had entered civil society on a very important scale.
In Vienna, emancipation began with the liberal reforms of 1848, and by the 1860s Jews had obtained full freedom of migration.
The Jewish population of Vienna increased exponentially from 1857 to 1880 and peaked at about 12 per cent of the city's population in 1890.
In Germany the large shift in Jewish identity came in the eighteenth and especially the nineteenth centuries as no longer Yiddish but German became the first language for most Jews.
Legislation which made official Jewish equality of citizenship rights was passed in the Norddeutschen Bund in 1869 and extended to a united Germany in 1871.
The Jewish population of Berlin also increased and peaked at about 3–4 per cent at the time of World War I. In multi-ethnic Vienna the Jews, though a different and more often stigmatized nationality, were still only yet another nationality.
In the more ethnically uniform Berlin the Jews were rather clearly the other nationality.
Moreover, as the Jews came to populate and impart, importantly, economic and cultural form to a now modernist civil society, Vienna and Berlin are again at opposite poles.
In juxtaposition to the rather comfortable at points virtual ‘merging’ of state and civil society in Vienna stands the age-old Prussian hostility and incompatibility of the two realms.
Our concern in this context is with the institutions of culture.
And, in painting, the Jews were ubiquitous.
Secession leader Max Liebermann was a Jew as was Neue Sezession leader Pechstein.
Pechstein and Jewish architect Erich Mendelsohn were active later in the Novembergruppe.
The most important areas of gallery space, again as apart from state institutions, offered to first impressionists and later to expressionists, were provided by Paul Cassirer.
Cassirer's gallery exhibited avant-garde art as early as 1895.
He organized the original Secession gallery on Kurfürstendamm and then with two Secession painters built a new gallery further west on Kurfürstendamm in 1904.
Cassirer was elected chairman of the Secession in 1912 and staged what probably was its most impressive exhibition in 1913.
Cassirer's brother Bruno's publishing house served both Secessionists and the new Expressionist poets as did the magazines, Kunst  und Künstler and Pan, that he edited.
During the war the Cassirers edited the liberal and patriotic periodicals Bildermann and Kriegzeit.
Cassirer was a friend and sponsor of the young architect Erich Mendelsohn.
In sort of a virtuous circle, talented Jewish architects such as Alfred Breslauer or the gifted (designer of Wertheim department store in the Leipziger Strasse) Alfred Messel would build single family houses in the Tiergarten for Jewish art dealers such as Alfred Flechtheim (also editor of Der Querschnitt) and Cassirer.
The latter's own gallery was in his house in Viktoriastrasse not far from a whole set of galleries and new theatres in Berlin's ‘alten Westen’ around Lützowplatz and Potsdamer Strasse.
Jewish funders of the arts such as Rudolf Mosse and Jules and James Simon, Mycenae for the national Kaiser-Friedrich museum, lived in villas nearby.
Closely connected with expressionism, and hence in opposition to ‘conservatives’ like Liebermann, as well as with the political left was Herwarth Walden (née Levine).
Walden, born in Berlin, a musician who also wrote some plays and poems, was the some time lover of the esteemed (Jewish) expressionist poet Else Lasker-Schüler.
Walden, whose nickname ‘der Bürgerschreck’ seems to have been well earned to judge from Kokoschka's portrait of him, was in his socialism and later communism a forerunner of the much more politicized cultural scene of the Weimar Republic.
His own aesthetic was based on Viennese art historian Alois Riegl's idea of an absolute Kunstwollen, in which art, based on an inner vision, takes the place of religion.
Walden's magazine Der Sturm regularly featured Brücke painters and especially Oskar Kokoschka.
Under the aegis of Sturm, and financed by, among others, Karl Kraus, Walden ran a publishing house, a bookstore, and a series of exhibitions.
In the theatre, Jews provided the institutions that helped Berlin emerge as a world-class cultural city.
And again these modernist institutions of culture in civil society were set up distinctly apart from, and largely opposed to, the state.
As in painting, the shift to the modern in Berlin theatre took two steps.
The first step here, paralleling the Secession, was the constitution of the Freie Bühne movement, which was associated with naturalism in the theatre.
The second was the break with naturalism, led by Max Reinhardt, which paved the way for expressionist theatre.
The state sponsored, bürgerliche, equivalent of historicism in painting and architecture, was the poetic idealism of Goethe and Schiller with its beautification and classicized, non-realist, dialogue.
The order and poetic classicism of this conventional theatre was disrupted by a ‘scandal’ which paralleled that of the exhibition of Munch's painting in the visual arts.
This was the uproar caused in official circles and among the public by the performance of a play written by naturalist dramatist Gerhart Hauptmann in the Lessing Theater in 1889.
In the same year, four men, all Jews, convened an historic meeting in the Cafe Schiller.
The men were Theodor Wolff (later Chief Editor of the Berliner Tageblatt), Maximilian Harder (actor and journalist), publisher Samuel Fischer, and director Otto Brahm.
The meeting was historic in its establishment of the basic conditions for the creation of the ‘Freie Bühne’, which itself was the institutional embodiment of modern theatre in Berlin, or, in Zivier's words, ‘der Ausgangpunkt aller späteren deutschen Theater-Erneuerungen’.
Brahm became Berlin's leading naturalist director.
His naturalism was intended to make the audience ‘forget the theatre’, and featured sparse sets and underplayed gestures.
Berlin naturalism, which thrived in the framework of the ‘Verein der Freie Bühne’, a large proportion of whose sponsorship and membership was Jewish, was called ‘Arme-Leute Theater’ and ‘Juden-Theater’by its opponents.
In 1900 Brahm's pupil, Max Reinhardt, met with a group of other young actors in Berlin's Cafe Monopol.
This group had come to oppose what they saw as the ‘sterile-naturalistic’ style of Brahm's productions.
Strindberg had in 1888 called for an ‘intimate theatre’.
And Reinhardt followed suit and had Peter Behrens rebuild Arnim's Theater (Unter den Linden 44) according to his specifications.
The theatre was rebuilt in a heavily ornamental classicist style, complete with doric columns and decorative masks.
The stage was small and the auditorium had only 366 seats.
Reinhardt's first big public success was an anti-naturalistic production of Gorki's Nachtasyl.
Working with Jewish theatre architect Oskar Kaufmann, Reinhardt was the first to make wide use of a fully ausgebauten Bühnenapparates, of full plasticity of scenery and new adventurous use of lighting.
Reinhardt put on, not just modernist, but a great variety of plays.
The most highly respected expressionist director, working  mostly in the post-war years, was Leopold Jessner, who also was Jewish.
Jessner was well known for doing the classics in expressionist form.
One could multiply examples ad infinitum in regard to Jewish presence in Berlin's modernist institutions of culture.
In the press Rudolf Mosse and Leopold Ullstein published the two big liberal Berlin dailies, the Berliner Tageblatt and Vossische Zeitung.
Gould this liberal press have been a factor in the very high vote among the Berlin bourgeoisie for the left-liberal Freisinnige Volkspartei in the years immediately before World War I?
These liberal dailies employed a high proportion of Jewish journalists, a number of whom as critics helped create an audience for the new movements in painting, theatre, literature, and music.
Other important institutions were public places in which avant-gardes could meet, like the legendary ‘Neopathetisches Cabarett’.
The latter was more than anything else a showcase for younger expressionist poets like Georg Heym.
Beginning in 1910, it put on performances as often as once a month, at which texts from, for example, Nietzsche, Rilke, Wedekind, and others were read.
Younger figures, perhaps above all the exciting young Jewish expressionist poet, Jakob von Hoddis, dominated the organization, the ‘Neuen Club’, which was responsible for these events.
These would draw as many as 250 people, including established names such as Karl Kraus, Heinrich Mann, and Else Lasker-Schüler, and received wide press coverage.
Most of the leading active members of the Neuen Club were Jews, several of whom wrote for publications like Sturm, Demokrat, Revolution, and Aktion.
CONCLUSION
Thus in the two and one-half decades prior to World War I a whole set of modernist institutions of culture were forged in German civil society, often in opposition to the state, and unusually often by Jews.
When the fighting broke out, Berlin had come almost from nowhere to become a world-class culture centre.
The sharp opposition of state and civil society was fundamentally altered in the years of the Weimar Republic when a much friendlier set of public bodies served partly as framework for the Bauhaus, and for Brecht's and Piscator's theatre.
The  transmogrified complexion of the state in the Weimar years is well reflected in the membership of the Akademie der Künste.
Heinrich Mann was chair of the Literature section, which included Alfred Döblin, Thomas Mann, Franz Werfel, and Jakob Wasserman.
The Section for Visual Arts included Kokoschka, Mendelsohn, Pechstein, Bruno Taut, Ernst Barlach, Otto Dix, Ernst Ludwig Kirchner, Kollwitz, Mies van der Rohe, and Schmitt-Rottluff.
The Music Section included Arnold Schoenberg.
The reassertion of the state/civil society opposition is documented by the fact that all of the above names either quit or were excluded from the Akademie in 1933.
We have come full circle now.
In our delineation of different national and urban modernisms in Paris, Vienna, and Berlin, we began with discussion of the Bürgertum or bourgeoisie and have ended with discussion of bürgerliche Gesellschaft or civil society.
At the very beginning, modernism was defined in terms of the disruption of bourgeois identity.
What differentiated national modernisms was (1) where the disruptive force came from and (2) what kind of identity was disrupted.
I argue along with T. J. Clark that Parisian modernism is most distinctive in terms of the disruptive force.
This force in the French case was the ‘popular classes’ and especially the petite bourgeoisie.
In Vienna, what was most distinctive was the type of bourgeois identity, which I argued was a ‘baroque’ identity, largely conditioned, as Carl Schorske noted, by the salient presence of a Catholic court nobility.
In Berlin, distinctive too was the type of bourgeois identity, in the German case conditioned by the salience of the state.
Discussion of the state led then to consideration of the state/civil society relationship.
What however is the implication of all this for the relationship of Bürgertum, or bourgeoisie, and bürgerliche Gesellschaft?
I understand bürgerliche Gesellschaft in the Anglo-American sense of ‘civil society’.
When Anglo-American political analysts use this term ‘civil society’, they tend often to refer to the example of contemporary Poland.
Here Solidarity has represented the flourishing of civil society against the state.
Civil society in this context means the whole package promised by an enlightened liberalism including full citizenship rights, free trade unions, representative government, and a culture largely autonomous of state control.
This is what I understand ‘bürgerliche Gesellschaft’ to mean.
As a general model, then, it might be fair to say that in early capitalism the bourgeoisie is very often on the side of the development of civil society, and in later capitalism it is often opposed to such development.
If the development of civil society in later capitalism means the growth of strong trade unions, socialist parties and a welfare state, then the bourgeoisie might find this disruptive to its material interests.
If the development of civil society means in later capitalism, say from the end of the nineteenth century, the flourishing of an independent cultural and aesthetic sphere, then this might, as I argued at length above, be disruptive to the ideal interests, indeed to the very identity, of the bourgeoisie.
This tension, or, if you will, this contradiction between bourgeois and civil society, seems to be written into the logic of development of Western societies.
In the earlier centuries of modernity, modernization entails a partial autonomization of cultural and aesthetic spheres, so that culture is constitutive of bourgeois identity.
With further autonomization and the advent of modernism, culture becomes either inaccessible and thus no longer can function positively to construct such a stable identity, or more commonly, as argued above, modernist culture comes to undermine and destabilize bourgeois identity.
If the difference of interests of bourgeois and worker is the social contradiction of capitalism, then the advent of modernist culture is what Daniel Bell has rightly called the cultural contradiction of capitalism.
And both of these contradictions of capitalism are built out of a developing incompatibility of bourgeoisie and civil society.
The national bourgeoisie of any country can be divided, following Max Weber's and more recently Pierre Bourdieu's analyses, into two fractions: one which is rooted in ‘economic capital’ and the other which is rooted in ‘cultural capital’.
German social  historians refer to the economic-capital fraction as the ‘Wirtschaftsbürgertum’ and the cultural-capital fraction as the Bildungsbürgertum.
Given this context, then how are we to perceive the German case?
Two factors, it may be said, separate out the German bourgeoisie from its counterparts in other Western and Eastern nations.
The first is the inordinately strong position of the Bildungsbürgertum (dependent on ‘cultural capital’) in comparison with the Wirtschaftsbürgertum (based on ‘economic capital’).
The second is the extraordinary presence, so to speak, of the state as very part and parcel of the Bürgertum.
In  England, in France, in Austria, the aristocracy had very much to do with the construction of bourgeois identity.
Not so in Germany.
The very radical separation of the middle classes and aristocracy in the latter left the state (and the state not conceived as a set of representative institutions along lines of the American model) a large space in the creation of bourgeois identity.
Further, in Germany, unlike in the Anglo-Saxon world, the Bildungsbürgertum existed as a major force historically prior to the Wirtschaftsbürgertum.
The very strength of the German Bildungsbürgertum meant that it served not only as ‘organic intellectual’ to the entire Bürgertum, but that it (unlike in other countries) was to be the hegemonic force imparting its own specific type of unity to the whole of the Bürgertum.
That is, in Bourdieu's terms, the Bildungsbürge1tum dominated the ‘habitus’ of the German Bürgertum much like the Wirtschaftsbürgertum dominated the habitus of its Anglo-American counterparts.
Finally, this Bildungsbürgertum, much more than elsewhere, subscribed to statist values.
No other country had such a highly educated corps of civil servants as had Germany.
And in no other country did civil servants (Beamten) comprise such a high proportion of the highly educated.
The threefold character of the German Bürgertum — strong state, strong Bildungsbürgertum, statist Bildungsbürgertum — made the situation for cultural modernism and for civil society trebly difficult.
What I am trying to argue is that in Germany the contradiction between bourgeoisie and civil society — as exemplified above in the contradiction of state and cultural modernism — was much much sharper than elsewhere.
In Poland, 1981 represented the revenge of the state, not just on the organized working class, but on civil society in general.
In Germany, 1933 was not just the revenge of the state on the working class, on cultural modernism, and on the Jews.
It also was the revenge of the bourgeoisie on civil society.
MODERNIZATION AND POSTMODERNIZATION IN THE WORK OF PIERRE BOURDIEU
The number one growth area in sociology at the beginning of this closing decade of the twentieth century — in the USA, in Britain, in Germany, and surely elsewhere too — is the sociology of culture.
And the most influential sociologist of culture is, without parallel, Pierre Bourdieu.
If ‘culture studies’, in its broadest sense, is represented paradigmatically by Michel Foucault in philosophy, by Jacques Derrida in modern languages, by Roland Barthes and Umberto Eco in semiotics, by Christian Metz in film theory, Henri Lefebvre in urbanism, and Jacques Lacan in psychoanalysis, then it is represented in sociology by Pierre Bourdieu.
Bourdieu is well known for his work on tribal society in Algeria, for his studies of education, his sociology of art, and his definitive tome, Distinction, on the consumer-side of social stratification.
He is well known for his theoretical considerations of the ‘habitus’ and ‘cultural capital’.
But ‘modernization and postmodernization’?
Surely no topic would seem to be less down the alley of this intellectually peripatetic social scientist.
Bourdieu has written on traditional societies and modern society, but does not at all on the face of it seem to have a theory of modernization.
Numerous analysts have castigated him, not just for the absence of a theory of modernization, but for the absence of any sort of mechanism and account of social change in his work.
And Professor Bourdieu, in response, has claimed that in fact social stasis is a more prevalent phenomenon than social change in empirical reality, and that he has been thus justified in his pronounced concern over his career with the explanation of  such social stasis.
Pierre Bourdieu has also significantly not participated in the debates on modernism and postmodernism.
He is sceptical of the existence of any such thing as postmodern culture.
He seems to hold the writings of the ‘popes’ of postmodernism, Baudrillard and Lyotard, in ill-disguised contempt.
He has in addition little time for the critical utopianism of Habermas.
This chapter refuses however to take either Bourdieu or his critics at their word.
In it I shall argue that there is a theory of modernization and postmodernization implicit in Bourdieu's work.
And that, whether Professor Bourdieu likes it or not, we can learn a lot about modernism and postmodernism by close analysis of its corpus.
Modernism and postmodernism refer to two sets of phenomena.
The first is to a set of phenomena taking place in society.
The second is to a set of phenomena that characterize social theory.
The aim of this chapter is to address both of these in the work of Bourdieu.
Thus we shall look, on the one -hand, at analyses of modernization and postmodernization in society.
And, on the other, at whether Bourdieu's theory itself can be characterized as modernist or postmodernist.
On this count it would seem that his repeated professions of scientificity would place Bourdieu firmly in the modernist camp.
I shall argue, however, much the contrary.
That is, I shall argue that the power/knowledge assumptions which form the very basis of Bourdieu's conceptual framework place him much closer to Foucault and the postmodernist end of the theoretical spectrum.
This said, the chapter divides into four parts.
The first and second parts look at the process of modernization in Bourdieu's work.
They do so via his notion of the ‘field’.
Here I argue that Bourdieu's fields are very much like Weber's economic, aesthetic, political, etc. ‘life orders’(Lebensordnungen).
And that modernization is a process of the progressive differentiation of these fields from an initial unity in traditional societies.
Bourdieu speaks of a number of fields: of, for example, an aesthetic field, a legal field, a political field, a cultural field, a field of education, and a religious field.
Each of these fields is conceived on the lines of a ‘market’, with producers and consumers of the symbolic goods produced in the field.
For example the field in art consists of painters, purchasers of art  works, as well as critics, museum curators, and the like.
The point is that the process of modernization and differentiation is also one of the autonomization of fields.
That is, in modern societies the various fields have their own autonomous logics of development.
In modernization they take on what Weber called a certain Eigengesetzlichkeit (self-legislation).
The third section of the chapter takes leave of Bourdieuan modernism to consider his accounts, explicit or implicit, of traditional and of postmodern society.
Here we see that in traditional society, power operates according to the principles of a sort of action theory, in which one social actor exercises power over another.
While in modern society, power is conceived on the lines of a structuralism, in which it is impersonal structures that exercise power over individuals.
If modernization is characterized by the differentiation of Bourdieu's fields, then postmodernization, we shall see, would be characterized by their de-differentiation.
And the pervasion of such a principle of de-differentiation presumes a new set of social actors, the new, post-industrial middle classes whose interests are furthered by such a process.
The fourth and final section takes leave of society to look at the realm of theory.
It does so via Bourdieu's critique of structuralism and his considerations of reflexivity.
Here we see that Bourdieu criticizes structuralism for its assumptions, not of too little, but of too much scientific objectivity.
And that his view of reflexivity, unlike that of, say, Habermas, presupposes reflections, not on the content of a scientific proposition or a social norm, but on the position in social power relations of the actors responsible for the creation of that norm or proposition.
In both cases Bourdieu's assumptions of the linkages of knowledge to power place him, I shall contend, rather firmly in the camp of, not the structuralists but the poststructuralists, of not the modernists but the postmodernists.
MODERNIZATION: MARKETS AND FIELDS
The notion of a ‘cultural economy’ informs pretty much the whole of Pierre Bourdieu's sociology of culture.
Bourdieu is, as I shall suggest below, importantly a sociologist of modernization.
As such he works from a sort of dichotomy of traditional and  modern societies, the former based on his anthropological studies in Algeria.
An economic heuristic informs his analyses of both traditional and modern societies; traditional societies being understood in the unmediated exchange of gifts, and modern societies in terms of exchanges mediated by markets.
Bourdieu's articles on markets preceded by a few years his pieces on ‘fields’.
The work on markets was very concentrated around the early 1970s, at about the time of appearance of Outline of a Theory of Practice.
The work on fields, apart from the very early Temps modernes piece, is more prevalent from the mid 1970s to the present.
The work on fields is of course key in the context of the issue of structure vs. agency because the fields are Bourdieu's structures.
The markets, while not identical with fields, provide a skeleton framework for the latter.
So let us look a bit more closely at the markets before we go on to the fields.
Key to the work on markets are considerations of change in the world religions and in painting.
Bourdieu in the early 1970s was much influenced by Weber's sociology of religion.
He recast, in a piece published in English only in 1987, Weber's model of religious change in the framework of cultural markets.
Thus Weber's (bureaucratic) priests and (charismatic) prophets are producers of ‘symbolic goods’ competing for consumers among the ‘laity’.?
In this we already have the three elements of the economy of culture:(1) the supply-side or the producers of cultural goods,(2) the symbolic goods or products themselves, and (3) the demand-side, the consumers of cultural goods.
The symbolic goods produced here will only have much of a chance of realizing their value if they stand in a relation of ‘elective affinity’ to the consumers; that is, to their ideal and material interests.
Bourdieu's re-working of Weber keeps intact the Weberian conceptualization of social change via the struggle between bureaucratic priests and charismatic prophets for the allegiance of the socially stratified masses.
I think the benchmark statement on the cultural economy was published in 1971, ‘Le marché des biens symboliques’.
In this article on painting, Bourdieu explicitly follows the Weberian sociology of religion paradigm.
The prophets are the modernist and proto-modernist painters in late nineteenth-century France.
The priests of course are the academic painters.
In this piece Bourdieu also introduces the institutions of culture as a part of  symbolic production.
The institutions of art here are ‘instances of conservation and consecration’.
The  Académie Française on this count he notes is similar to (Weber's bureaucratic) church.
The institutions include museums, newspaper critics, dealers/ gallery owners, and the art colleges.
Orthodox painters and avant-garde ‘heresiarchs’ in this are in competition for the consecration of the institutions.
Such symbolic markets for artistic goods and their corresponding ‘fields’ do not exist in traditional, ‘un-differentiated’societies, but only come to exist with differentiation in the process of modernization.
That is, in major part, modernization for Bourdieu — and again Weber's conception in ‘Politics as a Vocation’, ‘Science as a Vocation’, and the methodological articles on the world religions serve as a model — lies in the differentiation and autonomization of fields.
It is fair to say that Bourdieu's fields (the scientific field, the political field, intellectual field, and so on) are more autonomous from class interests than Althusser's superstructures (and indeed Althusser is quoted more often in this context by Bourdieu than Weber) but possess less autonomy, i.e. a smaller degree of Eigengesetzlichkeit than Weber's ‘Lebensordnungen’.
Now this very autonomization means for Bourdieu that in one given area there are two ‘fields of production’.
There is on the one hand the ‘de-limited (restreinte) field of production’ and, on the other, the ‘large-scale field of production’.
The delimited field of production is co-extensive with the specialized field itself, while large-scale production is for the broader ‘social field’.
In the delimited field, production is for the other ‘producers’, i.e. the agents and institutions in the field.
That is, in the delimited field the supply-side is also, and at the same time, the demand side.
In the art field of late nineteenth-century Paris, then, in the delimited field, bohemians of the avant-garde made paintings for other bohemian and avant-garde painters.
Others in this delimited market include academic and avant-garde galleries, museums, and magazines, and catalogues, as well as academic painters.
The critics, the galleries, the museum catalogues consecrate certain types of art through their powers of ‘nomination’.
They thus have the power to ‘name’ schools of art, to impart value to them, and to impose these nominations in an act of ‘symbolic violence’on the ordinary consumers in the wider social field.
The delimited field thus consists of agents and institutions  and involves three types of struggle — those between ‘makers’ of art (between, say, makers of consecrated art, makers of avant-garde, heretical art, and makers of ‘middle brow’art (‘art moyen’) such as photography, cinema, and jazz, which also is struggling for consecration by the institutions), those between makers and ‘marketers’(in essence the institutions), and those between marketers.
What mediates between the de-limited artistic field (and the other properly cultural fields) and the large social field, in other words what mediates between the field of production and consumption, is for Bourdieu the education system.
Unlike the institutions of art which help produce cultural objects, the education system produces not cultural objects, but consumers of art to match the cultural products.
That is the education system produces a ‘habitus’, in this case an ‘art habitus’.
What is inculcated in education for consumers of art is on the reception side and is a set of classificatory schema which enables the consumer to ‘decipher’ the work of art.
This is a set of codes which deal not only with the formal aspects of a work of art but also with its iconography and iconology.
The more developed the art habitus, Bourdieu writes, the more finely one can classify.
If modernization entails the differentiation of an autonomous aesthetic field, then the appreciation of the (modern) art that this brings about entails the inculcation of a ‘differentiated’ habitus.
The visitor to an art museum without any such training or differentiated habitus uses the classifications with which he/she perceives every-day reality to perceive the work of art.
Thus his/her appreciation of perhaps a landscape, but the dismissal of, say, a Pollock or Mondrian.
The field of artistic production is, like other fields, relatively autonomous from the social field.
Note here that Weber's religious field was also only relatively autonomous.
Productive interests in the artistic field would find ‘homologies’ with class interests in the social field.
Because the popular classes are in most cases effectively excluded, on account of relatively undifferentiated cultural capital, from even the large-scale social field of artistic production, the interests which pertain here are those of the two main fractions of the dominant class: the bourgeoisie and the intellectuals.
The former tend to have homologies, that is be the relevant consumers of (or have an elective affinity with) the  productions of ‘consecrated artists’(priests), while the intellectuals have homologies with the avant-garde or ‘artistes maudits’.
Striking in this context is the recent massive influx of members of both fractions of the dominant class (and even considerable numbers of petits bourgeois) into the delimited field of cultural production itself.
Consider the increasing employment in newspaper and magazine journalism, television (especially with de-regulation), the music industry, part-and full-time musicians, video and advert production, commercial and community arts organization, expanding number of museum employees, and the like.
The de-limited field is itself now forming a mass market.
Hence the success of ‘specialist, broadcasts on, for example, Britain's innovative Channel Four.
STRUGGLES FOR MODERNIST AUTONOMIZATION
Just how Bourdieu's fields (and markets) work can be encapsulated in the following statements.
(1) The specific and differentiated fields are sites of collective symbolic struggles and individual strategies.
(2) The aim of such strategies and struggles is to produce (or be associated with the production of, in the case of institutions and marketers) valuable cultural goods.
(3) The value of a symbolic good depends upon the value which is assigned to it by the relevant consumer community.
(4) These value judgements are in most fields determined by the amount of symbolic capital that the producer (or producers) has accumulated.
(5) Victory in a symbolic struggle means that one's symbolic goods have been judged to possess more value than those of one's competitors.
(6) The fruits of such victory is the right to impose one's symbolic goods on the social field; that is, to exercise symbolic violence on — and this entails the complicity of those subject to such violence — the ‘consumers’ in the social field.
How much ‘relative autonomy’?
Let us unpack these propositions in terms of the various fields and then scrutinize their implications.
The above paragraph describes what is constant across the whole range of Bourdieuan fields.
The central axis of their variation is their degree of autonomy.
Bourdieu is not entirely consistent in his assessment  of just what this autonomy is from.
At points it is from the dominant classes in the ‘field of power’(e.g. in Homo Academicus).
At points it is from the entirety of the social field.
The degree of such autonomy is neatly captured by Bourdieu via the economic heuristic.
The more autonomous a field is, the greater the extent to which production in that field is only for other producers and not for consumers in the social field (or field of power).
Thus the most autonomous of fields is the scientific field.
The academic field and artistic field (high culture) occupy rather intermediate positions, autonomy in the former being from the field of power and in the latter from consumers in the social field.
Still less autonomous is the legal field.
And least autonomous, and the relevant field here is the social field (all classes in the social field), is the political field.
Struggles and strategies in the fields have at stake not just the value of symbolic goods but also the degree of autonomy of a given field.
For example as the scientific field emerged historically from the religious field, some agents struggled against others for such autonomization.
In general, ‘prophets’ tend to gain by the autonomization of fields, while ‘priests’stand to lose.
Thus the various ‘secession’ movements in the arts (Paris, Berlin, Vienna) struggled for autonomy from the field of power, while those associated with the ‘academies’struggled against it.
Or in the academic field, the ‘priests’ associated with the Ecole nationale d'administration (ENA), the Sorbonne, the Foundation nationale des sciences politiques, the aggrégation, and the teaching and reproduction function have tended to struggle against autonomization from the field of power.
(n contrast the ‘prophets’ of L'Ecole des hautes études en sciences sociales, the doctorat du troisième cycle, and research and cultural production have struggled for autonomy.
The scientific field is the paradigm case of autonomy.
The more a field is autonomous from the social field and field of power, the more, Bourdieu notes, the field speaks the language of science.
This is the logic of ‘true and false’ instead of the ‘friend/foe’logic of the field of power.
Yet the main stake in the scientific field, according to Bourdieu, is not the production of valid statements but the ‘socially recognized capacity to speak and act legitimately’.
That is at the same time the power of imposition of the definition of science; that is, the power to draw the limits of the field, to decide who is in and who  is out.
The stake then is the ‘monopoly’ of ‘scientific competence’or ‘authority’.
If these are the fruits of victory, then what is the path to victorious symbolic struggle?
It is not, at least not in the first instance, the formulation of clear, precise, and coherently related propositions backed up by sufficient evidence and argument.
It is instead the accumulation of ‘scientific capital’.
The latter is less a cultural capital of scientific competences than a symbolic capital, based on the prestige of the university one went to, the graduate school, one's references, one's membership on prestigious editorial boards, grant committees, and institutes.
The sort of habitus which, it seems, would enable this sort of accumulation is one not primarily structured by scientific competence but one attuned to the accumulation of symbolic capital.
Bourdieu argues, however, that such a state of affairs would tend, not to impede, but to promote ‘scientific progress’.
Why?
First, because the competition of ‘priests’ with ‘conservation’strategies, and ‘prophets’with ‘subversion strategies’, for scientific symbolic capital tends to encourage innovation.
Second, because of the inculcation of scientific cultural capital, in the form of scientific method, which used in an agent's own selfish interests helps promote cross-control of results.
Scientific truth then is relegated to the place of an unintended consequence of the instrumental (and not substantive) rationality of agents in the economy of scientific practice.
Bourdieu scores some penetrating insights into legal practice in his consideration of the forms of autonomy of the juridical field.
Its comparative absence of autonomy is underscored by the very absence of ‘prophets’ in the field.
The centrality of hierarchical institutions in this field (and its closeness to the field of power) means that collective struggles will be between classes of ‘priests’ safely ensconced in institutions.
Two of the main protagonists here are the ‘professors’ and the ‘judges’.
The professors have an interest in autonomization and the elaboration of a ‘pure theory of law’ à la Hans Kelsen.
The judges are closer to the power field of the ‘friend versus foe’ relation between litigants.
British notions of equity and fair play are evidence not of a modernized, but of a traditional, undifferentiated legal system, in that equity and fair play are the language of the field of power, of friend versus foe.
If Britain is the paradigmatic country of the judges, Germany is probably that of the professors.
But the general trend in most countries is that of legal modernization, and hence the ‘professorial’ transformation of the friend versus foe logic of the power field into the true/false logic of the autonomous scientific field.
This displacement imparts to law a certain universality which gives to it symbolic efficacy in removing, or at least concealing, its arbitrariness.
At stake in the legal field is ‘the right to say the law’, which is an ‘act of nomination’.
Acts of nomination are at the same time acts of ‘classification’.
And the means by which agents in the legal field can obtain this stake is through the accumulation of symbolic-legal capital, mostly in the form of institutional positions.
Whereas statements in the autonomous scientific field are descriptive statements, legal utterances are performatives in their very effects of power over the social.
This power is of course symbolic power.
What is then the demand-side (in the social) of the large-scale field of juridical production?
It is on the one hand among the ‘profanes’ who consume legal services in their litigation struggles.
And on the other hand the less litigious masses among the laity who are complicit in their belief in the universality of these legal symbols.
The political field is the least autonomous of fields.
This means that it is furthest from the logic of true/false and must speak the friend/foe vernacular.
It means most of all for Bourdieu that the value of political products is largely determined outside of the political field.
But even the political market tends to increase in autonomy from the social field during the process of modernization — the Michelsian oligarchic mass party was one step in this direction; its recent supersession by politics as presentation through the media is a further step.
Yet it is still the least autonomous of fields.
The value then of a political product (produced of course by the professionals in the political field) is dependent on two factors:(1) the symbolic capital of the political agent and his/her party (political-symbolic capital includes the holding of party posts and the holding of local and less major national offices; its maximization entails hyperconformity to social norms) and (2) the extent to which these political symbols (Bourdieu likens them to ‘signifiers’) corresponds to the interests and central meanings (‘signifieds’) of stratified consumers in the social.
Note the similarity of this to ‘elective affinities’ in the religious field.
What are these political products?
They are symbolic products or in some sense ‘signifiers’ and include ‘positions, programmes, analyses, commentaries, concepts, and events’produced by the professionals (including journalists and  psephologists , etc.) of the field.
These political symbols have three functions vis-à-vis their relevant ‘reception classes’ in the social world.
They are (i) instruments of perception,(ii) instruments of expression, and (iii) instruments of mobilization.
Instruments of mobilization are crucial for class formation.
Though, structurally, classes already exist through ‘objective relations’ in the social field, what Bourdieu calls ‘empirical classes’do not yet exist.
They instead have to be ‘made’, formed into working class parties and trade unions, and this entails the work of professionals from the political field.
TRADITION AND POSTMODERNITY
What Bourdieu means by modernization and modernity is clarified through consideration of his analysis of traditional, tribal societies.
His model here comes of course from his early anthropological studies of Kabylia in Algeria.
As in modern societies, in traditional societies interaction operates via exchanges, and indeed, as in modern societies, via symbolic exchanges.
Only these exchanges are mediated by the ‘market’ in modernity, while they are unmediated in tribal societies.
Four of the most significant exchanges in traditional societies for Bourdieu are:(1) gifts,(2) injury,(3) wives, and (4) land.
The first two of these follow the logic of Marcel Mauss's gift.
The most significant gifts in Kabylia were those given for weddings, births, and circumcisions.
If the receiver of the gift cannot respond in due time with a ‘counter-gift’(counter gifts cannot be given too soon after gifts, because this would imply a logic of calculation which would deplete the symbolic force of the exchange) then the giver is in a position of creditor and the receiver in one of debtor.
And the creditor would hold ‘symbolic power’ over the debtor.
The creditor's honour or symbolic capital would have undergone ‘expanded reproduction’, while the debtor's symbolic capital would have experienced ‘disaccumulation’.
The exchange of injuries occasions a not dissimilar cycle, but this time one of offence and riposte.
When a challenge has  not, at a certain point in time, been countered by a riposte, then the person who has suffered injury has come under the symbolic power of the challenger.
And the latter stands as a ‘creditor’ in relation to him.
Both the cycle of gifts and of offence and revenge are aimed at the preservation or accumulation of symbolic capital.
Exchange of women and land partly are motivated by economic profit, though symbolic profit is the prime objective.
The difference is partly that gifts and the offence-vengeance cycle are routes to intragenerational mobility, while exchanges of women and wives have more to do with intergenerational mobility.
Symbolic capital has a much more central place in traditional than in modern societies.
In tribal societies lineages commonly subordinate their material to their symbolic interests.
For example, if one branch of a lineage puts up some ‘core land’(i.e. land of substantial symbolic meaning for the lineage's patrimony) for sale, another branch will buy it instead of some more fertile outlying land in order to maintain intact the honour (or symbolic capital) of the lineage.
Or material profits involved in the break-up of the landholdings of a lineage would be sacrificed to the symbolic profits associated with keeping the lineage's patrimony intact.
In much of his treatment of Kabylia Bourdieu is loath to speak of symbolic capital at all.
He rather speaks of ‘honour’.
Bourdieu writes, for example, that the habitus in traditional societies enables the agent to ‘produce all the practices and judgments of honour’.
That the ‘sense of honour’ is a ‘permanent disposition, embedded in agents’very bodies'.
That not the obedience to rules, but the ‘sense of honour’ enables agents to ‘engender all the practices consistent with the logic of challenge and riposte’.
Modernization as process
Consistent with a whole tradition in social theory, modernization according to Bourdieu is a process of differentiation.
The first principle of this is that the universe of ideas in traditional societies is characterized by one single undisputed ‘doxa’, while in modern societies principles of ‘heterodoxy’ and ‘orthodoxy’engage in struggle.
The immediate touchstone for this, as we noted above, seems to be Weber's logic of heterodox and  charismatic ‘prophets’ versus orthodox and bureaucratic ‘priests’.
Only Weber, unlike Durkheim (conscience collective) and Bourdieu, speaks little of an original moment of doxa.
The notion of heterodoxy versus orthodoxy as a ‘motor’ for modernization is integral to a theoretical genealogy which sees change as brought about by the tension of ‘ought’versus ‘is’, whether in Hegel's tension between the universal and the particular, jurisprudence's counterposition of positive law and natural law, or Adorno's well known ‘utopian moment’.
What is the significance of this in Bourdieu's systematic sociology?
The main principle of collective struggle in modernity (and in the fields), as we saw above, was that concerning heresy and orthodoxy.
Hence without the existence of heterodoxy and orthodoxy, collective struggles diminish greatly in importance in traditional societies.
The main Bourdieu categories of practice are ‘struggles’ and ‘strategies’.
Strategies have as aim the accumulation of (usually symbolic) capital.
Struggles aim at power and the imposition of a set of heterodox or orthodox norms and symbols.
In the absence of such competition, struggles are less likely to exist.
In primitive societies, practice for Bourdieu must then primarily be about strategy.
And indeed in much of his discussion of Kabylia (in his methodological writings) it is.
Strategies concern usually the lineage, or individuals within the lineage.
They are to maximize the lineage's accumulation of symbolic capital, and not primarily over principles of power over a whole society.
In modernity, Bourdieu's individuals and families may have strategies, but his social ‘classes’ and ‘groups’wage struggles.
In this sense ‘groups’ are far less important in traditional society.
Further, this conceptualization does proffer a mechanism for social change in modernity.
It even offers a model for change in the direction of an increase in rationality.
Thus traditional society assumes a ‘universe of doxa’.
But the struggle of heterodoxy and orthodoxy in modernity presumes a ‘universe of discourse’ and the necessity of ‘legitimation’.
Heterodoxy or heresy originally arises as opposed to doxa, which takes the shape of ‘orthodoxy’ to defend itself from the heretical challenge.
As orthodoxy, it must systematize its precepts and legitimate them.
So, in counterposition, must heterodoxy.
This opening for Habermas-like communicative rationality, however, is nipped in the bud by  Bourdieu's above-discussed imperative of the instrumentally rational accumulation of symbolic capital.
It does, though, present a genuine model for substantive social change.
What Bourdieu has in mind here is clearly not at all primarily the classificatory struggles concerning types of symbolic goods that form so much of the subject matter of Distinction (cf. also Un art moyen).
What he means is fundamental change of the class order of a society.
Indeed he says that the principle of ‘heresy’ enters a social formation either through cultural contact or through its indigenous class divisions.
Bourdieu's theory of heterodoxy/orthodoxy also concerns the representations or habitus of social agents.
As Durkheim and Mauss suggested, these ‘practical taxonomies’ are ‘transformed, misrecognizable forms of the real divisions (age, class, gender) of the social order’.
They are in traditional societies embodied in ‘mythico-religious systems’ such as rites of passage (age) and cosmetics and clothing (gender).
In turn they ‘contribute to the reproduction of order by producing…practices adjusted to those divisions’.
In the universe of doxa of primitive societies there is ‘full correspondence of (such) mental structures’ to doxa and thus a relatively undifferentiated habitus.
In modernity, to leave space for the production and reception of heterodoxy, this full correspondence must no longer exist and the habitus becomes differentiated.
Postmodernism
I believe that Bourdieu's conceptual framework opens up the social-scientific study of postmodernism in several ways.
The key to the analysis is that new entrants into both fractions of the dominant class as well as a number of petits bourgeois would be apposite reception classes for postmodernist culture.
These would be mainly among the culture producers of the new middle classes.
These groups would be involved in a ‘demand-side’ classificatory struggle with the more established members of the dominant classes whose aesthetic tastes would be for high modernist art.
Mike Featherstone was the first, to my knowledge, to develop this argument.
John Urry and I then broadened it and transformed it to make it the cornerstone of our chapter on postmodernism in The End of Organized Capitalism, especially  by locating it within a framework of a book which is essentially a comparative political economy of advanced capitalist societies.
This idea has also been developed by a number of urban sociologists and geographers.
The main points of the explanation that I would suggest are the following.
(1) The new entrants to the middle classes who are the audience for postmodernist culture are members of the post-industrial middle classes.
The new middle classes of industrial capitalism produced symbols which helped realize the value of industrial commodities.
The post-industrial middle classes produce symbols which help realize the value of other symbols.
(2) The post-modern culture which these social classes consume (e.g. in architecture and painting) is at the same time middle-brow culture (art moyen) and an avant-garde challenge to orthodox modernism.
So the classificatory struggles involved both on supply and demand side here take a particularly complex form.
(3) These new classes are created on account of, and as conditions of, the accumulation of capital in the contemporary, post-industrial and post-Fordist era.
There are several factors which directly connect postmodernism and the new mode of economic regulation.
For example, shifts in the work ethic.
Or the rise of ‘specialized consumption’.
Or the shift from ‘producer capitalism’ to consumer capitalism, in which, for example, the moment of distribution has come to assert itself versus the moment of production.
But perhaps the most important element connecting economy and culture are the (new) classes themselves with their material (economic) and ideal (cultural) interests.
One side of social class is thus economic, the other side symbolic, rather like the two sides of goods themselves.
This sort of framework attributes a much greater importance to the real, existing economy than Bourdieu's own analyses.
(4) This plays itself out in spatial terms in the restructuration of the centre of our great cities and the creation of a large group of central-city dwelling ‘yuppies’ among the post-industrial middle classes.
This arises first from the economic effects of the accumulation of capital.
That is, post-industrial growth has brought about a second wave of ‘tertiarization’ of our cities, in which massive extension of office building has marked the 1980s, often in postmodern architecture.
At the same time there has been  the renovation (cf. the also postmodern, ‘heritage industry’) of living quarters not far from these post-industrial central city districts.
All of this is for economic reasons.
But the new gentrification (or yuppification) is conditional on the existence of social agents, the ‘gentrifiers’ themselves, who have to choose to move into these areas.
Part of the reason they do so is cultural and has to do with the elective affinity of their habituses with postmodern culture.
Hence economic growth and cultural change (post-Fordism and postmodernism) constitutes as it were the two sides of these new post-industrial urban middle classes.
(5) Postmodern culture seems to proclaim itself as an avant-garde at the same time as announcing that avant.gardes no longer exist.
A Bourdieuan framework can help make sense of this in several ways:
(a)
Reception of modernist culture necessitates a differentiated habitus and a sort of specialized cultural capital.
The untrained eye from ‘off the street’ cannot apply the classification of every-day life to high modernist art.
But postmodernist culture is often consumed, though differently (e.g. a film like Robocop), by both those (1) who use the categories of every-day life, and (2) those with the specialized classificatory frameworks who then see postmodernism in terms of transgression of modernist conventions.
(b)
If modernization means the differentiation of fields, postmodernization means at least the partial collapse of some fields into other fields.
For example, as I just indicated, the implosion of the aesthetic field into the social field.
Or, with ‘commodification’, the collapse of the aesthetic field into the economic field.
(c)
There has developed in the past decade or two a mass audience for previously specialized cultural forms.
Part of this results from the explosion of the student population, which is now a ‘morphological factor’ in the social field.
So are the very large numbers now working in the culture industries.
This makes up such a large audience that the de-limited field of cultural production is no longer de-limited.
This implies that heterodoxy or avant-gardes are, so to speak, merged into the mass audience.
That avant.
gardes of culture producers are not necessarily ahead of audiences or the demand-side because the latter itself is now a mass of culture producers.
(d)
The avant-garde was always opposed to the ‘academy’.
Now it seems to have become collapsed back into the academy.
Especially with the development of the European new universities and expansion of the human sciences from the 1960s.
Much of the ‘new academy’ has comprised, as Bourdieu maintains, downwardly mobile bourgeois, ‘poorly endowed with academic capital’, who otherwise would have been excluded from the academy.
But these latter in their occupation of positions in the academic field, as university teachers and as students, have provided a sort of bas-clergé for the new institutions and subjects, and have been important institutional mediators for the pervasion, previously of Marxism and now of postmodernism, in the intellectual field.
Again this is partly ‘middle brow’, partly sophisticated high-cultural, but surely not avant-garde.
(6) The reception of postmodernist culture is associated not only with a new type of habitus, but with a characteristically ‘de-centred’ habitus, in which classificatory schema can be loose and boundaries blurred.
Hence the social positions of the university's new class that Bourdieu describes in Homo Academicus are ‘ill defined’ and have their ‘future surrounded with an aura of indeterminacy and vagueness’which ‘allows students to perpetuate as long as possible…an indeterminacy of social identity’.
Bourdieu likens this to ‘the professions of writer or artist’, and notes that these agents often find places in the ‘new professions, ‘on the frontiers of the intellectual or the university field’.
The postmodern obsession with ‘surfaces’ could also link to the more general and growing indeterminacy of the middle classes who need to put on a Goffman-like front in order to impose their ‘nominative powers’.
(7) Finally the Bourdieu thesis which views modernization as a shift from the primacy of agency to that of structure is paralleled by the debates within contemporary architecture.
In these, for example, Peter Eisenman sees the premodern in terms of (classical) Ancient and not archaic tribal societies.
But here, similarly, Ancient architecture is humanist and modern architecture structuralist.
Postmodernism in this context endorses a new humanism.
MODERNISM/POSTMODERNISM AS SOCIAL THEORY
Pierre Bourdieu, perhaps more than anyone, has contributed to making significant inroads on the problem of the relationship of structure and agency.
The question that I should like to address is what are the implications of Bourdieu's standpoint on the structure/agency problem for issues of reflexivity, truth, and validity.
The answer, we shall see, is that Bourdieu's position on these matters is a far cry from Habermas's universalistic modernism.
It is instead much closer to the postmodern-type power/knowledge assumptions of Foucault.
In terms of setting up his particular theoretical perspective, Bourdieu's reactions to structuralism have been more crucial than his response to action theories.
Let us note at the outset that Bourdieu's anti-structuralism is vastly different from other such critiques.
He does not, as does, say, Jon Elster, challenge structuralism for its putative functionalism.
Indeed Bourdieu is wont to speak of functions or their functional equivalent.
Equally any body of work, such as Bourdieu's, to which the process of reproduction is so central, leaves itself open to attacks as functionalist.
But I do not think that Bourdieu's particular type of functionalism is open to Elster's criticisms.
Elster's critique of functionalism is largely based on the latter's absence of an ‘explanatory mechanism’ between the structure at issue and its reproduction-enabling effects.
Bourdieu goes a long way to remedying this defect in his treatment of actual practices in his structure (fields).
Equally, Bourdieu's complaints about structuralism are not couched in moral arguments about human freedom, which is surely the argument against structuralism that one was most accustomed to in the 1970s.
Bourdieu's critique of structuralism seems to have three central components.
The first is against structuralism's putative ‘objectivism’.
This is not unconnected with Bourdieu's objections to elitism in French higher education.
Philosophy and later social-science structuralism à la Lévi-Strauss are seen by Bourdieu to be, in their ‘objectivism’, somehow au dessus de la  mêlée.
Bourdieu notes that philosophers such as Althusser and Foucault followed Lévi-Strauss (Canguilhem was a model here) in their valuation of objectivist scientificity.
For Bourdieu the social scientist is as involved in the mêlée of every-day life as any other social actor.
This means ‘immediate investment’ in the practices of every-day life inside of the university, instead of the elitist adoption of an objectivist and ‘presidential’stance.
It also means subscription to Foucaultian power/knowledge assumptions that are difficult to square with demands for modernist universalism.
This first critique of structuralism thus concerns the subject and not the object of sociological investigation.
It is of enormous importance to Bourdieu, as evidenced in the considerable work involved in Homo Academicus, his recent articles on the Grandes Ecoles, and his work in general on the school system and the intellectual field.
That is, in his work concerning modern society, the major critique of structuralism is not so much one of the relative weights of structure versus agency in the social world, but regarding the absence of objectivity, free-floatingness, transcendence in scientific and intellectual work.
Seen in the perspective of free will versus determinism, this means paradoxically that scientists, intellectuals, and artists have less and not more free will than on the structuralist model.
That is, we are only producers in an economy of symbolic goods like any others.
And we are thus subject to the constraints of these symbolic markets.
Ironically, Bourdieu's action theory means we human scientists are more constrained by structures than in Lévi-Strauss's or Althusser's structuralism.
Bourdieu's second criticism of Lévi-Strauss is that he misses the very specific nature of the exercise of power in traditional societies.
In traditional societies, before the differentiation of fields, symbolic power is exercised intersubjectively.
This has been noted by sociologists from Weber — in his contrast of traditional and legal-rational domination — through Parsons's pattern variables.
Lévi-Strauss misses all this by reading power into structures even in traditional society.
Lévi-Strauss reads then a very modernist Kelsenian ‘legalism’ into pre-modern societies and hence misses their very characteristic form of power relations.
In tribal (and perhaps feudal) societies the exercise of power  necessitates the day-to-day work of symbolic violence through obligations and the incurrence of debts created by (a) the fit and (b) the protection that the superordinate offers the subordinate.
This includes the complex and continuous ‘weaving of affective bonds’.
In modern societies, by contrast, direct symbolic violence between subjects declines.
Instead, institutions reproduce domination.
‘Mechanisms in fields’‘assure their own reproduction by their very functioning’.
Power passes from persons to ‘titles’, to occupational ‘places’, to ‘things’.
If subjects exercise symbolic violence in traditional societies, fields or structures produce symbolic goods and hence exercise symbolic violence in modernity.
A number of other social theorists as well have attributed power to structures in modernity.
In this sense methodological individualist analyses of power wildly miss the point.
For Marx power of course was not in the capitalist but in (the means of production as) capital over the labourer.
For Althusser, power lies in all of the structures.
For Foucault, in discourse.
For Baudrillard, in the ‘mediascape’.
But Bourdieu's notion of structure (partly because it includes agency) in modernity has a number of advantages over these other analysts.
This concept of structure is particularly difficult to grasp because it appears not once but twice.
First, there are the structures as objective relations between agents (possessed with the three types of capital) in the fields.
Second, the fields themselves function as structures.
It is the former, ‘objective relations’, which give shape to both the habitus and the fields.
In so doing, they, so to speak, structure the structures.
Thus the objective relations immediately fulfil two roles.
They (1) determine the habitus and (2) are the basis of the empirical interactions in the fields.
This empirical interaction takes place largely along the lines of the symbolic economy in the de-limited fields of production.
The empirical interaction in the fields then produces an outcome, i.e. the symbolic object which will have effects of symbolic power on the social field.
It is the entire field which produces this outcome, which is then an effect of the field or structure.
Hence it is the structure which has effect on the ‘laity’ in the social field in the symbolic economy of the ‘large-scale field of production’.
In this the structure constitutes the supply-side and individuals in the social field comprise the demand-side.
Bourdieu's critique of Lévi-Strauss is powerful.
It  shows that pre-modern power takes place via a set of unmediated exchanges between subjects, while modern power stems from a relationship between fields (whose symbolic economy imparts to them their structure) and the ‘consumer’ who is subject to this power.
Bourdieu's third challenge to structuralism concerns its empirical inadequacy in the investigation of traditional societies.
This involved his formative experience as a young anthropologist.
Lévi-Strauss, Bourdieu notes, took Mauss's notion of the gift — which concerned an exchange between subjects — and turned this exchange into a structure, into a ‘constructed object’ which then assumed the status of an ‘unconscious principle’.
In doing so, Bourdieu continues, Lévi-Strauss skates over the ‘temporal nature’ and cycle of reciprocity involved in symbolic exchanges and the hard empirical reality of symbolic power that creditor exercises over debtor.
Crucial for Bourdieu's challenge was his observation in Kabylia that Lévi-Strauss's principle of exogenous marriages did not hold.
Instead the rule was rather of parallel-cousin marriage (father's brother's daughter).
But even this rule was broken under certain conditions.
Bourdieu concluded that the point was not to look, as structuralists did, for the rule, but instead for the ‘strategy’.
On the one hand, exogenous marriages (for example cross-cousin marriage, i.e. mother's brother's daughter) can strengthen alliances — that is, help build a network of affines, and perhaps bring a prestigious maternal uncle into the lineage.
On the other, there were a number of different meanings for parallel-cousin marriage.
It could, for example, solidify the lineage.
It could have the objective of keeping the lineage's property from being divided.
It might save the honour of a father's brother who is otherwise unable to marry off his daughter.
In the case of a father's brother who has no sons, it keeps the father's brother's descendants in the lineage.
In some cases Bourdieu speaks of individual strategies intended to reinforce one's own position within the lineage.
For example, he gives a number of cases of brotherly rivalry in patrilineal, patrilocal, and patriarchal Kabylia.
Or of the mother who promotes cross-cousin marriage so that a new member of her own lineage can be brought into her adopted one, so that she will be less of an outsider in the latter.
But most of the strategies are  those of the lineage itself.
It is the lineage which rests on a ‘community of dispositions and interests’ and has common ‘ownership of the material and symbolic patrimony’.
The point Bourdieu makes versus structural anthropology is that it is not the marriage rule (or genealogy) that counts, but the economic and political strategies of the lineage.
Even where informants invoked the ‘rule’ of parallel cousin marriage it was mostly as a ‘second order strategy’.
That is, they were conscious of the rule, and rather than following it out of obligation, they were using it for their own benefit, as a sort of ‘officializing’ or ‘universalizing’strategy in order to ‘cloak themselves in legitimation’.
Bourdieu wonders how structural anthropologists could be seduced into positing the existence of the rule when informants were just using it as a strategy.
And all of these strategies of course were through exchanges to maximize the lineage's accumulation of symbolic and material capital.
Reflexivity and validity
No pure theory of structure or pure theory of agency can have a notion of reflexivity.
Reflexivity assumes (1) a subject,(2) an object, and (3) a medium of reflection.
Theories of reflexivity differ to the extent that these three parameters vary.
(a)
The reflecting subject can be an individual, a social class, an entire society.
If an individual it can be inter alia an intellectual, an artist, a scientist, a sociologist.
(b)
The object can be the norms which structure society, or the norms which structure a part of society.
The object can be symbolic.
It can be aesthetic or ethical.
It can be the products of knowledge of, for example, sociology.
(c)
The medium of reflection is usually either consciousness or language.
Hence, for example, in Habermas it is a speech community which reflects through language primarily on social or ethical norms.
For Lukács, class subjects reflect through consciousness on the social.
In Giddens, reflection is largely on social rules.
One thing that all these writers hold in common is that reflexive action is only possible in modernity.
And that in modernity (probably Giddens is clearest in this statement) social  actors can take cognizance of, and reflect rationally on, rules that had previously been only implicit for them.
This of course opens up possibilities of positive social change.
Of Weber's four types of action, only zweckrational and wertrational were characteristically modern.
The implication is that the modern actor is capable of formulating and reflecting on his/her means and ends of action, which was impossible in traditional action, structured by unreflective convention.
Weber's ‘ethics of responsibility’(and its subsequent neo-Weberian formulations) are also exemplifications of reflective action in which the demands of the different  Lebensordnungen are weighed and assessed.
Reflexivity can also mean the reflection of the subject on the subject itself.
This is true in Hegel's Selbstbewusstsein.
It also is at least implicit in Gouldner's demand for a reflexive sociology heralded in Coming Crisis.
Bourdieu's sort of reflexivity seems to be rather closer to this type.
Hence the stated aim of Homo Academicus to ‘classify the classifiers’.
Reflexivity in this sense looks at the producers of knowledge.
On Bourdieu's account these producers are most importantly understood through their habitus, and through their individual strategies and collective struggles.
These strategies and struggles (and self-reflexivity) inhere in their structural position in three senses:(1) their position in the objective relations of the academic or sociological field,(2) their position and trajectory in the objective relations of the social field,(3) their position in the struggles between orthodoxy and heterodoxy which determine the output of structure in the academic/sociological field.
What are the implications of this for truth and validity?
Bourdieu says in Homo Academicus that the idea is, not to render uncertain, but ‘to make more secure the foundations of sociological thought’.
And that the modus operandi here should not be ‘transcendental reflection’ but through ‘classifying the classifiers’.
He maintains that the ‘self-reflection of sociology’ will lead to anti-relativism and to ‘scientific profits’.
He also says in a recent interview that the way to the ‘universal’ is not through ‘foundations’but through ‘reflexive critique’.
How can we make sense of this?
Given the assumption of self-interest and instrumental action built into Bourdieu's economics of symbolic practice, there are three routes to truth and universalism:(1) through the innovations of ‘heterodoxy’,(2) through  cross-control by scientific method,(3) through the autonomization of the given field.
He uses these elements effectively to speak of validity in the aesthetic field.
Here he writes that with the succession of avant-gardes taking the place of established avant-gardes there is a certain ‘épuration’ of poetry in which the latter is ‘reduced’to its own ‘proper materials’.
This sounds very much like Adornian ‘aesthetic rationality’.
Art that is too much tied to the field of power has little to worry about from avant-gardes.
This is true also if ‘cross-control’ is separated from the field of power.
Similar prescriptions would hold for sociology's ‘self-reflexive critique’.
These would be (1) to examine and criticize the openness of sociology to challenging heterodoxies,(2) to try to ensure the autonomization of sociology from the field of power,(3) to sharpen methods of cross-control.
Is this what Bourdieu advocates?
To what extent is this different from self-reflexivity as the prolonged and systematic reflection on the sociological habitus outlined just above?
In one case or the other, these are prescriptions for the examination of the producer more than the product.
Would not systematic critique of the descriptive utterances of sociology (i.e. of sociology's products) be a more promising way to truth and the universal?
Also, Bourdieu's presuppositions make it seem as if a rational way forward is more or less ruled out in the political field.
Autonomous fields such as science and to a lesser extent art follow the ‘logic of true and false’(valid and not valid).
But the political field is inscribed with the logic of friend and foe.
Here statements are not descriptive utterances but performatives.
Here, unlike the scientific field, it is no great advantage to be ‘armed with reason’.
How, then, does the Bourdieu view of reflexive critique give any hope for a political future?
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Pierre Bourdieu instructs us to ‘classify the classifiers’.
How, then, I wonder, might we thus, sociologically, classify Bourdieu?
He might best, I suspect, be classified as riven by a set of social contradictions.
Bourdieu is, on the one hand, the enemy of avant-gardes, the outsider flouting ‘tout Paris’, the sturdy opponent of aesthetes and trendy left politicos.
This Bourdieu is the man of solid roots in the provincial couches populaires; the ‘hands on’ proletarian of research in an almost Anglo-American empirical mode.
But Bourdieu is on the other hand very French, very Parisian, and as seductively avant-garde in sociology as Foucault, Lacan, Barthes, Lefebvre, Derrida, and Deleuze are for other academic disciplines.
It is this second Bourdieu that this chapter has explored, or, more accurately, used in order better sociologically to understand modernization, modernism, and post-modernism.
What are then the main elements of such a theory present in the work of Bourdieu?:
(1) Tradition versus modernity
(i) In traditional society, power is exercised unmediatedly by one agent over another.
Relationships of power are effectively ‘exchange relationships’, based on the indebtedness of subordinate agent to his/her superordinate.
As for Nietzsche and for Mauss, for Bourdieu this relation of debt also determines status and cultural valuations and classifications.
In modernity, power is exercised via the mediations of Bourdieu's fields, which are in effect structures.
Cultural valuations (e.g. the social value attached to a work of art, a law, a scientific theory, a political policy) and classifications are then structurally determined by the fields.
(ii) Culture in traditional societies is structured by a single ‘doxa’; while, in modernity, culture is a stake for which ‘orthodoxy’ and ‘heterodoxy’do battle.
In contrast to tradition's ‘universe of doxa’ stands modernity's ‘universe of discourse’which presupposes that ideas must be legitimated in order to achieve hegemony, and hence presumes a certain autonomy of ideas from power relations.
(iii) Thus in Bourdieu's traditional society, like Hegel's Orient, stasis and not change is the rule.
In modernity, social/ cultural change is introduced through heterodoxy.
Change also presupposes, à la Weber, the existence of (often emergent) social classes or class fractions whose ideal interests these heterodox values serve.
(iv) For Bourdieu the distinction between ‘strategies’ and ‘struggles’is crucial.
‘Strategies’ are held by individuals as familiar.
‘Strategies’ aim at the accumulation of symbolic  capital.
Their goal is mobility and attainment of wealth, power, and status.
‘Strategies’ assume a given and static socio-cultural context.
‘Struggles’ are between collectivities — as supports of heterodoxy versus orthodoxy — and can lead to socio-cultural change.
In traditional society (taken as ideal-type), there are only strategies.
(n modernity, both strategies and struggles figure importantly.
(2) Modernization
(i) Bourdieu's ‘fields’ are structures in which these strategies and struggles take place.
Modernization is a process of the differentiation and autonomization of the ‘de-limited fields’(champs restreints)— i.e. the legal, political, intellectual, artistic, academic, cultural, and religious fields — from the more general ‘field of power’.
(ii) Modernization can only take place through struggles.
The battles of heterodoxy against orthodoxy are not just for changes, but for the autonomization of a given field from the field of power.
Thus they are struggles for modernization.
In these struggles, Bourdieu generalizes the model from Weber's sociology of religion and speaks of avant-garde ‘prophets’ supporting heterodoxy and modernist autonomization in struggle versus bureaucratic ‘priests’who support orthodoxy.
The priests represent tradition and the field of power versus such autonomization.
Note the Weberian, and even Nietzschean, notion of a ‘charisma of creativity’ implicit here, in which artists, scientists, and religious heroes are more or less interchangeable in the role of prophet.
(iii) The field of power operates from a Carl Schmitt-like logic of ‘friend versus foe’, while the autonomizing de-limited fields operate increasingly, along with modernization, on a logic of ‘true versus false’.
This true/false logic holds for the whole range of autonomizing fields, in the sense that aesthetic, scientific, normative, and legal statements can be understood as more or less valid.
This (modernity) is obviously the (Habermas-like)‘universe of discourse’.
(iv) Modernization is not just a process of change in structure, it is also one of change in agency.
Thus the Bourdieuan ‘habitus’ also undergoes a process of differentiation along with modernization.
The cultural capital of such a modernized and differentiated habitus is capable of using differentiated classificatory schema to understand, say, the modernist work of art in terms of its own particular aesthetic conventions.
The less differentiated, and more traditional, habitus perceives works of art in terms of the same visual classifications of every-day life.
(3) Modernism and Postmodernism
(i) Full modernity or complete modernism presupposes the absolute autonomy of fields.
This never in fact takes place, in that the fields are always sites of struggle for the stake of more or less autonomization.
(ii) Post-modernization would be a process of de-differentiation and a reversal of autonomization.
This includes a process of de-differentiation of fields or structures, and de-differentiation of agency, or the habitus.
The latter comprises a partial breakdown or de-centring of the grid of classificatory rules which structure the habitus.
(iii) As in modernization, there are two ‘motors’ of post-modernization.
The first lies in the emergence of new social classes as vehicles, both of production and reception, for the new postmodernist cultural forms.
Key here is the development of the post-industrial middle classes, the cultural-capital based fraction of the bourgeoisie.
In contemporary times, the cultural field of these symbol-producing middle classes undergoes such expansion, such ‘mass-ification’, that it begins to engulf or implode into the more general social field itself.
The cultural field expands thus to such a point that it bursts through the barriers that had previously contained it as only a de-limited field.
(iv) The second motor of postmodernization lies in the development of a new sort of prophet, a new type of avant-garde.
This new sort of avant-garde promotes, not heterodoxy and modernist autonomization, but orthodoxy and dis-autonomization.
Thus postmodern architects such as Venturi and Denise Scott-Brown reject the experimentation of Corbusier and van der Rohe, and proudly claim that ‘we like convention’.
In this sense Martin Pawley has described postmodernism as ‘an avant-garde leading from the rear’.
A parallel process of postmodernization has taken place in the realm of theory, in which the autonomization (whether relative or absolute) of structures and of theory itself has been under challenge.
Hence Derrida's poststructuralism challenged the modernist and autonomous science of autonomous linguistic structures of Saussure and Barthes.
And the  Nietzschean post-structuralism of Foucault's later (‘genealogical’) work broke with the scientistic study of autonomous structures of knowledge and discourse in his Order of Things and Archaeology of Knowledge.
It is in this social-theoretical context that we can understand Bourdieu's effectively poststructural challenge to Lévi-Strauss's and Althusser's eminently modernist conceptions of scientific objectivity and autonomous structures.
Bourdieu's epistemology, like the poststructuralists, grants only minimal autonomy to human-scientific practices from the field of power.
Equally running counter to modernist scientificity is, we have seen, Bourdieu's notion of reflexivity.
Social scientists in this are instructed to reflect, not on the validity of statements and propositions, but on the social and power position of the producer of these statements.
Attention is drawn thus not to the autonomous ‘universe of discourse’ and its logic of ‘true versus false’but to the field of power and its logic of ‘friend versus foe’.
Pierre Bourdieu's work is thus riven with contradiction indeed.
He is one of the great proselytizers for the virtues of science; yet he challenges the autonomy and objectivity, and even the possibility of validity of scientific statements.
The conditions of his social scientific success have been the denunciation of the Parisian intellectual avant-garde, which he is at the same time quite integrally part and parcel of.
The Parisian poststructuralist avant-garde, in their rejection of the modernist autonomization of cultural practices, have functioned effectively as ‘priests’, though in the guise of prophets.
In this the absence of any self-reflexivity on the part of these ‘priests in drag’ has been remarkable.
Bourdieu in his self-conscious rootedness in the provincial popular classes, far away from Paris and avant-gardes, at least seems to know where he stands.
Ironically, Althusser's autonomous structures and optimistic scientific objectivity and Habermas's autonomized cultural realms and rational discourse are, in a significant sense, two halves of the same neo-Marxist and modernist equation.
The  power/knowledge critique of structuralism from French theoretical postmodernism, must as it rejects Althusser, also reject Habermas.
Professor Bourdieu's work is of great, great value and is one of my main sources of inspiration for the sociology of culture developed through the pages of this book.
But the power/ knowledge assumptions of his work do place him rather uncomfortably close to his post-structuralist prima-facie opponents.
Both Bourdieu and the poststructuralists are somehow ‘avant-gardes leading from the rear’.
The difference is that the poststructuralists put themselves forth as heterodox prophets and turn out to be priests of convention.
While Bourdieu's self-deprecatory claims to priesthood and orthodoxy turn out to be a cover for a very avant-garde sociology of culture.
The only casualty along the way, and this is indeed a cause for distress, may be the modernist validity of social-scientific knowledge.