

CHAPTER THREE
Sunday (continued)
They found the weapon used to stun the bookseller: a piece of half-inch iron pipe about ten inches long.
It was the ideal court exhibit, complete with bloodstain and a fragment of adherent skin.
It had been tossed into a bed of nettles against the wall of the churchyard.
Even its provenance had been established: a whole heap of such material — mostly in longer pieces — had been ripped out of a nearby house and lay, awaiting removal.
Now the piece had been put into a polythene bag and given a label pending its despatch for forensic examination.
Needless to say it carried no prints.
Wycliffe went in search of Sara and was received in the drawing-room.
‘A worthy virgin’, Trice had called her and Wycliffe saw at once what he meant.
There was something essentially virginal about Sara Glynn, not the virginity of naivety or innocence, but the soured virginity which arises from resentment of the female role.
She might have been the headmistress of a certain type of girls' school, now almost extinct, or a Mother Superior in an enclosed order.
At any rate there could be no doubt that she had found the temptation of the flesh resistible.
She wore a dove-grey Jaeger frock, discreet and asexual, but off an expensive peg.
She was hollow eyed, drawn, and seemed very close to exhaustion but she had herself well in hand.
‘I understand that it was you who found your brother's body?’
‘Yes, and it was I who informed the police.’
Prompt and explicit.
‘You found him in his office at shortly after six this morning?’
‘That is so.’
Wycliffe was gentle but persistent.
‘You had a reason for going there at that time?’
‘I did.
I woke feeling unwell and I decided to go downstairs and make myself a cup of tea.
In the kitchen I noticed that there was a light in my brother's office.
It was possible that he had forgotten to switch it off last night or that he was at work early, but it was also possible that there had been an intruder.
I went there to find out.’
‘You couldn't see into the office from the kitchen?’
‘No, the curtains were drawn.’
Sara Glynn sat opposite Wycliffe in the big, rather gloomy room with its dark wallpaper, over-varnished oil paintings in gilt frames, and leather-upholstered chairs.
There was something about the woman which brought out the official streak in Wycliffe and with it the pompous, well-rounded phrases: ‘I'm afraid that we shall have to look into your brother's affairs and into his relationships both inside and outside the family.
Some of the questions that are asked may seem impertinent, but you may be assured…’
The official blend of stimulant and tranquillizer.
She shifted her position and adjusted the fine wool of her skirt over her bony knees.
Despite her tiredness her movements were deliberate, unhurried, and self-absorbed; like a cat.
When her attention returned to Wycliffe it was almost as though she found it an effort to recall what they were talking about.
She said: ‘Of course it goes without saying that you will receive full co-operation from the family.’
Wycliffe was well aware that it did not ‘go’, with or without saying.
As far as Sara was concerned he would hear only what she considered fit for him to know.
‘Perhaps you will tell me something about last night, how you spent the evening, whether you noticed anything unusual.
You have an evening meal?’
‘At 6.30.’
‘So we will start there.
Everybody was present at the meal?’
‘Yes.’
‘What happened afterwards?’
She pursed her lips and considered.
‘My niece, Gina, helped me with the washing-up.
The woman who comes in goes at five.
Afterwards I went to my room and spent the evening reading and writing letters.’
‘You spent the evening in your bedroom?’
‘No, Chief Superintendent; I have a sitting-room as well as a bedroom upstairs.’
Every word seemed to have been crafted and polished before it was allowed to escape through her discriminating lips.
‘You saw or heard nothing unusual?’
‘Nothing.’
‘Does your room overlook the back or front of the house?’
‘The front.’
‘You are quite sure that you did not go out at all last evening?’
‘Quite sure.’
‘When you went to your brother's office this morning was there a cat in the room?’
‘A cat?
No.’
‘You are saying that you did not see your brother  alive again after the meal you had together yesterday evening.
Is that so?’
She lowered her eyes and her voice.
‘That is correct.’
It was like filling in the blank spaces on a form and equally unprofitable.
More than that, she was lying; somewhere along the line, and perhaps more than once, she had found it necessary to lie.
He was sure of it but there was no point in putting on pressure until he had more to go on.
He changed the subject.
‘You had three brothers, Miss Glynn: Alfred, Matthew, and Maurice.
One would have expected that Alfred, as the eldest, would have taken over the family firm or that it would have been left to the four of you jointly.’
‘Alfred very much wanted to be a doctor and father encouraged him.
When it became obvious that he would not be successful he decided to train as a pharmacist and father set him up in business.’
There was an answer for everything.
Clearly all things worked together for good in this family where friction was as rare as in a well-oiled machine.
‘And Maurice?’
‘Maurice, as a young man, had a strong antipathy for business; he went to an art college and after…’
She hesitated, searching for the acceptable phrase.
‘After some false starts he set up as a potter at Trebyan in St -Hilary — a property which belongs to the family.
His work is becoming well known and he is able to live comfortably.’
‘Your father financed him?’
Did Sara allow a slight irritation to show?
At any rate she did not answer at once and Wycliffe had to insist.
‘I'm afraid that such questions will have to be answered, Miss Glynn; if not by you, then by others.’
‘All right; I will tell you.
My father provided Maurice with a capital sum and leased him the property he now  occupies at a nominal rental.’
Her look clearly said: ‘That must surely satisfy you!’
It did not.
‘When your father died — how many years ago?’
‘My father died in 1977.’
‘So at that time the freehold of the property leased to your brother must have passed to someone else.’
‘Under my father's will that part of his property went to my brother Matthew.’
‘Your mother died quite recently, was she not involved in any of these dispositions?’
A downturn of the lips: ‘Glynn women have never figured in wills; it has always been assumed that the men would look after them along with their other properties.’
Interesting.
The first intimation of discord, even of bitterness.
The room was depressing: the single window looked out on the narrow street; there were net curtains as well as heavy, red velvet drapes drawn half-way across.
Yet one was aware of everything that went on outside, of voices, of footsteps, of whatever traffic there might be.
She waited unruffled for his next question; a woman distressed but confident in her ability to handle any situation.
‘Are either of your brothers married, Miss Glynn?’
‘Alfred is not; he lives alone, over his shop.
Maurice is a widower and has a son, David, who is twenty.’
‘Presumably they know what has happened?’
‘I have just come back from talking to Alfred and I telephoned Maurice.’
A moment of hesitation, then: ‘I think you should know that Alfred is a sick man; he has a heart condition…’
It was clear that she had not yet made her point.
‘He is also a little eccentric, sometimes very odd, probably through living so much alone…
I hope that you will not think it necessary to harass him.’
‘I'll remember what you say, Miss Glynn.
There is just one other matter on which I shall be grateful for information.
I understand that about seventeen years ago your sister-in-law walked out of her home and did not return.’
‘So?’
‘At that time your younger niece must have been still an infant.’
‘Christine was two years old: Gina was eight, Gerald eleven.’
‘It seems very remarkable that a woman would walk out, leaving her children like that.’
‘Inez, my sister-in-law, was a very remarkable woman.’
‘Was there another man?’
‘I presume so.’
‘You don't know?’
A slight lift of the shoulders.
‘Was there a crisis in the marriage before she left?’
‘No, there was no crisis.’
A small smile.
‘Nothing disturbed the even tenor of our days.
Inez left, ostensibly to spend Sunday with a woman friend, and she did not come back.
They found her car abandoned in Exeter.’
‘Your parents were alive then; what was their attitude?’
She considered her answer.
‘My father was entirely pragmatic in his response to all situations, even the most distressing.
He believed, as I do, that people cannot be changed, that one must learn to cope with them as they are.’
‘And your mother?’
‘Mother was naturally very distressed.’
Sara straightened her skirt once more.
‘That is all I can tell you, Mr Wycliffe, because it is all there is to tell.
I have been frank because there is no purpose in  your people hunting for family skeletons which do not exist.’
He went out into the passage and through the communicating door into the shop.
Voices came from the direction of the offices and he found Fox expostulating with a tall youngish man, a Glynn without doubt and the heir apparent.
‘I want to see my father and your man here won't let me.
I've a right —’
Fox said: ‘Mr Gerald Glynn, sir.
I wouldn't let him through without your authority.’
Wycliffe was soothing.
‘Well, now I'm here, you can come in with me, Mr Glynn.’
There was likely to be more interest in a member of the family who seemed to have come to the boil than in Sara who would cost time and patience to bring to blood heat.
Wycliffe led the way into Glynn's office where one of the scenes-of-crime team was still at work.
Wycliffe stooped and lifted the sheet which covered the body.
Gerald stood, looking down at his father, his face expressionless.
After a moment or two he asked: ‘Did that knock on the head kill him?’
He added with a hint of apology: ‘I don't understand about this sort of thing.’
‘No, your father was strangled.’
‘It must've been a pretty powerful bloke who did that; father was no weakling.’
‘We think that he was first stunned by the blow on the head.’
‘Ah!
So anybody could've done it?’
‘So it seems.’
‘A woman?’
‘Yes, but why do you ask?’
Gerald said nothing but his gaze shifted to the desk, to the whisky bottle and glasses.
‘Somebody got  him pissed, I expect; it wasn't difficult.’
He sounded tolerant, almost affectionate.
Back in the outer office Wycliffe said: ‘A few questions while you are here, Mr Glynn…’
They sat down.
Gerald was subdued.
He said: ‘I could have seen him this morning before your lot arrived but I funked it.’
Wycliffe nodded.
‘That is understandable.
Now for my questions: It seems that your father willingly admitted his killer.
Can you suggest any visitor who might have arrived, late in the evening, and been admitted like that?’
‘Anybody.’
‘Anybody?’
‘That's what I said.
If you're in politics you have to cope with two sorts of people, the ones you can use, and the ones who want to use you.
Father made sure he was well acquainted with both sorts.
He kept his ear to the ground and he spent a lot of time in his office after hours.
All sorts would turn up for a little chat.’
Gerald smiled.
‘The old man was a damn good listener when it suited him and he knew the right questions.
I can speak from experience.’
‘Presumably he would be alone with his visitor during these sessions?’
‘Of course!
People likely to provide him with ammunition for his little campaigns wouldn't appreciate an audience any more than they'd want to be seen tripping up the steps of the council offices to some bloody committee room.’
‘Wasn't it unwise of him to keep open house like that, with direct access to his office from a back lane?’
‘Probably, but he's been doing it for years.’
‘Is it possible, in your view, that he might have been killed because of his ‘little campaigns’ as you call them?’
Gerald was contemptuous.
‘These things are only shadow boxing, overgrown schoolboys sparring; they never come to much.
The alternatives are bowls, golf, or chasing widow women.’
‘There was a cat in your father's office last night.’
‘That doesn't surprise me; the old man was fond of cats so Sara decided to be allergic to cat's fur and father encouraged the neighbourhood moggies into his office with kitchen scraps.
Ronnie Swayne's — from next door — a monstrous beast, is one of the regulars.’
Gerald pulled out a crushed packet of cigarettes from a trouser pocket and lit one.
He took a brief draw then fingered tobacco grains from his lips.
Wycliffe change the subject.
‘Your father must have had many acquaintances in business and in his council work, but did he have any close friends?’
‘Old ferret-face next door — Ronnie Swayne; he deals in stamps, medals and coins.
Then there's Mike Doble who keeps the wine shop farther up.
They meet fairly often to play chess.’
‘Here?’
‘Swayne's place; he lives over his shop.
Father was there last night.’
‘Three of them play chess?’
‘Don't ask me; I never mastered Snakes and Ladders.
Anyway Mike is ill in hospital at the moment and unlikely to play chess for a bit.’
‘How did you spend yesterday evening, Mr Glynn?’
‘At the Grantham in St Ives playing snooker.’
‘At what time did you get home?’
‘About 11.15, give or take a few minutes.’
‘You were driving?’
‘I was.’
‘What did you do with your car?’
‘I keep it in one of the lock-ups at the top of the back lane.’
‘And did you come into the house by the back or the front door?’
‘The front.
I didn't have any choice; the yard door was bolted.
I had to walk round the bloody block.’
‘Is that usual?’
‘No, of course it isn't!
I thought father had done it out of spite.
We haven't been getting on too well lately.’
Wycliffe spoke to the scenes-of-crime officer: ‘When you arrived this morning was the yard door bolted?’
‘Yes, sir.’
‘Check to see if that was the position when our chaps first came on the scene.’
Gerald said: ‘I suppose somebody could have been in there doing the old man while I was trying to get in.
But if the door was bolted this morning…’
‘You were seen trying to get in last night, Mr Glynn.’
‘I know; Dippy Martin was out looking for Cissie.’
‘And some time after you went round to the front of the house a woman was seen to go in.’
‘A woman?
I don't get it.’
‘That is what Martin says; he was some distance away at the time and wasn't able to see who it was.’
‘You've lost me.’
‘Is there anybody who might have had a serious grudge against your father?’
Gerald shrugged.
‘Sounds a bit hyped up put like that but he and Uncle Alfred had a long-running feud.’
‘What about?’
Suddenly Gerald became vague.
‘A quarrel about some girl, I think.
It's been that way ever since I can remember.
Something from the hot, heady days of youth when the sap was rising.
There were never any dramatic confrontations; they just didn't have anything to do with each other.’
‘Your uncle is the pharmacist, down the street?’
‘Yes, but you can't seriously think…
He's a sick  man and he's…
I mean you only have to look at him.
He couldn't swot a fly with a rolled-up newspaper.’
‘And your father's other brother — Maurice, with the Trebyan pottery at St Hilary — was there any friction there?’
Gerald ran his fingers through his dark hair.
‘Christ!
You make us sound like the Mafia or something.
We're an ordinary family with the usual family squabbles.’
‘But you haven't answered my question.’
‘Well, there's a spot of bother at the moment.
Father owns the pottery, a bit of scrubland around it and a couple of small fields.
All that's left of the Glynn acres.’
Gerald grinned.
‘The Glynns were farmers once upon a time.
Actually, the family lived at Trebyan up to a few months before I was born, then they moved next door to be near the shop.’
‘So what's the trouble about?’
‘Just that father wants — wanted to build houses on the scrub and on one of the fields.
He was after outline planning and thought he was going to get it.
Maurice is raising hell — spoliation of the countryside, damage to the rural environment, forcible eviction of rabbits you name it.’
He looked at Wycliffe with a sheepish smile.
‘Maurice and young David are ‘Greens’ and into organic vegetables, goats' milk, and yoghurt.’
He became serious.
‘You can't see people like that…’
He nodded towards the adjoining office.
In his own way Gerald was more skilful at whitewashing the family than his Aunt Sara.
‘Well, thank you, Mr Glynn, that's all for the moment but I may have more questions for you later.’
When Gerald had gone Wycliffe joined Fox in Matthew's office.
‘You were asking about the yard door, sir; it was bolted when the local police arrived this morning.’
‘By the way, any prints on the whisky glasses?’
‘The deceased's on one.
the other has been wiped clean.’
Wycliffe stood by the window, looking across the yard to the back of the house.
He could see the back door and what was, presumably, the kitchen window.
Sara said that she was standing at that window when she noticed the light in the office.
At six in the morning it would be daylight, and with the curtains drawn in the office…
Wycliffe left the office and walked the length of the dimly lit shop.
The window blinds were down and he had a feeling that he was behind the scenes in a theatre.
The bay to his left was labelled ‘Fiction A-H’, and to his right was the cash desk looking much the same as it must have done on the day the shop was first opened.
He could just read the faded inscription painted above the window: Glynn's Circulating Library.
Established 1886.
(When all the women were reading Mrs Henry Wood, and Marie Corelli was about to burst upon a waiting world.)
Four generations of Glynns, and the fourth of the dynasty had got himself murdered in his own office; no heat-of-the-moment crime either, but a  carefully planned murder executed in cold blood out of hatred, or fear, or obsessive greed.
The business of the yard door was puzzling; it was bolted at II.I5 and mysteriously unbolted later so that an unidentified woman was able to enter at about 11.30, but bolted again when the police arrived some time after six in the morning.
Then there was the cat…and Sara…
‘Second-hand and Rare Books.’
Wycliffe went upstairs to look.
As always he was nosing out the territory like a dog in a new home; no objective in view.
The upper floor was divided into two by a wooden screen with hammered-glass panels and a door bearing a  notice: ‘For access to the rare books section please apply at the desk.’
Wycliffe browsed among the second-hands.
Along with scores of authors of whom he had never heard he found forgotten friends: Hugh Walpole, John Galsworthy, and the redoubtable Mazo de la Roche, captivator of millions who would now be devotees of TV soap…
He must have been more sentimental and less cynical then.
But this was no trip down memory lane and there was nothing to see but books.
He was on the point of returning downstairs when he noticed that the door to the rare book section was not quite closed.
Out of curiosity he pushed it open.
The space devoted to rare books was very much smaller than to the secondhand.
A few bookcases with glazed doors were arranged around the walls leaving a central space for a table and chairs.
The floor was carpeted and the impression was one of a small library in a rather run-down country house.
If he had not actually gone into the room he would not have seen Gina; she was standing against one of the bookcases hidden from him by the open door.
‘Mrs Morse?…
Superintendent Wycliffe.’
‘I know.’
The door of the bookcase was open but there were no other signs of how she had been engaged.
For some reason though she looked guilty.
‘I had to be occupied, it's so demoralizing just waiting around.
It's my job to keep a check on the stock and it seemed a good chance to get something done…’
She was flustered.
Gina was an attractive young woman, on the plump side, oval face, dark hair and eyes, a pale skin, and freckles.
At the age of seven he had fallen in love with a schoolteacher like her.
‘So this is the rare books section.’
To say something.
‘That's what we call it but most of the books are not  all that rare.
We go in mainly for first editions of the classics but we do have some rather nice botanical books, floras mostly, sought after for their plates…
We make a thing of local-interest books…’
She was over-anxious, talking too much.
‘Somebody will be asking you questions more formally but perhaps you could tell me if you went out at all last evening?’
She seemed surprised, perhaps relieved by the question.
‘No, I was in all the evening.’
‘Do you know about your sister?’
‘Christine went to a play at St John's Hall; she came in at about half-past ten.’
‘And your aunt tells me that she spent the whole evening in her room.
I ask because a witness claims to have seen a woman entering your yard by the yard door at about II.30.’
She shook her head.
‘There must be some mistake.
Apart from anything else that door was bolted then, my brother couldn't get in.’
‘Is it possible that your father had a woman visitor?
I mean, is it possible that he had some emotional involvement outside the family?’
Gina looked blank then understanding dawned.
‘You mean a woman!’
She laughed shortly.
‘Father had more than enough of women in the house and the business.’
Wycliffe said: ‘Do you remember your mother, Mrs Morse?’
‘Of course I remember her; I was eight when she left.’
‘And you've never seen or heard of her since?’
‘No.’
‘Surely your mother's absence must have given rise to a great deal of discussion and speculation in the family — at the time, and afterwards.’
‘If so, it was a case of ‘not in front of the children’.’
‘But since you've been grown up?’
She frowned.
‘It's hard to explain.
There is very little discussion about anything in our family — the excuse was that one mustn't upset granny, but I think it's a Glynn thing; cut discussion to a minimum, especially of unpleasant things, and perhaps they'll go away.’
Wycliffe stood, irresolute, wondering how best to turn this chance encounter to advantage.
‘Your grandmother died four months ago; has her death had much effect on family relationships?’
It was clear that she saw the drift of his question but her answer was simple: ‘Granny seemed to exercise a sort of spell over her sons, her husband too, I think.
I suppose the only obvious change since her death is that we no longer have our Wednesday sessions.’
‘What were they?’
She smiled.
‘Old fashioned shops like ours still have half-day closing.
We close on Wednesday afternoons and every Wednesday Maurice and Alfred would come here for a sort of high tea, presided over by granny.’
‘Even though the brothers didn't get on together.’
‘Oh, granny wasn't supposed to know about that.
If she did, it was never admitted.’
Wycliffe was apologetic.
‘I hope these questions won't seem offensive but we need to know as much as possible about the family.
How do you remember your mother?
As affectionate — loving — or was your relationship with her, say, less intimate?’
The question disturbed her and she took time to answer.
‘I suppose you need to know these things…
My mother wasn't demonstrative.’
She hesitated.
‘I never remember being hugged.
On the other hand she was never hard on us and never unsympathetic; she looked after us, made sure we were properly fed and clothed, that we went to bed at a reasonable time — all that sort of thing.’
Another reflective pause.
‘No-one could say she wasn't a good mother.’
‘Looking back, does it surprise you that she left when she did?’
‘Yes, it does.’
With emphasis.
‘You were aware of no special crisis?
No rows?’
‘No, none.’
She looked at him in frank enquiry.
‘Does that tell you what you want to know?’
‘Yes, it does, and I'm grateful, but I have one more question: Was your Aunt Sara able, in some degree, to fill your mother's place?’
She thought for some time before saying: ‘In some degree’ puts it quite well.’
‘Were you harshly treated?’
‘No.’
She hesitated again.
‘Perhaps the impression I'm giving isn't quite fair to Sara; after all, she didn't ask for the job.’
Wycliffe walked downstairs into the gloomy shop.
A family affair.
All of them at least as concerned to limit the damage as to assist the inquiry.
But who could blame them?
He was beginning to get to know them as individuals and to glimpse their relationships but he could never be more than the outsider looking in.
He was becoming increasingly conscious of the existence of something at the core — in fact, a suspicion, a threat, which must at all costs be shielded from his probes.
It was after one.
Self-absorbed and brooding, he crossed the street, oblivious of the watchers, and entered the pub opposite.
He elbowed his way to the bar and ordered a lager and a ham sandwich.
If he was the cynosure of all eyes he didn't notice and in his present mood he wouldn't have been troubled if he had.
Although the little hut at Trebyan was only a couple of hundred yards from the house and the pottery it was over the slope of the hill and hemmed in by gorse and hawthorn: a single large room with a verandah, built of lap boarding, raised on a brick base and set in the side  of the hill.
From the verandah the only sign of human habitation was the tower of St Hilary church rising out of the trees half a mile away.
Christine reached the hut from the road by a steep track through the scrub and so avoided the house.
David was waiting.
‘Chris!’
He took her in his arms and hugged her, breathless.
‘I was afraid they wouldn't let you come.’
A kiss, and she moved away.
‘I didn't ask; I told Gina where I was going but I'd better not stay too long.’
They stood side by side, arms resting on the verandah rail.
Although it was overcast with rain threatening, opportunist bumble bees were making the most of the gorse flowers.
David said: ‘You don't have to say it, Chris; I know…
It's worrying me too.’
He put his hand to his head.
‘God!
I never manage to say anything properly!
I meant what's worrying you as well as the awful thing that happened to your father…’
At twenty he had not quite grown out of the gangling stage either in the control of his long limbs or in the expression of his most deeply felt thoughts and emotions.
‘If only dad hadn't lost his temper with Uncle Matt like that nobody would even think of it…’
Christine put her hand on his arm.
‘Dave!
As far as we know nobody has, but we mustn't be afraid to talk about what worries us.
We're more likely to see how silly it is.
Nobody who knew Uncle Maurice could possibly believe that he could do such a thing.
The two of them had a row about building houses here.
All right!
Perhaps they would have gone to court about it, but that doesn't mean that either of them…’
David said: ‘I keep telling myself that but it doesn't stop me worrying.’
They remained standing close, gazing out over the  valley.
Finally, speaking in a low voice, the boy said: ‘There's something you don't know: dad told me this morning that he was in bed when I got home last night.’
‘Well, he often is, isn't he?’
‘Not last night; I heard him come in a long time after I went to bed.
I don't know what time it was but it must have been late.’
‘Did he have the Land Rover?’
‘No, I would have heard that.’
‘So he was walking.’
‘There's an old bike he sometimes uses.’
‘You haven't asked him about it?’
He turned towards her.
‘How could I?’
‘No, sorry!…
Where is he now?’
‘I left him in the house; I said I was going to see to the goats.’
It was very quiet, not a sound anywhere; the cloud cover was beginning to thin and there was watery sunshine.
‘He told the police he was already in bed when I got home.’
‘They've been here?’
‘A detective and a uniformed bobby just after you rang.
They didn't stay long and they were very polite.
Dad told them he went for a drink to the pub at Goldsithney, that he left at about nine and came straight home.’
In a voice that made it sound like an article of faith, Christine said: ‘We both know that your father didn't kill mine so why he was late and why he didn't tell the police about it doesn't matter.’
‘I love you, Chris.’
She faced him.
‘You only know what your father told you.’
He took her in his arms but she separated from him.
‘Not now, love; I must get back.
But, Dave…’
He turned to her, questioning.
‘Remember, whatever happens we are still us.’
When Wycliffe returned to the bookshop Dr Franks's Porsche had joined the line of vehicles down one side of the street and it was raining.
Franks had just arrived with his secretary and was still in the shop.
‘Oh, there you are, Charles!
Have you had lunch?’
‘Of a sort.’
‘Lucky you!
Liz, here, bought me a ham sandwich on the way down: ghastly!
You've met Liz, of course.’
‘No.’
‘Really?’
The pathologist's secretaries followed one another in bewildering succession.
Usually Franks was elegantly dressed in fine worsted with a silk shirt; today he wore a denim overall.
‘Liz and I were going sailing, dammit!
First time out for the season.’
He was walking in and out of the bays, studying the bookshelves as though that was what he had come for.
‘This is a good bookshop, Charles.’
He spoke as a connoisseur might speak of a cheese or a wine.
‘When I was a boy my parents had a bookshop like this in Plymouth.
They had second-hand books upstairs too.
I used to spend Saturday mornings up there reading Havelock Ellis and Marie Stopes until the old man tumbled to it.
Father was an old-time Methodist; sex and the devil were one.
Perhaps he was right.
‘Well, where is the corpus delicti, old chap?’
The ritual began.
Franks made his preliminary examination of the body, dictating brief comments to his secretary.
The body was moved into fresh positions with Fox recording the whole process on film.
‘Rigor is almost complete.
Taking one thing with another: body temperature, ambient temperature, the fact that Saturn is in the ascendant and it's Sunday, I'd  say he's been dead up to eighteen hours, probably not less than fourteen, that puts it between nine and one last night.
Does that square with anything you know?’
‘It would have a job not to.’
Wycliffe was always irritated by Franks, by his flamboyant and casual approach to death.
He went on: ‘I would like the contents of his pockets now; his clothes will go to Forensic.’
‘You don't need me to tell you that he was stunned first, then strangled.’
‘The weapon used for the blow?’
Franks peeled off his surgical gloves.
‘I don't know.
Perhaps a piece of metal piping with a bit of a ragged edge.’
‘How about this?’
Wycliffe pointed to exhibit ‘A’.
Franks grinned.
‘Looks all right to me.
It seems to have struck edge-on as though the blow nearly missed.
That caused more bleeding than our friend probably bargained for.
I expect he/she wanted to avoid being spattered.’
‘And did he/she succeed?’
‘Perhaps.
The blood would trickle, not come in spurts.’
‘What about the ligature?
Anything enlightening about that?’
‘Not really.
Plaited flex certainly but it probably had a large knot or something to increase pressure in the region of the larynx.’
‘So we are looking for someone who knew his business.’
‘Someone who came fully prepared anyway.’
The body was moved once more to make the pockets accessible and Fox searched them — there were only those in his trousers; he was wearing a cardigan in place of a jacket.
The contents were predictable: a leather key-fold, a couple of pounds in coin, and a  handkerchief.
No safe key; it would have been too large for the key-fold.
Franks said: ‘Well, I'm off, Charles.
Shift him when you like but the sooner you get him over to me the better.
They tell me there's still a chance of a decent lunch at the hotel on the prom.’
Wycliffe saw Franks and his secretary off at the shop door.
Misty rain or Sunday lunch, or sheer boredom had dispersed the spectators and Lady Street was deserted.
CHAPTER FOUR
Sunday (continued)
The family had gathered in the kitchen for a late lunch made up of left-overs.
There was no appliance in the kitchen less than thirty years old; the walls were painted cream with a green dado and the red-tiled floor was scrubbed every Friday by the cleaning woman.
The wall clock had ‘Glynn Books’ lettered on its face and had been transferred to the kitchen from the shop in some major upheaval of the past.
They had eaten what there was, sitting or standing around; only Sara sat at the table.
Gina said: ‘I'll make some coffee — or tea, if anybody wants it.’
Nobody spoke and she went on: ‘Tea or coffee, Gerald?’
Her brother was standing by the window, looking across the yard to the single-storey extension which housed his father's office.
He turned to her: ‘What?…
All right, if you like.
I'll have coffee.’
‘Barry?’
Gina's husband was perched on a stool by the refrigerator.
To his straw-coloured hair and blue eyes he added an obvious desire to please, at least to be agreeable, attributes which were rare amongst the Glynns.
In zoological terms Barry was a commensal — a tolerated intruder from another species.
He seemed startled by his wife speaking his name.
‘Yes — sorry, what is it?’
‘Do you want coffee or tea?’
Gina enunciated the words as though speaking to a backward child.
‘Yes, yes please; I'll have coffee if you're making some.’
Gina filled the kettle and laid out cups and saucers.
In the brooding silences the ticking of the clock seemed to become louder.
They were trapped in each other 's company, each one wanting to break away, to do anything rather than stay there together, but none of them would risk being thought unfeeling, or odd.
It was the same with talk: what is an acceptable subject of conversation when one of the family has been murdered and the police are in the house?
Only Sara seemed composed and judicial; looking directly at Gerald she said: ‘The police have only just started their questioning; I think we should be very careful about what we say to them.
It will be all too easy to raise in their minds questions which have nothing to do with your father's death.’
And when they had drunk their coffee it was Sara who broke the spell.
She got up from her chair.
‘Well, I've got things to do.’
As she was leaving, Gerald said: ‘Shouldn't you tell me what it is I'm supposed to keep quiet about?’
Sara looked at her nephew but said nothing.
When the door had closed behind her Gerald waited, his eye on the door, as though to make sure that she was not coming back.
Gina said: ‘Why be so bloody-minded, Gerald?’
Gerald countered with a question of his own: ‘Has the Big Chief grilled you yet?’
‘I've spoken to him.’
‘And?’
‘He asked me what I was doing last night, and then one or two questions about mother.’
‘About mother?
What about her?’
‘He wanted to know if, looking back, I was surprised that she'd left.
I said that I was.’
Gerald said: ‘My God!
He intends to stir with a big spoon!’
And immediately changed the subject.
‘When I got home last night and found the yard door bolted I thought the old man had deliberately locked me out but the police reckon that whoever killed father was with him then — while I was banging on the door, trying to get in.’
Gina was incredulous.
‘You're saying they think the man…the man who killed father locked himself in?’
‘Why not?
He wouldn't want to be disturbed and all he had to do to get out was draw the bloody bolt.’
‘You think that's what happened?’
‘I've no idea but I'm beginning to wonder if the cops don't have another idea.
If the door was still bolted when they arrived this morning —’
‘Was it?’
‘I don't know, but if it was I think they're going to get round to some really nasty questions.’
Barry had been sitting, hunched up on his stool, his heels caught in the crossbar, now he became agitated.
‘You're not saying they might think it was one of us?
They couldn't!
It's too fantastic!’
Gerald was patronizing.
‘You'll be surprised what nasty minds some of these coppers have, Barry.
They're not all like your PC Palmer, singing Schubert to well-heeled geriatrics in your Sunday concerts.’
Gina, in a bored voice, said: ‘You really are a tailor-made bastard, Gerald.’
Gerald went on as though she had not spoken.
‘One other thing they'll want to know is the real reason why Sara was in father's office at just after six this morning.’
Christine had been telling herself: ‘This isn't something I've read in the newspapers, this is happening to us!
My father has been murdered and my uncle…
Yet  we sit here drinking coffee and…and talking as if …’
She said aloud, with an edge to her voice: ‘What are you saying, Gerald?
Aunt Sara wasn't feeling well; she came downstairs and saw a light in father's office…’
Gerald was gentle with her.
‘It was daylight at six, Chris, and the curtains were drawn in father's office-like now.
See for yourself: could you tell from here if there was a light on?’
After Franks had left, Wycliffe went to pay a courtesy call at the local station.
The skies were clearing.
The weather, fickle over this western peninsula, makes mock of the forecasters.
As he walked up Lady Street the sun broke through and he was able to take his first leisurely look at the pleasing medley of styles, periods, and usage.
The pavements were narrow, granite slabs set at ankle-wrenching angles, so that in the Sabbath quiet it was pleasanter to walk in the road.
‘M. Doble: Wine Merchant’— presumably the other chess player, now in hospital.
A freshly painted shop front with shining glass and a window full of bottles.
The windows over the shop were discreetly curtained so it was likely that whatever Dobles there might be lived over the shop.
At the nick he found a reception committee from the press.
Even reporters are sluggish on Sundays.
‘I'll arrange a press briefing as soon as I have a base and something to say; meanwhile, all I can tell you is that early this morning Matthew Glynn, the bookseller, was found dead in his office in circumstances suggesting foul play.’
‘How did he die?’
‘I haven't had the pathologist's report but the indications are that he was strangled after being stunned by a blow to the head.’
A wizened little man Wycliffe had known of old, said: ‘Somebody didn't like him.
Are you expecting to make an arrest shortly?’
‘No.’
‘What was the motive?’
‘I've no idea, and that is the truth.’
‘Anything taken?’
‘Not as far as I know.’
‘A break-in?’
‘There were no signs of a forced entry.’
When they were satisfied that there was no more to be got they let him go.
He found Kersey, sitting at the desk in an upstair, borrowed office surrounded by house-to-house reports prepared on the premises.
Kersey said: ‘They're doing all they can but there's really no way they can fit us in here for any length of time.
Shaw is after an available property which Trice suggested.
It's just across the road from the bookshop, down a little alley; about eight hundred square feet in three rooms, up one flight of stairs.’
‘You've seen it?’
‘I think it should suit.’
‘Good enough.’
DS Shaw who, amongst other things, acted as the squad's quartermaster, would see to the hiring, and fitting out of the rooms with equipment from central stores.
‘Anything in the reports?’
In a symbolic gesture of renunciation Kersey pushed his cigarette pack farther away.
‘As usual, ninety per cent waste paper, but there is something on Sara.
A witness claims to have seen her in Alexandra Road last night at about 11.15.’
‘Reliable?’
‘Our chap thought so.’
‘And that ties in with what Dippy Martin had to say  about a woman entering by the Glynns’ back door at around 11.30.’
In movements which could have been those of a somnambulist Kersey had retrieved his cigarettes and was placing one between his lips while feeling in his pockets for a lighter.
‘You want me to follow this up?’
Wycliffe said: ‘I'll think about it; we need to be careful with Sara.
Anything else in the reports?’
‘Only gossip.
It's common talk that Alfred is round the twist and that he's got worse recently, since his mother died.
They say he's been stopped from dispensing NHS prescriptions.’
Kersey stroked his rubbery nose between finger and thumb, a sure sign of cerebration.
‘How do you see it, sir?
A family thing or an outsider?’
Wycliffe was dismissive.
‘How can anybody see it?
Franks says Glynn died between nine and one, he might as well have said last night sometime.
It's open to the whole family plus any outsider with a sufficient grudge against Glynn.
‘The only indication we have is that somebody seems to have drawn the bolt on the yard door between Gerald failing to get in at 11.15, and the mystery woman succeeding at 11.30.
It's tempting to think that the killer made his getaway during that fifteen minutes.’
‘Or that somebody in the house wanted to give that impression.’
‘Guessing games!’
‘Now it looks as though the mystery woman could have been Sara.’
Wycliffe sighed.
‘It's all speculative.
I doubt if we shall get far by concentrating on opportunity; it's motive that matters in this case.’
‘The brothers weren't exactly fraternal.’
‘No, but I've yet to come across anything that looks like a motive for murder.
Anyway, I'm off to talk to this  character Swayne.
You see what you can do with Alfred — better still, let Lucy Lane try; the feminine touch.’
Kersey called after him: ‘Shaw has fixed us up at the hotel on the prom — is that all right?’
‘Sounds luxurious.
I wonder if our paymasters will stand for it.’
‘They're still on out-of-season rates.’
Next door to the Glynn shop there was a narrow frontage like a slice cut from a larger premises: two storeys, one room width, with an attic.
The shop window was tiny and covered by a metal grille.
In it coins and medals were set out on faded velvet pads and, at the back, there were cards of stamps displayed under amber polythene to protect them from the light.
A discoloured printed card read: ‘Collections Valued and Purchased.’
Ronnie Swayne: probably the last person to see Glynn alive apart from his killer.
Watched by the group of people opposite, Wycliffe pressed the doorbell and waited.
After an interval he heard someone coming downstairs, bolts were drawn and the door was opened by a little man with freckles and vestiges of red hair.
‘Mr Swayne?’
‘You're from the police.’
It was a statement.
‘Chief Superintendent Wycliffe.’
‘I'm glad you've come.’
The door did not lead into the shop as Wycliffe had expected but into a minute hall with the shop door on the right, and stairs leading up.
Swayne secured the door and led the way upstairs to a sizeable but cluttered room at the front of the house, overlooking the street.
Swayne wore rust-coloured trousers and a matching pullover, his movements were erratic, rapid yet precise, so that Wycliffe was reminded of a little red monkey.
‘Please sit down…
Drink?…
No?
Smoke if you want to…
I'm glad you've come.
I was thinking of getting in touch.
I had one of your chaps here this morning asking questions but I wanted to talk to someone in authority.’
On a desk by the window a tray of stamps was in process of being sorted; there were bookshelves, a cabinet of shallow drawers presumably for coins, a safe, a filing cabinet, journals and catalogues were piled on the floor and, incongruously, a pier table and a French commode stood against one wall looking uncomfortable.
The room was untidy, dusty, and much used.
Wycliffe put on his cud-chewing look and settled comfortably in his chair.
‘It seems likely that you were the last person to see Glynn alive, apart from his murderer, but at the moment I am more interested in what you can tell me about him — the sort of man he was — and about his friends and his enemies as far as you can.
You've known him a long time?’
‘Pretty well all my life.
When I was young my father kept an antiques shop where the restaurant is now, so we weren't far from the bookshop; the two families were on friendly terms and I was at grammar school with the Glynn boys.
Matt and I were the same age within a month but Alfred was two or three years older and Maurice quite a bit younger.
But the Glynns didn't actually come to live next to their shop until about the time Matthew got married.
Before that they lived out at Trebyan — where Maurice's pottery is now.’
‘Can you suggest any reason why anyone might have wanted to kill Matthew?’
Swayne was emphatic.
‘None!
Matt wasn't the sort of man to antagonize people.
I know he made the sparks fly sometimes in council committees but most of that was good humoured.’
Wycliffe's manner was easy, conversational.
‘I've  heard that he wasn't on speaking terms with Alfred and that the feud — whatever it was — goes back many years…’
A quick look from the sharp little eyes.
‘You don't imagine that Alfred —’
Wycliffe cut him short.
‘I don't imagine anything, Mr Swayne; I'm trying to find out as much as possible about the people concerned and I have to start somewhere.’
‘Yes, of course.’
Swayne took a small cigar from a box near his chair.
‘You don't mind?…
You won't join me?’
He went through the ritual of lighting the cigar and took a first luxurious puff before continuing: ‘It's not easy to put this sort of thing in proper perspective.’
A brief laugh.
‘Family feuds are hell; they don't have much logic.’
Wycliffe said nothing and his expression remained bland, almost sleepy.
‘Well, Matt and Alfred had; very different temperaments.
Alfred, as the elder, was expected to follow father in the business but he jibbed; he wanted to be a doctor.
To cut a long story short, he couldn't make the grade so he ended up as a pharmacist in the business his father bought for him as a going concern.
I'm pretty sure, in the way these things work, that Alfred felt he had made the wrong choice and, illogically, held it against Matthew.
But that was only the start.’
The door of the room opened a little way and a large tabby cat insinuated itself through the gap.
It paused, assessing the situation, green-eyed, then it leapt on to the arm of Swayne's chair and a moment or two later it had settled, tail and paws tucked in, tidily disposed for sleep.
Unnecessarily, Wycliffe said: ‘Your cat?’
Swayne stroked the creature.
‘Clarence — my family, and a lot less trouble than some other families I could mention.
‘Anyway, getting back to the Glynns…
Shortly after taking over the shop Alfred fell in love with the sort of girl men have fantasies about, and she seemed to respond.
Nobody knew much about her, she'd turned up in the town as a sort of companion-housekeeper to an old lady who had a house in Morrab Close, a Mrs Armitage — a widow.
I think she was a relative.
Anyway, Alfred couldn't believe his luck; he'd never really made it with girls and here he was hitting the jackpot.
The old lady died and within weeks they'd decided to get married; they started furnishing the rooms over the shop and all was set for a wedding.’
Swayne paused, watching the smoke curl upwards from his little cigar.
‘Well, there was a wedding all right, but it was Matthew who married the girl.’
Wycliffe was roused.
‘You mean you've been talking about — what was she called?— Inez — the mother of Matthew's children?’
‘Exactly, and it didn't improve matters from Alfred's point of view when he discovered that she was already a couple of months pregnant by Matthew when she married him.’
‘It must have caused a scandal.’
‘It didn't actually.
The Glynns have always played their cards close to their chests and, like Clarence here, they have the knack of fading into the background when it suits them.
There was a certain amount of gossip but it soon died down.’
Wycliffe was impressed.
‘And then, eleven years later, she walked out on Matthew and her three children.’
Swayne gave a short laugh.
‘That was Inez — that was!’
After a pause he went on: ‘I think you'll agree that Alfred had good reason to feel aggrieved.
From the  time of the marriage he cut himself off entirely from his brother, but it wasn't only from Matthew: he became more and more of a recluse until now he hardly sees anyone but the people he meets in the course of his business — and they're getting fewer by the month.
Until his mother died he used to pay a routine Wednesday visit but, of course, that's stopped now.’
‘Do you have any contact with him?’
Swayne smiled.
‘One of the privileged few.
I felt sorry for Alfred at the time — I still do.
I look in occasionally for a drink and a chat though he's getting more and more difficult to talk to.
As a matter of fact, Matthew asked me to keep an eye on him — I think he felt guilty.’
When Swayne stopped speaking small sounds reached them from the street: a woman's heels tapping on the paving stones, a snatch of conversation from the people opposite…
Swayne waited for some comment on his revelations, a word of commendation, even thanks, but when Wycliffe spoke it was on a quite different subject.
‘What happened last night?’
‘You mean, what happened here?’
Wycliffe said nothing.
There were advantages in failing to define your terms.
Precise questions encourage precise answers while vague ones often elicit more information.
Swayne said: ‘Matt arrived about half-seven and we played chess — just the one game and it was a rout.
Matt was off his game.
We chatted a bit, had a drink or two, and he left at half-past nine — said he had work to do in his office.’
‘The two of you were alone?’
‘Yes, Mike Doble usually joins us but he's in hospital at the moment for a heart operation.’
‘Would you say that Glynn was much as usual?’
A pause to consider.
‘No, he was preoccupied; worried about the business.
He's had problems lately: they need working capital and Matt has a dread of, as he put it, ‘getting into the hands of the bank’.
I don't think it was anything very serious.’
Wycliffe stood up.
‘Well, thank you for your help, Mr Swayne.
I expect I shall be calling on you again.’
Swayne escorted him downstairs and, at his own request, Wycliffe left by way of the backyard.
‘Is this what Glynn did last night?’
‘Yes, he always comes and goes this way.’
Some of the backs were dilapidated but the two premises belonging to the Glynns stood out in good repair: the wall had been recently pointed and colour-washed and the door freshly painted.
The door was bolted but Wycliffe banged on it and was admitted by a uniformed policeman.
He could not make up his mind about Swayne.
The little man had appeared shocked at the very idea that Alfred might be suspected of killing his brother yet he had gone on, with a certain relish, to provide a convincing motive — if a motive which has lain dormant for thirty years is still convincing.
Festering hatred, nurtured and cultivated like a precious plant for half a lifetime, is good stuff for the novelist, but does it happen?
He stood in the middle of the yard.
To his right was the single-storey extension which housed Glynn's office with its own exit to the yard.
The killer could have reached the office from the lane, or by crossing the yard from the house, or by coming through the shop from the house.
The yard door was bolted at 11.15 but a woman — Sara?— was seen to enter by it at around 11.30.
Presumably she bolted the door after her for that was how the police had found it in the morning.
There were alternative scenarios: the killer, an outsider, was still with his victim when Gerald tried to get  in but, by the time the woman arrived, he had left.
Dippy Martin had not seen anyone but he had spent some time at the top of the lane.
Alternatively, the killer was someone from the house who had secured the door to ensure privacy, but opened it again after his crime to confirm the impression that an outsider was involved.
There were other possibilities but for the moment these seemed the most plausible.
Of course it was conceivable that the assailant had climbed the yard wall but, without a ladder of some sort, this would have been an acrobatic feat.
Wycliffe felt like a crossword addict who has some of the clues, a few of the answers but no grid on which to relate them.
The back door of the house opened and a girl came out into the yard.
Christine, he supposed, the younger sister.
She was shaking a tablecloth when she looked up and saw him.
Her expression froze; a vague gesture and she turned to disappear indoors.
Sometimes the strangeness of his job came home to him.
What had he to do with that girl?
Why should she be troubled by the mere sight of him?
A few hours ago he had not known that she existed, now he was a licensed voyeur, authorized to meddle in her most intimate concerns.
In the office Fox and his team had completed their work including an inventory.
‘Except the safe, sir.’
Fox had a grievance, his manner was indignant.
‘I found the key eventually, it was in Glynn's bedroom — in a little bureau drawer with other keys.
I asked to have one of the family present when I opened the safe but Gerald objects to it being opened at all without their solicitor being present.
That would mean putting it off until tomorrow.’
‘Well?’
‘I told him I would ask you.’
‘It sounds reasonable, tell him to arrange for his solicitor to be here in the morning.’
‘But he's being deliberately obstructive.’
‘Perhaps, but that's life, Fox.
Put a seal on the safe and we'll see what's inside in the morning.
By the way, have you ever taken a cat's paw-prints?’
Fox was wary.
‘I can't say I have — a dog's, sir, but never a cat's.’
‘Have a try with Swayne's cat next door; he might have made the bloody marks on the carpet.
His name is Clarence, by the way.
Be nice to him — and to Swayne — and find out, if you can, what time Clarence came in last night.’
Fox was disapproving.
‘I take it you are serious, sir?’
‘As a judge.’
It was late afternoon.
That morning Wycliffe had heard of the Glynn family for the first time and in the few hours since he had learned something about them; about Gerald, Gina and Barry, about Christine and Aunt Sara, and about the uncles, Alfred and Maurice.
But he was still a very long way from knowing enough to judge the value of what each of them had chosen, or would choose to tell him, and what they would, for differing reasons, see fit to suppress.
Above all he knew little more about Matthew Glynn than might reasonably appear in his obituary, but he needed to know the man well enough to see him going about his daily life against the background of his home and shop and in the context of his family, friends, and acquaintances.
‘Glynn's bedroom — which room is it?’
‘Opposite the top of the stairs, sir.
‘And the bureau — is it locked?’
‘Yes, but the key was among those in Glynn's pocket.
I've got them here.’
Fox handed over the key-fold.
Wycliffe went through the shop and entered the  house by the communicating door.
It opened into a passage which ran the length of the house.
Voices came from somewhere at the back — probably the kitchen: families seem to favour the kitchen as an assembly point in times of crisis.
He had intended to visit Matthew's bedroom alone but changed his mind and went to the kitchen.
He knocked and opened the door.
They were standing around in frozen postures like a group caught when the music stops in a game of Statues.
‘Miss Glynn — Miss Sara Glynn?’
Sara wasn't in the kitchen but a voice behind him said: ‘You wanted me, Superintendent?’
He had not heard her approach.
‘I shall be grateful if you will show me your brother's room.’
He followed Sara up the stairs and into Matthew's bedroom.
The heavy wardrobe, the dressing-table with triple mirrors, the tallboy — all in walnut — and the matching double bed with its honeycomb quilt, belonged to the era of Matthew's father or even his grandfather.
Above the mantelpiece, in a place of honour, was an enlarged photograph of a middle-aged woman with the hairstyle and in the dress of the Forties; it was inscribed, boldly: ‘To Matt, from Mother’.
Wycliffe looked at the massive double bed.
‘Did your brother sleep in this room when your father was alive?’
‘No, he moved in here only recently — after mother died.’
A curve of the lips.
‘Of course it was the bedroom belonging to the head of the house but he couldn't have turned mother out.’
The irony was bitter.
‘I see.
I'm sorry to inflict this on you, Miss Glynn, but I want to look at the contents of the bureau amongst other things and it is better that a member of the family should be present.
It's also a chance to have another word with you.’
His manner was pleasant but she was unresponsive; she stood, motionless in the middle of the room, as though waiting patiently for her services to be called upon.
The bureau which was against the window wall and the chair beside it did not match the rest of the furniture.
Wycliffe unlocked and lowered the flap.
Everything was in meticulous order: envelopes and headed paper in pigeon holes, a section for unpaid bills, another for receipted accounts; a box for stamps.
Evidently Matthew had kept his personal affairs quite separate from his shop and council business.
The bureau had a single, locked drawer and in it, amongst other things, Wycliffe found a cheque book, a paying-in book, and a sheaf of bank statements clipped together.
While still leafing through the statements he turned to Sara: ‘We have a witness who claims to have seen you in Alexandra Road after eleven on Saturday night, and you may know that a woman was seen going in by the back door of this house at half-past.’
Wycliffe did not look up from the statements and for some time Sara gave no sign that she had heard; then she said: ‘I've been very stupid.
One does something on the spur of the moment that is trivial and perhaps a little silly, then when that action is caught up in…in a tragic event, one feels quite foolish telling of it.’
Wycliffe had transferred his attention from statements to cheque stubs.
‘So what did you do on Saturday night?’
‘As I told you, I spent some time writing letters and when I'd finished I thought it would be pleasant to get some fresh air so I went out and posted them — in the box outside the main post office —’
‘What time was that?’
‘About a quarter past ten.
It was pleasant out of doors  and I went for a walk, down by the station, along the Wharf and across the promenade.’
‘Surely it was raining?’
‘Now and then, but I don't mind the rain.’
‘You went out and came back by the yard door?’
‘Yes.’
‘And you saw nothing either going or returning to the house which seemed suspicious or even unusual?’
‘Nothing.’
‘Did you enter the house through the kitchen door or through your brother's office and the shop?’
‘Why should I go through his office?
I saw the light there and assumed that he was working.’
Wycliffe said nothing for a while but continued with his study of the cheque stubs.
When he spoke it was to change the subject.
‘Your brother seems to have had little use for credit cards.’
She seemed surprised by the new topic, perhaps relieved.
At any rate she came to stand by the bureau.
‘Matthew had very old-fashioned views about credit, even in running the business.’
Wycliffe held out a cheque stub folded to expose a particular counterfoil.
‘A cheque in favour of Eurotravel, dated a couple of weeks ago.
Was he planning a trip?’
‘Yes, a holiday; he intended to go away in May — it was a regular thing.
He had two holidays a year: in May he usually went abroad for a fortnight, then in October he would have another fortnight somewhere in this country.’
‘Do you know where he intended going next month?’
‘He tried to visit a different European country on each of his spring trips.’
She smiled.
‘I think it was Bulgaria's turn this year.’
‘He went on these trips alone?’
‘Oh, yes; I often wonder how he managed; he wasn't  the sort to make friends easily but he seemed to enjoy himself.
Of course they were package tours though he seems to have spent a surprising amount on this one.
Matthew was so careful with his money in most things.’
A few things remained in the bureau drawer; the odds and ends that accumulate in drawers: an engagement diary for 1981 which had only a few entries; an old wallet, empty except for an out-of-date RAC membership card.
‘Your brother seems to have kept nothing to remind him of his wife.’
‘Does that surprise you?
When it was obvious that Inez was not coming back he packed up everything connected with her and stored it in one of the attics.
He did it himself.
No-one was allowed to go through her belongings.’
‘She was still the mother of his children.’
Sara said nothing.
Wycliffe returned everything to the drawer.
He was in the act of locking the bureau flap when he said: ‘Miss Glynn, what made you go into your brother's office this morning when you came down, as you say, to make yourself a cup of tea?’
She was terse.
‘I told you; I saw the light.’
‘No.’
‘I beg your pardon!’
‘It was daylight at the time and the curtains in your brother's office were drawn.’
It took her a second or two to recover.
‘But I'm sure I saw a light…
If the curtains were slightly parted —’
‘Were they?’
‘I am trying to remember the exact circumstances; I am not accustomed to having my word questioned.’
Wycliffe stood looking at her, his face expressionless.
She was trying to decide between aggression and a more conciliatory approach but Wycliffe cut her short.
‘I advise you to think very carefully about what you have told me, Miss Glynn, and then to volunteer a statement.’
When Wycliffe left the Glynn house a bell in the church, almost next door, was tolling for evening service; not the usual tumbling peal but a monotonous counting out of strokes on the tenor bell, presumably in token of respect for bereaved neighbours.
He had to make his way past people converging on the church and was pointed out by several.
About half the tables in the hotel dining-room were occupied but Wycliffe, with Kersey and Lucy Lane, was placed in one of the window embrasures which gave them all the privacy they could have wished.
Detective Sergeant Lucy Lane was an established member of the Serious Crimes Squad and she more than earned her keep.
She was also an attractive girl.
With her mass of dark hair, her so-called classical features, and a slender body, she might have been a Klimt model clad in sober woollies instead of erotic raiment.
The fact that Wycliffe often deferred to her judgement made Kersey suspicious of her intrusion into their cosy male councils.
The food was good: a thin soup followed by pork spare ribs.
A white-haired waiter with a drooping moustache confided that the marinade was a speciality of the chef.
They drank Chablis, nicely chilled.
Kersey said: ‘Worth starving for.’
‘Let's finish the bottle.’
Lucy, with her hand over her glass, said: ‘No more for me.’
With the cheese Wycliffe told them of his interview with Swayne, and of Sara's revised version of her doings the previous evening.
Kersey said: ‘So Matthew married Alfred’ girlfriend after getting her pregnant; not exactly fraternal conduct, but as a motive for murder it's surely worn a bit thin after thirty years.’
Wycliffe turned to Lucy: ‘What did you make of Alfred?’
Lucy patted her lips with her table napkin.
‘I'm not sure.’
That in itself was unusual.
Lucy rarely prevaricated.
‘I felt sorry for him.
He's living alone in near squalor and he's obviously a sick man.’
‘You must have got something.’
‘It was difficult.
His sister, Sara, had been to see him and I think she must have upset him.
Of course I don't know what he's usually like.
I couldn't keep him to any particular point — he kept slipping from one subject to another without seeming to realize it.’
Kersey helped himself to a little more of the Stilton.
‘In other words, he's a bit gaga.’
Lucy frowned.
‘I'm not so sure about that.
My impression was that I was only getting a small part of his attention, that he was profoundly preoccupied and that the one thing he wanted was to be left alone.’
‘Was he afraid?’
‘Afraid?’
She shook her head.
‘Certainly not of me or of anything I might do.’
‘In your opinion, would he have been physically capable of the killing?’
‘I think so; after all it wasn't a job for a muscle man.
I suppose you knew that he had medical training?’
‘He told you that himself?’
‘In one of his digressions.
He either failed or didn't take his finals; I couldn't make out which.’
Kersey said: ‘I find it hard to believe that anybody, even a nut, would murder after thirty years of procrastination.’
Lucy emptied her wine glass.
‘Perhaps the fact that  his mother had only recently died had something to do with it.’
Wycliffe nodded.
‘That's a point we mustn't overlook in all this.
What was his attitude to Matthew?’
‘It's hard to say.
His first comment was: ‘I haven't seen much of Matthew recently’— as though they hadn't happened to meet in the street for a week or two — not that they hadn't spoken for nearly thirty years.’
‘Any particular antagonism?’
‘Not obviously.
His attitude was that of a well-bred man reluctant to discuss some family difference with a prying outsider.
To be honest I couldn't make up my mind about him and I'd like you to see him yourself.’
Outside the hotel window people strolled past, trailed by their dogs; Penzance must have a high rating in the doggy charts.
Others watched the sea from their parked cars strung out along the promenade.
It was a fine evening, the sea was an unruffled expanse of silvery blue; the Mount stood out, a grey-green pyramid with its fairy-tale castle at the top catching the low sun.
Everything was in sharp focus, the horizon was a clear line dividing sea and sky; more rain about.
Kersey brushed biscuit crumbs from his jacket.
‘Coming back to Sara: she went to post a letter, took a little walk in the rain, heard nothing, saw nothing and said nothing about it because she felt silly — is that it, sir?’
‘Just about.’
‘Do you believe it?’
‘I've asked her to think over her position, including her story about seeing a light in her brother's office from the kitchen this morning.
I've suggested she should volunteer a fresh statement.’
Wycliffe folded his table napkin and got up from his chair.
‘Whatever Sara might or might not have done, I think I'll go for a walk.’
It was predictable whenever he was away from home — the stroll before bed — and they both knew better than to offer their company.
He walked to Newlyn, where the paintings and the pilchards came from in the old days, and returned along the sea-front with the street-lamps struggling against the great plain of darkness that was the sea.
Eventually he went to sleep to the sound of little waves lapping against the sea-wall.
CHAPTER FIVE
Monday morning
The Incident Room premises secured by Shaw were part of a complex of old buildings near the wharf which were suffering from planning blight.
If their historical interest had saved them from the pick, the swinging steel ball, and the bulldozer, their intractable lay-out had discouraged renovators who might have put them to some use.
The rooms were over a former shop now used by a small-time printer, and the clacking and rumbling of his press would underscore the activities of the squad.
Already equipment and furniture were being delivered from central stores and technicians were installing a communications unit.
The smallest of the three rooms had been set aside for the officer in charge; it had a desk, a couple of chairs, and a telephone which, allegedly, would soon be functional.
Wycliffe looked about him and approved, especially of the walls which, in some past time, had been stencilled with designs that were mildly but cheerfully crazy so that to look at them for long made the eyes go funny.
Another plus: the window of this room looked out over grey slate roofs to the harbour and Albert Pier.
‘Incident Rooms I have Known’: Wycliffe could have written a book about them.
At the briefing he agreed to see Alfred, while Kersey would talk to the son-in-law, Barry Morse.
‘The outsider’, Wycliffe called him.
‘Gossip has it that he's a  good accountant, keen on music, and henpecked.
I don't suppose the three are incompatible but that's all we know about him.
Among other things you might get his view of the bookshop and of his father-in-law as a business man.’
Kersey grumbled: ‘I don't go down well with bank managers, accountants, and others of the breed; we are non simpatico.
Why not let Shaw do it?’
Wycliffe was brusque.
‘Because Shaw has his hands full with the Incident Room and you've got the rank.
When you've finished with Morse see what you can find out about Inez Glynn's disappearance; the records should be available by now.
‘Incidentally, when Inez went Matthew collected all her belongings together, everything that reminded him of her, and stored them in one of the attics; nobody else was allowed to touch the stuff.
I'm arranging for Fox to go through it.’
‘You think there's a connection?’
‘I've no idea.’
Lucy Lane was assigned to the bookshop; among other things to keep an eye on the opening of the safe.
House-to-house inquiries would continue with special attention to Matthew's acquaintances in business and in his council activities.
A steep alley provided a short cut from the wharf area to Lady Street.
The street looked very different from its Sunday image; the shops were open and delivery vans effectively blocked the way for all but the most resolute pedestrians.
It had rained overnight but now the sun was breaking through and the scene had a certain gaiety.
Seagulls swooped and planed overhead laying raucous claim to some scrap of food in the possession of one of them.
It was nine by the church clock and another clock over a bank in the town hammered out the strokes.
‘Alfred Glynn MPS.
Chemist and Druggist.’
The sign, in faded letters, was suspended over a shop window cluttered with a dusty, neglected display of sickroom adjuncts and toilet articles along with dummy boxes and bottles and tins advertising baby foods and patent medicines.
There were two or three granite steps up to the front door which had a grubby ‘Closed’ notice hung behind its glass panel; no bell, and no other door.
Wycliffe decided to approach from the rear.
He had to go through the churchyard to reach the back lane so he counted the houses to be sure of identifying Alfred's door.
It was devoid of paint and dragged on its hinges.
Part of the yard was taken up with a shed, the rest was a wilderness of weed with a slate path up to the back door.
He walked up the path.
There was a bell-push by the door and he pressed it.
A bell sounded somewhere in the house but there was no response.
After two more attempts he tried the door; it was unsecured and it opened into a little hall from which stairs led upwards.
He called: ‘Mr Glynn!’
Still no answer.
After a short wait he climbed the stairs and at the top he called again.
The only sound came from the ticking of a clock.
Several doors opened off the landing and there were ladder-like stairs which presumably led to the attics.
He tried the first door, it opened into the kitchen; the second led to the living-room.
He called once more without result then advanced into the room.
It was L-shaped and only when he reached the comer of the ‘L’ could he see the whole of the room.
There was no-one there.
It was a cheerless, comfortless room; only tattered books on makeshift shelves and an old-fashioned record player suggested any kind of relaxation; no radio, no television.
There were no pictures on the walls but on the mantelpiece, amongst a random collection of odds  and ends, there was a framed photograph of an elderly woman; her hair was gathered into an old-fashioned bun on the top of her head; she had a smooth, rather spoilt face and an expression of absolute serenity.
The photograph was inscribed: ‘To Alfred from mother, at 75’.
A single-bar electric fire stood in front of the empty grate and a wing-backed chair, threadbare and with broken springs, was drawn up in front of it.
On a low table by the chair were the remnants of a spartan breakfast — a few crumbs of toast, a tub of margarine, and a mug with coffee dregs at the bottom; also a book, open but face down: Le Carré's The Honourable Schoolboy.
Morning light streamed through the window searching out the shabbiness and the dust, the peeling walls and cobwebbed corners.
Through the window he could see over grey slate roofs across the bay to Newlyn, a mound of little houses behind its quays and boats and sheds.
A shaft of sunlight caught the hill above the village turning the fields acid green.
Wycliffe returned to the landing and tried another door: the bathroom and lavatory.
The Victorian stoneware ‘suite’ from Mr Twyford's manufactory was decorated with flowers in willow-pattern blue but paint flaked off the walls and the linoleum had worn through to the floorboards.
The next room was Alfred's bedroom: an iron bedstead with a tumbled mass of greyish bedding, a chest of drawers and a non-matching wardrobe.
There were more books in a nest of shelves by the bed.
For no reason he could think of the rooms reminded him of a deserted stage set when the play has ended its run and the actors have gone.
But it was the main bedroom which came as a surprise and a shock.
The room was in the front of the house and the  window overlooking the narrow street was hung with net curtains and pale blue velvet drapes which were almost completely drawn.
It was a moment before his eyes became accustomed to the gloom.
The room had been vandalized — viciously so; but it was equally apparent that it had been furnished and cared for at a level totally different from the other rooms.
The double bed, the wardrobe, dressing-table and tallboy were mahogany, the counterpane was of moiré silk and the eiderdown was covered in the same material; the carpet was a red-ground Wilton.
But the polished surfaces of the furniture had been scored, even gouged; the counterpane had been cut to ribbons and the eiderdown slit open in several places.
A carriage clock lay smashed on the floor beside an art-nouveau lamp; and the bedside table on which, presumably, they had both stood, had been split almost in two.
On the carpet by the tallboy were several red carnations, as fresh as they had come from the florist, and beside them, a shattered glass spill.
Water from the spill had soaked the carpet.
Also on the floor were three or four framed pictures which had been trampled stamped upon, so that the frames were broken and the glass shattered to fragments.
They were photographic enlargements, head-and-shoulders portraits, all of the same girl, photographed in profile; looking up and looking down, and seen from the right and from the left.
So this was Inez, the femme fatale of the Glynn brothers: her features were patrician: a long, slender neck, pouting, sensuous lips, a slightly aquiline nose and sloping forehead — a model for an Egyptian tomb-painting or limestone relief.
This was Inez in her early twenties, before she became the mother of Matthew's children.
In the mingling of the genes the children had  missed their mother's sculptural beauty and been forced to settle for mere good looks.
The double bed had been made up for two and there were two pyjama cases — relics of a past time — one embroidered with the letter ‘I’, the other with an ‘A’.
But it was obvious that the room was never used; it was a museum, perhaps a shrine.
So, for thirty years Alfred Glynn had preserved this room as it had been when he still believed that the silk counterpane and the eiderdown would be the covers on his marriage bed.
He had not only preserved the room, he had cleaned it with meticulous care and provided fresh flowers in the little glass spill.
Here was the connubial complement to Miss Havisham's wedding feast but without the cobwebs.
Now, certainly within the last twenty-four hours, the room had been vandalized.
By Alfred himself?
Or by another?
And where was Alfred?
He did not remember having seen a telephone.
He returned to the living-room and found that what he had taken to be a cupboard door, in fact gave access by a flight of stairs to the shop.
As he descended he was aware of a distinctive blend of smells recalling chemist shops of his childhood; it was compounded, among other things, of disinfectant, Parma violets, and balsam.
The shop was dimly lit and cluttered but he found his way to the front door which was bolted; Alfred had not left and could not return that way.
At the other end of the shop, behind a hammered-glass screen, was the dispensary and, adjoining that, a tiny office — with a telephone.
He tried the number of the Incident Room, found that it was functional, and spoke to the duty officer.
‘I'm at the pharmacy.
I want DS Fox here with his team and a uniformed man.
They should come by the back door.
Is Mr Kersey or DS Lane there?’
‘No, sir, but DS Shaw is.’
‘Then ask him to come to the phone.’
Shaw spent most of his time on organization and records; he was rarely involved directly in inquiries but he had been a first-class man on the ground.
‘Shaw speaking, sir.’
‘I want you to organize inquiries as to the whereabouts of Alfred Glynn, starting at the bookshop then going on to residents in the street who might have seen him; get in touch with his brother at the pottery.
No alarm as yet; it's quite possible that he's gone for one of his walks or he may be shopping or just visiting someone, but I'm concerned.’
While phoning Wycliffe opened drawers and cupboards in the Dickensian desk at which he was standing.
One cupboard was stacked with old prescription books while one of the drawers held enough sealing wax to supply a pre-war dispensary with red seals on the drug packets of a generation.
He was momentarily startled by the ringing of a doorbell.
He had to climb the stairs to the living-room then go down again to the back door.
They had sent him a WPC who looked like a schoolgirl dressed in police uniform for a school play.
‘WPC Ferrers, sir.
DS Fox is on his way.’
‘Do you know Alfred Glynn?’
‘Yes, sir, I've lived here all my life.’
‘I want you to stay here in the yard until he returns.
When he does — if he does — report to DS Fox before you let him into the house, and leave the explanations to Fox.’
‘What about the front of the premises, sir?’
Young she might be, stupid she was not.
‘The shop door is bolted on the inside so he can't get in that way.’
Fox arrived with an assistant and Wycliffe took him to the vandalized room.
‘It's obvious that this is all  fresh, probably done this morning.
I want to know whether it was done by Glynn himself or by an outsider.
Glynn's prints must be all over the premises so there should be no problem.’
‘Are we authorized to be here, sir?’
‘No, but that is my responsibility.
If Glynn turns up you will be warned by the WPC.
Go easy on him; one way or another he is or will be very distressed.’
Wycliffe left the house feeling disorientated as he did when emerging from the darkness and isolation of a cinema into reality and the light of day.
Lady Street had returned to what must have been normal for any morning at this time; the delivery vans had gone, there was sporadic traffic in the one-way street, and people had no time to stand about gawping at the bookshop though they slowed their pace in passing and tried to look in without appearing to do so.
There was a notice on the door: ‘Closed temporarily; all enquiries by telephone please.’
Wycliffe turned down the alley towards the Incident Room.
The printer, running off posters on his flat-bed press, was going through operations not significantly different from those performed by Caxton five hundred years earlier.
Police vehicles were tucked into every available space in the crooked, meandering alley and police personnel, uniformed and CID, were continually clattering up and down the stairs which led to the room above the printer's.
An alien presence had established itself in the heart of the town and people who had no connection with the crime under investigation or any other would feel uneasy until they were gone.
‘Paula!’
Sara was brusque.
‘You were in and out of this office all the time, you must have some idea of what my brother kept in his safe.’
Paula James, Matthew Glyrm's youthful amanuensis  (after a one-year course in office routines at the technical college) had turned up for work as usual, unaware of the events which had robbed her of her employer.
She found herself in his office, the centre of a family gathering with their lawyer and a policewoman.
Slightly confused, but by no means intimidated, she assumed an air of aggressive detachment.
‘What was in the safe, Miss Glynn, was nothing to do with me.
I only saw it open a few times but as far as I remember there were a couple of old ledgers and a stack of pocket files.’
They were all there except Christine, even Barry Morse who must have taken time off from his job, presumably to lend support to his wife and the family.
The presence of the lawyer contributed to the melodrama of the situation.
Grouped around the safe, against the light, almost in silhouette, they were a study for a Victorian painter, ready-made for his party piece at the RA Summer Exhibition-The Safe.
Gerald was impatient.
‘Let's get on with it!’
He turned to Lucy Lane: ‘Are you going to break those seals?’
Lucy looked at the lawyer who nodded.
She broke the seals, inserted a key, turned it, twisted the brass handle, and opened the heavy door.
At first sight it was as Paula had said: two ledger-like volumes, quite thick, bound in worn red leather and lettered on their spines in faded gilt.
These were on the shelf and the bottom of the safe was stacked with pocket files.
At the top a metal drawer extended the whole width.
‘Well, let's see what's in there, Gina!’
Gina looked at her brother, about to say something cutting but changed her mind.
She lifted out the books; they were quarto, half-bound in leather, and heavy.
She held the faded spine of one of them to the light so that she could read the lettering: ‘Journal of Martin J. Beale  1852–67.’
The other was date 1868–84.
The books were in manuscript and the text was interspersed with lively pen-and-ink sketches.
Jordan, the lawyer — a tubby little man, very dark, with glasses which made him look owlish — said: ‘Do you know anything about these books, Gina?’
‘I've never seen them before.’
Sara said: ‘But rare books are your department.’
Gina turned on her aunt in irritation: ‘I tell you I've never seen them before and I've no idea where they came from.’
Gina had the first volume open at the initial entry and she read aloud: ‘Durban, Natal, Thursday, January 1st 1852.
It occurs to me, being in this place at this time with no sign of an approaching end to the Kaffir war and all things uncertain, that it may be of interest to record the passages of everyday life if only as a source of remembrance and reflection in later years.
I am twenty-six years old…’’
Gina turned the pages of the other volume.
‘The whole journal appears to have been written in South Africa but he moved to Cape Province, and from later entries it seems he was in contact with Cecil Rhodes…’
The lawyer said: ‘Are the books valuable?’
Gina swept the hair from her eyes in a characteristic gesture.
‘I suppose they must be, as historical documents in their own right, and as material for a publisher.
I should have to get other opinions but I'd guess they would fetch a good deal of money at auction.
I just don't understand where father got them or why he kept them hidden like this.’
The lawyer was cautious: ‘I wouldn't say they were hidden, Gina.
In any case, can we get on?’
Lucy Lane interrupted, authority in her voice: ‘Before we move on, others of you must have seen the safe  open from time to time; it would be useful if we could establish how long the books have been there.’
Sara said: ‘I can't see what possible connection these books could have with my brother's death.’
‘Perhaps there is none but it is a possibility, however remote.’
There was a brief silence then Gerald spoke up: ‘I've seen the safe open several times since I've been working in the business.
The books have always been there as far as I can remember.
Like Paula, I thought they were old ledgers and I didn't take much notice.
In any case the old man wasn't the sort to let you take a close look at anything that didn't directly concern you.’
‘Miss Glynn?’
Suddenly they were being interrogated.
Sara made an effort to appear offhand.
‘I'm not often in here.
I suppose I've seen Matthew with the safe open, and I may have noticed the books, but this firm has been going for more than a century and one doesn't take much notice of such things, one has grown up with them.’
‘Mr Morse?’
Barry seemed more ill at ease than the others.
‘As you know I don't work in the firm but I do give a hand with the accounts from time to time—’
‘You work in here on those occasions?’
‘Yes, I do, but I don't think I've ever seen the safe open.’
A nervous smile.
‘It is almost axiomatic in businesses like this that nothing of value is ever kept in the safe.’
Lucy said: ‘That, apparently, wasn't the case here.’
‘No…
No, indeed!’
The pocket files were lifted out.
All of them contained agendas and minutes of council committee meetings.
The metal drawer was opened and found to be empty.
There remained only a cardboard box lodged behind where the journals had been.
Lucy Lane said: ‘What's in the box?’
Gina lifted it out.
‘It's empty.’
It was rectangular and it had a lid, like a shoe box, but it was longer.
The ornately printed label on one end read: ‘Hatchard's Patent Stencils: This box contains all the materials and instructions necessary to become proficient in the art of stencilling.’
Gina said: ‘It's Victorian.’
The box was not quite empty, it contained a tiny linen bag tied with a gilt cord and with a lavender head embroidered on it.
Gerald was impatient: ‘Do we have to waste time on an empty box?’
Lucy Lane said: ‘People don't usually put empty boxes into a safe.
One wonders what was in it.
Does anybody know?’
It appeared that no-one did.
Kersey was waiting for Morse when he left the safe party.
‘Detective Inspector Kersey; a word, Mr Morse…’
Morse looked at his watch.
‘I- want to put appearance at the office before lunch.’
‘I'll keep you no longer than necessary.’
The others had left.
Lucy Lane looked at Kersey.
‘Will you need me, sir?’
‘I think we shall manage.’
Back in Matthew Glynn's office, Kersey seated himself in the swivel chair behind the desk and casually waved Morse to a client's chair on the other side.
Morse hesitated then decided there was no alternative to sitting down.
Kersey lit a cigarette; before uttering a word he was finding out how the accountant reacted to boorish police tactics.
The answer was with dignified resignation.
‘Profitable morning, Mr Morse?’
Morse was in good shape physically, slender though muscular, even athletic, but the blond hair, the almost girlish colouring, and the Rupert Brooke profile, held no appeal for Kersey who had a face like a sad clown and the physique of a youngish gorilla.
Morse took his time to answer: ‘In what way might it have been profitable?’
‘A will?
Isn't that what families look for in safes especially when they invite a lawyer to see fair play.
Of course I could be wrong; I'm not well up in these things.’
Morse subjected him to a long unblinking stare before saying: ‘There was no will in the safe and, according to the lawyer, it is unlikely that my father-in-law made one.’
‘Awkward for you all.’
Kersey adopted a confidential manner.
‘As a matter of fact it was about your father-in-law's business affairs that I wanted to talk to you.
You realize, of course, that we have to go into these things — no details at this stage; we can get them later from his bank and his lawyer; just the overall picture.
It seemed best to have a friendly chat with one of the family not, perhaps, so emotionally involved — and you being an accountant…’
Morse was cool.
‘If you ask me what you want to know I'll see if I can tell you.’
Kersey blew out a great cloud of grey smoke.
‘Good!
The bookshop — prosperous?
Doing well?’
Morse considered.
‘I can see that such questions could seem relevant to your inquiry and for that reason I'm prepared to be frank.
The business is not doing well though sales are good — higher than one might expect in a town of this size and against significant competition —’
‘What's wrong then?’
‘Overheads are too high and too much money is tied up in slow-moving stock.
On any reasonable system of accounting, the second-hand and rare book departments are losing money and are heavily in debt to the other side of the business —’
‘So what —’
But Morse would not be interrupted.
‘My father-in-law was well aware of all this; it has been going on for some years but he would not do what was necessary to right the situation, that is cut out the loss makers and, perhaps, substitute other lines — stationery, office equipment, videos or any other line compatible with the book trade.’
‘So what did he do?’
‘He realized on other assets and used the money to subsidize the business.’
‘A short-term policy, surely?’
A thin smile.
‘My father-in-law was giving new meaning to the phrase ‘keeping a shop’.’
‘Does all this account for the proposed development at the pottery?’
‘I suppose so.’
‘A last resort?’
Morse hesitated.
‘I had thought so but recently he hinted at another asset he hoped to dispose of that would bring in quite a lot of money.
He did not say what it was but it may be that we found it in the safe this morning.
Your sergeant will tell you about that.’
Morse looked at his watch and stood up.
‘Now, if you will excuse me.
I really should —’
‘Just one more question.
Do other members of the family agree with your diagnosis and your proposed remedy?’
‘Gerald does — decisively; my wife too, but she is swayed by loyalty to her father.’
‘And Sara?’
‘Sara has never concerned herself with the business.’
Kersey watched him go, an appreciative grin on his face.
Full marks for presentation and content.
Barry was by no means negligible.
Wycliffe was back in the Incident Room.
‘Any news of Alfred Glynn?’
The duty officer was DC Holman, a local man, young enough to be ambitious and anxious to make the most of this chance to work with the crime squad.
‘They knew nothing at the bookshop, sir; his sister, Sara, seemed very upset; she wouldn't believe that he wasn't at home.
I think she's gone down there.
Anyway, there's been a report from a chambermaid at the hotel; she says she saw Alfred just before eight this morning, on his way up the street.
According to her he looked ill; she spoke to him but he didn't seem to see her.’
In the little office set aside for him, Wycliffe brooded over the accumulating mound of paper, the expanding case file, and among the rest a preliminary report from Franks on the autopsy.
It told him nothing new.
Matthew Glynn had become a subject: ‘Caucasian male, aged fifty-two…
No observable lesions other than those arising from the assault…
Death due to anoxia resulting from strangulation…’
And there was a memo from Fox: ‘Re cat, property of Ronald Swayne of 22a, Lady Street.
Casts of the paw-prints of this creature were found to correspond with blooded prints at the scene of the crime.
Questioned, Swayne stated that the animal had been let out at approximately 9.30 on Saturday evening and was crying to be let in at a little before midnight.
According to Swayne, it is the creature's habit to be out for no more than half an hour at night.’
Fox on the ethology of Felis catus.
Wycliffe suspected that the encounter between Fox and Clarence had not  been a meeting of kindred souls.
Interesting all the same.
Somebody must have let the cat out of Glynn's office shortly before midnight and, from Dippy Martin's evidence, the likelihood was that the somebody was a woman.
Wycliffe-went to the window and stood looking out over the roof tops to the harbour and Albert Pier.
The sun was shining but there was a bank of cloud out to sea; no discernible movement anywhere.
Three men stood motionless on the distant pier, part of a great stillness with no other living thing in sight.
Since childhood Wycliffe had experienced episodes when he seemed to see the world about him through fresh eyes, as though, without warning, he had become an intruder in some foreign place, and he would be overcome by the strangeness of it all.
There was nothing analytical in the experience, only a sense of wonder that things should be as he saw them and, in particular, that he should be involved.
Now somebody had strangled a 52-year-old man called Matthew Glynn and he was expected to identify and apprehend the killer.
Men and women were busy under his supervision investigating and reporting on the lives of people who might or might not have been concerned in the death of this man.
But at this moment it was as though he were watching a play…
Those three men on the pier, did they too, sometimes ask themselves…?
There was a tap at the door and Lucy Lane came in.
‘Am I disturbing you, sir?’
He motioned her to a chair and sat down himself.
Was she looking at him oddly?
Perhaps to keep herself in countenance she opened her notebook although he knew that she would not refer to it.
‘A couple of things, sir; I'm not sure whether either of them is relevant.
First, Matthew's secretary, the girl  who works in the office next door, turned up for work as usual this morning; she lives a few miles out and she knew nothing of what had happened.’
‘You got something from her?’
‘I had a word with her after the safe business was over.
She seems a bit spiteful and not very bright but what she had to say was factual.’
Lucy Lane was a daughter of the Manse, her father was a very orthodox Methodist parson and Lucy herself was emphatically  committed to the side of the angels, often to those with a partiality for flaming swords.
Any smoothy who saw her as a soft touch was in for a shock.
She frowned and pushed her notebook aside.
‘According to her, about a week ago, in his office, Matthew had a row with his brother —’
‘With Alfred?’
‘With Maurice.
There were customers in the shop and even they could hear it.’
‘We know about that; it seems to have been almost common gossip.
Did the girl know what it was about?’
‘She knew that it was connected with Matthew wanting to build houses on land adjoining Maurice's pottery.
It was the day after the council had agreed to a site meeting to discuss the scheme.’
‘Anyway I'll be seeing Maurice this afternoon.’
Wycliffe was returning to earth.
‘Now, what about the safe opening?
Who was there?’
‘All of them with the exception of Christine.’
Lucy Lane told him about the journal.
‘Where are the books now?’
‘Back in the safe and I've got the key for the moment.
What do you want me to do?’
‘Do you have any ideas about them?’
‘Not really.
Gina thought they must be valuable and she's probably right; but she's puzzled as to why her father kept them shut away and never mentioned them.’
‘You think they are involved in some under-the counter deal?’
‘It looks that way.’
‘Anything else in the safe?’
‘Nothing of interest.
The lawyer was hoping to find a will but it begins to look as though Matthew died intestate.’
‘That must have caused a flutter.’
‘It did.’
She was still preoccupied.
‘Something else on your mind?’
‘A small thing, sir.
I said there was nothing else in the safe but behind the books there was a cardboard box — rectangular, like a shoe box, but longer.’
‘What was in it?’
‘Nothing; at least only a lavender sachet.’
‘So?’
‘You don't put an empty box in a safe; there must have been something in it when it was put there and the lavender sachet makes me think it must have been something of sentimental value.’
‘That sounds reasonable.’
She grinned.
‘It sounds stupid, but I can't help associating the box with the journal —’
They were interrupted by the arrival of Kersey.
He came in looking sour as he usually did when he found Wycliffe conferring with Lucy Lane.
‘They told me you were here, sir…
If I'm not interrupting…’
He hooked one of the bentwood chairs into position with his foot and sat on it astride, arms resting on the back.
Wycliffe said: ‘You've heard that Alfred seems to have taken himself off?’
‘After wrecking the place — yes.’
‘As to who did the wrecking, we have to wait to hear from Fox, but I've got a search organized for Alfred.
Anyway, did you talk to Morse?’
Kersey felt in his pockets for his cigarettes.
‘Yes, he isn't a bad bloke actually; almost human.
He says the bookshop is in trouble.’
‘Financially?’
‘It seems that Matthew was running the thing on too big a scale for the size of the town — too much stock of the wrong sort and overheads too high.’
Kersey lit a cigarette and with a wry grin enquired: ‘Am I being antisocial?’
He was thawing.
‘Yes, but we'll live with it.
What more did you get?’
‘Matthew has been realizing on other assets to keep the business afloat.
Morse said it lent a new meaning to the phrase ‘keeping a shop’.’
‘And the next step was to build houses around his brother's pottery.’
Kersey nodded.
‘So it seems.’
Lucy Lane said: ‘I wonder he didn't cash in on the journal.’
Which involved an explanation to Kersey.
At the end of it Kersey said: ‘That figures.
Morse seemed to think you'd found something in the safe which Matthew regarded as a negotiable asset.’
Wycliffe was impatient.
‘This is all very well but I don't see in any of it a motive for murder.
I know that many killings are done for next to nothing but we are not dealing with street muggers or footloose louts, we are dealing with the middle-aged and the middle-class-people who know which side their bread is buttered and value their reputations almost more than their deeds and their share certificates.
In my experience fear is the most powerful drive to violence among such people and why should any of them in this case be afraid?’
CHAPTER SIX
Monday afternoon
Wycliffe was on his way to St Hilary, to the Trebyan pottery, and Maurice Glynn.
There had been no further news of Alfred since he was seen by one of the hotel staff in Lady Street at eight that morning.
Fox had completed his examination of the vandalized room and his report was conclusive: no prints, fresh or otherwise, of anyone other than Alfred himself.
What was more, Fox was satisfied that the presence of Alfred's fresh prints on the damaged articles was convincing evidence that it was he who had carried out the destruction.
It was very strange.
St Hilary Churchtown is a small cluster of old, grey-green houses built around the church at a kink in a tree-lined lane.
Wycliffe thought that time had passed the place by, that history must have piled day upon day, year upon year, in peace and quietude.
He was wrong.
In 1932 it had captured international headlines when the church was attacked by a mob of evangelical bigots who went to work with sledgehammers, wrecking altars and destroying ornaments of which they disapproved; perhaps the last violent twitch of the Puritan tail on English soil.
Wycliffe was alone and he had to get out of the car to rouse a sleeping dog in the roadway.
A woman was coming towards him, grey-haired, plump and freckled; Wycliffe asked her how to get to Trebyan.
‘You just keep on for half a mile or so and 'tis up on  your left.
Are you police?…
I wondered.’
She put a freckled multi-ringed hand on the car door, effectively barring him from getting back in. ‘'TIS a sad thing about poor Matthew and no mistake!
But they brothers never had much luck.’
She broke off to acknowledge an old man trudging by: ‘Good day to you, Mr Ivey!
Nice afternoon for a bit of a walk but don't you go overdoing it.’
She followed the old man with her eyes.
‘He's gone downhill, lately, poor old chap, but we all got to come to it.
‘Anyway, I was saying about the Glyrms: Maurice lost his wife when she was no more'n a girl; Matthew's missus walked out an' left him with three children.
Then there's Alfred — I mean, he never had what you'd call a proper life…’
She ran on, her voice as smooth and rich as cream.
Wycliffe said: ‘You obviously know the family.’
‘My dear life, I should do!
They three boys — and Sara — was all brought up at Trebyan and they was all at the village school.
‘Course they went on to grammar school as 'twas in they days.
But they was living at Trebyan up to when Matthew got married; then their father took that house in P'nzance next to the shop.
After they went, Trebyan was let for a year or two till Maurice got hisself married to some up-country girl.
Pretty li'l thing she was, but delicate; you could see she wouldn’ be long for this world — and they started that pottery thing…’
She seemed content to gossip indefinitely but Wycliffe showed no sign of impatience.
‘O'course tis none o’ my business but you won't find Maurice if it's him you want to see; he went off in his li'l truck when we was sitting down to our dinners.
But Alfred must be still there.’
‘Alfred is at Trebyan?’
It was plain that this was the pearl in her oyster.
‘Since this morning.
I seen him go past about nine an' I hardly knew him!
I heard he was changed but my dear life, he's an old man!’
‘He was on foot?’
‘When I saw him, but he must've come on the bus it'd stop at the turn an' 'twas about the time.
Anyway he never walked from P'nzance, not like he was.
I'll swear t’ that.’
‘Well, thank you, Mrs…’
She removed her hand from the car door; the climax had been achieved.
‘Pascoe — Emily Pascoe.
You're welcome.’
Wycliffe got back into his car.
Odd about Alfred.
They had enquired if he was at the pottery and been told that he was not.
Trebyan was a house and a group of former farm buildings on rising ground, adjacent to an area of gorse and hawthorn scrub, both in flower.
There was a farm gate painted white, standing open, and a sign: ‘Trebyan Pottery: Visitors Welcome’.
Wycliffe hoped that he would be.
He drove up a gravelled track past a couple of tethered goats browsing in the hedges.
The house was four-square, with a grey-slated hipped roof, overhanging eaves, and a chimney at each end — the archetypal house which children draw.
Hanging by the front door was a brass bell with a cord attached to its clapper and a little notice: ‘Please ring’.
Wycliffe rang with timidity; even so the silence he had scarcely noticed until now was brutally shattered.
But no-one came.
He was in what was once the farmyard, now largely grown over; hens pecked amongst the weedy cobbles.
To the right there were farm buildings which had been refurbished and through the open door of one of them he could glimpse open shelving displaying rows of pots.
Over that door there was a notice: ‘Retail Shop’.
To his  left the gorse and hawthorn sprawled over the hillside against a backdrop of little Cornish fields disposed in their unique version of three-dimensional geometry.
He was reminded of his childhood and of his father's farm; they too had kept a couple of goats.
He walked over to the shop but it was unattended.
He tried other doors: one opened into a former barn, now a workshop.
There were two power-driven pottery wheels, plastic bins for clay and slip, and an electric kiln at one end.
A glass bull's eye on a switch-panel by the kiln glowed red; the kiln was being fired.
On shelves around the walls there were pots, vases, jugs, pitchers and plaques of all sorts and sizes, leather-hard or biscuit-fired.
But the place was deserted.
He was getting that Mary Celeste feeling.
He found a clay store and a packing shed where, along with a mound of straw and some stout boxes, there were a couple of bicycles.
He came at last to a small, lean-to workshop where a girl, seated at a bench with her back to him, was decorating a pot placed on a turntable.
On her left a group of similar pots awaited attention; others, to her right, had already received the treatment, a vaguely Oriental squiggle to set buyers thinking of Leach and Hamada.
The girl must have heard him but she gave no sign.
He said: ‘Christine, isn't it?
I didn't expect to find you here.’
It was still a moment or two before she completed her work on the pot and turned round.
‘I come here in my spare time.’
‘You must have heard the bell.’
She said nothing.
‘Where is Mr Glynn?’
‘He's gone into Penzance to see the family.’
‘When are you expecting him back?’
She glanced at her watch.
‘Any time now.’
‘So you are here on your own?’
‘David is over in the field, hoeing potatoes.’
Her manner was unresponsive, even sullen.
‘Can you leave what you are doing for a while?’
‘I suppose so.’
She cleaned the brush she was using then washed her hands at the sink.
She wore bib-and-brace overalls which left her arms bare; the mass of her dark hair accentuated her pallor and she looked drawn, weary, and vulnerable.
‘How long have you been here?’
Her responses were slow as though it required an effort to reply.
‘I came over this morning just after ten.’
‘Have you seen your uncle Alfred?’
‘No, they phoned to know if he was here.’
‘You are quite sure that your uncle Alfred has not been here today?’
She frowned.
‘I haven't seen him.’
‘How did you get here?’
‘Bicycle.’
‘Your uncle Maurice has been gone a couple of hours?’
‘About that.’
‘You saw him go?’
‘Yes.’
‘Was he alone?’
‘Yes.’
‘Was he carrying anything — in the truck, I mean?’
‘No.’
‘I'll be back in a moment.’
He went to his car and spoke to the Incident Room on the telephone.
‘Regarding Alfred Glynn, I want you to get together a small team, with a dog handler, to await instructions.
Also to arrange a check on the buses which serve St Hilary.
Was Alfred Glynn on a bus which arrived here at around nine this morning?…
I shall be in touch again shortly.’
Christine was standing where he had left her.
‘You didn't stay for the, safe opening this morning, then?’
‘It was nothing to do with me.’
He wanted her to talk but he wasn't being very successful, her answers were as near monosyllabic as she could make them.
Well, if that was how she wanted it…
‘At what time did you get home on Saturday evening?’
‘At half-past ten.’
‘You had been to a play with David?’
‘Yes.’
‘How did he get home?’
‘Bicycle.’
When a car engine sounded in the distance she said with evident relief: ‘That will be uncle, I expect.’
They moved outside and saw a Land Rover pick-up emerge from the trees.
It turned in at the gate and came chuntering up the track to pull up beside them.
A middle-aged man, loose-limbed and lean, got out of the driving seat and slammed the door.
He wore a washed-out denim jacket, jeans, and trainers; his dark hair was beginning to grey.
‘Police?’
‘Chief Superintendent Wycliffe.’
Glynn nodded.
‘I've been to see the family; I've kept away until now…
Of course we've been in touch by phone but I wanted to see how things were…
Come up to the house.’
‘A moment, Mr Glynn!
Have you seen your brother, Alfred, this morning?’
‘No, I haven't, we're worried about him; but you know that.’
‘Your brother was seen passing through the village, apparently on his way here, at nine this morning.’
Maurice stood still, looking at Wycliffe, incredulous.
‘But I was here all the morning.
You haven't seen him, have you, Chris?’
‘I've told him.’
Maurice seemed genuinely perplexed.
‘I don't understand it, he hasn't been here in ten years!
Where's David?’
Christine said: ‘Up in the garden field.’
Maurice turned back to Wycliffe.
‘I don't understand it…’
Wycliffe said: ‘When did you last see your brother, Mr Glynn?’
‘Alfred?’
He ran a hand through his wiry hair.
‘I don't know; I drop in now and then when I'm in town — a fortnight? three weeks, perhaps.’
‘And your other brother, Matthew?’
‘Matt and I had a bust-up in his office a week or so ago.
I dare say you've heard about it.’
‘And that was the last time you saw him?’
‘It was.
There was no more we could say to each other except through the damned lawyers.’
He broke off and seemed to hesitate.
‘Something on your mind?’
He was reluctant but it came in the end: ‘I've been thinking; if Alfie really was coming here it's possible he would have taken the short cut like we did when we were boys.
There's a footpath from the road up through the scrub that cuts off two sides of a triangle…’
Wycliffe said: ‘We'd better find out.’
He moved off and looked to Maurice to follow.
‘You want me to come with you?’
He was oddly tense.
‘Please.’
‘I don't even know if it's passable — the gorse…’
‘We shall soon see.’
The two men set off down a narrow path which traversed the slope diagonally.
The path was in good shape but occasionally they had to push aside thrusting  shoots.
Then they came upon a clearing where there was a hut, made of lap-boarding with a verandah, and built up on bricks.
Maurice was going to continue along the path but Wycliffe stopped him.
‘What is this place?’
‘Originally my grandmother had it built as a sort of studio…
We children used to camp out here in the summer…’
He stood, looking up at the little building, feeling constrained to say more.
‘This is the first time I've been down here since God knows when.
It's worn well; David must be looking after it with a coat of stop-rot now and then.’
He was uneasy, talking to cover his nervousness.
Wycliffe went up the steps to the verandah and peered through the window, but because of reflections it was not easy to see inside.
The hut appeared to consist of one large room; there was a sink at one end and an oil stove; a lamp was suspended on gimbals from the roof.
He could see a table and chairs and what seemed to be the end of a large settee.
Maurice remained standing in the clearing as though anxious to get on but Wycliffe went along the verandah to the door.
‘It will be locked,’ Maurice said.
‘I think David will have the key; he'll show it you if you want to see it.’
But the door was not locked and Wycliffe went in.
The settee he had seen from the window was against one wall and Alfred Glynn was lying on the floor in front of it, his body oddly contorted.
Wycliffe had never seen Alfred before but he was in no doubt, the Glynn features and physique were unmistakable.
He knelt down in the constricted space.
Even in the dim light he could see that the face was cyanosed, deeply discoloured, and there were reddish spots or petechiae in the region of the eyes.
Alfred Glynn was dead.
Maurice was now standing outside the door with his back to the room; one hand rested on the verandah rail and without turning round he said: ‘Is he dead?’
‘I'm afraid so.’
In a muffled voice Maurice asked: ‘How did it happen?’
‘I don't know.’
Then: ‘If you would just confirm that it is your brother…’
Maurice came a little way into the room, looked down at the body and moved away again.
A whispered ‘Yes,’ and he was back on the verandah, supporting himself on the rail, and bending over as though at any moment he might vomit.
Wycliffe was angry with himself.
He had come alone deliberately in the hope that he might get farther with Maurice Glynn by keeping the interview in a low key.
Now he had fallen into a trap which the greenest copper would have avoided.
He was out of radio contact and faced with the alternatives of returning to the car with Glynn, leaving the body, or sending Glynn alone to telephone.
He joined Maurice outside.
‘I want you to go back to the house and telephone the Incident Room.
Tell the officer what has happened and that I'm here.
The first priority is a doctor but the officer will know what to do.
I'll write the number down.’
He did so and handed the slip of paper to Maurice.
Maurice took it without a word and, after a moment, shambled off up the path by which they had come.
There would be broad grins in the Incident Room.
‘The Old Man trod in it this time!’
Wycliffe turned back to the dead man.
He looked at his watch.
‘At approximately 15.25, in company with Maurice Glynn, I discovered the body of the deceased lying in a contorted position…’
It was unusual for a  chief super to have to give evidence of the discovery of a body.
Despite the mildness of the day Alfred was wearing a black overcoat over a dark suit which included a waistcoat and there was a homburg hat on the settee.
All were so shabby they might have been worn by a dressy tramp.
There had been a struggle, buttons had been ripped from the waistcoat, which was open, and a silver pocket watch dangled from its silver chain.
Alfred's shirt was tom from the collar down the front exposing his thin, bony chest covered with long grey hairs.
Wycliffe looked for signs of strangulation but found none.
Alfred had struggled, not with an assailant, but gasping and fighting for air.
The experts would say that he had died from suboxia — oxygen deficiency brought about in this case, Wycliffe believed, by a virulent poison.
The body was still warm and there were no signs of rigor.
There was a strong smell of brandy and, for the first time, Wycliffe noticed a silvery metal hip-flask lying on the floor, almost under the settee.
The stopper was missing and the brandy had trickled out to soak into the sisal matting which covered the floor.
There was nothing he could do but wait, the little hut had been the scene of a violent death and the medical and technical people must have their turn first.
All he could do for the moment was to stand in the doorway and look about him.
The hut had been cared for inside as well as out and it was being used.
Over the sink at the other end there was a shelf with cups, saucers, and plates; a saucepan hung on a hook and there was a kettle on the oil stove.
Close to the door where he stood there was another shelf, this time of books: bird books and  others on the identification and habits of small mammals.
Wycliffe went out on the verandah and stood, his arms resting on the rail.
Had Alfred committed suicide?
That was how it looked.
But why come out here to die?
Unless there was a strong sentimental attachment to the place.
That was possible; after all, the brothers had spent their childhood and youth at Trebyan; perhaps for Alfred the only time of happiness he had known.
But Alfred was a pharmacist; would he have chosen such a terrible death when a narcotic drug would have ensured a tranquil wait for the ferryman and a smooth crossing?
It was quiet, so quiet that Wycliffe listened to the silence and wondered.
Occasionally he heard the distant sound of traffic on the main road; now and then a dog barked somewhere in the village.
There was a movement in the undergrowth and a rabbit bobbed out into the clearing, settling to feed within a few feet of where he stood.
Had Alfred Glynn murdered his brother then killed himself in this frightful manner by way of expiation?
It was as irrational as it was melodramatic, but so was the darkened room where for nearly thirty years Alfred had striven to keep alive the great illusion of his youth.
It occurred to Wycliffe with a sense of surprise that of the three brothers he had spoken only to one; he had never seen either Matthew or Alfred in life, yet he needed to know them.
Physically the brothers had much in common but in personality it seemed they were very different.
Matthew was the man of affairs — busy, and apparently untroubled by self-doubt.
Alfred had become almost a recluse, a man haunted by his dream.
And Maurice…?
Wycliffe looked at his watch and wondered whether Glynn had done what was necessary.
The mere fact of  Alfred's death, whoever took the call, would be enough for the team to be sent and the police surgeon informed.
But that was assuming that the call had been made.
At ten minutes to four he heard a car in the village and a minute or two later it was travelling along the road.
Soon it was followed by another.
His troops were arriving.
Now the dead man was a centre of attention for the experts.
Fox, with his assistants, was searching the whole area and no rabbit would have ventured to show its whiskers.
Lucy Lane was there.
‘Mr Kersey is out on inquiries, sir.
DC Curnow has stayed at the house to keep an eye on Glynn.’
A good job somebody followed proper procedures.
Dr Rees, the police surgeon, was kneeling beside the body.
Rees had spent almost all his professional life in the area and was part of it, ready to applaud its strengths and condone its weaknesses.
‘The two brothers inside a couple of days…
Poor old Alfie!
Couldn't take it, I suppose — Matthew on top of everything else.
I know there wasn't much love lost between them but, as they say, blood is thicker than water; even doctors know that.’
‘You said ‘on top of everything else’?’
Rees sat back on his haunches.
‘Well, our lot — the medical practitioners — have been on his tail for years.’
Rees grinned up at Wycliffe.
‘A demarcation dispute, you could call it.
Alfie was fond of doing our job for us.
Then, recently, he went queer — queerer, I should say — and he was stopped from dispensing NHS prescriptions.
Quite right, of course, but hard on the old boy.’
Rees went on: ‘Looks as though he laced his brandy.
You'd have thought he'd have had more sense.’
‘More sense?’
‘Than to go for strychnine — that's what it looks like to me, and you can see that he had a rough passage out.
Conscious to the last probably.
Of course with a heart like his it wouldn't have taken long, but why pick on strychnine when he had a fair selection of the British Pharmacopoeia in his dispensary to choose from?
But there's no knowing what an intending suicide will do.’
‘Was he a patient of yours?’
Rees was testing the limbs for flexion.
‘He wasn't anybody's patient as far as I know.
He said he wasn't when he came to see me a couple of years back.
Just that one visit.
He wanted my opinion of his heart.
I examined him and suggested referral to a cardiologist but this he absolutely refused.
I told him that in my opinion he was suffering from valvular disease and that there was probably considerable dilation.
He said that was what he thought himself.
End of story.’
‘Can you tell me anything about time of death?’
Rees got to his feet.
‘According to the books strychnine raises the body temperature and so delays cooling.
Anyway, rigor is in the very early stages.
At a guess I'd say he's probably been dead five or six hours but don't hold me to that.
Is Franks going to be in on this?’
‘Yes.’
‘There you are then.’
‘In the circumstances we have to cover ourselves.’
Rees sighed.
‘Isn't that what we all try to do?…
You've got a visitor.’
Wycliffe turned to look.
A young man was standing in the path beyond the clearing just outside the area colonized by the police, tall and slim, dressed in jeans and a denim shirt — no mistaking who he was.
Wycliffe left the hut and walked up to him.
‘David Glynn?’
The boy nodded.
‘Shall we walk a little way?’
A word to Lucy, and Wycliffe walked off up the path with the boy.
They stopped just short of where the path ended in the yard.
‘Where were you this morning between, say, nine and midday?’
‘I was in the house until Chris arrived around ten, then I went to work in the little field behind the house where we grow our vegetables; I was there until nearly one.
After a snack lunch I went back there.’
‘So you were some distance from the hut.’
‘Quite a way — yes.’
The boy had inherited his father's mannerisms as well as his features and physique; a certain hesitancy, and a tendency to look away from the person to whom he was speaking.
‘You heard nothing — no cries of distress or anything of that sort?’
‘No…
You think Uncle Alfred suffered a lot?’
‘I'm afraid so, but it probably didn't last long and he may not have cried out.
Did you have much contact with your uncle?’
‘Not much…
It wasn't very pleasant going there and you tended to put it off…
‘And he didn't come here?’
‘I've never known him come here until today.’
Wycliffe was looking back down the slope, over the gorse towards the trees and beyond, to another clump of trees where the slender grey spire of the church rose above them.
‘Is this where your Uncle Matthew wanted to build houses?’
‘Here and in the adjoining field.’
‘And your father objected?’
‘Yes.
Father feels very strongly about this bit of so-called ‘waste’ ground; so do I.’
‘Apparently you keep the path clear and look after the little hut; does your father come here much?’
‘Never, as far as I know.
All the same, for him it's one of those special places.’
The boy's dark eyes were on Wycliffe, doubtful if he would understand.
‘I think it's to do with when he was young.’
‘You spend time at the hut yourself?’
‘Yes.’
‘And not always alone.’
The boy turned away.
Wycliffe said: ‘Let's walk on up to the house.
You left Chris at about 10.30 on Saturday night and cycled home?’
‘Yes.’
‘At what time did you get home?’
‘About eleven.’
‘Was your father at home then?’
‘Yes.’
‘Did my brother kill himself?’
‘I'm not able to answer that, Mr Glynn.
It seems that he died after drinking brandy which had been laced with strychnine and we have to try to discover how the poison got into the brandy.’
‘So it's possible that he was murdered?’
It was as though the question had been forced from him.
‘It is possible but so far there is nothing in the way of evidence to support the idea.’
Maurice had been greatly shaken; he was pale and he had difficulty in controlling his voice.
He shifted heavily in his chair.
‘If somebody killed him they must have had a motive, but what?
Yet why should he kill himself?
And in that horrible way?’
Wycliffe did not answer and after a pause Maurice went on: ‘What will happen now?’
‘We shall treat this as a suspicious death; there will  be an autopsy and, of course, an investigation to discover the source of the poison and how it got into the brandy.’
They were in what had been the dining-room of the house.
An extended dining-table was littered with papers held down by little pottery artefacts from ashtrays to small pitchers and there was a portable typewriter at one end.
Dining chairs were scattered about the room; there was a battered filing cabinet with a bulging, open drawer next to a massive sideboard with a marble top.
The carpet was threadbare and innocent of pattern, paper was peeling from the walls but there were pictures in gilded frames.
On the mantelpiece, at one end, was the inevitable framed inscribed photograph of mother; at the other end, a head and shoulders portrait of a young woman which caught Wycliffe's attention.
Maurice noticed his interest.
‘Celia — my wife.’
‘She was very beautiful.’
It was true, but Wycliffe remembered Emily Pascoe's words: ‘…delicate; you could see she wouldn't be long for this world.’
The girl in the photograph had a fair fragility, altogether too vulnerable.
‘She died when David was four.’
Maurice was clearly moved.
He fumbled in his jacket pocket and came out with a tobacco pouch and a pipe and offered the pouch to Wycliffe.
His hand trembled.
‘Smoke?’
Wycliffe refused.
‘Just as well; I grow my own.
Do you mind if I do?
It annoys some people — David is one of them.’
Maurice concentrated on filling his pipe, very slowly and deliberately; he put the stem between his teeth, and struck a match — a soothing ritual.
He was making a tremendous effort to appear calm, if possible to be calm.
He was the last of the brothers; whether or not he  had any part in their deaths he could be the key to a clearer understanding of the two who had died.
For that reason if for no other it was essential to draw him out rather than subject him to interrogation.
Wycliffe sat in an old armchair which had been moulded to comfort through use; his manner relaxed and conversational.
‘You had differences with your brother, Matthew, over possible developments here, I believe?’
‘Matthew wanted to build houses.
In my view he had no right.’
Wycliffe asked no question and, after a pause, Maurice continued: ‘You see, under my father's will Matthew got the bookshop on condition that he provided for Sara; Alfred had his pharmacy; and this place, where I had already started the pottery, should have been mine.
But father had no faith in my ability to make a go of anything.’
A brief pause, perhaps a nervous smile, then: ‘I've got to admit that there was evidence to support his point of view.
I'd made some mistakes and as far as he was concerned the pottery could have been another.
Anyway, he left what should have been my share to Matthew on condition that I was able to lease it back at a nominal rental.
The point was, he'd made sure I couldn't sell it and blow the proceeds on some other scheme.
‘Matthew became my keeper.’
Maurice was speaking more slowly; sometimes his lips seemed to tremble but his manner was once more tentative and self-deprecating.
Wycliffe asked: ‘Did you resent the arrangement?’
Maurice clasped his hands together and seemed to study them.
‘I don't think so.
It gave me a sense of security — security against myself.
I couldn't up sticks and away, which I might have done otherwise — regretting  it afterwards.
But the point was that he was holding this place in trust, on my behalf.’
‘You thought it unreasonable that he should exploit the property to his advantage — is that it?’
‘That was part of it, but I had another and more important reason for opposing him.’
‘And that was?’
‘I think it's time we stopped poisoning half the land and concreting in the rest.’
‘Where exactly was it proposed these houses should be built?’
‘On the scrubland and one of our two fields.’
He got up from his chair, fetched a rolled-up plan from the top of the sideboard and spread it over the litter on the table.
‘Here.’
He pointed with his pipe stem.
Wycliffe joined him at the table.
The plan showed the outlines of a dozen houses and a service road superimposed on a large-scale map.
Wycliffe spotted the little hut and saw that it would be obliterated by one of the proposed houses.
‘I gather that your brother may not have made a will; so what happens now?’
‘Whether he made a will or not doesn't affect me.
Under my father's will, in the event of Matthew's death, the property passes to me anyway.’
They returned to their seats; Maurice puffed at his pipe and seemed more relaxed.
‘If your brother had lived and been granted outline planning permission for his houses, what would you have done?’
Maurice did not hesitate.
‘I would have gone to law on the terms of my father's will.’
Wycliffe changed the subject.
‘You've lived here alone with your son since your wife died?’
Maurice looked around at the shabby and slightly  absurd incongruities of the room.
‘It's pretty obvious, isn't it?
I couldn't afford a housekeeper.
In any case if I had any spare money it would go on clerical assistance.
Paperwork is our bugbear; we can manage the housekeeping between us.
David does a masterly stew and I'm not bad with a salad.’
His confidence was returning.
‘It must have been hard when David was young.’
Glynn held his pipe away from his mouth.
‘I had to take him on more or less from the first.
By the time he was two Celia was spending a lot of time in hospitals, poor girl.
But people were very good; a friend from the farm came in to help out when I was in a real mess.’
He smiled a wan smile.
‘And Sara would take David for days at a time when I was busy in the pottery…
She's been good to me.’
He broke off.
‘There's David now, with Chris.’
Wycliffe looked out of the window.
The young couple were walking up the drive, arms about each other.
Maurice's eyes were dreamy.
‘They're like babes in the wood, but they'll be all right.
David's got more sense than I ever had and Chris is a good girl.
She could make her living as a potter if she wanted to; she's a natural.’
‘Does she want to?’
‘That's what she says but I don't try to influence her either way.’
There was a longish pause and this time it was Wycliffe who spoke first.
‘Do you recall the day your sister-in-law disappeared, Mr Glynn?’
Maurice seemed startled.
‘My sister-in-law?
Disappearance is hardly the word.
She simply left her home and family —’
‘That was seventeen years ago and she hasn't as far as I know been seen or heard of since; surely that adds up to a disappearance?
Anyway, were you surprised when she went?’
He hesitated.
‘Of course I was surprised.
You don't  expect a woman with a young family to simply walk out.’
‘Can you recollect how your brother reacted?’
‘You mean Matthew?
Matthew was stunned; he couldn't believe she'd gone.
He telephoned me late that evening — when they began to worry about her — asking if she'd been here.
She and my wife, Celia, got on fairly well and Inez would sometimes drop in unexpectedly and stay rather long — but never overnight.’
‘But you hadn't seen her on that occasion?’
‘No, I had not.’
‘And your other brother — Alfred — what about him?’
Maurice shifted heavily in his chair, making the joints creak.
‘Alfred was bitter; you must know that story by now.’
Wycliffe allowed the silence of the place to resume possession.
Such silences must have held sway for most of the day in this household of father and son.
When Maurice was beginning to get restless Wycliffe said: ‘Have you ever been over Alfred's rooms above the shop?’
‘His rooms?
Not all of them.
I've been in the living-room — and the kitchen, perhaps.
Why?’
‘Until very recently the bedroom he intended for Inez and himself was fully furnished, the bed made, pyjamas laid out, fresh flowers and a ticking clock on the bedside table.
There were framed photographs of Inez on the walls…
But it was obvious that the room was never used.’
Maurice was watching him, his expression incredulous.
He asked in a tight voice: ‘What do you mean by ‘Until very recently’?’
‘Early this morning or perhaps during the night the room was vandalized; everything in it was either damaged or destroyed.’
Maurice's fists were clenched, his features contorted; he got up from his chair and went to the window to stand with his back to the room.
Without turning round he said in a harsh voice: ‘If you want to know about Inez, Mr Wycliffe, you must ask Sara, the two of them lived in the same house for nearly twelve years.
I don't want to talk about her.’
As Wycliffe left the house he looked back and saw the gaunt figure still at the window.
He walked down the path to the little hut.
Alfred's body had been removed to the mortuary; Fox and Lucy Lane were still there.
Fox said: ‘We've covered the ground, sir.
Deceased's footprints occur in several places along the path between here and the road — wherever the ground is soft enough.
I can find no evidence that anyone accompanied him or that anyone met him here.’
‘Fingerprints?’
‘Plenty in the hut but none of them fresh except two or three belonging to the deceased.
Other than that, the hip-flask carries the prints of the fingers and thumb of his left hand, and the stopper, of the thumb and forefinger of his right.’
‘And the other prints in the hut — the old ones?’
‘Two people; one male, one female.
Well, sir, I've got photographs of the body, of the interior and surroundings of the hut and I'm wondering —’
Wycliffe said: ‘It's enough to be going on with.
Even if we have another homicide on our hands this is not the scene of the crime.
Just lock the place and take the key.’
CHAPTER SEVEN
Monday afternoon (continued)
 Troglodytes in Records had finally unearthed the seventeen-year-old Inez Glynn file.
Feet on the table and chair tilted, Kersey settled down to browse.
He turned to the last report made by the investigating officer before the file was consigned to Records.
This investigation, extending over three months, has failed to provide any clue to the present whereabouts of the subject or to suggest any immediate reason why she left her home and family…
On the other hand there is no evidence to support the idea of foul play…
In the past three years subject has been associated with at least two men other than her husband in circumstances giving rise to a strong presumption that the relationships were of a sexual nature…
Although she appears to have taken with her no significant quantity of clothing nor any substantial sum of money it seems certain that she was carrying her passport…
For reasons set out in earlier reports and in statements (IG 16–19) concerning her car, abandoned in Exeter station car-park, it is possible, even likely, that she met someone there by arrangement…
‘Having in mind all the circumstances I suggest  that active inquiries in this case be suspended until fresh information is forthcoming.
(Signed)
G. M. Marks Detective Inspector.
Active inquiries were suspended and the file crept farther and farther down the heap until two years after Inez Glynn's disappearance, it had drifted down to archives.
Marks and Kersey had had contact in the distant past.
Marks must have retired long since but he might still be around and, on the principle that half an hour's chat over a beer is worth a whole file of police gobbledegook, Kersey decided to enquire and found that Marks was still extant, sharing a bungalow with his sister and her husband in Newlyn.
He telephoned.
Marks said: ‘I'll meet you in the pub in half an hour — The Royal Duke — you know it?’
‘No.’
‘You'll find it.’
The Royal Duke was a fishermen's pub with an afternoon trade from men who had brought their catch in during the small hours of the morning.
The harbour was crowded with boats berthed two and three abreast but the market sheds were empty, sluiced down so that not even a small of fish remained.
Kersey arrived on time and found Marks already seated at a table by the window with a pint in front of him.
‘There's a bitter waiting for you.’
He signalled the barman; Kersey collected his pint and sat down.
Marks said: ‘So they made you up to DI.’
‘Not before time.’
Marks had grown greyer, more hairy, more stringy in the years-since their last meeting but he was the same man, shrewd, cynical, and a cop to the bone.
‘Serious Crimes Squad: you chaps are like Canute  these days, trying to hold back the tide.’
Kersey, who preferred to do his own job-knocking, was curt: ‘Perhaps, but I haven't got my feet wet yet.’
Marks sipped his beer.
‘So you want to hear about Inez.’
‘What sort of woman was she?’
‘The sort some men will sit up and beg for while others run; it wasn't only looks, she had style.’
Marks broke off to acknowledge a greeting from a newcomer who went to the bar.
‘Why she picked on the Glynns, God only knows.
She was thirty-six when she cleared out and she'd had three kids, but she still made younger women look and feel like there was no contest.’
‘You say she cleared out; I suppose you looked at the possibility that she went — wherever she did go — not of her own free will?’
Marks showed his spines.
‘Look here, boy, I wasn't wet behind the ears then and I'm not now!
Anyway you can have it as I got it.
Inez was friendly with a woman living in Hayle and she used to visit pretty often, usually on Sundays; occasionally she would stay overnight.
Anyway, that's what she told her husband.
‘Matthew knew it was sometimes genuine, sometimes an alibi.’
Marks made a dismissive gesture.
‘Didn't bother him; he'd reached that point.
As long as she kept the action out of town.’
Marks took a gulp of beer and wiped his moustache.
‘Anyway, this Sunday evening she didn't turn up and the woman in Hayle hadn't seen her — hadn't expected her.
The last the family ever saw of Inez was when she set off in her little red Mini Sunday morning with twenty quid in her purse and her passport.’
‘Was that the last report of anybody seeing her?’
‘Almost.
A woman friend saw her driving out of town a few minutes later; after that she just vanished into thin air.
Your shout, I think.’
Kersey went to the bar and had to wait while a group of fishermen jointly related to the landlord a story of putting into an Irish port for shelter and being suspected by the Garda of gunrunning for the IRA.
He was attended to at last and returned to his table with the drinks.
The pub was filling and the smoke haze thickened as spirits rose.
Marks said: ‘Good prices for this morning's landings.’
He sipped his beer and resumed where he had left off.
‘Matthew notified us Monday morning and her car was reported in Exeter station car-park on Thursday — been there since Monday morning at least.
The attendant reported it when news of our interest in red Minis filtered through.’
Kersey said: ‘So somebody drove the Mini to Exeter — could it have been anybody other than Inez?’
Marks was po-faced.
‘Could've been, but nothing to suggest that it was: her prints were all over the car and nobody else's.’
— Kersey said: ‘Easy enough to fix for anybody with reason to.’
‘I'm not denying it, but you've got to see it from our point of view at the time.
Nobody seemed all that surprised at her pushing off.’
‘Did she have any relatives?
I mean, did you come across any?’
‘Her mother — a widow and remarried, living somewhere in Kent — and a sister, married, with four children, in Nottingham.
Neither of them wanted to know about Inez.’
Marks was watching a young fisherman in the act of draining a pint tankard without swallowing.
‘I could do that once…
No, there was nobody overcome with anxiety it seemed to me, not even her husband.’
‘Leaving aside what you thought at the time, and  looking back, could he have driven the car to Exeter after disposing of his wife?’
Marks took his time.
‘That raises a question.
She left home that Sunday morning all right— no doubt about that.
How would he pick her up again?
By appointment?’
‘He could have known where she was going.’
‘Even if he did it seems a bit far-fetched to think he could do anything about it.
But, allowing that he could, he might just about have been able to drive the car to Exeter Sunday night.
It's a hundred and twenty miles — say up to three hours in that little crate — and he could make the night train down, arriving home in the early morning and, with luck, not being recognized by anybody on the trip or at the station, and not disturbing the family.’
Meditative, Marks drew his finger around the rim of his glass.
‘It's not on, boy!’
‘Is that all you've got to tell me?’
‘There was one thing that struck me as a bit odd when I had a chance to look back on it.
I had a phone call from a chap called Armitage — Colonel Armitage asking about her.
He was the son of the old lady Inez was companion to before she married Glynn.
The colonel said Inez was a distant relative and he wanted to know if there was anything odd about her disappearance.
I couldn't quite make out what he was after.
Anyway, I gave him the gist of what had happened and he asked me if I would let him know if we found her.’
‘Where did this colonel live?’
‘Somewhere in London then; it's probably in the files but it's unlikely he's there now.
I've got an idea they're a Cornish family and that's why the old lady was here in the first place.’
Kersey said: ‘So on the basis of what you've told me  you concluded that Inez was off to join her boyfriend in Exeter — is that it?’
‘No, it bloody well isn't, not altogether.
All this happened in early spring — the third week in March, I think — and for several weeks of the previous summer Inez had been carrying on with a man staying at one of the St Ives hotels.
In the course of our investigation it turned out that this character had been lying low, wanted by Bristol CID on fraud charges.’
Marks drained his glass.
‘He wasn't seen again either.
Are you having another?’
‘No thanks.
I've had my radon.’
Marks looked at him with a speculative eye.
‘Let's see, you got married or something, didn't you?’
‘I got married.’
‘Still with it?’
‘Yes.’
‘Any kids?’
‘Two girls at university.’
Marks nodded.
‘Wish I had.
I'm living with my sister; she's got a boy and a girl but it's not the same.’
‘About this guy in the St Ives hotel — was there any evidence to suggest that he and Inez kept in touch?’
‘Not directly but we did find out that Inez had been getting letters with Spanish stamps.’
‘And Spain was a cosy hideaway for our export villains; ergo, her boyfriend was waiting for her to join him on the Costa del Crook.’
Marks was nettled.
‘You can laugh, boy, but this was seventeen years ago.
We weren't still in the push-bike and whistle era down here but neither did we have whiz kids from the crime squad on our doorstep to tell us what to do and how to do it.
It was a different ball-game in those days and you bloody well know it.’
When Wycliffe returned to the Incident Room the  printer, like all the other business people in the town, had closed his shop and gone home, but two reporters were keeping vigil.
‘Suicide, Mr Wycliffe?’
‘I don't know.’
‘He was poisoned?’
‘Yes, the signs are that he died as a result of poisoning but this has to be confirmed.’
‘Will your investigation into the murder of Matthew Glynn continue or do you regard the case as closed?’
‘The investigation will certainly continue.’
‘Is it true that there was a long-standing feud between the two brothers?’
‘The word feud suggests a degree of acrimony for which I've found no evidence.’
Policemen are becoming as adept at verbal evasion as politicians, far outstripping bishops and trade union leaders.
Potter, the squad's fat man, was duty officer.
‘There are several memos and reports on your desk, sir.’
‘Is there any coffee going?’
‘I'll bring it up, sir.’
Wycliffe skimmed through the accumulated paper on his table, pushed it aside, got up, and walked to the window where he stood, looking out.
The sun was low in the sky somewhere away to his right, and the castle on the Mount was bathed in magical golden light.
On the south coast of the county, when the weather is sunny and calm, the hour before dusk induces a mood of solemnity.
In the offices of the church it is the turn of Vespers.
Wycliffe was always reminded of the hymn which sang of ‘saints casting down their golden crowns around the glassy sea’.
The image depressed him; if that was heaven it was best left to the cherubim and seraphim who might be turned on by that sort of thing.
Potter came in and concluded that his chief was absorbed in profound celebration; he put the coffee on the table and crept out…
Kersey arrived.
‘I gather I missed the excitement.’
Wycliffe turned away from the window with a sigh.
Kersey asked: ‘Are we still looking for the killer of Matthew Glynn?’
‘You're no better than the reporters!
I'd like to be a hundred per cent sure that Alfred killed himself.’
‘There's a doubt?’
‘There's bound to be.
Would you choose strychnine as a way out?
And would you go for a bus ride followed by a longish walk to take the fatal dose in a little hut in the middle of nowhere?’
‘From what we hear Alfred wasn't exactly rational.’
‘Perhaps not, and he may have had sentimental reasons for going to the little hut, but I want to be sure.
Anyway, I gather you've been delving into prehistory — Marks, wasn't it?
I remember him vaguely.
What did you make of it?’
Kersey lit a cigarette.
‘I don't think they had enough hard evidence to conclude that Inez ran off with or to another man.
Or, in fact, that she ran off at all.’
‘Her car?’
‘Anybody could have driven it to Exeter and dumped it at the station without leaving traces that would be discovered by anything short of a pukka forensic examination.’
‘Are you suggesting that she was murdered and that the car business was a cover-up?’
‘I'm saying that there was no real evidence against that as a possibility.
I'm not carping about the way Marks handled the case; an adult woman went missing in circumstances which seemed to offer a plausible explanation.
To me, the fact that she hasn't been heard of again in seventeen years puts a different complexion  on it.
She would be fifty-three or four now and I find it difficult to believe that any woman who had had three children wouldn't show some curiosity about what happened to them once the glamour of life had worn a bit thin.’
Wycliffe was silent for a while, engaged in such crucial activities as straightening his telephone flex, boxing up the heap of papers on his desk into a tidy pile, and scratching his chin.
Kersey blew smoke rings and watched them with approval.
Finally Wycliffe said: ‘There must be people still living in this town who knew her well.
It should be possible to find out more about the woman from sources less prejudiced than the family.’
‘The whole thing could turn out to be a mare's nest.’
‘Very likely, but anything you do find out could throw light on the family.
See what you can do in a couple of days.’
‘A free hand?’
‘A free hand.
Anything else?’
‘Just another thing which could be something or nothing.
While Marks's inquiry into Inez's disappearance was going on he had a call from a Colonel Armitage, son of the old lady Inez lived with before she married.’
‘Saying what?’
‘Nothing much, really just asking to be told if they found her.’
‘It could be worth contacting this colonel.
If he's still around it shouldn't be difficult.
As a last resort MOD might tell us if we filled in the right forms.
See what you can do.
If you locate him we'll send someone to interview him.’
Kersey left, and was back in less than ten minutes.
‘I found our colonel in the phone book; I remembered old Marks say he thought they might be a Cornish  family.
Anyway he's living at Helford, near Falmouth: Colonel Anthony Armitage CBE, DSO, Ponsyn Cottage.’
‘He might not be our man.’
‘He is; I phoned.
A woman answered and she agreed that his mother had lived in Penzance.
He's out at the moment but he'll be in later and he'll phone either tonight or in the morning.’
Wycliffe passed an uneasy night.
Names and faces, phrases and vivid little pictures presented themselves to his mind in a constant succession of changing patterns like the images in a kaleidoscope.
Sara, the worthy virgin, self-absorbed but acute: ‘…my sister-in-law was a very remarkable woman.’
Gerald, pretending to a savoir faire he did not possess; ‘I suppose somebody could have been in there doing the old man while I was trying to get in…’
Young David Glynn: ‘…for dad it is one of those special places.’
The scared look on the girl's face when she caught sight of Wycliffe in the yard.
Maurice Glynn: ‘Matthew was my keeper.’
The manuscript books with their red bindings which he had not actually seen.
Sara again: ‘No, there was no crisis…’
The darkened room with the double bed and the fresh, red carnations at the bedside, viciously destroyed.
Swayne: ‘Well, there was a wedding all right but it was Matthew who married the girl.’
Alfred's contorted body lying in the little hut.
Barry Morse quoted by Kersey: ‘It lends new meaning to the phrase ‘keeping a shop’.’
And Lucy Lane: ‘I wonder he didn't cash in on the journals.’
Did all the pieces belong to one puzzle?
Only experience saved him from despairing at this rag-bag of memories.
At a quarter to four by the little travelling clock at his bedside he got out of bed and went to the window.
He had sensed a change in the air, a salty dampness.
At the open casement a gentle breeze blew a mist of fine rain into his face.
Although there was no moon to be seen it was far from totally dark; the sea vas dimly luminescent while shapes and shadows defined the land.
An intermittent glow in the south-east marked the sweep of the Lizard Light while nearer to hand the harbour lights and the street lamps contributed patches of misty radiance.
He closed the casement and went back to bed and to sleep.
Next morning the whole town and bay were shrouded in mist which condensed on every cold surface.
The Mount was a shadow in the air and the iron railings along the promenade dripped globules of moisture.
Wycliffe walked to work with a salty taste on his lips and arrived at the Incident Room as the little printer was opening up.
At a quarter to nine he was joined in his office by Kersey.
‘Good morning– sir.’
Very formal and polite.
Kersey liked to discharge his obligations to the hierarchy early in the day; after that he felt free to speak his mind man-to-man.
He pulled up a chair and sat down.
‘I was going through the reports, trying to size up Matthew Glynn — what made him tick.
On the face of it his life centred around business of one sort or another, his own and the council's.
He had plenty of acquaintances but just a couple of friends — Swayne, the stamp man, and Doble, the wine merchant.
Apart from the weekly chess session he seems to have had no hobby, no what you might call recreation.’
Kersey's rubbery features creased in a ferocious grin.
‘I mean, a double bed made up for one.
After all he was only fifty-two and I'm fortnight.’
Wycliffe said: ‘He took two holidays a year: a spring fortnight abroad and an autumn fortnight in this country.’
‘Alone?’
‘Apparently.’
‘Well, it helps to fill in the picture but I haven't finished yet.
He had a car — a Volvo 244, five years old with only twelve thousand miles on the clock.
According to the family he rarely used it except on Sundays when he spent the afternoon and evening with an old chap who used to work for the firm and now lives in sheltered accommodation at Carbis Bay.
He would leave home immediately after lunch and come back between ten and eleven at night.’
Wycliffe was unresponsive; his look said: ‘Are we getting there?’
‘The point is, I rang the accommodation warden just to check; Matthew did visit the old boy every Sunday but he never spent more than half an hour with him.
He would hand over the old man's baccy for the week and a few sweeties then, after a bit of chat, he was away.’
Kersey looked at Wycliffe, expecting some question or comment and when none came he went on: ‘So where did he spend his time after lunch each Sunday?’
‘I don't know but you're going to tell me.’
‘I'm not, but I'm sending Curnow to Carbis Bay to talk to the old man.
It's possible he might know something.’
Wycliffe remembered the seemingly expensive package tour to Bulgaria, booked with — was it Eurotravel?
He reached for the telephone.
‘Get me the Penzance office of Eurotravel, please.’
He replaced the phone and explained to Kersey.
‘This may save Curnow a trip.’
The phone rang: Eurotravel had no local office; the nearest was Truro.
That in itself might mean something.
‘Get me the manager of the Truro office.’
A minute or two later he was speaking to a suave gentleman anxious to steer a safe course between Scylla  and Charybdis.
‘We do have to observe client confidentiality…’
—‘But your client is dead — murdered.’
‘Yes, but a second person may be involved —’
‘And that person could be a key witness in our investigation; but if you insist on a Court Order…’
‘No! no, of course we wouldn't want to do that.
If you will hold for a moment…’
It came at last: ‘Mr Glynn's travelling companion was to be a Mrs Florence Tremayne of Nansallas Cottage, New Mill.’
‘Was Mr Glynn a regular customer of yours?’
‘Every year as regular as clockwork — ever since I've been here, and that's eight years.’
‘With the same companion?’
‘Always.’
Wycliffe replaced the phone.
‘There we are then.’
‘They must have been very discreet.
Are you going to telephone her?’
‘No, I'll pay a call this afternoon.’
Kersey left and the telephone rang again.
‘Wycliffe.’
It was Franks, the pathologist.
‘Well, Charles, I've taken a good look at your latest victim.
Of course I've sent specimens to Forensic but you can take it from me that he died of strychnine poisoning; a fairly hefty dose but he'd been living on borrowed time any way.
The Old Reaper would have caught up with him in weeks, probably, months at most.
Talk about dilation!’
There were times when he felt cut off by some imponderable barrier; the usual sights and sounds reached him but they seemed to do so through a screen of interference, like a badly tuned radio.
He would sympathize with the computer that puts up its little sign, ‘Memory full’.
It was ten o'clock; he went into the outer room  and muttered to the duty officer: ‘I shall be at the pharmacy.’
Fox was already there with a pharmacologist from the country hospital who was looking at Alfred's stock of drugs with a view to discovering a possible source of the poison.
He left the Incident Room and walked up the steep alley to Lady Street, into the usual morning clutter of delivery vans and pedestrians.
Alfred's shop looked as though it had been closed and deserted for months; it was hard to believe that it was only three days since a few people, at least, had been entering through the rickety door with its small glass panes to buy patent medicines or seek advice.
Somebody had put a notice inside the glass, ‘Closed indefinitely’.
Wycliffe went round the back, rang the doorbell and was admitted by one of Fox's assistants.
‘The sergeant is in the shop, sir.
Shall I fetch him?’
‘No.’
He climbed the stairs, went through the living-room where nothing seemed to have changed, and down to the shop.
Fox met him at the bottom of the stairs.
Through the glass partition they would see the pharmacologist busy in the dispensary.
Fox said: ‘He was like a hungry dog let loose in a butcher's shop; not knowing where to start.
He says he's never seen anything like it; he reckons some of the stuff must have been here since before the First World War.
‘A profile of pharmaceutical dispensing over eighty years’— that's what he called it.
Odd, the things people get worked up about.’
‘I'll have a word.
What's his name?’
‘Edmunds, sir — Dr Edmunds.’
Edmunds was thirtyish, bearded, slim, and earnest; one of the modern breed of technical scientists who believe that the ultimate secret of life, the universe and  all that, must be reducible to the predictable antics of their molecules and atoms and the infuriatingly ambiguous particles which seem to compose them.
He waited for no introduction but launched into his current theme: ‘It's amazing!
Most of this stuff must have been here long before Glynn took over the business; it's a museum of pharmaceutical archaeology —’
‘About the strychnine —’
‘Yes, of course.
Well, at one time — into the Sixties, actually — strychnine was wed as a heart stimulant and in so-called ‘tonic’ medicines.
In fact, it has no medical value whatever and it is an extremely dangerous drug to have lying around.
It is one of the alkaloids derived from certain plant tissues but synthesized in the Fifties’
‘And there is strychnine amongst this lot?’
‘Oh, yes: two sources actually; a dry extract of nux vomica — that is to say of the ground-up seeds of the plant; this contains about five per cent strychnine; and a preparation known as liquor strychnine hydrochloride which contains about one per cent of the hydrochloride.’
Fox spoke up.
‘I examined the two bottles for prints and found nothing identifiable on the hydrochloride, but on the nux vomica bottle there were fresh prints of the deceased's left hand and on the stopper good prints of the forefinger and thumb of his right hand.
Also the stopper came out easily while most of the others were stuck.’
Edmunds went on in his lecture-room style as though Fox had not interrupted: ‘Either form of the poison could have been administered in brandy but brandy would not by any means completely mask the bitter taste.’
He added, generously: ‘You may know that it was the bitter taste which made it unpopular with  poisoners of the past even when it was fairly freely available.’
So Alfred had laced his own brandy and taken it to the little hut which had youthful associations, there to kill himself in a manner that was almost ceremonial.
Did it really matter from which bottle the stuff had come?
But the courts like to know these things; it creates a comfortable illusion of precision and that's what justice is about.
You can't put emotions in a bottle labelled ‘Exhibit B’.
As Wycliffe was about to leave, the telephone rang in the little office next to the dispensary.
Fox answered it and signalled through the glass partition.
‘DS Lane, sir.’
Lucy sounded mildly excited.
‘Sara is here, sir.
She says she wants to make a statement.’
‘So what's to stop her?’
‘She will only make it to you.’
‘What's she like — uptight?’
‘That about describes it, not exactly agitated, but disturbed.’
‘All right; I'll be there shortly.
Put her in my office with a WPC if you can find one.’
He turned back to Fox.
‘When you've finished here you've got Matthew Glynn's attic where all Inez's stuff is stored.’
Wycliffe got Fox to lay him out by the shop door.
Despite the misty rain the street was busy; the pubs had chalk-boards outside advertising their lunchtime menus; two of the shops had scaffolding against them, getting a face-lift before the start of the season.
He turned down the alley which led to the Incident Room.
The printer had become sufficiently reconciled to their presence to give him a friendly wave.
Lucy Lane was waiting for him.
‘I want you in on this.
I'll talk to her; I'd rather you didn't butt in at this stage — and nothing for the  record.
Afterwards you can take her statement.’
Sara was sitting on one of the bentwood chairs by the desk in the bare little office; a WPC, her black-stockinged legs tucked under her chair, sat by the door.
She stood up as Wycliffe came in followed by Lucy Lane.
‘You can go.
Tell them I don't want to be disturbed.’
Sara wore a thin mackintosh over a blouse and skirt; her handbag was on the floor at her side and a furled umbrella rested against the desk.
She looked very pale and drawn, almost haggard.
Lucy Lane took the seat by the door; Wycliffe settled behind his desk.
‘You wished to see me, Miss Glynn?’
His manner was formal.
‘You suggested that I should make a fresh statement.’
‘Perhaps you will tell me what it is you have to say?’
Sara was holding a pair of suede gloves crushed in one hand.
‘What I told you about Saturday night going out to post letters and afterwards going for a walk — was perfectly true.’
She looked across the desk at Wycliffe as though for encouragement, but none came; his expression remained bland; she could not even be sure that he was looking at her or whether his gaze was focused on the window behind her.
‘But I did not tell you —’ She broke off, distressed.
‘— I did not tell you that, on the way back, as I came round the church into the lane, I saw Alfred coming out of our back door…
He came down the lane towards me like a man sleep-walking.
I spoke to him but he walked past me as though I wasn't there…
I watched him go in by his own back door and I hurried on home.
I couldn't imagine what had happened…
I mean, I don't think Alfred had been in the house or the bookshop except for mother's Wednesday teas since we moved from Trebyan nearly thirty years ago.’
Sara stopped speaking and the silence was broken  only by the thudding of the printing press below.
She was kneading the gloves in her lap, gripping them so tightly that her knuckles showed white.
Lucy Lane, on the point of speaking, changed her mind.
Wycliffe gave no sign, and Sara was left with no option but to continue.
‘I was afraid something had happened but I never imagined anything so…so awful.
I saw the light in Matthew's office and I went —’
‘Did you bolt the yard door behind you?’
‘Yes, I did.’
‘Why?’
She looked vague, troubled.
‘I don't know; I was frightened, it seemed the thing to do…’
‘Go on.’
She looked down at her lap.
‘I went to the door of Matthew's office and opened it…’
‘Did you go in?’
‘There was no need.
I could see him…’
‘Did you see the cat?’
‘The cat?
Yes, it slipped past me as I opened the door.’
‘All right; go on.’
‘Well, I shut the door, crossed the yard, and let myself in through the kitchen.
There was no-one about…
I went upstairs to my room.’
She took a handkerchief from her sleeve and put it to her eyes, shaking her head.
‘I couldn't face any more…
I couldn't!…
And I had to decide what I should say…
It was a terrible night!’
‘And in the morning?’
She raised her eyes.
‘As soon as it was light I went downstairs…
I pretended to find Matthew and I roused the family…’
It was as though Wycliffe was giving her only part of his attention; he seemed to have become absorbed in his own thoughts and when Sara stopped speaking there  was an interval long enough for Lucy Lane to look at him with concern.
When he spoke it was abruptly and with a complete change of subject: ‘It seems that the little hut at Trebyan meant a lot to your brothers.’
‘The hut?’
She was surprised, startled by the abrupt change.
She said: ‘Yes, I suppose it did, when they were young.’
‘Did you spend much time there?’
‘No, it was the boys’ place.
They used to camp out there in the summer holidays.’
Wycliffe could not imagine Sara camping out anywhere or at any stage of her life.
‘And as they got older?
They must have been in their twenties when the family moved from Trebyan.’
Sara carefully separated her gloves which she had rolled up into a ball.
Without looking up she said: ‘I don't know what you are getting at, Mr Wycliffe; all this was a long time ago.’
‘Did they meet their girlfriends in the hut?’
‘I've no idea.’
Very prim.
‘Did they bring their friends home-to the house?’
‘No; my father was not —’ She broke off.
‘You were going to say?’
‘Nothing.
I can see no point in these questions.
I have told you what happened on Saturday night and I am willing to answer questions about it.’
Wycliffe looked at her, his grey eyes brooding and expressionless.
Sara puzzled him; he had underestimated her.
He said: ‘When your brother Maurice's wife was ill and David was an infant I understand you looked after him from time to time.’
‘I did what I could.’
‘Just one more question, Miss Glynn: when your brother Alfred visited his mother while Inez was still with you, did they have any contact?’
A vigorous shake of the head.
‘No.
Alfred would never acknowledge that she existed.’
Alone, he went to stand by the window, looking out.
Standing at windows was his favourite situation for brooding, self-examination, consoling or condemning himself…wondering what to do next.
It was still misty but the sun was gathering strength and the mist had acquired a pearly hue promising better things.
Sara's story made sense; it made sense in the context of Alfred's bizarre existence.
Matthew Glynn had been strangled by his brother Alfred because…
Alfred Glynn had killed himself because…
And Sara's story explained her own ambivalent behaviour…
Tidy.
Convincing.
He had no doubt that the case could be wound up on the strength of it.
No trial; you can't try a dead man.
The facts were accounted for and Sara's evidence at the inquest would clinch it…
But there were other facts: Inez Glynn had disappeared: but that was seventeen years ago.
Maurice Glynn had quarrelled with his brother: obviously a coincidence.
There was the unexplained presence of a nineteenth-century journal in Matthew's safe: nothing to do with the case.
And there was the little hut…
He didn't know himself what he meant by that…
Wycliffian dialectic.
He sighed.
All the same he was going to take another look.
CHAPTER EIGHT
Tuesday morning
The telephone rang and he went back to his desk.
A wary duty officer said: ‘A Colonel Armitage is here asking to see you, sir.’
Wycliffe went through to the little room which had been set aside for callers.
‘Colonel Armitage?…
Wycliffe.
Good of you to come.’
Armitage was by no means the popular image of a colonel, irascible and autocratic; he was thin, elderly, and mild-mannered; he looked more like an old-style academic who had acquired his pale-parchment skin through years of desiccation in college libraries; but his eyes were full of vitality.
‘My housekeeper drove me in — I'm not safe on the roads any more.’
With his long, scrawny neck and high-pitched voice, he suggested to Wycliffe an aristocratic parrot.
‘Now I spend all the time I can on the water — more room.’
A friendly grin exposing yellowed but home-grown teeth.
Wycliffe led him into his office and entered upon the preamble: ‘In a murder case we have to follow every possible lead.
We are in touch with you because your name cropped up in reports concerning the disappearance of the murdered man's wife.
That, of course, was seventeen years ago.
I understand that Inez Glyrm, prior to her marriage, was your mother's housekeeper-companion.’
The colonel nodded.
‘Quite so.
Inez was with mother  until she died.
It was shortly afterwards that she married the bookseller.’
‘And twelve years on, when Inez disappeared, you still expressed an interest.’
‘Yes, I did.’
Armitage marshalled his ideas.
‘In the first place, Inez was a distant relative — some sort of cousin — but I must confess to another more direct motive.
When my mother died I was a military attache at one of our embassies in eastern Europe.
It was at the time of the Bulganin-Khruschev circus and my leave was very short — not long enough to clear up my mother's affairs as I wished to do.
‘Subsequently I was disappointed to find that some of our family papers were missing.
I approached Inez, then Mrs Matthew Glynn, and she told me that she knew nothing of them.
Of course I was not in a position to contradict her.’
‘But you did not believe in her ignorance.’
Armitage spread his thin hands.
‘That is putting it rather more strongly than I would have done.
Years later, when I heard that Inez had left her husband and that the police were investigating her disappearance, I was tempted to carry the matter a little further.
However, it soon became obvious that Inez was not to be found, and everything I learned about Matthew Glynn convinced me that he was an honest man.’
The colonel shrugged.
‘In the circumstances there was no more to be done and I put the matter out of my mind until your officer telephoned my housekeeper yesterday.’
Wycliffe said: ‘Will you tell me the nature of the missing papers?’
 Armitage seemed almost as interested in the coloured stencilled designs which decorated the peeling walls as in the subject being discussed.
He recovered his manners in polite confusion.
‘Of course!
They concerned my mother's paternal grandfather who had spent  a great many years in southern Africa — Natal and Cape Colony.
They comprised his journal — a fairly detailed and animated account of his life during nearly forty years up to about 1890- and his letter books, with copies of his correspondence.
In his later years, he was closely associated with Cecil Rhodes so these records might have some historical as well as family interest.’
‘And considerable monetary value?’
‘I suppose so — yes.’
‘Was your great grandfather Martin J. Beale?’
Armitage looked at him in astonishment.
‘Yes, indeed.’
‘Then his journal is in Glynn's safe under seal at the moment.’
‘You amaze me!
I had no idea that my coming here would lead to anything of the sort.’
‘The letter books you mention are not there.’
‘No matter!
I'm delighted to recover…
I suppose I shall be able to recover the journal?’
‘I've no doubt of that but you will have to deal with the family or with their solicitor.
Was there anything else that you expected to find amongst your mother's papers that you did not?’
The colonel frowned.
‘Yes, there was a collection of letters written by Martin Beale to his mother; they were of purely family interest, kept by her out of sentiment I suppose.
After all, South Africa was a long way off in those days and home leave must have been a great rarity.’
They parted company, pleased with themselves and with each other.
It was past two when Wycliffe and Kersey made it to a pub for lunch; a pub not far from the bookshop.
They had a table by the window in an upstair room decorated with a random collection of memorabilia from a  colourful maritime past.
Outside the window, on a flat roof, seagulls strutted up and down eyeing inaccessible snacks like Dickensian children pressing their noses against pastry-shop windows.
Wycliffe brought Kersey up to date but seemed reluctant to enter into any sort of discussion.
Kersey watched the gulls and tried various gambits to draw him out, succeeding at last: ‘I suppose Sara's story is credible and you can't altogether blame her for not coming out with it sooner.’
‘No.’
‘Unless she killed Matthew and Alfred's death gave her a heaven-sent scapegoat.’
Wycliffe made a gesture of rejection.
‘I don't think Sara was Matthew's killer.
Look at the facts: she was seen in Alexandra Road at 11.15, the very time at which Gerald found the yard door barred against him.
Fifteen minutes later, a woman, who could only have been Sara, found the door unbarred.
It seems to me highly likely that the killer had locked himself in and that he got away during that fifteen minutes.’
‘And that Sara met him?’
‘That's another matter but it's quite possible.’
‘So where does that leave us?
What's the next move?’
‘My next move is to talk to Matthew's woman friend — Florence Tremayne — isn't that her name?
Your job is to get what you can on Inez.’
Kersey sprinkled sugar on his apple pie.
‘Yes, I've got a lead there.
There's an old lady living next door to what used to be the Armitage house; she was there when Mrs Armitage was alive and Inez was her companion.’
‘Could she tell you anything?’
‘Not much, but it seems that her daughter and Inez were close, and remained friendly after both of them married.
I gather the old lady didn't approve.
Anyway, the daughter now has grown-up children and is living  in Launceston.
I thought of going over there this afternoon.’
‘Good!
There's one other thing: can you recall Maurice's account of how he spent Saturday evening?’
‘I can check the report but I think he was in the pub at Goldsithney until ninish then he went home.’
‘Driving the Land Rover?’
‘No, he had a push-bike.
Why?’
‘I wondered.’
A little later Kersey tried again: ‘At least we know how Matthew got hold of the Beale journal and why he kept it under wraps.
From what Morse said it looks as though he was trying to flog it in some under-the-counter deal, but I don't see how it helps us.’
‘No.’
‘You're not having any dessert?
This pie is good.’
‘Only coffee.’
‘New Mill — do you know where it is?’
Lucy Lane was driving Wycliffe's car.
‘I've got a cousin who farms not far from the village and I used to stay there in the holidays when I was a girl.’
Lucy's relatives seemed to be uniformly and conveniently distributed throughout the south-western peninsula.
‘But you don't happen to know the lady we are going to see?’
‘I'm afraid not, sir.’
Lucy Lane had been working in his team for three years but he felt that he knew her only a little better than he had done after her first month.
She was a workaholic, highly intelligent, and singularly free from hang-ups, but there was a barrier.
Sometimes he thought it was of his own making: he was unaccustomed to working closely with women and this one was still young and attractive which made him self-conscious.
The road was narrow, no more than a lane, prone to cows and farm tractors, but Lucy drove with a relaxed confidence which he envied.
He had never achieved a rapport with the automobile and avoided the driving seat when he could.
New Mill consists of a straggle of houses following the course of the lane and a stream.
Like much of Penwith it has a powerful ethos which refuses to be submerged by the modern world; the countryside is littered with artefacts spanning the centuries, from megalithic chamber tombs to nineteenth-century mine workings, and only the moron can escape a sense of continuity with an obligation to the past.
If Glynn had wanted a cover for visits to his woman friend, his charitable trips to St Ives served him well; New Mill involved only a detour of a mile or so from the direct route.
‘It's some distance beyond the village, by the stream.’
Lucy had this from a man weeding his garden.
In fact the stream ran through Florence Tremayne's garden which was a wild garden with trees and an abundance of daffodils.
The cottage itself was severe, a slate-roofed little building in the Cornish tradition, but its walls were covered with creepers now coming into leaf.
A neatly written notice on the door read: ‘Knock and if there's no answer come round the back.’
There was an answer.
‘Mrs Tremayne?…
Chief Superintendent Wycliffe; this is Detective Sergeant Lane…’
She did not look like a predatory widow and she was no superannuated dolly-bird either; she must have been fifty, she was on the plump side, clear skinned, with a frank, open face.
She wore trousers and a smock.
‘I was expecting somebody, I suppose.
You'd better come in.
They were shown into a room which ran the whole depth of the cottage, bright and chintzy, the indoor equivalent of a herbaceous border.
There were daffodils in vases and framed flower-paintings on the walls.
‘You didn't think to get in touch with us, Mrs Tremayne?’
She was sitting on a gaily upholstered settee while Wycliffe and Lucy Lane had the two matching armchairs.
‘Yes, I thought about it but I decided that the family had enough to put up with without learning about me.
It isn't as though I could tell you anything that would help to explain what happened to Matt.’
Her manner was restrained; sad but not grief-stricken.
Wycliffe felt sure that in normal circumstances she was a cheerful woman, more ready to laugh than cry.
‘I should explain that Matt and I were not lovers in the accepted sense; we were friends — good friends, we'd known each other from childhood so we had a lot in common.
I was born and brought up in St Hilary Parish; my maiden name was Scoble and father farmed Little Carn.
Most of the older people in the parish remember me as Florrie Scoble.’
The sun was shining through the little window making patterns of light and shadow on the carpet and causing the polished woodwork to glow.
‘You've been in contact with Matthew Glynn all through?’
‘Oh, no!
When Matt married Inez I was left high and dry.
A year later I met a sales rep for an agricultural firm and married him.
You could say it was on the rebound but I had no reason to regret it.
We moved to Somerset and I saw nothing of Matt for — I don't know — it must've been sixteen years I suppose.
My husband was killed in a road accident in ‘71 and I couldn't bear to live on alone up there so I bought this place -returning to the scenes of my youth, or very nearly.’
She had a mop of unruly brown hair, streaked with grey, and she swept it back from her face with an impatient movement that was wholly girlish.
Wycliffe said: ‘You implied that you and Matthew were planning to marry when he married Inez — is that so?’
‘Oh, yes; at least that was my impression.’
A helpless gesture.
‘And Inez was supposed to be marrying Alfred.’
‘Was it a complete surprise to you when Matthew and Inez agreed to marry?’
For the first time she hesitated.
‘Oh, dear!
This is really probing the old wound.
I had no idea it could still hurt.
I knew that Inez had had her turn in the little hut but I didn't know until afterwards that she was pregnant.
Yes, when Matt told me he was going to marry her it was a surprise — a shock.’
She looked at him, questioning.
‘I suppose you know about the little hut?’
‘It's still there.’
She looked down at her hands.
‘I know.
It sounds quite absurd but the other day I walked up the footpath from the road just to see if it was.
A boy came out and looked at me, a bit suspicious, and I felt a fool, but that boy took me back thirty years.
He could have been any one of the brothers.
Of course, it was Maurice's boy.
‘Anyway, the hut looked just the same; things wear better than people, don't they?’
‘You have memories of the little hut?’
She coloured and laughed.
‘When I remember it first it was a playroom for the Glynn children and any others they cared to let in; a sort of clubhouse.
Later, as the boys became teenagers and young men, it became a place for them to meet their girlfriends.
‘Perhaps it's difficult to believe now, but the Glynn boys could take their pick of girls.
Of course Matt was  regarded as the prize and I suppose I was flattered when he became serious with me — or seemed to.’
Wycliffe said: ‘And you met Matthew again when you came back here to live?’
‘Within a year or so; a chance meeting.’
‘And that started the Sunday visits and the biannual holidays?’
A short laugh.
‘So you know our secrets.
I suppose you must, since you're here.
Anyway, that was all he wanted of me though he offered marriage.
He didn't really want a deeper involvement.’
‘And you?’
‘Oh, I would have turned him down anyway.
Meeting Matthew again after sixteen years of marriage and hearing about the rest of the family — it made me realize there was something about the Glynns…–
‘What kind of thing?’
She was picking at a loose cotton in the hem of her smock.
‘I can't quite explain it.
When I think back it seems to me they were all three of them looking for a groove to settle in — tramlines that would take them somewhere without them having to think where they were going.’
She laughed at her own image.
‘They might have to work — the Glynns aren't lazy — but they want to make their decisions once and for all.’
She looked up, questioning, wondering if she had made sense.
Wycliffe watched her, dreamy-eyed; it was impossible to say whether he was interested or not, even whether he was really listening.
Lucy Lane wondered, not for the first time, what it was about him that encouraged people to talk; sometimes it was almost as though he wasn't there.
Florrie Tremayne went on regardless: ‘And poor old Alfred with his shop; he'd wanted to be a doctor, a GP, plodding along in some backwater for forty years, supported by a sufficient number of loyal patients who hung on his words and swallowed his medicines with no fuss.
Instead, he had to settle for a chemist's shop, and though he still tried to behave like a doctor, it didn't work.
To make a living he had to sell things over the counter-like his brother.’
Lucy Lane said: ‘But apart from that there was a sort of tragedy in his life — at least he saw it as one.’
Florrie looked at the girl.
‘You really think so?
You may be right but some people seem to dramatize a commonplace misfortune and turn it into a cult.
They live on it.
I may be hard, but it looks to me like an excuse for not facing the real world — perhaps a welcome excuse.’
‘What about Maurice?
Has he found his groove?’
It was Wycliffe, giving the first indication that he had followed her argument, and she became flustered.
It was almost as though he was consulting her.
She said: ‘Oh, I think so — he was upset enough at the idea of Matt building houses next to his pottery, wasn't he?’
‘Upset enough to kill?’
The question came quietly, almost casually, but if Florrie had been flustered before, now she was shocked.
‘The idea had never entered my head!
I know it's not your fault, but you come here and we chat about the family, I say too much and, suddenly, we're talking about murder!’
‘But that's what I'm here for, to talk about murder.’
‘Yes, but my tongue runs away with me and I find it difficult to realize that Matt is dead.’
Wycliffe sat, unruffled in his chair, while Florrie calmed herself by going to make tea.
Soon she was back again and they were drinking tea and eating saffron cake.
‘About the little hut — did Alfred and Maurice meet their girlfriends there?’
‘Yes, but I don't think Alfred was much competition.’
She looked down at her hands.
‘I'm making it sound as though the little hut was some sort of brothel, but it wasn't like that at all.
I mean, we were young; there happened to be more girls in the neighbourhood than boys, and we experimented — there was nothing vicious about it.
Going back to Alfred, it was solemnly agreed that every couple who spent time in the hut would carve their initials somewhere.
Of course it became quite a game searching for pairs of initials but I don't remember finding Alfred's once.’
She cast a speculative eye on Lucy Lane.
‘Sometimes I get the impression that modern young people think they discovered sex.’
‘Did Sara come in on any of this?’
‘Oh, no!
Sara used to spy on the boys but if she ever had anything going for her I didn't know about it.’
Lucy Lane said: ‘They all seemed fond of their mother.’
Florrie smiled.
‘She was always a bit of a mystery to me; her sons worshipped her — I'm not so sure about Sara.
If there was anything unpleasant the first thing in the boys' minds was ‘not to worry mother’.
I've no idea how she managed it.
Anyhow she lived to be nearly ninety and I'm not surprised.’
They left at last.
In the car Lucy Lane said: ‘A very interesting woman.’
Wycliffe agreed.
‘A realist, and they're rare birds, God knows.’
When they arrived back at the Incident Room the little printer was locking up for the night.
‘Good evening, Mr Wycliffe.
Nice evening.’
They were becoming neighbours.
Dixon, one of the longest serving of Wycliffe's DCs and one who had never sought or wanted promotion, was duty officer.
‘The chief ‘s been on the line, sir; he wants you to ring him.’
Dixon had been in the business long enough to convey by a subtle nuance of tone that the Chief Constable was not in an amiable mood.
‘Right.
Get him on the line; I'll be in my room.’
His telephone rang almost at once; he was through to the chief's personal assistant, a grey-haired lady of vast experience who monitored and sometimes modulated communication (other than face to face) between the chief and the outside world — including his policemen.
‘The chief ‘s been asking for you for some time, Mr Wycliffe.’
Her tone was a caution.
‘I've been out.’
Bertram Oldroyd's voice came over the line.
‘Charles!
Where the hell have you been?
Never mind, you'll only tell me and I don't want to know.
The press, the TV and the radio would like to know what's going on and, incidentally, so would I. Kersey doesn't know, or he does and isn't saying.’
Wycliffe was wooden.
‘What exactly is it that is not known, sir?
We've had a homicide and a suicide and your office has been kept informed about both.’
Oldroyd laughed.
‘All right, Charles, come off it!
You know damn well the questions that are being asked the questions I'm asking: Is this case winding up or isn't it?
The facts seem to point to Matthew Glynn having been murdered by his brother, Alfred, as the climax of a long feud aggravated by Alfred's mental instability.
Alfred commits suicide which, in the circumstances, might well be construed as an admission of guilt.
You've no reason to doubt the suicide?’
‘None.’
‘Good!
Then what are we waiting for?’
Wycliffe said: ‘There is another piece of evidence  which hasn't reached you yet.
The dead man's sister, Sara Glynn, has made a fresh statement in which she claims to have seen her brother, Alfred, leaving the scene shortly after the time at which Matthew must have died.’
Oldroyd drew in his breath.
‘So that's it!
Surely it's over bar the paperwork.’
Wycliffe said: ‘I'm not satisfied, sir.
‘What more do you want?’
‘To be convinced.’
There was a lull.
Wycliffe could sense Oldroyd's mind ticking over.
‘All right, Charles.
I've got too much respect for you to argue but I hope you'll remember that you're tying up men and equipment down there.’
‘I'll remember.’
‘How long do you reckon you'll need?’
‘As long as it takes, sir.’
‘It's a good job I know you, Charles!
Have it your way.
I'll get Miller to draft a statement for the media and tell him to clear it with you before release.’
‘Thanks, I appreciate that.’
That evening Wycliffe's after-dinner walk took him once more to Newlyn, but it was a fine evening and still light so he continued along the coast road, past the stone quarries, to Mousehole.
(Nothing to do with mice or holes but probably a corruption of the Cornish Moweshayl, young women's river — perhaps where they did their washing.)
He trudged the maze of little streets, sometimes on the edge of the sea, sometimes, and unpredictably, separated from it by a row of cottages.
There was a quay, said to have been started by the Phoenicians; and everywhere, on sea and land alike, there were boats.
Just another Cornish village in transition from fish to tourists.
He found Merlyn Rock where, in the summer of  1595, the Spaniards landed and burned the village along with Newlyn and Penzance; then in the gathering dusk he made his way up the hill out of the village to Paul and the church of St Pol de Leon (not he of Tarsus but a Celtic gentleman), also burned by the Spaniards and rebuilt afterwards.
And all the time in the subterranean passages of his mind he was trying to come to terms with his own obstinacy.
Why would Sara say that she had seen Alfred leaving his brother's yard at about the time of the crime if she had not?
True, Alfred was not now in a position to contradict her, but why should she lie?
To protect herself?
To protect someone else?
Either was possible but why did he disbelieve her?
It came to him that what really troubled him was motive, or rather the lack of what he considered to be a convincing motive for the killing.
He reminded himself again that he was dealing with premeditated murder and the Glynns were not the sort to resort deliberately to force except in dire circumstances.
They were respectable; they and their like inherit and sustain their respectability as the aristocracy guard the family silver — an ultimate resource.
He had taken a longer walk than he intended and by the time he returned to the coast road at Newlyn it was quite dark.
CHAPTER NINE
Wednesday morning
It was not yet May but it was a May morning; the sun was shining and there was that certain sparkle in the air; air which, despite all that has been done to it, Wycliffe still found good to breathe.
And, according to the radio, doves were cooing in the Kremlin.
He felt mildly exhilarated, which troubled him a little because he couldn't think why.
It was high tide and on the wharf the swing-bridge was open to allow a toy ship to enter the toy-town dry-dock.
He stood and watched for a while but everything connected with seamanship is so majestically slow that he began to feel guilty of time wasting while the little vessel was still being manoeuvred through the gap.
He climbed the steep slope to the Incident Room, forcing his pace, and arrived just a little out of breath.
The printer had not yet opened.
Upstairs, Dixon, the duty officer, nodded towards the waiting-room.
‘A young lady to see you, sir
Christine Glynn.’
She was sitting on one of the bentwood chairs, knees together, her hands wedged between them.
She wore jeans and a zip-up denim top.
‘You wanted to see me, Christine?’
Without a word she followed him into his office.
He placed a chair for her and she sat down, pale and anxious.
‘It's about when they opened father's safe.’
‘You told me you weren't there.’
‘I wasn't; it was only when I was talking about it to Gina that I thought I ought to come here and tell you.’
She was holding herself so stiff that from time to time she trembled.
He tried to help her: ‘They didn't find much; only a couple of volumes of somebody's journal —’
‘Yes, I know.
And a box — an empty cardboard box.’
‘You know something about these things?’
‘Only that I've seen them before.’
‘In the safe?’
‘No.’
‘Tell me about it.’
She frowned, making an effort to compose herself.
‘It was about a month ago; one afternoon I sort of burst into father's office to ask him something.
Paula said there was nobody with him but there was: Ronnie Swayne was there.
Ronnie must have come in through the yard door without her knowing…
Father hated to be disturbed when he had anybody with him and I could see he was annoyed so I made myself scarce; I mean I didn't stay to say what I wanted.’
‘But you saw something?’
‘Yes.
The safe was open, and the two books were on father's desk with the cardboard box, and he was just taking the lid off the box as I came in.’
‘Was it empty?’
‘No, it was full of papers.’
‘Papers lying on top of one another— just stuffed in?’
‘No; they were sort of folded and put in next to each other, on edge.’
‘Like cards in a card index?’
She looked pleased.
‘Yes, just like that but they seemed too thick for cards and uneven — like folded papers.
I can't say for sure; I mean, I was only there for a second or two…
‘Did your father say anything to you or to Swayne while you were there?’
‘Not to me; I didn't stay long enough.’
‘To Swayne?’
‘He was saying something as I came in — something about a buyer…’
‘Having a buyer…finding a buyer…looking for a buyer?’
She shook her head.
‘I'm sorry, I can't remember.’
He wondered why she was so tense.
‘Why have you come to tell me about this, Christine?’
‘I thought you would want to know; I mean, there were things in the box that aren't there now.’
She reminded him very much of his own daughter as she had been not so long ago; on the verge of womanhood, nervous and unsure but determined not to be put down or patronized.
‘You think Swayne may have the things that were in the box?’
She drew back at this.
‘I don't know.
Gina said that your…your detective seemed to think the box mattered.
Perhaps I shouldn't have come.’
He was reassuring.
‘You were quite right to come and what you've told me may be important.
I just want to be sure that you've told me all you know.’
He sat watching the girl, wondering if there was any way of getting behind the mask.
She faced him, her dark eyes anxious.
‘Do you believe that your Uncle Alfred killed your father?’
‘Of course I believe it!
Aunt Sara saw him — she told you!’
Her response was so vigorous as to be almost violent.
He gave up.
‘Are you going out to the pottery today?’
‘I'm on my way; I've got my bike outside.’
He thanked her for coming and saw her off the  premises, but he was left wondering at her distress which seemed to arise more from fear than from grief.
But that did not prevent him seeing the possible significance of what she had told him.
Back in his office he put through a call to the colonel.
After the obligatory preamble on the weather he got down to business.
‘When you were here you mentioned a collection of letters written by Martin Beale to his mother which came into your mother's possession later.
How were they kept?’
‘Kept?’
The colonel echoed the word in his high-pitched voice.
‘In a shoe box or something of the sort.
Don't tell me you've found them?’
‘No, but we may have news of them.
Were the letters loose or still in their envelopes?’
Hesitation.
‘I'm afraid I can't tell you that.
My mother kept the box in a cupboard in her sitting-room along with all manner of other things which had been handed down through her side of the family.
I remember her pointing it out to me saying what was in it when we were really looking for something else.’
The colonel pondered.
‘No, I don't think I ever looked inside.
I suppose one gets more interested in that sort of thing as one grows older.’
Wycliffe thanked him and promised to keep him informed.
Swayne; perhaps he should have paid more attention to Swayne.
Lady Street was busy: there were even a few visitors about, weaving between the parked vans and lorries.
It's extraordinary the way they materialize like flies out of thin air when the sun shines.
The grill had been removed from the window of the stamp shop and the outer door stood open.
Wycliffe stepped down into the little hall and pushed open the door of the shop  itself.
There was a chest-high counter and the space on the customers' side offered room for no more than two people.
Swayne, wearing his half-glasses, was seated on a high stool behind the counter, sorting stamps, dividing the contents of a large heap into several smaller piles.
Clarence sprawled on the counter as only a cat can, performing an intimate and meticulous toilet.
Swayne looked over his glasses.
‘Good morning, Mr Wycliffe.
Do you want to come through?’
‘No, this shouldn't take long.’
Swayne went on: ‘I suppose it's about Alfred.
A shocking business!
One feels guilty about not having understood better what was going on.
I'm assuming that it was suicide following…’
‘Following what, Mr Swayne?’
Wycliffe was innocent.
‘Well, one shouldn't jump to conclusions but I can't help linking Alfred's death with Matt's.
I knew, of course— we all did — the bitterness which Alfred felt against his brother…
But after nearly thirty years!’
Swayne's fingers continued busily, sorting his stamps into colourful little heaps; he seemed to manage with the minimum of attention.
Wycliffe said: ‘It's not about Alfred that I'm here but another matter altogether.
Among the contents of Matthew's safe there were two manuscript volumes, the journal of a certain Martin Beale who lived and worked in Natal and Cape Province during the second half of the last century.’
Swayne made no comment.
‘I understand that Matthew showed you those books.’
‘Yes, he did.’
‘Do you know where he got them or why he kept them from his family?’
Swayne looked at Wycliffe over his glasses.
‘No, I  don't know, Mr Wycliffe.
Surely you're not suggesting that they had anything to do with his death?’
‘You didn't know that he acquired them through his wife who must have got them while she was housekeeper-companion to Mrs Armitage?’
Swayne's fingers ceased sorting his stamps and he gave Wycliffe his full attention.
‘No, I didn't know that.’
‘In what circumstances were they shown to you?’
‘Simply as a matter of interest.
We happened to be talking about the diary habit which, nowadays, seems to be largely confined to politicians.’
‘Did he ask you to find a buyer for them?’
The little green eyes widened.
‘Mr Wycliffe, Matthew was a dealer in rare books and something of an authority, why would he consult me?’
Wycliffe was standing with one arm resting on the counter, gazing at the freckled man whose sparse red hair was combed in streaks across his skull.
For an appreciable time no-one spoke and Swayne began to be uneasy.
The cat had stopped cleaning itself and had curled up asleep in a little pool of sunshine.
Somebody stepped down from the street and peered through the glass door but seeing Wycliffe went away again.
Wycliffe said: ‘What about the letters?’
‘The letters?’
‘In the cardboard box; they were in the safe with the journal.
Were you more interested in them?
You see, they are no longer there.’
Swayne fiddled with his little heaps of stamps.
‘Journals, letters — they were both Glynn's cup of tea, not mine.’
‘But letters come in envelopes and envelopes have stamps on them.
My mother always kept letters in their envelopes and a lot of other people must have done the  same or the stamp business generally would have been the poorer.’
‘I'm at sea, Mr Wycliffe.’
‘Then let me be more explicit.
Inez had no right to either the journal or the box of letters which passed into Matthew Glynn's possession and were shown to you.
Mrs Armitage's heir is already asserting his rights in the matter but that is not my concern.
My interest is in the murder of Matthew Glynn.’
Swayne was incredulous.
‘But surely you know who killed Matthew?’
‘No, I do not know!
We have one possibility but the case is still under investigation and I am looking for possible motives.
I don't know the value attaching to the stamps on those envelopes but if they are or have been in your possession you would be well advised to make a full statement of your involvement.
If I can't get the information I want any other way I shall ask the fraud squad to make inquiries.
At the same time you will be required to attend at the police station for a formal interview.’
Swayne made an angry movement.
‘This is harassment!’
Wycliffe straightened up.
‘Of course if you wish to make a voluntary statement you can come along to my Incident Room at some time to suit yourself.
One of the officers there will assist you.’
He left without giving the little man a chance to reply.
Out in the street he stood for a while, obstructing the pavement.
Swayne was a dealer, it was doubtful whether he was making more than a bare living out of his stamps and coins.
If there was a chance of real money he might be tempted…
Assuming the cardboard box was full of letters and that each one carried a stamp — used stamps of Natal and Cape Province between the years say, 1850 and 1890 — would they be  worth much?
Wycliffe had no idea but surely not enough to provide a motive for murder.
All the same, he was in no doubt that Matthew Glynn had handed over the contents of the cardboard box to Swayne with a view to some sort of deal.
Give Swayne time to brood.
Without conscious intent he walked the few steps to the bookshop.
The blinds were still down and there was a closed notice on the door, but there was no longer a uniformed man outside.
He rang the bell of the house door and it was answered by a grey-haired little woman in an overall; a Mrs Mop.
He had no need to introduce himself.
Brushing back her hair with the back of a damp hand she said: ‘Your lot are up in the attics, Miss Sara is out and they're in the shop.’
He went down the passage and through the communicating door into the shop.
At the back he found Gerald and Paula, the girl assistant, unpacking parcels of books.
Gerald straightened up.
‘I was hoping you might put in an appearance.
I know it sounds unfeeling but to be blunt we can't go on much longer without any money coming in.
The coroner has issued a disposal certificate and we've provisionally arranged the funeral for Saturday — service at the church and burial in the town cemetery beside granny.’
He looked at Wycliffe, oddly tentative.
‘Will the police raise any objection to that?’
‘Why should we?’
‘And we could open for business on Monday?’
‘It's up to you.’
The sound of a typewriter rattling away came from the little office and Gerald said: ‘Gina — catching up on the correspondence.
She'd rather do it herself than dictate to Paula.’
Gerald was uneasy, apologizing for the contending demands of the living and the dead, but Wycliffe was too preoccupied to be reassuring.
‘I'm going up to the attics.’
He climbed the stairs, paused for a moment to look out of the landing window at the bay in sunshine, then continued on up.
There were three attics and through the open door of one he could see Fox sorting the contents of a huge cabin-trunk while his assistant was foraging in a cupboard beside the chimney breast.
The room had the steeply sloping ceiling and dormer window typical of attics.
There were heaps of clothing on the floor, roughly sorted and laid out on newspaper.
Fox, house-trained and with a card-index mind, was shocked by the manner in which Inez's belongings had been stored.
‘I gather Matthew Glynn put all this away himself.
I've never seen such a jumble!
There's a lot of very good stuff here but he seems to have gathered it up in armfuls and just bundled it in anywhere.
When Leach opened that cupboard it just tumbled out on the floor.’
He stooped to retrieve an ear-ring which had dropped out of a blouse he was holding.
‘Odd items of jewellery fall out of anything you happen to pick up; photographs are mixed up with underclothes…
Handbags over here, Leach!’
He reached out to take a pig-skin handbag from his assistant.
‘That's the fifth, so far — one to go with each outfit I suppose…
That fur on the floor is mink…
One thing's certain: he didn't keep her short…’
Wycliffe brooded; he felt restless and frustrated, unable to make up his mind where he should be or what he should be doing.
And this attic depressed him; these expensive artefacts, stuffed away and unregarded, seemed to underline the futility of a certain kind of  living…
He tried to imagine Matthew's state of mind when he gathered up his wife's things and stashed them away.
Glynn was not by nature careless or casual; he must have been under strong emotion.
Grief?
Anger?
Remorse?…
‘Look out particularly for any photographs or letters.’
‘There's an album with snapshots, sir, mainly of the children —’ Gerry at five years’, ‘Gina at four months’— that sort of thing.’
Wycliffe was leaving when Leach lifted a bundle of clothing from the bottom shelf of his cupboard.
‘There's a brief-case under this lot!’
He stooped and held up a fairly modern brief-case of the sort office workers are said to carry their sandwiches in.
Fox took it from him.
‘It's locked.’
Wycliffe waited while Fox demonstrated his skill as a pick-lock.
The case was all but empty — just a few letters, still in their envelopes.
‘Three of them seem to be anonymous, sir,’ Fox said.
‘Addressed in block capitals to Matthew Glynn.’
Wycliffe took the three to a small table by the window.
The envelopes had been slit open.
All three had been posted in the Penzance district and the post-mark dates were: February 1St, February 22nd, and March 21St, all in 1971.
The last date was significant; it was the Monday following the Sunday on which Inez left home for the last time.
Wycliffe read the notes in date order; each consisted of one or two lines of block capitals, written with a ball point.
The first read: ‘You know what's going on with your wife.
What sort of man are you?’
The second: ‘Most Sunday afternoons her car is in Badgers’ Wood.
You can see for yourself.’
And the third: ‘Her car was there on Sunday.’
The other letters in the brief-case were a mixed bag and dated some time later.
One was from an astrologer  saying that he would find Matthew's wife for a fee; another proposed membership of a society for bereaved or deserted spouses; a third offered the services of ‘a well-known and respected private inquiry agent, formerly associated with Scotland Yard.’
‘I suppose neither of you have heard of Badgers’ Wood?’
Neither of them had.
Outside the door he all but ran into Sara.
Had she been eavesdropping?
If so she had learned very little.
He was astonished by the change in her since the previous day; then she had looked tired, now she looked grey and ill.
Evidently the making of a formal statement had not relieved her mind.
‘I heard you were up here going through what Inez left.
Why?
Surely you can leave us alone now?’
Her manner was pleading rather than aggressive.
‘I have to do my work, Miss Glynn.’
Smug; but what else could he say?
‘What work?
You know who killed Matthew — and why.
What more do you want, for God's sake?’
He could not be touched by this woman though he was well aware that she was deeply distressed.
‘I'm sorry.’
She let him go without further protest.
His mind was in turmoil.
He wanted to get away somewhere and think in peace, but experience had taught him that it would have achieved nothing because he was incapable of sustained logical thought.
The best he could hope for was to give his thoughts free rein, to recapture phrases, images, notions, and play with them, allowing them to make patterns in his mind.
While reading the anonymous notes the glimmering of an idea had come to him but he could not sharpen the focus.
It was like trying to recall a dream.
Without being aware of getting there he found  himself outside the printer's shop.
Upstairs, Curnow was duty officer.
‘I want a driver and the key to the little hut at Trebyan.’
He got one of the local uniformed men.
‘Trebyan — beyond St Hilary Churchtown.’
‘I know it, sir.’
‘You know the area well?’
‘I ought to, I was born and bred in Penzance; PC Hawken, sir.’
Late thirties, ought to have made sergeant by now but probably didn't want to.
Who could blame him?
‘Have you ever heard of Badgers’ Wood?’
‘No, sir.
There's Badgers’ Cross —’
‘I know Badgers’ Cross.’
They turned off the main road.
‘Take the lane to Churchtown.’
‘There's no need, sir, this road will —’
‘Do it.’
If PC Hawken had heard of Wycliffe's reputation for amiability he was being disillusioned.
‘Stop here.’
There was no dog in the road but they were among the little cluster of grey and brown stone houses near the church where Wycliffe had had his memorable conversation with Emily Pascoe.
He went to her house and knocked on the green door.
It was answered by Emily herself, an oven cloth in her hand.
‘Oh, it's you!
Come in, do!’
He was shown into an over-furnished little sitting-room from which the light was almost excluded by two sets of curtains.
A rich warm smell of baking came from the kitchen.
‘I just this minute took my cakes out of the oven.
I always bake of a Wednesday, just like my mother used to — two saffron cakes and a tray of buns they last us nicely through the week.’
She made a gesture of vigorous distaste.
‘I can't abide they ol' shop cakes.’
She guided him to an armchair and sat herself on the edge of a Victorian sofa.
‘What a terrible thing about poor Alfie!
You could've knocked me down with a feather when they tol’ me.’
She studied her plump, ringed fingers.
‘I come over quite queer.
To think that was what the poor fella was going to do when I saw ‘n pass my door Monday morning!’
‘Yes, it was a terrible thing.
I came this morning because I think you may be able to help me from your knowledge-of the family and of the area.
First, do you know a place called Badgers’ Wood?’
She frowned.
‘Badgers’ Wood?…
No, I never heard that name round here an' I've lived here all my life…
Badgers' Wood — no, I can't help you there, my dear.
‘Course, there's badgers up in the banks but I never heard that name —’ She broke off.
‘You was saying about the family…’
‘Yes.
I wanted to ask you about Maurice's wife — you mentioned her when —’
‘Yes, she come from somewhere up-country.
Poor li'l thing, she didn’ last long.
Depression.
In an' out of hospital she was.’
She gave Wycliffe a sidelong look.
‘They call it hospital now — what we used to call the asylum.
She never got over having young David — sad!
But like I said before, they Glynns never had much luck.
‘In the end she couldn’ stand it no longer.’
‘Are you saying that she killed herself?’
Emily pouted her lips.
‘Overdose.
Funny!
Not one of they brothers got and kept a wife.’
Through a narrow gap in the curtains Wycliffe could  see across the road to the churchyard with its sycamores and the little grey tower of the church pointing its slender steeple into blue sky.
Not a movement, not a sound anywhere.
‘Did Maurice have any help in the house when his wife was in hospital?’
‘Molly Pearce.
She was good as gold; I don't know what he would've done without her!’
‘An elderly woman?’
‘Elderly?
Nothing of the kind — thirtyish, I s'pose she must've bin then.’
A knowing smile.
‘I reckon she had her eye on Maurice when his wife died.’
‘I'd like to talk to her; does she still live around here?’
‘Where she always lived; she never married.’
‘Where is that?’
‘With her people — they farm Roskear; it's on the top road just above Trebyan.
The Glynns and the Pearces are neighbours.’
Wycliffe came out into the sunshine, blinking; Emily saw him off like an old friend.
She would probably gossip; so much the better.
PC Hawken was waiting in the car.
Wycliffe made up his mind: ‘I shall be at Trebyan for a while.’
‘Then I 'll drop you off there, sir.’
‘No, I prefer to walk.
Are you interested in churches?’
‘I can take them or leave them, sir.’
‘Never been in this one?’
‘No, sir.’
‘Try it.
Pity there's no pub.’
After twenty years in the force Hawken thought that he knew all there was to be known about the eccentricities of senior officers but he was wrong.
Wycliffe set out along the road which was no more than a lane following the course of a shallow valley.
There were fields on either side with occasional stands  of pine trees scattered unpredictably over the landscape.
In the hedges bluebells, red campions and white ramsons made patriotic splashes of colour.
Not a single vehicle.
Molly Pearce, the helpful spinster with her eye on Maurice; she fitted so exactly that Wycliffe could scarcely believe his luck.
He was beginning to find pieces which seemed to go together with the hint of a pattern…
Strolling rather than walking he reached the point where the footpath to Trebyan left the road; it was by no means obvious unless one was looking for it: a ditch, a screen of willows, and a stile all but covered with ivy.
Once over the stile he was soon amongst the hawthorn and gorse and on the track which led to the little hut; he was doing as Alfred must have done two days earlier.
It was a strange place and it gave him strange ideas; he was oddly aware of those who had played, and loved and quarrelled there.
Had they done so with more than ordinary intensity so that they had left behind something of themselves — a  persistent aura?
He told himself that this was nonsense; he was allowing his knowledge to influence his perceptions.
Yet Alfred had chosen it as a place to die and David had said of his father: ‘…for him it is one of those special places.’
He reached the hut and climbed the two or three steps to the verandah.
The silence was absolute; the sun shone and the air was still.
Then he noticed that there was a key already in the lock.
He opened the door but the dimness inside was such that for a moment he could see little; then, as his eyes accommodated, he saw Maurice standing, pressed against the far wall as though he wanted to vanish through it.
The hut seemed to be as he had last seen it except that the settee  had been pulled out from the wall to the centre of the room.
In a voice that sounded husky and uncertain, Maurice said: ‘I came down to look around.’
‘So you found another key.’