

Michael Latcham
The check in some early pianos and the development of piano technique around the turn of the 18th century
Towards the end of the 18th century two main traditions of piano building had become established, one in England, the other in Germany and Vienna.
In 1827 Johann Nepomuk Hummel (1778–1837) retrospectively described the differences between the pianos of these two schools in terms of the heaviness of the touch, the ease with which the pianos could be played, the quality of their sound and their carrying power.
Today, the names of the famous classical composers are associated with particular piano builders.
In a letter of 1777 Mozart praised the instruments of Johann Andreas Stein (1728–92), a German builder (illus.l).
In about 1783 Mozart bought a Viennese piano by Anton Walter (1752–1826).
Haydn recommended the Viennese pianos of Wenzel Schantz (c.1750–90) in a letter of 1790.
A recent article described how Beethoven requested Viennese piano builders to alter the touch of his 1803 Erard piano, which had an English action.
The alterations to the piano included making the touch lighter and reducing the key-dip.
These changes would have made the touch more like that of a piano with a Viennese action.
The invention of the piano is attributed to Bartolomeo Cristofori (1655–1731).
He had built pianos by the end of the 17th century, but the three pianos by him that still exist were made in the 17205.
The action design of these three is remarkable in that it contains all the essential elements of the action of the modern grand piano, including the check.
Immediately after hitting the string, the hammer is caught by the check.
It prevents the hammer from bouncing up and hitting the string again.
The check is thus of crucial importance in the relationship between the player and his instrument.
The principles of Cristofori's action design have been retained in instruments from 1720 to the present day.
Of the pianos made during the latter part of the 18th century and in the 19th century, those built in the English tradition most clearly demonstrate Cristofori's design.
The English piano builders in the classical era were rivalled by the Viennese.
In general, the action in Viennese pianos is apparently quite unlike the English action.
It is possible, however, to forge a link between the English and the German or Viennese traditions.
The exact origins of the Viennese school of building are not known, but Stein is generally accepted as its most important precursor.
He improved the German action by adding an escapement mechanism.
This allowed the hammer to return to its rest position immediately after hitting the string.
Those who built in the Viennese tradition based their designs on that of Stein.
But the principle of the escapement was already present in Cristofori's action.
Stein rearranged elements of Cristofori's action, interpreting them in the context of a German tradition.
In this sense, Stein did not invent the German escapement action but applied Cristofori's principle of the escapement to a German design.
The Viennese action is derived from Stein's action, whereas the English action is derived from Cristofori's.
If Stein's action can be seen as a rearrangement of Cristofori's action, then the Viennese action, formally speaking, can be seen as a transformation of the English.
The Viennese piano is often discussed as if it developed along one path, as if each improvement followed the previous one in an orderly fashion.
The resulting chronology should then enable one to date particular instruments according to the presence of certain features.
The check is often overlooked in surveys of the history of the piano.
Between about 1785 and 1805 some pianos made in the Viennese tradition were designed with a check and others without.
So the development of the Viennese piano building tradition at the end of the 18th century did not follow a single route.
The presence of a check enables the player to use a far wider dynamic range than is available on a piano without a check.
A check also gives the player more control over the action.
The simple fact that pianos with and without checks existed side by side in the Vienna of Mozart, Haydn and Beethoven also shows that at least two different schools of playing the piano co-existed around 1800.
There was no single way of playing the piano then, a fact which of itself is obvious of course.
But it may be of interest to note, simply through the observation of some important early instruments, that different ways of playing the piano can be shown to have e– ted at the same time.
The function of the check
The function of the check, as I have already mentioned, is to catch the hammer after it has hit the string.
Without a check the hammer can bounce up and hit the string again, distorting the sound intended by the player.
The situation without a check varies depending on whether or not the action in question has an escapement mechanism.
Without a check, the escapement mechanism allows the hammer to return to its rest position immediately after hitting the string, whether the key is released or not.
Without a check and with no escapement, the hammer remains between its rest position and the string until the key is released.
In either situation, both with an escapement and without, the absence of a check means that the hammer could bounce up again after hitting the string.
How close to the string the hammer then comes depends on the energy the hammer retains after hitting the string, how much of that energy is absorbed by the material from which the hammer then rebounds and how much energy is otherwise lost, for instance through the friction at the hammer pivot or hinge.
The net effect of these factors is to dissipate the energy of the returning hammer.
As more energy is put into the hammer without a check (in other words, as the player plays more loudly) a critical point will be reached at which the hammer retains enough energy after hitting the string to bounce up and hit the string again.
In this context, the early piano action design of Cristofori provides an interesting example.
The drawing of it by Scipione Maffei shows no check.
The hammer rests on two crossed silk threads.
If those threads were slack, they would have absorbed much of the energy of the returning hammer.
But if they were taut, they would have acted as a small trampoline, bouncing the hammer up towards the string again.
In general, there are many situations without a check in which enough of the energy of the returning hammer will be absorbed to prevent the hammer reaching the string for a second time, but not enough to stop the hammer bouncing up some way towards the string.
If the player repeats a note when the hammer is in this mode, he will have the unpleasant sensation of catching the hammer at an unpredictable point between the hammer rest and the string.
This point will depend on how fast the note is repeated.
If the player is quick, he may unwittingly make use of the upward bounce of the hammer, making the touch unexpectedly light.
If he is slow, he may feel a slight but unpleasant jolt, catching the hammer as it falls.
Nowadays, both these situations would upset the player's touch.
It is clear that the presence or absence of a check can influence the technique of the player.
With a check, the pianist has more control over the action of the piano and is offered a greater dynamic range.
Without a check, the player has less control, especially when repeating notes, and the hammer can bounce up and hit the string again, distorting the sound and inhibiting the freedom of the player to play loudly.
English and German piano action
The two main traditions of piano building are generally distinguished according to the type of action employed in them.
The English action is derived from Cristofori's design of the 17205.
The other type is called the German or Viennese action.
The inventor of the German action is not known but it was used in a square piano signed ‘Gottfried Silbermann, fevr. 1749’ This piano is more likely to have been made by Johann Gottfried Silbermann (1722–63) rather than by his more famous uncle, Gottfried (1683–1753).
It is the earliest signed and dated instrument with a German action known to the author.
It has no escapement and no check.
Stein is often said to have been the inventor of the escapement for the German action.
We know that Stein had designed an escapement action by 1777 because Mozart describes it in a letter of that year.
There is a growing body of opinion that distinguishes the German action, typified by Stein's action, from the Viennese action, typified by Walter's action.
Before discussing the main difference between the actions of Walter and Stein I shall compare the actions of Walter and Cristofori and describe how some Viennese builders resolved the problem of the check.
Cristofori and Walter
Both the action of Cristofori and that of Walter have four essential parts.
These are the key, the hammer, the escapement and a check.
The obvious difference between the two actions is that the hammer in Walter's action points towards the player while the hammer in Cristofori's action points away (compare illus.2,3).
This  difference is of secondary significance.
What is important is that in Walter's action the hammer is mounted on the key, but the escapement and the check are not.
In Cristofori's action the reverse is true.
The check and the escapement are mounted on the key while the hammer is not.
The designs of the check in the actions of both Cristofori and Walter take advantage of the rotation of the key.
The check operates after the hammer has struck the string but before the key is released.
The rotation of the key brings the check and the hammer closer to each other.
In Walter's action, the hammer is moved closer to the stationary check.
In Cristofori's action, the check is moved closer to the hammer.
The four essential action parts — the key, the hammer, the escapement and the check — are organized differently in the two actions.
But the underlying functional relations between the four parts remain the same.
The difference between the two actions is not one of principle but one of organization.
So in principle, the Viennese action of Walter is a transformation of the English action.
some checks in pianos with the Viennese action
Some Viennese and Italian builders appear to have attempted the impossible.
They mounted both the hammer and its check on the key.
One piano by Ferdinand Hofmann (1756–1829) has hammer rest blocks similar to those in some of Stein's pianos, and little pads, reminiscent of Cristofori's checks, mounted on the keys behind the hammers (illus.4).
An anonymous Italian square piano and a square piano by Johann Jakob Konnicke (1756–1811) both have checks.
The Italian instrument also has rest blocks for the hammers, but the Konnicke piano does not (illus.5).
The difficulty with these checks is that they cannot be adjusted to trap the returning hammers without hindering their upward motion.
Conversely, if the checks are adjusted to allow the hammers to pass freely on their way up, they will not be checked on their way down.
This is because both the check and the hammer are mounted on the key, so they cannot be brought closer to each other by the rotation of the key.
These checks will absorb some of the energy of the returning hammers but can only be considered as hammer rests, not as checks.
The builders of these  pianos may have seen the need for a check, but they did not provide one that would always prevent the hammer bouncing.
In his later pianos, Hofmann improved this type of check (compare illus.4,6).
The check in 18 of his pianos consists of an upright, flat piece of wood hinged with leather to the key just on the player's side of the hammer.
About a third of the way up this flat piece of wood, a shelf protrudes under the hammer head.
On its return from the string, the hammer lands on this shelf, causing the whole body of the check to move in towards the hammer.
The top part of the flat piece of wood then traps the hammer head.
These checks, which were also used by Schantz and Joseph Brodmann (1771–1848) in square pianos, are quite effective.
But a good forte can make the hammers bounce.
A proper check, which traps the returning hammer without fail, is either independent of the key if the hammer is mounted on the key, as in Walter's pianos, or on the key if the hammer is separate from the key, as in Cristofori's pianos.
Schantz's solution to the problem of the check in his grand pianos was to fix a rail on the raised sides of the keyframe just in front of the hammers.
He positioned individual checks on the rail, one for each hammer (illus.7).
Each check is mounted on the rail using a short length of brass wire.
When the action is pushed into the piano, these checks clear the underside of the wrest-plank.
The action sledge, a wooden frame, is then pushed in under the action, lifting it to the right height under the strings.
Walter did not use a sledge to raise the action.
The action passes under the wrestplank.
For the last 35 mm the action slides up two small ramps glued to the bottom at either side inside the case.
These ramps, together with a piece of wood glued to the front face of the keyframe, raise the action to the designed height under the strings.
Walter did not use individual checks for each note, but a continuous batten, triangular in cross section, mounted on the raised sides of the keyframe and serving all the hammers (illus.8).
Because of the disposition and the shape of Walter's continuous check in relation to the wrestplank, the treble end of the check would not pass under the wrestplank as the action slides up the ramps at the back if the ends of the check batten were rigidly fixed to the action frame.
Walter solved this problem by mounting a long flat spring between the check and the action frame at the treble end.
The check is forced down by the underside of the wrestplank as the action is pushed up the ramps, thus flexing the spring.
As the action reaches the tops of the ramps, the check clears the wrestplank.
The spring can then push up the treble end of the check, so that the middle of the check meets the underside of the gap — spacer.
The treble end of the check continues to be lifted, with the gap-spacer as a pivot, until the bass end, which rides on a vertical pin, is seated on the raised side of the action frame.’
One possible advantage of the checks in Schantz's pianos is that each check can be adjusted individually.
One possible advantage of Walter's check is that when broken hammer shanks are repaired, the correct lengths of the shanks have to be maintained if the hammers are to be properly checked.
Because the check is a single batten, it cannot be adjusted to accommodate discrepant hammer shank lengths.
In some pianos, Konnicke used individual checks like those in the instruments of Schantz, but in others he used the Walter type.
Such eminent builders as Conrad Graf (1782–1851) and Johann Fritz (active between 1810 and 1825) used the Walter type of check, the single batten sprung at the treble end.
Some checks in pianos with the English action
Cristofori's check, the small pad mounted on the key with an iron wire, is found in the three extant grand pianos of Gottfried Silbermann.’
This check was used in English grand pianos and in other pianos with English actions, including the grand pianos of Sebastian Erard (1752–1831)(illus.9).
A grand piano by Ignatz Kober (C.1755–1813) provides an interesting example of a piano built in Vienna but with an English action (illus 10).
The action of this instrument is similar to Cristofori's action in some ways, but the wrestplank is not inverted and there is no intermediate lever.
Furthermore, the escapement is hinged to the key rather than fitting into a slot and the hammer points towards the player.
In Cristofori's action the hammer points away from the player.
Nonetheless, both the escapement and the check of the Kober instrument are mounted on the key, and the hammer is independent of the key, mounted in a hammer rail.
Kober's action therefore appears to exemplify the principles of Cristofori's action without the transformation to the Viennese action.
But, because the hammer points towards the player, the rotation of the key moves the check away from the hammer when the key is played, rather than bringing the two closer together.
This check, although similar to the one on Cristofori's pianos, can never function as a true check.
Like the checks in Hofmann's pianos, it will dissipate some of the energy of the returning hammer but it will never completely exclude the possibility of the hammer bouncing.
The missing check: Cristofori and Stein
Cristofori provided his pianos of the 1720s with a proper check.
Some builders, as we have seen, working later than Cristofori, put in their actions something resembling a check but which could not function as a true check.
However, there were also builders who had no check at all in their action designs.
Recent authors, mentioned above, distinguish between Stein's German action and Walter's Viennese action because in detail their escapements do not function in quite the same way.
But it is the check that immediately differentiates the work of the two builders.
Walter already incorporated a check in the action of Mozart's piano in 1783, while Stein never used one (illus.11).
It is often said that the hammer axle bushing in the Kapsel , or fork in which the hammer shank is mounted, absorbs enough of the energy of the returning hammer to act as a check.
But when Mozart said of Stein's piano that ‘the little hammers fall back to rest immediately after they have hit the strings’, he was remarking on the quick response of Stein's action.
Any friction at the hammer pivot will slow down the movement of the hammer, tending to make the action sluggish.
Any useful absorption of the energy of the returning hammer occurs at the hammer rest block, not at the pivot.
Georg Kinsky even attributed the invention of the check for the German action to Stein.
The idea that it is normal to find a check in a piano action seems to be the reason for saying either that Stein used a check or that some part of his action functions as a check.
But Stein did not use a check in his pianos, neither did Sebastien Lengerer of Kufstein in a piano of 1793, nor did Johann David Schiedmayer of Erlangen in a piano of 1794, nor did Johann Schmidt of Salzburg in a piano of 1794.
Nannette Streicher (1769–1833), Stein's daughter, was a famous piano builder, like her father.
She settled in Vienna after her father's death in 1792.
She did not include a check in her action design until 1805 (illus.12).
The fact that Stein established a tradition of building pianos without checks requires an explanation.
The escapement transformed: Stein and Silbermann
Stein worked in the Silbermann workshop in Strasbourg from August 1748 until June 1749.
During that year he worked with all four Silbermann brothers, including Johann Gottfried and Johann Heinrich (1727–99), the nephews of Gottfried Silbermann.
The square piano, mentioned above, signed ‘Gottfried Silbermann, fevr. 1749’ was probably made by Johann Gottfried, so Stein would have been in Strasbourg when this instrument with the German action but no escapement was finished.
Stein will also have seen grand pianos with an action design very like that of Cristofori made by Johann Heinrich in the same workshop.
Stein was therefore familiar with the German action without an escapement and with the English action with an escapement.
He would have understood the principle of the escapement in relation to the hammer by studying Johann Heinrich Silbermann's version of Cristofori's action in which the hammer was independent of the key and the escapement was attached to the key.
In German action without escapement, the hammer was attached to the key and so it would have been logical to add an escapement that was independent of the key.
This is what Stein did in his German action (illus.12).
He pivoted the hammer in a wooden Kapsel on the key, which was normal for a German action, and added the escapement, not on the key, but hinged to the keyframe.
When the key is played, the beak, the part of the hammer shank on the other side of the Kapsel from the hammer, catches on the escapement.
The hammer then travels upwards towards the string until the beak slips out from the escapement.
The hammer continues upwards, using the energy it had initially acquired, until it hits the string.
The hammer then returns to the hammer rest block.
Stein's German escapement action is a transformation of Johann Heinrich Silbermann's English action.
Silbermann mounted the escapement on the key and the hammer separate from the key.
Stein made the escapement of his German action independent of the key but mounted the hammer on the key.
The vis-á-vis piano-harpsichord by Stein
Stein's vis-á-vis instrument now in Verona is so called because the piano and harpsichord it combines face each other.
At one of the short ends of this rectangular instrument is a keyboard from which the piano is played.
At the opposite end are three keyboards.
The lowest of these serves the piano and the other two are for the harpsichord.
The Verona instrument is said to have had a soundboard label, now lost, giving the date 1777.
Some other Stein pianos have spurious dates, earlier than 1777, on their soundboard labels but later dates written on the undersides of their soundboards.
The Goteborg claviorganum has the date 1770 on the label but 1781 under the soundboard.
The piano in Leipzig has 1773 on the label and 1783 underneath.
The Verona instrument therefore contains the oldest Stein piano we know, if the remembered date of 1777 is correct.
The piano action in the vis-á-vis instrument can be seen as a half-way stage in the transformation from Johann Heinrich Silbermann's English action to Stein's German escapement action (compare illus.13,14).
The escapement levers of the Verona piano anticipate the form of those in Stein's later pianos but are mounted on the keys (compare illus.13,14).
The keys themselves are hinged at the back, instead of being balanced near the middle.
Although the hammers are mounted in a hammer rail, as they are in the Cristofori-Silbermann design, the hammer shanks have the type of beaks normally found in the later Stein instruments.
In the action c, f the Verona piano, the escapement lever pulls down the hammer beak while the hammer pivot remains stationary.
In Stein's German action, the beak is held by the escapement lever while the pivot moves up with the key (compare illus.12,13).
In both these actions, the hammer beaks escape in the same way.
In both the action of the vis-á-vis piano and in Stein's German action, the escapement engages the hammer shank on the other side of the pivot from the hammer head.
In the Cristofori-Silbermann action, the escapement engages the hammer shank on the same side of the pivot as the hammer head: the escapement pushes up the hammer butt.
In the Verona instrument, the escapement pulls the hammer beak down.
Leaving aside this subtle rearrangement and the fact that the intermediate lever has been done away with, many features of the piano in the vis-á-vis instrument are clearly taken from the Cristofori-Silbermann design (compare illus.2,13).
The wrestplank is inverted, the dampers are very similar to those of Cristofori and of Silbermann, and the principle of the hammer rail is clearly derived from the Cristofori-Silbermann tradition.
The round hollow hammers, typical of the pianos of both Cristofori and Silbermann, are found in other  pianos by Stein but not in the Verona piano.
It has solid wooden hammers with no covering of leather or any other material.
Perhaps Stein used bare hammers in the vis-a-vis piano to give it a greater dynamic range so that it could balance the harpsichord at the opposite end.
The missing check explained: Stein and J. H. Silbermann
The German escapement action Stein employed in all the pianos that he made after the piano in the vis-á-vis instrument can be seen as a transformation of the Cristofori-Silbermann piano action.
It then seems strange that Stein did not include the check in that transformation.
The check in Cristofori's action is attached to the key.
The rule of the transformation is to attach to the key that which was unattached and vice versa.
The check should have emerged from Stein's transformation of Silbermann's Cristofori-type action unattached to the key.
But the check is simply not there.
Gottfried Silbermann copied Cristofori's action very exactly.
Silbermann's nephew Johann Heinrich, who worked with his uncle from 1742 to 1743, continued the tradition but with one change.
There is no check in either of the two grand pianos or in the square piano that survive (illus.13).
Johann Heinrich omitted the check and left an energy-absorbing pad in its stead.
When Stein studied the Cristofori-style action in the pianos of Johann Heinrich Silbermann, the check was no longer incorporated in the design.
There was no check to undergo the transformation (illus.14).
The absence of the check: Cristofori and Silbermann
The origin of Stein's escapement action and an explanation for the missing check are thus to be found in the history of the Silbermann workshop in Strasbourg.
But the fact that Johann Heinrich Silbermann omitted the check in his action remains intriguing.
When Cristofori built his pianos of the 1720s, the harpsichord and the clavichord were the usual stringed keyboard instruments.
The techniques for playing them would have been transferred to the new piano.
It is unlikely that these techniques would have required a check in the action.
Cristofori must have included the check in his pianos from the point of view of design rather than of performance.
When Johann Heinrich Silbermann modified Cristofori's design, the check was still unnecessary.
It would have seemed cumbersome and redundant, both for the player and to the builder.
Viennese action with and without the check
Walter incorporated a check in his piano action from 1783 onwards.
Stein never used a check in his action and Nannette Streicher's action had no check until 1805.
There were therefore two different types of Viennese piano actions that existed side by side for more than 20 years.
These two types of action reflect two different styles of playing the piano.
If a player did not use a large dynamic range, he would have been content with a piano without a check.
On the other hand, those who wanted to play with more power would have required a piano with a check.
In 1801 Andreas Streicher (1761–1833), the husband of Nannette Streicher, complained in his booklet that accompanied his wife's pianos that there were those who played too hard.
He then wrote:
Rather than by using the fist, the greatest volume is attained more easily and also more beautifully by placing the notes so close together that the ear hears no space between them.
The legato touch, described here, is at one extreme of the spectrum of articulation.
Streicher preferred it to force for producing a forte .
In the same booklet, the performance of the ‘bad player’ is discussed.
Streicher wrote:
Now comes the Adagio!
[Listen to]the unclear, stuttering notes.’
The ‘stuttering notes must surely have been the result of the hammers bouncing.
A player who usually played on an instrument with a check would easily have produced stuttering, unclear notes.
His touch, trained to an instrument with a check, would have been quite inappropriate on an instrument made by Nannette Streicher: in 1801, her pianos had no checks.
There would have been other players between the two extremes of those who required a check and those who did not.
Some would have been content with the type of solution Hofmann offered: a check that worked within certain limits.
The idea that there were very different ways of playing the piano is substantiated by Johann Ferdinand von Schönfeld.
In his Jahrbuch der Tonkunst von Wien und Prag , published in Vienna in 1796, he wrote:
Because we have two original builders of pianos, we also divide our pianos into two classes: those that are made in the style of Walter and those made in the style of Streicher.
By close observation we can also detect two classes of players amongst our best piano players.
One of these classes loves a great musical treat, that is, a powerful sound; to that end they play with a rich texture, extremely fast, study the most difficult and the fastest octaves.
This requires authority and a strong nerve.
Such players, whose strength knows no moderation, require pianos that  can take any excesses.
For the virtuosi of this kind we recommend the Walter style of piano.
The other class of player seeks nourishment for the soul, and loves playing that is not only clear but also soft and melting.
These can choose no better instrument than the Streicher or so-called Stein type.
The class between the virtuosi will however not be disappointed in finding good instruments to fit every taste and every pocket.
In this passage, Von Schönfeld described the two classes of player suited to each type of instrument.
Those who exploited the potential power of the new instrument were recommended a Walter piano, which had a check.
Those who played more quietly, probably using techniques derived from harpsichord playing, were advised to use a Streicher instrument, which had no check.
The ‘class between the virtuosi’ was perhaps content with pianos, like those of Hofmann, with checks that only worked within certain limits.
Mozart, Stein and Walter
In his letter to his father of 1777, Mozart wrote of the pianos of Stein:
His instruments are exceptional in that they are made with an escapement, something with which not one in a hundred bothers himself.
But without an escapement I think that it is not possible to stop a piano jangling or echoing.
When Mozart played a piano by Stein in 1777, it did not jangle, even though there was no check.
So he played gently enough not to make the hammers of Stein's pianos bounce up and hit the strings again.
In 1777 Mozart did not require a check in the pianos he preferred.
But in 1783 he bought a piano by Walter, with a check.
It may well have been the presence of a check that guided Mozart's choice.
The check would have given him more control over the hammers and the freedom to play more powerfully than he had done in 1777, without making the piano jangle.
In 1777 Stein's piano did not jangle because of the addition of the escapement.
In 1783 Walter's piano did not jangle because of the addition of the check.
Mozart's technique had changed between 1777 and 1783.
Nannette Streicher and Beethoven
Nannette Streicher, as we have seen, did not include a check in her pianos until 1805.
In 1809 Johann Friedrich Reichardt wrote in a letter:
Streicher has abandoned the softness of the other Viennese instruments, with their too delicate touch and bouncing rolling action, and on Beethoven's advice and request has given his instruments a more resisting touch…so that the virtuoso…has more control…in the striking and releasing.
Reichardt was referring to Andreas Streicher when he wrote ‘Streicher’.
Beethoven corresponded with Andreas Streicher on the subject of pianos, and with Nannette Streicher,née Stein, on the subject of household problems.
But whether or not Nannette was influenced by her husband, whom she married in 1804, or by others, such as Beethoven, through Streicher, it is clear that the pianos from her workshop had significantly changed not long before Reichardt wrote his letter in 1809.
One of the changes she made was to include a check in the action, abandoning what had become a ‘bouncing’ action, not through any fault in her father's design but because the technique of those whose ‘strength’knew ‘no moderation’had superseded those whose playing was ‘soft and melting’Between 1796, when von Schönfeld used those words, and 1809 when Reichardt wrote his letter, the potential of the new instrument became generally accepted in Vienna.
The check had become a matter of necessity rather than of choice.
Epilogue: the inverted down-striking action
Stein maintained the Cristofori-Silbermann inverted wrestplank design in the piano of the Verona instrument.
The nut is glued to the underside of the wrestplank.
When the hammer strikes, the string cannot be dislodged from the nut, as it tends to be in a conventional 18th-century action, but is hit into the nut as in a down-striking action.
One could say that Cristofori's action, and therefore also Stein's action in his vis-a-vis piano, are inverted down-striking actions.
When Nannette Streicher and her son designed their down-striking action in 1823, they effectively inverted the Verona action (compare illus.13,15).
The escapement lever is attached to the key and the hammer is mounted in a hammer rail, independent of the key, just as in the    piano action of Stein's vis-à-vis instrument.
But there are four differences.
The first two of these are simply the result of the inversion.
Because keyboards are played by depressing the keys, the keys of the Streicher piano have a balance pin somewhere in the middle, rather than being hinged at the end.
The second change has to do with gravity.
Because Streicher's hammers no longer come back to rest position simply because of their weight, springs were introduced to return them.
The third difference is that Nannette Streicher put a check in the action.
This check is mounted on the key, which follows the rule of the transformation from Cristofori's action to Viennese action.
The final difference lies in the direction of the hammers.
The hammers in Stein's vis-à-vis piano action point away from the player.
The hammers in Streicher's down-striking action point towards the player.
One might therefore expect that Streicher's checks would not   work.
In Kober's pianos the check could only function as a hammer rest and not as a true check because the hammer pointed towards the player.
But because Streicher's action is inverted, because it is down-striking, the hammer and the check are brought closer together by the rotation of the key.
If the hammer had pointed away from the player, the check would not have worked.
The check was omitted in the action of the piano of Stein's vis-à-vis instrument.
When his daughter Nannette inverted that action to make her down-striking action, she included the check, completing her father's piano action as he himself might have done had he seen Gottfried Silbermann's pianos, or indeed those of Cristofori, rather than those of Johann Heinrich Silbermann.
I am very grateful to the Accademia Bartolomeo Cristofori in Florence for giving me the opportunity to give this paper as a lecture at the Accademia on 1 May 1992.
I am also grateful to the following for all the help they gave me: Derek Adlam, Martha Novak Clinkscale, Stephanie Cudmore, Alan Curtis, Donatella De Giampetro, Alfons Huber, William Jurgenson, Sabine Matzenauer, Grant O'Brien, Enrico Paganuzzi, Paul Poletti and Stewart Pollens.
I am also grateful to the Friends of St Cecilia's Hall and the Russell Collection for a grant I received from the J. J. K. Rhodes Bursary Fund towards the research for this paper.
Michael Latcham is curator of the musical instrument collection at the Haags Gemeentemuseum, The Hague.
He is currently working on a PhD dissertation on early pianos at Edinburgh University.
Bruce Wood and Andrew Pinnock
The Fairy Queen : a fresh look at the issues
[Some]ha' not the heart to believe anything, But what they see in print.
Aye, that's an error Has abus'd many; but we shall reform it, As many things beside (we have a hope) Are crept among the popular abuses.
Thus Ben Jonson on the simple-minded reading public of 1625.
And the press is more of a menace than Jonson realized, now that people by the million have votes to cast, money to spend and leisure time to fritter away following their printed instructions.
If some topsy-turvy thinking on The Fairy Queen were the worst result of our ready belief in printed things, there would be little enough reason to complain.
Current theories about source relationships, and details of the stage history of The Fairy Queen that are inferable from them, rest upon printed evidence which has been taken at face value — accepted even when Purcell's autograph contradicts it.
Allowing the manuscripts greater weight than usual, and with the help of one or two new witnesses, we arrive at a different interpretation.
There are two ‘editions’ of the Fairy Queen wordbook, both quartos ‘printed for Jacob Tonson’: the first is dated 1692, the second 1693.
The 1693 title-page calls attention to ‘Alterations, Additions, and several new SONGS’, which is fair enough: Tonson had gone to some trouble to update it.
He was an honest man: differences between the two quartos are very real, and they point to an obvious conclusion — that The Fairy Queen first staged in 1692 was significantly altered for revival in 1693.
Zimmerman, for instance, writes that ‘Purcell…had been concerned throughout the early weeks of 1693 with revisions and additions to The Fairy Queen , which was again performed on 16 February [1693]for Queen Mary and the maids of honour at Dorset Garden.’
Had he, though?
Tonson's title-page said nothing of the sort; only that the word-book offered for sale in 1693 was a new improved version.
The ‘Alterations, Additions’ etc. may have been corrections to bring closer into line with happenings on stage a publication seriously misleading as first issued — difficult to sell, when word got round.
There are no ‘alterations and additions’ evident in the theatre score — signs of hurried completion, to be sure, and a number of telling omissions, but of systematic revision not a hint.
It is worth recalling the accident of history by which the theatre score survives, still in excellent condition.
After the 1692 production run and the 1693 revival the score disappeared — probably in 1695, on Purcell's death.
In 1701 the theatre company, wanting to revive the show, offered a reward for its return, but without success; as a result they were never able to mount a complete performance again, though they did manage to assemble the whole of one act for a revival in 1703.
It was another 200 years before the missing score turned up.
In 1901 John Shedlock, a lecturer at the Royal Academy of Music, had just edited The Fairy Queen for the Purcell Society, piecing together the scattered surviving fragments of the work as best he could.
He discovered the theatre score in the Academy's own library, just in time to stop the presses and make a new edition based on it.
In the preface to his edition he gave a detailed description of the manuscript:
The score is mostly in the handwriting of one or more copyists, who seem to have put it together as Purcell completed the various numbers, leaving blanks for what was not ready.
These have been partly filled in by the composer himself, but though the extra music written for Act 1 in the 1693 revival is included, neither ‘When I have often heard’ nor ‘O let me weep’[the famous Plaint]…is to be found in it.
On fol. 20a (following the chorus ‘Drive 'em hence’) there is a blank page headed ‘Dance’, and on fol. 47b a similar blank page headed ‘Dance for a Clown’ follows the ‘Dance for the Haymakers’, in Act I II.
Four pages (7gv. -81r.), headed ‘Dance for the Four Seasons' [,]are also left vacant in Act IV.
after Winter's Song…
The ‘Monkeys’ Dance' in Act V. is written before the Symphony, but its right place is indicated by a note on fol. g3b.: ‘6 Monkeys dance here.’
The Chaconne for a Chinese Man and woman…is written at the other end of the volume…no music has been found for the ‘Grand Dance of Twenty-four Persons’ at the end of the [Fifth]Act); in [the]MS there is no break between Hymen's solo ‘Love ne'er had yet– and the short Trio ‘They shall be [as]happy’(where, according to the Libretto, the Dance should take place), and it seems therefore possible that it was omitted in performance.
There is a curious contradiction here between Shedlock's  remark that the manuscript seems to have been copied up as Purcell completed the various numbers and his observation that it contains the extra music written for Act 1 in the 1693 revival —; or, to be more precise, labelled ‘new’ where it appears in the 1693 word-book.
More recent scholars have neatly squared the circle: in the words of Curtis Price, ‘the score was made in haste before the February 1693 revival…[or]it was prepared after the event for the library of the Theatre Royal, passing from Purcell's hands before he could write in the [missing]dances’.
But this theory begs a question: if the score was copied for a revival, or indeed after it, why was it done in haste, and — even more to the point — why were there blanks which had to be filled in by the composer?
Even if he added some new music for the revival, all the rest must already have been on paper for the premiere.
And if the theatre score really was copied for the 1693 revival, why, when it subsequently disappeared, was the company forced to advertise for its return, and unable to revive the work when it failed to turn up?
Why not simply use the score of the original version?
Surely they didn't lose both: as Lady Bracknell might have said, that looks like carelessness.
The Royal Academy score presents us with several further problems.
The first lies in the passages in Purcell's own handwriting.
Some of these are complete movements, and could possibly represent blanks that he had managed to fill, as Shedlock suggested.
But in others Purcell takes over from the copyist in mid-movement — suggesting that he was composing directly into the theatre score.
In one of these movements, the duet and chorus ‘Hymen, appear!’ towards the end of Act 5, he began by writing out only the chorus soprano part and the two solo soprano parts that alternate with the chorus.
He kept this up for several pages; it was only later, using a different mix of ink, that he added all the other vocal and orchestral parts.
It looks as if he was initially working not from a completed score but from a sketch, and simply making sure that enough space was left for the movement before the copyist took over for the next one.
There are other omissions, too, which Purcell did not make good, quite apart from the dances which Shedlock noted were missing — the overture, for one.
It begins in Purcell's own handwriting, but this breaks off, part by part, in bars 2–4.
The remainder, very carelessly and messily written, was supplied by an unidentified copyist, who contributed nothing else to the score; and it lacks trumpet parts, though he left staves for them.
Had Purcell composed only the string parts, leaving the trumpet parts to be added later?
It seems unlikely.
More probably he had not yet composed much beyond the opening of the movement; accordingly, after writing in these first few bars, he left space for the remainder of the movement to be inserted once it was finished, and another copyist took up the task of fair-copying subsequent movements which Purcell had already drafted.
In the event, however, it was not for several years — not until well after the composer's death — that the missing portion of the overture was at last copied into the score.
For its text is clearly derived from Ayres for the Theatre , published in 1697, in which it appeared without trumpet parts but with one or two tell-tale misprints.
The copyist who supplied it was, to judge from other manuscripts in his handwriting, almost certainly an amateur — not the kind of musician Purcell would have trusted with an important task — and was not active until 1700 at the earliest.
Thus, the theatre score is only a secondary source of the overture (apart from the three bars in Purcell's autograph): an ironic state of affairs, and one which editors of the music have entirely overlooked.
In the Dance for the Haymakers that follows the comic Dialogue between Coridon and Mopsa, only the outer parts have been copied — but all the way through this movement the copyist has provided staves, complete with clefs and key- and time-signatures, for the second violin and viola parts without which it manifestly does not present a complete texture.
The only plausible explanation for the omission is that, at the time of copying, Purcell had yet to finalize the detail of these inner parts.
In fact, close examination of the theatre score reveals that all but one of the string passages in Purcell's own handwriting were initially written as a two-part skeleton, to which he subsequently added the inner parts using a different mix of ink — further evidence that he was either composing directly into the manuscript, or, at best, copying from mere sketches.
(The exception is the Chaconne in Act 5.
In this instance all four parts are written in the same ink, but the inner parts contain numerous erasures and second thoughts, as well as a 16-bar gap in the viola part: as we shall see, Purcell seems to have added the entire movement later.)
Likewise, the next movement after the Haymakers' Dance, the countertenor solo ‘A thousand ways’, has a stave for a vocal bass line, which the copyist has left blank except for clefs and key- and time-signatures.
And the copyist left a blank in one other movement: the instrumental bass line of the song ‘Ye gentle spirits of the air’— one of the ‘new’ songs, placed just before the Haymakers' scene.
After the first ten bars.
he wrote in only a few important imitative  leads — bars 17–18, 25–26, 30–34 and 97–105 — which suggests that the composer had yet to commit the remainder to paper.
The missing passages have been supplied, in a very distinctive greyish ink, by an 18th-century hand.
The same writer, using the same mix of ink, also headed several of the vocal numbers with the page numbers on which they appear in the second volume of Orpheus Britannicus , published in 1702.
Finally, another of the ‘new’ songs, the famous Plaint, ‘O let me weep, is not in the manuscript at all(as Shedlock noted), nor was any space left for it; and the score also lacks ‘When I have often heard young maids complaining’, a song that was in the first version of the show and actually published in 1692, in a slim volume entitled Select Songs in the Fairy Queen .
Curtis Price ingeniously suggests that the singing actress for whom this song was written might have left the company by 1693; but on the omission of the Plaint he does not comment.
Shedlock simply supplied both songs from other sources, explaining in his preface that he had inserted them ‘in their proper places’.
‘When I have often heard’ is in the 1692 word-book; the Plaint is on a single-sheet insert bound into the 1693 word-book, with a few lines of dialogue to cover the joins.
It is chiefly thanks to the Drunken Poet — another new arrival in the 1693 quarto — that the score, another of his haunts, has been dated 1693 with such conviction.
Not everyone admires the Drunken Poet(s) scene: a ‘miniature comic drama’, ‘an amusing introduction to the freakish yet lyrical world of the play,[though]it possibly blunts the effect of what Purcell had planned as his first scene, the masque at the end of Act II’; ‘the scene badly disfigures the drama…it is dramatically incongruous and is introduced clumsily’ ' It might help to know where it came from.
Roger Savage notes a ‘Shakespearean precedent’: Falstaff in the last act of The Merry Wives of Windsor is assailed by ‘moonshine revellers’ dressed as ‘the Fairy Queen, fairies, and Hobgoblin'.
They pinch him and singe his fingertips with burning tapers.
Our Fairy Queen includes a direct quote from The Merry Wives:
FALSTAFF.
Oh, oh, oh!
Yet Falstaff is not a poet there, or a singer, or drunk, or blindfolded.
Far more important as a source — a direct hit on all four counts — is Sir John Suckling's play The Goblins , printed in successive editions of his collected works.
The ‘Goblins’ are a gang of thieves, ‘disguised in Devils habit’and in the shape of lions and bears sometimes, ‘to rob/More powerfully’.
SAMORAT.
The common people thinke them a race Of honest and familiar Devills, For they do hurt to none, unlesse resisted; They seldom take away, but with exchange; And to the poore often give, Returne the hurt and sicke recover'd, Reward or punish, as they do find cause.
ORSABRIN.
How cause?
SAMORAT.
Why Sir, they blind still those they take, And make them tell the stories of their lives, Which known, they do accordingly.
ORSABRIN.
You make me wonder!…
In the third scene of Act I they capture a poet.
THEEVES.
A prize,— A prize,— A prize.
—;
PERIDOR.
Set him downe,—;
POET.
Sings boozily .
PERIDOR.
Drunke as I live.
Pinch him, pinch him.
Whart art?
POET.
I am a Poet, a poore dabler in Rime.
PERIDOR.
Come confesse, confesse.
POET.
I do confesse, I do want money.
PERIDOR.
By the description hee's a Poet indeed.
Well proceed.
Pinch him.
POET.
What d'you meane?
Pox on you.
Prethee let me alone.
Sings again.
TAMOREN.
Set him by till hee's sober…
…which is not until Act 5, when the poet re-enters briefly, prattling on to his captors' exasperation.
We never get to hear his ‘confession’; and there is no need to quote further.
But the affinities between this scene and that of the Drunken Poet in The Fairy Queen (illus.2) are clear.
Why was an ‘incongruous’ singing poet thrust into The Fairy Queen ?
For comic relief, obviously; but we also suspect a topical reference worth considering as evidence in the dating game.
Thomas Durfey (illus.1) was identified as the real-life model long ago, though why this good-natured, reputedly moderate drinker merited such treatment has never been explained.
Curtis Price asks: ‘would Purcell have poked such cruel fun at one of his chief collaborators?’; we might add that Durfey was on good terms with Thomas Betterton the producer and Josias Priest the choreographer: a send-up without his consent seems highly unlikely.
A series of publications subjecting him to merciless ridicule appeared in 1691 — note the date.
Here are relevant extracts from the longest and nastiest, WIT for MONEY: OR, POET STUTTER.
A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Smith, Johnson , and Poet Stutter .
Containing Reflections on some late Plays; and particularly, on Love for Money , or,The Boarding-School ’
Stutter …
If you please, we will adjourn to the Tavern, and with a sober Bottle renew the Argument, Wine is a Friend
Smith…
I believe many of our Plays have been written in Claret — Stutter.
Come, let's go — and take a Dose of it, since as you say ‘tis a Pannacea , a cure for all Evils, and the Gentleman Usher of Mirth and Happiness.
On my word your Notion is not amiss (and by the way I'll not forget it) I will only give this Sheet to the Bookseller, and wait on you if you'll tell me where.’
[Later, in the Tavern]
Stutter …
My Stock will blaze when other snuffs are out; a Rising Star is worth two setting Suns: And now that in the style of my Siege of Memphis,opportunity reaches forth her silver hairs and bids me hold .
By dint of merit, I'll the Lawrel snatch; I'll not for it's reversion tamely Watch.
It's fading green I'll instantly revive, Drones shall not eat the Honey of the Hive: To Court I'll hye, and claim it as my due, Outdo them all; nay, even my self outdo: I'll Write and Sing, and Write, till it will do.
Nay, rather than I'll leave my Cause i' th' Lurch, I'll — I'll — I'll
[scratches his Head.]
Smith .
Fast, seem Godly, Pray, and go to Church — the Rhyme will be left in the lurch else.
This was a smart fit of Rhyming if it had but held out; I see you have your Poetical Concordance in your head pretty ready.
Prithee what Rhimes to Jehova , Chimny, Month, or to Scurvy?
Stutter .
Scurvy — humph — Scurvy — Stay — Pox, that's a Scurvy Rhime, and a Scurvy question now: The nearest to it, is a very good friend of mines Name, that begins with a D
Smith .
Who is a Scurvy Rhymer. aside.
Stutter.
But waving that; I'll not be affraid of old worn-out Rivals…
The Scurvy/Durfey rhyme is very deliberately established — and hard to forget, once it has been pointed out.
Again, in A Search after WIT; OR, A VISITATION OF THE AUTHORS, 1691:
Be their Works or their Fortunes,or lucky,or scurvy;From great Mr .
Bays [Dryden]down to little Mr .
D — y.
The decision to include a drunken, singing poet in The Fairy Queen — a ‘Scurvy Poet’, indeed — would have had more topical point in the spring of 1692 (with anti-Durfey pamphlets fresh in the memory) than in 1693 (when tempers had cooled).
Durfey may have written  the lyrics himself, adding a coded signature to cock a snook at his detractors (‘The Town may da-da-da-m me as a poet, but they sing my songs for all that’); or he may conceivably have acted the part himself, for money he appeared to need, and plenty of laughs backstage.
Durfey's entry in the new Highfill-Burnim-Langhans Biographical dictionary offers some intriguing hints:
orator, author, singer, composer, actor?…
In addition to writing plays by the dozens, D'Urfey turned out song lyrics by the hundreds.
These he occasionally set to music himself, and he frequently sang them in his rich bass voice for his friends' (and perhaps the public's) pleasure…
The Revolution of 1688 lost D'Urfey the courtly connections he had developed, so that he had to turn to other means of support.
He taught singing to the girls at Josias Priest's school in Chelsea and wrote the epilogue to Dido and Aeneas when it was presented there in 1689–90.
(It occurs to us that it may have been Durfey who sang Aeneas in the school production.
And Priest, remember, was choreographer for Dioclesian ,King Arthur and The Fairy Queen .)
Is it possible that the Drunken Poets' scene was in the original version of the show?
If it was, then the theatre score could just as easily have been copied for the first run as for the revival.
Further evidence on this point would be welcome — and luckily some turns up when we compare the score with other music sources: the 1692 volume of Select Songs in the Fairy Queen , and a songbook in Purcell's autograph, now in the Guildhall Library in London.
The Select Songs were printed very early: their title page states that they were sold in the theatre as well as in shops.
They sold well enough to justify a second edition, completely re-set, with a few misprints corrected, with the countertenor solos removed from the alto clef to the treble in tactful acknowledgement of the amateur market, and with a title-page announcing it as a new edition.
Neither edition contains variant readings of any significance, but there is one very interesting feature.
The first song is ‘Sing while we trip it, headed ‘First Song sung in the second Act’.
This comes on p.3 of the collection, following the title-page and its blank verso: ppn and 2 are absent — in both editions, oddly enough.
It looks as if some music belonging to Act 1 was originally printed, but removed before the books were put on sale.
What could this have been?
One candidate is the duet ‘Come let us leave the town’— the first vocal number in the theatre score, though it is not in the 1692 word-book: it is the first piece of ‘new musick’ in Q1693.
But, as it happens, this duet was subsequently published elsewhere.
in the fifth book of Comes Amoris .
issued in 1604: it happens to use the same fount of music type as the Select Songs in the Fairy Queen , and it occupies two and a half pages: it could not have been squeezed onto two.
So perhaps Act 1 as originally planned included a different song — one that, in the event, was withdrawn.
This remains a mystery, because the 1692 word-book does not cue any music at all in Act 1.
We shall return to the results this omission seems to have had.
The comic Dialogue between Coridon and Mopsa, printed and paginated separately, it also included in nearly all the surviving copies of the Select Songs .
This differs considerably from the version found in the theatre score.
There are several very interesting variants in the instrumental bass line, and one in Mopsa's part.
More radically, the printed version is in F, and gives the part of Mopsa in the treble clef; the version in the score is in G, with Mopsa in the alto clef.
Another print of the dialogue, pirated from the present one and issued undated by Thomas Cross, tells us that Mopsa was sung by the countertenor John Pate in drag — one of his specialities.
Was this in 1692 or 1693?
Most writers avoid the question.
But because the F major, treble-clef version was published in 1692, it has been argued that the dialogue was composed in that key, with Mopsa sung by a soprano in the original show and uproariously ‘sent up’ by Pate in the revival — hence the G major, alto-clef version in the theatre score.
If, however, we look at the detail of the variants between the print and the theatre score, a different picture emerges.
Nearly all the readings of the printed version are either musically superior to those in the theatre score, or result from octave transposition — necessary at one point to avoid an unplayable bottom B' B♭ occasioned by downward transposition from G to F. (A change would have been unnecessary had the transposition gone the other way.)
It looks very much as if the version in the manuscript came first and Purcell did some polishing before the piece was printed — in the treble clef, of course, with an eye to the market.
But why the transposition?
The likeliest answer is, once again, market forces.
The Dialogue was not published for the benefit of transvestite amateur countertenors: Mopsa's part in it was aimed at young ladies.
They might not have been pleased to find the part peppered with top b' naturals — but dropping the piece from G to F removes the problem.
(Downward transposition was not at all uncommon when countertenor solos were issued in print: for instance, ‘I envy not the pride of May, from Purcell's 1693 birthday ode for Queen Mary, is in E major in the original and also goes to top b’ B♭♯, but it was published, in the treble clef, in D major.)
On the other hand, if Coridon and Mopsa had originally been written in F major, for a soprano, it could perfectly well have been left in that key for Pate to sing (an octave lower, of course), because it would go no lower than f.
In fact, even in the lower key, the tessitura of the part is much more comfortable for a countertenor than for a soprano.
This is mostly conjecture; and our opinion that the instrumental bass line of the duet was polished before publication can be dismissed as subjective.
So is there any other evidence?
Fortunately yes.
The Dialogue is one of the pieces Purcell included in the Guildhall songbook: he seems to have compiled this manuscript for his young lady singing pupils, and several of the items in it show similar signs of revision and re-working.
It includes none of the solo numbers that were published in Select Songs — which is not surprising: Purcell's pupils could easily buy a copy of that.
But it begins with a sizeable group of numbers from The Fairy Queen — two of them, incidentally, countertenor solos written out in the treble clef and a tone below their original key — so Purcell may indeed have started it in 1692.
The very first item is the Dialogue between Coridon and Mopsa — in F, with Mopsa's part in the treble clef.
Did Purcell start with this because it needed revision and transposition before it could be published?
How does it relate to the theatre score and the printed version?
The answer is that it comes mid-way between them — which tells us nothing about which of the other two came first.
But one crucial detail settles the matter.
Towards the end Mopsa is interjecting off-beat minim shrieks of ‘Nay!’ above Coridon's blandishments (illus.3a).
In the 1692 printed version (illus.3b) she goes further, spitting out the word ‘Pish’ as well, spoken instead of sung: in order to make this more manageable, the shrieks of ‘Nay!’are reduced to crotchets.
The word ‘Pish’ is not in the libretto: hardly a matter for surprise — it is just the sort of embroidery that a singer might have improvised on stage.
In the Guildhall songbook Purcell altered the detail of this passage (illus.3c), using a different mix of ink.
Originally it gave the same reading as the theatre score; Purcell made the alteration in order to bring it into line with the printed version.
This alteration, small and innocent-looking though it is, settles the chronological relation between the two versions of the passage: the one in the theatre score came first.
And this must mean that the score itself came first as well— before the publication of the song-book, which was offered for sale in the theatre during the 1692 run of the show.
Purcell thought highly enough of this little improvement to write it into his own song-book as an emendation: so it is scarcely conceivable that he would have allowed the original, unimproved version to go into a score being copied under his own supervision for a revival — especially given that the effect of the improvement itself was theatrical rather than primarily musical.
The Royal Academy score, then, is that of the original version: copied before (though only just before)The Fairy Queen started its first run, and used not for rehearsals — there are no signs of wear and tear — but as a master from which the parts were prepared.
Purcell did not make extensive changes for the Fairy Queen revival — and indeed he had two excellent reasons not to.
First, the show had cost a fortune to put on — the costumes, scenery and music alone had swallowed 3,000, a huge sum in those days, so the management would certainly not have welcomed laying out yet more money on a whole new scene for a revival whose aim was to recoup losses.
Second, even though it had cost the management dear, the original run of The Fairy Queen had been a smash hit with the public: so, in the immortal words of Henry Ford, ‘If it ain't broke, don't fix it.’
What was broke, though, and did need fixing, was Jacob Tonson's 1692 word-book.
The publisher had a stack of unsold copies on his hands — unsold because there were things obviously wrong with them.
(He may just have over-estimated demand; but we think that that is unlikely.
The word-books for Dioclesian (1690) and King Arthur (1691) were Tonson publications too — earlier sales figures told him how many Fairy Queen quartos to order.)
Tonson got hold of a Fairy Queen script months in advance.
He took it along to Stationers' Hall on 2 November 1691 and entered it in the Stationers' Register to establish copyright of a sort:
Entred…book or coppy under the hand of Warden MORTLOCK entitled The Fayery Queene, or Midsomers Nights Dreame, A play acted at ye Queenes Theatre Lycensed by JOHN FRASER…vjd
Then a wait.
No doubt he kept in touch with the Queen's Theatre, asking for news of any significant alterations; someone there supplied detailed descriptions of the scenes and machines when it was clear how these would look — but printing had to start well before the show opened.
Tonson wanted his word-book ready for the first rush of eager customers, coming hotfoot from Dorset Garden.
He advertised it in The London Gazette for 5–9 May 1692, within days of the premiere.
A small print shop, working on other jobs at the same time, would have done well to complete the Fairy Queen edition    in under a month: and during printing, work in the theatre carried on apace.
Tonson took a risk, swinging into production ahead of the event; and this time he was caught out.
The printing history of The Fairy Queen is described below in our bibliographical addendum, so as not to interrupt the story here with a page of rather convoluted formulae.
But the key points are these.
The 1692 Fairy Queen quarto exists in five or six different states; the prologue, preface and dramatis personae are bound in a different order in different copies, and the prologue is missing in at least one, showing that the preliminaries were thrown hastily together.
Since two different groups of headlines appear in E [the last sheet but three]it is obvious that an interruption occurred while E was printing; and it appears probable that it came about because the printer abruptly decided to run off a small number of complete copies of the book for sale while the opera was being presented and then to finish the entire edition at leisure.
For these signs of haste — and for signs of hurried completion in the theatre score — there is a simple explanation: the royal ban imposed on Dryden's new play Cleomenes early in April 1692.
Friendly representations on Dryden's behalf got the ban lifted (Cleomenes opened on 16 April), but with an ugly gap threatened in the theatrical diary, for a while it looked as though The Fairy Queen would have to be brought forward.
Tonson's printer and Purcell himself put on an extra turn of speed in case.
The 1693 quarto is loosely described as the ‘second edition’, but strictly speaking it is a reissue of Q1692: sheets remaining from the original print-run, spruced up for sale after a decent interval.
Sheet B — carrying the first eight pages of text proper — has been replaced; two new songs are tipped in (printed on separate leaves, with instructions telling the binder where to put them); and a cancel title-page proudly announces the alterations.
Tonson did his best, without reprinting the whole from start to finish, correcting every detail, to bring his reading text into line with theatrical fact; but we need not assume that changes on the stage and on the page were perfectly synchronized.
The familiar Fairy Queen editions — Shedlock's original Purcell Society edition, and Anthony Lewis's revised version — rearrange Purcell's music so that it follows the 1692 quarto order.
We believe the order there is wrong; that drastic revisions were made in the month or so before opening, too late for the publisher and printer to do anything about them.
The 693 quarto reissue was a belated attempt to catch up; and since much of that (44 text pages out of 52) was carried over unchanged from 1692, it needs to be tested critically too.
We have already discussed Act 1, in which Q1692 contains no cue for ‘Come let us leave the town’ and the Drunken Poet scene.
In Act 2, by contrast, there are no serious discrepancies between the score and the quarto.
But Purcell did not set the lyrics in quite the way their writer had mapped out for him.
What the quarto labels ‘the First SONG ’ runs right through from ‘Come all ye songsters’to ‘Sing while we trip it’Purcell divided this into no fewer than five separate numbers: the countertenor solo ‘Come all ye songsters’; the trio ‘May the god of wit inspire’— without the chorus repeat specified in the quarto, but duly followed by what it labels ‘a Composition of Instrumental Musick, in imitation of an Eccho ’; a chorus which, instead of repeating ‘May the god of wit’, sets the first line of the second stanza, ‘Now join your warbling voices all’; and finally a solo, ‘Sing while we trip it’, this time with the specified chorus repeat.
And in the next musical sequence, the songs for Night, Mystery, Secrecy and Sleep, Purcell ignored the refrain — or perhaps da capo which the librettist had indicated for each song.
He also cut the last line of the final song, ‘Rest till the rosy morn's uprise’, leaving the Fairy Queen herself at the centre of a choral lullaby.
Act 3 contains a whole cluster of consecutive movements over which the score and the quarto disagree.
The first is the song ‘Ye gentle spirits of the air’, which is in the score but not the quarto: it occupies the first of the two single-sheet inserts in Q1693, with the cue ‘To be Sung just before the Dialogue of CORIDON and MOPSA.
Its omission from Q1692 is easily enough explained if it was a late addition to the show — too late to catch the printers — and the score itself offers some evidence that this was indeed the case: Purcell, as we have already seen, left blank about 60 bars of the instrumental bass line.
Next in the score comes the Dialogue between Coridon and Mopsa; this is in Q1692, but there, curiously, it lacks the last four lines of its text:
Coridon .
So small a request you must not deny, Nor will I admit of another reply.
You must not, you cannot, you shall not deny.
Mopsa .
Nay, what do you mean?
O, fie, fie, fie, fie!
Maybe these lines were a late addition — though the dialogue seems curiously inconclusive without them.
But another explanation is possible for their omission from Q1692.
The very next piece of text in it is the song ‘When I have often heard young maids complaining’, which is   not in the score — though we know it was sung in the 1692 production because it is in the Select Songs .
If this was a late addition, one that went into the quarto at the last minute, the printer may have lost four lines of type in the process — or even cut them in order to be able to finish Act 3 tidily on the last page of a quarto sheet: the very next page, as it happens, which left scarcely any room for manoeuvre.
And this would explain a further problem affecting the order of things in the quarto: this song comes between the Dialogue of Coridon and Mopsa — the Haymakers' scene — and the Dance of Haymakers which directly follows it in the score and belongs to it musically in every way: both are in G major and a quick 6/4, and share the same bucolic atmosphere as well as their thematic material, whereas ‘When I have often heard young maids complaining’ is a sophisticated song in C major and stately triple time.
We suspect the text of this song was sent late to the printer with some such direction as ‘Put this in after the Dialogue of Coridon and Mopsa’— exactly the kind of wording used with ‘Ye gentle spirits of the air’— and the printer did literally that, not realizing that the Dance of Haymakers belonged to the Dialogue.
Tonson would have had a strong incentive to make the effort to accommodate this particular late arrival: unlike ‘Ye gentle spirits of the air’, which is a virtuoso show-piece full of semiquaver pyrotechnics (and therefore unsuitable for the amateur market), it was included in the Select Songs volume — so to omit it from the word-book might have led to complaints.
Here again the score suggests there was some hurried work at this point in the show.
First, the complete omission of ‘When I have often heard young maids complaining’(This may seem surprising, given that the text managed to get into the quarto, even if late; but as a continuo song it could, at a pinch, have been accompanied by the harpsichordist from a separate sheet, with a gamba player reading over his shoulder.
That would have been risky with ‘Ye gentle spirits of the air’— also a continuo song — because it contains difficult display passages in the bass line as well as the vocal part.)
Next, the Haymakers' Dance, with its missing inner parts.
Purcell probably completed this piece late, and supplied it on a separate sheet; the part-copyist would have been able to gauge from the skeleton provided in the score how much space to leave in the second violin and viola parts.
In performance suitable inner parts are required (for a suggested reconstruction see ex.1)— and the dance needs to run straight on from the Coridon and Mopsa dialogue.
Next in the score is a page left blank, apart from clefs for four-part strings, with the same key- and time signatures as for the Haymakers' scene, and the heading ‘Dance for a Clown’.
This is not indicated in the quarto; and we have no means of telling whether it ever existed.
The score then goes on to the last musical number in Act 3, ‘A thousand thousand ways’, which is a song repeated by the chorus.
It was published in Select Songs as a countertenor solo, and it is invariably performed as one.
But the score contains a blank stave throughout the song, with clefs and key signatures for a vocal bass line, and the words are surely those of a duet:
A thousand thousand ways we'll find To entertain the hours; No two shall e'er be known so kind, No life so blest as ours.
With the vocal bass line reconstructed (ex.2) the music makes perfect sense.
In Act 4 the theatre score and the quarto are in total agreement: the only problem is the blank space left in the score for the Dance of the Four Seasons, which we must regretfully conclude is lost.
Act 5 presents a new problem — a movement which is both included in the score and indicated in the quarto, but in different places.
The score places the grotesque number for six dancing monkeys as the second of a sequence of three orchestral numbers played during a spectacular scene shift:
While the Scene is darken'd, a single Entry is danced; Then a Symphony is play'd; after that the Scene is suddainly Illuminated, and discovers a transparent Prospect of a Chinese Garden,the Architecture, the Trees, the Plants, the Fruit, the Birds, the Beasts, quite different from what we have in this part of the World.
It is terminated by an Arch, through which is seen other Arches with close Arbors, and a row of Trees to the end of the View.
Over it is a hanging Garden, which rises by several ascents to the top of the House; it is bounded on either side with pleasant Bowers, various Trees, and numbers of strange Birds flying in the Air[;]on the Top of a Platform is a Fountain, throwing up Water, which falls into a large Basin.
There is no mention here of dancing monkeys; and the quarto puts them in two pages and several musical numbers later.
But we suspect it was found necessary to place the Monkeys' Dance where the score has it in order to allow time for setting this exotic scene — and six dancers cavorting about on the forestage could make a useful amount of noise to mask what was happening on the darkened scenic stage behind the proscenium arch.
The question is complicated by an annotation in the score, ‘6 Monkeys Dance here’, added at the point where the quarto places this dance; but this is in the same 18th   century hand and ink as the page-references to the 1702 volume of Orpheus Britannicus mentioned earlier.
Although it is conceivable that the writer had seen the show in 1692 or 1693, and recorded the actual running order in the annotation, it is much more probable that he merely ‘corrected’ the theatre score from the quarto wordbook.
It seems unlikely that the dance was copied into the score at the wrong point: if it had been, one would expect to find it headed by some warning that it belonged several pages later — otherwise severe complications would result in orchestral parts copied from the score.
Interestingly, it was at this very juncture that an addition was made to the show for the revival — a movement which is not found either in the score or the 1692 quarto, but which is printed on the second of the single-sheet inserts in Q1693.
Did they need even more time for that scene change to be safe?
The new number would certainly supply it: it is the famous Plaint — only six lines of text, but six or seven minutes of very slow music in Purcell's best melancholy manner.
This number would also provide new interest for the revival — especially if, as we think likely, the obbligato part was played by solo oboe, not violin, making it the very first song of this uniquely colourful and expressive kind in English musical history.
The final divergence between score and quarto proves to be more imaginary than real.
It concerns the ‘Grand Dance of Twenty-Four Persons’, for which Shedlock stated that no music had been found.
The cast list printed in the wordbook, however, specifies a Grand Dance not of 24 persons but of ‘24 Chineses ’; while in the manuscript score, copied separately at the reverse end of the book, is the big movement — the longest instrumental     number in the entire show — headed ‘Chaconne: Dance for a Chinese man and woman’.
note the singular — only one man and one woman.
The heading in the manuscript appears to tally with a stage direction in the word-book, ‘A Chinese Man and Woman dance ’, printed between the final verse and chorus ‘They shall be as happy as they're fair’ But this direction means merely that the Chinese Man and Woman are to dance to the music of the verse, just as the next printed stage direction, ‘All the Dancers join in it ’, which follows the words of the final chorus, means that all of them should dance to its music.
The weighty Chaconne is, clearly, no duet, but a dance for Chinese men and women — the ‘24 Chineses’ of the dramatis personae.
It is, in other words, the ‘missing’ Grand Dance, and its proper place, as the word-book indicates, is immediately before the vocal finale.
It is misplaced in both the revised and the original Purcell Society edition of the score.
Anthony Lewis, taking its heading at face value, inserted it between the final verse and chorus; but these are musically continuous, and totally unrelated to it.
Shedlock placed it, without explanation,after the vocal finale — thereby severing a beautifully direct link back into the acting text.
The chorus ends as follows:
And every time the Sun shall display His Rising Light, It shall be to them a new Wedding-Day; And when he sets, a new Nuptial-Night,
The next spoken lines are Oberon's:
At Dead of Night we'll to the Bride-bed come, And sprinkle hallow'd Dew-drops round the Room.
There is one last question which the score cannot help us settle — how did The Fairy Queen open in May 1692: with Act 1, scene 1 in the 1692 quarto?
Duke .
Now, good Egeus , what's the News with thee?
Egeus .
Full of Vexation come I, and Complaint, Against my Child, my Daughter Hermia…
Or with Peter Quince and his fellow comedians meeting to rehearse Pyramus and Thisbe, as in the 1693 reissue?
It is a question of some importance to would-be producers.
Roger Savage is quite clear:
I assume that the ‘definitive’ state of Fairy Queen is the 1692 material with the 1693 material added.
The strange fact that the 1693 playbook leaves out the whole of the first 1692 scene (the scene with the Duke, Egeus and the Lovers) can only be accounted for, I believe, as a printing-house convenience, since it makes room for the inclusion at the end of Act I of the new episode of the Drunken Poets.
The play as a whole makes no sense at all without the ‘omitted’ first scene, and I am sure it was never performed without it.
More recently Curtis Price has argued convincingly that ‘the 1693 production was almost certainly acted without [Q1692's]first scene’.
He points to a small cut on p.1 in the 1693 quarto, removing a reference to Hermia, Demetrius and Lysander, who — with 1692'5 Act 1 scene 1 disposed of — have yet to appear on stage.
We cannot be certain that Act 1 scene 1 of Q1692 was ever acted.
It may have been dropped during the run-in to opening in 1692, to spare the first-night audience too long a wait for the music they had paid to hear in this long-expected opera; for it can perfectly well be done without.
Act 2 scene 3 supplies as much information as is needed to understand the plot:
Enter Demetrius , and Helena following him.
Demetrius .
Why do you follow him who Loves you not?
Where is Lysander? and fair Hermia ?
You told me they were stoln into this Wood.
I seek, but cannot find her .
Hence, be gone.
There would probably have been some cutting in Act 5.
If Duke Egeus did not ask Hermia to choose between Demetrius and life in a nunnery in Act 1, there would be no point pressing her for an answer four acts later.
There is a clue that cuts were made (though we cannot tell how extensive — for, unlike Act 1, Act 5 was not reprinted in 1693: it was inherited from the 1692 stockpile).
Illus.4 shows the opening of Act 5 as it appears in both quartos.
The Duke's speech (boxed in) would have to go; and with it probably the ‘Composition in imitation of Hunting’ and the Duke's line cueing it in.
There is no trace of hunting music in the theatre score at this point or anywhere else.
In his revised edition of Langbaine's English Dramatick Poets (1699) Charles Gildon included the following note on A Midsummer Night's Dream :
The comical part hereof is printed 4 to .
under the Title of Bottom the Weaver , and acted by small Parties at Bartholomew Fair, and other Places: and since publish'd under the Name of the Fairy Queen .
And sure enough, Bottom the Weaver — like the 1693 Fairy Queen quarto — opens thus:
Enter Bottom the Weaver, Quince the Carpenter, Snug The Joyner, Flute the Bellows-mender, Snout the Tinker, and Starveling the Taylor.
Bottom .
Come, Neighbours, let me tell you, and in troth I have spoke like a man in my daies, and hit right too, that if this business do but displease his Graces fancy, we are made men for ever.
Quince .
I believe so too, Neighbour, but is all our company here?
Bot .
You had best to call them generally man by man according to the Scrip.
Critics with over-delicate modern sensibilities will be shocked to learn that a 17th-century observer remembered The Fairy Queen as Bottom the Weaver, a knockabout comedy with lots of music.
Textual studies have aesthetic implications in the end, which is the best reason we can think of for carrying on with them.
This article is an edited version of a paper read by the authors at the Durham Conference on Baroque Music, July 1992.
Bruce Wood is a Senior Lecturer in Music at the University of Wales, Bangor, and a director of the Early English Opera Society.
He is currently engaged in editing all of Purcell's court odes and welcome songs for the new Purcell Society edition.
Andrew Pinnock is an Arts Council Music Officer (early music is his specialist field), and has recently been appointed Artistic Administrator to the Purcell Tercentenary Trust.
Bruce Wood and Andrew Pinnock are writing a book on Purcell's operas for Cambridge University Press.
Bibliographical addendum
Until now Purcellians have relied on Paul S. Dunkin's account of the printing history of the Fairy Queen quartos: not a very easy read, and misleading in several respects.
But hidden away in Fredson Bowers's book on bibliographical description are some altogether clearer descriptive notes.
The Fairy Queen is a textbook case: it ‘exemplifies treatment of issues and states’, and Bowers refers to it repeatedly.
The account in this addendum follows Bowers.
There is only one ‘edition’ of The Fairy Queen , which was issued first in 1692 — in May, when the show opened (this is clear from Tonson's advertisement in The London Gazette ); it was re-issued at some time in 1693, with the modifications already described — a new title-page, a new Act 1, and two new songs on single-leaf inserts later in the book.
The 1692 issue exists in a number of states , which differ most obviously in the way their preliminary leaves are arranged:
A The title-page, the Prologue and ‘The Names of the Persons’ printed on a two-leaf fold, with the Preface on a single-leaf insert (illus.5a).
B The title-page and ‘The Names of the Persons’ printed on a two-leaf fold, with the Prologue and the Preface both printed on separate leaves (Prologue single-sided, Preface double-sided)(illus.5b).
Prologue and Preface are bound inside the title/names fold or immediately afterwards, as chance would have it.
The following are all possible orders:
Seen in this way, Dunkin's bewildering range of ‘issues’(states , strictly speaking) reduces to something manageable.
Copies of Q1692 survive minus the Prologue — the Cornmarket Press issued a facsimile of one such — minus the Preface, or minus both; to which variation no significance beyond carelessness in the bindery need be attached.
And it is easy enough to answer the question: ‘Why bother at all with the B arrangement, which is wasteful of paper, since three of the four versos are left blank?’
The printer started work on the title/ Names fold, as in B,before copy for the Preface and the Prologue had been delivered to his shop — with the deadline looming, no doubt.
He produced as many copies as possible in the economical A state, stopping the press at once to rejig the type.
(Bowers notices that ‘The Names of the Persons’ suffered a slight accident when they were moved from their original recto to the new verso position: ‘Demetrius …
Betroth'd to Helena ’ became ‘Demetrius …
 Betroth'd to Helena ’.)
Still, the title/ Names folds run off initially were too valuable to throw away, and to finish the job a supply of single-sided Prologue leaves were printed to go with them.
Dunkin made much of ‘headline…evidence’(pp.300–305), which it will be as well to comment on.
By ‘headline’ he meant the title of the opera: ‘The Fairy-Queen’centred at the top of every page.
(‘Running title’ is a more exact term, since it   excludes the page numbers ranged right (odd) and left (even), but level with ‘The Fairy-Queen’and strictly a part of the full width headline.)
Quarto sheets were machined four pages at a time (hence ‘quarto’): four pages were printed on one side of the sheet, four on the other.
The type in each four-page ‘forme’(four type pages wedged tight inside an iron frame, ready for the press) was cleaned and ‘distributed’ when finished with — the pages were broken up, and each individual piece of type was returned to its proper compartment in the compositor's upper or lower type case.
But it made sense to keep the running titles intact and transfer them as a set to another forme on its way to the press, saving a little of the compositor's time.
Dunkin noticed that in ‘the major part of the text of The Fairy Queen two basic groups of headlines appear: one in gatherings B, D, and F and another in gatherings C, E, and G’.
(The printed sheets were ‘signed’ with a letter of the alphabet, so they could be gathered up in the right order — one of each, B, C, D, etc.
By convention, signature A was reserved for the preliminaries.)
Each group of headlines, furthermore, ‘consists of two sets, one for the outer forme [the forme containing the two pages which would end up outermost when the sheet was folded — ppa/8, 9/16 and so on]and another for the inner, and the various headlines in each set appear in the same sequence whenever used’(p.300).
Individual running titles can be identified by their typographical peculiarities — damaged letters, missing hyphens (‘Fairy-Queen' or ‘Fairy Queen ’), characteristic spacing.
Dunkin thought that two groups of headlines ‘each consisting of two sets would be required only if four formes were constantly in use’(p.301), i.e. if The Fairy Queen had been printed on two presses (two formes per press, working simultaneously: one forme in use; the other standing by) or, conceivably, printed on four presses (the presses doing only one side of a sheet each).
Two- or four-press printing would mean haste in the extreme — rather at odds with our leisurely estimate.
But since Dunkin's article appeared, bibliographers have built up a much more realistic picture of work-flow through the 17th-century print shop.
‘The price of a common press was only about one-tenth of the cost of the 1,000 kg of type that kept it occupied in a busy shop…so that the master could afford to own more presses than he would normally need.’
Yet in London in 1668, ‘85 per cent of –6 businesses had 1,–, or 3 presses, the largest 6 presses’ .39 Four-press printing for The Fairy Queen seems most improbable.
Going on:
Printers…had several books in production at once— as many as ten or twelve even in a two-press shop…
This meant that an individual book took longer to print than it might have done if all the workmen had concentrated on it alone; but also that, by utilizing plant and labour less wastefully, all the books could be printed in less time altogether, and at less cost, than they would have been by serial production.
The minor jobbing work such as labels, bills and prospectuses, which every printer undertook, was a valuable — perhaps an essential — part of the scheme, for it filled gaps that were too short for the stages of book production.
Some books were set by a single compositor, but
most were set by several…[and]although one compositor might set a whole book, he would not normally be working on that book alone but would intersperse work on other jobs when it was called for…
The shifting patterns of concurrent production meant that there could be no regular correlation between particular skeleton formes [with their identifiable running titles]and particular compositors or presses.
Neither did the number of skeletons used in the book necessarily reflect the numbers of men or machines employed in its production, or the edition quantity.
A more likely explanation for the regularly repeating running title pattern observed by Dunkin is this: the compositor (or compositors) working on The Fairy Queen , and a number of other jobs besides, deliberately kept a step ahead of the pressmen.
While sheet B was being printed off — from two formes, inner B and outer B — the compositor prepared the next two formes, inner and outer C, with another two sets of running titles; then he got on with something else.
When the pressmen started on sheet C, the compositor washed and distributed type from the two B formes just finished with (keeping the running titles safely, though); he prepared inner and outer D, which the pressmen would call for next, fitted the B running titles neatly in place, and again got on with something else.
And so on through the book.
Dunkin's two-press inference passed in 1946, but it should probably be abandoned now.
along with the other details of his ‘tentative’ printing history which depend upon its being true.
Another of Dunkin's suggestions is at least questionable.
This is his argument, quoted above, that the two different groups of headlines on sheet E arose because the printer ran off a small number of copies of the book for sale while the opera was being presented and finished the edition later.
Given the complexities of concurrent working, there might have been a hundred and one other explanations.
E is a badly muddled sheet, as we saw: missing ‘Ye gentle spirits of the air’ and the last four lines of Coridon and Mopsa, with ‘When I have often heard’squeezed in, and the Dance of Haymakers misplaced.
It is possible that, part way through E, the printer decided to stop, move on to F, G and H, which appeared less problematical (G then inherited the E running titles sooner than expected), and await clarification from the theatre or from Tonson the publisher.
If so, it is clear that he gave up after a short while, returned to E (which needed a fresh set of running titles before printing could resume) and finished it off regardless.
Outer G, as Dunkin and Bowers both remark, was ‘pied during printing’.
–This means that the outer G forme was removed from the press part way through — printing stopped for some reason — and someone dropped it, scattering the letters everywhere.
Before the printing of outer G could resume, a compositor had to reset it completely.
(Comparing a number of copies of Q1692, Dunkin and Bowers observed outer G in two different states.)
Why the interruption?
Many explanations are possible, but there may again have been doubts about the accuracy of the text, sufficient to halt work temporarily.
It may be significant that the stage direction ‘A Composition in imitation of Hunting’— not set by Purcell — and the opening of the Act 5 masque, where the theatre score places his ‘Dance for Six Monkeys’ but Q1692 does not, both appear on pages which belong to outer G (pp.44 and 48 respectively).
A final point.
Both Dunkin and Bowers record a single copy of Q1692 for whose original Act I (occupying the whole of sheet B, pp.l-8) the ‘1693’revised Act 1, Drunken Poet and all, has been silently substituted.
The 1692 title-page is intact (not a mention of the ‘Alterations, Additions, and several new SONGS’); and the 1693 single-leaf song inserts are not present.
This is probably an aberrant copy; but it may just represent a true 1692 state with the stage/page discrepancies in Act 1 already made good.
Michael Cole
A Handel harpsichord
Before it arrived at the Bate Collection, all that was known about the William Smith harpsichord (illus.1) was to be found in a brief summary in Boalch's Makers of the harpsichord and clavichord .
It was said to have two sets of strings only, at 8' pitch, and, on the evidence of its appearance, it was to be dated to the first quarter of the 18th century.
Since fewer than ten English harpsichords survive from this period it was therefore something of a rarity, and quite obviously a highly prized and valuable acquisition.
Few had previously seen the instrument.
So far as is known it had never been loaned for exhibition, it had never passed through an auction room and those few who had been fortunate enough to see it had done so at the private house in Oxford where it had been in the possession of the same family for many years.
It is difficult to acquire any further facts about its past.
A member of the family has suggested that it may have been purchased from a London dealer about 1920.
A small illustration of its front view had appeared in the second edition of Boalch among a selection of plates chosen to illustrate signatures and inscriptions — in this instance ‘Gulielmus Smith Londini fecit’ written in ink directly on the frontboard.
Few facts are known about William Smith except that he was bound apprentice to Benjamin Slade in London in 1709.
It may well be that he took the place of Thomas Hitchcock who had been apprenticed to the same master nine years previously.
But whereas Hitchcock was to thrive in business selling a vast number of spinets, of which a great many survive, William Smith would be quite forgotten but for the chance survival of this one harpsichord.
We have no way of knowing how many he made, nor even how long his working life may have been.
When it arrived at the Bate Collection the instrument was found to be basically well cared for.
It was a pleasure to discover that it had escaped the sort of wholesale restoration so commonly carried out in the earlier part of this century.
The soundboard had cracks but no one had attempted to repair them.
The bottom boards showed no sign of the disturbance that would have occurred if anyone had interfered with the internal structures.
Here then was an instrument that might be confidently expected to have retained its historical integrity.
Delight enough to be sure, but the pleasure was greatly amplified when it was recognized, almost immediately, that the harpsichord bore an uncommon resemblance to the instrument shown in the famous Mercier portrait of Handel (see cover).
Bringing a copy of this picture to the instrument for comparison only served to show how right these first impressions were (illus.2): there were the same keys, the characteristically carved end-blocks, the lockboard batten and the nicely rounded crown on the spine adjacent, the colour of the veneer, the same stop knob in the same place — and leaning against this harpsichord the most revered of all ‘English’ composers, Handel himself!
In this article I shall examine the correspondences between the William Smith harpsichord and the instrument seen in the Handel portrait, enquire into the probability of Handel's ownership of that harpsichord, and place the harpsichord in a revised understanding of the instrument-making traditions of the period.
The Mercier portrait is reckoned to be the earliest, and in many respects the most interesting likeness of Handel in London.
In place of the usual 18th-century formality it has a sense of verité that a later age can find reassuringly informative.
Other artists offer a variety of interpretations.
Roubiliac gives a heroic view of the composer gazing into the heavens for inspiration.
Hudson and Denner present only a successful and respected gentleman whose accomplishments might only be guessed at.
Mercier, by contrast, gives us the working man, drawn with almost Hogarthian candour.
Rather than waiting for inspiration he is shown with a pen in his hand, an unfinished manuscript on the table, and at his side a harpsichord on which we are to imagine him playing through the work in progress.
When W. S. Rockstro made the first thorough-going attempt at a life of Handel in 1883, he had before him a list of no fewer than 53 likenesses made during the composer's lifetime.
It appears, however, that 19th-century scholars were not familiar with the Mercier portrait.
Many of the 53 were line engravings such as were commonly taken from existing portraits in oils: the Mercier picture seems, though, to have escaped this treatment and was not copied until the age of the photogravure plate.
William Dale claims the honour of being the first to reproduce it accurately in his Tschudi the harpsichord maker of 1913: previous reproductions were so murky as almost to obliterate the harpsichord.
Dale's purpose was to elaborate on the supposedly close friendship between Tschudi and Handel, on which subject he provides some lively anecdotes.
Regrettably, the whole foundation for this is the rather suspect testimony of Tschudi's grandson, James Schudi Broadwood, which was not published till 1862 and a rather speculative connection between Handel and an evidently much altered harpsichord dated 1729 that purports to have belonged to his prima donna, Anna Strada.
Observing that Tschudi can be shown to have made keyboards with ‘skunktail’ sharps (quite exceptionally on the 1766 instruments for Frederick the Great), Dale rashly conjectures that the instrument seen in the Mercier portrait might be by Tschudi even though it bears no resemblance to the 1729 harpsichord or anything that subsequently emerged from the Meard Street or Great Pultney Street workshops.
A Tshudi it is not.
The provenance of the painting, however, is entirely secure.
On the back of the canvas is an inscription which reads ‘Portrait of Mr Handel given by him to Thomas Harris Esquire, about 1748.
Now, the very word ‘about’ clearly warns us that the inscription was probably added some time after the event, but all the available evidence does point toward its veracity.
The Thomas Harris referred to was closely associated with the composer, and his signature may be seen as witness to Handel's will and to its first three codicils; in the fourth and last codicil he actually becomes a beneficiary.
His nephew, James, was created first Earl of Malmesbury: it is with this line of the family that the painting and various other mementoes of the composer have remained to this day.
Concerning the painter we know a good deal also.
Although his name, and something in the manner of his paintings, suggest French extraction, Philip Mercier was in fact born in Germany.
It was there, in Hanover, about 1716 that he came to the notice of Frederick, Prince of Wales.
Frederick's patronage and admiration for his work persuaded the artist to travel to London, where, in   1728 he was duly rewarded with an official appointment as portrait painter to the prince.
This post he held till
8, when, for some reason, perhaps some personal misconduct, he was dismissed; he decamped to York, where he resided for many years.
His pictures vary in style: in his later days he showed himself capable of the common sort of conventionally flattering portrait, but, particularly from his earlier years in London, there exists a body of work demonstrating his great talent for lively detail and natural rather than conventional compositions.
Among the most memorable of paintings in this manner is his group portrait of the Prince of Wales with his three sisters sometimes referred to as The music party (illus.3).
In it we see Prince Frederick playing the cello, Princess Amelia reading Milton, Princess Anne playing the harpsichord and Caroline the mandora.
The sitters are evidently at their ease, and in the background we see a representation of the Dutch House at Kew, a favourite place just a few miles from London where they could escape from the formalities of public life.
This picture offers us a useful parallel with the Handel portrait dating from about 1728 and has the same kind of confidential candour.
The dress of the princesses shows no concessions to the formal court styles; indeed, it would be very difficult to distinguish them from genteel country folk — only the sash worn by Frederick gives any hint at the exalted social status of the sitters.
There can be little doubt that we are seeing their real diversions, that these are their own instruments and the clothes they would really have worn.
Just so with the Handel portrait.
Its truthful and intimate style gives us no reason for supposing that we are seeing anything other than Handel at home — his own comfortable and well worn chair, his own clothes and his own table.
What is more likely than that the harpsichord should also be his?
The painting clearly  represents a real instrument, and since the picture was intended for Handel to keep (as we may infer from his afterwards presenting it to Harris) there seems to be little likelihood of the painter substituting an instrument with which the composer had no connection.
Yet the expectation has persisted that Handel ought to have been shown next to some larger and more recognizably worthy instrument.
Wishful thinking though this may be, it is necessary at this point to examine the foundations for an enduring tradition associating Handel with an instrument by Ruckers.
The ultimate source is Sir John Hawkins, who remarks, in what appears to be a personal recollection, that Handel had ‘a favourite Rucker harpsichord, the keys whereof, by incessant practise, were hollowed like the bowl of a spoon’ In justice to Hawkins it must be stated that he does have a reputation for being, for his time, a careful scholar, so it is unfortunate that this brief, almost casual remark, should have been embellished with a little fanciful romancing that appears to be added only to enliven his text with some colourful anecdote.
The keys of old harpsichords are indeed often seen to be hollowed; however, what this suggests is not that Handel had been assiduously practising on it for many years, but rather that (being at least loo years old when Hawkins saw it) it had never had the keys replated. 19th-century scholars were intrigued by this tale, and more than a century after Handel's death embarked on the quest to rediscover the instrument.
Their starting point was Handel's will, drawn up in 1750, in which he bequeaths to his assistant Christopher Smith ‘my large harpsichord, my little house organ, my music books, and five hundred pounds’ Subsequent variations to the will by codicils do not appear to alter any of this.
So, Christopher Smith having taken possession of the ‘large harpsichord’(presumably in 1759), it is surprising to find that the instrument has not been preserved and revered in proportion with the never-flagging enthusiasm of the English for their adopted composer.
But the truth is that it has entirely disappeared, and, try though they might, later scholars have been unsuccessful in establishing any convincing connection with any extant instrument.
There is a tradition, traceable only to some anecdotes published by the Rev. W. Coxe in 1799 that the Handel harpsichord was given, with some manuscripts and the Roubiliac bust, to that notable Handel enthusiast George III.
Accordingly, in 1883 a woefully neglected Ruckers of 1612 was located in Windsor Castle and proffered as a likely candidate.
The rival claimant, an Andreas Ruckers of 1651, was produced by the piano house of John Broadwood and Sons, who deposed that this instrument had once belonged to Christopher Smith and thus might have been Handel's.
This sad and unsatisfactory conclusion is, of course, regrettably paralleled by the case of J. S. Bach, who in his will left at least five keyboard instruments, three of which devolved upon his youngest son, Johann Christian.
He, like Handel, ended his days in London; where his father's instruments were disposed of is also a mystery.
Mention must be made here of Handel's other harpsichords.
It is plain that just like Bach he must have owned several — indeed, the wording of his will implies as much.
To Christopher Smith he left his large harpsichord.
Compare this with his description of the organ —‘my little house organ’.
This adjective, emphasizing its size, is inserted to distinguish it from his great organ (sic), then standing in the theatre at Covent Garden (which, incidentally, he left not to Smith but to John Rich).
The implication is that there was at least one other harpsichord in Handel's house, and Christopher Smith was to have the large one.
But the question must arise: what was it that Handel and his assistant would have thought of as a large harpsichord in 1750?
An essential requirement surely, if this was meant to be in any way a useful gift, would be an adequate number of notes.
Might it be that large implies not necessarily physical bulk or even two manuals but a keyboard with a full five octaves?
If this were so then it must at least be questioned whether the large harpsichord could be synonymous with the Ruckers harpsichord that Hawkins remembered.
A worn and hollowed keyboard does not suggest an instrument that had been recently refurbished with extended keyboards but rather an old instrument that Handel admired for its tone.
It might be, therefore, that the 19th-century scholars who were seeking a large Ruckers harpsichord were rather too precipitate.
Half a century before their quest was begun, an inventory was taken of the private apartments in Buckingham Palace.
The inventory is dated 2 May 1825, just five years after the death of George III.
There in the King's sitting room the clerk noted ‘a harpsichord by Handell in a walnut tree case’ Clearly there are two scribal errors here the spelling of the composer's name and the omission of a verb: these make it possible to argue (if a little perversely) that this was just another of those many instruments reputed to have been played by Handel.
Surely, if Handel's harpsichord truly was given to George III, this would have been exactly the place to find it.
Needless to say, thanks to an over-dependence on Hawkins's remark, this has never been followed up and the harpsichord can   no longer be identified.
Indeed, its very ordinariness and the want of any reliable documentation could easily have led to its disposal.
It will be remembered that during the last 30 years of life the King had suffered from a distressing illness that resulted in his being kept under guard and even put into a straight-jacket: if he had said anything about the origin of the instrument it is unlikely that much weight would be given to his words.
A possible clue to the identity of an alternative Handel harpsichord is provided by the design for a lid painting by Sir James Thornhill which is reproduced by Russell.
That it should require a lid painting at all suggests that it cannot have been an English instrument or a Ruckers, and, if its shape is drawn as carefully as the presence of an accompanying scale would indicate, the rather blunt double curve of the bentside would suggest one of the Hamburg makers.
Allowing then that Handel must have owned several harpsichords, though perhaps not all at one time, the identity of the harpsichord in the Mercier portrait may be of some interest.
It is clearly an English instrument.
Thomas Hitchcock is the name that has been most plausibly suggested until now.
The keyboard certainly looks similar to Hitchcock's with its ‘skunktail’ sharps and a compass descending chromatically to G♯.
However, even here a discrepancy arises as Mercier shows the keyfronts to be black (just as we see them on the William Smith), whereas in all of the spinets by Hitchcock and in his sole surviving harpsichord at the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, the colour of the keyfronts matches the natural key plates (i.e. ivory keys always have ivory arcades).
The veneer treatment of the keywell of the V&A harpsichord does not look at all like Mercier's painting, but from the multitude of Hitchcock spinets we know that he was not averse to the use of sycamore in this area, which, when it is varnished over, darkens to that golden hue that the painter has reproduced so faithfully.
However, Hitchcock's keywell inlay is generally of a simple rectangle, whereas Mercier and William Smith are in agreement that the rectangle should be broken with half circles on the shorter sides — a decorative motif that was common at the time and appears on a number of spinets (though not apparently any by Thomas Hitchcock).
Unfortunately, the surviving harpsichord by Hitchcock has lost its stop knobs: it would have been most useful to compare them with the painting.
What Mercier has painted corresponds exactly, both as to position and as to its plain, rather globular form, with Smith's design.
In summary, one can say beyond reasonable doubt that if one were asked to choose which of Slade's apprentices is most likely to have made the harpsichord on which Handel rests his elbow, the evidence weighs very heavily in favour of William Smith.
Indeed, the Bate Collection's instrument displays an astonishingly close resemblance to it.
A difficulty is that Mercier's brushwork, and an essential freedom in his style, does not lend itself to the same kind of minute scrutiny that could be applied to a painter like Zoffany.
One is never sure whether trifling details, sketchily represented on the canvas, actually record significant features of the instrument as Mercier saw it.
For example, just above the keys there seems to be a suggestion of a darker horizontal band.
One would not recognize this as significant until, comparing with the Bate Collection harpsichord, one sees that William Smith constructed his instruments with a detachable batten behind the keys, the front or fascia board being permanently fixed to the wrestplank.
This was not a common feature of London-made harpsichords of the pre-Tabel era, most makers  preferring to use a one-piece front board that lifts out vertically even if this means (as with the Coston and Hancock harpsichords) that the stop levers must be unscrewed first.
It is not at all improbable that Hitchcock also followed this system, but in the absence of a single manual from him we cannot be sure.
The detachable batten is, of course, the norm for the Tabel school.
Just above, the feature inlay as Mercier paints it is worthy of comment, chiefly because the panel with the semicircular ends is placed very much farther to the left than we would expect to see it.
Whether one is satisfied that Mercier made free with its location so as to avoid having a fussy detail right at the edge of his picture must be for each observer to decide.
This and several other small details concerning the inlay do require a certain amount of indulgence if they are to be reconciled completely with this particular example of Smith's work.
Feature for feature, the Bate Collection harpsichord and the Mercier portrait show a remarkable correspondence.
It is natural, though, to ask whether there are other surviving harpsichords that should be considered.
In an attempt to provide concise information on this point I have gathered together details of all the surviving English harpsichords from the period 1700–1744, judging that nothing outside this time span could be relevant to the Mercier picture.
The sample is a fairly small one.
There are fewer than 20 instruments altogether, some of which can be disregarded immediately because, although they were made in London, they fall into the class of quasi-Ruckers harpsichords (like the Ham  House instrument) and were always intended to deceive.
Rather fortuitously, our residual list of 13 harpsichords includes at least one example by almost every known maker active in London at the time.
Their visible features make an interesting comparison with the Mercier picture.
Only six of them have the necessary external lockboard battens applied to the cheek and spine.
If we require instruments with a chromatic G♯ compass the list is reduced to four.
If our next sorting procedure selects those harpsichords with a fixed frontboard (with a removable batten behind the keys) we are already reduced to two — Smith and Hitchcock (perhaps).
But whatever selection of visible features one chooses, the field very quickly narrows towards the William Smith —be it a sycamore frontboard with round-ended panels, be it ivory naturals with black fronts, or whatever.
Table 1 summarizes the information about these harpsichords.
Only four of them are not dated; their position in the chronological ordering has been estimated.
The characteristics chosen for this analysis were selected to illustrate any visual correspondences that the instruments might or might not have with the Mercier portrait.
However, a secondary result emerges: a remarkable discontinuity is demonstrated.
The first seven instruments  in the list form a distinct group; those that follow (together with many unlisted examples) form another.
The dichotomy is first signalled by the change from G♯ to F♯ keyboards.
It is emphasized still further when we see that of the latter group none has external lockboard battens.
Further distinctions not shown in the table could also be drawn: the first group has short string scales, ranging from 10¼’ to 12½’;; they have pine keys with rear rack guiding; they have shallower cases with thinner scantlings and show a method of construction without dovetails in which the case parts can be assembled around the bottom boards.
All of these features are contradicted by the second group: string scales range from 13¼’ to 14½’; cases are deeper and more robust; keyboards are nearly always lime; and rack guidance is replaced by front rail pins.
The distinction here is between two very distinct schools of harpsichord-making; a tradition carried on by native craftsmen who flourished during the first 25 years of the 18th century and an imported tradition initiated by Hermann Tabel that displaced its native rival as effectively as a cuckoo might take charge in a sparrow's nest.
Tabel has received too little credit in the standard literature — Hubbard dismisses him as some sort of shadowy figure and takes little trouble to describe the 1721 harpsichord.
Its innovative design suggests the hand of a truly original master and the subsequent history of ‘English’ harpsichord-making entirely endorses Burney's estimate of him as ‘the celebrated Tabel’The fortuitous survival of the 1721 harpsichord and Charles Mould's researches affirm Tabel's status beyond doubt.
His success led to the rapid demise of the native English tradition by 1730, and the slender, short-scaled harpsichords were made no more.
Tabel took none of these craftsmen into his workshop but employed immigrant tradesmen such as Tschudi, Kirckmann and Willbrook.
The English makers thus became marginalized in the less prestigious field of spinet production (in which, of course, they had always been active) and their distinctive style of workmanship was perpetuated, without any obvious concessions to the Tabel tradition, by makers such as John Hitchcock, who was still active in the mid-1760s.
In the middle of the century therefore there was a division in the trade, with immigrant craftsmen making only harpsichords and native makers almost wholly confined to spinet production.
But this does not permit us to regard the Englishmen as solely or by choice specialists in spinets.
They clearly regarded themselves and their working methods in a different light — witness the frequent attempts to   break into the Schudi-Kirckman duopoly in the harpsichords of Faulkner, John Hitchcock and Baker Harris.
Hubbard's remark that ‘the constructional features of (Thomas) Hitchcock's harpsichord reveal a sensitivity to influence which may bespeak a certain uncertainty on the part of its maker’ is surely unjustified.
But since he wrote those words some of the harpsichords he was unable to see, and one that he dismissed too lightly, have become more accessible.
The Hancock in the Russell Collection (now in Edinburgh) has been joined by the Francis Coston an instrument that like the Tisseran has a gorgeously painted soundboard.
The Tisseran itself is now in the Bate Collection (illus.4): its painted and gilded case reminding us of the harpsichord the princess is playing in The music party .
The discovery of a Thomas Barton harpsichords throws fresh light on the scribbled information in the Talbot Manuscript taken from an instrument we know only as ‘Jenny's harpsichord’ The stringing list is almost identical.
A picture emerges of a flourishing and diverse tradition of individual craftsmen whose skills and working methods were applied equally to full-sized harpsichords or to bentside spinets.
To this tradition the William Smith belongs.
The casework is of walnut with an overall length of 2010 mm (6 feet 8 inches as Smith would have said).
The depth, not including the lid, is 204 mm (just 8 inches).
There are three pierced brass hinges of graduating length for the main lid, similar to those on the Tabel, with matching smaller hinges at both of the lid flap openings.
To hold the lid when closed there are three brass ‘S’ hooks of early, zoomorphic style in which the tip is shaped and incised to resemble a heron's beak.
It has a stand of four baluster-style turned legs joined by stretchers in the usual English fashion.
Though there are a few anomalous features in this framing (and the sceptic is well aware how often unscrupulous dealers have altered or exchanged such items for the sake of a sale) it is nevertheless easier to believe that it is original than to contrive any coherent explanation.
The keyboard range is G'-g''' (61 notes)— far exceeding the requirements of Handel's published keyboard music — and the three-octave span (Stichmass)is 490 mm.
The key levers are pine, rack-guided at the rear, with wooden tongues, and there is a three-rail keyframe.
The jack rail is quite light and the action is stopped on the front rail.
The jacks themselves are very slim (the very opposite of spinet jacks), affording very generous margins when backing off, even with a good-length, flexible plectrum.
A noteworthy feature of the instrument's design is the extreme shortness of the scalingc’ = 261 mm (10¼’), which suggests brass stringing throughout.
Improbably combined with this is a substantial beech bridge, 18 mm high in the bass and tapering to 14 mm in the treble, of the truncated triangular form and mass that is seen in the much more heavily strung harpsichords of the Flemish tradition.
The soundboard grain runs at about 40° to the spine, i.e. approximately at right angles to the bridge alignment.
The case has not been opened, but by tapping it is conjectured that there are two light bars running parallel with the bridge.
The case itself has very little internal bracing; a narrow crack in the bottom boards allows us to detect only one structural member — a bottom brace passing from the middle of the bentside directly across to the spine.
In keeping with the Bate Collection's policy of exhibiting instruments, wherever possible, in playing order, the harpsichord was restrung in brass and voiced in crow quill.
If there were any lingering doubts about the wisdom of Smith's design, as to whether light brass stringing could be successful with such a bridge, they were dispelled immediately.
The light structures and free soundboard amplify the resonances in a very satisfactory way.
Initially a pitch of a ♯ = 408 was chosen as being close to the Bate Collection's recorders of the period: at this pitch  it sounds fine but one could easily allow that the original use of the instrument might have been at a higher pitch than this.
There are one or two blemishes in the shorter set of strings (and therefore lower tensioned) in the treble, where the down bearing and side draught at the bridge have been compromised by small changes in the instrument's geometry during the vicissitudes of 250 years.
Nevertheless, an assessment of the harpsichord's tone can be adequately made.
It may be sufficient to remark that when the instrument was demonstrated to an assembly of interested parties in Oxford it met with great approval.
BOOKS
Music in late Renaissance and early Baroque Italy
TIM CARTER Batsford, London , 1992, £25
Michael Talbot
This book is only partly an exploration of the transition from the Renaissance to the Baroque in the context of Italian music.
In reality, it is a history of Italian music from the era of Netherlandish dominance at the beginning of the 16th century to the end of Monteverdi's career.
Thus there is much in it that is purely ‘Renaissance’: Palestrina is the mid-point rather than the starting-point of the narrative.
Actually, ‘narrative’ is a misnomer.
The book's 14 chapters certainly cover the ground thoroughly, giving sacred vocal, secular vocal and instrumental genres their due weight, but the connecting threads are rather tenuous.
There is no grand idea gradually unfolding.
One is reminded, in fact, of a retrospectively assembled collection of writings such as Reinhard Strohm's Essays on Handel and Italian opera .
This is, of course, no accusation of failure; the author states frankly in his preface that the ‘treatment of broad themes, not ‘comprehensive coverage, is his aim.
It does mean, however, that each chapter has to be judged on its individual merits or — putting the matter more positively — that each can be digested successfully without reference to its companions.
Tim Carter is an enthusiastic advocate of contextual music history: a style of history that locates the conception, production, transmission and consumption of music firmly within a social, religious, economic and political context.
This approach does not preclude analytical discussion of the musical notes themselves (some critics have appeared to erect a false antithesis between contextual and notes-based history), and the author has judged very well how much space to devote to purely musical matters and how deeply to go into technicalities.
Dr Carter is thoroughly versed in the most recent literature relevant to his subject, and much of his account draws together in outline the present state of knowledge (to which he himself, through his articles, has abundantly contributed).
This is not a weakness but a strength, for to the extent that musicology is a science, it is inevitably a collective effort.
Nor should my observation imply that the book lacks ‘added value’ although the facts and arguments that are recognizably new occur at uneven intervals, being sometimes sparse and sometimes dense.
In dealing with the relationship between words and music the author unfailingly reveals both great experience and great imagination.
My favourite aperçu comes in the very last paragraph of the final chapter (‘From madrigal to cantata’), where Carter introduces the idea of a distinct ‘terza prattica, whose principal vehicle was the emerging aria of the 1620s and 1630s.
This is surely an insight worth taking up by scholars of the subsequent period.
It also helps to explain why late Monteverdi is so different from early Monteverdi.
I cannot recall reading a recent work in English on music history better written and more carefully seen through the press than this one.
The many quotations are skilfully chosen and superbly translated.
By way of correction I can offer only the thought that the word comprimat in the third line of Musae Jovis is a jussive subjunctive (‘let…crush’), not an indicative (‘crushes’).
If this book has a significant weakness, it is simply that it takes three chapters to get into its stride.
The discussion of conventional  labels in the opening chapter, ‘Renaissance, Mannerism, Baroque?’ is not ruthless enough in its dissection of word and meaning.
When music historians coin or appropriate their own terms (e.g. Ars Nova), they themselves can define the stylistic and chronological boundaries and guarantee that the two are congruent.
When, however, they borrow them from other disciplines, they must expect either that the chronological fit is bad (if they insist on matching the style) or that the stylistic fit is bad (if they match the chronology).
In practice, music historians — and Carter, unfortunately, is no exception — tend to vacillate uncertainly between the two positions.
Whether Josquin and his fellow Northerners active in Italy are properly to be regarded as ‘Renaissance’ figures, a question that he ponders at some length, is at bottom a non-issue.
They do not place themselves inside or outside the Renaissance by anything they actually do: it is we who place them there (or exclude them therefrom) by opting for one definition of the term rather than another.
Chapter 2, ‘The city states of Italy, tries to pack too much into its nine pages and loses precision as a result.
This is the one place in the book where Carter's enviable fluency is in danger of ceding to superficiality.
With Chapter 3, ‘From composer to consumer, the waiting is over and a more authoritative voice begins to speak.
If, as I hope, the book is soon reissued in paperback, the author might consider three small improvements.
The music examples number only 25not overgenerous for a book of 288 pages.
Some chapters lack music examples altogether while others are comparatively well provided, and there seems no reason for the disparity.
Adding five examples to the chapters that at present lack them would kill two birds with one stone.
Second, the index has entries for names and places but none for subjects.
This is a shame in a book so rich in ideas and so virtuoso in its handling of specialist terminology.
Finally, the map representing ‘Italy in the sixteenth century’ should be made to show the boundaries between states more clearly and to narrow its time-frame to a period when they remained exactly the same.
Because it straddles (though less symmetrically than its title implies) what are generally conceived as two distinct musical periods, this fine study will probably be selected only rarely as ‘essential’ reading for a history course, given that such courses almost invariably observe the traditional boundaries.
Let us hope, then, that it achieves the automatic status of recommended ‘additional’ reading.
Music and merchants: the laudesi companies of republican Florence
BLAKE WILSON
Clarendon Press, Oxford , 1992, 40
Elizabeth Sole
Continuing the fine series of monographs on music in late medieval and Renaissance cities produced by Clarendon Press (Lewis Lockwood's Ferrara , Reinhard Strohm's Bruges , and Frank Dobbins's Lyons ) is Blake Wilson's recent study of the Florentine laudesi companies from their founding in the late 13th century to their decline in the early 16th century.
The prevalent merchant culture in the early Italian city-republics, notably in Florence — one of the largest cities in Europe at the time and one which is well known for its lauda tradition — provided the ideal climate for the development of the lay companies.
(Wilson chooses the word ‘companies’ in preference to the currently favoured term ‘laudesi confraternities’as it is more commonly found in contemporary Italian documents.)
These compagnie delle laude were founded by groups of lay persons, primarily members of the merchant guilds, who sought some spiritual ratification of their essentially secular daily activity.
They affiliated themselves to the mendicant orders such as the Franciscans and Dominicans for their religious authentication, and engaged themselves, like their mendicant counterparts, in active participation of their faith, managing numerous charitable enterprises and conducting their own daily evening devotional services.
Central to their  evening devotions was the practice of lauda singing.
Wilson provides a study which examines not only (as is often the case) the lauda repertory of these companies, but also the devotional and socio-political context in which this lauda-singing took place.
He draws on a rich body of primary material, mostly confraternity documents held in the Florentine Archivio di Stato, from which he extracts both general features of the companies and specific details relating to the structure and practices of 12 active laudesi companies in the city.
The reader is presented with as wide a context as possible, and from this is better able to understand the central role that the laude assumed in their devotions and how numerous bequests maintained this tradition.
He draws interesting parallels between the lauda texts and the vernacular sermons of the friars, suggesting that some might even have been sung in conjunction with sermons, particularly those attributed to the 13th-century Franciscan friar and poet, Jacopone da Todi.
The documents reveal valuable details relating to the professional performing forces, vocal and instrumental, that the companies employed.
Wilson presents these in a chapter devoted entirely to a discussion of the practices of each of the 12 laudesi companies.
We see the move from monophonic to polyphonic practice and the changes in the musical and poetic styles and how they affected the size of the performing forces.
Wilson gives lists of salaried musicians serving each company; and he investigates the conditions and patterns of activity concerning these professional laudese.
Besides the companies' statutes, account books and legal contracts, there are the liturgical documents which include, among others, the laudarios.
These give the poetic texts and occasionally also the music.
However, few musical laudarios are extant, and only one of Florentine provenance has survived from before the 15th century: the renowned, luxuriantly decorated early 14th-century manuscript, MS Banco Rari 18, which belonged, rather surprisingly, to one of the more modest Florentine companies, the Compagnie delle laude di Santo Spirito.
Wilson discusses its repertory briefly in relation to a similar musical manuscript of Umbrian provenance, MS Cortona 91.
The two sources share a number of concordances.
It is interesting to observe the melodic and orthographic variants, as well as the generally more florid melodic style of the Florentine examples, from which Wilson suggests that both an oral and a written tradition prevailed.
It is hard to imagine, though, how the non-performing members of the companies memorized the more intricate turns of the refrains in the Florentine manuscript, but then these may have been instrumental improvisations.
In the 15th century there is a dearth of Florentine musical examples of the laude, and Wilson has had to resort to a discussion of the music found in lauda sources from the Veneto.
These, he maintains, are the likely examples which relate to the Florentine cantasi come prints; and he presents a strong case for the performance of the polyphonic models, and not the monophonic ones as Giulio Cattin suggests.
The musical examples in the appendix reveal some useful comparisons of settings preserved in some of these 15th- and 16th-century sources.
If there is anything to quibble about in Wilson's thorough and engaging study which also relies on an extensive body of secondary material, as reflected in the footnotes and excellent up-to-date bibliography, it is in the section relating to the musical sources of the lauda in the 15th and early 16th centuries.
The proofreading seems not to be as accurate here as in the rest of the book, and there are some flaws in the details concerning the manuscripts and the discussion of the settings.
For instance, the MS Panciatichi is referred to as a Florentine source.
Its close repertorial ties with the northern Italian sources of MS Cape Town Grey 3. b.12 and MS Paris Res Vm7 676 would seem to suggest otherwise.
The Galletti references are confusing, in that some are marked as page references (sometimes incorrectly) while others  refer to the Roman numeration in the 19th-century edition; and it seems dangerous to rely on Francesco Luisi for the numbers of the literary sources of the laude in question.
But this is surely nitpicking, in what can be viewed as a significant contribution to our knowledge of so many aspects relating to the ordinary citizens of Florence over a period of more than 200 years.
It is also a book that will be of interest to a wide group of readers.
Byrd studies
Edited by Alan Brown and Richard Turbet
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge , 1992, £37.50
Roger Bowers
William Byrd was proud of his longevity.
Out of all the many hundreds of 16th- and 17th-century wills that I have studied, his is the only one to include a reference to its writer's age: its intimation that on 15 November 1622 he was in his 80th year allows 1992 or 1993 to be marked as the 450th anniversary of his birth.
This collection of a dozen essays is offered to mark the occasion, to advertise the vigour and diversity of current research, and to encourage informed admiration and appreciation of the music.
Indeed, several employ the recently established body of appraisal and synthesis contained in Oliver Neighbour's Keyboard and consort music of William Byrd and Joseph Kerman's Masses and motets as a launch-pad from which to commence the process of establishing the next generation of new observations.
Consequently it is with this, rather than with the aggregation and synthesis of disparate items of previous work and the distillation from them of new insights, that the volume is largely concerned.
It is a very mixed bag, which is not surprising for a composer so prodigal with his talents over so wide a field.
During his long life Byrd concentrated his compositional activity on production for the intimate music-making of the domestic parlour and its courtly equivalent, and of the clandestine chapel.
There is music for the vernacular liturgy of the 1559 Book of Common Prayer, and a handful of pieces probably intended for use as the extra-liturgical anthem; this was composed for the vocal chorus available at the Chapel Royal and the greater corporate churches, and virtually alone among Byrd's output qualifies as public rather than domestic music.
Of the remainder, the music for viols and solo keyboard, the songs and domestic devotional consorts, and the large amount of music to religious or moralizing texts in either English or Latin, was all alike pre-eminently private chamber music.
Best viewed in a like context are the many Latin liturgical settings for the Mass.
Among these, there is much for which it is likely that performances could never have been contemplated by whatever scratch ensembles could furtively be gathered at clandestine celebrations held in recusant households; these must have been composed simply as an act of faith.
Except for the consort song, all of these types of composition are represented somewhere among the studies presented here.
Craig Monson builds on his edition of the vernacular service music to validate suspicions that between the Short Services by Tallis and Byrd, and between those by Byrd and Morley, there is a commonality of material and procedures both overt and covert that is not coincidental but deliberate, and possibly inspired by respect for and deference to a master by (not a pupil, but) a disciple.
Joseph Kerman subjects to detailed appraisal a single example of vernacular song, ‘Retire my soul’ from the Psalms, Songs and Sonnets of 1611.
The song is but brief, and perhaps an appreciation of Kerman's penetrating, if occasionally purple, dissection and minute analysis would have been much easier to grasp had all the music been reproduced.
Another article to show much ingenuity in spotting small-scale correspondences and diagnosing their significance is that by John Irving, who aligns well chosen items of keyboard music (and some consort music) by Byrd and Tomkins to illustrate the extent to which the younger composer applied (among other influences) principles of ‘creative reinterpretation’(p157) of Byrd's procedures  in the development of his own personal style.
In the same vein of concentrated analysis (and again, with rather an insufficiency of music examples) Oliver Neighbour considers the authorship of certain anonymous keyboard pieces, most particularly a transcription of Byrd's ‘O quam gloriosum est regnum’ Its procedures demonstrate the activity of a master hand (not inconceivably Byrd's own) even if only to satisfy himself that the exercise wasn't worth the candle.
Also on the subject of authorship, John Morehen, with a degree of lucidity rare in this area, subjects pieces bearing suspect attributions to Byrd to computer analysis, and explains how contributions to conclusions may thus be made.
With different degrees of success, two articles venture upon ground that appears to be substantially less well worked than that already considered.
Owen Rees displays an enviable acquaintance with potential sources of indigenous origin for the texts chosen by composers (or their employers or patrons) for setting.
First he shows how, in the successive volumes compiled under the generic title of ‘Primer’, composers would have found whole psalms located in contexts able to suggest the composition of the psalm-motet not chronologically in succession to, but simultaneously with, the votive antiphon.
He capitalizes on this discovery by observing that certain editions of the English Primers from C.1530 onwards also contain Savonarola's soliloquy on Psalm 1, ‘Infelix ego, thus supplying Byrd (directly or indirectly) both with his words and with an English ambience to an ostensibly purely foreign text that the composer exploited in his chosen manner of setting.
Composers scored their music for the forces that were available, and David Wulstan is surely correct in perceiving that the recognition of evolutions and innovations in the performing medium may contribute to the establishment of a chronology for a composer so long-lived as Byrd.
The idea does not reap the success it deserves, however, since among other things Wulstan does not make allowance for the fact that even within the corpus of vocal music the performing medium was not uniform.
There is not so much as even a prima facie case for imagining that the ad hoc domestic forces available for the Latin music and the English devotional settings bore any close resemblance to the stereotyped and institutionalized vocal dispositions (SAATB, succeeding SATB and SATTB) supplied by the contemporary church choir; these several bodies of music need to be addressed separately.
Comparisons with pre-Reformation music are also made, and these are bedevilled by Wulstan's well known but personal and unsubstantiated views on the sounding pitch of Latin music written before C.1558.
In an appendix he adverts to an article in which an alternative view was proposed; however, he addresses none of the very real objections to the ‘high pitch’ theory evinced there, not least the demonstrable nonexistence of the over-age ‘super-trebles’needed to sing the highest voice.
The style and tone of this appendix are quite astonishing; fortunately, readers of this book and of Early music will be aware that for one writer to read another's work insufficiently carefully to understand it, to attribute to him ideas he does not hold, and then to subject them to sarcasm and ridicule is no way to conduct academic debate, and about these four pages the present writer — the recipient of this attention — needs say no more.
The ‘high pitch’ theory is unsubstantiated and, it now appears, not defensible against more plausible and rational proposals.
Chronology is broached also by Peter le Huray, who examines Morley's prescriptions for good composition (published in 1597), considers the undoubtedly early ‘Libera me, domine, published in 1575, and argues for recognition of mature procedures and thus a relatively late dating for the monorhythmic cantus firmus piece ‘Christus resurgens a mortuis’.
In respect of consort composition, John Bennett finds in Richard Mico a composer whose output suggests affinities with Byrd; the two composers' paths appear certain to have crossed within the orbit of the Petre family between 1608 and 1623.
Meanwhile, Desmond Hunter subjects to detailed examination the gracing symbols found in the principal source of Byrd's earlier keyboard music, My Ladye Nevells Booke, completed in 1591; he takes into account their physical placement on the stave, and the associated harmony and written-in fingerings.
As might be expected, no prescriptions emerge.
Use of the single stroke was limited to specific circumstances not all of which signified gracing, while the double stroke constituted a sign of embellishment largely at the discretion of the player — a discretion tempered by harmonic and rhythmic context and, it is to be hoped, good taste.
The volume concludes with a comprehensive discography of Byrd's music.
In the course of their observations several authors comment in passing on the confusion created by gratuitous editorial practices of reducing note-values to half those that the composer thought appropriate — a muddle which is exemplified perfectly by the printing of ‘five minims’ where, in terms of the music example supplied, ‘five semibreves’was meant (see line 27 of p.13).
If users of editions have no need for this particular intrusion, could they please let editors and publishers know, so that this now superannuated tinkering with the composer's own notation can be brought to a belated but welcome end?
Bach's Clavier-Übung III: the making of a print.
With a companion study of the Canonic Variations on ‘Vom Himmel hoch’, BWV769
GREGORY BUTLER Duke University Press , 1990, $37.50, 35.50
The Bach manuscripts of Johann Peter Kellner and his circle: a case study in reception history
RUSSELL STINSON Duke University Press , 1990, $37.50, 35.50
David Ledbetter
Since the 1950s the main achievements in Bach research have been based on a new examination of music sources.
In the case of the vocal works — many of which  can be dated virtually to the day of composition — this has led to a fundamental change in our perception of Bach's activities and outlook.
Similar work on the sources of the instrumental, particularly keyboard, works has begun only in the last decade or so, and is now bearing fruit in a far clearer understanding of Bach's thoughts and intentions.
This work has shed much new light not only on chronology, and therefore on the development of Bach's style, but also on performance practice and what is loosely termed reception history.
This is currently the main thrust of new thinking about Bach.
Gregory Butler has long been a field leader in this domain.
His 1983 study of the composition history of The art of fugue , once thought to be Bach's last work, showed that its composition spanned at least a decade, with a significant change of conception en route .
He has now achieved a similar reversal of consensus with regard to Clavierübung 111 and the Canonic Variations on ‘Vom Himmel hoch’ It has been too readily assumed that printed works were conceived as entities in their final form shortly before publication.
Some will be disappointed to learn that Clavierübung III as finally printed has nothing to do with the number of buttons on Bach's waistcoat or the transit of Venus, but everything to do with his compulsion to expand on his original conception of works on a more or less ad hoc basis.
Based mainly on a very close examination of all surviving copies of the print, and in particular on what can be deduced from the erasure of page numbers, Butler has reconstructed two distinct layers of composition.
The nucleus of the first consists of the preludes on chorales associated with the Lutheran mass (Kyrie and Gloria) and the larger (pedaliter)catechism preludes.
Butler intriguingly proposes the mass items as a keyboard pendant to the B minor Missa sent by Bach to August III of Saxony in July 1733.
He dates this earlier layer to 1735–6, perhaps put together for Bach's recital at the Dresden Frauenkirche in December 1736.
Around the time of engraving (late 1738) Bach undertook a large-scale expansion of the L scheme, adding the E♭ prelude and fugue (themselves composed perhaps as early as 1735) and the manual catechism preludes.
The earlier of these were probably intended to fill out the unused space at the end of the longer pieces (Bach was a great paper magpie), while the later ones (notably the prelude on ‘Jesus Christus unser Heiland’) were conceived on a much more generous scale.
The problematic four Duetti (two prelude and fugue pairs) were added as an afterthought at the last moment.
For the non-specialist, Butler's first chapter, on specific musical influences, will be of most interest.
In particular there are highly illuminating comparisons of the sons of the E♭ prelude and fugue with works of Hurlebusch which Bach is known to have possessed.
The remaining chapters present substantiating evidence from the physical properties of the sources.
Technical though the argument is, it provides an excellent introduction to 18th-century engraving methods and the music printing trade in general.
And he manages to present what could be very dry stuff with the flair of a good detective writer, setting up expectations whose fulfilment contains an element of surprise, while saving up a few clinching strokes for the end.
The companion study on the Canonic Variations similarly reverses the traditional assumption that the printed version was Bach's offering on joining Mizler's Corresponding Society in 1747.
Here again the core of the work probably dates from some time before (late 1745) and was expanded for the 1747 event.
It looks as if the manuscript version (with a different ordering from the printed one) was the one submitted to Mizler, while the engraved plates may well not have been used until after Bach's death, providing a companion to the posthumous printing of The art of fugue .
Again the dry materials of source study (in this case the formation of C clefs and other diplomatic details of the script of Bach's Nuremberg engraver Balthasar Schmid) are woven into a compelling narrative.
Another received view that needs revision is the myth of the neglect of Bach's music in the second half of the 18th century.
There was a lively cult of the keyboard works not only in his native Thuringia and Saxony, but also in Berlin, led by his pupil Kirnberger and the organist Johannes Ringk, not to mention three of his sons at various times.
It was from this Berlin circle of admirers that Baron von Swieten brought the cutting that was to flourish in Vienna.
Editors have naturally concentrated on sources closest to Bach, but there is in the more peripheral ones a wealth of information about the origin and reworking of pieces, as well as performance practice (notably fingerings and ornaments) for which musical sources can shed light on specific details in a way more generalized literary documents rarely can; and on the estimation of Bach's music by his contemporaries and immediate successors.
They are by no means dispensable — the earliest versions of around 40 works are in Kellner circle copies, many copied during Bach's lifetime.
Stinson gives a well argued presentation of these issues.
After a general rundown on the copyists he focuses on individual works — Kellner's copy of the Sonatas and Partitas for unaccompanied violin; some organ arrangements, notably of the G major gamba/two flute sonata (BWV1027/1039); and a number of keyboard works.
Kellner's importance as a transmitter of Bach works has of course been long recognized.
But the precise nature of his relation to Bach (with whom he said he was acquainted) is unclear.
Stinson gives as much definition as one reasonably can, but there is no new information here.
The interest is in the fact that Kellner seems to have had access to earlier version of works in sources that no longer survive, and Stinson is very adroit at disentangling and reconstructing Bach's original conceptions.
This being the case it would have been good to have had some assessment of Kellner's copy of the cello suites, recently issued in facsimile by Bärenreiter together with Anna Magdalena's copy and two others.
One slightly frustrating aspect of this book is the lack of a bibliography, meaning  that one has to go hunting in the footnotes for first references.
This also conceals the fact that quite a lot of it has appeared in print before in one form or another, a factor to bear in mind before parting with 35.50.
General information about Kellner and his copy of the works for unaccompanied violin was in Early music way back in May 1985 (xiii/z); the organ trio arrangements were discussed in a contribution to Don Franklin's Bach studies (CUP, 1989); and copies of the more important keyboard works were the subject of an article in the Journal of musicology , vii/4 (Fall 1989)
These two books maintain the very high standards of scholarship and production of the Duke Studies in the Sources of Music and their Interpretation.
The only pity is that they both appeared just too early to take account of the revised Schmieder catalogue, and also of the political events of 1989.
Regions of the old DDR have been subsumed into the new federal states of Germany, and many of the sources are housed in what must now be called the Staatsbibliothek zu Berlin, Preussischer Kulturbesitz — a name that in itself sums up the problems of uniting the two Germanies.
The impresario's Ten Commandments: Continental recruitment for Italian opera in London, 1763–64 CURTIS PRICE, JUDITH MILHOUS and ROBERT D. HUME Royal Musical Association, London , 1992 (Royal Musical Association Monographs, vi),13.95
The impresario's Ten Commandments: Continental recruitment for Italian Opera in London, 1763–64
CURTIS PRICE, JUDITH MILHOUS and ROBERT D. HUME
Royal Musicological Association, London, 1992 (Royal Musicological Association Monographs, vi), 13.95
Simon McVeigh
A prestigious opera house featuring foreign-language operas and ballets; international stars demanding colossal fees; exorbitant prices that only an élite could afford; a beleaguered manager embroiled in public debate…
First-rate opera has never been free from controversy; but managing London's premier opera house in the 17605 was a particularly hazardous occupation, especially as there was no formal state subsidy and the impresario was personally responsible for the finances.
One might well ask why the violinist Felice Giardini should have wished to take on this administrative burden, celebrated as he was as one of the principal virtuosos in London's concert life.
No doubt it appealed to his vanity and his ambition to be regarded as more than a mere fiddler; but after a harrowing year it must have been a decision he bitterly regretted.
The opera season 1763/4 must by any standards be regarded as one of London's least successful.
Because he took over the reins at such a late stage in 1763 Giardini was unable to entice to London either the best Italian singers or a famous composer.
As a consequence the number of subscribers was probably no higher than 100 and the productions attracted little critical interest.
Giardini ended the season in serious financial embarrassment, virtually imprisoned in his home for fear of his creditors — and it took him five years to pay off a huge overdraft of –602.
But this very failure has resulted in the survival of an unusual amount of information about the opera season.
It ended  in a vitriolic public dispute between Giardini and his agent Gabriele Leone, and in a Chancery lawsuit involving the same parties and other members of the company.
The bulk of this short book consists of transcriptions of letters sent by Giardini to Leone while the latter was scouring Italy for suitable singers.
These letters have been known for some time, as the aggrieved Leone published them in a pamphlet in 1764.
But this is the first major study devoted to them, and the Chancery documents have provided useful supplementary material, including letters from performers and copies of contracts.
All the transcriptions are presented with parallel translations and copious biographical annotations (but the Martini mentioned in item non is surely G.B. Sammartini, not Padre Martini).
The book certainly fills a gap between the authors' well-known researches into opera management during Handel's time and their continuing work on London opera in the 1780s and 1790s.
It should be said that anyone looking here for enlightenment about great music will reap scant rewards.
The season's highlight was a new opera by the inexperienced Mattia Vento, who later achieved only a modest reputation for a pleasant melodic gift.
Where the book scores is in its revelations about attitudes towards opera management and about deals that went on behind the scenes.
Giardini's artistic policies were clear enough.
He concentrated entirely on opera seria , attempting to engage the acknowledged leader among Italian opera composers, Niccòlo Piccinni; he was even prepared to allow Piccinni a rare concession, his own choice of libretto.
Giardini of course shared his countrymen's disdain for the German interloper J. C. Bach, who had already achieved modest successes on the London stage: in July 1763 he wrote that Bach had departed to ‘great regrets and lamentations, but easily dried up without a great handkerchief’ In the end London had to make do with Vento, who was largely responsible for stitching up patchwork operas from assorted numbers that Leone also helped to collect on his travels.
(I suggest, though, that the sacred choruses mentioned on p.5 were destined for oratorio rather than the opera stage.)
When Giardini despatched Leone on his Continental travels in July 1763 his instructions (including the ‘Ten Commandments’ of the book's title) contain sensible advice and reveal high hopes.
But the letters lapse into exasperation and impatience as it became clear that the plans were wildly over-optimistic.
Communication with a roving agent was always fraught with difficulties, but Leone was dilatory and displayed little sense of urgency as the new season approached: Giardini impulsively began to open up negotiations himself, resulting in an increasingly frenetic tone to the correspondence.
In truth, though, neither emerges from this tale with great credit.
Leone almost certainly defrauded Giardini by obtaining false receipts from the singers he engaged.
Giardini, though generous with other promoters' money (he was responsible for doubling the fees paid to orchestral players), was unscrupulous and devious as an impresario.
He evidently led musicians on with false promises: a long letter from the cellist Carlo Graziani details amounts owing and favours not forthcoming (Giardini seems to have promised him a place in the Queen's Band, though it is highly unlikely that he would have had such influence).
Neither Giardini nor Leone had any qualms in encouraging singers to break contracts in Italy, knowing that litigation was virtually impossible.
One of the most elusive aspects of operatic promotion concerns the influence of patrons in the selection of performers, and intriguing snippets here hint at the interference of the aristocracy in both London and Paris.
There was even talk of political concession to the French court if one of Giardini's dancers were allowed to return to London the following season.
But a great deal about opera management remains shadowy and inconclusive, and even this highly detailed study is unable to come up with a complete financial statement for the season.
Nevertheless, it does contain much revealing information about operatic fees and fascinating insights into the negotiations that surrounded them.
A handbook of historical stringing practice for keyboard instruments
MALCOLM ROSE and DAVID LAW
Published by the authors, at the Workshop, English Passage, Lewes, BN7 2AP, 1992, £29.50
Ephraim Segerma
A random opening of this book is very likely to reveal a table or a graph of the stringing of some old instrument of no immediate interest.
This can easily lead to the impression that it is a scholarly work of only archival interest.
This cannot be further from the truth.
The book's purpose, in which it succeeds admirably, is to be of practical use.
Since the book mostly contains figures, a few figures in describing its contents seem appropriate.
It starts with a five-page introduction, mostly discussing string measurements.
Following this are stringing tables for 84 instruments for which fairly full evidence of original stringing exists.
Tabulated for each pitch note is the vibrating length, gauge number (if marked), diameter (of core and winding plus winding pitch if covered) and tension (at defined pitch standards).
String materials and positions of changes are also given.
Included are 77 pianos (1745–1856), six harpsichords (1711–89) and one clavichord (1775).
Next are tables for 48 other instruments for which only fragmentary evidence of original stringing survives.
These include 36 pianos (1770–1840), nine  harpsichords (1707–98), an English virginal (1671), a clavichord (n.d.) and information from a late 17th-century German manuscript relating notes, string materials and gauge numbers for a clavichord and an ‘instrument’.
Spinets are included here among the harpsichords.
The remainder of the book is concerned with tension curves and stringing design.
In 11 pages, such curves are explained and illustrated, and a practical systematic method given for designing a  set of strings once the tension curve is chosen.
Following this, for each of the 84 instruments in the first set of tables, are the graphs of the string tension for each note.
Then there are six pages of appendices giving formulas and how to use them, constants that go into the formulas, and string suppliers.
The last appendix has nine pages of blank work sheets for duplication and use for calculations, tension graphs and reporting measurements.
Finally there is a brief bibliography and a seven-page index.
If a reader ever expects to do more about the stringing of an old keyboard instrument (or a modern instrument designed after one) than replacing broken strings, it is essential that he or she is familiar with this book.
Though this is by far the best collection of historical stringing information ever assembled (most of it not available elsewhere), authenticity is rarely the important issue.
Of most concern is getting the best sound out of the instrument without the strings pulling it apart and needing returning too often.
The original stringings had decades of experimental experience by early makers and players behind them.
It would be arrogant foolishness to ignore that experience and to start from scratch designing a stringing by ear.
And if there is reason to deviate from historical practice, it is important to consult this book to get a rational perspective and to get a systematic approach into what one is doing.
A person who is responsible for stringing a keyboard instrument is not necessarily a person who feels comfortable about manipulating numbers by formulas.
The authors are very understanding of the ‘formula-shy, and they even help by providing the sequence of key punches on a pocket calculator.
The stringings of some of the instruments that the authors include in the category of ‘fairly full evidence’ seem fragmentary and ambiguous because the majority of strings that are there to be measured are considered to be replacements of non-original diameters.
Such judgements should be based on experience that one continually learns from, which leads to knowing what to expect.
The authors give enough information about the bases of their judgements, showing their open-mindedness, for me to feel that they can be trusted.
No matter how good a book is it has its faults, and these give the reviewer the chance to display his knowledge.
The formula for calculating the tension of an open-wound string is likely to give a figure over 10 per cent too high because the theory behind it does not consider the deviation of the winding wire from a circular cross-section as it is bent around the core.
The tension is always arrived at by formula rather than by direct measurement, and since the error applies to the tension of the original strings as well as to modern reproductions, this weakness does not affect the accuracy of reproduction.
The question of original pitch standards is avoided, with a'=415 assumed for all pianos.
This leads to tensions which are somewhat higher than original for some of the harpsichords and somewhat lower than original for the later pianos.
The choices of the authors are nevertheless quite practical since players are much more likely to pick their pitch standards than original ones.
Also avoided are comparisons in sound produced between modern piano wire (which is never mentioned), the various carbon steels available for early instruments (which are listed) and the carbon-free phosphorus steel originally used, at least on the earlier instruments (which are never referred to, but the relevant book by Goodway and Odell is in the bibliography).
The authors refer to the carbon steels as ‘equivalent modern wires’ That equivalence presumably was established to Rose's satisfaction during the many years of his research on original strings before marketing his ‘English Iron’It is a pity that this research has not been published.
These are not faults that affect the book's practical usefulness.
It is attractively, clearly and intelligently written and produced.
(A heavy plastic pocket sleeve over the paperback cover provides excellent protection as well as storage for notes.)
It is a must for those who might have the practical opportunity to use it.