

EDITORIAL
Clarity of the Law Again
In the past few weeks plain English drafting and the typography of statutes have again become the subject of public comment in the United Kingdom.
Comment has been stimulated by the publication of a Words at Work discussion paper by Martin Cutts, ‘Unspeakable Acts?
Clarifying the language and typography of an Act of Parliament’.
The discussion paper includes a redraft of the Timeshare Act 1992 in ‘plain English’ and in a revised typography.
The redraft and the original are set out side by side so that typography and language may be compared.
While there are some aspects of the redraft where it might be argued that the law has not been accurately expressed, there is no doubt that both its language and typography suggest that there are considerable improvements which could be made to the present drafting and printing of statutes in the UK.
Comment was further stimulated by a report of the Hansard Society Commission on the Legislative process, ‘Making the Law’.
The Report will be fully considered in a future issue of the Review but in respect of the drafting and presentation it has made some measured recommendations.
One recommendation is that ‘Parliamentary Counsel and departmental lawyers should take to heart the criticisms that continue to be made, by those most directly affected, of the style of drafting of statute law, and should review their own drafting styles accordingly.’
Parliamentary counsel in particular become weary of the criticism of their work by lawyers and non-lawyers, who do not appreciate the pressures under which they work and who not infrequently have little or no drafting experience.
This weariness is exemplified by a letter from the First Parliamentary Counsel which is included in the Words at Work discussion paper.
However, weariness aside, a measured reasoned response to the criticism is needed.
Legislation is interpreted by the judiciary and perhaps lawyers at least should now also turn their attention to the form and style of judgments.
Unlike primary legislation, where there is, whatever its failings, a consistency of style  and form there is little such consistency in judgments.
The statement of the relevant facts and evidence are commonly set out at the beginning of the judgment, but in appellate courts they may be incorporated by reference to the judgments of lower courts and may be in the middle of the report of the case if that is where the principal judgment appears.
Relevant statutory provisions may be grouped together or scattered through the judgment.
The submissions may be drawn together but can appear anywhere in the judgment or they may simply also be scattered through the judgment amongst the judicial reasoning, which may itself be discursive.
Generations of law students have spent many hours trying to learn how to identify the ratio in judgments and even experienced practitioners may have difficulty locating the ratio .
The presentation and typography is equally inconsistent.
Some judges make extensive use of shoulder headings; some do not use them at all.
Statutory provisions and quotations may be inset or may be incorporated in the text of the judgment.
Judgments frequently consist of long paragraphs and convoluted sentences replete with subordinate clauses.
The use of different typefaces, other than in shoulder headings, is rare.
As parliamentary counsel continue to be harried to express meaning in a clear and accessible manner, perhaps the judiciary should be encouraged to do the same.
A Judicial View of Modern Legislation
‘A judicial view of modern legislation’ is a title ingeniously contrived to embrace little or much according to the  predilection of the speaker and the patience of his audience.
Note the indefinite article — A judicial view, not the judicial view.
I stress this in order to underline that the view which I express is idiosyncratic, prejudiced and probably heretical.
So far as the view is intended to be a strictly subjective one, it is capable of being summarised, frivolously but informatively, in a single word —‘jaundiced’; but that, perhaps applies to all legislation and not exclusively to modern legislation.
As to specifically modern legislation, it would be equally unhelpful, although equally accurate, to express simply the initial and irresistible impression that there is a lot of it about, that some of it is unintelligible and that all of it is indigestible.
But I must resist the temptation to treat so serious a matter with levity.
Wasn't it Mr. Justice Cocklecarrot (or was it Mr. Justice Wool?) in Misleading Cases in the Common Law who observed sternly to that persistent litigant, Mr. Haddock, ‘People must not do things for fun.
We are not here for fun.
There is no reference to fun in any Act of Parliament’.
Nevertheless, levity is sometimes difficult to resist, for there are occasions when even the most solemn and serious student of legislation is compelled to the conclusion either that Parliament has gone off its collective head or that the parliamentary draftsman was drunk, demented or determined to perpetrate (and perpetuate) some private joke in the well-founded hope that it would not be spotted until it was too late.
It is, for instance, not easy to envisage a new Ballad of Reading Gaol composed by the prudential Assurance Company.
But what is one to make of a solemn pronouncement in a Companies Act that ‘an insurance company which contravenes a restriction to which it is subject by virtue of subsections (1) or (2) above shall be guilty of an offence and liable on conviction on indictment to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years’?
[Companies Act 1967.
Section 68 (5)].
It is a rather less than fair criticism sometimes levelled at the judiciary that judges approach legislation with the pedantic eye of a grammarian and, indeed, sometimes with an almost perverse delight in defeating legislative intentions.
These criticisms are commonly voiced by those who have some political or academic axe to grind and who are, or think that they are, the blessed recipients of some God-given intuition which enables them to divine the actual mind of Parliament, no matter how obscure or equivocal the language in which it has chosen to express itself.
Moreover, they misunderstand the nature of the task upon which the judge has been compelled to engage himself, which is to discover, using the tools with which the law has furnished him — the accepted presumptions and canons of construction — not some speculative but unexpressed ‘intention of Parliament’ but the ambit of the written rules that Parliament has imposed for the regulation of the subject's conduct and his rights and duties under the law.
for every legislative enactment constitutes a diktat by the state to the citizen which he is not only expected but obliged to observe in the regulation of his daily life and it is the judge and the judge alone who stands between the citizen and the state's own interpretation of its own rules.
That is why it is so vitally important that legislation should be expressed in language that can be clearly understood and why it should be in a form that makes it readily accessible.
Edmund Burke observed that bad laws are the worst form of tyranny.
But, equally, well-intentioned laws that are badly drafted or not readily accessible are also a form of tyranny.
It is, as Lord Renton pointed out in an address to this Society in 1990, too much to ask that legislation should always be expressed simply; for the complexities of modern life do not always admit of simplicity and we cannot afford, in providing a code of conduct, to sacrifice certainty to simplicity.
But we can at least aim at a code that is capable of being understood by a person of average intelligence and of being understood and applied from the four corners of the document that he is directed to consult.
The instructions which come with a video recorder tend to be expressed in an amiable pidgin Japanese, but the citizen who misunderstands them suffers no worse fate than that of failing to record the programme that he wants, unless and until his ten-year-old grandson can be prevailed upon to work the thing for him.
But the citizen who misunderstands, and thus fails to heed, the dictates of an ambiguous Act of Parliament is liable to suffer much more serious consequences.
He may find himself liable for taxes that proper understanding would have enabled him to avoid.
He may suffer financial penalties.
He may find the home which he has regarded as his Englishman's castle invaded, occupied or even demolished about his ears.
He may even risk loss of liberty.
And that is why, as it seems to me, fairness dictates that the instructions upon which he is directed to act should be expressed in language which is unambiguous and capable of being readily understood without reference to speculation, from material not obvious or readily available to the reader, about what Parliament intended to say but has not clearly said.
And that is also why, speaking for myself, I have always been a little suspicious of what is  described as ‘purposive’ construction, at least in cases where the purpose is not self-evident, although authority has compelled me on more than one occasion to apply it.
That this is a counsel of perfection I am, of course, conscious.
Nevertheless, it is, I think, salutary that the judge who is called upon to construe statutory language should ask himself whether the meaning that is urged upon him is one which can fairly be drawn by a person of reasonable intelligence ordinarily conversant with the English language.
I believe that the notion of fairness to the ordinary citizen-reader perhaps underlies and explains what some regard as judicial pedantry.
It is this too which causes me personally to be deeply resentful of the practice so prevalent in the mass of fiscal and planning legislation of relegating provisions of real substance to Schedules which are sometimes cross-referenced between one another, so that construing the statute becomes a sort of verbal jigsaw puzzle that can only be solved by laying out numerous copies of the Act open at different pages or by the judicious use of more fingers than the number with which nature has been pleased to endow us.
Even more reprehensible is the increasingly common use of the so-called ‘Henry VIII clause’, enabling a Secretary of State, which means, in practice, some unelected civil servant, to amend, and even sometimes to repeal, primary legislation.
As reprehensible are provisions enabling the Secretary of State to make (to use a favourite phrase)‘such supplementary, incidental or consequential provisions as may be expedient for the purposes’ of the Act.
This sort of delegated legislation is not only thoroughly objectionable constitutionally.
It is unfair to the citizen, who is entitled in a democratic society to have the rules by which his life is to be regulated properly debated and scrutinized by his elected representatives.
And, by removing the legislation from the competent hands of the parliamentary draftsmen into those of departmental civil servants, it frequently results in drafting disasters.
That is a risk which is, perhaps, inherent in all delegated legislation.
A recent example is to be found in DPP v. Hutchinson where the Ministry of Defence, by slavishly following existing precedents, succeeded in enacting by-laws which were quite clearly ultra vires .
Another and perhaps even more striking example of the undesirability of the practice can be found in the case of Woolwich Equitable Building Society v. IRC where the finance Act 1985 had included sections enabling the Inland Revenue to make regulations for the payment by building societies of tax on ‘such sums as may be determined in accordance with regulations’ and went on to provide that any such regulations might contain ‘such incidental and consequential provisions as appear to the Board to be appropriate’.
Why it was thought appropriate to leave the important matter of imposing tax on building societies to secondary rather than primary legislation in this way remains a mystery; but, whatever the explanation, the experiment was a total disaster and resulted in the Revenue producing some regulations  in respect of a particular period of assessment which were so hopelessly flawed that the House of Lords found itself compelled to declare them void as being ultra vires .
There is another important consideration — the simple matter of accessibility.
There are something like 2,000 pieces of delegated legislation brought into force every year in the United Kingdom and a recent article in Statute Law Review drew attention to some of the difficulties which are likely to arise in discovering what local instruments are in force and what they say.
However, turning aside these local instruments, and that is not to suggest that they are unimportant, how may lawyers and interested laymen each year obtain copies of delegated legislation which are thought to, and may indeed, affect their client's or their own life and course of conduct, only to find that they are out of print or not yet available?
One accepts, of course, that the sheer volume and intractability of the subject matter render resort to delegated legislation to some degree inevitable; but, by the same token, those very factors of volume and intractability almost necessarily involve a degree of perfunctoriness in parliamentary scrutiny.
It really is not right or fair that legislative provisions of real substance should be not only practically inaccessible but should be left in the hands of some virtually unsupervised departmental draftsman.
Thus is the citizen beset by the vision of a terrifying Trinity — Unaccountability, Inaccessibility and Unintelligibility.
This last brings me to a further point.
The English language, as has been observed on more than one occasion, is frequently susceptible of ambiguity.
Whenever anyone finds a provision difficult to understand with certainty, his first and instantaneous reaction is to blame the draftsman.
It is, of course, very easy to make fun of the parliamentary draftsmen.
I confess to having myself once described a particularly abstruse provision as ‘something of a minor masterpiece of opacity’, but I regret it because I think that such shafts are frequently not aimed at the right target.
The draftsman doesn't draft in a vacuum and straight out of his head.
It is his job as well as his misfortune to seek to reduce to writing concepts and ideas fashioned and implanted by somebody else.
The parliamentary draftsmen do an immensely important task and do it under almost intolerable pressure; but in the end they merely put into words what their political masters state as their desired object.
If the object is itself bizarre or ambiguous, one can hardly be surprised that the result is bizarre or ambiguous.
I like to remind myself, from time to time, of Lord Macnaghten's remark that he did not think that the framers of the Irish Land Act were to blame for not assuming that a judge would go out of his way to derogate from the rights of a third person who had nothing whatever to do with the matter in hand.
‘The process vulgarly described as robbing peter to pay paul’, he said, ‘is not a principle of equity, nor is it, I think, lightly to be attributed to the Legislature even in an Irish Land Act.’
If one finds, as one sometimes does, that an Act contains a provision that does not make sense, it is only too easy to assume that it is the draftsman who has made an error.
What sometimes fails to strike the judicial mind is that the draftsman was in fact doing exactly what he was instructed to do and that his drafting does indeed truly reflect that elusive ‘parliamentary intention’.
It is precisely this that makes me very suspicious of searching for some supposed rational parliamentary intention outside the language in which a draftsman who is known to be rational has chosen to express it.
It is the statute that marks out the field and dictates to the citizen the rules by which he is to play and the goal at which he is to aim.
Too often, I think, the referee is tempted to shift the goal-posts in reliance upon his own speculation about what it would have been sensible for Parliament to do if Parliament had thought of doing it.
This and also the danger which, as it seems to me, lurks in the encouragement of judicial excursions into the parliamentary preserve of legislative policy, may be illustrated by reference to two cases.
One of the cases also incidentally raises the question of whether, and to what extent, it may be desirable to have regard to what was said in Parliament at the time when the legislation was under discussion.
I have already observed that I regard the so-called ‘purposive’ approach to construction with a somewhat critical eye.
That does not mean that I would discard it as an instrument of statutory interpretation even were I empowered to do so.
All other considerations apart, membership of the European Community inevitably involves, at least in those cases with any European dimension, the absorption into UK jurisprudence of the approach of the European Court of Justice to the construction of Community instruments.
What I do think that we have to be very cautious about, however, is the manner in which we determine the unexpressed ‘purpose’ of legislation.
I turn then to my two illustrative cases.
The first, I believe, is a case where the Court guessed, but guessed incorrectly, at the parliamentary intention and so construed the Act in a way which accomplished a most desirable social purpose but which nevertheless contradicted the clear and unequivocal terms in which it was expressed.
The second is a classic case of the Court's creation of a policy never expressed by Parliament and the imposition of that policy on the legislation in plain contradiction of its express and unequivocal terms.
Indeed, one must infer that the policy was deliberately not expressed in the legislation because it appeared in express terms in other legislation relating to other transactions.
The first case is R .
v Central Criminal Court, ex p.
Francis & Francis and concerned the police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984.
The Act confers extensive powers of entry, search, and seizure which necessarily involve an invasion of the citizen's rights of privacy and property; on that account the legislation might be thought to call for a strict construction.
Under the Act the citizen is protected from arbitrary and oppressive harassment by the establishment of   a special procedure for obtaining what is called ‘special procedure material’, defined, in broad terms, as material which is in the possession of a person who holds it subject to an obligation of confidence.
from that material, and thus from liability to search, production, or seizure, there are excluded ‘items subject to legal privilege’ which are defined in section 10(1).
They include, for instance, communications with legal advisers and others for the purpose of taking or giving legal advice or in connection with legal proceedings.
Section 10(2), however, provides that ‘items held with the intention of furthering a criminal purpose are not items subject to legal privilege’.
Now these words are as clear and unequivocal as any draftsman could reasonably make them and they cannot, as a matter of ordinary English, relate to the intention of anyone other than the holder.
The material under discussion is material which, by definition, is in the possession of a person who ‘holds it’ subject to certain obligations; and the exclusion relates to material which is so ‘held with the intention of furthering a criminal purpose’.
It is really impossible to see how something could be ‘held with ’ an intention which is not the intention of the holder.
In the case the issue arose in relation to an order made against a firm of solicitors under section 27 of the Drug Trafficking Offences Act 1986, which incorporates section 10 of the 1984 Act.
The order was for the production of material relating to the purchase by a client, Mrs G, of certain real property, the allegation being that she was a member of the family of another person who was suspected of being a drug trafficker and who was using her for the purpose of laundering the proceeds of such trafficking.
It was not suggested that either the solicitors, who were simply carrying out a straightforward conveyancing transaction, or Mrs G herself, had any criminal or quasi-criminal intent or were aware of the suspected intent of the alleged drug trafficker.
Thus the case was presented on the footing that the documents concerned had come into being and were held by the solicitors for their client as the result of a suspected intent by a third party to use them for the purpose of furthering his criminal activity.
The Divisional Court, and the majority of their lordships in the House of Lords, were struck with what might be thought to be the obvious purpose of the Act, which was clearly passed with a view to assisting the police in the detection and prevention of crime.
However, they were oppressed, perhaps not altogether surprisingly, by the thought that, if the Act meant no more than, in plain terms, it said, then it was taking a sledgehammer to crack a very small nut, since the ambit of the exclusion — and thus the utility of the special procedures — would be very considerably narrowed.
Material, otherwise privileged, would be excluded from protection only in what, it is to be hoped, is the very rare case of the crooked solicitor who holds the material intending to use it for the furtherance of a personal criminal purpose.
Parliament, it was said, could not have intended, despite the clearly expressed intention to the contrary, to have given the exclusion so limited an operation, for that would have been of very little assistance to the police.
Thus ‘held with the intention’ came to be construed in a sense which the language of Parliament  cannot possibly bear as a matter of ordinary sense and grammar, as embracing not only material held by the crooked solicitor but material held without any intention on the part of the holder but infected, either at the time of its creation or, seemingly, at any subsequent time, by an intention on the part of any person, whether the client entitled to it or anyone else, to use it for furthering some criminal purpose.
Thus from a very narrow and restricted expression there has been drawn a very wide and unrestricted principle, all based on the assumed purpose of Parliament and the perceived absurdity of seeking to effect it by the language in which Parliament actually chose to express it.
‘Held with the intention’ has come to mean brought into being with the intention, on the part of anyone, and subsequently held, by him or by anyone else'; and if that is what the draftsman intended or was instructed to express, the conclusion is irresistible that he did so with a degree of competence that would not have disgraced a chimpanzee learning the piano.
The decision was, I do not doubt, a thoroughly beneficial decision which has given a sensible ambit to powers which Parliament had conferred in a way which good sense would suggest had left them far too restricted.
My contemporary interest in the case is in the argument that Parliament could not sensibly have intended to frame its enactment in these terms simply for the purpose of dealing with the rare and improbable case of a crooked solicitor and, therefore, the  provision must have been intended to have some wider operation.
However, after the case was over I confess to having cheated and done what the voices of infallibility, myself among them, have said must not be done in construing legislation: I looked at Hansard.
It showed that subsection (2) of section 10 had been introduced as a government amendment and it was piloted through the committee stage by the then Minister of State for the Home Office, Mr Patrick Mayhew.
It is true that during the passage of the Bill, section 10 was explained as being intended to reflect the position at common law, in which there is respectable authority for the proposition that the client's legal privilege cannot attach to communications made with criminal intent.
Yet what is interesting is that, when a query was raised as to the meaning and effect of subsection (2), in the context of the liability of journalists to search and interrogation, the Minister of State described it in terms which are consistent only with its having been inserted to cover the case of a holder who himself was a party to the criminal purpose.
So the draftsman clearly did exactly what he was instructed to do and removed the privilege from a holder who had a personal criminal intent.
I cannot help feeling that there must be a lesson here.
It may go wider than this, but at the very least it shows that we must be cautious about blaming the draftsman.
As to the other case that I want to say a word about, I have to confess now to beating a drum that I have been beating with varying success for a number of years.
How far can it be right for the judiciary, whom no one has elected, to assume the mantle of the legislature by inventing and applying to legislation, under the guise of construction, concepts of public policy which Parliament itself has deliberately refrained from expressing?
Paragraph 6 of the 7th Schedule of the Finance Act 1965 provided a perfectly clear, intelligible and unambiguous code regulating what was to happen when companies chose to amalgamate by way of an exchange of the existing shares of one company in consideration of the issue of new shares in the acquiring company.
The effect of the provisions is that the newly issued shares are deemed, as it were, to be a replacement of the shares transferred so that no capital gains tax becomes payable on the transfer by the transferor at that stage.
They have in effect the same base (or acquisition) value as the shares transferred and if and when they are subsequently disposed of, if they ever are, the taxable gain will be based on that original acquisition value.
So far as the acquiring company is concerned, the shares transferred to it are acquired at their actual value at the time of transfer, so that that forms the base value if and when they come to be disposed of.
If they are disposed of immediately after their acquisition, there will, of course, be no gain and thus no tax.
Well, of course, it did not take very long for people to realize that if someone wanted to sell his company and retire to the country with the proceeds, these provisions could be used to postpone payment of capital gains tax almost indefinitely so long as he was prepared to continue to hold the shares issued to him and to treat them as an investment.
But that is what Parliament provided and told the citizen that he could do.
He holds shares in Company A which he wants to sell.
So he forms a little investment company, B, and exchanges his shares in A for shares in B. No capital gains tax at that stage.
B then sells the shares in A to a purchaser at a price equal to the value of the shares in A when it acquired them.
No gain made by B; so no capital gains tax.
Capital gains tax will not become payable until the original shareholder sells his shares in B; and if B is formed in a tax haven in which there are no restrictions on loans to directors, he can in fact enjoy the proceeds of the original shares in Company A free of tax until he dies or takes up permanent residence outside the jurisdiction.
There is nothing false or sham about those transactions.
There is a genuine exchange, a genuine sale and a genuine investment company, the whole transaction being carried out in a way which the Act, in express terms, provides for.
But as the reader will be aware, during the past decade or so, the courts, building on a series of decisions which quite properly and logically held ineffective a number of ingenious and entirely artificial schemes devised for the manufacture and allowance of losses or expenses which were never in fact incurred, have sought to create and apply to transactions conferring tax advantages for which the legislature has made provision a doctrine of ‘legitimate business purpose’, the general effect of which is that even though the citizen follows to the letter that which Parliament has told him that he can do in order to attract the fiscal consequences which Parliament has statutorily decreed will follow if he does it, nevertheless, whatever Parliament may have said shall be the consequences, the courts will and must decline to give effect, not to what he has done, but to the fiscal consequences which Parliament has provided, unless he demonstrates that there was a ‘legitimate business purpose’ for his action.
To reduce the burden of taxation by legal means is not, it is said, a legitimate business purpose.
Where did this principle come from?
Certainly not from Parliament, for Parliament has shown itself perfectly capable, where it wishes to do so, of enacting specific anti-avoidance provisions to deal with specific cases; and indeed it did subsequently legislate to nullify the fiscal advantages of transactions of the type to which I have referred.
The principle seems to have been imported from the United States, where the doctrine was enunciated by the Supreme Court in 1935 in Gregory v. Helvering .
And it was, of course, welcomed by the Inland Revenue with the same unrestrained enthusiasm as that with which the importation of ‘Dallas’ was received by the television-viewing public.
But it is, to my mind, a much more dangerous and insidious type of fiction than Dallas for it poses as an exercise in statutory construction, when in fact it is nothing of the sort.
The construction of the statute is not in doubt.
The court construes it according to its terms and finds that, so construed, it enables tax to be saved or minimized.
It then assumes a parliamentary intention that the steps which Parliament has enjoined or authorized for saving or minimizing tax shall not be effective if they are carried out for that purpose but are only to be effective if carried out for some other ‘legitimate’ business purpose.
This is not construction.
It is legislation in an area in which Parliament itself has not thought it right to legislate and thus, in my view, it steps outside the judicial function.
It is ironical, perhaps, that one of the principal exponents of the legitimate business purpose doctrine was the late Lord Diplock.
I say ‘ironical’ because it was Lord Diplock who, in his address to the Holdsworth Society in 1965, observed:
‘You may suspect that judges share the common human failing of wanting to tell other people what they ought to do to lay down the law.
But in the fiscal field at least my conscience is clear.
Except in its application to me personally, about which there is unfortunately no room for dispute, I am not interested in reforming tax law.
It no more lies within the field of morals than does a cross-word puzzle.
I would rather do a cross-word puzzle than try a revenue appeal.’
Now one can argue indefinitely about the morals and the merits of the decisions of the House of Lords in Furniss v. Dawson and Craven v. White , in the latter of which, as you will be aware, there was a sharp division of opinion.
I am encouraged to see that in the more recent case of Ensign Tankers v. Stokes the House of Lords has now rejected the notion that the mere fact that a transaction is undertaken for the purpose of obtaining a fiscal advantage   compels the court to ignore and nullify all the fiscal consequences which are beneficial to the taxpayer.
I do not, I must emphasize, quarrel in the slightest with the salutary principle of Ramsay v. IRC that the court can and will ignore sham transactions or the creation of magical and non-existent losses or expenditure by a series of carefully contrived steps in a process of fiscal legerdemain.
In assessing the genuineness or otherwise of a transaction, it is, of course, perfectly proper and logical to ask what the real purpose was.
However, what does seem to me to be both dangerous and impermissible is the judicial superimposition, under the guise of statutory construction, of a principle, supposedly based on some parliamentary intention nowhere expressed, that genuine transactions carried out in conformity with unequivocal statutory provisions are to be annulled or rendered ineffective because undertaken with either the sole or the predominant motive of obtaining the fiscal benefits which those provisions confer.
I urge, therefore, a cautious approach to the ascertainment of the intention of the legislature.
Of course, that is what we have to look for, and, of course , there are inevitably going to be occasions when we are compelled to look for it outside the four corners of the language that the draftsman has used.
Yet let us always beware of jumping to conclusions, of assuming too readily that those experienced parliamentary draftsmen did not know their business and, perhaps above all, of attributing legislative intention too readily simply because we think that we, the judges, had we been the legislators, would have found such an intention sensible or morally or politically desirable.
I think that there is much to be said for statutes to be preceded by some statement of what Parliament is seeking to achieve in rather longer form than is normally provided by the long title, in the form of perhaps a return to the days of the preamble containing recitals — a form adopted in European Community legislation.
I sometimes believe that there is also a powerful case for referring on occasions to Hansard as an aid to construction, at any rate in case of a clear ministerial statement of intent.
In a sense it would be an extension of the continental European, and indeed our own, well-established practice of consulting the ‘travaux préparatoires’ as an aid to interpretation.
Indeed, even a non-forensic reference in Hansard may provide some illustrative insights.
In a recent case in which the courts were called upon to construe the ambiguous expression ‘land includes land covered by water’ in the Rights of Way Act 1932, the House of Lords, upholding the trial judge and reversing the Court of Appeal, held that the Act did not cover the creation of rights of navigation.
I have since learned of the curious way in which that provision came to be inserted.
As originally framed in 1911, the Bill clearly referred to   rights of navigation since it referred to any ‘way over land or water’ and to persons ‘in possession of such land or water’.
The Bill was referred to a Committee under the chairmanship of Lord Alverstone, which deleted the words ‘or water’ but added the equivocal expression which caused all the trouble.
It seems that by mistake the Committee clerk failed to delete the words ‘or water’ from the expression ‘in possession of such land or water’in the print of the draft Bill.
That this was an error was explained to the House by Lord Eversley, who then stated that ‘the case was provided for by words which appear at the end of the clause’.
It is one of life's little ironies that the alteration from what was perfectly clear to what was perfectly ambiguous was effected by a Committee to whom the Bill was referred ‘because it required the attention of expert legal draftsmen’!
Looking at European Community Texts
This article examines some of the issues arising in connection with the drafting and interpretation of European Community legal texts in the widest sense.
There is a hierarchy among these different texts.
In the highest rank come the founding treaties, which are concluded by the Member States.
The principal ones are the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) Treaty signed in 1951, the European Economic Community (EEC ) Treaty signed in 1957 and the European Atomic Energy Community (Euratom) Treaty, also signed in 1957.
These treaties have not remained immutable but have been amended and supplemented by other treaties over the course of time.
Thus, for example, they were supplemented by the Convention on Certain Institutions Common to the European Communities (of 1957) which had the effect, among other things, of setting up a single Court of Justice common to the three Communities rather than leaving three courts to subsist separately under each treaty.
To give another, quite well-known example, those treaties were again amended in 1972 by the Treaty and the Act concerning the Accession of the United Kingdom, Denmark and Ireland to the European Communities.
More recently, they have been amended and supplemented by the Single European Act, signed in 1986, and still more recently, though subject to ratification, by the Treaty on European Union, signed at Maastricht in February 1992.
To return to the ECSC Treaty, it was concluded for a period of 50 years only and is therefore due to expire in less than ten years from now.
If it is not renewed, which may well be the case, the products which it now covers will then fall under the general rules of the EEC Treaty.
The picture that emerges of the founding treaties is thus one, not of immutable texts, but of texts subject to periodical evolution.
It is clear that the founding treaties, and in particular the EEC Treaty which   has by far the broadest scope of the three, have established the Communities and the institutions which enable them to operate; but more than this, they have been held by the European Court to have set up a new legal system separate from those of the Member States.
Thus, in its judgment in Case 6/64 Costa v. ENEL , the Court held that, by contrast with ordinary international treaties, the EEC Treaty had created its own legal system which, on the entry into force of the Treaty, became an integral part of the legal systems of the Member States.
In certain recent cases the Court has, moreover, referred to the EEC Treaty as ‘the basic constitutional charter’ of the European Economic Community.
This confirms the analogy which has often been drawn between the founding treaties of the European Communities and a written constitution in a sovereign state.
In the hierarchy of Community legal texts to which I have alluded, the founding treaties may thus be placed at the highest level, in a position comparable to that of a written national constitution.
At a lower rank come the Acts adopted, not by the Member States, but by the institutions established by the founding treaties, that is, the Council and the Commission in collaboration, as appropriate, with the European Parliament and the Economic and Social Committee.
These Acts comprise primarily the regulations, directives, and decisions adopted by those institutions.
This is ‘Community legislation’ in the sense in which that expression was taken at the Statute Law Society's Annual Conference at Cambridge in 1988, and the phrase will be used in the same sense in this article.
The title is intended to indicate a wider scope than ‘Community legislation’ in this narrow sense, extending to all categories of Community legal texts.
Apart from the founding treaties and Community legislation, they may include in particular the multi-lateral conventions concluded between Member States under the auspices of the Community, pursuant to Article 220 of the EEC Treaty, such as the Brussels Convention on Jurisdiction and the Enforcement of Judgments in Civil and Commercial Matters of 1968.
Being lower in rank than the founding treaties, the provisions of Community legislation must be interpreted so as to conform with the provisions of the treaties, and they may be annulled if they are incompatible with them.
The Court of Justice has held that when it is necessary to interpret a provision of secondary Community law, preference should as far as possible be given to the interpretation which renders the provision consistent with the Treaty.
Regulations, directives, and decisions have in common that they are binding legislative Acts.
According to Article 189 of the EEC Treaty:
‘A regulation shall have general application.
It shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States.
A directive shall be binding, as to the result to be achieved, upon each   Member State to which it is addressed, but shall leave to the national authorities the choice of form and methods.
A decision shall be binding in its entirety upon those to whom it is addressed.’
On the other hand, Article 189 mentions two other types of measure which are not binding, that is, recommendations and opinions, as to which it provides:
‘Recommendations and opinions shall have no binding force.’
These are the only types of legislative measure explicitly referred to by Article 189, which begins with the words: ‘In order to carry out their task the Council and the Commission shall, in accordance with the provisions of this Treaty, make regulations, issue directives, take decisions, make recommendations or deliver opinions.’
However, although that enumeration may appear exhaustive, the ingenuity of the legislative institutions is such that they have adopted a number of other Acts outside those categories such as, for example , action programmes, codes of conduct, resolutions.
The largest category of legislative Acts is by far that of regulations, of which some 6,471 were in force at 1 January 1992.
By comparison, some 3,936 decisions and some 1,432 directives were in force at the same date.
These figures serve to indicate a relative order of magnitude.
It is important to note in particular that although much is said and written about directives (as indeed will be the case later in this article), they are much less numerous than regulations, which appear in effect as the most frequently used Community legislative instrument.
Certain requirements are laid down for these various legislative measures, some in the Treaty itself and others in instruments of lower rank.
One of the most important is contained in Article 190 of the Treaty, which provides:
‘Regulations, directives and decisions of the Council and of the Commission shall state the reasons on which they are based and shall refer to any proposals or opinions which were required to be obtained pursuant to this Treaty.’
There is in this respect a total difference between Community legislation and British primary legislation, in respect of which there is no obligation to state reasons and at the present time no practice of doing so.
The obligation to state reasons, being contained in the Treaty, is a basic requirement, and failure to comply with it may invalidate the instrument concerned.
Indeed, where it has found that the statement of reasons fails to fulfil the requirements of Article 190, the Court has in a number of cases annulled the measure in question.
A recent example is Case C-358/90 Compagnia Italiana Alcool v. Commission , in which the Court annulled a Commission decision of 18 October 1990 rejecting a bid for the purchase of a large quantity of alcohol made from wine out of Community intervention stocks, on the grounds that   the statement of reasons for the decision was insufficient.
The statement of reasons merely referred to the current situation of the world market in fuel and declared that regard had been had to the bids received.
The Court held that these were mere statements of fact and as such were not relevant.
It added, perhaps with some irony, that there was always a situation of the world market in fuel and that it was natural for the Commission to receive bids in response to its invitations to tender.
Although the Commission had a wide discretion, it was held in this case that the reasons stated fell short of the minimum required by Article 190.
Failure to state reasons, or adequate reasons, is frequently invoked as a ground of annulment before the European Court; and as a result there is a substantial amount of case law on the subject.
It emerges from this case law that Article 190 requires that regulations, directives, and decisions should contain a statement of the reasons which led the institution to adopt them, so as to make possible a review by the Court of Justice and so that the Member States and the nationals concerned may have knowledge of the conditions under which the Community institutions have applied the Treaty.
The extent of the obligation to state the reasons on which a legislative measure is based is not defined once and for all but must be determined on the basis of the particular facts of each case.
According to the settled case law of the Court of Justice, the statement of reasons required by Article 190 must be appropriate to the nature of the measure in question.
It must show clearly and unequivocally the reasoning of the Community authority which adopted the measure so as to inform the persons concerned of the justification for the measure adopted and enable the Court of Justice to exercise its powers of review.
However, the statement of reasons is not required to specify the often very numerous and complex matters of fact or law dealt with in legislative measures, provided that those measures fall within the general scheme of the body of measures of which they form part.
Consequently the degree of detail required in different measures may vary substantially.
In current practice, individual competition decisions thus contain very long and detailed preambles setting out the reasons for the operative part which is, by comparison, quite short.
Likewise, regulations imposing anti-dumping duties (which are in certain respects akin to decisions in the field of competition) also tend to comprise long and relatively detailed statements of reasons in their preambles.
On the other hand, measures of more general application may often have shorter, more succinct statements of reasons.
This is particularly true of regulations in heavily regulated fields such as agriculture, where they may be part of a long string of related measures or be limited to implementing a regulation of broader scope.
In such cases the Court of Justice has held that the requirements of Article 190 are satisfied if the statement of   reasons given explains in essence the measures taken by the institutions and that a specific statement of reasons in support of all the details which might be contained in such a measure cannot be required, provided such details fall within the general scheme of the measures as a whole.
The extent of the duty to state reasons thus varies according to the nature and context of the measure in question, and it may be said that it is not required to go into matters of detail to a disproportionate extent.
The statement of reasons of a Community legislative measure is contained in a series of paragraphs at the beginning of the measure.
These paragraphs each begin with the word ‘whereas’, and are called ‘recitals’.
To take an example from the Sixth VAT Directive, one may quote the ninth recital, which is in the following terms:
‘Whereas the taxable base must be harmonized so that the application of the Community rate to taxable transactions leads to comparable results in all the Member States.’
This recital explains the purpose served in particular by Article 11 of the Directive, defining the taxable amount.
Article 11 is a long, detailed and complex provision.
The recital quoted sets out the reason for adopting such a provision; and when it comes to interpreting one or other of those detailed provisions, the recital is helpful in setting out the overall purpose to which they relate.
It is by now quite well known (certainly it will have come to the attention of those who attended the Statute Law Society's Annual Conference at Cambridge in 1988) that the European Court's method of interpreting Community legal texts is primarily teleological, that is to say the interpretation of a provision on the basis of its object and purpose.
That method is frequently used in conjunction with the schematic method of interpretation and, to a somewhat lesser extent, the literal method.
The three methods are complementary, and often fall to be applied together.
Hence, the usual practice of the European Court is to interpret the text in question in the light of its spirit, general scheme, and wording as well as the overall legal context, in particular the system and objectives of the founding treaties and the instrument containing the provision.
I shall not develop this subject any further here= It is covered in detail in Timothy Millett's excellent article.
What I should like to underline in the present context is the connection between the recitals in the texts and the teleological method of interpretation.
for it is clear that the recitals, containing as they do a statement of the reasons for the measure adopted, facilitate an interpretation of the operative Articles of a measure in accordance with its purpose.
The use of the teleological interpretation by the European Court is facilitated by the statements of purpose contained in the recitals of the text in question.
The purpose of a legal text does not have to be surmised or deduced from the bare terms of its operative   parts: the recitals, if properly drawn, state it clearly in express terms.
The European Court frequently refers in its judgments to the preambles of legal texts for this purpose.
Given such preambles, it seems natural to adopt a teleological approach to interpretation.
In this respect it can be said that the methods of interpretation developed by the European Court match the particular characteristics of Community legal texts.
Hence it is appropriate that the recitals should be used as an aid to interpretation not only by the European Court itself, but by any court dealing with the interpretation of a Community legal text, for example a British court or tribunal of any level.
The Community practice of stating reasons in the recitals has many advantages.
I would only demur as to one matter of detail in present practice, namely the use of the word ‘whereas’ to introduce each recital.
It is taken as an equivalent of ‘considérant que’ in the French text.
To my mind, it would be a stylistic improvement if Community legal texts were now to abandon the use of the word ‘whereas’ for the purpose of introducing their recitals.
Preambles to Community legal texts do not only contain recitals, the paragraphs beginning ‘whereas’.
They also comprise a small number of shorter paragraphs or clauses beginning with the words ‘having regard to’.
These clauses are called ‘citations’, and they precede the recitals.
They cite the provisions under which the measure concerned has been adopted, as well as any proposals, opinions, or consultations which led up to their adoption.
Thus, for example, the preamble to the Sixth VAT Directive contains the following citations preceding its recitals:
‘Having regard to the Treaty establishing the European Economic Community, and in particular Articles 99 and 100 thereof, Having regard to the proposal from the Commission, Having regard to the opinion of the European Parliament, Having regard to the opinion of the Economic and Social Committee.’
Proposals and opinions such as those mentioned here are usually published in the Official Journal of the European Communities (C Series), and in that case the citations will be accompanied by the reference to the relevant publication in the Official Journal.
In that respect, the citations serve to indicate, at least in part, the ‘travaux préparatoires’ of the measure adopted.
This is convenient, and on occasion the European Court does refer to such preparatory works.
However, it is by no means a universal practice, even when such preparatory works exist.
The citations also refer to the provisions on which the measure is based.
Thus, in the example just given, it can be seen that the Sixth VAT Directive is based on Articles 99 and 100 of the EEC Treaty concerning, respectively, harmonization of tax legislation and the approximation of laws affecting the functioning of the common market.
This statement of the legal base has always been important to the European Court, because it helps situate a measure in  its legislative context and is thus a valuable aid to the schematic method of interpretation.
However, it has assumed great importance in the case law of the European Court in recent years for an additional reason, namely a struggle for power between the different European institutions both inter se and in relation to the Member States.
The empowering provisions in the founding treaties generally lay down the method of adoption of the measures which they authorize, specifying in particular the institution which may propose the measure, the institution which may adopt it, the institutions which must be consulted and whether the voting shall be unanimous or by majority.
Thus, for example, Article 99 of the EEC Treaty provides that provisions for the harmonization of tax legislation, such as the Sixth VAT Directive, are to be adopted by the Council, acting unanimously on a proposal from the Commission and after consulting the European Parliament.
Such a requirement of unanimous voting gives the individual Member States, represented in the Council, more power than a requirement of majority voting, which opens the possibility of the views of one or more Member States being overridden by a majority of the others.
The tendency in the Council is therefore always to lean towards a choice of legal base requiring unanimous voting.
On the other hand, Article 99 expressly requires consultation of the European Parliament, which allows that institution to exert some influence on measures in this field, whereas in other fields its consultation is not provided for.
Considerations such as these came into prominence after the conclusion of the Single European Act in 1986, with its extension of majority voting and increase of powers for the European Parliament.
Many cases have subsequently been brought claiming the annulment of Community measures on the grounds that they were founded on the wrong legal base, the underlying purpose of such actions being to defend or strengthen the powers of the applicant Member State or institution.
In this connection, therefore, the citations facilitate judicial review of what English lawyers would call the vires of the measure concerned and the procedure by which it was adopted.
How does this compare with the practice in British domestic legislation?
In fact it may not be so different as may at first be thought.
Secondary legislation in the United Kingdom is routinely published with an introductory paragraph indicating the statutory provisions on the basis of which the instrument is adopted and accompanied by an explanatory note setting out the purport of the instrument in plain language.
Taking the two together, the effect is not far from that of the citations and recitals in the preamble of a Community text.
As an example, one may cite The Offshore Installations (Safety Zones)(No. 18) Order 1987, which begins with the paragraph:
‘The Secretary of State, in exercise of the powers conferred on him by section 21(1),(2) and (3) of the Oil and Gas (Enterprise) Act 1982, and of   all other powers enabling him in that behalf, hereby makes the following Order:’
At the end of the text of the Order is appended the following explanatory note:
‘This Order establishes, under section 21 of the Oil and Gas (Enterprise) Act 1982, a safety zone, having a radius of 500 metres from a specified point, around the installation specified in the Schedule to this Order and maintained in waters to which the section applies…
Vessels (which for this purpose include hovercraft, submersible apparatus and installations in transit) are prohibited from entering or remaining in the safety zone except with the consent of the Secretary of State or in the circumstances mentioned in Article 2(2) of the Order.’
It is specified that the explanatory note is not part of the Order.
It is not built into the Order, and it is not drafted in quite the same way as a recital; in the example given, somewhat more in the nature of a summary and somewhat less in the nature of a statement of purpose.
Nevertheless, to some extent it can be said that it fulfils some of the functions of the preambles in Community texts to which I have just referred.
British primary legislation, on the other hand, seldom contains anything more than a long title by way of a preamble, and does not refer to any preparatory works.
The result is that British primary legislation, as drafted at present, is presented in, as it were , a ‘naked’ state when it is compared with Community legal texts.
The comparison prompts the question whether some sort of preamble would not be a helpful adjunct to British primary legislation from the point of view of those called upon to interpret and apply it, all the more so in view of the rule (recently modified) against referring to Hansard as an aid to interpretation in English courts.
Thus, for instance, Jeremy Lever QC in a recent article referred to ‘the lack of recitals to United Kingdom legislation and the rule that reports of parliamentary debates are inadmissible as aids to construction, in consequence of which there may be no way in which the objects of United Kingdom legislation can be readily ascertained by our courts.’
Whether that will change in whole or in part remains to be seen.
Such a step might not involve a great deal of additional work in the legislative process, since Bills are already accompanied on presentation to Parliament by an Explanatory and Financial Memorandum, which is frequently well drafted and helpful.
This document is not reproduced when the Bill finally becomes an Act of Parliament and is not admissible in court as an aid to the interpretation of the Act.
However, it might be useful to admit the document as an aid to interpretation and publish it (with appropriate amendments) along with the Act or even to re-work it more fundamentally and present it as a formal preamble.
Returning to Community legislation, the founding treaties lay down certain basic rules on the publication and commencement of such texts.
Article 191 of the EEC Treaty provides:
‘Regulations shall be published in the Official Journal of the Community.
They shall enter into force on the date specified in them or, in the absence thereof, on the twentieth day following their publication.
Directives and decisions shall be notified to those to whom they are addressed and shall take effect upon such notification.’
This explains why regulations are published in the Official Journal under the heading ‘I — Acts whose publication is obligatory’ while directives and decisions (if they are published) are published afterwards under the heading ‘II — Acts whose publication is not obligatory’.
The Council's Rules of procedure provide that the last Article of a regulation shall specify the commencement date if the date is other than the twentieth day following publication.
It follows that one always knows the commencement date of a Community regulation without going outside the text of the regulation itself.
It is a sound practice, having the advantage of being simple and clear.
It appears that British secondary legislation follows a similar practice, whereby the date of coming into force of a statutory instrument is stated at the beginning, just after the title.
Unfortunately, the same cannot be said of British primary legislation, where ascertaining the date of commencement can be a substantial problem.
Under the Acts of Parliament (Commencement) Act 1793, an Act comes into force on the day on which it receives the Royal Assent unless otherwise provided, with effect from the last moment of the previous day.
However, it has now become exceptional for that simple rule to apply, and it is necessary to seek out a separate commencement order for the Act or, as often happens, for various parts of the Act.
This practice is inconvenient, and comparison with Community regulations (or, for that matter, with British secondary legislation) prompts the question whether it might not be possible to reduce the use of separate commencement orders for Acts of Parliament.
Anyone looking at Community legal texts cannot help being struck by the large quantity of them and, although the European Communities are still a relatively youthful organization, a lot of those texts have already been amended many times over.
One well-known example would be the basic social security regulation, Regulation 1408/71 which, although still in force, has been amended over and over again.
Many other examples can be found in the field of agriculture, since it is heavily regulated, technical and subject to frequent change.
This is particularly true of monetary compensatory amounts, which typify the kind of legislation adopted at the end of marathon meetings of agriculture ministers and subsequently amended   again and again to respond to political adjustments or monetary fluctuations.
The recent judgment of the European Court in Case C-334/90 Belgian State v. Societé Marichal-Margréve ’ offers the interesting and unusual sight of the Court explicitly working its way through a thicket of successive amendments to the legislation on monetary compensatory amounts in order to prepare the ground for its ruling in the case.
It illustrates, in an acute form perhaps, the frequently encountered problem of establishing the version of a text which is in force at a given time when that text has been much amended, whether it be the latest version or the version in force at a particular date in the past.
For a judge at the European Court, the answer to this problem is generally provided by the use of computers.
Specialist staff within the Court will call upon CELEX, the database containing all Community legislation, to ascertain with certainty and up to date the state of any particular provision of Community law which comes into question.
CELEX is open to the public and is available to subscribers by network, although that is said to be rather difficult to use.
However, in present circumstances it would be unrealistic to expect ordinary citizens and all but the largest courts or law firms to be able to exploit the possibility.
for the great majority of those concerned, the answer must still be sought in paper publications.
This is the raison d'être of the Communities' official publication Directory of Community Legislation in Force , which is re-edited annually and lists all Community legislation in force at the date of publication along with indications of all amendments to it.
The private sector has also responded to the need with, for example, Butterworth's European Community Legislation: Current Status , which lists all Community legislation since 1952 (except for legislation dealing with the daily running of the Communities) and indicates whether it is currently in force, amended, repealed, or spent.
Such publications, useful and valuable though they are, are but indexes and do not comprise the text of the provisions in question.
In that connection, an effective method of making available the up-to-date version of a frequently amended text is to consolidate it.
That is a technique which has been practised in this country for many years, and there is now increasing pressure for it, and increasing use of it, in relation to Community legal texts.
In the Community context it is often referred to as ‘codification’, although in practice it most often corresponds to what is called ‘consolidation’ in the British context.
A forerunner of this tendency was the basic social security regulation, Regulation 1408/71, which after many amendments was re-enacted in a consolidated version in 1983.
More recently the vast programme of legislation for the completion of the single market has given a new urgency to the matter.
Hence the European Parliament's Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens' Rights proposed a comprehensive report on codification in May 1989, and in 1991 its chairman Graf von Stauffenberg again stressed ‘the pressing need for proper   codification and simplification, and hence greater transparency, of Community law’.
The Commission, in its Eighth Annual Report to the European Parliament on the Application of Community Law, announced the launching in 1990 of a programme of codification by the European Community publications Office in order to increase and facilitate the dissemination and transparency of Community law for all Community citizens.
In November 1991 the Council repealed Regulation 3796/81 on the common organization of the market in fish products and replaced it with a new, consolidated regulation, Regulation 3687/91.
By January 1992 the Commission, in the context of the single market programme, had adopted a codified directive on cosmetics and had proposed codifications on tractors, fertilizers, the marketing of dangerous substances, medical qualifications, public supply contracts, fruit juice, and machine safety.
More such codified texts are to follow.
Although they are mainly what would be called consolidating enactments in British practice, one which may perhaps be considered a genuine code is the regulation bringing together all the various Community rules on customs matters, in effect a Community Customs Code, on which the Council adopted a common position on 14 May 1992.
This practice plainly makes Community legislation clearer and more accessible, and it is to be hoped that it will be maintained and developed in the coming years.
Having alluded to some of the characteristics of Community legal texts, I turn now to the question of their application in the Member States, and in particular in the United Kingdom.
for Community law does not exist only in some faraway place but forms part of our national legal system.
Community regulations and certain provisions of the founding treaties (such as Article 30 of the EEC Treaty on free movement of goods and Article 85 of the same treaty on competition) have direct effect, which means that they may be relied on directly by any citizen without the need for any intervening national measures to ‘receive’ them and indeed without any possibility for national measures to exclude or modify them.
Thus, for example, the Court held in a 1970 decision that, since Community regulations are directly applicable in all the Member States, the Member States cannot, in order to ensure their application, in the absence of a provision to the contrary, take measures the purpose of which is to alter the scope of or add to their provisions.
The direct effect of such provisions is provided for within the United Kingdom by section 2(1) of the European Communities Act 1972, in the following terms:
‘All such rights, powers, liabilities, obligations and restrictions from time to time created or arising by or under the Treaties, and all such remedies and procedures from time to time provided for by or under the Treaties, as in accordance with the Treaties are without further enactment to be given legal effect or used in the United Kingdom shall be recognised and available in law, and be enforced, allowed and followed accordingly.’
When Community rules are thus applied by the national courts, they fall to be interpreted, not according to domestic canons of construction, but according to Community methods of interpretation.
This requirement is expressly laid down in the United Kingdom by section 3(1) of the European Communities Act 1972, in the following terms:
‘For the purposes of all legal proceedings any question as to the meaning or effect of any of the Treaties, or as to the validity, meaning or effect of any Community instrument, shall be treated as a question of law (and, if not referred to the European Court, be for determination as such in accordance with the principles laid down by and any relevant decision of the European Court).’
It follows that the British courts are under a statutory obligation to apply to Community legal texts the Community methods of interpretation as developed by the European Court; they would be under Community law even without the statutory provision.
As was briefly pointed out above, these methods are very different from domestic ones, being primarily schematic and teleological rather than literal and historical.
A good example of the contrast is provided by the case of R .
v. Henn and Darby , where the Court of Appeal held that the term ‘quantitative restrictions’ in Article 30 of the EEC Treaty did not cover a total prohibition on imports on the grounds that such a restriction was not related to a quantitative measure, whereas the case law of the European Court had clearly established that the term in question covered both outright bans and quotas on imports.
Reversing the Court of Appeal's decision, the House of Lords (per Lord Diplock) drew the following lesson:
‘In the Court of Appeal considerable doubt was expressed by that court as to whether an absolute prohibition on the import of a particular description of goods could amount to a quantitative restriction or a measure having equivalent effect, so as to fall within the ambit of Article 30 at all.
That such doubt should be expressed shows the danger of an English court applying English canons of statutory construction to the interpretation of the Treaty or, for that matter, of regulations or directives.
What is meant by quantitative restrictions and measures having equivalent effect in Article 30 of the Treaty has been the subject of a whole series of decisions of the European Court to which the attention of the Court of Appeal ought to have been drawn.
Section 3(1) of the European Communities Act 1972 expressly provides that the meaning or effect of any of the Treaties ‘shall be treated as a question of law (and, if not referred to the European Court, be for determination as such in accordance with the   principles laid down by and any relevant decision of the European Court)’.’
In considering Community legal texts, national courts must be aware of the characteristic features of Community law and the particular difficulties to which its interpretation gives rise.
These were enumerated by the European Court in its judgment in the CILFIT case in the following terms:
‘To begin with, it must be borne in mind that Community legislation is drafted in several languages and that the different language versions are all equally authentic.
An interpretation of a provision of Community law thus involves a comparison of the different language versions.
It must also be borne in mind, even where the language versions are entirely in accord with one another, that Community law uses terminology which is peculiar to it.
Furthermore, it must be emphasized that legal concepts do not necessarily have the same meaning in Community law and in the law of the various Member States.
Finally, every provision of Community law must be placed in its context and interpreted in the light of the provisions of Community law as a whole, regard being had to the objectives thereof and to its state of evolution at the date on which the provision in question is to be applied.’
If the national court dealing with a question of Community law finds it particularly difficult, it always has the possibility of referring the matter to the European Court for a preliminary ruling to elucidate the matter.
In such circumstances national courts of all levels remain entirely at liberty to bring a matter before the European Court if they consider it appropriate to do so.
There remains the question of how to approach national legislation in the light of relevant Community directives.
Unlike regulations and directly effective treaty provisions, directives do contemplate intervening national measures for their implementation.
As was seen above, Article 189 of the EEC Treaty provides that a directive ‘shall be binding, as to the result to be achieved, upon each Member State to which it is addressed, but shall leave to the national authorities the choice of form and methods’.
Thus in principle a directive is addressed to the Member State and not to the citizen; it sets out an object which the Member State is to achieve and leaves it to the Member State to adopt the measures which it considers apt to accomplish that object.
Directives always set a time limit for the adoption of such implementing measures.
If implementation is carried out properly and in time, legal relations will be governed by the national implementing measures, and the directive remains in the background.
If, on the other hand, implementation is not carried out in time or is not carried out adequately, three consequences may follow.
first, and in all cases, the Member State concerned will be in breach   of its duty under the Treaty to implement the directive concerned and will accordingly be exposed to infringement proceedings under the Treaty.
Secondly, if the provision of the directive in question is sufficiently clear and unconditional, it may be relied upon directly by the citizen against the defaulting Member State.
This doctrine (the direct effect of directives) results from the case law of the European Court and is based on the idea that a Member State cannot be allowed to rely, as against the citizen, on its own failure to fulfil its Treaty obligation to implement directives.
Thirdly, a recent decision of the European Court has established the principle that a Member State may be liable in damages to persons harmed as a result of its failure to implement a Community directive.
The exact conditions and extent of this liability are not yet fully established, but it now has to be borne in mind as a possible consequence of the non-implementation of a directive.
It is thus apparent that serious consequences may follow if a national court finds that national legislation, on its true interpretation, does not have the effect of implementing relevant provisions of a Community directive.
Those consequences can be avoided (and Community law respected) in so far as national courts interpret national legislation so as to comply with the terms of the directive in question.
The House of Lords has given useful guidance in this respect.
In Garland v British Rail Engineering Ltd their Lordships had to consider a provision of the Sex Discrimination Act 1975 which could be interpreted either in accordance with or contrary to Article 119 of the EEC Treaty.
They made the following remarks (per Lord Diplock), which I take to apply to all implementing measures, whether they serve to implement provisions of the Treaty or the provisions of directives:
‘It is a principle of construction of United Kingdom statutes, now too well established to call for citation of authority, that the words of a statute passed after the Treaty has been signed and dealing with the subject matter of the international obligation of the United Kingdom, are to be construed, if they are reasonably capable of bearing such a meaning, as intended to carry out the obligation, and not to be inconsistent with it.
A fortiori is this the case where the Treaty obligation arises under one of the Community treaties to which section 2 of the European Communities Act 1972 applies.
In the instant case the words of section 6(4) of the Sex Discrimination Act 1975 that fall to be construed, ‘provision in relation to…retirement’, without any undue straining of the ordinary meaning of the language   used, are capable of bearing either the narrow meaning accepted by the Employment Appeal Tribunal or the wider meaning preferred by the Court of Appeal but acknowledged by that court to be largely a matter of first impression.
Had the attention of the court been drawn to Article 119 of the EEC Treaty and the judgment of the European Court of Justice in Case 43/75 Defrenne v. Sabena (1976) ICR 547, I have no doubt that, consistently with statements made by Lord Denning in previous cases, they would have construed section 6(4) so as not to make it inconsistent with Article 119.’
The European Court defined a similar obligation in its judgment in the Von Colson case, where it held:
‘In applying the national law and in particular the provisions of a national law specifically introduced in order to implement Directive 76/207, national courts are required to interpret their national law in the light of the wording and the purpose of the directive in order to achieve the result referred to in the third paragraph of Article 189.
It is for the national court to interpret and apply the legislation adopted for the implementation of the directive in conformity with the requirements of Community law, in so far as it is given discretion to do so under national law.’
It is submitted that in order to comply with such an obligation, it is necessary for the national court to take account of the terms of the directive where implemented by specific national legislation at all times.
It would not be consistent with the obligation for a national court to be subject to a precondition such as a requirement that it may not look behind the text of a national implementing measure unless it is first found to be ambiguous.
for a court to tie its hands in this way might lead to a ‘wrecking’ interpretation of national provisions which might needlessly bring them into conflict with Community law rules.
The principles thus stated apply not only to national legislation which has been specifically adopted to implement a directive but also should only be applicable to any national legislation adopted after the directive.
A final question which falls to be considered is whether they also apply to national legislation adopted prior to the directive.
The point was long in doubt, and there may have been reasons for thinking that it might not be appropriate to extend the obligation to measures adopted before a directive existed.
That is my view.
However, the European Court's Sixth Chamber has now held that similar obligations apply also to legislation adopted prior to a directive.
In the Marleasing case, it held:
‘In applying national law, whether the provisions in question were adopted before or after the directive, the national court called upon to interpret it is required to do so, as far as possible, in the light of the wording and the purpose of the directive in order to achieve the result pursued by the latter and thereby comply with the third paragraph of Article 189 of the Treaty.’
Thus, surprising though it may seem in some respects, national courts are required to interpret in the light of Community directives even national legislation enacted before the directive was adopted.
How far this principle is to be carried remains to be worked out.
As Community law exerts an ever greater effect on the interpretation of British legislation, it is important to bear in mind the specific characteristics of Community legal texts and the particular rules governing their interpretation.
The object of the present discussion has been to point out some of those characteristics and examine some of the questions arising in relation to interpretation.
I would conclude by returning briefly to the Marleasing judgment.
The European Court's teleological approach can be seen once again in the passage cited from that judgment, referring as it does to the ‘purpose’ and the ‘result pursued by’the directive.
At paragraph 12 of the judgment the European Court refers, as it so often does, to the preamble to the directive in question in order to ascertain its purpose.
It is important for national courts to use all proper aids to the interpretation of Community legal texts (such as the preamble) even if they are not accustomed or allowed to do the same in relation to their own national texts.
The object sought is an ever more accurate understanding of Community legal texts and an interpretation which as far as possible ensures harmony between national and Community provisions.
Maastricht and English Law
I. Introduction
Any discussion of the legal consequences of the Maastricht Treaty has become complicated by its narrow rejection in the Danish referendum and its narrow acceptance in the French referendum.
This means that any examination of the details of its terms must be tempered by a consideration of whether or how they might be brought into operation.
There are, nevertheless, features of the Maastricht text which raise questions of general legal interest, irrespective of its fate.
These include the development of new areas of activity through inter-governmental co-operation outside the jurisdiction of the European Court, the concept that certain aspects of Community activity will not necessarily involve all the Member States, and the related problems of the extension of Community competence and recognition of the principle of ‘subsidiarity’.
On the other hand, despite the tone of much of the political debate in the United Kingdom, it should be said at the outset that questions such as the transfer of powers (or sovereignty) to the Community, the direct application and direct effect of Community law, and the correlative theory of the primacy of such provisions of Community law when they conflict with provisions of national law, were all established aspects of Community law when we joined in 1973, and are not new problems relating to Maastricht.
II.
The ‘Union’ and Inter-governmental Co-operation
The Maastricht Treaty has the stated aim of creating a ‘European Union, founded on the European Communities ‘supplemented by the policies and forms of cooperation established by this Treaty’.
The basic theory therefore   appears to be that the Communities are a part of the Union, but that there are aspects of the activity of the Union which fall outside the competence of the Communities; in other words, the widening of the scope of co-operation between the governments of the Member States is not necessarily accompanied by a correlative widening of the powers of the Community or by a deepening of its institutional structure.
However, before attempting to analyse the concept of the ‘Union’, it should be remembered that the Maastricht Treaty resulted from separate draft treaties respectively on political Union and on Economic and Monetary Union, and that different solutions were adopted with regard to the achievement of those ‘unions’.
The provisions relating to Economic and Monetary Union take the form of amendments to the EEC Treaty and therefore form an integral part of Community law (even if one might have doubts as to the likelihood of the factual events which would trigger the final stage); on the other hand, in the context of the provisions relating to political Union, a distinction was made between those matters which constituted amendments to the existing Community treaties, and those which fell outside the scope of the Communities, notably the provisions on a Common foreign and Security policy and those on co-operation in the fields of Justice and Home Affairs.
It should be said at the outset, however, that the terminological distinction is not always maintained: it is somewhat blurred in the context of citizenship of the Union, which is inserted into the Community Treaty in a new Article 8 and 8a to 8e.
These provisions include Article 8b(1), to the effect that ‘Every citizen of the Union residing in a Member State of which he is not a national shall have the right to vote and to stand as a candidate at municipal elections in the Member State in which he resides, under the same conditions as nationals of that State’, which has caused considerable debate in some Member States.
Following the example of the exclusion of the political Cooperation provisions of the Single European Act from the jurisdiction of the European Court, Article L of the Maastricht Treaty similarly defines the provisions of that treaty subject to the jurisdiction of the Court in such a way as to exclude those on Foreign and Security policy and those on Home Affairs and Justice (with one minor exception).
Whilst at first sight this takes these areas outside the scope of enforceable Community law, it may be wondered how total the exclusion is.
To take a simple example, joint action decided as a matter of foreign policy may be reflected in measures adopted by the Community: this is envisaged in the second paragraph of Article C of the Maastricht Treaty, which provides that ‘the Union shall in particular ensure the consistency of its external activities as a whole in the context of its external relations, security, economic and development policies’.
Thus, to take a matter of current importance, the policy of imposing sanctions on Serbia and Montenegro is implemented at Community  level by legislation adopted under Article 113 of the EEC Treaty as a matter of common commercial policy.
These regulations produce their normal effects under Community law and are subject to the normal judicial remedies of Community law, irrespective of their political genesis.
Furthermore, it should not be forgotten that, whatever may be said in the Maastricht Treaty, the European Court held in its Opinion 1/91 on the European Economic Area Agreement that, having regard to the Treaties then in force, the Community already had the objective of achieving European Union.
How this might be reconciled with the terms of the Maastricht text goes beyond the scope of this article, but it gives rise to the thought that it might even be legitimate for the Community (given the political will) to legislate in this area using the general power of Article 235 of the EEC Treaty, which allows the Council, in the absence of more specific powers, to enact legislation which is necessary to achieve the objectives of the Community.
This could, of course, occur even if the Member States failed to ratify the Maastricht Treaty.
It will be clear from what has been said above that the functions of Community and Union cannot be kept totally separate.
However, a particular feature of the provisions on Cooperation in the fields of Justice and Home Affairs is that they expressly envisage that certain matters may be transferred to Community competence.
The matters regarded as being of common interest under this title are listed in Article K.1:
(1)
asylum policy;
(2)
rules governing the crossing by persons of the external borders of the Member States and the exercise of controls thereon;
(3)
immigration policy and policy regarding nationals of third countries:
(a)
conditions of entry and movement by nationals of third countries on the territory of Member States;
(b)
conditions of residence by nationals of third countries on the territory of Member States, including family reunion and access to employment;
(c)
combating unauthorized immigration, residence and work by nationals of third countries on the territory of Member States;
(4)
combating drug addiction in so far as this is not covered by 7 to 9;
(5)
combating fraud on an international scale in so far as this is not covered by 7 to 9;
(6)
judicial co-operation in civil matters;
(7)
judicial co-operation in criminal matters;
(8)
customs co-operation;
(9)
police co-operation for the purposes of preventing and combating terrorism, unlawful drug trafficking and other serious forms of international crime, including if necessary certain aspects of customs co-operation, in connection with the organization of a Union-wide system for exchanging information within a European police Office (Europol).
The first three of these are clearly concerned with the treatment of third-country nationals, and it is therefore of interest to note that the question of visa policy, which might be thought to be implicit in the second and third objectives mentioned above will fall within the scope of Community competence by virtue of the new Article 100C of the EEC Treaty introduced by the Maastricht Treaty.
Furthermore, by virtue of Article K.9, ‘the Council, acting unanimously on the initiative of the Commission or a Member State, may decide to apply Article 100C of the Treaty establishing the European Community to action in areas referred to in Article K.1(1) to (6)’, although it is envisaged that such a decision would require national ratification.
However, of the three areas excluded from potential transfer to the Community, it might be argued that customs co-operation was already implicit in the concept of the customs union (which has existed since 1968).
Furthermore, in the field of crime connected with Community assets, the Court has made it clear as a matter of Community law both that Member States must use their criminal law if necessary to enforce Community laws and that the Commission must co-operate with the Member States (e.g. by allowing its officials to give evidence) when they are trying to enforce Community law.
Be that as it may, this is an area where the dividing line between Community activity and Union activity could change, irrespective of whether another diplomatic conference is held.
III.
A Community of Less than Twelve
a.
General Considerations
There is nothing to prevent eleven (or fewer) Member States entering into a treaty between themselves on matters outside or additional to the existing treaties — indeed the Maastricht Treaty itself, as is well known, envisages less than twelve Member States acting together in the ‘new’ areas of Monetary Union and Social policy — and in that sense can hardly be regarded as deepening the Community as previously defined.
In the case of Monetary Union, the situation arises not just from the special treatment accorded to the UK and Denmark, but also from the fact that it was appreciated that not all Member States would meet the rather strict criteria for economic convergence laid down as the precondition for participation in the monetary union; such States are referred to as ‘Member  States with a derogation’, and would,inter alia , be excluded from the decision-making process on certain matters.
The example could also be taken, however, of the Schengen Agreement on the elimination of border controls, to which the United Kingdom is not a party.
This agreement was negotiated in June 1985 (i.e. before the adoption of the Single European Act) between Germany, France, and the Benelux countries, and has been acceded to by Italy (1990), Spain and Portugal (1991), and Greece (1992).
Without entering into the substantive details of the agreement or of the 1990 convention for its application, which appears not yet to have entered into force, it may be noted that it sets out rules for crossing the signatory states' frontiers not just for their own citizens but also for citizens of all EC Member States, and the Convention of Application distinguishes between treatment at the internal and external borders of the signatory states.
Since the external frontiers of a Schengen state may be with another Community state, this poses a possible conflict with Article 8A of the EEC Treaty requiring the Community to be an area without internal frontiers.
Furthermore, the Schengen Treaty indicates matters on which the signatory states are to take common initiatives at the Community level, such as VAT harmonization, and it requires the development of common policies by its participants in areas such as visas for citizens of non-Member States of the EC — a matter which would be brought expressly into Community competence by the Maastricht Treaty under Article 100c, providing that‘the Council, acting unanimously on a proposal from the Commission and after consulting the European Parliament, shall determine the third countries whose nationals must be in possession of a visa when crossing the external borders of the Member States’.
There are, indeed, a number of other matters dealt with under the Schengen Agreement which would appear to fall within the Maastricht ‘Provisions on Cooperation in the fields of Justice and Home Affairs’.
These include common rules on asylum (where there is a further overlap with the Dublin Convention of 15 June 1990 between the Member States of the Community), mutual assistance in police and security matters, judicial co-operation in  criminal matters and co-operation in the fight against drugs, as well as the creation of a Schengen Information System.
It may be wondered both whether it is actually open to a group of Member States to enter into an agreement on a matter which would appear to fall within Community competence (at least if Maastricht comes into force) and how far this is an indicator of things to come if some Member States do not ratify the Maastricht Treaty.
b.
Economic and Monetary Union
With regard to the United Kingdom's special treatment in the context of Economic and Monetary Union, it is sometimes forgotten that the EEC Treaty has from the outset required, under Articles 103 and 105, co-ordination of economic policy and exchange rate policy, and in Opinion 1/91 the European Court also suggested that the attainment of Economic and Monetary Union was already a Community objective; it should therefore hardly be a surprise that the ECU has been defined in a series of regulations enacted under Article 235.
Furthermore, legislation expressly intended to give effect to the first stage of Economic and Monetary Union has already been enacted, following the decision of the European Council in Madrid in June 1989 that that stage should begin on 1 July 1990.
Attention might particularly be drawn to Council Decision 90/141 on the attainment of progressive convergence of economic policies and performance during stage one of EMU, and Council Decision 90/142 amending the previous legislation on the Committee of Governors of the Central Banks of the Member States of the European Community.
However, the European Monetary System itself shows what can (and cannot) be achieved in the grey area between political agreement and ‘soft’ law: its ground-rules adopted in December 1978 are contained in a ‘Resolution’(an act nowhere defined in the Treaties) of the ‘European Council’(a body whose existence was first legally recognized in the Single European Act and which is treated in the Maastricht Treaty as an organ of the Union rather than of the Community).
Whatever its legal status, considerable amounts of money have recently been spent endeavouring to maintain it.
Formal secondary legislation has been used to create a Monetary Committee (which was again envisaged in the original treaty), the Committee of Governors of Central Banks which has already been mentioned, and the European Monetary Cooperation Fund.
It may be doubted as a matter of law (as opposed to politics) whether it is impossible to create a European Central Bank (or system of central banks) by the same method.
On the other hand, the existing case law on delegation of powers suggests that it would not be possible to grant such a body power to issue binding Community legislation of the types defined in the treaty, whereas the Maastricht Treaty envisages in its Article 108a that the Central Bank would be able to issue regulations, decisions, recommendations, and opinions (though not directives).
Similarly, if secondary legislation has already created the ECU, can it not further define its role as a currency?
Such legal theorizing should, however, be tempered by the need for economic convergence, as was realized by those who drafted the Maastricht Treaty.
c.
Social Policy
The discussion of social legislation in the context of Community law is hardly novel: the first substantive legislation under the EEC Treaty was that on social security for migrant workers, adopted in 1958.
Nevertheless, the reluctance of the United Kingdom to see an extension of the Community's social competence is well known, and, in the context of discussion of a Community of less than twelve, the Maastricht protocol on Social policy does, of course, purport to allow eleven Member States to act together through the Community institutions.
However, the present author is one of those who has doubts as to how far this possibility would be used: the protocol on Social policy refers to continuing ‘along the path laid down in the 1989 Social Charter’(also signed by eleven Member States).
That charter declared expressly that its implementation ‘must not entail an extension of the Community's powers as defined by the Treaties’, and listed in detail the existing provisions which could be used.
Legislation has in fact been issued under general treaty powers which expressly states that it is intended to implement the Social Charter, such as Directive 91/533 on contracts of employment, which, since it was made under Article 100 which requires unanimity in the Council, must at the least not have been opposed by the United Kingdom minister.
This pattern has been repeated in Council Directive 92/56 on collective redundancies, which contains detailed extracts from three paragraphs of the Social Charter in its recitals, but which is again made under Article 100, and therefore unanimously.
The present author remains of the opinion that most of the Social policy protocol may be achieved under existing treaty provisions, whether specific or general, and the scope of the general provisions will be considered in the next section of this article.
IV.
Community Competence and the Principle of Subsidiarity
a.
Development of Community Competence
The question of widening or deepening is relevant not only to membership of the Community, but also to the powers of the Community.
It is well known that the extension of Community competence to new areas has largely been achieved on the basis of Articles 100 and 235 of the EEC Treaty.
Article 100 as originally drafted provides that the Council shall, acting unanimously on a proposal from the Commission, issue directives for the approximation of such provisions laid down by law, regulation or administrative action in Member States as directly affect the establishment or functioning of the Common Market.
Article 235, on the other hand, provides that if action by the Community should prove necessary to attain, in the course of the operation of the Common Market, one of the objectives of the Community (and this treaty has not provided the necessary powers), the Council shall, acting unanimously on a proposal from the Commission and after consulting the Parliament, take the appropriate measures.
Particular emphasis has been given to the prevention of distortions of competition (an express treaty objective under Article 3(f), to justify a very wide use of Article 100, since it could be argued that any difference between national regulatory frameworks may distort competition in the Community, even in the area of social policy.
Indeed, it might be suggested in this context that to use the concept of subsidiarity to restrict the Community's activities is hardly compatible with the achievement of a ‘level playing-field’ throughout the Community.
A noteworthy recent example of the use of Article 100 in the area of social policy is Council Directive 91/533 on an employer's obligation to inform employees of the conditions applicable to the contract or employment relationship, where it is quite simply asserted in the recitals that ‘differences in the legislation of Member States may have a direct effect on the operation of the common market’.
To recapitulate, it is clear that differences in national legislation may not only have the effect of preventing a good or service produced in one state being sold in another, but may also distort conditions of competition between manufacturers or suppliers located in different Member States of the Community.
It was this potential distortion of competition that was in particular invoked by the Community institutions when they started to enact environmental and consumer protection legislation during the 1970s.
In the 1970s, the House of Lords Select Committee suggested that Article 235 could extend only to the economic and financial purposes provided for by Article 2 of the Treaty.
On the other hand, just as he defended the use of Article 100, George Close also defended the use of Article 235 on the same grounds, i.e. that even in purely economic terms it can be shown that environmental and consumer legislation does in fact affect production and marketing costs.
The present writer has gone on record elsewhere with the view that most of the ‘new’ powers in the Single European Act represented treaty recognition of developments which had already taken place under general treaty powers, in particular Articles 100 and 235, in areas such as environmental law.
The same approach could be taken with regard to the Maastricht Treaty: when it was signed there was already Community legislation on, for example, consumer protection, tourism, energy policy, European networks, health protection, and (to a limited extent) education.
It might finally be observed that in its short life, Article 100A, which derogates from Article 100 by allowing the Council to act by qualified majority in co-operation with the European Parliament in order to complete the internal market, has already been used to anticipate new competences expressly recognized in the Maastricht amendments: two of these relate to the encouragement of ‘trans-European networks’ and measures in the sphere of energy, yet Article 100A had already been used to enact Council Directive 90/547 on the transit of electricity through transmission grids and Council Directive 91/287 on the transit of natural gas through grids.
Article 235 has continued to be used to develop new policies.
Apart from the issue of development co-operation already mentioned, at the end of 1986, a Council Decision and two recommendations were adopted in the area of tourism.
The decision established a system of consultation and co-operation in tourism and the recommendations dealt respectively with the standardization of information in hotels, and with fire safety in hotels.
Subsequently, Council Decision 89/46 on an action programme for the European Tourism Year was also adopted under Article 235.
Whilst the European Court accepted in Luisi and Carbone that tourists as recipients of services fall within the scope of the EEC Treaty, nevertheless there was no express treaty provision dealing with tourism and the promotion thereof.
However, the Maastricht amendments have introduced measures in the sphere of tourism into the Community's express objectives.
Whatever may be the limits of Article 235, and it has been noted that it gave rise, even before the Community acquired its express environmental competence, to legislation on the conservation of wild birds, examples can be found of the development of what would appear to be new Community policies, without even a reference to Article 235.
A striking example is the  Resolution of the Council and of the ministers responsible for cultural affairs meeting within the Council on 27 May 1988 on the future organization of their work.
Under this Resolution, it was agreed to set up a Committee on Cultural Affairs, and that the Commission should implement actions decided on by the Council that were to be implemented at Community level.
A Title on Culture was subsequently introduced into the treaty by the Maastricht amendments.
Furthermore, although the Commission put forward a proposal for a Council Recommendation on banning smoking in public places based on Article 235, this gave rise to a Resolution of the Council and of the Ministers for Health of the Member States which, whilst it referred to that proposal in its recitals, claimed to be made ‘having regard to the Treaty’.
Again, certain health measures are included in the Maastricht amendments.
b.
Subsidiarity
i.
General issues
Whilst many current EEC provisions may only be used to the extent ‘necessary’ for the achievement of the Community's objectives, failure to ratify the Maastricht Treaty will mean that there will be no express reference to ‘subsidiarity’.
This term would appear to have been introduced into Community parlance in the European Parliament's Draft Treaty on European Union in 1984, and is already familiar in the context of the 1989 Social Charter.
In its Action programme relating to the implementation of the Community Charter of Basic Social Rights for Workers, the Commission stated in paragraph 3 of the General Introduction that ‘in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity…the Commission's proposals relate to only part of the issues raised in certain articles of the draft Charter.
The Commission takes the view that responsibility for the initiatives to be taken as regards the implementation of social rights lies with the Member States, their constituent parts, or the two sides of industry, as well as, within the limits of its powers, with the European Community.’
In putting forward this apparently self-denying approach, the Commission was reflecting and extending what was also stated in the recitals to the Charter itself.
The statement of the principle of subsidiarity in the Maastricht text is in what would be a new Article 3B of the EEC Treaty, to the effect that ‘in areas which do not fall within its exclusive competence’ the Community should take action only if and so far as the objectives of the proposed action cannot be sufficiently achieved by the Member States and can, therefore, by reason of the scale or effects of the proposed action, be better achieved by the Community.
This in fact repeats more generally what was stated with regard to environmental competence by Article 130R(4) of the EEC Treaty, inserted by the Single   European Act, under which ‘the Community shall take action relating to the environment to the extent to which the objectives…can be attained better at Community level than at the level of the individual Member States’, a provision which does not yet appear to have been the object of scrutiny by the European Court of Justice.
While subsidiarity, indeed subordination, may be inherent in provisions like the new Articles 126 and 127 on education, which refer to ‘supporting and supplementing’ the action of Member States, and indeed in Article 2 of the Agreement on Social policy following the protocol on Social policy in the Maastricht text, which states that the Community shall ‘support and complement the activities of the Member States’in certain listed fields, the continuation in force of existing legal bases for action subject to a new general requirement of subsidiarity raises fundamental legal issues, particularly as to the exclusivity of Community competence, as to the necessity for Community action and as to the appropriateness of Community action.
However, at the outset it may be said that to some extent the political objective of requiring the Community legislative institutions to bear those considerations in mind would appear already to be being observed; for example, Council Decision 92/421 on tourism policy expressly refers in its recitals to ‘the need to comply with the subsidiarity principle’.
The question of the exclusivity of Community competence is of particular difficulty with regard to two concepts derived from the case law of the European Court: the concept that the existence of Community legislation on a matter excludes national legislation on the same matter, which may be illustrated in the context of the free movement of goods, and the concept that the duty of the Community to act in a particular matter from a particular date may exclude the possibility of Member States acting in that area from that date, which may particularly be illustrated in the context of external competence.
Furthermore, there were attempts to change the law in specific aspects of these matters in the Single European Act which in some respects have been continued in the Maastricht text.
ii.
The effects of Community action
The exclusive Community competence arising from the existence of Community legislation may be particularly illustrated with reference to restrictions on the free movement of goods.
While in the context of the prohibition of quantitative restrictions and measures equivalent thereto there is express provision for national safeguard measures, it is clear that both under Article 36 of the EEC Treaty and under the theory of the protection of mandatory requirements, national measures may only be justified where the matter at issue is not governed by provisions of Community law.
The question then arises as to how specific the Community legislation has to be before it precludes national legislation.
In Case 73/84 Denkavit Futtermittel , it was held that where directives regulated the composition and preparation of animal foodstuffs, but did not regulate health inspections of those products, Member States could still justify national health inspections under Article 36.
In some instances Community law itself may permit or require Member States to carry out inspections or take other measures, but it is now clear that the Council or Commission may not authorize a Member State to take measures which go beyond those which would be justified under Article 36.
On the other hand, a Member State may not invoke its own legislation where EEC directives expressly require a Member State to allow the marketing of goods which comply with the provisions of those directives, and more generally national legislation will not be justified if the Community legislation is intended to regulate the matter at issue in a comprehensive manner.
This was clearly shown in Case 28/84 Commission v. Germany , where the animal foodstuffs directives, which, as mentioned in the previous paragraph, had been held not to preclude health inspections under national law, were found to create a comprehensive system with regard to the composition and preparation of animal foodstuffs, so that Germany could not lay down its own rules on minimum and maximum levels of certain ingredients.
Similarly, where Community law sets up a comprehensive system of health controls on export, as in trade in fresh poultrymeat, the importing Member State may no longer impose systematic checks on importation under its own law.
Community legislation may be comprehensive without necessarily dealing with the precise point raised by the Member State, and may therefore have the effect of ‘freezing’ the situation.
This occurred in Case 60/86 Commission v. United Kingdom with regard to motor vehicle headlights.
The United Kingdom introduced legislation requiring the fitting of a ‘dim-dip’ device, invoking safety grounds, but it was held that the EEC directives on motor vehicle headlights regulated the matter in an exhaustive manner, so that a Member State could not require a form of lighting which was not listed in those directives.
This line of case law would appear to be challenged by the wording of Article 100A(4) of the EEC Treaty, introduced by the Single European Act.
Article 100A provides that harmonization of national legislation for the purpose of establishing the internal market by the end of 1992 may be achieved by ‘measures’(rather than directives alone, as under Article 100) adopted by a qualified majority.
However, where such measures are adopted by a qualified  majority, Article 100A(4) provides that ‘a Member State which deems it necessary to apply national provisions on grounds of major needs referred to in art.
36, or relating to protection of the environment or the working environment’ shall notify such provisions to the Commission, and the Commission may confirm them after having verified that they are not a means of arbitrary discrimination or a disguised restriction on trade between Member States.
If it considers that a Member State is making improper use of the powers provided for in this paragraph, the Commission (or another Member State) may invoke an accelerated enforcement procedure against the Member State.
The obvious intention of this provision is to override the Court's case law and empower Member States to legislate on matters covered by Community legislation, at least where that legislation is enacted under Article 100A.
It does, nevertheless, give rise to both procedural and substantive difficulties.
procedurally, does it apply whenever Article 1600A is used or only if a qualified majority vote is taken?
If, as appears likely, it only applies to the latter case, can it be invoked by any Member State or only by a Member State which voted against the legislation?
The further problem then arises as to whether the Commission's confirmation is to be obtained before or after the entry into force of the national measures.
In the present context, however, it is the substantive problem which is perhaps of greater interest.
Article 100A(4) speaks of ‘major needs referred to in art.
36’, yet the provisions of Article 36 make no reference to ‘major needs’.
A perusal of the French text shows that it uses the phrase ‘exigences importantes’, which appears to bear a family resemblance to the phrase ‘exigences impératives’ used in the french texts of judgments following the Cassis de Dijon case law and rendered into English as ‘mandatory requirements’.
It may therefore be wondered if the drafting of Article 100A(4) does not betray some confusion between that concept and Article 36.
Be that as it may, the limitation by reference to Article 36 means that Article 100A(4) cannot be used, for example, to protect consumers, although it may be used to protect health, and the specific reference to the environment means that it may also be used in that context.
Nevertheless, perhaps because of the procedural problems outlined above, Article 100A(4) appears to have been used for the first time only in 1992, in relation to German legislation banning the use of PCP (pentachlorophenol) despite the fears expressed at the time the Single European Act was signed that it would destroy the Court's achievements in this sphere.
More positively, Article 100A(4) may be seen as the price to be paid for the acceptance of a system of decision-making which may lead to the enactment of Community legislation in areas still subject to national measures.
Article 100A has in fact been used in the context of measures relating to health, such as food additives, in the context of consumer protection, such as the indication of prices, as in the legislation on air pollution by gaseous emissions from motor vehicles, to give examples from important areas that could otherwise be subject to national legislation which would have the effect of hindering the free movement of goods.
In the light of this, it is worth noting that Article B of the Maastricht Treaty states that one of the objectives of the Union would be to maintain in full the ‘acquis communautaire’, and build on it, which implies that there is to be no going back on the matters already governed by Community law.
iii.
The Community's power and/or duty to act
It is now long established that if the Community has competence to negotiate an international agreement on a particular matter, a Member State cannot have a separate competence on the same matter.
However, Article 130R(5) introduced by the Single European Act states that within their respective spheres of competence, the Community and the Member States shall co-operate with third countries and with the relevant international organizations, but then adds that this provision shall be without prejudice to Member States' competence to negotiate in international bodies and to conclude international agreements.
This terminology is repeated in the new Article 130R(4) which would result from the Maastricht text, and also in the new Article 109(5) on agreements relating to monetary policy or fixing exchange régimes and the new Article 130Y on development co-operation.
At first sight this provision might seem to be a contradiction in terms, but some light is cast upon it by the Declaration appended at the end of the Single European Act, which, whatever its legal status may be, states that the conference considered that the provisions of Article 130R(5) (2) did not affect the principles resulting from the judgment handed down by the European Court in the ERTA case.
In this case it was held by the European Court that where the Community has exercised an express internal power, the corresponding external powers, that is, the power to negotiate an international agreement relating to external aspects of the same matter, fell within Community competence.
It may therefore be suggested that the aim of Article 130R(5), even though it is not evident from the words used in that provision, is to accept that where the Community has enacted environmental legislation for its internal purposes, it is the Community that has power to negotiate corresponding external agreements.
However, the aim would also appear to be to attempt to override the case law of the European Court which goes beyond this principle.
The European Court has in fact held that the internal competence may be exercised at the same time as the external competence so that the Community acquired the power to negotiate an international agreement before it had in fact exercised its internal powers, and this theory had in fact been taken further in the fisheries sector in the judgment in the Kramer cases.
In those cases the European Court had actually held that a power to negotiate external arrangements could be derived form an internal power even where that internal power had not yet been exercised, and furthermore suggested that when the deadline for exercising the internal power had expired, the Community's competence in the matter became exclusive even though no Community legislation had been enacted.
In that particular case, the Community should have negotiated a common fisheries policy by the end of 1978, by virtue of the 1972 Act of Accession.
The European Court, in that and other cases, took the view that one the 1978 deadline had expired, only the Community had competence to enact new measures within the community, and correspondingly this gave rise to an exclusive power in the Community to negotiate international fisheries agreements.
The implication of the second sub-paragraph of Article 130R(5) therefore appears to be that although that provision gives the Community competence to negotiate international agreements relating to the protection of the environment, if the Community has not in fact exercised its powers internally, then Member States may continue to enter into international arrangements in their own right.
To that extent, therefore, Article 130R(5) may be regarded as a limitation of previous theories as to Community competence.
It remains to be seen, however, whether its wording will turn out to be adequate to achieve what it has here been suggested is its purpose.
It is, nevertheless, interesting to note that the Council Decision 88/840 on the Vienna Convention and Montreal Protocol on the protection of the ozone layer, agreements which were obviously negotiated on the footing that they fell partly within Community competence and partly within the competence of the Member States, contained provisions which actually instructed the Member States as a matter of Community law to deposit their national instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, by 1 January 1989.
At first sight, this would appear to be a Community instrument instructing Member States as to how to exercise their national competence.
If a summary might be attempted in the area of social law, it may be submitted that in those areas where the Community has specific express powers, those powers have been largely exercised, as in the free movement of persons, so that it is a matter of exclusive Community competence on either theory.
On the other hand, in so far as general provisions such as Articles 100 and 235 may be used in this area, national competence would appear only to be excluded to the extent that the Community has enacted legislation.
iv.
The appropriateness of, or necessity for, Community action
The determination whether objectives can be ‘better’ achieved by the Community obviously involves a comparative judgment, and the question arises as to who is to make that judgment and whether it is justiciable.
However, a number of existing treaty provisions only allow the Community to act where it is ‘necessary’, notably Article 235, and it is instructive to note the European Court's attitude to these.
Essentially, it appears only to have been willing to investigate the necessity for Community legislation to the extent that it has been alleged that the existing law already complied with the objectives of that legislation, i.e. to determine whether the Community legislation was redundant.
Otherwise, it seems to have regarded it as a matter of political judgment.
The question of the necessity for Community action under Article 235 was first considered in the context of the Customs Union, in a judgment which illustrates the first of those approaches.
Regulations 802/68 and 803/68 respectively on the concept of the origin of goods and on the valuation of goods for customs purposes were enacted under Article 235 on the basis that the treaty had not otherwise provided the necessary powers.
The original valuation regulation was, however, in fact derived from the 1950 Customs Cooperation Council Valuation Convention and this gave rise to a dispute referred to the European Court in the Massey-Ferguson case, as to the legitimacy of using Article 235 in these circumstances.
The argument was put before the Court that since all the Member States were already parties to the 1950 Convention, there could be no need for action by the Community under Article 235, since all the Member States would, by definition, already be applying the same rules.
However, the Court found that, as was stated in the recitals to the regulation, the definition of value and the interpretative notes set out in the 1590 Convention had been embodied into the legislation of the Member States in different ways, and also certain optional provisions of the interpretative notes were being applied differently in different Member States.
It was therefore held by the Court that the fact that all the Member States had signed the Customs Cooperation Council Valuation Convention would not lead to the necessary extent to the uniform determination of the value for customs purposes of imported goods required for the functioning of customs union.
The Court therefore concluded that the use of legislation enacted under Article 235 was here justified.
The matter was further considered in relation to Article 67 of the original version of the EEC Treaty in Case 203/80 Casati , which illustrates the other approach.
Article 67, which is concerned with the free movement of capital, differs from the other ‘freedoms’ laid down by the treaty in that it is not drafted in absolute terms.
It does not require restrictions on the movement of capital simply to be abolished; rather it requires them to be abolished ‘to the extent necessary to ensure the proper functioning of the common market’.
In Casati it was held that the scope of that restriction might vary in time and depended on an assessment of the requirements of the Common Market and on an appraisal of both the advantages and risks which liberalization might entail.
It was further stated that such an assessment was ‘first and foremost’ a matter for the Council, and that the obligation to abolish restrictions on movements of capital could not be separated from the Council's assessment of the need to liberalize the category of transactions in question.
In other words, it was not a straightforward rule which a national court, or even the European Court, could apply directly, but essentially a question of policy for the Council, the role of the Court being limited to checking whether the Council had overstepped the limits of its discretion.
In this context it is worth recalling the long-established case law on the judicial review of a Community institution's discretion where ‘the evaluation of a complex economic situation’ is involved: the Court must confine itself to examining whether the exercise of the discretion contains a manifest error, or constitutes a misuse of power or whether the institution did not ‘clearly’exceed the bounds of its discretion.
Since this case law was developed in the context of the exercise of delegated powers by the Commission, it would seem highly unlikely that the Court would wish to exercise a greater degree of control over the exercise of original legislative power by the Council of Ministers.
On the basis of this, it is submitted that the question of subsidiarity is essentially a political question for the Council, and if the Council decided to act at the Community level it would not be possible to challenge what it did simply on the basis that it could better have been done at the level of the Member States; rather, it would be necessary to show a manifest error, a misuse of power or a clear passing of the limits of discretion, and it is submitted that the occasions when this might be done will be rare.
Indeed, it may be suggested that the substantive issue of subsidiarity will be essentially non-justiciable, as the present author has suggested to the House of Lords.
What may, however, be justiciable is the procedural aspect: recitals to Community legislation on matters not within its exclusive jurisdiction which made   no reference to the principle of subsidiarity might well be susceptible to challenge.
Furthermore, it might be argued from Case 131/86 United Kingdom v. Council , where the Court looked at the preparatory measures to the legislation in question in order to determine whether it was genuinely intended to be agricultural legislation, that the Court might investigate whether there had been a genuine consideration of the question of subsidiarity.
It is, nevertheless, submitted that the Court may not review the outcome of that consideration except in the circumstances outlined above.
V. Conclusions
Whatever the future of the Maastricht Treaty itself, it may be suggested that certain of its aims may be achieved by other legal means, or by extra-Community arrangements between certain Member States.
Ironically, one casualty of failure to bring it into force would be the express attempt to limit action on the part of the Community through the concept of subsidiarity, even if in practical terms account already seems to be being taken of this concept.
In any event, the Treaty itself envisages extra-Community inter-governmental co-operation in certain areas, whilst providing for Community action which will not involve all the Member States — though it does contain some welcome institutional reforms, a number of which reflect the case law of the European Court.
Parliamentary Material and Statutory Construction: Aspects of the Practical Application of Pepper v. Hart
I. Introduction
At a hearing before an enlarged Appellate Committee of the House of Lords, seven Lords of Appeal in Ordinary held in Pepper (Inspector of Taxes) v. Hart , Lord Mackay of Clashfern LC dissenting, that, in limited circumstances, reference may be made to parliamentary material as an aid to statutory construction.
It was also held, unanimously, that this relaxation of the rule excluding parliamentary material did not amount to questioning or impeaching proceedings in Parliament contrary to Article 9 of the Bill of Rights 1688.
The case concerned the tax liability of teachers employed at Malvern College, a fee-paying school, under a concessionary fees scheme which allowed members of the staff of the school to have their sons educated at the school at 20 per cent of the fees charged to the public.
Having examined the parliamentary history of sections 61 and 63 of the Finance Act 1976, it was held that the parliamentary intention was that in-house benefits should be assessed for income tax on the basis of marginal costs to the employer and not as a proportion of the total costs incurred in providing the service both for the public and the employee; that this effect applied to the education of the children of teachers who were employees; and that section 63 of the 1976 Act should be construed accordingly.
Lord Mackay of Clashfern LC held, on a construction of section 63 without the aid of reference to the parliamentary material, that the tax-payers were   only assessable on the extra cost of providing the in-house benefit, and in reaching this finding regarded it as crucial that, on the facts, as found, the teachers' sons occupied only surplus places and their right to do so was entirely discretionary.
In R .
v. Warwickshire County Council, ex parte Johnson , the Appellate Committee again admitted parliamentary material either as an aid to construing section 20 of the Consumer protection Act 1987, or alternatively to confirm its judgment on the construction.
This article considers some of the implications of the rule in Pepper v. Hart on the admissibility of parliamentary material as an aid for statutory construction passed in these two cases.
II.
General Aspects of the Rule
The relaxed exclusionary rule, as expressed by Lord Browne-Wilkinson in Pepper v. Hart , with which five of his six colleagues sitting in the Appellate Committee concurred, would:
‘permit reference to parliamentary materials where (a) legislation is ambiguous or obscure, or leads to an absurdity;(b) the material relied upon consists of one or more statements by a minister or other promoter of the Bill together if necessary with such other parliamentary material as is necessary to understand such statements and their effect;(c) the statements relied upon are clear.’
Apart from uncertainties which arise from the language in which it is couched, there are some more general concerns arising from the rule.
a.
Parliamentary Intention
One concern is the effect of the rule on the notion of ‘parliamentary intention’.
Lord Browne-Wilkinson quotes the observation of Lord Reid that ‘we often say that we are looking for the intention of Parliament but that is not quite accurate.
We are seeking the meaning of the words which Parliament used.
We are seeking not what Parliament meant but the true meaning of what they said…’
Prior to Pepper v. Hart , essentially the ‘parliamentary intention’ of primary legislation was judicially determined from the enacted text.
As a result of  Pepper v. Hart , this rather artificial notion has been extended by a presumption, which may be grounded in a degree of political reality.
This is that, where there is judicial uncertainty over the meaning of a legislative text, in the absence of any consequent overt expression of a contrary parliamentary view, certain categories of statement on the effect of the provision of a Bill by one of a narrowly defined group of parliamentarians, if not later withdrawn or varied, can be assumed to be an expression of parliamentary intention.
Thus, in certain circumstances parliamentary intention will be judicially assumed not only from parliamentary action but also from parliamentary inaction.
b.
Relationship with Other Aids to Construction
Secondly, having relaxed the exclusionary rule,Pepper v. Hart gives no guidance as to the relationship between reference to parliamentary material as an aid to statutory construction and other aids to construction.
As with other aids to construction it has entered a judicial mélange of aids to construction to which unregulated weight may be given.
So, for example, the practitioner has no guidance on the weight which will be given to an admissible ministerial statement that a situation is not covered by one clause but is covered by another that is in conflict with a construction based on textual examination of the legislation as a whole.
Similar conflicts could arise between admissible ministerial statements on the effect of a provision and, say, a construction based on the punctuation of the provision, or on prior or subsequent legislative provisions.
This lack of guidance may create other uncertainties.
Parliamentary material is admissible where the legislation is ambiguous, uncertain or leads to an absurdity.
If the ambiguity or uncertainty or apparent absurdity can be resolved by the more established aids to construction, is parliamentary material admissible to confirm the construction reached by other means?
Again, is parliamentary material admissible in support of an argument for an alternative construction?
So, for example, in ex parte Johnson one analysis of the speech of Lord Roskill would suggest that material was examined to confirm a construction of a statutory provision which had already been firmly reached.
c.
Admissibility and Weight
A further general concern with the relaxed exclusionary rule in Pepper v. Hart is that, no doubt in an effort to limit the use of parliamentary material, it conflates questions of the admissibility of the material with questions of the weight to be given to admitted material.
Pepper v. Hart (i) admits statements by a minister or other promoter of a Bill, where the resultant statute is ambiguous, obscure or leads to an absurdity; however,(ii) the statements must be ‘clear’ and (iii) may be supported by other parliamentary material ‘as is necessary to understand such statements’.
It is submitted that element (ii), and to some extent element (iii), go to the weight to be given to the parliamentary material and have no proper place in the formulation of a rule regulating the admissibility of the material.
Including them as elements of the rule serves to create uncertainty over its application.
d.
Costs and Improperly Introduced Material
These general concerns, coupled with ambiguities arising from the formulation of the rule which are considered below, may have a particular importance for the practitioner.
In Pepper v. Hart , Lord Browne-Wilkinson observed that,
‘attempts to introduce material which does not satisfy those tests [in the rule as formulated]should be met by orders for costs made against those who have improperly introduced the material.’
With respect, it is submitted, that to the extent that the observation may be characterized as seeking to compensate for any lack of clarity in the formulation of the rule in Pepper v. Hart , by the threat of judicial orders for costs, this approach is wrong in principle.
III.
Specific Aspects of the Rule
a.
Legislation Which is Ambiguous or Obscure, or Leads to an Absurdity
In Pepper v. Hart , Lord Browne-Wilkinson stated that ‘…reference to parliamentary material should be permitted as an aid to construction of legislation which is ambiguous or obscure or the literal meaning of which leads to an absurdity’ and subsequently carefully established the ambiguity in the statutory provision in issue before relying on parliamentary material as an aid to   its construction.
The clear implication of Pepper v. Hart is that reference to parliamentary material is only permissible where the legislative text is obscure, ambiguous, or leads to an absurdity.
Such material may not be introduced to establish textual ambiguity in an apparently unambiguous statutory provision.
Lord Oliver of Aylmerton commented that ‘ingenuity can sometimes suggest ambiguity or obscurity where none exists in fact, and if the instant case were to be thought to justify the exercise of combing through reports of parliamentary proceedings in the hope of unearthing some perhaps incautious expression of opinion in support of an improbable secondary meaning, the relaxation of the rule might indeed lead to the fruitless expense and labour which has been prayed in aid in the past as one of the reasons justifying its maintenance’.
However, he considered that, if the three elements within the relaxed exclusionary rule as formulated by Lord Browne-Wilkinson were understood and observed, this could not be the result.
Yet there remain areas of uncertainty about this element of the rule.
So, for what purposes may parliamentary material be admitted where a legislative text is ambiguous or obscure?
Clearly, the material may be introduced to resolve a choice between two interpretations and the analysis in the Speech of Lord Browne-Wilkinson is essentially based on there being two possible meanings within a legislative text.
So, the legislative text may suggest meaning X or Y and parliamentary material may clearly support meaning Y.
However, will the relaxed exclusionary rule admit parliamentary material which clearly refines questions of ambiguity in an ambiguous or obscure legislative text?
So, would a court faced with such a text which suggests meanings X or Y admit parliamentary material which clearly indicates an intention to legislate for an aspect of meaning X (X) but excludes other aspects of that meaning (X) and alternative meaning Y. Or, to take a more extreme case, where a legislative text suggests meanings X or Y, will the relaxed exclusionary rule admit parliamentary material which clearly suggests a parliamentary intention of another distinct meaning, Z?
The same questions may be put in terms of the third element of the relaxed exclusionary rule.
To be admitted as an aid to construction must parliamentary material (a) in its own terms express a clear parliamentary intention or (b) must it express a clear parliamentary intention which resolves an already identified ambiguity?
Expressed in this way, it is submitted that (a) is the preferable approach for the courts to adopt.
If this is correct, the purposes for which parliamentary material will be admitted is enlarged.
A further uncertainty is whether a legislative text remains ambiguous or obscure for the purposes of the relaxed exclusionary rule once it has been judicially interpreted or construed.
If, for example, a statutory provision has been judicially construed, should parliamentary material indicating a clear parliamentary  intention of an alternative construction be admissible in a subsequent case?
b.
Admissible and Contextual Parliamentary Material
The second element of the formulation by Lord Browne-Wilkinson of the relaxed exclusionary rule is that ‘the material relied upon consists of one or more statements by a minister or other promoter of the Bill together if necessary with such other parliamentary material as is necessary to understand such statements and their effect’.
This is based on the presumption that, where there is no subsequent relevant amendment, a parliamentary statement on the mischief or effect of a statutory provision, which is not withdrawn or varied, expresses parliamentary intention.
The limited category of members of Parliament whose statements are to be admissible under the rule derives from Lord Browne-Wilkinson's belief that ‘in the case of statements made in Parliament, as at present advised I cannot foresee that any statement other than the statement of the minister or other promoter of the Bill is likely to meet these criteria’.
However, the category may be wider than has been envisaged.
It would certainly include statements by successful movers of amendments and new clauses to Bills.
It may also, for instance, include a statement by a minister on the effect of a provision in a private Members Bill.
The element of the formulation of the rule also leaves open some questions of not only whose statements but what statements are admissible either to establish parliamentary intention or to put such statements in context.
The rule refers to permitting reference to ‘parliamentary materials’ and here to contextual ‘Parliamentary material’.
The Speeches suggest that these phrases refer to Hansard reports but, particularly in respect of contextual material, this may not be so.
Assuming admissible statements to establish parliamentary intention are limited, as would appear presently to be the case, to parliamentary statements, there remain grey areas in the application of the rule.
for instance, are the parliamentary statements limited to those made during consideration of the Bill?
Could a relevant statement by the Chancellor of the Exchequer in the Budget Speech be admissible for establishing parliamentary intention in the construction of a provision of a finance Act in the absence of a clear ministerial statement during the passage of the Bill?
Contextual parliamentary material is only admissible to the extent necessary to understand parliamentary statements establishing parliamentary intent.
The range of such contextual material which is admissible under the rule is not entirely clear.
On the basis that even before Pepper v. Hart a wider range of   parliamentary material might be judicially considered to determine the mischief, presumably the same range of material may, if it is necessary, be admitted as contextual parliamentary material.
Arguably, where a parliamentary statement to establish parliamentary intention incorporates by reference other material, that material may also be admitted on a contextual basis.
Even where such material is not incorporated by reference apparently reference may still be made to it for contextual or confirmatory purposes.
So, in Pepper v. Hart , Lord Browne-Wilkinson referred to a press release issued contemporaneously with an admitted ministerial parliamentary statement.
When reference to contextual parliamentary material is necessary is also uncertain.
Even with respect to statements made by Members in the course of parliamentary proceedings which are introduced as contextual parliamentary material it may be a nice question whether they are necessary.
In ex parte Johnson , Lord Roskill quoted from the speech of Lord of Morton of Shuna in moving an amendment to delete the words ‘of his’ in the relevant clause to establish the context of the ministerial speech opposing the motion.
However, he also quoted a sentence from the speech by Lord Denning during the short debate on the motion: ‘the words ‘of his’ are not only unnecessary but misleading.’
It has to be doubted whether this sentence from Lord Denning's speech was, in addition to the extract from Lord Shuna of Morton's speech, necessary to establish the context of the ministerial statement, more particularly as in describing the words as misleading Lord Denning was referring to another implication of the provision which was not in issue in ex parte Johnson .
c.
Clear Statements
The third and final element of the relaxed exclusionary rule as formulated by Lord Browne-Wilkinson is that ‘the statements relied upon are clear’.
Various formulations of in exactly what respect the statements should be clear are to be found in the Speech.
Counsel for the taxpayers in his reported submissions, which were accepted by Lord Browne-Wilkinson, referred to ‘clear statements showing the intention of the promoter of the Bill’ and to where ‘a minister clearly states the effect of a provision’.
Lord Browne-Wilkinson refers to material which ‘clearly discloses the mischief aimed at or the legislative intention lying behind the ambiguous or obscure words’ and which ‘contains a clear indication from the minister of the mischief aimed at, or the nature of the case intended, by the legislation’.
To be admissible as an aid to construction, as opposed to determining the mischief, it is submitted   that a statement must be a clear expression of the legislative intention in adopting the structure or language of the provision which falls to be construed or interpreted.
Admissible statements must also be clear in the sense that the legislative intention which they express must also be attributable ‘to Parliament as a whole’.
To do so, it is necessary to demonstrate that there has been no subsequent inconsistent amendment to the Bill and that the statement has not been subsequently withdrawn or varied.
There are various considerations and implications which surround the adoption of an admissible statement as an expression of parliamentary intention.
first, in both Pepper v. Hart and ex parte Johnson the statutory provisions to be construed had very straightforward legislative histories.
In Pepper v. Hart , the statement of the financial Secretary to the Treasury was made during consideration of the finance Bill in Standing Committee and there was no subsequent parliamentary consideration of the point in issue.
In ex parte Johnson , the ministerial statement was made during the Report Stage in the House of Lords, where the Bill had been first introduced, and again there was no subsequent parliamentary consideration of the matter.
Courts are likely to be faced with more complex parliamentary history and consequently more difficulty in determining whether a statement may be assumed to demonstrate parliamentary intention.
An example of one difficulty will be to determine whether subsequent variations of a statement is of a nature which makes it impossible to characterize the statements as clear in themselves or as clearly demonstrating a parliamentary intention.
Different parliamentary circumstances might be found to justify different determinations.
So, for instance, a variation in ministerial statements on the legislative intention behind a provision in a Government Bill might be sufficient to characterize the statements as unclear, but a similar variation in the statements in the Commons and the Lords by the promoters of a private Members Bill might not be treated as having the same significance.
However, there are more fundamental constitutional issues.
for example, would it be appropriate to attribute as an expression of parliamentary intention a ministerial assurance on the effect of a provision which was given and accepted in the Lords when considering a Bill which had already been passed by the Commons?
It is submitted that it would be ill-advised to treat such statements made in one House after the Bill had completed its passage in the other House as an expression of the intention of, in the words of Lord Browne-Wilkinson, ‘Parliament as a whole’.
Secondly, attributing parliamentary intention to parliamentary statements is a significant consideration in estimating the increase in legal costs which are likely to flow from admitting parliamentary material as an aid to construction.
The likelihood of added costs was the basis for the dissenting Speech of the Lord Chancellor on the admission of such material and Lord Browne-Wilkinson  recognized the increased research burden on practitioners, which has obvious cost implications, as an objection of ‘real substance’.
Lord Browne-Wilkinson observed that ‘it is easy to overestimate the cost of such research: if a reading of Hansard shows that there is nothing of significance said by the minister in relation to the clause in question, further research will become pointless’.
However, as the relaxed exclusionary rule is formulated, this is, with respect, both an over-simplification and perhaps an over-optimistic analysis.
faced with an ambiguous or obscure provision, a legal adviser must be satisfied that, at each stage of the Bill in both Houses, no admissible statement of legislative intention has been made.
This would entail, in most cases, at least an examination of, in the House of Commons, the opening and winding-up speeches at Second Reading, the consideration of the provision, and amendments moved to it, at the Committee stage, and the opening and winding-up speeches at the Report Stage; and, in the House of Lords, the opening and winding-up speeches at Second Reading and the consideration of the provision, and amendments moved to it, at the Committee and Report Stages.
If an admissible statement is identified, the legal adviser may then be required to conduct a more rigorous examination of the subsequent parliamentary proceedings to establish whether the statement has been repeated, varied or withdrawn and a — somewhat less onerous task whether there has been a relevant subsequent amendment to the provision.
The earlier in the legislative history of the provision the admissible statement is found obviously the greater this task becomes.
Thirdly, establishing that an admissible statement should be adopted as an expression of parliamentary intention requires establishing a negative, namely that the subsequent parliamentary proceedings do not reveal that the statement was withdrawn or varied or that a relevant inconsistent amendment was successfully moved.
However, in contrast to some other jurisdictions, the relaxed exclusionary rule does not permit the use of parliamentary material simply to establish a negative as an aid to construction.
Where a court is considering whether a provision does or does not cover X the rule will not admit the parliamentary history of the provision to demonstrate that at no stage in the parliamentary proceedings was there any suggestion that the provision covered X. It remains to be seen how long judges in the United Kingdom will be able to require negative evidence from parliamentary material to establish that an admissible statement is an expression of parliamentary intention, but exclude such evidence as an aid to construction.
Finally, in rejecting the submission that relaxing the exclusionary rule could amount to the courts questioning proceedings in Parliament contrary to Article 9 of the Bill of Rights, Lord Browne-Wilkinson observed that ‘the purpose of looking at Hansard could not be to construe the words used by the minister   but to give effect to the words used so long as they are clear’.
Without prejudice to this judgment on the question of law, on which opinion was unanimous, it may, in practice, prove difficult for the courts to avoid construing, or at least evaluating, admissible parliamentary statements.
Various circumstances have been indicated above where such judicial construction or evaluation may arise.
In addition, a statement may be a clear expression of legislative intention, and adopted as an expression of parliamentary intention, but nevertheless be based on an erroneous premise.
So, for instance, the promoter of a Bill may state that Clause 1 is not intended to cover X because X is covered by Clause 2, and the Clause 3 is intended to implement a Community obligation; yet, as a matter of law, X may not be covered by Clause 2 and there may be no obligation in Community law.
In such circumstances it would be difficult for a court to address the use of the statement as an aid to construction without some evaluation of its substance.
IV.
Conclusion
The relaxation of the rule excluding parliamentary material as an aid to the construction of statutes deserves to be welcomed on the basis that the judiciary should not deny themselves whatever assistance may be derived from such material.
Although Pepper v. Hart is the initial formulation of the relaxed exclusionary rule, the ambiguities which it contains and the failure to relate it to other aids to statutory construction are perhaps less deserving of a welcome.
For the legal adviser and the practitioner there will remain concern over the intensity and extent of research into parliamentary proceedings which may be entailed by Pepper v. Hart .
for the judiciary and parliamentarians there will continue to be concern over the extent to which in practice Pepper v. Hart will require the construction and evaluation of parliamentary statements and procedure, and the implications for the existing constitutional relationship of the legislature and the judiciary.
These concerns have not been greatly alleviated by subsequent reported cases.
Parliamentary Scrutiny of Community Legislation
The United Kingdom system of parliamentary scrutiny of Community legislation can trace its origins to 1972, when the European Communities Bill was before Parliament.
There was wide concern — particularly in the House of Commons — that parliamentary sovereignty was to be ceded to the Council and Commission in Brussels.
Before 1972 no treaty to which the United Kingdom had become a party had been capable of directly altering the law of England or of Scotland.
prior to ratification there would always be enabling legislation, incorporating by statute those prospective treaty obligations which could not be given effect under prerogative powers, and required changes to domestic common law or statute.
Community law was different in kind.
Regulations adopted by the Council and Commission in Brussels would form part of the law of the United Kingdom, without any intervention or endorsement by Parliament.
Directives would require to be implemented by familiar forms of domestic legislation — but the substance of the legislation would already have been determined by the Council.
Parliament was assured in 1972 — and again in 1974' — that the basic principle of United Kingdom constitutional law would be unaffected by accession.
Parliamentary sovereignty had not been ceded to Brussels but merely delegated.
The direct effect in the United Kingdom of the Community treaties and of legislations made by the Council and Commission under treaty powers would depend on the European Communities Act.
The Act could be repealed if Parliament so decided.
These assurances, however, were accepted as relating to constitutional theory.
Concern remained at loss of the substantive power to determine the content of specific legislation.
The Government found it necessary to assure Parliament that special arrangements would be devised under   which it would be consulted on draft Community legislation before crucial decisions were taken in Brussels.
When the European Communities Act 1972 became law each House of Parliament set up a committee to advise on how scrutiny of European legislation could most effectively take place.
The House of Commons was advised by the Foster Committee and the House of Lords by the Maybray-King Committee.
The arrangements set up by the two Houses differed widely, but they have had in common that their powers derive from the practical assistance given by the United Kingdom Government in the prompt provision of legislative proposals and other Community documents, and from the Government undertaking not to agree any proposal in the Council of Ministers until parliamentary scrutiny is complete.
provision of documents might seem an obvious duty for any Community Member State executive to carry out for its Parliament.
But we were told recently by a delegation from the french Senate, studying British methods of scrutiny of Community legislation, that they had great difficulty in obtaining copies of Commission legislative proposals and that it had been necessary for them to establish an office in Brussels to ensure a reliable supply.
The undertaking by the Government not to agree to a proposal while either House maintains its ‘parliamentary reserve’ was embodied in a resolution of the House of Commons of 30 October 1980.
The undertaking is applied equally to the House of Lords.
Exceptionally, a minister may override the scrutiny reserve.
There may be an urgent need for a Council decision — for example, to impose an anti-dumping duty to protect a Community industry from damage, or to grant emergency aid following an earthquake.
Where intensive negotiations on a proposal are under way in Brussels, Parliament may be informed of the latest developments shortly before the critical Council — thus placing a new reserve on the proposal even if an earlier draft has previously been cleared — but if a compromise satisfactory to United Kingdom interests emerges, the minister will wish to agree, and to make his peace with Parliament later.
In all these cases the minister will write justifying this decision to override the scrutiny reserve to the chairmen of both Scrutiny Committees and will in addition appear personally in the House of Commons.
The principal reason why the methods of scrutiny in the House of Commons and the House of Lords differ so widely is that the House of Commons has traditionally seen its power as residing in the Chamber itself and in the power to call ministers to account on the floor of the House.
In recent years this has begun to change with the establishment of the departmental committees and the increasing use of Standing Committees to consider Bills.
But the view was taken in 1972 that important Community measures should be debated in the House of Commons itself.
The function of the European Legislation Committee set up in December 1972 was therefore confined to determining which proposals were legally important or politically important and to advising which   of these should be debated by the full House.
This was an essential function, but limited to scope.
The House of Commons Committee did not advise on the merits of a proposal, or consult outside expert opinion or vested interests on its substance.
The timing of debates which took place in the House of Commons on proposals which the European Legislation Committee advised were legally or politically important was dependent on the Government.
The Government was not always helpful.
It tended to arrange debates late at night, and much too close to the critical Council meeting, when it realized it would otherwise have to maintain a parliamentary reserve in the Council if scrutiny had not been completed by a debate.
Far too many of those who regularly spoke in those debates were a stage army who thought we should never have joined the Community in the first place.
The debates could be a very effective form of control where broad political issues were at stake; but much Community legislation is highly technical and not readily comprehensible without considerable understanding of the Community background and of the special sectors which would be affected.
In the last few years it has been appreciated by the House of Commons that the method of scrutiny chosen was not best adapted to influence the final shape of Community legislation.
The European Legislation Committee has begun to seek and to publish written evidence from specialist bodies likely to be directly affected by Commission proposals.
They have taken oral evidence from ministers more frequently.
They have published opinions of Speaker's Counsel which set out reasons why a proposal is legally important or open to challenge.
The House of Commons Select Committee on procedure recommended in 1989 that special Standing Committees should be created with powers to hear statements from ministers on Community proposals, cross-examine them and then debate the merits of the proposals.
Initially five such committees were proposed, but in the event only two were established.
The effect of these Standing Committees has been that debates have been of a much more highly focused and objective quality.
They have taken place when there is still plenty of time to influence the shape of Council legislation and the speeches show careful consideration of the issues in the light of constituency and special interest representations received.
The House of Lords did not share the reluctance of the House of Commons to relegate scrutiny of Community proposals from the floor of the House to a Committee.
At the outset it established a Select Committee on the European Communities with very wide terms of reference ‘to consider Community proposals, whether in draft or otherwise, to obtain all necessary information about them, and to make reports on those which, in the opinion of the Committee, raise important questions of policy or principle, and on other questions to which the Committee consider that the special attention of the House should be drawn’.
The Committee has appointed six sub-committees — each with competence  over particular aspects of Community activity.
They are known by letters for which we have provided suitable mnemonics: ‘A’(the Accounting Committee) deals with Budget and Finance as well as Trade and External Relations; ‘B’(the Blazing Committee) deals with energy and technology as well as transport; ‘C’(the Caring Committee) scrutinizes consumer and social affairs; ‘D’(the Digging Committee) is responsible for agriculture; ‘F’, the Environmental Committee is named the ‘Friends of the Earth’; Sub-Committee E (Law and Institutions) is traditionally chaired by a Law Lord — formerly by Lord Oliver of Aylmerton and now by Lord Slynn of Hadley — and is known as the Legal Eagles Committee.
Sub-Committee E has wider terms of reference than the other sub-committees.
As revised and extended in 1983, it is required to consider and report on:
‘(a)
any Community proposal which would lead to significant changes in UK law, or have far-reaching implications for areas of UK law other than those to which it is immediately directed;
(b)
the merits of such proposals as are referred to them by the Select Committee;
(c)
whether any important developments have taken place in Community law; and
(d)
any matters which they consider should be drawn to the attention of the Committee concerning the vires of any proposal.’
The six sub-committees are the coal-face of Committee scrutiny work.
Each year the Committee receives nearly a thousand documents from Brussels, with helpful explanatory memoranda from the Government which summarize for each its nature and likely effect, the Government's approach to it, and the prospective timing of its progress in Brussels and Strasbourg.
Most of these are either unimportant or highly technical — for example, tariff changes, budgetary transfers, anti-dumping duties or minor amendments to legislation or Community agreements with third states.
Each week the chairman of the Select Committee — now Lord Boston of Faversham QC — sifts the inflow with the assistance of the Legal Adviser and the Clerks to the Committee and its sub-committees, and sends those which are important or controversial to one or occasionally more than one of the sub-committees.
A document of major general importance such as the Commission's Annual Report on Implementation of Community Law or its recent Communication on Subsidiarity might even be sifted to all six sub-committees.
Because of Sub-Committee E's special remit to scrutinize the vires of any Community proposal, any document which shows that there is doubt or controversy over the appropriate legal base will be identified and sifted to E. About a quarter of all documents are sifted to a sub-committee and the remainder, when the sift is endorsed by the full Select Committee at its next meeting, are cleared.
The parliamentary reserve is lifted, and the Government can act on the proposals in the Council without further reference to the House.
Each sub-committee is largely autonomous in its handling of a document which has been sifted to it.
The sub-committee may note and clear it, so lifting the parliamentary reserve.
It may authorize the chairman, or recommend that the chairman of the Select Committee should write to the responsible minister.
A letter to the minister enables the sub-committee to express views swiftly, usually on one aspect only.
The letter enters the public domain as soon as it has been drawn to the attention of the Select Committee, and the Government may use it in Council discussions — which they do if they find it helpful to their position.
Twice a year letters to ministers are collected and published as a Select Committee Report to the House of Lords, under the title ‘Correspondence with Ministers’.
Letters to ministers have been most frequently used by Sub-Committee E, to draw to the Government's attention their views of the correct legal base for a Commission proposal.
When the Single European Act first came into force, they took exception to a number of Commission proposals put forward as single market measures under Article 100A of the EEC Treaty, and thus capable of being adopted by qualified majority in the Council.
In their view the Commission were giving Article 100A an unduly wide construction and were using it for proposals which should properly have been based on some alternative Article of the EEC Treaty, such as Article 100 or Article 235, which required unanimity in the Council.
Sub-Committee E was able continuously to monitor the use of the new powers given by the Single European Act which allowed majority voting in the Council and to respond immediately, by way of a letter from Lord Oliver as Chairman to the Minister, on receipt of any proposal based on use of Article 100A which appeared improper.
Lord Oliver was once heard to remark that he had pen-pals in every department of Whitehall.
On most occasions the Committee's views were sustained in the Council of Ministers.
Sub-Committee C has also queried the excessive reliance by the Commission of the new powers given by Article 118A of the EEC Treaty, introduced by the Single European Act to allow legislation on health and safety matters.
Article 118A also allows majority voting in the Council, so offering obvious political attractions to the Commission and to the European Parliament who are thereby given greater powers over the legislation.
The United Kingdom Government has shared the Committee's reservations as to the excessive use of Article 118A, and these have also been supported by other Member States in the Council.
The most significant and the most controversial documents will, however, usually be the subject of full inquiry by the Sub-Committee to which they have been sifted.
Timing is crucial in selecting topics for inquiry and in placing them in order.
Too soon, or too late, and the effort may have little result.
Greater use of majority voting provisions since the entry into force of the Single European Act have made the timing question more difficult for the Committee.
When the inquiry is set up, a number of witnesses — bodies liable   to be directly affected by the measure proposed or individuals having particular expertise in the subject-matter will be invited to submit written evidence.
There will be a series of sessions of oral evidence to the sub-committee — usually once a week.
The Commission has been most helpful in authorizing Commissioners — or more usually senior officials — to travel from Brussels to give oral evidence in public.
The Government almost always gives oral evidence.
Other witnesses — depending on the subject of the inquiry — may include consumer bodies, industry, professional associations, academic experts, foreign embassies in London.
The Committee may travel to Brussels, other places in the Community or — very rarely — elsewhere, to take evidence.
Most evidence is taken in public— sometimes with radio microphones or television cameras present — and all of this is recorded and published.
When the evidence is completed a report is drafted and the sub-committee deliberates on it until agreement is reached.
The report next goes for approval or amendment by the Select Committee itself.
It is then printed and on publication goes to the House of Lords either for information (in which case the scrutiny reserve is lifted forthwith) or for debate (when the reserve remains until the debate takes place).
Although there are no minority reports, a peer who has reservations about the conclusions of a report is not bound in debate by collective responsibility, and debates, which, of course, are for the whole House, often show more diversity of views than does the report.
A copy of the report goes to the minister responsible in advance of publication where the matter is shortly to come before the Council of Ministers for decision.
Until recently the minister had to respond only when the report was debated in the House.
In the last few years, however, the Government began more frequently to provide a formal written response, and last year they undertook to respond in writing to all reports within two months of their publication.
These responses are now of uniformly high quality, which is not to say that they always endorse the views of the Select Committee, but they show that the Government has thought seriously about what the Committee has argued.
The reports also go to the press along with a press release, to witnesses who have assisted in the inquiry and — especially important — to those with direct responsibility for further progress on a legislative proposal.
These include the Council Secretariat (with a copy for onward transmission to the Presidency), the Chairman of the lead Committee in the European Parliament and sometimes the Chef de Cabinet of the responsible Commissioner.
Although formally the reports are primarily for the information of the House, in reality their principal objective is to influence the Community legislative process.
The question most often asked by those who have heard an explanation of the mechanics of how parliamentary scrutiny works is what influence does it have on the final result — the directive or regulation which becomes Community law.
In the last few years, when Select Committee activity has appeared to be itself under scrutiny, we have often tried to answer this question and  found it very difficult.
I would emphasize first, here speaking as one who has in the past given evidence on behalf of the Government, that the value of the scrutiny process is in part that it forces those with more direct power to consider their positions and their arguments carefully and to defend them in the face of public questioning by a Committee whose members may have long experience of the subject-matter involved.
for example, when the Select Committee conducted an inquiry into Economic and Monetary Union and political Union, Dr Kari-Otto pöhl, giving evidence as president of the Bundesbank, found that the ad hoc Committee questioning him contained three former Governors of the Bank of England.
Secondly, I would point out that it is unusual for the Committee to be able to assert with confidence that legislation which is changed so that it conforms to their views, was changed solely because of these views.
There are such cases — where a novel idea originated with the Committee's Opinion and is then taken into the legislation, where a national judge or European Advocate-General cites a Committee report or where a member of the European Parliament says in evidence that he will prepare an amendment to respond to a concern expressed by a sub-committee and then does so.
More usually the Committee is synthesizing informed opinion on a particular proposal.
It could be argued that these opinions would in any event have prevailed.
Arguments made to the House of Lords Select Committee are also made to the Commission, to the European Parliament and to the Governments of the Member States.
Nevertheless, the overall record is encouraging.
Sub-Committee E has certainly carried out a number of inquiries — for example, those into Merger Controls and into product Safety and into Unfair Contract Terms, where the final content of the legislation corresponded entirely to the views they had earlier expressed.
An ad hoc Committee of the Select Committee carried out an inquiry into Staffing of Community Institutions and produced a report which received little public attention but had considerable long-term influence on the way in which the Community Institutions recruited and transferred its staff and on how the United Kingdom sought to obtain its proper share of senior posts.
The Select Committee last year carried out an inquiry into the draft Maastricht Treaty.
An appendix to that report on political Union: Law-Making powers and procedures contained a systematic analysis of the important changes which would be made by entry into force of the treaty and compared these with the recommendations made over a number of years in various reports of the Select Committee.
Voting rights in local elections for nationals of all Community Member States, wider powers for the Court of Auditors, clearer duties on Member States to fight fraud against the Community budget   and progress towards a single currency are all examples of matters supported by the Select Committee over the last few years and now set out in the Maastricht Treaty.
Certain features of the House of Lords scrutiny system have proved to be well suited to the effective exercise of influence.
Most important are the non-partisan character of questioning and deliberation, the high level of expertise on sub-committees (now being increased by the addition of new life peers with direct experience of the Commission, the Council of Ministers, or the European Court), the reliance on expert outside evidence and specialist advice and the production of a single report, initially prepared for deliberation by clerk or adviser to the sub-committee.
Although the single report does conceal some of the rich diversity of opinion on complex or controversial issues, it provides for outsiders a more usable tool than a long debate.
The Committee's reports do not bind United Kingdom ministers.
Neither House of Parliament exercises the constitutional control over the minister in the Council which is exercised by the Danish Folketing Market Committee.
It has been said that if twelve national parliaments — twenty-one chambers — mandated their ministers in the Danish way, it would be impossible for the Council to negotiate final compromises.
There is, however, room for greater involvement by national parliaments in the open and informed debate which precedes most Community legislation.
The last few years have seen significant developments in this direction, as the different European Affairs committees in national parliaments study one another 's methods of scrutiny, control, and influence in order to improve their own, and work together more systematically to promote informed and transparent law-making by the Community.
A Statutory Definition of Charity
I. Introduction
It is extraordinary that there is no statutory definition of charity in English law.
There is extensive charity legislation, the Charities Act 1960 and other scattered statutes and the Charities Act 1992 (hopefully soon to be consolidated).
Yet ‘to ascertain whether or not an institution is a charity, it is, then, no good looking at the Act’.
The Charities Act 1960, section 45, says ‘charity’ means any institution, corporate or not, which is established for charitable purposes', a somewhat tautologous and unhelpful non-definition.
A charity is a charity.
It is curious, or perhaps not so curious, that a number of fundamental common law concepts in everyday use are still statutorily undefined, for example, murder, manslaughter, contract, defamation, negligence (though the concept of duty of care was successfully defined in the Occupiers Liability Act 1957).
There is a vast body of charity case law, many House of Lords decisions, a vast jurisprudence, massive textbooks, a profligacy of articles, a thriving Chancery Bar, the solicitors' profession and the Charity Commissioners responding to numerous enquiries.
‘If a gentleman of education, without legal training, were asked what is the meaning of a ‘trust for charitable purposes’ I think he would most probably reply ‘That sounds like a legal phrase.
You had better ask a lawyer.’’
In order to ascertain whether or not a particular trust is or is not charitable you must look at the preamble to the statute of Elizabeth I, the Charitable   Uses Act 1601 and the classification by Lord Macnaghten in Commissioners for the Special Purposes of Income Tax v. Pemsel and the reported cases generally.
Ironically, the Charitable Uses Act 1601 was repealed by the Mortmain and Charitable Uses Act 1888, section 13(1), and the Charities Act 1960, section 38, repealing the law of mortmain states, clumsily:
‘Any reference in any enactment or document to a charity within the meaning, purview and interpretation of the Charitable Uses Act 1601 or of the preamble to it, shall be construed as a reference to a charity within the meaning which the word bears as a legal term according to the law of England and Wales.’
In other words, the preamble may continue to be used as before, as indeed it has.
Bentwich observed,
‘the clearest and simplest remedy for this evil of litigation about charity, by which so often the kindly intention of a testator is defeated, and still more often a considerable part of the benefaction is wasted in legal costs, would be for Parliament to enact a modern definition or classification of charities on some broad lines.
We cannot expect judicial interpretation to unravel the judicial knots…’
The late John Brunyate, a distinguished equity scholar and practitioner, offered the following suggested definition of charity:
‘1.
The relief of poverty or other distress.
2.
The advancement of  education , learning, science and research.
3.
The public advancement of religion.
4.
Purposes beneficial to the community not falling within the preceding heads, which satisfy the following rules:
(a)
A purpose is not charitable unless the benefit thereby conferred to the community is substantial having regard to the nature of what is given.
(b)
A purpose which is for the direct benefit of a particular class of persons (other than a State institution) is not charitable, although it results in an indirect benefit to the community.
(c)
Subject as aforesaid a purpose is charitable if either:
(i)
It confers a direct and tangible benefit on all members of the community; or
(ii)
It confers a direct and tangible benefit on a particular institution of the State tending to increase the efficiency of its communal activity; or
(iii)
Not being for the direct benefit of a particular class of persons it   is in the general enlightened opinion of the time wholly for the benefit of the community, although such benefit be intangible.
(d)
In this context the community means either the international community, the national community, or a local community (that is to say, a substantial geographical section of the national community) or a section of such a community determined by sex or age.
Any other section of the community is to be regarded as a particular class of persons.’
Such a definition may appear at first sight not to add much to Lord Macnaghten's.
That is logically necessary unless one rejects the whole basis of decided law under the fourth head.
for if the cases of which Goodman v. Mayor of Saltash is the type are to be retained as legally charitable — and there is good a priori reason for retaining them — public benefit is the inevitable foundation of this head of charity.
The question then is to distinguish cases in which the public benefit is direct and entire from those in which it is indirect and partial, and thereby to obtain a definition which, unlike Lord Macnaghten's, is a sufficient as well as a necessary condition of charity.
The solution lies in removing from the fourth head the bulk of cases which are charitable in spite of the fact that a particular group is primarily benefited, namely gifts in relief of distress, and thereby making possible a more limited definition of the general sections which can be regarded as benefiting the community and a more sweeping rejection of gifts which though benefiting the community do not do so directly.
The definition suggested has been framed on the lines of existing law.
Re-definition on such lines could without a statute be effected by the House of Lords, which alone has sufficient authority to attempt the task, and would not involve much disturbance of decided cases; there are certainly many obiter dicta at all levels to be sacrificed, but that would be a most desirable result.
To re-define charity by statute on the lines of existing law would not be easy and might well confuse rather than clarify the law, for the essential difficulties connected with benefit to the public require more explanation and analysis than is convenient in an Act of Parliament.
There could, of course, be an entirely new statutory definition either wider or more restricted than existing law.
A really wide definition, aimed at including all gifts proceeding from benevolent motives, would certainly resolve most of the questions which arise today, but, besides perpetuating a number of imprudent gifts, might well lead later to a multiplicity of special definitions of charity for the purpose of particular statutes; the Treasury, for example, would probably find that too much income tax was being avoided and introduce a special definition for tax purposes.
A statutory definition more restricted than existing law could also be rendered reasonably precise, especially if it abandoned the idea of public benefit and rejected many charities now falling under the fourth head.
That might indeed be a fair solution, though it would render non-charitable various objects which deserve to be charities and would hamper the natural growth of charity in the future.
On the whole, however, it is submitted that a judicial is preferable to a statutory re-definition, because the existing law, although imprecise, is founded on the right principle, that continuance in perpetuity and exemption from tax should be allowed to those purposes and those alone which are for the benefit of the public.
Re-definition, however, whether by the courts or Parliament, is at best a partial answer to the difficulties which have arisen, since the difficulties of construction are at least as important as those of substance and can be resolved only by statutory amendment of the rule that ‘a gift for both charitable and non-charitable purposes wholly fails’.
So, in Brunyate's opinion, although a statutory definition is possible, sufficient, even necessary, none the less in the end he somewhat surprisingly and complacently prefers ‘judicial re-definition’, by which presumably he must mean judicial statement and restatement along traditional lines.
Professor G.W. Keeton favoured a periodic judicial abstract restatement of general principles, a practice which, apart from obiter dicta , is not provided for in the English legal system, which is anathema to the judges and which is surely legislative responsibility.
He suggested,
‘I do not think there is any comfort to be gained from definition in this branch of the law.
We must rely, as heretofore, upon the social acumen of the judges; but at the same time we are entitled perhaps to ask for a little more boldness in the formulation of principles.
This is a branch of the law in which precedents lose their cogency through a change in social conditions, and in which analogies are frequently remote.
Accordingly, I would ask for a periodic statement, preferably by the House of Lords, of some of the general principles upon which their charity decisions are founded…’
It is significant that charity law was unable to accommodate the modern contemporary social welfare and recreational trusts that developed in the 1940s and 1950s and legislation had to be passed to deem them charitable, provided the public benefit element was there.
II.
The Arguments against a Statutory Definition
A variety of arguments are offered to suggest that a statutory definition would be a bad idea or impossible.
The concept of charity is elusive, moving, embodied in a corpus of decided cases built up over centuries.
A distillation of the riches of the existing law would be a most formidable task.
If a statutory definition were to be promulgated, it would lead to confusion, and a spate of litigation.
Everything would be ‘in the melting pot’; centuries of settled case law would be jettisoned, lost; the whole process of building up the case law   would have to start again; or the definition would have to be construed and interpreted in the light of the old case law, with attendant problems.
Existing charities would wonder whether they still fell within the legal definition.
Bodies concerned with the more ‘peripheral’ areas of social welfare, sport and research, would wonder whether they qualified or not.
A wide statutory definition would require exceptions so as to exclude tax avoidance; a narrow definition would exclude many existing qualified worthy bodies, and hamper growth for the future.
Different definitions of charity for different purposes, for example, charity, tax, rating, would be very confusing.
The lawyers, knowledgeable in the existing law, see no need for change or legislation.
Would the new statutory definition be taken as a fresh start?
Would it fall to be construed and interpreted in the light of the old case law?
Would it seek merely to codify the existing case law or to reform on the existing case law?
Lord Macnaghten in Pemsel did not aspire to a definition, but only to a classification of the then existing case law.
The concept of public interest, so essential to the concept of charity, is an inherently vague and subjective concept, not suitable for statute but better left to judicial discretion within the normal judicial constraints.
Government rejected the statutory definition approach.
‘The Government has much sympathy with this proposal, but they believe that it is not practicable…
Any new definition that could be devised would be new in substance as well as form; and if the case law is to be presumed, with it must be preserved, implicitly or explicitly, the preamble of the statute of Elizabeth I on which it is based.
Therefore the choice is between leaving things as they are and adopting a new definition which is different in substance.
The Government agree with the Committee (Nathan) that there is no reason to change the present content of charity and therefore they do not propose that a fresh statutory definition should be enacted.’
III.
The Arguments for a Statutory Definition
The layman favours statutory definition.
The citizen ought to be able to find the basic law, the principal law, in statutory form.
The existing case law is for the citizen impossible to understand and for the lawyer difficult.
Judges have a hard time trying to thread their way through the labyrinthine case law.
The existing case law is frequently archaic and uncertain and contradictory; it calls for a fresh start.
To avoid disruption it would be possible for the new statutory definition to apply only to new trusts, leaving the old law to continue to apply to old trusts by way of transition.
The new statutory definition would naturally   draw quintessentially upon existing case law and also current aspirations and modern requirements, expressed in general principles, in terms of broad classes.
The scope for flexibility and adaptation and judicial development would remain.
Statutory amendment might be necessary from time to time, but statutory restatement by way of codification or reform would be possible.
A degree of statutory definition has been enacted in the past, without any noticeable subsequent insuperable or oppressive difficulties.
Definitions have been offered in the past by Lord Macnaghten, John Brunyate, Lord Silkin and Lord Chorley.
The judges and commentators are constantly expounding the legal elements of charity.
The Law Commission could readily produce a definition, which could be refined by Parliament.
The Renton Committee noted that definitions may take various forms: they may be exhaustive; they may be merely inclusionary; they may concentrate only the boundaries of the concept; they may seek to exclude descriptive material and concentrate upon conceptual analysis; they may rely upon general principles.
It is a matter of judgment in the context.
A general conceptual boundary-fixing approach would seem to be indicated for charity, because the concept is organic, reflecting contemporary public views of public interest, and because the principal if not the sole issue is usually whether the trust is or is not charitable.
The Nathan Committee favoured statutory definition in the form of a cautious statutory statement of the existing position:
‘We consider that a rewording of the ‘definition’ of charity is needed and we favour a definition which would allow of flexibility in interpretation.
We recommend that…there should be put on the statute book a ‘definition’ based on Lord Macnaghten's classification, but preserving the case law as it stands.’
Any definition may fall short of perfection, but all statutory definitions serve the useful purposes of distillation, simplicity, brevity, accessibility and they can be improved in the light of experience and need.
IV.
Conclusion
Attempts to insert a statutory definition into the Charities Bill 1960 failed No such attempt was even made in the passage of the Charities Bill 1992, despite the active participation in debate of Lord Renton and Lord Brightman and Lord Allen of Abbeydale.
However, whether or not a statutory definition of charity is introduced the present problems must not be exaggerated.
provided that trustees can persuade the Charity Commissioners, who are very experienced and expert, to register them, then the trust is conclusively presumed to be a charity whilst on the register, subject to recourse to the courts.
Though applicants for registration may have little or no idea of charity law, the Charity Commissioners are bound by the existing law, and the process of registration can be complicated, lengthy and the results seemingly arcane, not to say incomprehensible, in the terms of the language required by the Charity Commissioners.
BOOK REVIEW
F. A. R. Bennion,Statutory Interpretation , second edition, Butterworths, 1992. cxlix + 925 pp. £130.
When the first draft of this review had been completed, a protein plaque or two moved in the reviewer's senile brain and he remembered that he had in fact reviewed the first edition for this journal.
This was indeed fortunate as it prevented him from revealing the fossilization of his mind by repeating much of what he had written in 1986.
It also led to an investigation of whether anything said in that review had been noticed by the author.
A complaint made then that the definition of ‘Scotland’ did not mention the Island of Rockall Act 1972 which made Rockall part of Scotland has had effect; the reviewer now ungraciously points out that the discussion of what is ‘England’does not mention section 10 of the Channel Tunnel Act 1987, which incorporates the tunnel system up to the ‘frontier’into England.
Moreover, there remains the failure to refer to the lukewarm approach of the House of Lords to the Barras principle, the presumption that when Parliament continues to use a word which has been interpreted by the courts it intends the word to continue to have the judicial meaning, but the author can no doubt contend that the doctrine has been given a new lease of life by the Court of Appeal in EWP Ltd v. Moore , and A-G v. Brotherton .
The new edition is even larger than the last and runs to 925 pages, partly because of some repetition; for example, the full name of the privy Council is given twice on the same page as is the statement that its jurisdiction extends only to Great Britain.
A host of new cases has been added.
In recognition of the enlightened recruitment policies of the Parliamentary Counsel Office the ‘draftsman’ has now become the ‘drafter’.
The main change in this edition, however, is a rearrangement of the order of the sections of the Code, the content of the sections being largely as before.
The first of the six divisions deals with ‘Interpreter, Instrument and Enactment’.
Many of these sections are descriptive rather than prescriptive and contain sentences such as‘Most legislators are not lawyers, however, and need to rely on skilled advice’.
Partly, this is because the author rightly recognizes that many users of the Statute Book approach it in a different way from a judge who is presented with two opposing interpretations with supporting   arguments.
The part of this division relating to instruments explains the processes by which primary and secondary legislation is produced and such matters as commencement and extent.
Division Two deals with meaning, legislative intention and methods of interpretation.
The remaining four divisions treat rules of construction, principles, presumptions and canons but, as the author admits, the boundaries between them are far from clear.
Rules deal with such things as the use of Hansard and the extent to which the long title can be used in interpretation.
On the latter subject, the author points to the inconsistent decisions on whether the effect of unambiguous operative provisions can be cut down by the long title and he seems to incline to the view that they can be so affected; this, perhaps, does not give sufficient weight to what was said about the effect of the preamble in Prince Ernest Augustus of Hanover .
Division four is devoted to ‘Interpretative principles Derived from Legal policy’ which are, for example, that law should serve the public interest, and that law should be just and not subject to casual change.
The ‘principle Against Doubtful penalisation’ is also in this division although other presumptions are discussed in Division five which also contains an interesting treatment of purposive construction which the author regards as a modernized form of the mischief rule.
Canons in Division Six are the familiar eiusdem generis, expressio unius and so on.
While the rearrangement of sections is an improvement one feels that the best order has not yet been found.
What other criticisms can be made?
The treatment of EEC and EEC-derived law is on the light side.
There is no mention of Marleasing SA v. La Comercial Internacional de Alimentacion SA , in which the Court of Justice of the Communities held that a national court is bound to try to interpret national legislation so that it will comply with the requirements of Community law whether the legislation was passed before or after the creation of the Community obligation.
This means that EEC law must be examined not only when the UK legislation has been passed to implement an EEC obligation but in all cases in which the EEC has legislated in the field under consideration.
Moreover, the importance which EEC law has now assumed in the UK would suggest that a book on UK statutory interpretation should deal with how EEC regulations should be interpreted, when directives have direct effect and so on.
These criticisms are, however, minor and the book retains its unique place as a well from which all concerned with statutory interpretation must regularly quaff.
Interesting developments abound in this subject.
Since the book went to press there has been Smith v. Schofield , in which it was said that seventeen pages of algebra used to show the consequences of one construction of a tax   Act should have been proved by an expert witness and not merely put before the judge; this does raise sharply the difference between argument and evidence.
As this review was going the House of Lords has permitted the citation of Hansard; Mr Bennion will have to start on his next edition.
W.A. Wilson 